=== CASE 2230153 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:38.281881+00 ===

720 N.E.2d 1211 (1999)
A Joseph TAWDUL, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 17A03-9903-CR-110.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
December 20, 1999.
*1212 Sarah L. Nagy, Indianapolis, Indiana, Attorney for Appellant.
Jeffrey A. Modisett, Attorney General of Indiana, James B. Martin, Deputy Attorney General, Indianapolis, Indiana, Attorneys for Appellee.
*1213 OPINION
KIRSCH, Judge
A jury convicted A Joseph Tawdul of resisting law enforcement,[1] as a Class A misdemeanor. Tawdul now appeals, raising three issues for our review, which we restate as follows:
I. Whether the trial court erred in imposing an executed sentence of ten days imprisonment combined with one year of probation.
II. Whether it was reasonable for an officer to order Tawdul, a passenger in a lawfully stopped vehicle, to return to the vehicle that he immediately exited after the car was stopped.
III. Whether the trial court erred in allowing the State to cross-examine Tawdul about a prior traffic offense that he committed ten years earlier.
We affirm, but remand for sentencing.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
The facts most favorable to the verdict reveal that on the evening of February 14, 1999, Tawdul was a passenger in his friend's car. Officer James Sloan, driving in a marked patrol car, approached the car in the opposite lane and noticed that its bright lights were illuminated. He flashed the headlights of his patrol car at the oncoming car to signal the driver to switch to low beams. When the driver of the car failed to dim its headlights, Sloan turned his car around and began to follow the car. After following the car for approximately one mile and waiting for the car to exit a curve, Sloan activated his emergency lights.
The driver of the car initially failed to pull over in response to the emergency lights even though other cars did yield. Sloan followed the car for less than a mile before the driver pulled into an alley and then onto a private drive. Sloan exited his patrol car and observed both the driver and Tawdul exit the car in which they were riding. Sloan asked them both to remain in the car. Both individuals refused to return to the car despite Sloan's repeated requests to remain inside the car. Tawdul told Sloan that he was going to go inside to use the restroom. Sloan responded that if he did he would be arrested for resisting law enforcement. Tawdul proceeded toward the house and told Sloan to shoot him if he had to. Tawdul returned outside a few moments later and was arrested by other officers who had arrived in response to a dispatch by Sloan.
Tawdul was charged with resisting law enforcement. A jury found him guilty. The trial court sentenced him to 180 days imprisonment with 170 days suspended for a total executed sentence of ten days. The trial court also imposed a probation period of one year. Tawdul now appeals.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
I. Sentence
Tawdul first argues that the trial court erred in imposing a 180 day sentence combined with one year of probation. He claims that this sentence exceeds the statutory maximum one year sentence for a misdemeanor. IC XX-XX-X-X. Therefore, Tawdul requests us to remand the case to the trial court with instructions that "[t]he term of probation imposed should not exceed 185 days because [his] prison term was 180 days." Appellant's Brief at 5. The State concedes that the trial court erred, but argues that Tawdul can be placed on probation for up to 345 days. While we agree with Tawdul that the trial court erred, we disagree with his interpretation of the case law establishing the formulation for determining whether a sentence exceeds the maximum penalty authorized by statute.
*1214 In Smith v. State, 621 N.E.2d 325 (Ind. 1993), our supreme court held that "a combined term of probation and imprisonment exceeding one year is inconsistent with the maximum term for conviction for a misdemeanor." Id. at 326. The court found that the trial court erred by extending the defendant's sentence of one year imprisonment with 255 days suspended by imposing a one-year probation period. The court vacated the Court of Appeals' majority opinion and instead agreed with Judge Barteau's dissenting opinion: "`[t]he trial court has the option, in sentencing a class A misdemeanant, to suspend the sentence in whole or in part and to place the defendant on probation, so long as the combination of the executed sentence and the probationary period do not exceed the maximum statutory sentence for that offense.'" Id. (citing Smith v. State, 610 N.E.2d 265, 272 (Ind.Ct.App. 1993) (Barteau, J., dissenting)) (emphasis added).
In Albright v. State, 708 N.E.2d 15, 16 (Ind.Ct.App.1999), this court recently held that the trial court erred by placing Albright on probation for one full year for each of two misdemeanor convictions after suspending the executed portion of the sentence to time served. We further determined that Albright was entitled to good time credit for the time he spent incarcerated awaiting trial. Id.
Here, the trial court sentenced Tawdul to 180 days imprisonment with 170 days suspended for a total executed sentence of ten days. In addition, the court placed him on probation for one year. Because the sentence imposed a term of probation that caused Tawdul to serve more than one year of combined imprisonment and probation, the trial court erred. We therefore remand this case to the trial court for a determination of the probationary period not to exceed 345 days.
II. Investigatory Stop of Passenger of Vehicle
Tawdul next alleges that his arrest was made in violation of the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution and Article One, Section Eleven of the Indiana Constitution. He argues that the initial stop was unlawful because the officer could not articulate any reasonable suspicion that he was involved in any criminal activity. According to Tawdul, the failure of the driver to dim her headlights and to yield to an emergency vehicle cannot be imputed to the passenger. Because the driver was independently culpable, and the officer could articulate no facts that he was involved in any criminality, Tawdul asserts that he had no obligation to return to the car and to be detained by the officer.
In Pennsylvania v. Mimms, 434 U.S. 106, 98 S.Ct. 330, 54 L.Ed.2d 331 (1977), the United States Supreme Court set forth the bright-line rule that law enforcement officers may, as a matter of course, order the driver to exit a lawfully stopped vehicle. Two decades later the Court in Maryland v. Wilson, 519 U.S. 408, 117 S.Ct. 882, 137 L.Ed.2d 41 (1997), extended this per se rule to apply to passengers of lawfully stopped vehicles. In both cases, the Court employed a balancing test to determine whether the police acted reasonably. Mimms, 434 U.S. at 109, 98 S.Ct. 330; Wilson, 519 U.S. at 413, 117 S.Ct. 882. The public interest in officer safety was weighed against the personal liberty interest that individuals have to be free from arbitrary government interference. Mimms, 434 U.S. at 109, 98 S.Ct. 330; Wilson, 519 U.S. at 413, 117 S.Ct. 882. The Mimms Court concluded that on the public interest side of the balance officer safety was a "legitimate and weighty" concern and that it would be unreasonable to require the police "to take unnecessary risks in the performance of their duties." Mimms, 434 U.S. at 110, 98 S.Ct. 330 (internal citation omitted). On the other side of the balance, the Court considered the additional intrusion of asking the driver to exit the vehicle to be "de minimis." Id. at 111, 98 S.Ct. 330. Determining that a request by the police for the driver to *1215 exit a lawfully stopped vehicle was "at most a mere inconvenience," the Court concluded that the interest in officer safety outweighed an individual's privacy interest. Id.
This same balancing test was applied in Wilson where the court concluded:
"On the personal liberty side of the balance, the case for the passengers is in one sense stronger than that for the driver. There is probable cause to believe that the driver has committed a minor vehicular offense, but there is no such reason to stop or detain the passengers. But as a practical matter, the passengers are already stopped by virtue of the stop of the vehicle. The only change in their circumstances which will result from ordering them out of the car is that they will be outside of, rather than inside of, the stopped car. Outside the car, the passengers will be denied access to any possible weapon that might be concealed in the interior of the passenger compartment. It would seem that the possibility of a violent encounter stems not from the ordinary reaction of a motorist stopped for a speeding violation, but from the fact that evidence of a more serious crime might be uncovered during the stop. And the motivation of a passenger to employ violence to prevent apprehension of such a crime is every bit as great as that of the driver."
Wilson, 519 U.S. at 413-14, 117 S.Ct. 882. The Court also noted that the risk of harm to the police is reduced when they "routinely exercise unquestioned command of the situation." Id. at 414, 117 S.Ct. 882 (internal citation omitted). Moreover, the dangers faced by the police in a traffic stop were likely greater when passengers were present in a stopped vehicle. Id. The Court ultimately held that even though "there is not the same basis for ordering the passengers out of the car as there is for ordering the driver out, the additional intrusion on the passenger is minimal" and thus the police could order passengers to exit the vehicle pending completion of the stop. Id. at 414-15, 117 S.Ct. 882.
Recently, in Walls v. State, 714 N.E.2d 1266 (Ind.Ct.App.1999), reh'g denied, a panel of this court held that when a passenger of a car that has been lawfully stopped exits the car and walks away, a police officer may not as a matter of routine practice order the passenger to return to the car. In Walls, a police officer observed a car make a left-hand turn without signaling. The officer activated his emergency lights and the driver yielded. Almost immediately, the officer saw the passenger, Walls, get out of the car and begin to walk away. The officer ordered Walls to return to the car. Walls complied. The officer then asked him if he had any weapons. Walls told the officer that he had a knife in his pocket. A pat-down search of Walls revealed two knives, one blade had a white chalky substance that later was determined to be crack cocaine. Walls was subsequently convicted of possession of cocaine.
On appeal, Walls argued that he was unlawfully detained and that the search and seizure were invalid. The majority in Walls began its analysis by noting that the United States Supreme Court in Wilson declined to resolve the issue of whether the police may "forcibly detain a passenger for the entire duration of the stop" when it adopted the rule that the police while conducting a lawful traffic stop can routinely order passengers out of the vehicle. Id. at 1267 n. 2 (quoting Wilson, 519 U.S. at 415 n. 3, 117 S.Ct. 882). The court wrote:
"In both Wilson and Mimms the underpinning of the Court's conclusion was that once a car was lawfully stopped by police, the additional intrusion on the liberty of the driver or passenger in ordering either of them to exit the car, is de minimis and is outweighed by considerations of the officer's safety. Stated differently, the Mimms / Wilson analysis seems to contemplate an order to exit along with some indication that the officer's safety may be compromised. *1216 Where, for example, a police officer orders a driver or passenger to exit a car and, during the course of the traffic stop, the driver or passenger attempts to flee the scene, makes a furtive movement, or somehow threatens the officer's safety, then the officer may have an articulable suspicion of criminal activity justifying detention of either the driver or the passenger, or both."
Id. at 1267 (citations omitted). The court found that the officer in Walls lacked reasonable suspicion based upon specific or articulable facts that Walls had engaged in or was about to engage in criminal activity. Id. at 1268. The court also "reject[ed] the notion that for purposes of taking `command of the situation' or maintaining a `tactical advantage' a police officer may routinely order the passenger of a car to remain at the scene of a traffic stop." Id. The court stated that "such an intrusion upon the liberty of a private citizen who has been observed engaging in no illegal activity, and whose only transgression is his untimely presence in a car that has been stopped for a minor traffic violation, is not de minimis." Id. Accordingly, the majority held that the motion to suppress should have been granted.
In dissent, Judge Sullivan noted that the officer in Walls believed not only that he was being placed at a "tactical disadvantage," but also that both his safety and the integrity of the investigation were being compromised when Walls exited the vehicle. Id. at 1269. He reasoned that the Mimms/Wilson rationale allows the police to minimize the potential risk of harm to themselves by maintaining control of the scene during a lawful traffic stop. We agree with Judge Sullivan's analysis.
Judge Sullivan cited with approval the Illinois Supreme Court's holding in People v. Gonzalez, 184 Ill.2d 402, 235 Ill.Dec. 26, 704 N.E.2d 375 (1998), cert. denied, ___ U.S. ___, 120 S.Ct. 75, ___ L.Ed.2d ___ (1999). The facts in Gonzalez were virtually identical to those in Walls. After a police officer stopped a car for exceeding the speed limit, the passenger, Gonzalez, immediately exited the vehicle. The officer ordered Gonzalez to return to the car, and when he eventually complied, the officer asked him if he was carrying any guns, needles or knives. Gonzalez responded affirmatively, and a subsequent pat-down revealed a gun in the waist of his pants. According to the Illinois Supreme Court:
"It is clear under the rationale of Mimms and Wilson that the movements of occupants of a vehicle which is legitimately stopped may be subject to control by the police officer conducting the stop, even though the officer has no suspicion that the individuals have been involved in criminal behavior. This rule is dictated by the public's strong interest in officer safety during potentially dangerous traffic stops when balanced against the minimal intrusion on privacy interests of the driver and passengers. Thus, consistent with the rationale of Mimms and Wilson, we conclude in the cause at bar, that, because the public interest in officer safety outweighs the potential intrusion to the passenger's liberty interests, it is reasonable for a police officer to immediately instruct a passenger to remain at the car, when that passenger, of his own volition, exits the lawfully stopped vehicle at the outset of the stop. We find that because the same risk of harm to officers discussed in Mimms and Wilson is present where a passenger unexpectedly exits a lawfully stopped vehicle, the officer's need to exercise `unquestioned command of the situation' is likewise present."
Id. at 382-83 (internal citations omitted). The court concluded that its holding was consistent with the trend of decisions in other jurisdictions that following the rationale of Mimms and Wilson had held that it was reasonable for the police to order a passenger to return to the vehicle. Id. at 383.
Following the logic and rationale of Wilson, we too hold that the police have a limited right to briefly detain a passenger *1217 who exits the vehicle after it has been lawfully stopped. As an exercise of this authority, the police may order a passenger who has exited a lawfully stopped vehicle to return to the vehicle. This limited authority extends only long enough for the police to make an initial assessment of the situation. The brief detention does not necessarily encompass detaining the individual for the entire length of the traffic stop. The police may detain the passenger in order to ascertain the situation and to alleviate any concerns the officer has for his or her safety. If probable cause or reasonable suspicion develop during this short period of time, then the officer may be justified in detaining the individual longer in order to further investigate.
We further reject Tawdul's argument that the initial stop was unlawful because the driver's failure to dim her headlights and to yield to an emergency vehicle cannot be imputed to the passenger. The stop of the vehicle was lawful based upon the traffic violations witnessed by Sloan. Once an officer effects a lawful traffic stop, the passenger of that vehicle is also validly stopped. See id. at 382. It would be inconsistent to allow the police to order a passenger to exit a vehicle, but not to grant the police the limited authority to order the same person back to the car in order to safeguard officer safety and allow the police to conduct an initial assessment. See id. at 379 (quoting People v. Gonzalez, 294 Ill.App.3d 205, 228 Ill.Dec. 766, 689 N.E.2d 1187 (1998)). Moreover, simply because the driver may have been independently culpable for the traffic offenses, does not entitle the passenger to simply exit the vehicle and walk away. Although under no suspicion of culpability, the passenger is still subject to the limited authority of the officer.
We therefore conclude that Tawdul had the obligation to comply with the officer's request to return to the car for purposes of ensuring officer safety and allowing the officer to make an assessment of the situation. Because Tawdul failed to comply with this request, his arrest for resisting law enforcement is valid.
III. Prior Offense Cross-Examination
Finally, Tawdul claims that the trial court erred by allowing the State to cross-examine him about a traffic offense that occurred ten years prior to the trial. Specifically, he claims that the court erred in overruling an objection by his trial counsel to exclude evidence of the prior offense. He contends that allowing this evidence to be introduced was impermissible because it amounted to "prior bad act" evidence in violation of Indiana Rule of Evidence 404(b). We disagree.
A trial court is given broad discretion in ruling on the admissibility of evidence. Link v. State, 648 N.E.2d 709, 712 (Ind.Ct.App.1995). Absent an abuse of that discretion, a trial court's decision will not be reversed on appeal. Id. The conduct and scope of cross-examination is left largely to the court's discretion. Norton v. State, 273 Ind. 635, 408 N.E.2d 514, 523 (1980).
The scope of cross-examination is "limited to the subject matter of the direct exam and matters affecting the credibility of the witness." Ind. Evidence Rule 611(b). The scope of cross-examination includes "all matters reasonably related to the issues put in dispute by the direct examination, and all inferences and implications arising from the testimony on direct examination." Reeves v. Boyd & Sons, Inc., 654 N.E.2d 864, 871 (Ind.Ct. App.1995), trans. denied (1996) (citing 13 ROBERT LOWELL MILLER, JR., INDIANA PRACTICE § 611.201 at 197 (1995)). Any matter that tends to elucidate, modify, explain, contradict, or rebut direct testimony is permissible during cross-examination. Id. (citing Hicks v. State, 510 N.E.2d 676, 679 (Ind.1987)). Generally, when a defendant injects an issue into the trial, he opens the door to otherwise inadmissible evidence. Kelley v. State, 555 N.E.2d 1341, 1345 (Ind.Ct.App.1990). When a party touches upon a subject in direct examination, *1218 "`leaving the trier of fact with a false or misleading impression of the facts related, the direct examiner may be held to have `opened the door' to the cross examiner to explore the subject fully, even if the matter so brought out on cross examination would otherwise have been inadmissible.'" Reeves, 654 N.E.2d at 871 (quoting 13 INDIANA PRACTICE § 611.204 at 201).
In the present case, the State did not introduce evidence of Tawdul's prior offense. Instead, Tawdul's own counsel elicited this evidence. The State was simply attempting to clarify for the jury Tawdul's direct examination testimony. On direct examination of Tawdul, the following colloquy occurred:
"Q. You have any prior felony or misdemeanor convictions?
A. No. No. (Pause) Excuse me. I take that back. Mr., Mr. Shively, uh, did, ten years ago we had a, it was a, it was a[sic] obstruction of traffic. It was in Angola. I had my kids in the truck. And I was ___
Q. Was that an infraction?
A. Yeah. I don't know what it was. It was something like that.
Q. Wasn't a misdemeanor or felony conviction?
A. It's been a long time.
Q. After you were arrested, were you taken downtown to Auburn?
A. Yeah.
Q. Where'd they take you? Okay. Did they test you for any use of alcohol?
A. Yeah.
Q. You didn't get arrested for any of that, did ya?
A. No.
Q. You hadn't been drinking?
A. No. They told me if I didn't take the test I'd be kept there eighteen hours."
Record at 346-47. Immediately following this questioning, the prosecutor began his cross-examination:
"Q. First of all, since you brought it up, let's talk about that incident in Angola ten years ago.
A. I didn't bring it up.
[DEFENSE ATTORNEY]: I'm gonna object to the relevance, Your Honor, of any incident in Angola ten years ago.
THE COURT: Overruled. You may an [sic], you may ask.
Q. Okay. As I recall the facts of that case, you were stopped at a stop sign on North Wayne Street, on a side street going on North Wayne Street in Angola. Is that right?
A. It's ten years ago. I don't remember.
Q. Okay. Now you don't remember. And you testified that you've never done anything violent in your life?
[DEFENSE ATTORNEY]: I don't think he ___
[PROSECUTOR]: I'm sorry.
[DEFENSE ATTORNEY]: I don't think that was his testimony.
Q. I'm sorry. I wanta get the words right. You testified you're not a violent person.
A. No; I'm not.
Q. Do you mean not anymore?
A. I wasn't before.
Q. Okay. You don't remember ten years ago?
A. It's, it's sketchy. I could probably go dig some records up. I wasn't violence [sic]."
Record at 347-48.
Here, Tawdul in his direct examination "opened the door" for the State to explore and seek to clarify his testimony with respect to his prior traffic offense. Tawdul's responses to his attorney's questions lacked clarity and could have left a misleading impression with the jury. Tawdul cites no authority, and we are not aware of *1219 any authority, that would permit a defendant to "open the door" and then to close it as his convenience. See Thornton v. State, 653 N.E.2d 493, 499-500 (Ind.Ct. App.1995). We agree with the State that it was entitled to seek to clarify the evidence elicited from Tawdul by his trial attorney. Tawdul's claim that he was "unduly prejudiced by the admission of the prior bad acts," is disingenuous and unfounded given the fact that he opened the door to specific questions on cross-examination about the previous episode. Appellant's Brief at 11.
On appeal, the appellant bears the burden of establishing that there was error prejudicial to his substantive rights. Gray v. State, 579 N.E.2d 605, 608 (Ind. 1991). Even were we to hold that the trial court erred, there has been no showing of how Tawdul was harmed by the State's brief questioning on cross-examination. Accordingly, we hold that the trial court did not err in allowing the State to question Tawdul further about the prior offense.
Conviction affirmed; remanded for sentencing.
SHARPNACK, C.J., and RILEY, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  See IC XX-XX-X-X(a)(3).

=== CASE 9742178 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:08:06.582965+00 ===

COOPER, J.
Kalkaska County, Crawford County, and the Crawford County Board of Commissioners (the Counties) appeal as of right in these consolidated appeals from various orders and the judgment entered by Judge Dennis Kolenda (the lower court) in the litigation pursued by the 46th Circuit Trial Court (the Trial Court) seeking adequate funding. The Counties also appeal from various orders entered in the related suit filed by the Counties against Otsego County, the control unit for the Trial Court. We affirm.
I. FACTS AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
These consolidated cases arise out of a funding dispute between the Trial Court and two of its funding units — the Counties. A detailed narrative of much of the history of this case is provided in 46th Circuit Trial Court v Crawford Co,1 an opinion issued by this Court following an interlocutory appeal. In that appeal, this Court affirmed the lower court’s award of attorney fees to the Trial Court based on the Trial Court’s inherent power to seek adequate funding. While that appeal was pending, however, this case proceeded in the lower court.
The 46th Circuit Trial Court was created by order of the Michigan Supreme Court as an experiment in consolidating the various levels of trial courts into one, unified trial court system.2 The 46th Circuit Trial Court *156was the only multi-county experimental court created and included Otsego, Crawford, and Kalkaska counties. During the early stages of unification, the Trial Court concluded that all employees, regardless of the county in which they physically worked, should earn equal pay and receive equal benefits. Wages needed to be redetermined, as many positions had been eradicated and others had taken on consolidated functions. Consequently, in the summer of 2000, Chief Judge Alton Davis asked the employees to make cost-saving concessions to serve as a bargaining chip in securing the funding units’ approval of a retiree healthcare plan and an improved pension plan. The employees agreed to phase out longevity pay and dedicate a portion of all future wage increases to fund the retiree benefits package. Employees also agreed to accept a cost-saving health care insurance plan that offered less coverage and had a higher prescription co-pay. Following the funding units’ passage of resolutions approving these plans, the Trial Court implemented the employee concessions at substantial savings to the Trial Court and its funding units.
During the August 29, 2000 meeting, at which the Crawford County Board of Commissioners passed resolutions approving the plans, the commissioners voiced their concerns about becoming financially responsible for potential future unfunded liability and over the low figure represented as the annual retiree payment cap.3 Judge Davis promised to put a “failsafe” provision in writing to outline the method of handling any unfunded liabilities. Despite these concerns, the Board passed the following resolutions at the conclusion of the meeting:
*157MOTION by Hanson, seconded by Beardslee, to authorize the County [to] pay 24% of $50,000 ($12,000) for the year 2000 and that payment will increase at 4% per year until 2017, and at that time will pay an estimated $94,649 and that the Blue Cross/Blue Shield medical supplement payment per individual would be capped at [sic] the year 2000 at $4,087.00 [and] would increase at 4% per year until 2017 for an employee to be eligible for $7,654.00 per year.
MOTION by Wieland, seconded by Hanson, to request the [Trial] Court [to] not implement the MERS B-4 upgrade at this time, but recognize the change in the 2001/2002 budget cycle.
Later that day, Judge Davis learned that the correct figure for the annual retiree payment was over $5,000, and immediately informed the Crawford County Board of Commissioners of his error.4
Following this meeting, the Trial Court created a comprehensive contract outlining the retiree benefits package to serve as an informative guide for the Trial Court and its employees. The contract also included the promised memorialization of the “failsafe” provision. Kalkaska and Otsego counties immediately signed the contract, but Crawford County refused. The Crawford County Board of Commissioners consulted with its auditor and labor counsel after approving the retiree benefits package and was advised that its approval was unwise. Crawford County was in the middle of a budget crisis and had been forced to cut many county services. As a result, the Board claimed that it had not approved the pension plan and was induced to approve the retiree healthcare plan by the Trial Court’s misrepresentation of cost. This led to Crawford County’s refusal in FY 2001, 2002, and 2003 to appropriate the full amount of their 24% of the Trial Court’s requested operating *158budget.5 Although Kalkaska County initially approved of the retiree benefits package and fully funded the Trial Court, it soon followed suit by rescinding its earlier resolutions and cutting appropriations.
Following lengthy negotiations with its funding units, the Trial Court filed suit against the Counties, seeking the enforcement of the contract to implement the retiree benefits package and adequate funding based on the constitutional theory of inherent powers. The Counties filed a counterclaim for declaratory judgment regarding their duty to fund the Trial Court and defended against the contract claims based on fraud. Otsego County was brought into the litigation by the Counties, which also filed a separate suit against it. The Counties asserted that Otsego County, as the Trial Court’s control unit, had violated the Uniform Budgeting and Accounting Act (UBAA)6 by disbursing funds to the Trial Court in excess of appropriations. The Counties also raised a fraud claim against Otsego County. The Counties’ fraud defense and all claims against Otsego County were dismissed before a trial on the merits began. Following a six-day trial in the summer of 2003, the lower court ruled in favor of the Trial Court on both its contract and constitutional theories in pursuit of funding.7
II. CONTRACT CLAIMS
The lower court determined that the resolutions passed by the funding units created an explicit contract *159with the Trial Court to implement the retiree benefits package. Even if the parties had not formed a contract, the lower court determined that one could be implied. On appeal, the Counties contend that the lower court improperly interpreted the Crawford Board’s resolution regarding the retiree healthcare plan as a valid acceptance, rather than a counteroffer. The Counties also contend that the Crawford Board’s resolution regarding the pension plan was not an approval of the plan, but showed the Board’s intent to table all discussion until the following year. We disagree.
The lower court correctly determined that Crawford County approved the retiree benefits package and formed a valid contract with the Trial Court for its implementation. Issues of contract interpretation are questions of law that we review de novo.8 Issues regarding the formation of a valid contract are all questions of fact,9 which we review for clear error.10 The interpretation of a county resolution, like the interpretation of a statute, is a question of law, which we review de novo.11
We reject the Counties’ contention that the resolutions passed by the Crawford County Board of Commissioners did not amount to a valid acceptance of an offer to implement the retiree benefits package. “ ‘Decisions regarding the legitimacy of an offer and acceptance *160revolve around the particular facts pertaining to a specific transaction . . . .’ ”12 “ ‘[A]n acceptance sufficient to create a contract arises where the individual to whom an offer is extended manifests an intent to be bound by the offer,. . . through voluntarily undertaking some unequivocal act sufficient for that purpose.’ ”13 The acceptance must be unambiguous and strictly conform to the essential terms of the offer.14 The Trial Court correctly asserts that the essential term of the offer to implement the retiree healthcare plan is the required annual appropriation, which would be 24% of $50,000 for Crawford County. The Crawford County Board of Commissioners clearly agreed to this term in the resolution. The annual payment cap was not an essential term. The change in amount did not affect the overall appropriation of the funding units. Therefore, this error was not a material deviation from an essential term and Crawford County’s resolution was a valid acceptance.
Furthermore, the initial error in the representation of this figure did not negate the mutual assent of the parties. Fraud in the inducement is a defense to the formation of a contract. However, the claimant must prove that it actually relied upon a material misrepresentation.15 The alleged “misrepresentation” was not material. Additionally, as will be discussed in great *161detail later, the lower court properly dismissed the Counties’ fraud defense before trial due to a lack of actual reliance.
We also disagree with the Counties’ contention that the second Crawford County resolution did not approve of the pension plan. The only evidence supporting the Counties’ claim is a series of affidavits by the individual commissioners stating their actual intent in passing the resolution. A county board speaks only through its official minutes and resolutions and their import may not be altered or supplemented by parol evidence regarding the intention of the individual members.16 The clear language of the second resolution shows the Board’s intent to approve of the plan, but delay its implementation until the following cycle.
We also reject the Counties’ contention that Crawford County’s failure to sign the written contract outlining the retiree benefits package vitiated the existence of a contract. The official minutes and resolutions of the August 29, 2000 meeting memorialize the agreement of the parties. They officially voted to approve the retiree benefits package and the Trial Court relied on those resolutions to the detriment of its employees. While Judge Davis created a formal written contract regarding the retiree benefits package, Crawford County’s signature on this extraneous writing was not required as evidence of the agreement.17
*162The Counties also argue that any continued duty to perform under the contract ended when they passed resolutions rescinding their prior approval of the retiree benefits package. However, a party to a contract may not unilaterally modify or waive a contract.18 Finally, we reject the Counties’ contention that the contract was invalid because its term exceeded the term of the current Board. There are many administrative functions that must be handled on a day-to-day basis that may require contracts lasting longer than the normal term of office.19 If a successor board had the power to repudiate these types of contracts at will, a government entity’s ability to do business would be compromised.20 Accordingly, the lower court properly determined that the Trial Court had formed a valid contract with its funding units to implement the retiree benefits package.
III. RIGHT TO SEEK ADEQUATE FUNDING BASED ON INHERENT POWERS
The lower court also determined that the Trial Court had the inherent power to file suit seeking adequate *163funding from the Counties. Whether the Trial Court has the inherent power to compel the Counties to fund its retiree benefits package is a constitutional question, which we review de novo.21 In discussing a court’s inherent power to seek adequate funding, this Court reasoned as follows in the previous appeal:
The principles the lower court relied on in this regard have been accepted in Michigan for at least the last thirty-five years. In Wayne Circuit Judges v Wayne Co, 383 Mich 10,33; 172 NW2d 436 (1969) (Wayne I), Justice BLACK, with Justice DETHMERS concurring, noted the “unanimous” authority that a court charged with the responsibility for judicial service “receives and accepts with that responsibility the inherent power and duty to take such action as is reasonably necessary to fulfil the constitutional obligation thus undertaken.” On rehearing two years later, the Supreme Court adopted the BLACK-DETHMERS opinion as the opinion of the Court, noting that it had been “authenticated” by decisions handed down by the supreme courts of Missouri and Pennsylvania:
“In view of the developing strength of the principle of inherent power and duty of the judiciary, called into play as it was by the opinion of Justices DETHMERS and BLACK aforesaid, this Court is constrained on rehearing to adopt that opinion; adding only that the judiciary ... must stand foursquare in support of the constitutional doctrines which, most recently in the [Commonwealth, ex rel Carroll v Tate, 442 Pa 45; 274 A2d 193 (1971)] case, were declared. ‘Must’ we have accented, just as the Tate Court stressed ‘must possess’ in this terse and pointed summary of constitutional necessity ... :
“ ‘Expressed in other words, the Judiciary must possess the inherent power to determine and compel payment of those sums of money which are reasonable and necessary to carry out its mandated responsibilities, and its powers and duties to administer Justice, if it is to be in reality a co-equal, independent Branch of our Government. This *164principle has long been recognized not only in this Commonwealth but also throughout our Nation.’ ” [Wayne Circuit Judges v Wayne Co, 386 Mich 1, 8-9; 190 NW2d 228(1971) (Wayne II), quoting Tate, supra at 52.]
A more recent and oft-cited discussion of the inherent power doctrine is found in Employees & Judge of the Second Judicial Dist Court v Hillsdale Co, 423 Mich 705; 378 NW2d 744 (1985) [Hillsdale]. The opinion of the majority agreed with the dissenting justices that “an inherent power analysis is implicated when judicial functions are in jeopardy” and reiterated that the “Court has stood ‘foursquare’ in support of the constitutional doctrine of inherent power” while concluding that the doctrine was not implicated under the facts of the case at hand. Id. at 724.
In a dissent concurred in by two other justices, Justice Riley noted that, “ ‘irrespective of specific grant by constitution or legislation,’ ” the inherent power doctrine supplies “ ‘authority to incur and order paid all such expenses as are reasonably necessary for the holding of court and the administration of the duties of courts of justice.’ ” Id. at 734 (RILEY, J., dissenting), quoting 20 Am Jur 2d, Courts, § 78, p 440, and 59 ALR3d, § 2, p 574. Justice RlLEY explained that
“[t]his inherent authority of the court is nonajudicatory. It does not deal with justiciable matters. It only relates to the administration of the business of the court.
“One aspect of the administration of district and circuit courts is the determination of the operational needs of the court and the establishment of a budget to provide for these needs.” [Hillsdale, supra at 734-735.]
It is clear from these and other precedents, see, e.g., Judicial Attorneys Ass’n v Michigan, 459 Mich 291, 299-300; 586 NW2d 894 (1998); Livingston Co v Livingston Circuit Judge, 393 Mich 265, 273; 225 NW2d 352 (1975); Ottawa Co Controller v Ottawa Probate Judge, 156 Mich App 594,602-603; 401 NW2d 869 (1986); [17th Dist Probate Ct v Gladwin Co Bd of Comm’rs, 155 Mich App 433, 451-452; 401 NW2d 50 (1986) (Gladwin)], that a court has *165inherent power to take whatever steps are reasonably necessary to fulfill the judicial function.[22]
In taking those steps reasonably necessary to fulfill the judicial function, a court must remember that “ ‘each branch must recognize and respect the limits on its own authority and the boundaries of the authority delegated to the other branches.’ ”23 A court has the inherent power to seek “financing that is reasonable and necessary.”24 When a court files suit seeking adequate funding, it must show that the funding unit has failed to appropriate funds to allow the court to function “servicably as a co-equal branch of Michigan’s government. . . .”25 This Court defined “serviceability” as follows:
Serviceability must be defined in the context of Justice Black’s opinion, i.e. “urgent”, “extreme”, “critical”, and “vital” needs. A serviceable level of funding is the minimum budgetary appropriation at which statutorily mandated functions can be fulfilled. A serviceable level is not met when the failure to fund eliminates the function or creates an emergency immediately threatening the existence of the function. A serviceable level is not the optimal level. A function funded at a serviceable level will be carried out in a barely adequate manner, but it will be carried out. A function funded below a serviceable level, however, will not be fulfilled as required by statute.[26]
*166The lower court’s determination that the Trial Court’s requested budget, specifically the requested appropriation for the retiree benefits package, was reasonable and necessary represents a factual finding that we review for clear error.27 The lower court found that the Trial Court had reduced its staff to the “bare bones” and would be unable to function at a serviceable level if required to make more cuts. The lower court further found that funding the requested benefits was indispensable to serviceability. Many employees had taken on extra duties and all employees had accepted concessions to their detriment. Continuing to operate without the bargained-for retirement benefits package would cause morale to plummet and competent employees to take alternate employment, leading to a decrease in productivity. These findings were based on the record evidence and were not clearly erroneous.
The Counties’ contention that the Trial Court’s budget request was excessive and unreasonable in light of the state of the Counties’ budgets is without merit. Although the Counties assert that they were financially unable to fund the Trial Court at the requested level, they have not demonstrated that the requested funds were necessary to fund other “obligations having the same rank and priority . . . .”28 Second, the Trial Court presented evidence that certain employees in each of the funding units received identical pension benefits.29 Third, the Trial Court was not required to select a *167retiree benefits package consistent with that provided by any of the three funding units. Administrative Order No. 1998-5 provides that a court with multiple funding units may implement “a single, uniform personnel policy that does not wholly conform with specific personnel polices of any of the court’s funding units.”30 Finally, we note that the lower court’s factual determination that the retiree benefits package was a reasonable and necessary expense to the continued serviceability of the Trial Court is consistent with longstanding precedent finding similar court expenses to be within reason.31 Accordingly, the lower court did not commit clear error by determining that the requested appropriation to fund the retiree benefits package was reasonable and necessary to the continued serviceability of the Trial Court.
IV. AWARD OF ATTORNEY FEES TO THE TRIAL COURT BASED ON INHERENT POWERS
A. ENTITLEMENT TO ATTORNEY FEES
Early in the litigation, the lower court determined that the Trial Court was entitled to recover its attorney fees expended in seeking adequate funding. The funding units were each required to provide one-third of these fees. As a court has the inherent power to seek *168adequate funding, it must also have the inherent power to seek attorney fees in order to bring such litigation. These attorney fees are based on the constitutional power of a court, not a party’s success on the merits. Furthermore, as the policy of this state is to assess interest on awards of attorney fees and costs, the lower court properly determined to assess interest at the statutory rate. The Trial Court was entitled to the fees incurred in litigating all its claims, as the contract claims were part and parcel of the inherent powers funding litigation. The lower court also determined that the Trial Court was entitled to attorney fees under MCL 49.73, which requires a county to secure and fund outside counsel for a county official, including a judge, who is named as a defendant, based on the Counties’ counterclaims.
The Counties filed an interlocutory appeal of the lower court’s order. In the prior published opinion, this Court affirmed the lower court’s order. However, this Court found that MCL 49.73 was inapplicable under the circumstances as the Trial Court had instituted this action.32 Furthermore, this Court determined that the amount of attorney fees that a court may recover in funding litigation must be limited. Therefore, a court may only recover attorney fees at an hourly rate that was 150% of that charged by its funding unit’s counsel, and only 150% of the total fees expended by the funding unit.33
The Counties continue to challenge the lower court’s order and now contend that the previous published opinion of this Court was erroneous as well. Even if we were to agree with the Counties’ challenges, we would *169be unable to provide any relief. We are bound by the previous published opinion of this Court.34 We are further bound by the law of the case doctrine.
The law of the case doctrine holds that a ruling by an appellate court on a particular issue binds the appellate court and all lower tribunals with respect to that issue. Thus, a question of law decided by an appellate court will not be decided differently on remand or in a subsequent appeal in the same case.[35]
Accordingly, we decline to review the Counties’ claimed errors.
B. RELIEVING OTSEGO COUNTY OF ITS DUTY TO PAY THE TRIAL COURT’S ATTORNEY FEES
The Counties also challenge the lower court’s order relieving Otsego County of its responsibility to fund the Trial Court’s attorney fees and reapportioning its duty among the other two counties. Although Otsego County sought to be indemnified by the Counties for its share of the attorney fees, the lower court instead determined that it was entitled to relief based on equitable principles. In doing so, the lower court rejected the Counties’ attempt to reapportion the fees according to the Trial Court funding formula, under which Otsego County was responsible for the lion’s share of the budget.
*170We review a lower court’s decisions in equity de novo and all underlying findings of fact for clear error.36 “Jurisdiction of the courts of equity is recognized where ‘the facts involved in litigation are such that a claimed legal remedy, although available, will not afford adequate relief.’ ”37 Otsego County’s indemnification claim sounded in tort as it was based on the Counties’ “wrongdoing” in failing to fund the Trial Court and instigating this litigation. As the underlying suit is constitutional in nature, such indemnification would be precluded, denying Otsego County adequate relief. Ot-sego County was brought into this litigation with “clean hands” — it had continually funded the Trial Court at the requested level. Accordingly, it was entitled to the equitable relief granted by the lower court.38
Additionally, the lower court properly found that the Counties were not immune from Otsego County’s motion to be relieved from its duty to pay the Trial Court’s attorney fees. As noted previously, the Trial Court’s right to collect attorney fees arose from its constitutional inherent powers. Those powers may not be abridged or restricted by statute, by allowing another governmental unit to be immune while violating that constitutional power.39
The Counties also challenged the propriety of the lower court’s order as Otsego County failed to present *171the claim to the Counties’ clerks pursuant to MCL 46.11(m). Although the lower court determined that the statute only requires the presentment of claims based on private wrongs, nothing in the plain language of the statute supports that theory. However, it would have been futile for Otsego County to present its claim for relief to the Counties as the Counties continually fought the payment of the Trial Court’s attorney fees and were seeking the reapportionment of those fees in their favor.40
C. DETERMINING THE REASONABLENESS OF THE TRIAL COURT’S ATTORNEY FEES WITHOUT AN EVIDENTIARY HEARING
In the previous appeal, the Counties challenged the lower court’s determination regarding the reasonableness of the Trial Court’s requested attorney fees. This Court determined that the Counties forfeited the right to an evidentiary hearing by failing to request one. This Court also determined that the Counties would not be entitled to a hearing, even if one had been requested, because the parties presented a sufficient record from which the lower court could determine the reasonableness of counsel’s hourly rates and the hours expended on the litigation.41
As the litigation continued, the lower court granted the Trial Court’s continuing requests for attorney fees without evidentiary hearings, although requested by the Counties. We review a lower court’s determination regarding the necessity of an evidentiary hearing regarding the reasonableness of requested attorney fees *172for an abuse of discretion.42 As the Trial Court continually presented evidence of the same nature and quality, the lower court properly determined with each request that the record was sufficient for a review without an evidentiary hearing.
V. FRAUD AND INNOCENT MISREPRESENTATION
In defense of the Trial Court’s contract claims, the Counties asserted that Crawford County was induced to approve of the retiree healthcare plan, as Judge Davis misrepresented the actual costs of the plan. Specifically, the Counties claimed that Judge Davis represented that the annual payment per retiree would be over $1,000 less than the actual cost. The Counties also asserted that they were induced to approve of the pension plan upgrade without adequate cost information as the Trial Court and Otsego County misrepresented that they did not possess actuarial valuations regarding this plan.
All of these claims were dismissed prior to trial, as they lacked factual support. A letter written by Crawford County Controller, Paul Compo, to the Counties’ counsel, Mr. Cohl, on December 17,2001, became public during discovery. In this letter, Mr. Compo admitted that the Crawford County Board of Commissioners was aware of the correct annual payment figure before passing the resolution approving the plan and included the incorrect figure in the resolution to cause a reaction.43 Based on this letter, the lower court dismissed *173the Counties’ fraud defense against the Trial Court and imposed sanctions upon the Counties and their counsel for filing a frivolous defense. The lower court also dismissed the Counties’ claim that the Trial Court misrepresented actuarial valuations regarding the pension upgrade. The Counties learned by records received through a Freedom of Information Act request before this litigation commenced that the Trial Court did not possess any relevant actuarial valuations. None of the valuations analyzed the proposed pension plan and each contained a disclaimer that it was inapplicable to other levels of benefits. The lower court declined to sanction the Counties for raising the defense on this ground.
Before trial, the Counties voluntarily dismissed their fraud claim against Otsego County. In 2001, Otsego County passed a resolution approving the pension plan. This resolution indicated that the approval was based on an actuarial valuation prepared in January of 2001. During discovery, Otsego County admitted that it never possessed the cited valuation and based its resolution approving of the pension plan on form language provided by the Michigan Employees’ Retirement System. The lower court sanctioned the Counties and their counsel for raising this claim as the Counties could not allege that they relied on a resolution and actuarial valuation *174dated after their own resolutions approving the pension plan.
The Counties now challenge the lower court’s dismissal of their fraud claims against the Trial Court pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(10).44 We review a lower court’s determination regarding a motion for summary disposition de novo.45 A motion under MCR 2.116(0(10) tests the factual support of a party’s claim.46 “In reviewing a motion for summary disposition brought under MCR 2.116(0(10), we consider the affidavits, pleadings, depositions, admissions, or any other documentary evidence submitted in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party to decide whether a genuine issue of material fact exists.”47 Summary disposition is appropriate only if there are no genuine issues of material fact, and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.48
The elements of fraudulent misrepresentation are (1) the [declarant] made a material misrepresentation, (2) the representation was false, (3) when making the representation, the [declarant] knew or should have known it was false, (4) the [declarant] made the representation with the intention that the [induced party] would act upon it, and (5) the [induced party] acted upon it and suffered damages as a result. A claim of innocent misrepresentation is shown if a party to a contract detrimentally relies on a false representation in such a manner that the injury suffered *175by that party inures to the benefit of the party who made the representation.[49]
The letter from Mr. Compo clearly indicates that the Board knew of the error and purposely included the figure in its resolution. Furthermore, several commissioners admitted at their depositions that they knew of the error or believed the figure was incorrect. Accordingly, the lower court properly dismissed this defense. Furthermore, as the Trial Court actually did not possess any relevant actuarial valuations to disclose to the Counties, the lower court properly dismissed that defense as well.
However, the Counties also challenge the use of Mr. Compo’s letter by the opposing parties and the lower court. The Counties assert that the letter was protected by the attorney-client privilege and, therefore, any injustice caused as a result of its use must be remedied. The Trial Court and Otsego County do not dispute that the letter would be protected by the attorney-client privilege;50 however, they assert that the Counties waived their right to assert that privilege. Whether a party has waived the attorney-client privilege is a question of law, which we review de novo.51
The Trial Court and Otsego County first relied upon the letter during Mr. Compo’s deposition. The Counties objected to its use at that time; however, neither party could determine how the letter was disclosed. Although the Counties contend that opposing counsel received *176this letter by improper means, the Counties concede for purposes of this appeal that the letter was disclosed to the opposing parties inadvertently during discovery. Following Mr. Compo’s deposition, the Trial Court and Otsego County continually relied on the letter in seeking the dismissal of the Counties’ fraud claims and in seeking sanctions for these frivolous claims. However, the Counties failed to reassert their objection to the use of the letter based on the attorney-client privilege until five months after the last fraud claim had been dismissed and three months after the lower court had entered its final judgment on the merits. The attorney-client privilege is personal and may only be waived by the client.52 The client’s waiver of that privilege cannot be predicated upon an inadvertent disclosure; it must be “ ‘an intentional, voluntary act and cannot rise by implication.’ ”53 While the inadvertent disclosure of the letter did not waive the Counties’ right to assert the privilege, the Counties’ failure to object over a prolonged period of time is a voluntary and intentional act evincing the Counties’ waiver of that privilege. Granting the Counties relief now, after their extended acquiescence to the use of the letter throughout this litigation, would result in a waste of judicial time and resources. Accordingly, we affirm all actions taken as a result of the use of this letter.
VI. STANDING UNDER THE UBAA
Prior to trial, the lower court sua sponte questioned the Counties’ standing to raise claims against Otsego *177County based on the UBAA. After giving the parties an opportunity to brief the issue, which the Counties neglected to do, the lower court found that the UBAA clearly provides that only the Attorney General or a prosecuting attorney has standing to institute a civil action for a violation of the act.54 Therefore, the lower court dismissed the Counties’ claims to the extent they were based on the UBAA.55 The lower court also sanctioned the Counties’ counsel for filing these claims when the lack of standing was self-evident.
Whether a party has standing is a question of law that we review de novo.56 Generally, to have standing, “a party must have a legally protected interest that is in jeopardy of being adversely affected.”57 A party raising a claim must have “ ‘ “some real interest in the cause of action, or a legal or equitable right, title, or interest in the subject matter of the controversy.” ’ ”58 However, the Counties’ claims are governed by statute. This Court has already held that, according to the plain language of that statute, the only parties with standing to bring an action under the UBAA are the Attorney General and prosecuting attorney.59 Accordingly, the lower court properly dismissed the Counties’ claims against Otsego County for lack of standing.
We also reject the Counties’ contention that the lower court should not have raised the issue of stand*178ing. The Counties contend that the Trial Court waived its right to raise this defense by failing to include the defense as a motion for summary disposition under MCR 2.116(C)(5) in its first responsive pleading pursuant to MCR 2.116(D)(2). However, this Court has determined that a standing defense need not be raised under MCR 2.116(C)(5); it could also be raised under MCR 2.116(C)(8), which can be raised at any time.60 Furthermore, we see no need to prohibit a lower court from considering an issue of its own accord, especially where that consideration will prevent further error for our review.61
VII. SANCTIONS FOR FRIVOLOUS CLAIMS AND DEFENSES
The Counties and their counsel challenge the imposition of sanctions for filing a frivolous fraud defense against the Trial Court and for filing a frivolous fraud claim and claims predicated upon the UBAA against Otsego County. We review a lower court’s determination that a claim or defense is frivolous for clear error. A determination is clearly erroneous when, although there is sufficient evidence to support it, we are left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made.62 Pursuant to MCR 2.114(D), an attorney or party that signs a pleading certifies that “to the best of his or her knowledge, information, and belief formed after reasonable inquiry, the document is well grounded in fact and is warranted by existing law or a good-faith *179argument for the extension, modification, or reversal of existing law[.]”63 Sanctions may be imposed on the attorney, client, or both for a violation of this rule. These sanctions “may include an order to pay to the other party or parties the amount of reasonable expenses incurred because of the filing of the document, including reasonable attorney fees.”64 A party raising a frivolous claim or defense is also subject to costs pursuant to MCR 2.625(A)(2) and MCL 600.259165 as follows:
(1) Upon motion of any party, if a court finds that a civil action or defense to a civil action was frivolous, the court that conducts the civil action shall award to the prevailing party the costs and fees incurred by that party in connection with the civil action by asserting the costs and fees against the nonprevailing party and their attorney.
(2) The amount of costs and fees awarded under this section shall include all reasonable costs actually incurred by the prevailing party and any costs allowed by law or by court rule, including court costs and reasonable attorney fees.
(3) As used in this section:
(a) “Frivolous” means that at least 1 of the following conditions is met:
(ii) The party had no reasonable basis to believe that the facts underlying that party’s legal position were in fact true.
(iii) The party’s legal position was devoid of arguable legal merit.[66]
*180As noted previously, the lower court properly determined that Crawford County had actual knowledge that the annual payment cap represented by Judge Davis was incorrect at the time the resolution was passed. Their counsel learned of this fact one year before the lawsuit was initiated. Accordingly, the lower court properly determined that the Counties’ fraud defense against the Trial Court was frivolous at the time it was filed and, therefore, imposed sanctions against both the Counties and their counsel.67
Also as noted above, it is clear from the plain language of the UBAA and binding precedent of this Court that the only parties with standing to raise a claim under that statute are the Attorney General and prosecuting attorney. This authority was available long before counsel filed these claims in this litigation. As these were statutory claims, counsel could have no argument that standing was conferred on any other ground. Accordingly, the lower court also properly imposed sanctions against counsel for filing the UBAA claims against Otsego County.
The Counties and their counsel also challenge the lower court’s imposition of sanctions without first holding an evidentiary hearing. As noted above, the Trial Court presented a sufficient record from which the lower court could determine the reasonableness of its fees without an evidentiary hearing. Otsego County *181presented an identically sufficient record, including detailed billing statements and affidavits of counsel.68 Therefore, no evidentiary hearing was required to determine the reasonableness of the fees imposed as sanctions. However, the Counties also challenge the lower court’s determinations regarding the percentage of counsel’s time used in defending the claims for which sanctions were imposed. Judge Kolenda presided over the entire proceeding and was aware of the amount of time spent litigating the issues in court. Furthermore, he equitably divided the fees among each claim raised in the lawsuits. Under the circumstances, this formula was a reasonable approximation of the time actually expended and we find no abuse of discretion.69
VIII. DISINTERESTED JUDGE
The Counties contend that the State Court Administrative Office improperly assigned an interested judge in violation of Administrative Order No. 1998-5. The order requires the assignment of a disinterested judge to hear a case involving a funding dispute between a court and its funding unit. The Counties failed to move for Judge Kolenda’s disqualification in the lower court. Whatever their articulated reason for failing to do so, it is fatal to their claim. Accordingly, the Counties waived appellate review of their challenge to the judicial assignment by failing to raise an objection below.70
IX. MOTION FOR GUIDANCE
Shortly before we were scheduled to hear oral argument in this case, the Counties filed a motion for *182guidance asserting that the Trial Court ceased to exist on August 1, 2004, with the passage of Administrative Order No. 2004-2.71 With that order, the Michigan Supreme Court ended the demonstration project status of the 46th Circuit Trial Court. The Supreme Court also adopted the concurrent jurisdiction plan proposed by the Trial Court. However, a review of the concurrent jurisdiction plan clearly reveals that the Trial Court intends to continue to function as a unified trial court system. Accordingly, we reject the Counties’ frivolous contention that the entire litigation must be dismissed.
Affirmed.
NEFF, J., concurred.
46th Circuit Trial Court v Crawford Co, 261 Mich App 477; 682 NW2d 519 (2004), lv held in abeyance 687 NW2d 297 (2004) (pending the resolution of these consolidated appeals).
As will he discussed in further detail later, the “demonstration project” status of the Trial Court ended in 2004; however, the Trial Court continues to function as a unified court system.
Judge Davis told the Board that each retiree would he entitled to $4,087 per year; however, the Board was aware that the correct figure was over $1,000 more.
This incorrect figure was never presented to Kalkaska County.
Crawford County only fully funded the Trial Court in FY 2004, in exchange for the Trial Court’s voluntarily dismissal of an additional funding claim for that year. Crawford County has fully funded the Trial Court in FY 2005.
MCL 141.421 et seq.
Further facts necessary to this appeal will be discussed throughout this opinion where appropriate.
Burkhardt v Bailey, 260 Mich App 636, 646; 680 NW2d 453 (2004).
See In re Costs & Attorney Fees, 250 Mich App 89, 97; 645 NW2d 697 (2002) (Costs I) (regarding whether a legitimate offer has been made and accepted forming a valid contract); Haji v Prevention Ins Agency, Inc, 196 Mich App 84, 87-88; 492 NW2d 460 (1992) (regarding whether a promise was consideration for a contract).
MCR 2.613(C); Alan Custom Homes, Inc v Krol, 256 Mich App 505, 512; 667 NW2d 379 (2003).
Eggleston v Bio-Medical Applications of Detroit, Inc, 468 Mich 29, 32; 658 NW2d 139 (2003).
Costs I, supra at 97, quoting Patrick v US Tangible Investment Corp, 234 Mich App 541, 549; 595 NW2d 162 (1999).
Id., quoting Kraus v Gerrish Twp, 205 Mich App 25, 45; 517 NW2d 756 (1994).
Eerdmans v Maki, 226 Mich App 360, 364; 573 NW2d 329 (1997); Giannetti v Cornillie, 204 Mich App 234,237; 514 NW2d 221 (1994), rev’d on other grounds 447 Mich 998 (1994) (only a material departure from the terms of the offer invalidates an acceptance).
Samuel D Begola Services, Inc v Wild Bros, 210 Mich App 636, 639; 534 NW2d 217 (1995).
Tavener v Elk Rapids Rural Agricultural School Dist, 341 Mich 244, 251; 67 NW2d 136 (1954), quoting Stevenson v Bay City, 26 Mich 44, 45 (1872).
We reject the dissent’s assertion that the contract between the Counties and the Trial Court to implement the retiree benefits package lacked consideration as counties have a preexisting statutory duty to fund the courts. The Trial Court’s employees supplied the consideration for this contract by giving up rights to which they were otherwise entitled in order to secure the Counties’ agreement to the benefits package.
Quality Products & Concepts Co v Nagel Precision, Inc, 469 Mich 362, 372-373; 666 NW2d 251 (2003); H J Tucker & Assoc, Inc v Allied Chucker & Engineering Co, 234 Mich App 550, 564-565; 595 NW2d 176 (1999).
See Harbor Land Co v Grosse Ile Twp, 22 Mich App 192; 177 NW2d 176 (1970) (finding that a township board had the power to enter into a long-term contract for the construction and operation of a waste treatment plant).
As we affirm the lower court’s determination that an express contract existed to implement the retiree benefits package, we need not reach the lower court’s alternate determination that an implied contract existed. However, we note that, if necessary, a contract could be implied under the circumstances to prevent the Counties’ unjust enrichment as the Trial Court’s employee concessions had already been implemented. See Martin v East Lansing School Dist, 193 Mich App 166, 177; 483 NW2d 656 (1992).
Harvey v Michigan, 469 Mich 1, 6; 664 NW2d 767 (2003).
46th Circuit Trial Court, supra at 488-490.
Hillsdale, supra at 717; quoting United States v Will, 449 US 200, 228; 101 S Ct 471; 66 L Ed 2d 392 (1980).
Gladwin, supra at 454-455, citing Livingston, supra, and Hillsdale, supra.
Wayne Circuit Judges v Wayne Co, 383 Mich 10, 33; 172 NW2d 436 (1969) (Wayne I) (opinion by BLACK, J.).
Wayne Co Prosecutor v Wayne Co Bd of Comm’rs, 93 Mich App 114, 124; 286 NW2d 62 (1979). See also Wayne Co Sheriff v Wayne Co Bd of Comm’rs, 148 Mich App 702, 708; 385 NW2d 267 (1983).
MCR 2.613(C); Alan Custom Homes, supra at 512. See also Gladwin, supra at 456-457.
Wayne Co Prosecutor, supra at 128, quoting Wayne Circuit Judges v Wayne Co, 15 Mich App 713, 728-729; 167 NW2d 337 (1969), rev’d in part on other grounds Wayne I, supra.
See Administrative Order No. 1998-5, § II. 459 Mich clxxvi-clxxvii (1998). See also Livingston, supra at 288 (dissent by Levin, J.) (“In determining the amounts to he appropriated for judicial needs, a board of *167commissioners necessarily considers other county needs and the wage levels of other employees paid with county funds.”).
Administrative Order No. 1998-5, § VI. 459 Mich clxxxi.
See Branch Co Bd of Comm’rs v Service Employees Int’l Union, Local 586,168 Mich App 340, 349; 423 NW2d 658 (1988); Ottawa Co Controller, supra (finding that a court has the power to set expenses, such as employee wages, within the funding unit’s overall appropriations to the court). See also Cameron v Monroe Co Probate Court, 457 Mich 423, 427-428; 579 NW2d 859 (1998) (finding that “the supervision and administration of court personnel is a necessary expense of justice for which the county is expected to pay”).
46th Circuit Trial Court, supra at 486-488.
Id. at 499-501.
MCR 7.215(C)(2); Catalina Marketing Sales Corp v Dep’t of Treasury, 470 Mich 13, 23; 678 NW2d 619 (2004). The fact that the Counties appealed this decision to the Michigan Supreme Court, which held the application in abeyance pending the resolution of these consolidated appeals, has no effect on the prior opinion’s precedential value. MCR 7.215(C)(2); Johnson v White, 261 Mich App 332, 347; 682 NW2d 505 (2004).
Ashker v Ford Motor Co, 245 Mich App 9, 13; 627 NW2d 1 (2001), citing Driver v Hanley (After Remand), 226 Mich App 558, 565; 575 NW2d 31 (1997).
Eller v Metro Industrial Contracting, Inc, 261 Mich App 569,571; 683 NW2d 242 (2004).
Mooahesh v Dep’t of Treasury, 195 Mich App 551, 561; 492 NW2d 246 (1992), quoting Wild v Wild, 360 Mich 270, 276-277; 103 NW2d 607 (1960).
Rose v Nat’l Auction Group, 466 Mich 453, 462-463; 646 NW2d 455 (2002).
Persichini v William Beaumont Hosp, 238 Mich App 626, 638-639; 607 NW2d 100 (1999). See also Smith v Dep’t of Public Health, 428 Mich 540, 544; 410 NW2d 749 (1987) (opinion of Brickley J.), aff d sub nom Will v Michigan State Police, 491 US 58 (1989).
See Manor House Apartments v City of Warren, 204 Mich App 603, 606; 516 NW2d 530 (1994); Miller Bros v Dep’t of Natural Resources, 203 Mich App 674, 681; 513 NW2d 217 (1994) (finding that a party need not take futile actions).
46th Circuit Trial Court, supra at 502-504.
Id. at 502.
The letter states in relevant part:
[Implementation Order 2000-11] states that each of the funding units had passed resolutions approving the shift in benefits. This is not entirely true. Crawford had passed a motion to approve *173the caps in retirement health care insurance, knowing the numbers were wrong as a way to “call the [Trial] Court’s bluff.”
The [Trial] Court also included a copy of the minutes for the Special Board Meeting of August 29th, 2000. During this meeting the Board agreed to fund the retirement health care as proposed for 17 years. They did not agree to the terms and conditions outlined in the proposed contract. They agreed to this because they believed the information provided on this issue by the [Trial Court] was erroneous and would cause the [Trial] Court to react.
The lower court actually granted the Trial Court’s motion to strike the Counties’ fraud defense. However, the lower court based its decision on the lack of factual support for the claims. Accordingly, we will review the lower court’s decision as a motion for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(0(10).
MacDonald v PKT, Inc, 464 Mich 322, 332; 628 NW2d 33 (2001).
Auto-Owners Ins Co v Allied Adjusters & Appraisers, Inc, 238 Mich App 394, 396-397; 605 NW2d 685 (1999).
Singer v American States Ins, 245 Mich App 370, 374; 631 NW2d 34 (2001).
MacDonald, supra at 332.
Novak v Nationwide Mut Ins Co, 235 Mich App 675, 688; 599 NW2d 546 (1999).
As neither party disputes that the letter would he protected by the privilege, we will assume for purposes of this appeal that the privilege applies.
Leibel v Gen Motors Corp, 250 Mich App 229, 240; 646 NW2d 179 (2002).
Paschke v Retool Industries, 445 Mich 502, 518 n 15; 519 NW2d 441 (1994), quoting Passmore v Passmore Estate, 50 Mich 626, 627; 16 NW 170 (1883); Leibel, supra at 240.
Sterling v Keidan, 162 Mick App 88, 91; 412 NW2d 255 (1987), quoting Kelly v Allegan Circuit Judge, 382 Mich 425,427; 169 NW2d 916 (1969).
MCL 141.440.
The Counties voluntarily dismissed these claims in their entirety on the first day of trial when they could find no other grounds upon which to base their claims.
Nat’l Wildlife Federation v Cleveland Cliffs Iron Co, 471 Mich 608, 612; 684 NW2d 800 (2004).
In re Foster, 226 Mich App 348, 358; 573 NW2d 324 (1997).
Id., quoting Bowie v Arder, 441 Mich 23; 42-43; 490 NW2d 568 (1992), quoting 59 Am Jur 2d, Parties, § 30, p 414.
Rayford v Detroit, 132 Mich App 248; 347 NW2d 210 (1984).
See Kaiser v Schreiber, 258 Mich App 357, 369-371; 670 NW2d 697 (2003) (opinion by Sawyer, J.), rev’d on other grounds 469 Mich 944 (2003). See also MCR 2.116(D)(3).
See LME v ARS, 261 Mich App 273, 287; 680 NW2d 902 (2004); Paschke v Retool Industries (On Rehearing), 198 Mich App 702, 705; 499 NW2d 453 (1993), rev’d on other grounds 445 Mich 502 (1994).
Kitchen v Kitchen, 465 Mich 654, 661-662; 641 NW2d 245 (2002); In re Attorney Fees & Costs, 233 Mich App 694, 701; 593 NW2d 589 (1999).
MCR 2.114(D)(2).
MCR 2.114(E).
MCR 2.625(A)(2) directs that costs may be charged pursuant to the statute.
MCL 600.2591.
The dissent argues that these sanctions are duplicative as the Counties were already required to pay the Trial Court’s attorney fees and costs and, therefore, were unnecessarily punitive and a waste of taxpayer dollars. However, neither the court rule nor the statute makes a distinction between attorneys for private, versus public, clients. A careful review of the record in this case would indicate that both the proceedings before the lower court and this Court were entirely frivolous. These sanctions are designed to reimburse counsel for excess work necessitated by such meritless claims and were properly imposed.
The Counties do not contest the reasonableness of the hourly rates of Otsego County’s counsel.
See Costs I, supra at 104-106.
See MCR 2.003(C)(1), (3).
Administrative Order No. 2004-2, 470 Mich lxiv (2004).

=== CASE 9742179 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:08:06.591189+00 ===

ZAHRA, P.J.
(concurring in part and dissenting in part). I concur with the results reached in parts III, IV, V, VI, VIII, and IX of the majority opinion. I respectfully dissent from parts II (addressing contract claims) and VII (addressing the imposition of sanctions) of the majority opinion. In short, I disagree with the majority’s conclusion that a valid contract existed between the Counties and the Trial Court. The Counties were under a preexisting duty to appropriate reasonable funds necessary for the Trial Court to carry out its constitutionally mandated duties. Thus, the promise to fund the Trial Court cannot constitute adequate consideration to support a contract. I further conclude that the imposition of sanctions on the Counties served no purpose except to punish the Counties. The sanctions mandated under MCL 600.2591 and MCR 2.625(A)(2) are intended only to compensate litigants for attorney fees and costs expended in answering frivolous claims and defenses. These sanctions should not be punitive. Here, *183the Counties were already paying the Trial Court’s reasonable attorney fees and costs. Therefore, the Trial Court did not incur expenses as a result of the Counties’ pursuit of allegedly frivolous claims and defenses.1 Thus, the award of attorney fees as a sanction was not warranted. I would reverse that portion of the lower court’s judgment that found the Counties in breach of contract. I would also vacate the award of attorney fees and costs as a sanction for pursuit of frivolous claims and defenses. In all other respects, I would affirm the judgment of the lower court.
I. CONTRACT CLAIMS
The majority concludes in part II of its opinion that the Counties breached an express contract with the Trial Court to implement an improved employee retirement plan. I dissent from this decision because the Counties could not enter into a contract with the Trial Court to fund something they had a preexisting duty to fund under statute and the Michigan Constitution.
The duty of the counties to fund the circuit courts is defined by statute. MCL 600.591(1) requires the county board of commissioners in each county to annually appropriate funds for the operation of the circuit court in that county. Administrative Order No. 1998-5 sets forth the details of court budgeting.2 Not only do *184counties have this statutory duty to fund circuit courts, but the judiciary possesses the inherent constitutional power to compel the counties to pay those sums of money that are reasonable and necessary to carry out the courts’ mandated responsibilities. 46th Circuit Trial Court v Crawford Co, 261 Mich App 477, 489; 682 NW2d 519 (2004), citing Wayne Circuit Judges v Wayne Co, 386 Mich 1, 8-9; 190 NW2d 228 (1971) (Wayne II). This includes the power to fix the salaries of its employees within the budget appropriations. Employees and Judge of the Second Judicial District Court v Hillsdale Co, 423 Mich 705, 722; 378 NW2d 744 (1985); Ottawa Co Controller v Ottawa Probate Judge, 156 Mich App 594, 603-604; 401 NW2d 869 (1986). The judiciaiy also has the inherent authority to manage its employees in order to carry out its operations. Judicial Attorneys Ass’n v Michigan, 459 Mich 291, 297; 586 NW2d 894 (1998) , vacated in part on other grounds 460 Mich 590 (1999) . “[T]he fundamental and ultimate responsibility for all aspects of court administration, including operations and personnel matters within the trial courts, resides within the inherent authority of the judicial branch.” Id. at 299. A court may file a civil action to compel funding “[i]f, after the local funding unit has made its appropriations, a court concludes that the funds provided for its operations by its local funding unit are insufficient to enable the court to properly perform its duties and that legal action is neces*185sary . . ..” Administrative Order No. 1998-5, § III, 459 Mich clxxvii.
Simply put, the Counties were obligated by statute and the Constitution to provide the Trial Court funding adequate to fulfill its function. In fact, the Trial Court asserted its inherent power to order adequate and necessary funding under Administrative Order No. 1998-5. The lower court concluded that funding for the retirement plan was reasonable and necessary for the Trial Court to fulfill its statutorily mandated function. The majority has determined that there is sufficient evidence to support the lower court’s finding.3 “A pledge to undertake a preexisting statutory duty is not supported by adequate consideration.” Gen Aviation, Inc v Capital Region Airport Auth (On Remand), 224 Mich App 710, 715; 569 NW2d 883 (1997). Because the Counties had a preexisting duty to appropriate funds for the retirement plan, this duty could not provide adequate consideration for any alleged contractual relationship. Alar v Mercy Mem Hosp, 208 Mich App 518, 525; 529 NW2d 318 (1995). Further, the Trial Court could not offer the Counties anything in exchange for the Counties providing funding beyond that required by statute. The funding of the trial courts is not a bargained exchange subject to contract principles, but is a statutory obligation for the funding units and a constitutional right for the courts. Because the alleged con*186tract between the Trial Court and the Counties lacked consideration, plaintiffs contract claims must fail.4
Additionally, neither the statutes governing appropriations for trial courts nor Administrative Order No. 1998-5 provide that trial courts and their funding units can enter contracts concerning court appropriations. Rather, Administrative Order No. 1998-5 speaks only of contracts between the courts and their employees. Because courts have the authority and responsibility for personnel matters, any contract regarding the salaries or benefits of court employees should be between the court and its employees, not between the court and its funding unit.5
6The funding unit must appropriate sufficient funds to satisfy a contract between the court and *187its employees. If the funding unit considers an agreement between a local judiciary and its employees to be excessive because it appears that the budget reflecting the contract will exceed the total appropriation, the funding unit may file suit to test the reasonableness and necessity of the provisions contained in the agreement. Livingston Co, supra at 274; Stanley v Ferndale, 115 Mich App 703, 709; 321 NW2d 681 (1982). However, there is no legal authority supporting the pursuit of contract claims between courts and their funding units. Accordingly, I conclude that the contract claims lack legal merit.
II. SANCTIONS FOR FRIVOLOUS CLAIMS AND DEFENSES
The majority concludes in part VII of its opinion that the lower court properly sanctioned the Counties for raising frivolous fraud claims and defenses. I dissent because the sanction amounts to a duplicative award of attorney fees and costs to the Trial Court.
If a party raises a frivolous claim or defense, the court must award the prevailing party costs and fees incurred by that party in connection with the civil action. MCL 600.2591; MCR 2.625(A)(2). “The amount of costs and fees awarded under this section shall *188include all reasonable costs actually incurred by the prevailing party and any costs allowed by law or by court rule, including court costs and reasonable attorney fees.” MCL 600.2591(2). Thus, assuming that the Counties’ fraud claims and defenses were frivolous, the lower court had the duty to award the Trial Court reasonable attorney fees and costs. In re Attorney Fees and Costs, 233 Mich App 694, 705; 593 NW2d 589 (1999).
As recognized by the majority in part IV of its opinion, this Court concluded in Crawford Co, supra at 490-491, that, under the Trial Court’s inherent powers, it was entitled to recoup reasonable attorney fees and costs it incurred in litigating all its claims. The majority in the present case holds that the Trial Court is also entitled to attorney fees and costs under MCL 600.2591 for raising frivolous claims and defenses, thus effectively giving the Trial Court a duplicate recovery of attorney fees and costs.
In McAuley v Gen Motors Corp, 457 Mich 513, 525; 578 NW2d 282 (1998), repudiated in part on other grounds by Rafferty v Markovitz, 461 Mich 265, 273 n 6 (1999), our Supreme Court held that the plaintiff was not entitled to recover duplicative attorney fees under the mediation rule because he already had been fully reimbursed for his reasonable attorney fees under statute. In so holding, the Court explained that only compensatory damages generally are available in Michigan, and that punitive sanctions may not be imposed. Id. at 519-520.6 “Because the purpose of compensatory damages is to make the injured party whole for the losses *189actually suffered, the amount of recovery for such damages is inherently limited by the amount of loss; the party may not make a profit or obtain more than one recovery.” Id. at 520. If a party has already been fully reimbursed for reasonable attorney fees and costs, there are no “actual costs” remaining to be reimbursed. Id. at 520-521. However, if a party has been awarded something less than a reasonable attorney fee and there are actual costs remaining, an additional award may be appropriate in some cases. Id. at 521.7
Here, the Trial Court was awarded reasonable attorney fees and costs under the inherent power doctrine. MCR 2.625(A)(2) and MCL 600.2591 also provide for an award of court costs and reasonable attorney fees. But there is no indication in MCR 2.625(A)(2) or MCL 600.2591 that a double recovery would be appropriate. Further, the purposes of the statute, the court rule, or the Michigan Constitution would not be served by giving a court double recovery at the expense of its funding unit — a sum that would ultimately punish the taxpayers and result in the court recovering money that is not necessary for its functioning.
Because the Trial Court was already reimbursed for reasonable attorney fees and costs, I conclude that it is not entitled to a double recovery of these costs. McAu-ley, supra at 522-524.
For the purpose of addressing this issue, I shall assume without deciding that the claims and defenses pursued by the Counties were frivolous.
Administrative Order No. 1998-5, § II provides, in pertinent part:
A court must submit its proposed and appropriated annual budget and subsequent modifications to the State Court Administrator at the time of submission to or receipt from the local funding unit or units. The budget submitted must be in conformity with a uniform chart of accounts. If the local funding unit *184requests that a proposed budget be submitted in line-item detail, the chief judge must comply with the request. ... A chief judge may not enter into a multiple-year commitment concerning any personnel economic issue unless: (1) the funding unit agrees, or (2) the agreement does not exceed the percentage increase or the duration of a multiple-year contract that the funding unit has negotiated for its employees. [459 Mich clxxvi-clxxvii.]
The lower court’s finding that funding for the retirement plan was reasonable and necessary for the Trial Court to function is reviewed for clear error. MCR 2.613(C); Alan Custom Homes, Inc v Krol, 256 Mich App 505, 512; 667 NW2d 379 (2003). Clear error exists only where a reviewing court “is left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made.” Id. While I have concerns whether the funding of a retirement plan can be necessary to the functioning of a court, I cannot conclude definitively that the lower court erred in making this finding, given the unique circumstances surrounding the merger of courts under the demonstration project imposed upon the Counties.
Plaintiff alleged alternative counts of breach of contract and contract implied in law (quantum meruit), which it was entitled to do under MCR 2.111(A)(2). H J Tucker & Assoc, Inc v Allied Chucker & Engineering Co, 234 Mich App 550, 573; 595 NW2d 176 (1999). Quantum meruit is an equitable principle. In re McKim Estate, 238 Mich App 453, 458; 606 NW2d 30 (1999).
“A contract implied in law is not a contract at all but an obligation imposed by law to do justice even though it is clear that no promise was ever made or intended. A contract may be implied in law where there is a receipt of a benefit by a defendant from a plaintiff and retention of the benefit is inequitable, absent reasonable compensation. However, this fiction is not applicable where there exists a relationship between the parties that gives rise to the presumption that services were rendered gratuitously.” [Id. at 457-458, quoting In re Lewis Estate, 168 Mich App 70, 74; 423 NW2d 600 (1988) (citations deleted).]
In the present case, there can be no contract implied in law because the Counties did not receive any benefit from the Trial Court. The Counties were statutorily and constitutionally obligated to fund the retirement plan whether or not the Trial Court employees gave up employment benefits in exchange for implementation of the retirement plan.
In Judicial Attorneys Ass’n, supra at 299 n 6, our Supreme Court noted:
*187Over the years, some trial court judges have arrived at agreements under which the trial courts have allowed their funding units to negotiate on their behalf directly with court employees. In those jurisdictions, typically, the terms and conditions of the court employees vary little if at all from those of the funding unit employees. In contrast, in many jurisdictions the funding units have not desired to play any role concerning the terms and conditions of trial court employment. And in a few jurisdictions, from time to time, courts and their funding units have found themselves at loggerheads over employment issues. It is this category that our case law concerning separation of powers and court employment arises.
As the Court observed, there are “statutory exceptions to this general rule that specifically provide for punitive damages, e.g., MCL 15.240(7)..., MCL 600.2911(2)(b).. ., MCL 750.539h(c)... "McAuley, supra at 520 n 8.
In McAuley, supra at 522, our Supreme Court stated in obiter dicta that there are situations in which independent policies and purposes may serve to allow a party double recovery. But in Rafferty v Markovitz, supra at 273 n 6, the Supreme Court repudiated “the dicta in McAuley that left open the possibility of recovering attorney fees under both a court rule and a statute where each attorney-fee provision serves an independent purpose.”

=== CASE 2230155 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:38.317287+00 ===

720 N.E.2d 1273 (1999)
EVANSVILLE GARAGE BUILDERS, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
Jeff SHRODE and Jeanette Shrode, Appellees-Plaintiffs,
General Accident Insurance Company of North America, Cross-Appellant.
No. 82A01-9901-CV-17.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
December 28, 1999.
*1274 David D. Bell, Bamberger, Foreman, Oswald & Hahn, LLP, Evansville, Indiana, Attorney for Appellant.
Curt Angermeier, Evansville, Indiana, Attorney for Cross-Appellant.
Rodney H. Grove, Evansville, Indiana, Attorney for Appellees.
OPINION
MATTINGLY, Judge
This appeal is taken from default judgments entered in favor of Jeff and Jeanette Shrode (the "Shrodes"), first against Evansville Garage Builders ("Garage Builders") and then its insurer General Accident Ins. Co. of North America ("General Accident").[1] Both Garage Builders and General Accident raise two issues on appeal. We find dispositive the issue of whether the trial court abused its discretion in entering default judgment against Garage Builders when the Shrodes failed to provide notice of application for default judgment as required by Ind. Trial Rule 55(B). We therefore do not address the other issues raised by the parties.
*1275 We reverse and vacate both default judgments.[2]
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
In January 1997, the Shrodes allegedly suffered a loss to their home resulting from improvements performed by Garage Builders. That same month, Garage Builders' insurer, General Accident, became aware of this loss and issued two checks to the Shrodes totaling $12,274.76. Though these checks were never presented for payment, General Accident considered the case closed.
Six months later, on July 28, 1997, the Shrodes filed a complaint against Garage Builders for damage to their home on theories of negligence, breach of contract under Ind.Code § 24-5-11-10(a)(4),[3] and fraud. On September 4, 1997, counsel retained by Garage Builders entered an appearance and moved for an extension of time in which to respond. On October 23, 1997, Garage Builders timely filed its answer and affirmative defenses. According to the Scheduling Conference Order dated November 26, 1997, the matter was set for trial beginning August 24, 1998.
On February 17, 1998, counsel for Garage Builders filed a motion to withdraw. The matter was set for hearing on March 9, 1998 at which time Garage Builders failed to appear and the court granted the motion to withdraw. Garage Builders was without counsel of record until October 16, 1998.
On June 1, 1998, the Shrodes appeared before the court and requested a progress hearing. Pursuant to this request, the court ordered Garage Builders to appear for a progress hearing on June 29, 1998.[4] At the time of the progress hearing, Garage Builders failed to appear, by counsel or otherwise, and upon oral motion by the Shrodes was "defaulted" as to the issue of liability.
A hearing on damages was set for August 21, 1998.[5] In preparation for this hearing, Jeanette Shrode contacted James L. Defibaugh, an adjuster with General Accident, to inquire about reissuance of the settlement checks first issued in January 1997 but which, at that point, had become stale. General Accident claims this is the first it knew of the lawsuit against Garage Builders. Upon learning of the suit, Defibaugh attempted to contact Garage Builders to establish the status of the suit. After several unsuccessful attempts to reach Garage Builders' president Nall, Defibaugh called the Shrodes and explained the procedure for reissuing the settlement checks. On the date scheduled for the hearing on damages, Garage Builders failed to appear and the court, after hearing evidence, entered judgment for the Shrodes in the amount of $40,647.92.[6]
On September 24, 1998, the Shrodes instituted proceeding supplemental asking the court for judgment against General Accident as Garage Builders' insurer. A hearing was set for October 14, 1998 at which time General Accident failed to appear by counsel or representative. A default *1276 judgment was entered against General Accident. On October 16, 1998, counsel for General Accident entered an appearance and moved to set aside the garnishment default. On December 16, 1998, the trial court heard arguments on Garage Builders' and General Accident's motions to set aside the default judgments. These motions were denied and this appeal followed.
DISCUSSION
Garage Builders
When Garage Builders failed to appear for a progress hearing on June 29, 1998, the court, upon oral motion by the Shrodes, "defaulted" it on the issue of liability. Garage Builders argues the trial court's failure to set aside the default judgment was an abuse of discretion because the Shrodes failed to provide notice of the application for default judgment pursuant to T.R. 55(B). We agree.
Though the remedy is extreme in nature, it is within the purview of the trial court to sanction a recalcitrant party by entering a default judgment against it. T.R. 16(K) states in relevant part:
If without just excuse or because of failure to give reasonable attention to the matter, no appearance is made on behalf of a party at a pre-trial conference... the court may [order]:
(1) payment by the delinquent attorney or party of the reasonable expenses... [and/or]
(2) take such other action as may be appropriate.
"Such other action" may include entry of a default judgment against a defendant pursuant to T.R. 55. Farinelli v. Campagna, 166 Ind.App. 587, 593-94, 338 N.E.2d 299, 303 (1975) (recognizing the authority of the trial courts to order dismissals for violations of T.R. 16 orders); see also 2 William F. Harvey, Indiana Practice § 16.4 (2d ed.1988). We hold that when a trial court enters a default judgment against a party as a sanction under the authority of T.R. 16(k), as occurred here, it must follow the procedures prescribed by T.R. 55.[7]
The grant or denial of a T.R. 55 default judgment is within the sound discretion of the trial court. Precision Erecting, Inc. v. Wokurka, 638 N.E.2d 472, 473 (Ind.Ct.App.1994). T.R. 55(A) states that a party may be defaulted if it has "failed to plead or otherwise comply with these rules." Once a party is entitled to judgment by default, it must apply to the court for such judgment and a hearing will be held. "If the party against whom judgment by default is sought has appeared in the action, he ... shall be served with written notice of the application for judgment at least three [3] days prior to the hearing on such application." T.R. 55(B).
The Shrodes do not dispute that Garage Builders was entitled to three days notice of an application for default judgmentit clearly was so entitled. While notice is not required when a defendant has failed to enter an appearance, Jostens Learning Corp. v. Education Sys. Corp. of Ind., 651 N.E.2d 1186, 1189 (Ind.Ct.App. 1995), or if counsel has appeared and withdrawn and no responsive pleading was filed, Stewart v. Hicks, 182 Ind.App. 308, 312, 395 N.E.2d 308, 311 (1979), if "counsel appears and files a responsive pleading, and then withdraws his appearance, the litigant for purposes of T.R. 55(B) has appeared and notice of default is required." Horsley v. Lewis, 448 N.E.2d 41, 43 (Ind.Ct.App.1983). Therefore, even though Garage Builders' counsel had withdrawn, Garage Builders was still entitled to notice of any application for default judgment as it had appeared and filed a responsive pleading.
*1277 The Shrodes contend they more than complied with T.R. 55(B), as Garage Builders had notice of the progress hearing and was ordered to appear twenty-eight days in advance of the hearing. The notice sent to Garage Builders is reflected in the Chronological Case Summary which states that:
COMES NOW JEFF SHRODE AND JEANETTE SHRODE, PLTFS ... AND REQUESTS THE COURT TO SCHEDULE THIS MATTER FOR PROGRESS HEARING. COURT SETS PROGRESS HEARING FOR 6/29/98 AT 8:30 A.M., AT WHICH TIME THE DEFT, EVANSVILLE GARAGE BUILDERS IS ORDERED TO APPEAR.... (CC: R. GROVE; EVANSVILLE GARAGE BUILDERS, INC.)
(R. at 63.) The Shrodes do not argue Garage Builders was given notice of an application for default judgment; rather, they argue the notice of the progress hearing alone was sufficient to satisfy the requirements of T.R. 55(B). We disagree.
The language of T.R. 55(B) is not superfluous and strict adherence to the notice provision is required. Carroll v. Lordy, 431 N.E.2d 118, 126 (Ind.Ct.App.1982). Under the specific language of the rule, a party "shall be served with written notice of the application for judgment at least three [3] days prior to the hearing on such application." There is no question that Garage Builders was given notice of a progress hearing only and not of an application for default judgment. Notice of the progress hearing alone does not suffice. The fact that Garage Builders sat idle for months prior to being defaulted and likely would not have appeared even if given notice of an application for default judgment does not abrogate the need for specific notice.
Under T.R. 55(C), the proper procedure for setting aside a default judgment is to first file a Rule 60(B) motion. Siebert Oxidermo, Inc. v. Shields, 446 N.E.2d 332, 337 (Ind.1983). Under T.R. 60(B), the court may, at its discretion, relieve a party from a default judgment for a variety of reasons including "[m]istake, surprise, or excusable neglect," T.R. 60(B)(1), "the judgment is void," T.R. 60(B)(6), or "[a]ny reason justifying relief from the operation of the judgment, other than those reasons" explicitly stated. T.R. 60(B)(8). On review, a trial court's decision whether to set aside a default judgment is given substantial deference. Our review is limited and we will overturn a trial court's judgment only for an abuse of discretion. Jostens, 651 N.E.2d at 1188.
In this case, the Shrodes' failure to file an application for default judgment and give at least three days notice prior to a hearing on the application rendered the default judgment voidable. Standard Lumber Co. of St. John v. Josevski, 706 N.E.2d 1092, 1096 (Ind.Ct.App.1999). A voidable judgment "operates to accomplish the result sought to be accomplished, until the fatal flaw is judicially ascertained and declared." In re L.C., 659 N.E.2d 593, 599 (Ind.Ct.App.1995) (quoting Lucas v. Estate of Stavos, 609 N.E.2d 1114, 1117 (Ind.Ct. App.1993)). Such a judgment qualifies for relief under T.R. 60(B)(8) (the "catch-all provision"),[8]Standard Lumber, 706 N.E.2d at 1096, and is sufficient grounds for reversal. In Pinkston v. Livingston, 554 N.E.2d 1173, 1176 (Ind.Ct.App.1990), we found "an obvious error" when a default judgment was entered by a trial court on the same day the defendant failed to appear when no notice of an application for *1278 default was sent. See also Horsley, 448 N.E.2d at 43; Nehring v. Raikos, 413 N.E.2d 328, 330 (Ind.Ct.App.1980); Protective Ins. Co. v. Steuber, 175 Ind.App. 139, 146, 370 N.E.2d 406, 410 (1977); Northside Cab Co., Inc. v. Penman, 156 Ind.App. 577, 581, 297 N.E.2d 838, 841 (1973). We reverse and vacate the default judgment entered against Garage Builders because we find the trial court abused its discretion when it refused to set aside a voidable judgment brought to its attention within a reasonable time.
Though we vacate the default judgment and allow Garage Builders to defend on the merits, we note our disapproval of the lackadaisical manner in which Garage Builders approached its defense prior to default. Garage Builders ignored a court's order to appear for a progress hearing and thereby opened the door to sanctions. A party who ignores a trial court's orders does so at its own risk. The trial court was well within its authority to sanction Garage Builders for its failure to appear and could have entered a default judgment had the proper T.R. 55(B) procedures been followed. Since they were not, we must reverse and vacate the judgment.
General Accident
The default judgment entered against General Accident was in a proceeding supplemental. A judgment in a proceeding supplemental is merely a continuation of the underlying claim on the merits. Reversal of the underlying judgment, in this case the default judgment entered against Garage Builders, nullifies any proceedings supplemental. Koors v. Great Southwest Fire Ins. Co., 538 N.E.2d 259, 260 (Ind.Ct.App.1989). Because we vacate the default judgment against Garage Builders, the garnishment default against General Accident is thus nullified.
CONCLUSION
We find the trial court abused its discretion by failing to set aside the default judgment entered against Garage Builders because the judgment was voidable for lack of notice. Additionally, we find the garnishment default entered against General Accident is a nullity as it was entered in a proceeding supplemental. We vacate the trial court's decision and remand for further proceedings in accord with this opinion.
Reversed.
SHARPNACK, C.J., and BAKER, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  The default judgment against General Accident was entered at a hearing on proceedings supplemental.
[2]  Oral arguments were heard on December 1, 1999 in Evansville, Indiana.
[3]  This statute requires that a home improvement supplier provide the consumer with a completed home improvement contract. That contract must include certain information, including under subsection (a)(4) a "reasonably detailed description of the proposed home improvements."
[4]  Garage Builders claims not to have any records confirming receipt of the progress hearing notice.
[5]  Garage Builders acknowledges it received notice of the damages hearing. Garage Builders' president Charles Nall stated: "Apparently, a low level employee named John Tucker signed for the certified mail which gave notice of the damages hearing, but it was not brought to my attention prior to the hearing date of August 21, 1998." (R. at 55.)
[6]  This judgment was corrected nunc pro tunc to $35,122.00 on December 22, 1998. (R. at 73.)
[7]  We note that this differs from discovery sanctions under T.R. 37. A dismissal by the trial court as a sanction under T.R. 37 is involuntary and "the trial court [is] not required to follow the notice requirements applicable to default judgments." Hatfield v. Edward J. DeBartolo Corp., 676 N.E.2d 395, 400-01 (Ind.Ct.App.1997).
[8]  Generally under T.R. 60(B)(8), a defaulted party seeking relief from judgment must, in addition to establishing a valid ground for relief, present evidence of a meritorious defense. However, "where a default judgment is set aside because it was entered without notice or proper service, a meritorious defense need not be shown." Standard Lumber, 706 N.E.2d at 1096 (quoting Tardy v. Chumrley, 658 N.E.2d 959, 962 (Ind.Ct.App.1995)). We therefore do not address whether Garage Builders has a meritorious defense to the Shrodes' claim.

=== CASE 2230156 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:38.359885+00 ===

720 N.E.2d 1175 (1999)
Sandra GOLD as Administrator of the Estate of Margaret Frostick, Deceased, Appellant-Plaintiff,
v.
Badr A. ISHAK, M.D., Board of Trustees of Porter Memorial Hospital and Thomas Kalmbach, M.D., Appellee-Defendant.
No. 64A05-9809-CV-479.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
December 15, 1999.
*1178 William H. Tobin, Benjamen W. Murphy, Ruman Clements Tobin & Holub, Hammond, Indiana, Attorneys for Appellant.
David C. Jensen, Alyssa Stamatakos, Eichhorn & Eichhorn, Hammond, Indiana, Attorneys for Appellee Badr A. Ishak, M.D.
Robert J. Palmer, W. Todd Woelfer, May Oberfell & Lorber, South Bend, Indiana, Attorneys for Appellee for Thomas Kalmbach, M.D.
Kathleen M. Maicher, Robert D. Brown, Merrillville, Indiana, Attorneys for Appellee Porter Memorial Hospital. *1176
*1177 OPINION
SHARPNACK, Chief Judge
Sandra Gold[1] appeals the trial court's grant of a motion for judgment on the evidence in favor of Badr A. Ishak, M.D., Board of Trustees of Porter Memorial Hospital and Thomas Kalmbach, M.D. (collectively "Medical Providers"). Gold raises three issues which we consolidate and restate as whether the trial court erred in refusing to apply the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur and in granting the Medical Providers' motion for judgment on the evidence. We reverse and remand.
In addition, the Medical Providers raise one issue on cross-appeal which we restate as whether the trial court erred in failing to grant summary judgment in their favor. We affirm.
The relevant facts follow. On January 23, 1995, seventy-eight year old Margaret Frostick was admitted to Porter Memorial Hospital. Following an evaluation of Frostick and her medical tests, she was scheduled to have a right carotid endarterectomy.[2]
Dr. Kalmbach ordered monitored anesthesia care, a type of anesthesia commonly referred to as a "mac" be used in the procedure. The "mac" keeps a patient in a sedated state but still allows the patient to be responsive, so that her vital signs can be closely watched and oxygen can be administered. The "mac" method was chosen because Frostick was susceptible to certain complications due to having multiple *1179 systematic diseases, including diabetes and coronary artery disease. Supplemental oxygen was given to Frostick through a mask in order to prevent complications. The oxygen mask that was used came in only one size, and therefore did not provide an airtight seal.
In performing the carotid endarterectomy, Dr. Kalmbach used an electrocautery unit[3] provided by Porter Memorial Hospital. The electrocautery unit sat on a rolling cart that was about three feet high and measured about a foot and a half wide and a foot deep. A cord runs from the machine to a device that looks like a pencil that emits sparks which the doctor uses to cauterize blood vessels on the patient. There is also another cord that attaches to a grounding pad so the current can be dispersed through the patient to make the circuit complete during the procedure.
Frostick's surgery was performed on January 24, 1995. During the surgery, Dr. Kalmbach, Dr. Ishak, Dr. Joseph Venditti, Jr.[4] and Porter Memorial Hospital employees Grace Dytrt, a nurse, and Barbara Fugate, a surgical technologist, were present. Dr. Kalmbach was standing on Frostick's right side and Fugate was on Frostick's left side. Dr. Ishak was standing at the head of the bed and Dytrt was at the foot of the bed.
The following events occurred in the operating room. The circulating nurse, who was employed by Porter Memorial Hospital, used a skin preparation on Frostick called PhisoHex. Dr. Kalmbach placed towels on Frostick's face, and then, with the assistance of a circulating nurse, placed drapes around her that separated the electrocautery unit from the oxygen mask. The drapes were placed in such a manner that Dr. Kalmbach could not see Frostick's face or the oxygen mask from where he stood during the surgery. Dr. Ishak, the anesthesiologist, who was sitting at the head of the table, was the only person that could see Frostick's face.
During the procedure, a "popping" sound came from the electrocautery unit used by Dr. Kalmbach. Record, p. 360. Dr. Venditti then checked the settings on the unit. Dr. Kalmbach continued the procedure because everything appeared fine. A second "popping" sound was heard and Frostick began squirming under the towels and became very agitated. Record, p. 360. Fugate testified that she saw an unusually large spark. At that point, Dr. Ishak, Dr. Venditti and Fugate realized that the oxygen mask was on fire. Dr. Ishak or Dr. Venditti removed the burning mask from Frostick's face. Although the mask was in flames, the drapes were not burned. It is undisputed that the only thing that caught on fire was the oxygen mask. Frostick's face and chest were burned as a result of the fire.
Frostick presented a claim of negligent treatment to a medical review panel who concluded on August 26, 1996, that the Medical Providers had complied with the requisite standards of care in treating Frostick. On October 24, 1996, Frostick filed a complaint against the Medical Providers for medical malpractice. The Medical Providers all moved for summary judgment. The trial court denied the Medical Providers' motion for summary judgment, concluding that Frostick did not need to present direct evidence of a breach of the standard of care under the res ipsa loquitur doctrine and that the common knowledge exception applied, thus obviating the requirement for expert testimony on that subject. The Medical Providers moved to reconsider the denial of the motion for summary judgment, and the trial court denied that motion as well.
The trial commenced in August of 1998. At the close of Frostick's case the Medical Providers moved for judgment on the evidence. *1180 They asserted that Gold had failed to present direct evidence of a breach of the standard of care and that the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur and the "common knowledge" exception did not apply. Gold argued that this issue had been decided at the summary judgment stage and that the facts presented at trial were no different than the facts presented for the summary judgment motions. Nonetheless, the trial court granted the Medical Providers' motion for judgment on the evidence.
I.
The first issue is whether the trial court erred in not applying the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur and in granting the Medical Providers' motion for judgment on the evidence. Indiana Trial Rule 50 governs judgment on the evidence. It provides in relevant part:
"Where all or some of the issues in the case tried before a jury or an advisory jury are not supported by sufficient evidence or a verdict thereon is clearly erroneous as contrary to the evidence because the evidence is insufficient to support it, the court shall withdraw such issues from the jury and enter judgment thereon notwithstanding the verdict."
Ind. Trial Rule 50(A). Upon review of a motion for judgment on the evidence, we consider the evidence most favorable to the nonmoving party along with all reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom. Weinberg v. Geary, 686 N.E.2d 1298, 1301 (Ind.Ct.App.1997), reh'g denied, trans. denied. Judgment on the evidence should be denied unless there is a total absence of evidence or reasonable inference on at least one essential element of a plaintiff's case. Id. at 1301-1302. As long as there is probative evidence or a reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence presented or if reasonable people would differ as to the result, judgment on the evidence is improper. Id. at 1302. A motion for judgment on the evidence should be granted only in those cases where the evidence does not conflict, is susceptible to only one inference, and supports judgment for the movant. Id.
Medical malpractice actions are similar to other negligence actions. Slease v. Hughbanks, 684 N.E.2d 496, 498 (Ind. Ct.App.1997). Generally, the mere fact that an injury occurred will not give rise to a presumption of negligence. Baker v. Coca Cola Bottling Works, 132 Ind.App. 390, 394, 177 N.E.2d 759, 762 (1961). The plaintiff must prove that the defendant owed him a duty and that the defendant breached that duty, which proximately caused an injury to the plaintiff. Slease, 684 N.E.2d at 498. Physicians are not held to a duty of perfect care. Id. Instead, the doctor must exercise the degree of skill and care ordinarily possessed and exercised by a reasonably skillful and careful practitioner under same or similar circumstances. Id. at 498-499. To establish the applicable standard of care and to show a breach of that standard, a plaintiff generally must present expert testimony. Id. at 499. Because medicine is an inexact science, an inference of negligence usually will not arise simply because there is a bad result without proof of some negligent act. Carpenter v. Campbell, 149 Ind.App. 189, 194, 271 N.E.2d 163, 166 (1971). To hold otherwise would require physicians to insure rapid and proper recovery by their patients from any and all surgical and postoperative treatment. Id. However, the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur is a qualified exception to the general rule that the mere fact of injury will not create an inference of negligence. Baker, 132 Ind.App. at 394, 177 N.E.2d at 762.
Res ipsa loquitur literally means "the thing speaks for itself." Id. at 394, 177 N.E.2d at 761. Consequently, the facts or circumstances accompanying an injury may be such as to raise a presumption, or at least permit an inference, of negligence on the part of the defendant. Id., 177 N.E.2d at 761. The doctrine of res ipsa loquitur is a rule of evidence which allows an inference of negligence to be drawn from certain surrounding facts.
*1181 Vogler v. Dominguez, 624 N.E.2d 56, 61 (Ind.Ct.App.1993), reh'g denied, trans. denied. Application of the doctrine does not in any way depend on the standard of care imposed by law but, rather, depends entirely upon the nature of the occurrence out of which the injury arose. Id. Whether the doctrine applies in any given negligence case is a mixed question of law and fact. Id. The question of law is whether the plaintiff's evidence included all the underlying elements of res ipsa loquitur. Shull v. B.F. Goodrich Co., 477 N.E.2d 924, 928 (Ind.Ct.App.1985) reh'g denied, trans. denied. We have previously held that
"[u]nder the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur, negligence may be inferred where [1] the injuring instrumentality is shown to be under the management or exclusive control of the defendant or his servants and [2] the accident is such as in the ordinary course of things does not happen if those who have management of the injuring instrumentality use proper care."
Vogler, 624 N.E.2d at 61 (emphasis added). A plaintiff relying upon res ipsa loquitur may show that the event or occurrence was more probably the result of negligence by relying upon common sense and experience or by expert testimony. Id. The plaintiff's burden in this regard is to produce a reasonable showing that the injury was indeed one which would not ordinarily occur in the absence of proper care on the part of those who manage or maintain the instrumentality. Id.
A.
We first look to whether Gold has shown that the injuring instrumentality was under the management or exclusive control of the Medical Providers. See Vogler, 624 N.E.2d at 61. The element of "exclusive control" is a broad concept which focuses upon who has the right or power of control and the opportunity to exercise it, rather than actual physical control. Id. Exclusive control is satisfied if the defendant had control at the time of the alleged negligence. Id. at 61-62. Exclusive control may be shared control if multiple defendants each have a nondelegable duty to use due care. Id. at 62. In proving the element of exclusive control, the plaintiff is not required to eliminate with certainty all other possible causes and inferences, but must show either that the injury can be traced to a specific instrumentality or cause for which the defendant was responsible, or that the defendant was responsible for all reasonably probable causes to which the accident could be attributed. Id. The reason for this is because proof in a res ipsa loquitur case seldom points to a single specific act or omission; typically, it points to several alternative explanations involving negligence without indicating which of them is more probable than the other. Id. Hence, a plaintiff may offer such evidence as may be available tending to show specifically the items of negligence and still rely upon the inference permitted under res ipsa loquitur. Id.
Here, Dr. Kalmbach placed towels on Frostick's face, and then, with the assistance of a circulating nurse, placed drapes around her. During the surgery, Dr. Kalmbach used an electrocautery unit that was supplied by Porter Memorial Hospital and Dr. Ishak controlled the oxygen mask. A nurse and surgical technologist employed by the Hospital were also present during the surgery. Dr. Kalmbach and Dr. Ishak admitted that the source of ignition for the fire must have been the electrocautery unit. Dr. Kalmbach testified that the oxygen mask may have become displaced enough to break the seal while Dr. Ishak testified that the mask did not produce an air-tight seal, therefore oxygen could escape. There is no evidence that anyone else participated in the procedure or made use of the electrocautery unit, the drapes, or the mask. Therefore, Gold has presented evidence that the electrocautery unit and the oxygen mask were the injuring instrumentalities and were under the *1182 exclusive control of the Medical Providers. See Vogler, 624 N.E.2d at 61.
B.
Next, we look to whether a fire under these circumstances is such that in the ordinary course of things it would not happen if the Medical Providers used proper care in relation to the electrocautery unit and oxygen mask. See Vogler, 624 N.E.2d at 61. Here, the doctors used an electrocautery unit near an oxygen source, creating a risk of fire. The risk of fire here was especially great because the type of oxygen mask used did not produce an air tight seal. Therefore, during this procedure drapes were used to separate the electrocautery unit from the oxygen. Although Dr. Kalmbach claims that the electrocautery unit did not come any closer than the operative area which was four inches from the oxygen mask, neither Dr. Ishak or Dr. Kalmbach can explain how the elements combined here to cause the fire.
Gold's expert, Dr. Stephen Lalka,[5] testified that he has performed the carotid endarterectomy procedure over 400 times. Although Dr. Lalka testified that the use of the electrocautery unit combined with the use of supplemental oxygen does not itself fall below the standard of care, he stated that he had never heard of a fire resulting from the procedure and asserted that it was not an expected result. Dr. Lalka opined that although the records did not show what went wrong, something clearly did. Dr. Lalka also stated that the fire was extremely unusual. Accordingly, Gold has presented evidence that a fire does not ordinarily happen during a carotid endarterectomy if those who have control of the electrocautery unit and oxygen mask use proper care. See Vogler, 624 N.E.2d at 61.
Gold has presented evidence that the electrocautery unit and oxygen mask were under the exclusive control of the Medical Providers and that the fire was such that the ordinary course of things would not happen if those who used these devices exercised proper care. See id. The conditions surrounding the surgery have met the underlying elements of the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur, and therefore, the inference of negligence is applicable. See Shull, 477 N.E.2d at 928. Consequently, the trial court erred in not applying res ipsa loquitur.
The Medical Providers present several arguments to support their claim that the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur should not be applied to this case because Frostick did not present sufficient evidence to establish that the fire was most probably the result of negligence. First, the Medical Providers argue that Frostick's own expert testified that there were several possible causes for the fire and that none of them were a result of negligence or a breach of the standard of care.
Under the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur it is not necessary for a plaintiff to exclude every other possibility other than the defendant's negligence as a cause for the plaintiff's injury. Merriman v. Kraft, 253 Ind. 58, 63, 249 N.E.2d 485, 487 (Ind. 1969). Once a plaintiff has presented sufficient evidence to bring himself within the operation of the doctrine, the burden of going forward with the evidence to explain the accident is cast upon the defendant. Hammond v. Scot Lad Foods, Inc., 436 N.E.2d 362, 364 (Ind.Ct.App.1982) However, even though the defendant comes forward with an explanation of the accident and evidence of his careful inspection, tests, and due care, the inference of negligence drawn from the facts does not disappear from the case, but instead remains, and is placed upon the scales to be weighed by the trier of fact along with any *1183 and all explanations of the defendant, as well as all of the other evidence. Id.
Here, the Medical Providers argue that the PhisoHex skin preparation or hair on Frostick's face could have caused the fire. Consequently, they argue that the fire could have occurred without any negligence on their part. On cross-examination, Dr. Lalka opined that it was possible that no medical provider breached the standard of care. He testified that, based upon the records prepared by the defendants, it was possible that the medical providers properly draped Frostick. Dr. Lalka espoused his two "best guess theor[ies]" for what could have happened, based upon all the records being complete and accurate. Record, p. 342. Those were that it was possible that either facial hair or PhisoHex could have been the fuel for the fire which was ignited by the electrocautery unit. However, it is not necessary for Gold to exclude every other possibility other than the Medical Providers' negligence as a cause. See Merriman, 253 Ind. at 63, 249 N.E.2d at 487. We conclude that although the Medical Providers have come forward with an explanation of the accident and evidence of due care, the inference of negligence drawn from the facts does not disappear from the case, but instead remains, and should be placed upon the scales to be weighed by the trier of facts along with all of the other evidence. See Hammond, 436 N.E.2d at 364.
Next, the Medical Providers argue that the jury should not be allowed to exercise its common knowledge to decide this case. Therefore, they conclude there is no evidence that Frostick's injury was probably the result of negligence. However, we have held that res ipsa loquitur can be proven through expert testimony or common knowledge. Vogler, 624 N.E.2d at 61. In this case there was evidence provided by expert testimony to support the inference of negligence. Therefore, we need not address the Medical Providers argument against the use of common knowledge, but will do so because this issue may arise on remand.
The Medical Providers assert that the common knowledge exception does not apply here because the carotid endarterectomy was a complicated medical procedure. Ordinarily the standard of care that is required of a doctor may not be resolved without resort to expert testimony. Stumph v. Foster, 524 N.E.2d 812, 815 (Ind.Ct.App.1988) reh'g denied. However, expert testimony is required only when the issue of care is beyond the realm of the lay person. Id. The standard of care need not be established by expert opinion when the doctor's conduct was understandable by the jury without extensive technical input. Id.
Here, Frostick's face and shoulder were burned as a result of a fire that started during her surgery for a right carotid endarterectomy. Common sense tells us that injury to the patient from a fire in the operating room is not a frequent or expected outcome of surgery. In performing the carotid endarterectomy, Dr. Kalmbach used an oxygen mask which did not provide an airtight seal in conjunction with an electrocautery unit which emitted sparks. The Doctors recognize, as do we, that the use of the electrocautery unit near an oxygen source creates a risk of fire.
Therefore, we conclude that expert testimony is not required because a fire occurring during surgery where an instrument that emits a spark is used near a source of oxygen is not beyond the realm of the lay person to understand.[6]See Stumph, 524 *1184 N.E.2d at 815. While mere use of the electrocautery unit combined with the use of supplemental oxygen may not itself fall below the standard of care, it is easily understandable to the common person that careless use of the two could cause a fire and result in bodily injury. Moreover, the doctor's conduct was understandable by the jury without extensive technical input. See Stumph, 524 N.E.2d at 815, 816 (holding res ipsa loquitur applicable thus raising an inference of negligence because a rational trier of fact could infer that a careful chiropractor would not have broken the plaintiff's rib while manipulating her spine); Burke v. Capello, 520 N.E.2d 439, 441 (Ind.1988) (holding that expert testimony was not required where a doctor used liquid cement in a wound during surgery because a rational trier of fact could have inferred from the admissible evidence that the cement would have been in at least a hardening state and thus perceptible by sight or touch to a careful observer engaged in the process of cleansing the wound of debris, instruments, and other paraphernalia), overruled on other grounds by, Vergara by Vergara v. Doan, 593 N.E.2d 185, 186 (Ind.1992).
The Medical Providers argue that the common knowledge exception only applies where foreign objects have been left in a patient's body. Among other cases, they rely upon Weinberg, 686 N.E.2d at 1302. In Weinberg, we stated that "a plaintiff is not required to present expert testimony in cases where a deviation from the standard of care is a matter within the common understanding of lay persons and the deficiency of the physician's conduct `speaks for itself' " Id. They rely on our statement that "`common knowledge' or res ipsa loquitur exception, has been narrowly construed to apply only in cases of `obvious' malpractice and, thus, has typically been limited to cases involving the failure of an operating physician to remove some surgical implement or other foreign object from the patient's body." Id. (emphasis added). Although we have typically limited the use of common knowledge to cases involving the physician's failure to remove an object, that does not preclude the use of the res ipsa loquitur or common knowledge exception in other cases, such as this one. See id.
Finally, the Medical Providers assert that the focus should be on their actions, not the ultimate result. For this assertion, they rely upon our statement in Whyde v. Czarkowski that common knowledge applies when "`the complained-of conduct is so obviously substandard that one need not possess medical expertise in order to recognize the breach. It is otherwise when the question involves the delicate inter-relationship between a particular medical procedure and the causative effect of that procedure upon a given patient's structure, endurance, biological makeup, and pathology. The sophisticated subtleties of the latter question are not susceptible to resolution by resort to mere common knowledge.'"
Whyde v. Czarkowski, 659 N.E.2d 625, 628 (Ind.Ct.App.1995), trans. denied (quoting Malooley v. McIntyre, 597 N.E.2d 314, 319. (Ind.Ct.App.1992)). Here, we are looking at whether negligence can be inferred from a fire resulting where oxygen and a spark were used in close proximity during surgery, not the effect of the right carotid endarterectomy on Frostick's subsequent health. See Whyde, 659 N.E.2d at 628. Therefore, there are no "sophisticated subtleties" to this question which would require expert testimony. See id.
The evidence presented at trial clearly shows that Gold has established the elements necessary for the inference of res ipsa loquitur. See Vogler, 624 N.E.2d at *1185 61. Consequently, the trial court erred in granting the Medical Providers' motion for judgment on the evidence. See Weinberg, 686 N.E.2d at 1302.
For the forgoing reasons, we reverse the trial court's grant of the Medical Providers' motion for judgment on the evidence and remand the case to the trial court for a new trial. Reversed.
II.
We now address the Medical Providers' claim on cross appeal. That is, whether the trial court erred in failing to grant summary judgment in their favor. The evidence before the trial court at the time of the Medical Providers' motion for summary judgment was for all intents and purposes the same as that before the trial court when it granted their motion for judgment on the evidence, with the exception of Dr. Lalka's testimony that something might be missing from the records. Having concluded that there was sufficient evidence from which a jury could conclude the Medical Providers were negligent, we necessarily conclude that the evidence at the summary judgment stage was sufficient to create a genuine issue of material fact as to the negligence of the Medical Providers. See Scott v. Bodor, Inc., 571 N.E.2d 313, 318 (Ind.Ct.App.1991). Therefore, the trial court did not err in denying the Medical Provider's motion for summary judgment. See id.
For the forgoing reasons, we affirm the trial court's denial of the motion for summary judgment.
Affirmed.
MATTINGLY, J., and BAKER, J. concur.
NOTES
[1]  Gold is the administrator of the estate and daughter of Margaret Frostick who was the plaintiff patient in this case until her death on July 12, 1998.
[2]  A right carotid endarterectomy is a procedure that is performed on the patient's right carotid artery which is on the right side of the face and neck. During the surgery the patient's head is turned to the left side to expose the right side of the neck.
[3]  The electrocautery unit is also referred to as a "bovie." Record, p. 208.
[4]  Dr. Venditti is not a party to this case. However, he was the assistant surgeon for Frostick's procedure.
[5]  Dr. Lalka is a peripheral vascular surgeon who is a Professor or Surgery at Indiana University Medical Center.
[6]  Medical Providers argue that Slease controls the outcome of this case. However, the Slease court relied upon the fact that the plaintiff was unable to point to an instrument in the control of the defendants which was the probable cause of his burn. Slease, 684 N.E.2d at 499, 500. There was no evidence of a fire in Slease. In deciding whether expert testimony was required we stated that "the true question is whether the burn was caused by an instrument or technique used during the surgery and whether the instrument or technique was misused or whether burns are a common and expected result." Id. at 499. Frostick's situation is easily distinguishable because there is abundant evidence that the electrocautery unit was the instrumentality that caused the fire that resulted in her injury.

=== CASE 9742180 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:08:07.655881+00 ===

*375COOPER, J.
Plaintiff Katrina McKim1 appeals on leave granted a trial court order granting defendant Forward Lodging, Inc.’s motion for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(0(10) in this premises liability action. As there remains a question of material fact whether defendant breached its duty of care to plaintiff as an invitee, we reverse the trial court’s order and remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
I. FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
Defendant’s complex includes a hotel, conference center, and restaurant in West Branch, Michigan. At around 10:30 a.m. on the morning of January 6, 2001, a hotel guest, Verna Dolle, was injured when she slipped and fell on ice in defendant’s north parking lot. An ambulance was summoned and two paramedics arrived on the scene. Several of defendant’s employees came to Ms. Dolle’s assistance, including Jana Healey, the assistant manager of defendant’s restaurant. As Ms. Healey stepped off the sidewalk to cross the north parking lot, she also slipped and fell, breaking her ankle. At that time, a second ambulance was summoned and plaintiff arrived on the scene. After assessing Ms. Healey’s condition, plaintiff walked across the parking lot to her ambulance to obtain the appropriate medical equipment. On the way, plaintiff slipped and fell on the ice, hitting her head on the pavement. It is undisputed that the north parking lot had not been salted before Ms. Dolle fell. However, there was conflicting testimony on many issues pertaining to the condition of the north parking lot at the time of these falls. The witnesses presented different accounts regarding the visibility of *376the ice on the asphalt surface, when the parking lot was actually salted, and whether plaintiff was warned to be careful of the ice.2
Plaintiff subsequently filed the current premises liability action. On May 8, 2003, the trial court granted defendant’s motion for summary disposition of plaintiffs claims. The trial court found that defendant did not have a duty to warn plaintiff of the icy conditions, as the danger was open and obvious. One month later, the trial court denied plaintiffs motion for reconsideration as untimely. Plaintiffs motion was based upon the affidavit of an architect stating that the hotel’s roof design was defective, as it allowed water from melting snow to discharge onto the cooler parking lot surface, contributing to the formation of ice. Subsequently, the trial court denied plaintiffs motion for relief from judgment based on newly discovered evidence3 and fraud.4 Ms. Dolle, as a resident of Ohio, had filed a negligence action in federal court. Evidence presented in that case revealed that defendant was not only aware of the icy conditions in the north parking lot, but had actually created the dangerous condition on the previous day. Defendant’s employees spent several hours spraying hot water to dislodge an ice dam on the roof. There was evidence that mist from this activity coated the north parking lot and that the water poured over the roof created giant icicles on that side of the building. *377However, defendant never revealed this maintenance activity during plaintiffs case.5
II. DUTY OF CARE OWED TO A PARAMEDIC ON HOTEL PROPERTY
In granting leave to appeal, this Court ordered the parties “to address the issue of the duty owed by defendant, as a private business or commercial premises owner, to plaintiff given her status upon entry onto defendant’s premises as a paramedic or emergency medical responder employed by the county.”6 The parties were directed not to assume that plaintiff was an invitee.7 Plaintiff contends that she was an invitee on the premises. As plaintiff was summoned to care for an injured guest, plaintiff contended that she should receive the same protection as that guest. Defendant, however, contends that plaintiff was a licensee and that her right to recovery should be limited by the “fireman’s rule.”
Determining plaintiffs status on the land is especially important, as the possessors of land do not owe the same duty of care to all who enter.
A “licensee” is a person who is privileged to enter the land of another by virtue of the possessor’s consent. A landowner owes a licensee a duty only to warn the licensee of any hidden dangers the owner knows or has reason to know of, if the licensee does not know or have reason to *378know of the dangers involved. The landowner owes no duty of inspection or affirmative care to make the premises safe for the licensee’s visit. Typically, social guests are licensees who assume the ordinary risks associated with their visit.[8]
Invitees, however, are owed a higher duty of care. “An ‘invitee’ is ‘a person who enters upon the land of another upon an invitation which carries with it an implied representation, assurance, or understanding that reasonable care has been used to prepare the premises, and make [it] safe for [the invitee’s] reception.’ ”9 In Michigan, the definition of “invitee” has been limited to one who is invited onto the land for a commercial purpose:
[W]e conclude that the imposition of additional expense and effort by the landowner, requiring the landowner to inspect the premises and make them safe for visitors, must be directly tied to the owner’s commercial business interests. It is the owner’s desire to foster a commercial advantage by inviting persons to visit the premises that justifies imposition of a higher duty. In short, we conclude that the prospect of pecuniary gain is a sort of quid pro quo for the higher duty of care owed to invitees. Thus, we hold that the owner’s reason for inviting persons onto the premises is the primary consideration when determining the visitor’s status: In order to establish invitee status, a plaintiff must show that the premises were held open for a commercial purpose.[10]
What status to grant a county-employed paramedic responding to an emergency on private property is an *379issue of first impression for this Court. As noted above, defendant asks this Court to determine that a paramedic is a licensee and to extend the “fireman’s rule” to limit a paramedic’s right to recovery. In Kreski v Modem Wholesale Electric Supply Co,11 the Michigan Supreme Court adopted the common-law “fireman’s rule.”
Thus, as a matter of public policy, we hold that fire fighters or police officers may not recover for injuries occasioned by the negligence which caused their presence on the premises in their professional capacities. This includes injuries arising from the normal, inherent, and foreseeable risks of the chosen profession.[12]
The public policy arguments in favor of adopting such a rule included the fact that the very nature of the service provided by police officers and firefighters is to confront dangerous situations for the protection of the public.13 As they respond to emergency situations, “ [f]ire fighters and police officers often arrive at unpredictable times and may enter portions of the premises not open to the public.”14 It would, therefore, be unreasonably burdensome to require landowners to prepare their premises for the arrival of these emergency personnel.15 Furthermore, limiting the recovery of firefighters and police officers to worker’s compensation benefits fairly spreads the cost of injury onto the public.16
Under the common-law rule, there may have been room to extend the limitation on recovery to paramed*380ics; however, we need not decide that issue.17 The Michigan Legislature abolished the common-law rule18 and enacted a statutory version.19 With certain delineated exceptions and limitations, the statutory “fireman’s rule” prevents “a firefighter or police officer who seeks to recover damages for injury or death arising from the normal, inherent, and foreseeable risks of his or her profession while acting in his or her official capacity” from recovering from a landowner for his or her injuries.20 According to the clear and unambiguous language of the statute, only firefighters and police officers have a limited right to recover for injuries. There is no room for interpretation, and we must reject defendant’s request to extend the limitation.21
We also reject defendant’s contention that plaintiff should be treated as a licensee. We first note that plaintiff responded to a call from defendant to assist a hotel guest and an employee. Both of these parties were clearly invitees on defendant’s property. Ms. Dolle, as a paying guest of the hotel was obviously on the premises for a commercial purpose.22 Before the Stitt commercial *381purposes test was introduced into Michigan jurisprudence, employees were considered invitees of the landowner.23 We see no need to change the status of employees under the commercial purposes test. An employee furthers a landowner’s pecuniary gain and, therefore, is clearly on the land for the owner’s commercial purpose. Beyond owing its hotel guest and employee the heightened duty of care of an invitor to an invitee, defendant also had a special relationship with both of these parties, obligating defendant to provide aid and assistance not available to the general public. It is well settled that a special relationship exists between an innkeeper and his or her guests and between an employer and his or her employee mandating a heightened standard of care.24
Plaintiff contends that she is entitled to the same standard of care as those she was summoned to assist. We agree. Defendant held its property open to the general public for commercial purposes. On the property, defendant ran a hotel, restaurant, and conference center. Integral to defendant’s ability to conduct its business was the provision of a parking lot open to everyone using these facilities. It is true that plaintiff was not on the property to make use of any of the services provided by defendant. However, there need not be a direct commercial gain from the particular visitor to be considered an invitee. In determining to limit the highest standard of care to business invitees alone, the Michigan Supreme Court adopted the reasoning in the Florida Supreme Court decision of McNulty v *382Hurley 25 In McNulty, the court found that, in order to become an invitee,
“the person entering the premises, i.e. the invitee, must have done so for purposes which would have benefited the owner or occupant of the premises, i.e. the invitor, or have been of mutual benefit to the invitee and the invitor. And as we view it this benefit must be of a material or commercial rather than of a spiritual, religious, or social nature.”[26]
Therefore, the Michigan Supreme Court found “a business purpose or a business or commercial benefit to the landowner as a necessary requirement in order for a visitor to be deemed an invitee.”27
Plaintiffs presence on the property provided a commercial benefit to defendant. She provided emergency medical services in an open public area to fellow invitees on the property. Defendant was required to seek plaintiffs medical services both because Ms. Dolle and Ms. Healey were invitees and because defendant shared a special relationship with the injured parties. As plaintiffs presence was directly tied to those interests, we find that she was also an invitee on defendant’s property and was, therefore, owed a heightened duty of care as an invitee.28
*383III. OPEN AND OBVIOUS DOCTRINE
Plaintiff contends that the trial court erroneously granted defendant’s motion for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(10) as there remained a question of material fact whether defendant breached its duty of care. This Court reviews a trial court’s determination regarding a motion for summary disposition de novo.29 A motion under MCR 2.116(C)(10) tests the factual support of a plaintiffs claim.30 “In reviewing a motion for summary disposition brought under MCR 2.116(C)(10), we consider the affidavits, pleadings, depositions, admissions, or any other documentary evidence submitted in [the] light most favorable to the nonmoving party to decide whether a genuine issue of material fact exists.”31 Summary disposition is appropriate only if there are no genuine issues of material fact, and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.32 We review the trial court’s denial of plaintiffs motion for relief from judgment for an abuse of discretion and the underlying findings of fact for clear error.33
“In general, a premises possessor owes a duty to an invitee to exercise reasonable care to protect the invitee from an unreasonable risk of harm caused by a dangerous condition on the land.”34 The open and obvious *384doctrine presents a major exception to the general rule. This Court recently described the open and obvious doctrine in Michigan as follows:
An invitor is protected from liability, however, if the danger is open and obvious.23 Michigan’s open and obvious doctrine was initially based on the Restatement of Torts.24 Under the Restatement approach, a premises possessor is not liable for harm caused by known or obvious dangers “unless the possessor should anticipate the harm despite such knowledge or obviousness.”25 A possessor must still warn or protect an invitee against open and obvious dangerous conditions when the possessor should anticipate the harm.26
However, in Lugo v Ameritech Corp, our Supreme Court replaced the Restatement approach with a special aspects analysis as follows:
“[T]he general rule is that a premises possessor is not required to protect an invitee from open and obvious dangers, but if special aspects of a condition make even an open and obvious risk unreasonably dangerous, the premises possessor has a duty to undertake reasonable precautions to protect invitees from that risk.”[27]
A special aspect exists when the danger, although open and obvious, is unavoidable or imposes a “uniquely high likelihood of harm or severity of harm.”28 Pursuant to Lugo, a court must “focus on the objective nature of the condition of the premises at issue, not on the subjective degree of care used by the plaintiff” or other idiosyncratic factors related to the particular plaintiff29
The Supreme Court recently solidified this... legal premise in Mann v Shusteric Enterprises, Inc. ... The Supreme Court held that courts must examine whether a danger is open and obvious, and whether special aspects render an open and obvious condition unreasonably dangerous, from the perspective of “a reasonably prudent person.”33 Whether a dangerous condition is open and obvious is “not dependent on the characteristics of a particular plaintiff. .. .”34
*385The open and obvious danger doctrine is equally applicable in those cases involving the accumulation of ice and snow on a winter day.36 As early as 1975, the Michigan Supreme Court found that a landowner could be liable for injuries caused by the natural accumulation of ice and snow. In Quinlivan v The Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Co,37 the Supreme Court held:
*386[W]e reject the prominently cited notion that ice and snow hazards are obvious to all and therefore may not give rise to liability. While the invitor is not an absolute insurer of the safety of the invitee, the invitor has a duty to exercise reasonable care to diminish the hazards of ice and snow accumulation.... As such duty pertains to ice and snow accumulations, it will require that reasonable measures be taken within a reasonable time after an accumulation of ice and snow to diminish the hazard of injury to the invitee.[38]
More recently, the Supreme Court found in Mann v Shusteric Enterprises, Inc:39
Thus, in the context of an accumulation of snow and ice, Lugo means that, when such an accumulation is “open and obvious,” a premises possessor must “take reasonable measures within a reasonable period of time after the accumulation of snow and ice to diminish the hazard of injury to [plaintiff]” only if there is some “special aspect” that makes such accumulation “unreasonably dangerous.”[40]
Pursuant to Mann, this Court must apply the open and obvious danger doctrine and principles regarding special aspects to all premises liability actions, including those involving the accumulation of black ice 41A landowner has a duty to inspect the premises and “make any necessary repairs or warn [invitees] of any discovered hazards.”42 Furthermore, the duty of a landowner *387to take reasonable measures within a reasonable time following the accumulation of ice and snow to reduce the risk of injury remains intact where the accumulation is not open and obvious or where special aspects exist.43
The parties presented conflicting evidence regarding the icy conditions in defendant’s north parking lot on the morning of January 6, 2001. One witness claimed that the parking lot was a mix of ice and snow, one that the lot merely appeared wet, and yet another claimed that the lot was completely covered by a sheet of ice. Other witnesses asserted that the ice was not visible because it was covered by snow. Regardless of this disagreement, the trial court properly found that the condition was open and obvious under the circumstances. Plaintiff arrived on the scene of a multiple-victim slip and fall accident on a cold winter day in northern Michigan. Given that two people had fallen and no one claimed that the north parking lot was clear and dry, plaintiff should have realized that ice was present. However, even if the icy condition of the north parking lot was open and obvious, the fact that defendant created the situation and failed to take immediate remedial action is a special aspect rendering the condition unreasonably dangerous.
Plaintiff presented evidence that defendant created the icy condition in the north parking lot on the day prior to the accident by spraying hot water on the roof to dislodge an ice dam. In depositions taken in the federal action brought by Ms. Dolle, defendant’s general manager and former maintenance manager both *388admitted that such action was taken on the roof above the restaurant kitchen on January 5, 2001. However, both witnesses claimed that any water run-off flowed over onto the east parking lot. Another former employee, Clifford Brody, testified that he witnessed the maintenance activity. While standing outside an employee entrance on the north side of the building, Mr. Brody watched giant plumes of steam rise from the roof where the maintenance men were attempting to dislodge the ice. The water running over the edge of the roof created giant icicles like a lava flow along the gutter downspouts on the north side of the building. Mr. Brody even slipped, but did not fall, as the north parking lot became slippery throughout the day. Furthermore, there was evidence that there was a brisk northwesterly wind on January 5, 2001, which would have blown the mist from the plume of steam over the north parking lot. When the maintenance department completed its activities on the roof, Mr. Brody stated that he informed employees of the icy conditions and advised them to salt the north parking lot. However, the former maintenance manager admitted in his deposition that no salt was spread in the parking lot until after Ms. Dolle’s fall.44
Plaintiff was unable to introduce this evidence to the trial court until her motion for relief from judgment, as defendant never disclosed this activity in her case. Defendant asserted in answers to interrogatories that it had no knowledge of the icy conditions until Ms. Dolle’s fall. The first indication that defendant had knowledge of and actually created the condition came from a July 8, 2003 affidavit signed by probate judge Eugene Tur-*389kelson. Judge Turkelson is Ms. Dolle’s nephew. On July 4, 2001, he met Ms. Healey in a local store. Ms. Healey told the judge about her conversation with Mr. Brody regarding the maintenance activities on the kitchen roof on the day before her accident.
Based on this evidence, we find that plaintiff created a question of material fact regarding defendant’s knowledge of the icy condition of the north parking lot. Defendant’s own activities created the icy conditions. Furthermore, defendant’s maintenance men were placed on notice by Mr. Brody that their activities had led to an accumulation of ice, and yet took no action to remedy the situation within a reasonable time. Defendant’s negligent maintenance of the property and subsequent, and apparently purposeful, failure to remedy the situation created an unreasonably dangerous, unavoidable situation. Defendant’s patrons had full use of the north parking lot. Hotel guests who parked in the lot on the previous day when it was clear and dry would be forced to traverse the icy and unsalted lot to return to their vehicles. These patrons, such as Ms. Dolle, would be essentially trapped by the condition. Similarly, plaintiff was unable to avoid the dangerous condition as she was summoned to the aid of Ms. Dolle and Ms. Healey in the icy lot. Accordingly, the trial court improperly denied plaintiffs motion for relief from the order granting defendant’s motion for summary disposition.
Reversed and remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. We do not retain jurisdiction.
SMOLENSK!, J., concurred.
As Steven McKim’s claims are derivative from those of his wife, we will refer to Ms. McKim as the singular plaintiff.
The conflicting testimony regarding the condition of the parking lot, whether actions had been taken to remedy the icy conditions, and whether defendant warned plaintiff of the danger will be discussed in detail later.
MCR 2.612(C)(1)(b) (“Newly discovered evidence which by due diligence could not be discovered in time to move for a new trial under MCR 2.611(B).”).
MCR 2.612(C)(1)(c) (“Fraud (intrinsic or extrinsic), misrepresentation, or other misconduct of an adverse party.”).
We granted plaintiffs renewed motion to supplement the record on appeal to include the evidence presented in the federal case. McKim v Forward, Lodging, Inc, unpublished order of the Court of Appeals, entered February 24, 2005 (Docket No. 251498). This evidence will also be discussed in further detail later.
McKim v Forward Lodging, Inc, unpublished order of the Court of Appeals, entered March 25, 2004 (Docket No. 251498). However, such wording did not prohibit the parties from arguing that plaintiff was an invitee on defendant’s premises.
Id.
Stitt v Holland Abundant Life Fellowship, 462 Mich 591, 596; 614 NW2d 88 (2000), citing Wymer v Holmes, 429 Mich 66, 71 n 1; 412 NW2d 213 (1987), and Preston v Sleziak, 383 Mich 442, 451; 175 NW2d 759 (1970).
Id. at 596-597, quoting Wymer, supra at 71 n 1 (alterations in original).
Id. at 604 (emphasis in original).
Kreski v Modern Wholesale Electric Supply Co, 429 Mich 347; 415 NW2d 178 (1987).
Id. at 372.
Id. at 367.
Id. at 368, citing Prosser & Keeton, Torts (5th ed), § 61, p 431.
Id.
Id. at 369-370.
Even though it is unnecessary to determine whether the common-law "fireman’s rule” could he extended to limit a paramedic’s right to recovery, we note that such a limitation would be inappropriate in this case. Coming to the assistance of injured people, is not, by its nature, a dangerous job. Furthermore, plaintiff did not arrive on defendant’s premises at an unpredictable time and venture into areas closed to the public. Plaintiff arrived during normal business hours and remained in a parking lot open to the general public. See 2 Restatement Torts, 2d, § 345(2), p 227 (limiting the application of the common-law “fireman’s rule” when the public officer is injured on a portion of the land open to the general public).
MCL 600.2965.
MCL 600.2967.
MCL 600.2967(1) (emphasis added).
People v Morey, 461 Mich 325, 329-330; 603 NW2d 250 (1999).
See Upthegrove v Myers, 99 Mich App 776, 779; 299 NW2d 29 (1980) (finding that a hotel has a duty to protect its guests, as business invitees, from injury).
See, e.g., Riddle v McLouth Steel Products, 440 Mich 85; 485 NW2d 676 (1992) (treating an injured employee as an invitee when determining the landowner’s duty of care).
See Graves v Warner Bros, 253 Mich App 486, 494; 656 NW2d 195 (2002) (citing a long history of case law upholding these special relationships).
McNulty v Hurley, 97 So 2d 185 (Fla, 1957).
Stitt, supra at 605, quoting McNulty, supra at 188.
Id.
Plaintiff contends that she became an invitee by virtue of the emergency medical services act, MCL 333.20901 et seq., which requires a paramedic to respond to all emergency situations within his or her response area, MCL 333.20921(l)(b). As the emergency situation involved invitees of defendant, plaintiff argues that she should receive the same protection as those she was summoned to assist. However, the statute is silent regarding a landowner’s duty to paramedics on its property. As we have determined on other grounds that plaintiff was an invitee on defendant’s property, we need not consider plaintiffs contention in further detail.
Beaudrie v Henderson, 465 Mich 124, 129; 631 NW2d 308 (2001).
Auto-Owners Ins Co v Allied Adjusters & Appraisers, Inc, 238 Mich App 394, 397; 605 NW2d 685 (1999).
Singer v American States Ins, 245 Mich App 370, 374; 631 NW2d 34 (2001).
MacDonald v PKT, Inc, 464 Mich 322, 332; 628 NW2d 33 (2001).
People v McSwain, 259 Mich App 654, 681; 676 NW2d 236 (2003).
Lugo v Ameritech Corp, 464 Mich 512, 516; 629 NW2d 384 (2001), citing Bertrand v Alan Ford, Inc, 449 Mich 606, 609; 537 NW2d 185 (1995).
Lugo, supra at 516, citing Riddle [supra at 96].
Mann v Shusteric Enterprises, Inc, 470 Mich 320, 336-337; 683 NW2d 573 (2004) (CAVANAGH, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part), citing Lugo, supra at 528 (CAVANAGH, J., concurring), Bertrand [v Alan Ford, Inc, 449 Mich 606, 609; 537 NW2d 185 (1995)], and Perkoviq v Delcor Homes[ — ]Lake Shore Pointe, Ltd, 466 Mich 11, 16; 643 NW2d 212 (2002).
2 Restatement Torts, 2d, § 343A, p 218. See also Mann, supra at 337 (CAVANAGH, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part).
2 Restatement Torts, 2d, § 343A, comment f, p 220.
Lugo, supra at 517.
Id. at 518-519.
Id. at 523-524.
[Mann, supra] at 328-329.
Id. at 329 n 10.[35]
Bragan v Symanzik, 263 Mich App 324, 331-332; 687 NW2d 881 (2004) (some alterations in original).
Kenny v Kaatz Funeral Home, Inc, 264 Mich App 99, 106-107; 689 NW2d 737 (2004).
Quinlivan v The Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Co, Inc, 395 Mich 244; 235 NW2d 732 (1975).
Id. at 261.
Mann, supra.
Id. at 332 (alteration in original). Mann clarified the Quinlivan Court’s position that not all hazardous ice and snow conditions are obvious to all. See Kenny, supra at 107, quoting Mann, supra at 333 n 13.
Kenny, supra at 107. See also Corey v Davenport Coll of Business (On Remand), 251 Mich App 1, 7-8; 649 NW2d 392 (2002) (finding that the Quinlivan analysis had been subsumed by the open and obvious rule created in Lugo).
Stitt, supra at 597. See also O’Donnell v Garasic, 259 Mich App 569, 573; 676 NW2d 213 (2003) (a landowner must use reasonable care “to prepare the premises and to make them safe” for invitees).
Kenny, supra at 107. See also Riddle, supra at 93 (finding that Quinlivan’s holding that reasonable measures be taken to ehminate accumulations of ice and snow is part of the correct definition of the law regarding a landowner’s duty of care to invitees).
There was conflicting evidence regarding the exact time this salt was actually applied. Whether the salt was applied before or after plaintiffs arrival has no effect on our determination of this case, however.

=== CASE 2230160 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:38.4366+00 ===

720 N.E.2d 1131 (1999)
308 Ill. App.3d 1076
242 Ill.Dec. 176
Gencie M. PERKINS, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Frederick T. HARRIS, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 5-98-0767.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Fifth District.
November 18, 1999.
*1132 Jeffrey M. Skoglund, Greensfelder, Hemker & Gale, Belleville, for appellant.
Richard M. Roessler, Gundlach, Lee, Eggmann, Boyle & Roessler, Belleville, for appellee.
Justice HOPKINS delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant, Frederick T. Harris, appeals the trial court's order granting plaintiff's posttrial motion to tax costs. Plaintiff, Gencie M. Perkins, brought the underlying negligence action to recover for injuries plaintiff sustained in an automobile accident. The jury returned a verdict in favor of plaintiff, and the trial court entered judgment on the verdict. Plaintiff filed a posttrial motion to tax costs, including plaintiff's witness fee and the costs of videotaping and editing the deposition of plaintiff's treating physician. Over defendant's objection, the trial court granted plaintiff's posttrial motion.
In the instant appeal, defendant requests that we reverse the trial court's order granting plaintiff the cost of the witness fee and the cost of videotaping and editing the evidence deposition. We affirm.
I. FACTS
On July 11, 1997, plaintiff filed her complaint against defendant to recover for injuries plaintiff sustained in an automobile accident that occurred on January 29, 1996. At trial on September 24, 1998, plaintiff's treating physician, Jean-Claude Jacob, testified pursuant to a videotaped evidence deposition. The other witnesses at trial included plaintiff and defendant. The jury returned a verdict for plaintiff in the sum of $2,766.69. The trial court entered judgment on the verdict.
On September 28, 1998, plaintiff filed a posttrial motion to tax costs. Plaintiff requested that the court tax costs to defendant. These costs included $470 to Mudge Legal Video for videotaping and editing Dr. Jacob's evidence deposition, $190.45 to Kennedy M. Russell for transcribing Dr. *1133 Jacob's evidence deposition, and $375 to Dr. Jacob for testifying at the evidence deposition. The request, including other, undisputed costs, totaled $1,449.45. On September 30, 1998, defendant filed an objection to the portions of plaintiff's motion concerning the professional fee of Dr. Jacob for testifying at the evidence deposition and the charges of Mudge Legal Video for videotaping and editing the evidence deposition. After a hearing on October 27, 1998, the trial court granted plaintiff's motion to tax costs in the amount of $1,449.45, which included the amounts contested by defendant. Defendant filed his timely appeal.
II. DISCUSSION
Defendant asserts that the trial court erred in awarding the costs of Dr. Jacob's witness fee and of fees associated with videotaping and editing Dr. Jacob's evidence deposition because such costs are not provided for by statute. Plaintiff counters that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in awarding the costs associated with the evidence deposition because the award falls within statutory authority. We agree.
"At common law, a successful litigant was not entitled to recover from his opponent the costs and expenses of the litigation." Galowich v. Beech Aircraft Corp., 92 Ill.2d 157, 162, 65 Ill.Dec. 405, 441 N.E.2d 318 (1982). "The allowance and recovery of costs is therefore entirely dependent on statutory authorization." Galowich, 92 Ill.2d at 162, 65 Ill.Dec. 405, 441 N.E.2d 318.
The legislature has provided as follows:
"If any person sues in any court of this state in any action for damages personal to the plaintiff, and recovers in such action, then judgment shall be entered in favor of the plaintiff to recover costs against the defendant * * *." 735 ILCS 5/5-108 (West 1996).
"While the power to impose costs must ultimately be found in some statute, the legislature may grant the power in general terms to the courts, which in turn may make rules or orders under which costs may be taxed and imposed." Galowich, 92 Ill.2d at 162, 65 Ill.Dec. 405, 441 N.E.2d 318. Specifically, under section 1-105 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the legislature has established as follows:
"The Supreme Court may provide by rule for the orderly and expeditious administration and enforcement of this Act and of the rules, including * * * the assessment of costs * * *." 735 ILCS 5/1-105 (West 1996).
The supreme court has provided for the assessment of costs to the prevailing party by stating the following in Supreme Court Rule 208:
"(a) Who Shall Pay. The party at whose instance the deposition is taken shall pay the fees of the witness and of the officer and the charges of the recorder or stenographer for attending. The party at whose request a deposition is transcribed and filed shall pay the charges for transcription and filing. The party at whose request a tape-recorded deposition is filed without having been transcribed shall pay the charges for filing, and if such deposition is subsequently transcribed the party requesting it shall pay the charges for such transcription.
* * *
(d) Taxing as Costs. The aforesaid fees and charges may in the discretion of the trial court be taxed as costs." 134 Ill.2d R. 208(d).
Additionally, the legislature provided:
"This Act shall be liberally construed, to the end that controversies may be speedily and finally determined according to the substantive rights of the parties. The rule that statutes in derogation of the common law must be strictly construed does not apply to this Act or to the rules made in relation thereto." 735 ILCS 5/1-106 (West 1996).
*1134 Because neither the costs statute (735 ILCS 5/5-108 (West 1996)) nor the supreme court rules provide a specific definition of costs (see Galowich, 92 Ill.2d at 165, 65 Ill.Dec. 405, 441 N.E.2d 318), "[t]he proper definition of `costs' has been left for the courts to determine." Boyle v. Manley, 263 Ill.App.3d 200, 206, 200 Ill.Dec. 675, 635 N.E.2d 1014 (1994). Thus, the awarding of costs and fees "is discretionary with the trial court and will not be disturbed on review absent a clear abuse of discretion." Gleason v. Carter, 212 Ill. App.3d 206, 156 Ill.Dec. 474, 570 N.E.2d 1196 (1991); Perlman v. Time, Inc., 133 Ill.App.3d 348, 355, 88 Ill.Dec. 524, 478 N.E.2d 1132 (1985).
Videotape and Transcription Fee
The supreme court in Galowich held that Rule 208(d) authorizes "the trial court to tax as costs, in its discretion, the expenses only of those depositions necessarily used at trial." Galowich, 92 Ill.2d at 166, 65 Ill.Dec. 405, 441 N.E.2d 318. Noting that "neither the Illinois costs statute nor the supreme court rules provide a specific definition of costs," the Illinois Supreme Court defined costs as "allowances in the nature of incidental damages awarded by law to reimburse the prevailing party, to some extent at least, for the expenses necessarily incurred in the assertion of his rights in court." Galowich, 92 Ill.2d at 165-66, 65 Ill.Dec. 405, 441 N.E.2d 318. The court in Galowich reasoned that to assess as costs the defendant's discovery deposition expenses against a plaintiff who voluntarily dismisses his case before trial presents serious practical problems requiring the trial court to try the case hypothetically in an attempt to determine which depositions would necessarily be used. Galowich, 92 Ill.2d at 167, 65 Ill.Dec. 405, 441 N.E.2d 318; see also Premier Electrical Construction Co. v. Morse/Diesel, Inc., 257 Ill. App.3d 445, 462, 195 Ill.Dec. 626, 628 N.E.2d 1090 (1993) (where the court held that depositions listed in a motion for summary judgment were not necessary for use at trial because there was no trial). The supreme court in Galowich also explained that it is undesirable to encourage increased deposition-taking, and consequent increases in the delay and expense of litigation, with the prospect that the expense may eventually be recouped in an award of costs. Galowich, 92 Ill.2d at 167, 65 Ill.Dec. 405, 441 N.E.2d 318; see Galowich v. Beech Aircraft Corp., 209 Ill.App.3d 128, 154 Ill.Dec. 46, 568 N.E.2d 46 (1991) (Galowich II) (where the appellate court held that, although the defendant used the depositions during trial for impeachment purposes, the trial court still needed to make an independent determination that the deposition was necessary).
Defendant asserts in the case sub judice that even if the evidence deposition of Dr. Jacob is deemed necessarily used for trial, the only necessary means of recording that deposition was the typed transcription that plaintiff obtained through Kennedy Russell Reporting Service, not the videotape of Dr. Jacob's deposition obtained through Mudge Legal Video. Defendant asserts that the legislature did not provide for videotaping concurrently with transcription and, therefore, the use of the videotape and transcription cannot both be taxed as necessarily used at trial. Plaintiff counters that the trial court properly taxed as costs the charges associated with transcribing and recording the deposition pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 208.
We find the trial court did not abuse its discretion in taxing the costs of videotaping, editing, and transcribing the evidence deposition because the deposition itself was necessarily used at trial. First, Galowich held that the costs of the discovery deposition may be taxed in the discretion of the trial court when the discovery deposition is necessarily used at trial. In the present case, Dr. Jacob was the primary treating physician of plaintiff with respect to the auto accident, and Dr. Jacob could not testify live at trial due to his demanding *1135 surgery schedule. Dr. Jacob's deposition was an evidence deposition necessarily used at trial: it was played for the jury in lieu of Dr. Jacob's live testimony.
Our holding is consistent with the policy considerations in Galowich. Taxing the costs of Dr. Jacob's evidence deposition does not encourage increased deposition-taking because evidence depositions substitute for testimony at trial and do not result in consequent increases in the delay and expense of litigation as referred to in Galowich. See Galowich, 92 Ill.2d at 167, 65 Ill.Dec. 405, 441 N.E.2d 318. Additionally, taxing the costs of Dr. Jacob's evidence deposition does not encourage taking unnecessary discovery depositions, as this was an evidence deposition and it was necessarily used at trial in substitution of Dr. Jacob's live testimony. See Galowich, 92 Ill.2d at 167, 65 Ill.Dec. 405, 441 N.E.2d 318. Furthermore, we need not try the present case hypothetically because the case went to trial and the evidence deposition video was played to the jury. The trial court did not err when it independently determined that the evidence deposition, which was transcribed and recorded on video, was necessarily used at trial.
We further reject defendant's assertion that the trial court erred in awarding costs for concurrent transcription and videotaping of the deposition even though both means were not used at trial. Videotaping a deposition and concurrently transcribing the deposition is common practice because the transcription protects the audio-visual recording of the deposition in case of technical failure. In Supreme Court Rule 208, the Illinois Supreme Court provided for the costs of audio-visual taping of a deposition and for transcribing a deposition and specifically stated that a trial court has discretion in taxing such costs. 134 Ill.2d R. 208. The Committee Comments to Supreme Court Rule 208 concern "the charges for the recorder when the deposition is recorded by sound or audio-visual means, [and] when such a deposition is filed without being transcribed[,] * * * the charges for filing, and * * * if [the deposition is] subsequently transcribed, * * * the charges for such transcription." 134 Ill.2d R. 208, Committee Comments at 157. Whether the transcription occurs concurrently or subsequently is of no consequence to the trial court in its determination in taxing costs because Supreme Court Rule 208 provides for fees associated with videotaping and transcription and, as a result, provides for the trial court to tax both to defendant.
The trial court did not abuse its discretion in awarding costs to plaintiff for the fees associated with transcribing, videotaping, and editing Dr. Jacob's evidence deposition because the deposition was necessarily used at trial and because costs concerning concurrent video-recording and transcribing of the deposition are allowed to be taxed to the prevailing party under Supreme Court Rule 208(d).
Dr. Jacob's Witness Fee
Defendant next asserts that no Illinois statutory authority or case law allows the trial court to tax as costs the charges for Dr. Jacob's time appearing at the evidence deposition. Defendant contends that Dr. Jacob's fee is a nonstatutory expert fee, a fee resulting from a private agreement, and a party must pay for nonstatutory fees charged by his own expert. Plaintiff counters that Illinois Supreme Court Rule 208 provides the circuit court with the authority to tax costs associated with a treating physician's time in testifying at an evidence deposition because Dr. Jacob's testimony, as a treating physician, was necessary at trial to provide medical evidence that plaintiff suffered injury as a result of the accident and because the supreme court rules have recognized that a physician's time should be compensated.
Defendant cites Falkenthal v. Public Building Comm'n of Chicago to assert that the trial court does not have discretion to tax certain costs, namely, the cost of a physician to testify at a deposition. Falkenthal v. Public Building Comm'n of *1136 Chicago, 111 Ill.App.3d 703, 67 Ill.Dec. 262, 444 N.E.2d 498 (1982). The court in Falkenthal scrutinized specific items that the plaintiff was awarded by the trial court, including fees for the time of the plaintiff's expert witnesses who testified at trial, and the court noted that "in the absence of statutory authority experts' fees are not taxable as costs." Falkenthal, 111 Ill. App.3d at 711, 67 Ill.Dec. 262, 444 N.E.2d 498. In Falkenthal, the court stated that the sole statutory authority cited by the plaintiff in support of the costs she requested and received was section 7 of the costs statute (Ill.Rev.Stat.1979, ch. 33, par. 7 (now see 735 ILCS 5/5-108 (West 1996))), which authorized the award of costs to a successful litigant in general terms. Falkenthal, 111 Ill.App.3d at 710, 67 Ill.Dec. 262, 444 N.E.2d 498.
In Falkenthal, the trial court seemed further unwilling to tax the defendant with the cost of discovery depositions, which were vaguely described. Falkenthal, 111 Ill.App.3d at 711, 67 Ill.Dec. 262, 444 N.E.2d 498. The court stated, "Other costs awarded to plaintiff apparently related to deposition expenses, * * * [but] [p]laintiff's only representation to the trial court concerning this was that the depositions at issue were discovery depositions." Falkenthal, 111 Ill.App.3d at 711, 67 Ill. Dec. 262, 444 N.E.2d 498. Because the appellate court could only speculate as to what portion of the costs awarded was proper, the court vacated the award of costs and remanded the cause to the trial court for further proceedings to determine what costs were properly documented and supported by statute or court rule. Falkenthal, 111 Ill.App.3d at 711, 67 Ill.Dec. 262, 444 N.E.2d 498.
We reject defendant's contention that Falkenthal precludes the award of costs in the case sub judice, because Falkenthal is inapplicable to the present case. The plaintiff's witnesses in Falkenthal included expert witnessesan expert architect and a consulting physician retained for the purpose of rendering an opinion at trial. Falkenthal, 111 Ill.App.3d at 705, 67 Ill.Dec. 262, 444 N.E.2d 498. In the present case, Dr. Jacob is a treating physician. The supreme court has held that treating physicians who are not hired only to render an opinion at trial do not come within the category of retained experts. Tzystuck v. Chicago Transit Authority, 124 Ill.2d 226, 235, 124 Ill.Dec. 544, 529 N.E.2d 525 (1988). In addition, in Falkenthal, the costs of expert witness fees included the fees for the time spent testifying at trial; thus, the fees did not fall within Supreme Court Rule 208 concerning fees of witnesses testifying at a deposition, as in the present case. Finally, the Falkenthal court failed to make a finding concerning the "other costs" of the discovery deposition because the request for costs was too vague. Falkenthal, 111 Ill.App.3d at 711, 67 Ill.Dec. 262, 444 N.E.2d 498. Here, the request for costs of the evidence deposition was not vague.
Defendant also cites Lee v. Hyster Co. to assert that the trial court erred in taxing the costs of Dr. Jacob's time to testify in the evidence deposition. Lee v. Hyster Co., 156 Ill.App.3d 214, 108 Ill.Dec. 890, 509 N.E.2d 586 (1987). The court in Lee addressed the issue of which party must incur the fees involved in taking an expert witness's deposition. Lee, 156 Ill.App.3d at 219, 108 Ill.Dec. 890, 509 N.E.2d 586. The court differentiated between statutory and nonstatutory fees, noting that statutory fees of witnesses include the fees as stated in section 47 of the Code of Civil Procedure and constitute $20 for each day's attendance and 20 cents per mile. Lee, 156 Ill.App.3d at 219, 108 Ill.Dec. 890, 509 N.E.2d 586. Citing Falkenthal, the court held that statutory fees fall within Supreme Court Rule 208 and, therefore, because the defendant requested the deposition, the defendant was responsible for paying the statutory fees to the witness deposed. Lee, 156 Ill.App.3d at 220, 108 Ill.Dec. 890, 509 N.E.2d 586.
The court then addressed what it characterized as nonstatutory fees: the fees an *1137 expert witness requests to appear and testify at a deposition. Lee, 156 Ill.App.3d at 220, 108 Ill.Dec. 890, 509 N.E.2d 586. The court stated, "Such fees are nonstatutory in nature, as they are not required to be paid pursuant to either a supreme court rule or a provision of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure," and the court held that the "nonstatutory fees" fall under Supreme Court Rule 220(c)(6) (107 Ill.2d R. 220(c)(6)), concerning expert witnesses, which requires each party to bear the expense of all fees charged by his expert witness unless manifest injustice would result. Lee, 156 Ill.App.3d at 220, 108 Ill. Dec. 890, 509 N.E.2d 586. The court stated, "[I]n order for Rule 220(c)(6) to be consistent with section 47 of the Fees and Salaries Act [Ill.Rev.Stat.1985, ch. 53, par. 65] and Rule 208, the term `fees' as used in Rule 220(c)(6) must be read as relating solely to nonstatutory fees which are the result of private agreements between a party and his expert witness." Lee, 156 Ill.App.3d at 218-21, 108 Ill.Dec. 890, 509 N.E.2d 586. The court held, therefore, that the plaintiff could not recover costs for the payment of the nonstatutory fee his expert requested as compensation for his appearance and testimony at the discovery deposition. Lee, 156 Ill.App.3d at 220-22, 108 Ill.Dec. 890, 509 N.E.2d 586.
Defendant also incorrectly applies Lee to the present case. As defendant explains, the court in Lee interpreted Supreme Court Rule 208 in conjunction with Supreme Court Rule 220(c)(6), concerning expert witnesses, which provides that "unless manifest injustice would result, each party shall bear the expense of all fees charged by his expert witness or witnesses." 134 Ill.2d R. 220(c)(6). Supreme Court Rule 220, concerning expert witnesses, is inapplicable not only because Dr. Jacob was a treating physician (see Tzystuck, 124 Ill.2d at 235, 124 Ill.Dec. 544, 529 N.E.2d 525) but also because Supreme Court Rule 220 has been deleted by order entered June 1, 1995, effective January 1, 1996.
Supreme Court Rule 208 provides that a trial court may in its discretion tax "fees of the witness" to testify at a deposition. 134 Ill.2d R. 208. Supreme Court Rule 208 does not distinguish between "statutory" and "nonstatutory" fees. Furthermore, the Supreme Court Rules have noted the importance of fees for primary treating physicians. Supreme Court Rule 204(c) specifically allows for reasonable payment to a physician for his testimony at a discovery deposition. 166 Ill.2d R. 204(c). We find the policy behind Supreme Court Rule 204 equally applicable in this case.
Because the evidence deposition in the case sub judice was necessarily used at trial, the court was within its discretion in taxing as costs against defendant the physician's fee in testifying and the videotaping and transcription fees in recording the evidence deposition.
III. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of St. Clair County is affirmed.
Affirmed.
CHAPMAN and KUEHN, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2230162 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:38.474357+00 ===

720 N.E.2d 1223 (1999)
GALLANT INSURANCE COMPANY, Appellant-Garnishee Defendant,
v.
Stephanie WILKERSON, Appellee-Plaintiff, and
Nathaniel Burton, Jr., Appellee-Defendant.
No. 02A03-9903-CV-125.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
December 20, 1999.
*1225 Thomas E. Rosta, Kopka Landau & Pinkus, Crown Point, Indiana, Attorney for Appellant.
Timothy E. Stucky, Blume Connelly Jordan & Stucky, Fort Wayne, Indiana, Attorney for Appellee Stephanie Wilkerson.
*1224 OPINION
BROOK, Judge
Case Summary
Appellant-garnishee defendant Gallant Insurance Company ("Gallant") appeals from the trial court's judgment ruling that it waived and is now estopped from asserting the defense of non-cooperation in proceedings supplemental and ordering the payment of insurance proceeds in satisfaction of the judgment against its insured, Nathaniel Burton, Jr. ("Burton").
We affirm.
Issues
The following issue is dispositive of our review: whether Gallant waived the defense of non-cooperation and is now estopped from asserting the same in proceedings supplemental.[1]
Facts and Procedural History[2]
On the afternoon of March 25, 1995, Burton was driving in Fort Wayne, Indiana, when he disregarded a stop sign and collided with a vehicle driven by Stephanie Wilkerson ("Wilkerson"). As a result of the injuries she sustained in the accident, Wilkerson retained an attorney who proffered a settlement demand of $25,000: the limits of Burton's insurance policy with Gallant. After efforts to settle her claim failed, Wilkerson filed a complaint against Burton alleging negligence and claiming personal injuries and loss of income on March 21, 1996. Wilkerson forwarded a courtesy copy of the complaint to the insurance adjuster who had been negotiating the claim for Gallant.
In response to Wilkerson's complaint, Gallant retained attorney Kenneth M. Wilk ("Wilk") to file an appearance and answer on Burton's behalf. Wilk took Wilkerson's deposition in February 1997 and communicated a settlement offer of $4,000 in August 1997. Gallant also hired an independent medical expert to evaluate Wilkerson's injuries, who concurred with the opinions of Wilkerson's own health care providers. Throughout settlement negotiations and trial preparation, Gallant contacted Burton only twice.
A jury trial was held on April 15, 1998. At that time, Burton was imprisoned at the Indiana Department of Correction ("DOC"); however, Gallant had not sought the assistance of the trial court to secure *1226 his attendance at trial and proceeded with its defense of Burton in his absence. Following the presentation of her case-in-chief, Wilkerson moved for a directed verdict on the issue of Burton's liability, which the trial court granted. Thereafter, the issue of damages was submitted to the jury, who returned a verdict in favor of Wilkerson for $57,500.
On September 24, 1998, Burton and Wilkerson entered into an agreement whereby Burton assigned all rights and claims against Gallant to Wilkerson, and Wilkerson agreed not to seek enforcement of the $57,500 judgment against Burton. On September 25, 1998, Wilkerson filed a motion to enforce the judgment by proceedings supplemental, naming Gallant as garnishee defendant and asserting in the alternative that she was entitled to the $25,000 policy limits of its insured. Gallant filed its answer on November 6, 1998, alleging as a defense that Burton had violated the policy's cooperation clause by failing to appear at trial. Gallant also requested a jury trial on the proceedings supplemental.
The trial court issued a memorandum decision on December 8, 1998, ruling that Gallant had waived the defense of non-cooperation and was estopped from asserting it in proceedings supplemental. The trial court thus denied Gallant's request for a jury trial and entered a garnishment order for $26,393.28the maximum policy amount plus costs and interest. Gallant now appeals.
Discussion and Decision
Gallant argues that the trial court erred when it determined Gallant had waived the defense of non-cooperation and was therefore estopped from raising it in proceedings supplemental. Initially, we note that the trial court's memorandum decision ordering the payment of insurance proceeds does not constitute special findings of fact and conclusions of law under Ind. Trial Rule 52. See Smithers v. Mettert, 513 N.E.2d 660, 662 (Ind.Ct.App. 1987), trans. denied. Accordingly, Gallant appeals from a general judgment that may not be disturbed unless the record fails to support any theory justifying the trial court's decision. Id. We will affirm the trial court's judgment on any legal theory supported by the evidence most favorable to the judgment, together with all reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom. Hermitage Ins. Co. v. Salts, 698 N.E.2d 856, 858 (Ind.Ct.App.1998).
A cooperation clause such as the one at issue here applies to the conduct of the insured in proceedings subsequent to the notice of loss, claim, or suit but prior to a determination of an insurer's liability. 8 Appleman, INSURANCE LAW & PRACTICE § 4771, at 211-12 (1981). The purpose of cooperation clauses is to protect insurers by preventing collusion between the insureds and the injured parties. Id. at 213. Along with this protection, however, come certain duties, and "[w]hen an insurer attempts to show a breach of the cooperation clause by its insured, it is incumbent upon it to show in what manner the insurer strove to achieve compliance." Newport v. MFA Ins. Co., 448 N.E.2d 1223, 1229 (Ind. Ct.App.1983). In other words, the insurer must demonstrate that it exercised good faith and diligence in securing the cooperation of its insured before asserting the defense of non-cooperation. Id. As explained by the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals,
The problem of non-cooperation has a dual aspect: not only what the assured failed to do, but what the insurer on its part did to secure co-operation from an apathetic, inattentive, or vanished policy holder, must be considered. Liability insurance is intended not only to indemnify the assured, but also to protect members of the public who may be injured through negligence.... It would greatly weaken the practical usefulness of policies designed to afford public protection, if it were enough to show mere disappearance of the assured without full proof of proper efforts by the insurer to locate him.
*1227 Id. (quoting Pennsylvania Threshermen & Farmer's Mut. Casualty Ins. Co. v. Owens, 238 F.2d 549, 550-51 (4th Cir.1956)).
When an insurer questions whether an injured party's claim falls within the scope of policy coverage or raises a defense that its insured has breached a policy condition, the insurer essentially has two options: (1) file a declaratory judgment action for a judicial determination of its obligations under the policy; or (2) hire independent counsel and defend its insured under a reservation of rights. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co. v. Metzler, 586 N.E.2d 897, 902 (Ind.Ct.App.1992), trans. denied; State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co. v. Glasgow, 478 N.E.2d 918, 923 (Ind.Ct.App. 1985). In contrast, an insurer who believes it has no duty to defend and thus refuses to defend its insured "does so at its peril." Cincinnati Ins. Co. v. Mallon, 409 N.E.2d 1100, 1105 (Ind.Ct.App.1980). Indeed, we have acknowledged the sound public policy which dictates that:
[a]n insurer, having knowledge its insured has been sued, may not close its eyes to the underlying litigation, force the insured to face the risk of that litigation without the benefit of knowing whether the insurer intends to defend or to deny coverage, and then raise policy defenses for the first time after judgment has been entered against the insured.
Metzler, 586 N.E.2d at 902. Likewise, we have held that sound public policy requires the converse to be true, that is, "when an insurance company assumes the defense of an action against its insured, without reservation of rights, and with knowledge of facts which would have permitted it to deny coverage, it may be estopped from subsequently raising the defense of noncoverage." Salts, 698 N.E.2d at 859.
It is well settled that contractual provisions of an insurance policy may be waived or that the insurer may be estopped from asserting such provisions.[3]Motorists Mut. Ins. Co. v. Johnson, 139 Ind.App. 622, 632, 218 N.E.2d 712, 718 (1966); see also 7A AM.JUR.2D Automobile Insurance § 402, at 189 (1997). "[T]he doctrines of `waiver' and `estoppel' extend to practically every ground upon which an insurer may deny liability." Johnson, 139 Ind.App. at 632, 218 N.E.2d at 718 (quoting Travelers Ins. Co. v. Eviston, 110 Ind. App. 143, 154, 37 N.E.2d 310, 314 (1941), modified on other grounds by W.H. Barber Co. v. Hughes, 223 Ind. 570, 63 N.E.2d 417 (1945)). For instance, the conduct of an insurer inconsistent with an intention to rely on the requirements of the policy that leads the insured to believe that those requirements will not be insisted upon is sufficient to constitute waiver. Id., 139 Ind.App. at 633, 218 N.E.2d at 718. As it relates to the instant case,
[w]aiver of the cooperation clause has... been implied from the conduct of the insurer, with knowledge of the noncooperation, in continuing to act for the insured before the trial of the suit brought against him or her, or in defending the insured at trial, or in appealing from a judgment adverse to the insured. But since it is an essential element of an effective waiver that the party against whom the waiver is asserted must have knowledge of all the material facts affecting the right and the existence of the right to be waived, there can be no implied waiver by the insurer of a breach of the cooperation clause by the insured if the insurer, at the time of the *1228 alleged waiver, was not in possession of knowledge of the material facts concerning that breach.
7A AM.JUR.2D, supra, at 190-91 (citations omitted).
Here, the undisputed evidence establishes that Gallant had "notice of and the opportunity to control" the proceedings in the underlying tort action. See Metzler, 586 N.E.2d at 900 ("The doctrine of collateral estoppel applies to insurance contracts and an insurer is ordinarily bound by the result of litigation to which its insured is a party, so long as the insurer had notice and the opportunity to control the proceedings."). Specifically, it had full knowledge that Burton was in the custody of the DOC at the time of trial. Under these unique circumstances, it was impossible for Burton not to violate Gallant's cooperation clause based solely on his non-attendance at trial, because it was both physically and legally impossible for him to appear in court without the issuance of a writ or subpoena.[4] Gallant had the opportunity to secure Burton's presence at trial, and having assumed Burton's defense in his absence, it was incumbent upon Gallant to do so. See Newport, 448 N.E.2d at 1229 (insurer must exercise diligence in securing cooperation of insured). However, we can discern no evidence from the record, nor does Gallant present us with any, to support even an inference that it took the affirmative steps necessary to procure Burton's attendance. See Smithers, 513 N.E.2d at 663; Newport, 448 N.E.2d at 1229. Indeed, Burton testified at the proceedings supplemental that he did not wilfully refuse to cooperate with Gallant and further, that he was contacted by the insurance company only twice prior to trial.[5]
The general rule adopted by the courts of several other states has been that:
an automobile liability insurer which learns before the trial of an action against its insured that the insured has breached the cooperation clause of the policy, and nevertheless defends him at the trial, thereby waives or is estopped to assert the insured's noncooperation, in a subsequent action to recover on the policy. This rule has been applied in a number of cases in which the insured failed to appear at the trial of the original action brought against him or her, and where the insurer conducted the *1229 defense of the insured in his or her absence[.]
7A AM.JUR.2D, supra, § 403, at 191 (citations omitted); see also Romualdo P. Eclavea, Annotation, Liability Insurance: Insured's Failure to Attend Trial or to Testify as Breach of Cooperation Clause, 9 A.L.R.4th 218, § 7, at 300-04 (1981) (waiver or estoppel of non-cooperation defense). We believe this rule to be an equitable one that also comports with the underlying purpose of proceedings supplemental. The filing of a motion for proceedings supplemental "speaks only to how the claim is to be satisfied, whereas the complaint in the original action speaks to whether the claim should be satisfied." Salts, 698 N.E.2d at 859 (quoting Citizens National Bank v. Harvey, 167 Ind.App. 582, 590-91, 339 N.E.2d 604, 609 (1976)). Proceedings supplemental are merely a continuation of the underlying claim initiated under the same cause number for purposes of enforcing a judgment. Id. at 858. To allow an insurer to defend its insured without a reservation of rights and thereafter raise a policy defense would subvert the very function for which proceedings supplemental were created. Clearly, proceedings supplemental "are not appropriate vehicles for creating, enlarging or reducing liability[.]" 30 AM. JUR.2D Executions and Enforcement of Judgments § 708 (1994).
In conclusion, we turn to the sound reasoning expressed by our colleagues on the Illinois Appellate Court:
An insurer may not raise a policy defense when it has defended and lost the underlying claim without a reservation of rights. It would be unfair to the insured to allow the insurer to defend the underlying claim while at the same time it is formulating policy defenses to deny coverage. It would also waste the time of the courts and the litigants to go through a trial expected to be dispositive only then to discover the insurer is claiming a second bite at the apple in the form of a policy defense.
Western States Ins. Co. v. Weller, 299 Ill. App.3d 317, 233 Ill.Dec. 692, 701 N.E.2d 542, 545 (1998) (citations omitted), appeal denied; see also Debra E. Wax, Annotation, Liability Insurer's Waiver of Right, or Estoppel, to Set Up Breach of Co-operation Clause, 30 A.L.R.4th 620, § 12, at 673-79 (1984) (insured's failure to appeal at trial). Similarly, Gallant seeks to take a second bite at the proverbial apple at the expense of Wilkerson, who expended considerable time and effort to litigate her claim before a jury of her peers. This we cannot condone. Gallant had a full and fair opportunity to raise Burton's alleged non-cooperation in the underlying tort action and could have protected its interests either by defending Burton under a reservation of rights or by filing a declaratory judgment action on the issue of his cooperation. See Progressive Casualty Ins. Co. v. Morris, 603 N.E.2d 1380, 1383 (Ind.Ct. App.1992); Metzler, 586 N.E.2d at 902. Gallant did neither.
Accordingly, by assuming Burton's defense in his absence, while having full knowledge of his incarceration and of the necessity for a writ or subpoena to secure his attendance at trial, Gallant waived the right to thereafter raise the defense of non-cooperation based solely on Burton's failure to appear and is now estopped from asserting the same in proceedings supplemental.[6] To hold otherwise would require this Court to penalize an injured party for the insurer's decision to proceed to trial without its insured and then reward the insurer for its belated *1230 efforts to avoid satisfaction of a just and fair judgment entered as a result of that adjudication. We will not allow an insurer to "sit idly by and wait until an adverse judgment is entered before raising a dispositive defense," Salts, 698 N.E.2d at 859, nor will we permit conduct contrary to the principles of equity, efficiency, and the finality of judgments.
Conclusion
For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
KIRSCH and DARDEN, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Because Gallant's waiver of the non-cooperation defense is dispositive of this appeal, we do not reach the issues raised by Gallant with respect to any prejudice resulting from Burton's alleged non-cooperation and the trial court's denial of Gallant's request for a jury trial on the proceedings supplemental.
[2]  Oral argument in this case was heard at Valparaiso University School of Law on November 17, 1999. We extend our appreciation to the parties for the quality of their advocacy, as well as to the students, faculty, and administration of the law school for their interest and hospitality.
[3]  We note that there is a technical distinction between the terms "waiver" and "estoppel." Waiver is the intentional relinquishment of a known right involving both knowledge of the existence of the right and the intent to relinquish it. Corrigan v. Al-Trim Corp., 700 N.E.2d 481, 484 (Ind.Ct.App.1998), trans. denied. The elements of estoppel are the misleading of a party entitled to rely on the acts or statements in question and a consequent change of position to that party's detriment. Tate v. Secura Ins., 587 N.E.2d 665, 671 (Ind. 1992). In insurance cases, the distinction between waiver and estoppel is difficult to preserve, and courts have found it unnecessary or inadvisable to make such a distinction, often using the terms interchangeably. Id.
[4]  See Ind. Trial Rule 45(E), which reads, "At the request of any party subpoenas for attendance at a hearing or trial shall be issued by the clerk of court of the county in which the action is pending when requested.... A subpoena may be served at any place within the state[.]" Cf. also IND.CODE § 35-37-5-3, which governs the compulsory attendance of imprisoned or institutionalized witnesses in criminal proceedings and outlines the mechanisms available to insure the safe transportation and keeping of such witnesses. But see Hill v. Duckworth, 679 N.E.2d 938, 939 (Ind. Ct.App.1997) (trial court cannot secure attendance of incarcerated plaintiff at civil action unrelated to case resulting in incarceration).
Nevertheless, we point out that Gallant had several options other than requesting a transport order transferring Burton from the DOC to court on the day of trial, including: (1) deposing Burton and submitting his deposition into evidence pursuant to Ind. T.R. 32(A)(3)(c); (2) conducting the trial by telephonic conference; or (3) postponing the trial until Burton's release from incarceration. See id. at fn. 1. Obviously, had Gallant requested a transport order, a continuance, or any of the other foregoing possibilities, and had the trial court denied that request within its discretion, Burton's nonattendance may have been an issue. However, this is clearly not the case, as the evidence remains that Gallant did nothing to procure Burton's attendance or participation in lieu of a personal appearance. Indeed, we find it "curious," as did the trial court, "that the Plaintiff was able to obtain the Defendant's appearance for hearing on Proceedings Supplemental with the Court's assistance, yet the file in this cause is void of any request for assistance by the Garnishee Defendant in securing the Defendant's appearance at trial." (Emphasis added).
[5]  The record does not contain a transcript of either the trial or the proceedings supplemental. At oral argument, appellate counsel advised the Court that none of the hearings surrounding the proceedings supplemental was recorded by the trial court.
[6]  We note that had there been any indicia of non-cooperation other than Burton's failure to attend the trial in this case, we may have reached a different result. However, Gallant raised only Burton's failure to appear as the sole basis of their claim of non-cooperation. The absence of any facts supporting an inference of non-cooperation on grounds other than Burton's failure to appear at trial, together with the evidence that Gallant made no effort to secure Burton's presence despite knowledge of his whereabouts, leads us to the conclusion that we reach today.

=== CASE 2230163 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:38.50282+00 ===

720 N.E.2d 440 (1999)
George Otis TURNER, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 39A05-9901-CR-12.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
December 6, 1999.
*442 Terrance W. Richmond, Milan, Indiana, Attorney for Appellant.
Jeffrey A. Modisett, Attorney General of Indiana, J.T. Whitehead, Deputy Attorney General, Indianapolis, Indiana, Attorneys for Appellee.
*441 OPINION
DARDEN, Judge
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
George Otis Turner appeals his convictions by jury of two counts of child molesting, one as a B felony and one as a C felony.
We affirm.
ISSUES
1. Whether the trial court erroneously admitted testimony by a forensic nurse examiner.
2. Whether the trial court erred when it did not allow
(a) Turner to testify about certain actions by the victim; and
(b) a psychologist to testify that she had recommended Turner's children remain in his custody.
3. Whether sufficient evidence supports the convictions.
FACTS
In March of 1996, Scarlet Klett married Turner. She and her four year old daughter K. moved into the trailer where he lived with his three school-age children. In August of 1996, the family moved to a house. From August until January 1997, Scarlet worked two jobs outside the home, *443 and Turner worked three twelve-hour shifts on Friday, Saturday, and Sunday. When K. was not in day care, Turner watched her at home.
During the period when the family lived in the house, Turner "gave [K.] a bad touch" by touching her "in a wrong place," explained by K. to be the area of her genitals. (R. 785, 786). Turner touched K.'s genital area "with his hand," which he "made [ ] go back and forth" when he "put it on [her] privates." (R. 786). Turner also made K. wrap her hand around his penis and move her hand up and down on it. And more than once Turner made K. put her mouth on his penis.
Two months after her marriage to Turner, Scarlet noticed a change in K.'s behavior. Having earlier been "a very happy, friendly outgoing little girl," K. became short-tempered, confrontational, and "clingy." (R. 787, 788). These changes in demeanor were more pronounced during the period of August through December of 1996. K. also resumed bed wetting  which she had not done in more than a year.
In January of 1997, Scarlet separated from Turner and went to Richmond, Virginia with K. Around the first of March, Scarlet observed K. positioning her dolls one on top of another and saying that they were having sex. Scarlet had taught K. the proper terms for body parts but "had not known that she was familiar" with the idea of sex. (R. 740). When K. told Scarlet that "she had been touched where she shouldn't have been," (R. 741), Scarlet called the child abuse hotline, and then the Department of Social Services in Virginia.
Based upon the advice of the latter, Scarlet contacted the Chippenham Medical Center about bringing in K. for an examination. The Center advised her that they had a specialist for such an examination, who would be available the next morning. The next morning, Scarlet took K. to the Center, where she was examined by Gail Ragan, a certified forensic nurse examiner. As a certified forensic nurse examiner, Ragan observes, identifies and documents abuse injuries. As to K.'s medical history, K. reported to Ragan that "she was touched ... and rubbed" by Turner in her genital area. (R. 484). Ragan then performed a gynecological examination of K. in order to observe and identify any possible abuse injuries. Ragan observed five or six striated areas around the labium majora and a small area of red stippling. According to Ragan, striations are essentially scar tissue, and stippling is the spotting from broken blood vessels. Ragan described these conditions as "indicative of some type of abuse," possibly "from finger manipulation." (R. 544).
After having K. examined at the Center, Scarlet took her to the Department of Social Services, where K. was interviewed by Karen Vaughn, the senior social worker who was lead investigator in cases of alleged abuse. The Department recommended counseling for K., and K. began seeing Emily Blankenship, a licensed clinical social worker. Blankenship diagnosed K. as suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder, which may result when a child has perceived a serious threat to her safety.
In Indiana, Yvonne Wilson of the Jefferson County Office of Family and Children was assigned to investigate the possible abuse of K. She arranged for Dr. Deborah Willage, a psychologist, to interview Turner's three children. The children were allowed to continue to live with Turner.
Turner was charged with three counts of child molesting. Before trial, the State filed, and the trial court granted, a motion in limine to exclude the testimony of Judy Taylor, a registered nurse. Taylor would have testified that Ragan was not a medical doctor and did not consult with a medical doctor in the course of her examination of K. When Ragan's deposition was read at Turner's trial, the jury was informed of these two facts. The State also filed a motion in limine to exclude testimony of *444 "alleged specific instances [K.'s] past conduct" prohibited under Ind. Evidence Rule 412. (R. 224). The trial court also granted this motion. After a three day trial, the jury found Turner guilty of two counts of child molesting.
DECISION
1. Admission of Evidence
Turner claims that the trial court erred in permitting forensic nurse Ragan to testify that striation in the genital area is "indicative of some type of abuse" and "could be from finger manipulation in that area" because "Ragan was not qualified to give such testimony" and "[o]nly a doctor practicing forensic pediatrics could speak to such a conclusion." Turner's Brief at 18.
The trial court has broad discretion to determine the admissibility of evidence, and we will not reverse the trial court's ruling on the admissibility of evidence absent an abuse of discretion. Willoughby v. State, 660 N.E.2d 570, 580-81 (Ind.1996). Also, the trial court's determination of whether a witness is qualified to testify as an expert is reviewed for an abuse of discretion. Hanson v. State, 704 N.E.2d 152, 155 (Ind.Ct.App.1999)
Ind. Evidence Rule 702(a) provides that
[i]f scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge will assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue, a witness qualified as an expert by knowledge, skill, experience, training or education, may testify thereto in the form of an opinion or otherwise.
The Rule assigns to the trial court a "gatekeeping function." Hottinger v. Trugreen Corp., 665 N.E.2d 593, 596 (Ind.Ct. App.1996), trans. denied. Two requirements must be met for a witness to be qualified as an expert. Taylor v. State, 710 N.E.2d 921, 923 (Ind.1999). First, the subject matter must be distinctly related to some scientific field, business, or profession beyond the knowledge of the average person. Id. Second, the witness must have sufficient skill, knowledge, or experience in that area so that the opinion will aid the trier of fact. Id.
As to whether Ragan was qualified to give the testimony admitted, her testimony reflects that she had been a registered nurse for 21 years and had worked in the emergency room for 15 years. In addition, 2 years before her examination of K., Ragan had been trained and certified as a forensic nurse examiner. Ragan detailed the course work she completed in that regard, as well as "practical training" with a physician. (R. 534). She stated that she was trained to conduct physical examinations and take medical histories. She regularly examines patients to observe, identify, and document their injuries. In this case, Ragan said, she was charged with the duty of observing K.'s injuries as the forensic nurse in the Center's emergency room. Thus, Ragan's observations as to the striations and stippling she observed in K.'s genital area were observations she was both trained and employed to make. Ragan's education and training provided her with specialized knowledge that would be helpful to the triers of fact. Given her education, training, and experience, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in allowing Ragan to testify within the limits of that education, training, and experience. See Swoaks v. State, 519 N.E.2d 149 (Ind. 1988).
As to Turner's argument about the substance of Ragan's testimony, in Swoaks our supreme court considered a claim that a licensed practical nurse was not qualified to testify as an expert. It noted the nurse's years of emergency room experience in treating various types of injuries  including cuts inflicted by glassand held that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in allowing the nurse to testify that a patient's cuts "were consistent with other cuts she had treated which were known to be cuts caused by broken glass." Id. at *445 150. Swoaks noted that the nurse "did not testify as to the cause of the injuries" but "merely testified that the cuts and abrasions in appellant were consistent with glass-cut wounds she had previously observed." Id. at 151.
Ragan did not opine that the injuries she observed on K. were caused by sexual molestation. Rather, she stated that the striation and stippling "indicate a possibility of something occurring in that area" and such were "not the strongest points we aim in on, but they are red flags." (R. 504). The subsequent testimony then explains this testimony, by saying that striation "is indicative of some type of abuse" that "could be from finger manipulation." (R. 544) (emphasis added). Thus, like the nurse in Swoaks, Ragan did not testify as to the cause of K.'s injuries.[1]
The trial court did not err in admitting her testimony.
2. Exclusion of Evidence
a. Testimony by Turner
Turner refers us to a series of motions in limine filed by the State before trial which he claims prevented his "responding to the allegations and presenting his defense." Turner's Brief at 14. However, we find only one proffer in this regard, and it appears to contest the State's motion in limine to exclude "any evidence of alleged specific instances of past conduct of" K. because it would contravene Evid. R. 412.
Evid. R. 412 provides that in a prosecution for a sex crime,
evidence of the past sexual conduct of a victim ... may not be admitted, except:
(1) evidence of the victim's ... past sexual conduct with the defendant;
(2) evidence which shows that some person other than the defendant committed the act upon which the prosecution is founded;....[2]
According to Turner's proffer to the trial court, he would have testified that K. once "tried to grab his penis;" that he had watched her place her fingers "inside her pants and move her fingers in the vaginal" area and saw her "do masturbation;" and that he had once seen her in the yard with a neighbor boy and both were "unclothed ... from their naval down to the knees." (R. 898, 899).
Turner fails to assert that the testimony described in his proffer would be evidence fitting within an exception to the prohibition of evidence of the past sexual conduct of a victim. The first assertion, that K. tried to grab his penis, is not necessarily viewed as sexual conduct on K.'s part with Turner. See Evid. R. 412(a)(1). And testimony about masturbation by K. does not fit within the exception for sexual conduct by K. with Turner. Turner does direct us to Steward v. State, 636 N.E.2d 143, 149 (Ind.Ct.App.1994), aff'd 652 N.E.2d 490 (Ind.1995), which allows "introduction through cross-examination of specific evidence which supports a reasonable inference and tends to prove that the conduct of a perpetrator other than the defendant is responsible for the victim's condition which the State has placed at issue." Turner has failed to develop an argument as to how Steward applies to the facts here. If Turner intends to suggest that his having seen K. outside with a neighbor boy when both were partially undressed would "support[ ] a reasonable inference" that the boyand not Turner  molested K., and on this basis his testimony must be admitted, we must disagree.
As in Kielblock v. State, 627 N.E.2d 816, 820 (Ind.Ct.App.1994), trans denied, the *446 exception allowing evidence that another might have committed the molestations is inapplicable because there is no evidence that K. was confusing her perpetrator, inasmuch as she consistently accused Turner of molesting her and identified him in court as the perpetrator. Moreover, in his offer Turner did not testify that he observed any molesting action undertaken by the neighbor boy. See id. Because Turner's testimony was not of a specific instance of sexual activity that showed some person other than Turner had committed the acts upon which the prosecution was based, the trial court did not abuse its discretion by excluding the evidence. Id.
b. Testimony by Dr. Willage
Turner also claims that the trial court erred in not allowing testimony of Dr. Willage that she recommended Turner's children remain in his home. Turner presents no authority for the proposition that such exclusion was wrongful; he simply argues that the exclusion prevented his presenting "his complete defense." Turner's Brief at 28.
As already noted, the trial court has broad discretion in its determination on the admissibility of evidence, and we will not reverse such a ruling absent an abuse of discretion. Willoughby, 660 N.E.2d at 580-81. Evidence that is not relevant is inadmissible. Evid. R. 402. Relevant evidence is evidence having any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be without the evidence. Ind. Evidence Rule 401.
According to Turner's proffer, the psychologist interviewed Turner's children and "determined that there was nothing that she saw that was of particular concerning regarding the children having been possibly molested." (R. 775). Evidence that Turner's own children had not been molested does not have any tendency to make it less probable that he molested his stepdaughter. Moreover, as noted in FACTS, the jury heard testimony indicating that Dr. Willage interviewed Turner's children, and that the children were allowed to remain in his care after the interviews. Therefore, even if Dr. Willage's testimony was erroneously excluded, there is no reversible error. See Sylvester v. State, 698 N.E.2d 1126, 1130 (Ind.1998) ("Where the wrongfully excluded testimony is merely cumulative of other evidence, its exclusion is harmless error.")[3]
3. Sufficiency of the Evidence
Finally, Turner argues that the evidence was not sufficient for the jury to find him guilty of two counts of child molesting because "the credible evidence did not establish each essential element of the crimes beyond a reasonable doubt and the uncorroborated testimony of [K.] contained only bald assertions without specific information as to how, when and where these acts occurred." Turner's Brief at 21.
*447 In appellate review on a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, we neither reweigh the evidence nor judge the credibility of witnesses. Fields v. State, 679 N.E.2d 898, 900 (Ind.1997). We consider only the probative evidence supporting the verdict and reasonable inferences therefrom to determine whether a reasonable trier of fact could conclude the defendant was guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. Id. If there is substantial evidence of probative value to support the conviction, it will not be set aside. Id.
As to Turner's contention that we look at only the "credible evidence," our standard of review precludes our making such an assessment. With respect to his claim that each essential element of the crimes was not established, he fails to develop any argument in that regard.
The jury convicted Turner of one count of child molesting that charged he had inserted his penis in K.'s mouth, and a second that charged he had performed or submitted to fondling or touching with K. K. testified that Turner, who she identified in court, made her place her mouth on his penis. K. testified that Turner "gave [her] a bad touch" by touching her "in a wrong place," explained by K. to be the area of her genitals. (R. 785, 786). She testified that Turner touched her genital area "with his hand," which he "made [ ] go back and forth" when he "put it on [her] privates." (R. 786). K. testified that Turner made her wrap her hand around his penis and move her hand up and down on it.
A conviction for child molesting may rest solely upon the uncorroborated testimony of the victim. Parmley v. State, 699 N.E.2d 288, 291 (Ind.Ct.App.1998), trans. denied. K.'s testimony alone is sufficient to sustain Turner's convictions. Moreover, Turner's assertion of a lack of any corroboration for K.'s testimony ignores her mother's testimony about her behavior, the nurse's observation of physical markings in K.'s genital area, and the counselor's diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder.
Finally, we note Turner's claim that his convictions must be reversed for lack of sufficient evidence because "no testimony whatever was given relating to where these acts occurred, when, what time of day, who else was present or anything else which might complete" K.'s account of the molestations. Turner's Brief at 22. We refer again to the definition of relevance. See Evid. R. 401. Turner fails to enlighten us as to how the place or time or presence of another person is relevant to proving the charged molestations by Turner. Also, we note that he failed to pursue these questions he now deems critical in his own cross examination of K.
We find no error here.
GARRARD, J., and FRIEDLANDER, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Within this issue, Turner suggests that Ragan impermissibly gave an opinion on "the ultimate issue of guilt" and "the credibility of the child victim witness." Turner's Brief at 19. He directs us to no such testimony, and we find none.
[2]  The Rule further provides that the party proposing to offer such evidence "must" file a "written notice" at least ten days before trial describing the evidence. Evid. R. 412(b). Turner filed no such motion.
[3]  In his argument as to how the trial court erred in allowing the testimony of Nurse Ragan, Turner also argues that the trial court erred in excluding the testimony of Nurse Taylor. As noted in FACTS, the State filed a motion to exclude testimony from Taylor about how Ragan was not a medical doctor and had not consulted with a medical doctor about her examination of K. At trial, the court held testimony from Taylor was "not relevant." (R. 812). Taylor practiced nursing in Indiana and Kentucky. She had not examined K. Turner makes no argument on appeal as to how her testimony was relevant and presents no authority for the proposition that the exclusion of her testimony constituted an abuse of discretion.
Moreover, Turner's cross-examination of Nurse Ragan established that Ragan was not a doctor. It further established that "before [Ragan] let the child go," she had "given a verbal report" to a physician about her examination of K., but the procedure at the Center was that a physician would only become involved if the patient had a physical injury that required medical treatment. (R. 507). Thus, even if the exclusion of Taylor's testimony was erroneous, Turner could not show how he was harmed inasmuch as the jury heard this evidence. See Sylvester.

=== CASE 2230165 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:38.532985+00 ===

720 N.E.2d 10 (1999)
CASTLEWOOD PROPERTY OWNERS ASSOCIATION, INC. Appellant-Defendant,
v.
Connee TREPTON and Ronald Gruszka, Appellees-Plaintiffs.
No. 45A03-9808-CV-368.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
November 17, 1999.
*11 Robert E. Stochel, Crown Point, Indiana, Attorney for Appellant.
Adam D. Decker, Austgen, Reed & Decker, P.C., Crown Point, Indiana, Attorney for Appellees.
OPINION
RUCKER, Judge
Connee Trepton and Ronald Gruszka (referred to collectively as "Plaintiffs") sued the Castlewood Property Owners Association on a complaint for indemnification. After a bench trial, the court entered judgment in Plaintiffs' favor and awarded them attorney fees. Castlewood now appeals raising three issues for review which we consolidate and rephrase as: (1) *12 were Plaintiffs entitled to indemnification, and (2) if so, were Plaintiffs entitled to attorney fees in excess of $7,000.00 for collecting a $2,000.00 obligation.
We affirm.
Castlewood is a non-profit Indiana corporation which owns a residential subdivision in Dyer. The subdivision is governed by restrictive covenants which are enforced by a five-member board of directors. In early 1990, Plaintiffs were appointed to the board, and part of their responsibilities included serving on the architectural review committee. It was the responsibility of the committee to ensure that the requirements of the restrictive covenants were met. Any party desiring to build a home in the Castlewood subdivision had to comply with certain minimum construction standards, and their plans had to be approved by the committee. In the spring of 1990, a local builder, Donald Echterling, submitted plans to the architectural review committee for the construction of a single-family residence. The committee rejected Echterling's plans, but Echterling proceeded with construction anyway. Castlewood then filed a petition for preliminary injunction to prevent further construction. The petition named Echterling and the couple who had agreed to purchase the home, Janet and Kenneth Snyder (referred to collectively as "Echterling"). After a hearing, the trial court denied the petition. Thereafter, Echterling filed a counterclaim against Castlewood, Plaintiffs, and other members of the board seeking damages for the alleged willful and wanton conduct in denying their house plans. Before the issue proceeded to trial, Plaintiffs settled with Echterling. In consideration of a $2,000.00 payment, Echterling executed a covenant not to sue and dismissed Plaintiffs from the lawsuit. Plaintiffs then submitted a written request to Castlewood seeking indemnification as corporate officers for costs in settling the action. When Castlewood refused indemnification, Plaintiffs filed a complaint for declaratory judgment seeking the trial court to declare the terms and conditions for indemnification of board members acting in their official capacities. After a bench trial, the trial court entered judgment in favor of Plaintiffs for $2,000.00. The trial court also awarded Plaintiffs $7,509.75 in attorney fees. This appeal followed.
At Castlewood's request, the trial court entered findings and conclusions thereon in support of its judgment. When a party has requested special findings of fact and conclusions of law pursuant to Ind. Trial Rule 52(A), the reviewing court must first decide whether the evidence supports the findings and second whether the findings support the judgment. Panhandle Eastern Pipe Line Co. v. Tishner, 699 N.E.2d 731, 736 (Ind.Ct.App.1998). The findings and judgment will be reversed only when clearly erroneous. G & N Aircraft, Inc. v. Boehm, 703 N.E.2d 665, 672 (Ind.Ct.App.1998), reh'g denied. Findings of fact are clearly erroneous when the record lacks any evidence or reasonable inferences from the evidence to support them. Temby v. Bardach, 699 N.E.2d 775, 777 (Ind.Ct.App.1998). The judgment is clearly erroneous when it is not supported by the findings of fact and the conclusions of law entered on the findings. G & N Aircraft, 703 N.E.2d at 672. In making these determinations we shall neither reweigh the evidence nor judge witness credibility but consider only the evidence and the inferences flowing therefrom which are most favorable to the judgment. Panhandle, 699 N.E.2d at 736.
Castlewood complains that Plaintiffs did not comply with the statutory requirements for indemnification, and therefore the trial court erred by awarding them $2,000.00 in damages. The Indiana Nonprofit Corporation Act of 1991 ("the Act") provides in relevant part:
If an individual is made a party to a proceeding because the individual is or was a director, a corporation may indemnify *13 the individual against liability incurred in the proceeding if:
(1) The individual's conduct was in good faith; and
(2) The individual reasonably believed:
(A) In the case of conduct in the individual's official capacity with the corporation, that the individual's conduct was in the corporation's best interests;....
Ind.Code § 23-17-16-8.
A corporation may pay for or reimburse the reasonable expenses incurred by a director who is a party to a proceeding in advance of final disposition of the proceeding if the following occur:
(1) The director furnishes the corporation a written affirmation of the director's good faith belief that the director has met the standard of conduct described in [Ind.Code § 23-17-16-8].
(2) The director furnishes the corporation a written undertaking, executed personally or on the director's behalf, to repay an advance if it is ultimately determined that the director did not meet the standard of conduct.
Ind.Code § 23-17-16-10. Castlewood acknowledges that it may have been obligated to pay the settlement cost in the Echterling-Snyder litigation. However, according to Castlewood, it was not obligated to do so in this instance because the Act required Plaintiffs to furnish Castlewood, in advance of any settlement, a written statement that Plaintiffs' conduct was undertaken in good faith. Here, Plaintiffs provided the information after they had reached settlement.
We disagree with Castlewood's reading of the statute. Nothing in the plain language of the Act mentions the timing of a director's statement of good faith. The only requirement is that a director furnish the corporation with the statement. In this case, the trial court found and the evidence of record shows that Plaintiffs furnished Castlewood with written affirmation of their good faith belief that they met the standard of conduct described in Ind. Code § 23-17-16-8. The trial court found and we agree that the written affirmation was provided Castlewood "in advance of final disposition of the proceeding" as required by 23-17-16-10. We find no error on this issue.
Castlewood also contends that Plaintiffs' $2,000.00 settlement payment was unreasonable and not made in the best interest of the corporation. In support of this contention, Castlewood points to testimony of the corporation's attorney who stated Plaintiffs' settlement was "in their own interest as people but not [Castlewood's]" R. at 279, and that the Echterling-Snyder lawsuit "was not meritorious." R. at 286. Castlewood's argument is essentially a request that we reweigh the evidence and judge witness credibility. In denying Castlewood's motion for preliminary injunction, the court found "the Architectural Review Committee has acted in an arbitrary and capricious manner in denying permission to the defendants to construct the house in question." R. at 332. The counter claim filed against Castlewood was based on those same grounds and sought compensatory damages in excess of $175,000 and punitive damages in excess of $350,000. Plaintiffs testified they settled in order to keep the cost of litigation lower. This evidence is sufficient for a determination that Plaintiffs acted in the best interests of the corporation. Further, the fact that the case would be dismissed some years later does not mean it lacked merit at the time it was filed. We find no error here.
Next, Castlewood contends the trial court erred in awarding Plaintiffs attorney fees. Generally, attorney fees are not recoverable from the opposing party in the absence of an agreement between the parties, statutory authority, or a rule to the contrary. City of Hammond v. Marina Entertainment Complex, Inc., 681 N.E.2d 1139, 1142 (Ind.Ct.App.1997), trans. denied, 690 N.E.2d 1187. In this case the Act provides in relevant part:
*14 Unless limited by articles of incorporation, a corporation shall indemnify a director who was wholly successful, on the merits or otherwise, in the defense of a proceeding to which the director was a party, because the director is or was a director of the corporation, against reasonable expenses actually incurred by the director in connection with the proceeding.
Ind.Code § 23-17-16-9 (emphasis added).
Unless a corporation's articles of incorporation provide otherwise, a director of the corporation who is a party to a proceeding may apply for indemnification to the court conducting the preceding or to another court of competent jurisdiction. On receipt of an application, the court may, after giving any notice the court considers necessary, order indemnification in the amount the court considers proper if the court determines one (1) of the following:
(1) The director is entitled to mandatory indemnification under section 9 [Ind. Code § 23-17-16-9], in which case the court shall also order the corporation to pay the director's reasonable expenses[1] incurred to obtain court ordered indemnification.
Ind.Code § 23-17-16-11 (emphasis added). Castlewood argues that Plaintiffs did not actually defend the Echterling-Snyder proceeding, but rather they merely paid $2,000.00 in settlement. Thus, the argument continues, Plaintiffs were not "wholly successful on the merits or otherwise" and therefore were not entitled to attorney fees. We disagree with Castlewood's assessment. Faced with potential personal liability of several thousand dollars, Plaintiffs were specifically advised by the subdivision attorney to obtain private counsel. They did so and counsel proceeded to negotiate with the lawyers for Echterling. In exchange for the payment of $2,000.00, Echterling executed a covenant not to sue and dismissed Plaintiffs from the action. We fail to see how this conduct can be considered anything other than a defense of the proceedings.
As for Plaintiffs not being "wholly successful" we observe that the law favors the voluntary resolution of disputes. Williams v. Rogier, 611 N.E.2d 189, 197 (Ind.Ct.App.1993). Accordingly, settlement agreements, including covenants not to sue, are encouraged by the court. Scott County v. Vaughn, 704 N.E.2d 1029, 1034 (Ind.Ct.App.1998), trans. denied. In the absence of fraud or mistake, a settlement is as determinative of the parties' rights and obligations as a judgment on the merits. 409 Land Trust v. City of South Bend, 709 N.E.2d 348, 350 (Ind.Ct.App.1999), reh'g denied. Plaintiffs were "wholly successful" in that although Castlewood's preliminary injunction was denied, Echterling did eventually change the home's plan and complete the home in accordance with the Plaintiffs' decision. Plaintiffs settled prior to the outcome so that a lengthy and costly proceeding could be avoided, which would have cost Castlewood more than $2,000.00 to defend. Thus, because Plaintiffs' decision was ultimately vindicated, they were "wholly successful" on the merits.
As its final point, Castlewood contends that even if attorney fees were proper, the trial court nonetheless abused its discretion in awarding attorney fees in excess of $7,500.00 when the settlement amount was for the relatively small amount of $2,000.00. The amount of an award for attorney fees is left to the sound discretion of the trial court. Stepp v. Duffy, 686 N.E.2d 148, 153 (Ind.Ct.App.1997), trans. denied. We will reverse an award of attorney fees only in the event of an abuse of discretion. Id. The trial court abuses its discretion only when its decision is clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and circumstances before the court. Valadez v. R.T. Enterprises, Inc., 647 N.E.2d 331, 333 (Ind.Ct.App.1995). In determining the amount of attorney fees, *15 there must be evidence supporting the trial court's award. Posey v. Lafayette Bank and Trust Co., 583 N.E.2d 149, 152 (Ind. Ct.App.1991)
The record shows that Plaintiffs introduced the affidavit of their attorney in order to establish the amount of attorney fees to which they were entitled. Contained in the affidavit were the hourly billing rates for attorneys and law clerks which amounted to $100 and $45, respectively. In addition, there was a detailed bill submitted as an exhibit to the affidavit which explained the time spent and charged along with a description of the project. This evidence is sufficient to support the award of attorney fees. In re Marriage of Boren, 475 N.E.2d 690, 696 (Ind.1985).
Citing to Trinkle v. Leeney, 650 N.E.2d 749 (Ind.Ct.App.1995), Castlewood maintains that the award of attorney fees was unreasonable because there was no "complexity or novelty to this case." Amended Brief of Appellant at 26. The trial judge is considered an expert on the question of attorney fees, and he may or may not accept the evidence presented regarding the reasonableness of those fees. Trinkle, 650 N.E.2d at 754. Castlewood is again asking us to reweigh the evidence in its favor which we decline to do. Id. We conclude the trial court did not abuse its discretion in awarding Plaintiffs $7,509.75 in attorney fees.
Judgment affirmed.
STATON, J., and NAJAM, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  "Expenses" include attorney fees. See Ind. Code § 23-7-1.1-69.

=== CASE 9742245 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:09:08.213682+00 ===

Mr. JUSTICE JONES, dissenting: I respectfully dissent. Even though I disagree with the majority’s assessment concerning the voluntary character of defendant’s admissions, I must agree that since the People failed to appeal from the trial court’s order of suppression, they are barred from relitigating the issues decided by that order. (People v. Taylor (1971), 50 Ill. 2d 136, 277 N.E.2d 878.) Therefore, we must treat defendant’s confessions as involuntary, and consequently my emphasis is also on Mr. Justice Stewart’s statement that: “any criminal trial use against a defendant of his involuntary statement is a denial of due process of law ‘even though there is ample evidence aside from the confession to support the conviction.’ ” (Emphasis in original.) (Mincey v. Arizona (1978), 437 U.S. 385, 398, 57 L. Ed. 2d 290, 303, 98 S. Ct. 2408, 2416.) My objection to the majority’s reasoning is that they have attempted to apply this language in a vacuum without addressing the fact that defense counsel’s trial tactics invited the complained-of testimony. Although the majority opinion reproduces Greg Toelle’s rebuttal testimony in its entirety, the majority has failed to detail the testimony, procured by defendant, which made the rebuttal testimony necessary. During its examination of witnesses the State made no reference to the admission which defendant had made to the students. However, during cross-examination of Officer Kluge, defense counsel made explicit reference to this incident. The following excerpts reproduce that cross-examination in pertinent part: “Q. [DEFENSE COUNSEL] Now in the course of that statement, Detective Kluge, isn’t it true that David Cooper told you that he was taken at gunpoint and at knifepoint in the back yard of 316 Linda Drive later that afternoon? $ « O A. [OFFICER KLUGE] He said that there were three men that did approach him with those weapons. Q. Did he also tell you that they took him into the house at 316 Linda Drive later on that day? A. Pardon? Q. Did he also tell you that they took him into the house at 316 Linda Drive on that day? A. Yes sir. Q. And isn’t it true, Detective, that during that conversation Mr. Cooper told you that there was an agreement reached between the people at 316 Linda Drive and David Cooper as to the return of certain property that was taken? A. I don’t think it was specifically mentioned during the tape recorded interview. It may have been discussed prior to that. Q. Is there something that might refresh your memory on that? A. The transcript undoubtedly would. Q. Detective Kluge, I am going to hand you what I have had marked as Defendant’s Exhibit No. 1 for identification and ask you to look at that. Can you tell me what that is, sir? A. This is a copy of the transcript of the tape recorded statement made by David Cooper on January 22nd, 1980. # # # Q. And isn’t it true, sir, that Mr. Cooper told you that he was to return the property that had been taken and the police would not be called or contacted as to him being apprehended there, correct? A. Yes. Q. And isn’t it true, Detective Kluge, that David Cooper told you that there was a lot of dope taken from the house and that he was supposed to get the dope back? A. He said something like that, yes sir. # # # Q. Isn’t it also true, Detective Kluge, that David told you that when he was apprehended in the back yard at 316 Linda Drive that he was taken into the house by the side door by the garage? COURT: Let the record show that witness again referring to the transcript, if that is necessary to refresh his memory. A. I remember that they did take him inside, I don’t remember specifically what door. Q. And do you recall when you talked to David, did David tell you that when he was taken into the house at 316 Linda Drive that he was there for sometime? A. Yes.” The People rested after Officer Kluge’s testimony. Defendant then testified that he had not participated in the burglary but that he had heard about it from an acquaintance named Kim Traylor. Traylor allegedly told defendant that he and someone named Richard had broken into the house and had hidden the stereo in the bushes. According to defendant, he went to the house to recover this property when he was apprehended by the students. Defendant continued his testimony by making extensive reference to what occurred after he was apprehended. As outlined below, defendant testified that he had told the students he had heard about the burglary but had not participated in it. Defendant was examined by his attorney on this incident, as follows: “Q. [DEFENSE COUNSEL] Did you in fact go to this place on Linda Drive? A. [DEFENDANT] Yes, I did. Q. What happened when you got there? A. Well, as I was going out toward the direction I made up well if the guy sees me in his yard or something I will just tell them I was cutting through over to my guy’s house next door. Q. What happened when you got to that yard? A. I never did make it to the back of the yard. I was right about somewhere in the middle of the yard and two guys came toward me with a gun and one of them had a knife. Q. Are those the two guys that testified here earlier today? A. Yes. Q. After those guys came to you with the guns what happened then? A. I made up, I was just telling them, you know, I came back here, you know. They was telling me that the house had been broken in and then they looked at me and they said, yeah, you look like the one that done it. I told them, I said, well, I came back you know to get the stuff but I didn’t have nothing to do with the burglary. I also told them you know, before this happened, you know, I was trying to make up a bunch of excuses but he wouldn’t go for it you know, because he had a gun on me so I just told him, you know, the very reason I was really came [sic] there for. Q. After you told him that, Mr. Cooper, what happened then? A. Well, that is when they led me into the house. Q. And did you have a conversation with them in the house? A. Yes, I did. Q. And what was that conversation about? A. It was about the stuff that came up missing, about some dope that also came up missing. Q. And did you have some sort of an agreement with those people? A. Yes, I did. Q. What was the agreement? A. I told them that I would go to the two guys I had talked to earlier in the day and make an agreement with them that if I got the stuff back and some money, you know, that you won’t call the police in on me. Q. Did they agree to that? A. Yes, they did. Q. And did they let you go? A. Yes, they did.” It was only after defendant had elicited testimony, indicating that he had denied direct involvement to the students, that the State offered the rebuttal testimony reproduced in the majority opinion. Therefore, defense counsel invited the rebuttal testimony, and it is well established that a defendant can not complain of testimony invited by defense counsel. (People v. Burage (1961), 23 Ill. 2d 280, 178 N.E.2d 389, cert. denied (1962), 369 U.S. 808, 7 L. Ed. 2d 555, 82 S. Ct. 651; People v. Baker (1980), 82 Ill. App. 3d 240, 402 N.E.2d 662.) Accordingly, it has been authoritatively recognized that constitutionally inadmissible evidence may be allowed in rebuttal under circumstances such as occurred here. This is because “defense tactics which likewise seek to gain extraordinary advantage from the fact of suppression of certain evidence may also be deemed to have ‘opened the door’ * * * [because there was] a calculated effort to create a high degree of confusion based upon knowledge that any adequate explanation would require some reference to evidence previously suppressed.” (3 LaFave, Search and Seizure §11.6(b), at 711-12 (1978).) Any other rule of law would be ill-founded, because without such a rule the prosecution would be powerless to correct the misrepresentations which a criminal defendant could otherwise make with impunity. In Illinois this principle has been held to apply to the introduction of a statement (People v. Green (1972), 9 Ill. App. 3d 280, 292 N.E.2d 65), and the failure to make a statement (People v. Lykins (1978), 65 Ill. App. 3d 808, 382 N.E.2d 1242, affirmed (1977), 77 Ill. 2d 35, 394 N.E.2d 1182, cert. denied (1980), 445 U.S. 952, 63 L. Ed. 2d 787, 100 S. Ct. 1602), even though that evidence would otherwise be constitutionally inadmissible. It has also been used to bar objection on appeal to an allegedly involuntary statement used at trial. (People v. Franklin (1966), 74 Ill. App. 2d 392, 220 N.E.2d 872.) In fact, the rule that defendant may not urge reversal on the basis of error which he invited at trial is such a basic tenet of American criminal procedure that Justice Stewart’s statement in Mincey is, beyond doubt, qualified by that rule. (Lawn v. United States (1958), 355 U.S. 339, 2 L. Ed. 2d 321, 78 S. Ct. 311; Dennis v. United States (1951), 341 U.S. 494, 95 L. Ed. 1137, 71 S. Ct. 857; United States v. Steele (8th Cir. 1979), 610 F.2d 504.) Consequently, if defendant invited the use of Toelle’s rebuttal testimony, he cannot claim error from that use. An examination of the record, especially those portions reproduced here, persuades me that defendant did elicit the evidence of which he now complains. Defense counsel attempted to discredit defendant’s later confession to police by showing that defendant gave it only after: (1) being told by police that he would be better off if he cooperated; and (2) having originally denied direct involvement in the burglary to the students. In procuring this testimony defense counsel not only laid bare the facts and circumstances surrounding the admissions to the students but also introduced defendant’s version of what was said while attempting to keep the prosecution mute. I will not pass judgment on this trial tactic. However, I do not think that the defendant is entitled to a new trial because of the State’s use of rebuttal testimony concerning the same events. The majority opinion has the effect of turning the trial court’s order of suppression into a one-sided prohibition. Under the majority’s rationale defendants will be free to make virtually any representation concerning a suppressed event, and the State cannot attempt to impeach that statement without risking reversal. For these reasons I would affirm.

=== CASE 9742246 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:09:08.484599+00 ===

Miller-Lerman, J.
NATURE OF CASE
This contract case, embodied in cases Nos. S-03-941 and S-03-1242, generally involves one transaction, the sale of a business by appellee, Gary’s Implement, Inc. (Seller), to appellant, Bridgeport Tractor Parts, Inc. (Buyer). The transaction was accomplished by execution of several documents on July 15, 1998. The three documents critical to this appeal are labeled: “Agreement,” “Promissory Note,” and “Non-Competition Agreement.” The three documents refer variously to one another. In this lawsuit, Seller generally claimed that Buyer failed to make certain payments due after the sale, and Buyer generally alleged and counterclaimed that Seller improperly competed with it and failed to deliver goodwill and that, therefore, its obligation to make periodic payments to Seller was excused. Buyer sought damages. Buyer did not seek rescission. Buyer’s counterclaim was rejected by a jury, Seller’s claims were successful before the court, and judgment in favor of Seller in the amounts of $612,225 and $20,000 on the Promissory Note and Non-Competition Agreement, respectively, plus interest, was entered by the district court for Morrill County. Buyer appeals. As explained below, we reverse and vacate, and remand for further proceedings.
SUMMARY OF CASE
The business underlying the transaction involved agricultural equipment, more particularly, Seller’s “salvage and used parts business.” In summary, the total purchase price of $1,050,000 was allocated and payable as follows: pursuant to the Agreement, $525,000 was allocated to equipment and inventory to be paid at closing; pursuant to the agreements, $500,000 was allocated to the sale of goodwill to be paid pursuant to the Promissory Note *288over 5 years; and, pursuant to the Non-Competition Agreement, $25,000 was allocated to Seller’s agreement to not compete with Buyer, payable over 5 years.
On October 5, 2000, Seller filed a petition against Buyer in the district court for Morrill County. The petition contained two breach of contract “causes of action.” In its petition, Seller alleged that Buyer had failed to make the separate payments due in 2000 under the Promissory Note and the Non-Competition Agreement. In its answer, Buyer alleged that its obligation to make these payments had been excused as a result of Seller’s violation of the Non-Competition Agreement and Seller’s failure to transfer goodwill, the purchase of which was reflected in the Promissory Note. Buyer alleged it had been damaged. Buyer also filed a counterclaim against Seller. In its counterclaim, Buyer alleged that Seller had breached the Non-Competition Agreement and other promises and sought damages therefor. In view of our disposition of the case, we do not comment on Buyer’s claims for damages.
A trial was conducted over several days. The issue raised in Buyer’s counterclaim as to whether Seller had breached the Non-Competition Agreement was given to the jury, and the issues raised in Seller’s petition as to whether Buyer had violated its payment obligations under the Promissory Note and the Non-Competition Agreement were ultimately decided by the court. The parties do not disagree on appeal with the case having been submitted in this fashion.
During the trial, the parties and the court dedicated considerable time to the meaning of the Non-Competition Agreement and, in particular, to the nature of the business activities not subject to the Non-Competition Agreement and therefore reserved to Seller. After concluding that the Non-Competition Agreement was valid, the court instructed the jury on the meaning of the Non-Competition Agreement and submitted to the jury Buyer’s counterclaim that alleged Seller had breached the Non-Competition Agreement and that Buyer had been damaged thereby. In its instruction summarizing and paraphrasing the Non-Competition Agreement, the court inserted additional language not found in the Non-Competition Agreement. After being so instructed, the jury rejected Buyer’s counterclaim.
*289Pursuant to the jury’s verdict on the counterclaim, on July 22, 2003, the district court entered judgment in favor of Seller on Buyer’s counterclaim and in addition found in favor of Seller on its contract claims that alleged that Buyer’s failure to make payments violated the Promissory Note and the Non-Competition Agreement. The court entered monetary judgment in favor of Seller on these breach of contract claims. Buyer appeals.
As explained below, we conclude that by virtue of its orders and instructions to the jury, the district court concluded that the Non-Competition Agreement was ambiguous, and we do not disagree with this conclusion. However, because the interpretation of the ambiguous Non-Competition Agreement was a question of fact that should have been determined by the jury, we conclude that the district court committed prejudicial error when it instructed the jury as to the meaning of certain provisions within the ambiguous Non-Competition Agreement. Because of this prejudicial error, judgment based on the verdict on the counterclaim must be reversed and vacated, and Buyer’s counterclaim must be properly resubmitted to a jury. Further, it logically follows that the judgment in favor of Seller on its contract claim based on Buyer’s failure to make payments under the Non-Competition Agreement must be reversed, and the resolution of this claim must await a proper jury outcome on Buyer’s counterclaim.
As explained below, we further determine that in this transaction, the Promissory Note representing the sale of goodwill by Seller is inextricably intertwined with Seller’s contractual obligation not to compete as embodied in the Non-Competition Agreement. Thus, the issue of whether the Promissory Note should be enforced as Seller seeks or whether Buyer’s payment obligation under the Promissory Note should be excused or reduced by a damage award or setoff must necessarily follow a proper resolution of Buyer’s counterclaim alleging that Seller violated the Non-Competition Agreement. We therefore conclude that the district court erred in entering judgment in favor of Seller on its breach of contract claim based on Buyer’s failure to make payments under the Promissory Note and that such judgment must be reversed and vacated.
In summary, we reverse and vacate the judgment of the district court entered in favor of Seller on its petition and against Buyer *290on its counterclaim and remand the causes for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
STATEMENT OF FACTS
Seller is owned by Gary and Joan Phillips and has been doing business in Bridgeport, Morrill County, Nebraska, since approximately 1970. The record reflects that Seller was engaged in at least two separate businesses, a salvage and used parts yard, and a used whole goods business, sometimes referred to as the “sales business,” which sold used tractors, trucks, and farm equipment. On July 15, 1998, Seller entered into the Agreement with Buyer, by which Seller sold its “salvage and used parts business in Morrill County, Nebraska (the ‘Salvage Business’)” to Buyer for a total purchase price of $1,050,000.
The terms of the transaction were carried out in three separate but interrelated documents: the Agreement, the Promissory Note, and the Non-Competition Agreement, all executed on July 15, 1998. The Agreement refers to and incorporates the Promissory Note and the Non-Competition Agreement, both of which are attached as exhibits to the Agreement. The Promissory Note refers to the Agreement. The Non-Competition Agreement refers to the Agreement and the Promissory Note.
Pursuant to the Agreement, Buyer purchased the following assets of the Salvage Business: (1) the equipment, motor vehicles, bookkeeping computer system, and radios used by Seller in the Salvage Business (the equipment); (2) the inventory of the Salvage Business; and (3) all goodwill and other intangible assets of the Salvage Business, including all customer lists and customer names (goodwill). Certain of Seller’s assets were specifically excluded from the sale, including all of Seller’s assets associated with Seller’s business of selling whole used farm equipment and trucks.
Under the provisions of the Agreement, the purchase price for the sale was allocated and was to be paid by Buyer as follows:
(1) $525,000 was allocated to the purchase of Seller’s equipment and inventory and was to be paid at the closing.
(2) $500,000 was allocated to the purchase of Seller’s goodwill. This sum was to be paid in annual payments of $100,000 plus interest at the rate of 6 percent per annum. The first payment was due 1 year after the closing, with additional payments *291due on the same day of each subsequent year until paid in full. This amount was evidenced by the Promissory Note. Under the terms of the Promissory Note, Seller was to provide Buyer with “30 days of written notice” to cure any default under the Promissory Note.
(3) $25,000 was allocated to the Non-Competition Agreement to be executed by Seller and the Phillipses. Buyer agreed to pay Seller and the Phillipses $5,000 per year for 5 years, with the first payment due 1 year from the date of the execution of the Non-Competition Agreement, and with each additional payment due on the same day of each subsequent year.
The Non-Competition Agreement provided in pertinent part as follows:
1. [Seller and the Phillipses] will not, directly or indirectly, for a period of 5 years from the Closing Date:
a. manage, operate, join, control, own, be an employee of, participate or become interested in or be connected with, as a partner, owner, member, shareholder, director, officer, employer or investor, or in any other individual or representative capacity, or otherwise;
b. lend credit or money for the purpose of establishing, operating or otherwise finance;
c. furnish consultation or advice to;
d. sell services on behalf of; or
e. permit their name(s) to be used by anyone other than Buyer, or its successors and assigns;
in connection with any business, partnership, joint venture, corporation, trust or other organization or entity (other than that of Buyer) engaged in the agricultural and machinery salvage and used, new or rebuilt agricultural parts business within 150 miles of Bridgeport, Nebraska.
Paragraph 5 of the Non-Competition Agreement contained the following exceptions:
5. Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, this Non-Competition Agreement shall not restrict the following actions of Seller and/or [the Phillipses]:
a. The purchase and sale of antique (1961 and prior year [sic]) vehicle or machinery parts.
b. The purchase and sale of cores on a wholesale basis.
*292Paragraph 6 of the Non-Competition Agreement provided that in the event Seller violated the Non-Competition Agreement, “Buyer . . . shall have a cause of action for any damages caused by the competition . . .
As stated above, on July 15, 1998, Seller and Buyer executed the Agreement. On the same day, Seller, the Phillipses, and Buyer executed the Non-Competition Agreement, and Buyer executed the Promissory Note. Also on July 15, Buyer paid Seller the $525,000 due under the Agreement for the equipment and inventory of the Salvage Business.
Following its purchase of Seller’s Salvage Business, Buyer became concerned that Seller and/or the Phillipses were violating the Agreement and Non-Competition Agreement by salvaging and selling used, nonantique parts; by competing with Buyer for the supply of salvage tractors and machinery; and by trading on the goodwill that Seller had sold to Buyer. This concern arose, in part, due to a series of advertisements Seller published in the Bridgeport area. One of these advertisements, published on November 7, 1998, stated “Save 50% to 80% on used tractor, harvest and farm equipment parts.” Despite these concerns, on July 15, 1999, Buyer paid Seller $105,000, in accordance with the terms of the Promissory Note and the Non-competition Agreement.
Buyer’s concerns about Seller’s adherence to the Agreement and Non-Competition Agreement continued after the July 1999 payment, and David Dyke, one of Buyer’s owners, had several conversations with Gary Phillips in regard to this perceived competition. On June 27, 2000, Buyer, through its attorneys, sent a letter to Seller and the Phillipses, stating, in part, as follows:
[Seller and Gary Phillips] are currently engaging in direct competition with [Buyer] with respect to operating a salvage and used parts business. We understand you are purchasing salvage and used parts inventory and that you are selling the same to the general public to the damage and detriment of [Buyer].
The letter further provided that as a result of
such salvage and used parts business, [Seller and Gary Phillips] are in default of the Non-Competition Agreement and your agreement to sell [Buyer] the goodwill associated *293with the salvage and used parts business purchased by [Buyer]. Because you are selling salvage parts and used parts from [Seller] you are essentially capitalizing on the “goodwill” which you sold to [Buyer],
The letter demanded that “salvage and used parts business activities” engaged in by Seller and the Phillipses cease immediately. The letter further stated that in the event such “competitive activity” did not cease, Buyer would deem the “Non-Competition agreement and the agreement to sell goodwill to have been breached” and that as a result, Buyer would not make the July 15, 2000, payments called for under the Non-Competition Agreement or the Promissory Note. On July 15, Buyer did not pay Seller the payments provided for under the Non-Competition Agreement and the Promissory Note.
On July 21,2000, the attorney for Seller and the Phillipses sent a letter to Buyer’s counsel enclosing a “Notice of Nonpayment” as a result of Buyer’s failure to pay the July 15 payments. Payments were not forthcoming. On October 5, Seller filed suit against Buyer in the district court for Morrill County. In its petition, Seller asserted two causes of action against Buyer. The first cause of action alleged, in summary, that Buyer had breached “the Agreement and the terms of the [Promissory] Note” by failing to make the July 15, 2000, payment of $100,000. The second cause of action alleged, in summary, that Buyer had breached the Non-competition Agreement by failing to make the July 15, 2000, payment of $5,000. For relief, Seller sought the balance due under the Promissory Note and interest, the $5,000 due under the Non-competition Agreement, and postjudgment interest on the Non-competition Agreement.
On October 31, 2000, Buyer filed its “Answer and Counterclaim.” Buyer denied that it had breached either the Promissory Note or the Non-Competition Agreement. Buyer further alleged, in summary, that Seller had competed against Buyer in violation of Seller’s agreement to sell its goodwill to Buyer and in violation of Seller’s agreement not to compete with Buyer. Buyer alleged that as a result of this competition, Seller had breached the Agreement and the Non-Competition Agreement and that, therefore, Buyer asserted it was excused from making payments to Seller under the Non-Competition Agreement and *294the Promissory Note. Buyer alleged it had been damaged. For its counterclaim, Buyer alleged that Seller had breached the Agreement and the Non-Competition Agreement and that Buyer had been damaged thereby, which damages included revenue and inventory losses. For relief, Buyer sought, inter alia, the dismissal of Seller’s petition with prejudice, a finding that Seller had materially breached the Agreement and the Non-Competition Agreement, a finding that Buyer was no longer obligated to make payments due under the various agreements, and damages Buyer had allegedly sustained as a result of Seller’s breaches of the agreements. Buyer did not seek rescission. Seller replied, inter alia, that Buyer had waived its rights under the Non-Competition Agreement by modifying its terms.
The case came on for a jury trial beginning on July 14, 2003, and continuing through July 17. A total of 15 witnesses testified, and over 100 exhibits were offered into evidence. The issue in Buyer’s counterclaim alleging that Seller had violated the Non-competition Agreement was given to the jury, and the issues of whether Buyer had violated its obligations under the Promissory Note and the Non-Competition Agreement were presented to the court.
During the trial, considerable evidence was adduced from the parties describing what the parties believed to be the nature of the Salvage Business sold to Buyer and the nature of the business that had been excepted from the Non-Competition Agreement and retained by Seller. In this regard, Joan Phillips testified that Buyer purchased “the business of the used parts business and the salvage inventory that supported this business” from Seller. She further testified as to her understanding of the term “salvaging,” stating that it meant “[tjaking a part off of a piece of equipment” to either sell individually or use to restore another piece of equipment. She stated that after Seller sold the Salvage Business to Buyer, Seller continued to buy salvage machinery and tractors to “backup [Seller’s] whole goods business” that had been retained by Seller after its sale of the Salvage Business to Buyer. According to Joan Phillips, Seller would take parts off the salvage machinery and tractors it purchased and use those parts to restore or refurbish the used whole goods which Seller sold as part of its “whole goods operation.” Joan Phillips further testified *295that “[w]e agreed in the noncompete not to compete against them in the used parts business.”
Gary Phillips also testified concerning Seller’s business activities after it sold the Salvage Business to Buyer. On direct examination, in response to the question whether Seller continued to operate the used parts business that was sold to Buyer, Gary Phillips testified that “[w]e operated it for our own in-house use on tractors that we were rebuilding.” On cross-examination, Gary Phillips agreed that Seller would buy farm equipment to salvage parts for other farm equipment that Seller was refurbishing. When asked whether that conduct constituted “salvaging,” Gary Phillips said “[y]es” and stated that “[t]hat was part of the business we reserved.”
Dyke testified that he was concerned with Seller’s competition with Buyer following Buyer’s purchase of the Salvage Business. According to Dyke, Seller’s purchase of salvage tractors and equipment conflicted with the goodwill that Seller had sold to Buyer. With regard to the goodwill that Seller had prior to the sale, Dyke testified that Gary Phillips indicated that he
knew everybody and everything that had to do with the farm machinery company in this entire region. He could introduce me to people to buy salvage, he could introduce me to the dealers that traded him salvage ... he could identify what type of the machinery, where to locate it.
In the course of the trial, the district court entered a one-page order dated July 14, 2003, interpreting paragraph 5 of the Non-competition Agreement. Regarding the activities reserved to Seller, the court ruled:
“Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, this Non-Competition Agreement shall not restrict the following actions of [S]eller and/or [the Phillipses]: a) the purchase and sale of antique (1961 and prior year [sic]) vehicle or machinery parts . . .” contemplated that [Seller] could salvage parts as long as they were 1961 or prior.
At the close of evidence, the district court instructed the jury. In instruction No. 9, the substance of which Buyer objected to, the district court instructed the jury that Seller’s breach of contract claims were a matter for the court to decide, stating:
*296The Court has determined as a matter of law that the instruments alleged by [Seller] and admitted by [Buyer] are valid and that [Buyer] did not make the payments which were due on July 15, 2000. The Court will determine what are the rights and obligations of the parties in light of these facts. The matter which you must decide is [Buyer’s] Counterclaim.
In instructing the jury on the counterclaim, the district court stated in Instruction No. 9 as follows:
The interpretation of [the Non-Competition Agreement] is [the court’s] responsibility. You are to determine whether the non-competition agreement was breached. Insofar as relevant to the question which you must decide, you are instructed that the proper interpretation of the non-competition agreement is as follows:
1. The agreement did not restrict [Seller’s] purchase, sale, or salvage of antique vehicle or machinery parts (1961 and prior years);
2. The agreement permitted [Seller] to retain its sales business which was the sale of used and rebuilt machinery to include the salvage function that supported that business', and
3. The non-competition agreement was not effective and did not restrict [Seller’s] activities in any way at any time after August 20, 2000.
(Emphasis supplied.)
The jury was also instructed on Seller’s defense that Buyer had waived any of Seller’s breaches of the Non-Competition Agreement and further instructed on Buyer’s damage claim for “the reasonable value of the profits it has lost.”
The case was given to the jury at approximately 3:30 p.m. on July 17, 2003. By 7:35 p.m., the jury had returned a unanimous verdict in favor of Seller on Buyer’s counterclaim, finding that Buyer had not met its burden of proof. In view of the verdict, the jury did not reach the issue of damages, if any, suffered by Buyer. In accordance with the jury verdict, the district court entered judgment in favor of Seller and against Buyer on Buyer’s counterclaim. Thereafter, the district court entered judgment in favor of Seller and against Buyer in the amounts of *297$612,225 on the Promissory Note and $20,000 on the Non-competition Agreement, plus interest from and after the judgment date. Buyer appealed.
ASSIGNMENTS OF ERROR
On appeal, Buyer assigns three errors. Buyer claims, renumbered and restated, that the district court erred (1) in failing to submit Buyer’s entire counterclaim to the jury, incorrectly instructing the jury on the counterclaim, and entering judgment against it on its counterclaim; (2) in entering judgment in Seller’s favor on its breach of contract claims; and (3) in awarding Seller double satisfaction of its claims and subjecting Buyer to forfeiture.
STANDARDS OF REVIEW
The meaning of a contract and whether a contract is ambiguous are questions of law. Big River Constr. Co. v. L & H Properties, 268 Neb. 207, 681 N.W.2d 751 (2004); Wood v. Wood, 266 Neb. 580, 667 N.W.2d 235 (2003). On a question of law, an appellate court is obligated to reach a conclusion independent of the determination reached by the court below. Id.
In an appeal based on a claim of an erroneous jury instruction, the appellant has the burden to show that the questioned instruction was prejudicial or otherwise adversely affected a substantial right of the appellant. Pribil v. Koinzan, 266 Neb. 222, 665 N.W.2d 567 (2003).
ANALYSIS
The Jury Was Improperly Instructed on Buyer’s Counterclaim and the District Court Erred in Entering Judgment Against Buyer on Its Counterclaim and in Favor of Seller on Its Contract Claim Based on the Non-Competition Agreement.
We first address Buyer’s claim that the district court incorrectly instructed the jury on its counterclaim, because resolution of this issue is dispositive of this case. On appeal, Buyer asserts that the district court erred when it instructed the jury in instruction No. 9 with regard to the meaning of the Non-Competition Agreement. Specifically, Buyer argues that the district court prejudicially erred when it added to instruction No. 9 the terms “salvage” and “salvage function that supported that business” to *298the business activities retained by Seller in paragraph 5 of the Non-Competition Agreement. We agree with Buyer that instruction No. 9 constituted prejudicial error requiring that the judgment in favor of Seller and against Buyer on Buyer’s counterclaim be reversed and vacated. Buyer also argues that as a consequence of a reversal of the judgment on the counterclaim, a corresponding reversal of entry of judgment in favor of Seller on its breach of contract claim based on the Non-Competition Agreement is also required. We agree that the resolution of Seller’s breach of contract claim based on Buyer’s failure to make payments under the Non-Competition Agreement must await proper resolution of the counterclaim, and therefore, the judgment in favor of Seller based on Buyer’s alleged violation of the Non-Competition Agreement is also reversed and vacated.
Initially, we note that there is no claim by either party that the Non-Competition Agreement was not valid. The rules of law applicable to this contract case are familiar. A contract written in clear and unambiguous language is not subject to interpretation or construction and must be enforced according to its terms. Spanish Oaks v. Hy-Vee, 265 Neb. 133, 655 N.W.2d 390 (2003). However, a contract is ambiguous when a word, phrase, or provision in the contract has, or is susceptible of, at least two reasonable but conflicting interpretations or meanings. Jensen v. Board of Regents, 268 Neb. 512, 684 N.W.2d 537 (2004). Whether a contract is ambiguous is a matter of law. Big River Constr. Co. v. L & H Properties, 268 Neb. 207, 681 N.W.2d 751 (2004). The meaning of an ambiguous contract is generally a question of fact. Kropp v. Grand Island Pub. Sch. Dist. No. 2, 246 Neb. 138, 517 N.W.2d 113 (1994).
We have stated that a court is not free to rewrite a contract or to speculate as to terms of the contract which the parties have not seen fit to include. Honda Cars of Bellevue v. American Honda Motor Co., 261 Neb. 923, 628 N.W.2d 661 (2001). Rather, when a court has determined that ambiguity exists in a document, an interpretative meaning for the ambiguous word, phrase, or provision in the document is a question of fact for the fact finder. Dammann v. Litty, 234 Neb. 664, 452 N.W.2d 522 (1990). In this regard, we have stated in a jury case that when the terms of the contract are in dispute and the real intentions of the *299parties cannot be determined from the words used, the jury, not the court, should determine the issue from all the facts and circumstances. Luschen Bldg. Assn. v. Fleming Cos., 226 Neb. 840, 415 N.W.2d 453 (1987).
In the instant case, it is apparent that the district court, through its July 14, 2003, order and instruction No. 9, effectively concluded that the Non-Competition Agreement was ambiguous and supplied terms to the Non-Competition Agreement which the parties had not included. As noted, paragraph 1 of the Non-Competition Agreement prohibited Seller and the Phillipses from competing with Buyer “in the agricultural and machinery salvage and used, new or rebuilt agricultural parts business within 150 miles of Bridgeport, Nebraska” for a period of 5 years. The Non-Competition Agreement, however, contained the following exceptions:
5. Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, this Non-Competition Agreement shall not restrict the following actions of Seller and/or [the Phillipses]:
a. The purchase and sale of antique (1961 and prior year [sic]) vehicle or machinery parts.
b. The purchase and sale of cores on a wholesale basis.
The Non-Competition Agreement did not provide an explanation as to the meaning of these two exceptions. However, during the trial, the district court in its order of July 14 concluded, inter alia, that paragraph 5 of the Non-Competition Agreement “contemplated that [Seller] could salvage parts.”
Consistent with its July 14, 2003, ruling, in instruction No. 9, when advising the jury on Buyer’s counterclaim, the district court instructed the jury that
the proper interpretation of the non-competition agreement is as follows:
1. The agreement did not restrict [Seller’s] purchase, sale, or salvage of antique vehicle or machinery parts (1961 and prior years);
2. The agreement permitted [Seller] to retain its sales business which was the sale of used and rebuilt machinery to include the salvage function that supported that business.
(Emphasis supplied.) In this instruction, the district court added the language “salvage” and “salvage function that supported that *300business” to paragraph 5 of the Non-Competition Agreement. Upon our review of the district court’s rulings and in particular instruction No. 9, we determine that the district court effectively concluded that the Non-Competition Agreement was ambiguous and that despite that conclusion, through instruction No. 9, interpreted the Non-Competition Agreement, whereas it should have given the issue of the meaning of the ambiguous Non-competition Agreement to the jury.
The meaning of a contract, and whether a contract is ambiguous, are questions of law. Big River Constr. Co. v. L & H Properties, 268 Neb. 207, 681 N.W.2d 751 (2004). On a question of law, an appellate court is obligated to reach a conclusion independent of the determination reached by the court below. Id. In reviewing the district court’s decision that the Non-Competition Agreement was ambiguous, we conclude that the district court did not err. However, once the district court determined that the Non-Competition Agreement was ambiguous, and given the record as we read it, the meaning of the ambiguous contract became a question of fact for the fact finder. See Dammann v. Litty, 234 Neb. 664, 452 N.W.2d 522 (1990). Because it was the role of the jury and not the court to determine the meaning of the ambiguous contract from all the facts and circumstances, the district court erred in instructing the jury as it did in instruction No. 9. See Luschen Bldg. Assn. v. Fleming Cos., 226 Neb. 840, 415 N.W.2d 453 (1987).
In an appeal based on a claim of an erroneous jury instruction, the appellant has the burden to show that the questioned instruction was prejudicial or otherwise adversely affected a substantial right of the appellant. Pribil v. Koinzan, 266 Neb. 222, 665 N.W.2d 567 (2003). When the error in this case consisted of supplying terms to an ambiguous contract in the jury instruction, such error cannot be cured by the giving of other jury instructions. This is so because such an error consists not in the omission of some material fact, but in the affirmative statement by the court as to the existence of a fact which the jury ought to decide. See Wilch v. Western Asphalt Paving Corporation, 124 Neb. 177, 245 N.W. 605 (1932). See, also, Platte Valley Public Power & Irr. Dist. v. Armstrong, 159 Neb. 609, 68 N.W.2d 200 (1955); Nocita v. Guiliano, 130 Neb. 241, *301264 N.W. 672 (1936). We conclude that the error in the giving of instruction No. 9 was prejudicial.
In concluding that instruction No. 9 was prejudicial error, we note that Buyer introduced evidence on its counterclaim designed to show that Seller was buying used tractors and equipment in order to salvage parts to support its whole goods business and that such salvage activity violated the Non-Competition Agreement. Despite Buyer’s allegations, by instructing the jury that paragraph 5 of the Non-Competition Agreement permitted Seller to conduct the salvage activity demonstrated by Buyer’s evidence, there was little if anything factually for the jury to decide on Buyer’s counterclaim. The district court incorrectly removed an issue from the jury and in effect instructed the jury that Seller had not violated the Non-Competition Agreement. Therefore, as noted above, instruction No. 9 constituted prejudicial error that we determine requires reversal of the judgment dismissing the counterclaim entered upon the jury verdict.
As a consequence of this reversal, we turn to the propriety of the judgment in favor of Seller based on its claim that Buyer failed to make payments due under the Non-Competition Agreement. In view of the reversal of the judgment on the counterclaim based on the Non-Competition Agreement, it necessarily follows that judgment in favor of Seller on its contract claim based on the Non-Competition Agreement must be reversed and vacated and await proper resolution of Buyer’s counterclaim.
In sum, the district court’s judgment entered in favor of Seller dismissing Buyer’s counterclaim based on the jury’s verdict is reversed and vacated, and the resolution of the counterclaim is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. In addition, judgment in favor of Seller based on Buyer’s alleged breach of the Non-Competition Agreement is also reversed and vacated.
The District Court Erred in Entering Judgment in Favor of Seller on the Promissory Note.
Buyer claims that the district court erred in entering a money judgment in favor of Seller on both of Seller’s breach of contract claims which alleged separately that Buyer failed to make payments on the Non-Competition Agreement and the Promissory *302Note. We have explained above that the entry of judgment on Seller’s claim that Buyer violated the payment obligations under the Non-Competition Agreement must be reversed and vacated. As explained below, resolution of whether Buyer improperly failed to make payments under the Promissory Note, or whether Buyer’s payment obligation under this instrument will be excused or reduced, as by a damage award or setoff, must also await a proper resolution of Buyer’s counterclaim, and therefore, entry of judgment in Seller’s favor on its contract claim based on the Promissory Note must also be reversed and vacated at this time.
In answer to Seller’s petition, Buyer alleged, inter alia, that Seller had competed against Buyer, in violation of Seller’s agreement not to compete against Buyer, and that Seller had failed to sell its goodwill to Buyer, the purchase of which would be accomplished under an instrument to pay, denominated “Promissory Note.” We note that the quantity and the quality of Seller’s alleged violations of the agreements were substantial and not trivial and that a finder of fact could find the violations material. Buyer further alleged that by virtue of Seller’s actions, Buyer was excused from making additional payments to Seller under both the Promissory Note and the Non-Competition Agreement. As discussed earlier in this opinion, Buyer counterclaimed, alleging Seller had violated the Non-Competition Agreement, and sought damages therefor. We have concluded that whether Seller violated the Non-Competition Agreement has not yet been properly submitted to the fact finder.
In the instant case, the transaction involving the sale of the Salvage Business was accomplished by three documents: the Agreement, the Promissory Note, and the Non-Competition Agreement. These three agreements were all executed at the same time and in the same place, and shared parties in common. Indeed, the Agreement refers to and incorporates the Promissory Note and the Non-Competition Agreement, the Promissory Note refers to the Agreement, and the Non-Competition Agreement refers to the Agreement and the Promissory Note. The three agreements were related and part of one transaction, and therefore their substance will be read together. See Nowak v. Burke Energy Corp., 227 Neb. 463, 418 N.W.2d 236 (1988). See, also, Lauritzen v. Davis, 214 Neb. 547, 335 N.W.2d 520 (1983); *303Northland Mortgage Co. v. Royalwood Estates, Inc., 190 Neb. 46, 206 N.W.2d 328 (1973); Cedars Corp. v. H. Krasne & Sons, Inc., 189 Neb. 220, 202 N.W.2d 205 (1972).
There is no dispute that the Agreement covered the sale of equipment and inventory and that the Non-Competition Agreement required Seller, with certain exceptions, not to compete with Buyer. Although we are aware of the long-term tax consequences of structuring the transaction as the parties did, we nevertheless determine that as the Agreement states and as the evidence shows, the Promissory Note in fact represented the payments Buyer was to make for acquisition of the goodwill sold by Seller.
We have stated generally that goodwill may be described as “ ‘ “the habit of customers to return to the concern with which they have been previously dealing.” ’ ” Chambers-Dobson, Inc. v. Squier, 238 Neb. 748, 759, 472 N.W.2d 391, 399 (1991) (quoting Meeker v. Stuart, 188 F. Supp. 272 (D.D.C. 1960)). More particularly, we have said that “ ‘good will is that “value which results from the probability that old customers will continue to trade or deal with the members of an established concern.” ’ ” 238 Neb. at 759, 472 N.W.2d at 399 (quoting Jackson v. Caldwell, 18 Utah 2d 81, 415 P.2d 667 (1966)).
We have recognized that where the sale of goodwill is involved in the sale of a business, such as in the instant case, “ ‘the buyer’s interest in what he has acquired cannot be effectively realized unless the seller engages not to act so as unreasonably to diminish the value of what he has sold.’ ” 238 Neb. at 756, 472 N.W.2d at 397 (quoting Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 188, comment b. (1981)). We have explicitly recognized the interrelationship between goodwill and noncompetition in a single transaction, and we so recognize the interrelationship in the instant transaction between Seller’s sale of goodwill under the Promissory Note and Seller’s agreement not to compete under the Non-Competition Agreement. In this regard, we have stated that “a covenant not to compete which is contained in a contract for sale of a business is a seller’s self-imposed restraint from trade and is frequently necessary to make goodwill in the seller’s business a transferable asset and ensure that the buyer receives the full value of acquired goodwill.” 238 Neb. at 756, *304472 N.W.2d at 398. We apply the principles noted above to the instant transaction.
Given the nature of the entire transaction, we determine that Seller’s promise not to compete and Seller’s agreement to sell goodwill, reflected in the Non-Competition Agreement and the Promissory Note respectively, are inextricably intertwined. Given the intertwined nature of the Non-Competition Agreement and the Promissory Note, we further determine that whether payment under the Promissory Note will be enforced or excused, or reduced as by damage award or setoff, must await a proper resolution of whether Seller improperly competed with Buyer as alleged in Buyer’s counterclaim. When agreements are inextricably intertwined, a breach of one agreement may excuse or reduce obligations on the other agreement. For the sake of completeness, we note that our recognition of the effect of the Non-competition Agreement and the Agreement on the instrument to pay is consistent with Neb. U.C.C. § 3-117 (Reissue 2001) (pertaining to negotiable instruments and entitled “Other agreements affecting instrument”). Accord Skiles v. Security State Bank, 1 Neb. App. 360, 365, 494 N.W.2d 355, 359 (1992) (discussing earlier codification of § 3-117, denominated Neb. U.C.C. § 3-119 (Reissue 1980) and repealed in 1991, and noting that code provision “is consistent with longstanding Nebraska case law”).
It is not uncommon for suit on a promissory note to be subjected to a defense. See, e.g., Larsen v. First Bank, 245 Neb. 950, 515 N.W.2d 804 (1994) (discussing duress as defense to promissory note); S.I.D. No. 32 v. Continental Western Corp., 215 Neb. 843, 343 N.W.2d 314 (1983) (discussing fraud as defense to promissory note). See, also, Neb. U.C.C. § 3-305(a) (Reissue 2001) (discussing defenses to negotiable instruments). Indeed, in Midlands Transp. Co. v. Apple Lines, Inc., 188 Neb. 435, 197 N.W.2d 646 (1972), although the obligor challenged enforcement of a promissory note in a “cross-petition” and the obligor’s evidence was insufficient, we suggested that a promissory note was subject to a setoff where the entity entitled to enforce the note had allegedly violated a covenant not to compete. Our opinion in Midlands Transp. Co., endorsing damages as a setoff against a promissory note, is consistent with well-recognized contract law that a minor breach of contract is compensable in *305damages. See Restatement (Second) of Contracts §§ 236, 237, and 241 (1981). We note, however, that a material breach will excuse the nonbreaching party from its performance. Id. Thus, in Electrical Distributors, Inc. v. SFR, Inc., 166 F.3d 1074, 1086 (10th Cir. 1999), it was stated in a case where the breach was material that “because [the breaching party] breached his covenant not to compete, [obligor] was excused from performance, i.e., making payments on the note to [the breaching party].” See, also, England v. O’Flynn, No. 18952, 2002 WL 27314 (Ohio App. Jan. 11, 2002) (unpublished opinion) (affirming decision determining that defendant was not obligated to pay on promissory note when plaintiff had materially breached other related contract).
Elsewhere, the courts have recognized that where a promissory note is connected with certain other contractual obligations, the resolution of enforcement of the note must await resolution of the defenses thereto. Thus, for example, when the seller of a business in a summary proceeding sought to recover moneys owed on a promissory note, the appellate court concluded that denial of a seller’s motion for summary judgment was proper because “the note being sued upon is inextricably intertwined with certain contractual obligations, including a noncompetition agreement, entered into between the parties.” Cohen v. Marvlee, Inc., 208 A.D.2d 792, 618 N.Y.S.2d 62, 63 (1994). The court in Cohen continued by stating: “While generally the breach of a related contract cannot defeat a motion for summary judgment on an instrument for money only, that rule does not apply where the contract and instrument are intertwined ....” Id. Similarly, in a termination of employment case involving a promissory note for severance pay and redemption of an employee’s shares made in connection with a master termination agreement, the appellate court affirmed the denial of the former employee’s motion for summary judgment on the note, stating that
one of the defenses [to enforcement of the promissory note] is predicated upon the anti-competition provisions contained in the Master Agreement [and] given the fact the Master Agreement and the promissory note are intertwined, [the former employer] has shown the existence of a triable issue of fact with respect to a bona fide defense ....
*306Lavelle v. Urbach, Kahn & Werlin P.C., 198 A.D.2d 751, 751-52, 604 N.Y.S.2d 614, 615 (1993). See, also, Eurotech Development v. Adirondack Inc., 224 A.D.2d 738, 636 N.Y.S.2d 956 (1996); Regal Limousine v. Allison Limousine Service, 136 A.D.2d 534, 523 N.Y.S.2d 154 (1988).
In response to Seller’s claim seeking to enforce the Promissory Note, Buyer, in part, alleged as a defense that Seller had breached the Non-Competition Agreement and that such breach excused Buyer’s obligation to make further payments under both the Promissory Note and the Non-Competition Agreement. We have determined that there is an interrelationship between the Non-Competition Agreement and the Promissory Note, and as noted above, adherence to the agreement not to compete is often critical to the transfer of goodwill. It therefore follows that the jury’s finding on Buyer’s counterclaim alleging Seller violated the Non-Competition Agreement necessarily must precede any decision on Seller’s breach of contract claim based on the Promissory Note, because in this case, a breach of the Non-Competition Agreement can excuse or reduce payment under the Promissory Note. Accordingly, we reverse the judgment in favor of Seller on the Promissory Note and remand the causes for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Remaining Assignments of Error.
Having concluded that the district court erred in instructing the jury with regard to Buyer’s counterclaim and erred in entering judgment in Seller’s favor on both of its breach of contract claims, we do not address Buyer’s remaining assignments of error. An appellate court is not obligated to engage in an analysis which is not needed to adjudicate the controversy before it. Livingston v. Metropolitan Util. Dist., 269 Neb. 301, 692 N.W.2d 475 (2005).
CONCLUSION
We conclude that the district court prejudicially erred in instructing the jury with regard to the Non-Competition Agreement and that the issues on the counterclaim must be resubmitted to the fact finder. Judgment against Buyer on its counterclaim and judgment in favor of Seller on the Non-Competition Agreement are both reversed and vacated. We further determine that the *307Non-Competition Agreement and the Promissory Note are inextricably intertwined and that enforcement of the Promissory Note must be determined after the issues related to the Non-competition Agreement are resolved. We therefore conclude that the district court erred in entering judgment at this time in favor of Seller and against Buyer on Seller’s claim that Buyer breached the Promissory Note.
For the reasons stated above, we reverse and vacate the district court’s judgment in its entirety and remand the causes for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Reversed and vacated, and causes remanded FOR FURTHER PROCEEDINGS.

=== CASE 9742247 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:09:08.492356+00 ===

Gerrard, J.,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent. In my opinion, the record does not support the majority’s characterization of the district court’s determinations regarding the ambiguity of the Non-Competition Agreement. Rather, I believe the court determined that the Non-competition Agreement was not ambiguous but that the plain language of the Non-Competition Agreement contemplated Seller’s salvage of parts from 1961 and prior. I agree with the majority’s conclusion that the plain language of the Non-Competition Agreement does not, standing alone, support this interpretation and is ambiguous in that regard.
However, this is an appeal from a judgment entered pursuant to jury verdict; thus, the question is whether the court erred in instructing the jury that the Non-Competition Agreement was intended to permit Seller to continue salvaging pre-1961 parts. While the Non-Competition Agreement was ambiguous, and the meaning of an ambiguous contract is generally a determination to be made by the trier of fact, the evidence presented at trial established as a matter of law that Seller’s continued salvage of parts from 1961 and before was contemplated. Therefore, I conclude that the court did not err in instructing the jury to that effect.
Ambiguity of Agreement
The majority premises its disposition of this appeal on its conclusion that “it is apparent that the district court, through its July 14, 2003, order and instruction No. 9, effectively concluded that the Non-Competition Agreement was ambiguous and supplied *308terms to the Non-Competition Agreement which the parties had not included.” The majority then concludes that the district court did not err in determining that the Non-Competition Agreement was ambiguous, but that the court erred in not submitting the meaning of the Non-Competition Agreement to the jury.
However, I see no support in the record for the assertion that the district court, even implicitly, found that the Non-Competition Agreement was ambiguous. At the pretrial hearing held on July 14, 2003, the court engaged in the following colloquy with Seller’s counsel, memorializing for the record a discussion held in chambers prior to jury selection:
THE COURT: Let’s see. I think I said something else, didn’t I. . . ?
[Seller’s counsel]: Yes, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Go ahead.
[Seller’s counsel]: I think you reacted to your — the Court’s responsibility to interpret the contract. You noted that there had been no allegations that the contract was ambiguous on behalf of either [side]. That being the case, I think, Nebraska law is quite clear in terms of if contracts are clear ... the Court may not resort to the rules of construction simply to interpret the contract as a matter of law.
With regard to the issue of antiques, you look particularly at page 3 of the covenant not to compete,
THE COURT: I think it was 5A.
[Seller’s counsel]: I think it’s with regard to page 2 of the covenant not to compete that says specifically — and I wanted to quote that language for you, Judge. Here it is, page 2 of the noncompete clause, particularly paragraph no. 5 that “Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, this Non-Competition Agreement shall not restrict the following actions of seller and/or Phillips: a. The purchase and sale of antique (1961 and prior year) vehicle or machinery parts.”
I think you determined that you are going to find as a matter of law that because of the language “notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary,” that, in fact, that provision also contemplated that [Gary] Phillips and Gary’s *309Implement could salvage antique parts as long as they were 1961 or prior.
THE COURT: That is the finding of the Court.
At the conclusion of the hearing, the court accepted two exhibits into evidence: the Agreement and the Non-Competition Agreement. Significantly, other exhibits were received solely for the purposes of Buyer’s offer of proof, but apparently were not considered by the court.
These events are reflected in the court’s pretrial order, rendered on July 14, 2003. The court’s order specifically noted that “there were no allegations that the contract was ambiguous.” The court found that “the language” of the Non-Competition Agreement quoted above “contemplated that [Seller] could salvage parts as long as they were 1961 or prior.” The court received the Agreement and Non-Competition Agreement into evidence for purposes of this order, but only “received the remaining exhibits for the purpose of the Offer of Proof.”
My reading of the foregoing portions of the record is that contrary to the majority’s assertion, the district court expressly did not conclude that the Non-Competition Agreement was ambiguous. The court noted the absence of any argument that the contract was ambiguous and determined the meaning of the contract “as a matter of law,” basing its determination solely on the language of the Agreement and Non-Competition Agreement— the only evidence the court received for purposes of making that determination.
I recognize the quandary faced by the majority, because the district court’s reasoning in making its determination is not crystal clear. The plain language of the Non-Competition Agreement, even when considered in conjunction with the Agreement, does not indicate as a matter of law that the parties contemplated Seller could continue to salvage parts from 1961 and before. However, I believe it is a fairer reading of the record to conclude that the court simply erred in its reading of the contract, rather than to assume that the court overlooked the basic proposition that the meaning of an ambiguous contract is a matter for the trier of fact. See, e.g., Kropp v. Grand Island Pub. Sch. Dist. No. 2, 246 Neb. 138, 517 N.W.2d 113 (1994).
*310No matter how the majority gets to the question, however, I agree with the majority’s conclusion that the Non-Competition Agreement is ambiguous. While each of the parties contends that the contract is unambiguous and supports their respective positions, we are not bound by their arguments. See Younker Brothers, Inc. v. Westroads, Inc., 196 Neb. 168, 241 N.W.2d 679 (1976). Whether a document is ambiguous is a question of law, and an appellate court considering such a question is obligated to reach a conclusion independent of the trial court’s decision. Union Ins. Co. v. Land and Sky, Inc., 247 Neb. 696, 529 N.W.2d 773 (1995). Therefore, this court’s decision about the ambiguity of the contract does not depend on its characterization of the district court’s determination.
Considering the Agreement and the Non-Competition Agreement together, see Norwest Corp. v. State, 253 Neb. 574, 571 N.W.2d 628 (1997), it is apparent that the parties intended for Buyer to purchase some aspects of Seller’s business enterprises, but reserve other aspects for Seller. Buyer was to acquire Seller’s salvage business, but the parties also contemplated that Seller’s trade in antique tractor parts would be reserved. What is unclear, from these agreements, is whether Seller was to be precluded from the act of salvaging parts, to the extent that activity was being performed in support of Seller’s purchase and sale of antique parts. This represents, at the very least, a latent ambiguity in the Non-Competition Agreement. See Plambeck v. Union Pacific RR. Co., 244 Neb. 780, 509 N.W.2d 17 (1993). Stated another way, the agreements, considered together, are ambiguous on whether the salvage of antique tractor parts was part of the salvage business, acquired by Buyer, or the antique business, retained by Seller. I agree with the majority’s ultimate conclusion that the Non-Competition Agreement is ambiguous.
Evidence of Meaning of Non-Competition Agreement
The majority states that “once the district court determined that the Non-Competition Agreement was ambiguous, the meaning of the ambiguous contract became a question for the fact finder.” The meaning of an ambiguous contract is generally a question of fact. Kropp, supra.
However, while instructions withdrawing consideration of material issues of fact presented by the pleadings and evidence *311are erroneous, the trial court must eliminate all matters not in dispute and submit only the controverted questions of fact on which the verdict must depend. Palmtag v. Gartner Constr. Co., 245 Neb. 405, 513 N.W.2d 495 (1994). Under the former code pleading system, which was applicable in this case, jury instructions were to be confined to issues presented by the pleadings and supported by the evidence. See Maxwell v. Montey, 262 Neb. 160, 631 N.W.2d 455 (2001). A trial court did not need to instruct the jury on an issue where the facts did not justify such an instruction. Farmers Mut. Ins. Co. v. Kment, 265 Neb. 655, 658 N.W.2d 662 (2003).
Here, the majority assumes, without discussion, that because the meaning of an ambiguous contract is a question of fact, the meaning of the contract at issue in this case should have been decided by the trier of fact. However, if the evidence at trial would not support differing conclusions on the meaning of the ambiguous contract, then the district court did not err in taking that issue away from the jury. See, e.g., Selig v. Wunderlich Contracting Co., 160 Neb. 215, 69 N.W.2d 861 (1955) (holding trial court erred in instructing jury on possible interpretation of agreement that was unsupported by evidence presented at trial). As explained by Justice Breyer, then on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the First Circuit:
The words of a contract may be so clear themselves that reasonable people could not differ over their meaning. Then, the judge must decide the issue himself, just as he decides any factual issue in respect to which reasonable people cannot differ. . . . Courts, noting that the judge, not the jury, decides such a threshold matter, have sometimes referred to this initial question of language ambiguity as a question of “law,” which we see as another way of saying that there is no “genuine” factual issue left for a jury to decide.... Even if there is ambiguity in the language, however, the evidence presented about the parties’ intended meaning may be so one-sided that no reasonable person could decide the contrary. In such a circumstance, the judge also would take the matter from the jury, deciding the factual question of meaning himself as (in the same sense) one of “law.”
*312(Citations omitted.) Boston Five Cents Sav. Bank v. Dept. of Housing, 768 F.2d 5, 8 (1st Cir. 1985). See, also, Don J. McMurray Co. v. Wiesman, 199 Neb. 494, 260 N.W.2d 196 (1977) (when terms of contract and facts and circumstances that aid in ascertaining intent of parties are insufficient to raise issue of fact, interpretation of contract is matter of law).
In the instant case, the record does not contain substantial evidence to suggest that the Non-Competition Agreement was intended to preclude Seller from engaging in the salvage of parts from 1961 and prior in support of its antique business. David Dyke testified at trial that he was upset, generally, by Seller’s salvage operations because he thought “that was the goodwill I bought.” Dyke explained:
A significant portion of it was increased in the price I paid for the company because [Gary Phillips] convinced me that he knew everybody and everything that had anything to do with the farm machinery company in this entire region. [Gary Phillips] could introduce me to people to buy salvage, he could introduce me to the dealers that traded him salvage, he could keep in contact with all of the customers, big and small, he could identify what type of the machinery, where to locate it.
However, this testimony, and Buyer’s other evidence, did not specifically address salvage in the context of Seller’s antique business.
In contrast, Seller’s evidence addressed that subject directly. Joan Phillips explained the operation of the antique business as a discrete operation from both the salvage business that was sold to the Buyer and the whole goods business that was also retained by Seller. The antique business, although operated separately from the salvage business, also involved “salvage” in the sense of taking a part off a piece of equipment to sell or use to restore another piece of equipment. The Phillipses each testified that the business purchased by Buyer was the used parts business and the salvage inventory that supported that business, but that the whole goods business and antique business continued to operate as before.
In short, the evidence adduced at trial established that the “salvage business” sold to Buyer was distinct from the “whole goods business” or “sales business,” and the “antique business,” both of *313which were to be retained by Seller. The antique business, as it was operated before and after the Agreement, was supported by the salvaging of antique parts. However, the record is clear that the Non-Competition Agreement was not meant to prevent Seller from operating its whole goods and antique businesses and, thus, was not intended to preclude Seller from salvaging antique parts to support the antique business. Regardless of how it determined that the Non-Competition Agreement allowed Seller to salvage antique parts, the district court did not err, based on the evidence presented at trial, in instructing the jury to that effect.
Consideration of Extrinsic Evidence
I recognize that given the posture of this case when it went to trial, Buyer was in a precarious position with respect to extrinsic evidence of the meaning of the Non-Competition Agreement. Neither party was arguing that the Non-competition Agreement was ambiguous, and the district court had endorsed that conclusion.
Nonetheless, Buyer could have argued that even if the Non-Competition Agreement was ambiguous, extrinsic evidence existed to support an interpretation that was favorable to Buyer’s position, and Buyer could have preserved that argument at trial by proffering such evidence. Instead, Buyer made the strategic choice, at trial and on appeal, to rely on the plain language of the contract, and the plain language of the contract simply does not support Buyer’s position. Buyer chose not to make offers of proof containing evidence supporting its interpretation of the Non-Competition Agreement, and in my view, that choice has consequences on appeal.
In many ways, this case illustrates the limitations placed on litigants and courts by Nebraska’s adherence, albeit implicit, to the “plain meaning” or “four comers” mle for determining the ambiguity of a contract. The mle in Nebraska has been that extrinsic evidence is not permitted to explain the terms of a contract that is not ambiguous. Spanish Oaks v. Hy-Vee, 265 Neb. 133, 655 N.W.2d 390 (2003). A contract is ambiguous when a word, phrase, or provision in the contract has, or is susceptible of, at least two reasonable but conflicting interpretations or meanings. Id. Courts that subscribe to the “ ‘plain meaning *314rule’ ” hold that the decision as to whether ambiguity exists must be made without reference to any source other than the contract itself. 5 Margaret N. Kniffin, Corbin on Contracts § 24.7 at 33 (Joseph M. Perillo rev. ed. 1998). See, e.g., Sack Bros. v. Great Plains Co-op, 260 Neb. 292, 616 N.W.2d 796 (2000).
However, as a noted commentator has explained, there is a growing trend toward admitting extrinsic evidence to explore whether ambiguity exists. See 5 Kniffin, Corbin on Contracts, supra, § 24.30 (citing cases). This court has not always been completely consistent in its adherence to the four corners doctrine, see, e.g., Plambeck v. Union Pacific RR. Co., 244 Neb. 780, 509 N.W.2d 17 (1993), but we have not expressly recognized the sensible principle that in many instances, it is impossible to ascertain the intended meaning of contract terms without reference to the evidence of surrounding circumstances.
Although extrinsic evidence is not admissible to add to, detract from, or vary the terms of a written contract, these terms must first be determined before it can be decided whether or not extrinsic evidence is being offered for a prohibited purpose. The fact that the terms of an instrument appear clear to a judge does not preclude the possibility that the parties chose the language of the instrument to express different terms. That possibility is not limited to contracts whose terms have acquired a particular meaning by trade usage, but exists whenever the parties’ understanding of the words used may have differed from the judge’s understanding.
Accordingly, rational interpretation requires at least a preliminary consideration of all credible evidence offered to prove the intention of the parties.
Pacific Gas & E. Co. v. G. W. Thomas Drayage etc. Co., 69 Cal. 2d 33, 39-40, 69 Cal. Rptr. 561, 565, 442 P.2d 641, 645 (1968). Simply stated, “[w]hen determining whether a contract is ambiguous, any relevant evidence must be considered. Otherwise, the determination of ambiguity is inherently one-sided, namely, it is based solely on the ‘ “extrinsic evidence of the judge’s own linguistic education and experience.” ’ ” (Citations omitted.) Ward v. Intermountain Farmers Ass’n, 907 P.2d 264, 268 (Utah 1995). Accord, e.g., Taylor v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 175 Ariz. *315148, 854 P.2d 1134 (1993) (enbanc); C.R. Anthony Co. v. Loretto Mall Partners, 112 N.M. 504, 817 P.2d 238 (1991); Harrigan v. Mason & Winograd, Inc., 121 R.I. 209, 397 A.2d 514 (1979); Simpson v. State Mutual Life Assurance Co., 135 Vt. 554, 382 A.2d 198 (1977); Anderson v. Kammeier, 262 N.W.2d 366 (Minn. 1977). See, also, 5 Kniffin, Corbin on Contracts, supra, § 24.30; 2 E. Allan Farnsworth, Farnsworth on Contracts § 7.12a (2d ed. 1998). Consequently, in determining whether a term or expression to which the parties have agreed is unclear, a court may hear evidence of the circumstances surrounding the making of the contract and of any relevant usage of trade, course of dealing, and course of performance. C.R. Anthony Co., supra.
In accord with this view, the Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 212(1) at 125 (1981) states that “[t]he interpretation of an integrated agreement is directed to the meaning of the terms of the writing or writings in the light of the circumstances . . . .” The Restatement, supra, comment b. at 126, further explains:
It is sometimes said that extrinsic evidence cannot change the plain meaning of a writing, but meaning can almost never be plain except in a context. Accordingly, the rule stated in Subsection (1) is not limited to cases where it is determined that the language used is ambiguous. Any determination of meaning or ambiguity should only be made in the light of the relevant evidence of the situation and relations of the parties, the subject matter of the transaction, preliminary negotiations and statements made therein, usages of trade, and the course of dealing between the parties. . . . But after the transaction has been shown in all its length and breadth, the words of an integrated agreement remain the most important evidence of intention.
In my opinion, this process for determining whether a contract is ambiguous is more sensible and practical than rigidly adhering to an obsolete fixation on the “four corners” of the document. Just as significantly, I believe this process accurately reflects what courts are actually doing when determining the meaning of contracts, even if not permitted to acknowledge it.
In this case, for instance, the trial court and the parties would have been on much firmer ground had they known, from the outset, that the court could consider extrinsic evidence relevant to *316the ambiguity of the contract. They would not have been forced to choose between arguing that the contract was unambiguous or presenting evidence relevant to the intent of the parties. And, had the relevant extrinsic evidence been considered prior to trial, the court could have openly relied on that evidence to support its conclusion that the Non-Competition Agreement did not prohibit Seller from continuing to salvage antique parts in support of its antique business — a conclusion which I believe, as explained above, is apparent when the relevant evidence is considered.
In short, the dubious procedural posture of this case demonstrates the impracticality of the “four comers” rule for determining whether a contract is ambiguous. But this case was tried under that rule, and it is pursuant to that rule that this appeal must be decided. However, this court should, in an appropriate case, consider expressly adopting the more sensible mle expressed in the Restatement, supra, advocated by respected commentators, and already embraced in several well-reasoned decisions from other jurisdictions.
Conclusion
The evidence presented at trial in this case established, as a matter of law, that Seller was entitled, under the Non-Competition Agreement, to continue salvaging antique tractor parts. Thus, the court did not err in instructing the jury to that effect. I respectfully dissent.

=== CASE 2230378 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:43.916967+00 ===

702 N.W.2d 485 (2005)
GENERAL ELECTRIC COMPANY, Appellant,
v.
IOWA STATE BOARD OF TAX REVIEW, Appellee.
No. 04-0458.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
August 12, 2005.
*486 Bruce W. Baker of Nyemaster, Goode, West, Hansell & O'Brien, P.C., Des Moines, Walter Hellerstein of University of Georgia School of Law, Athens, Georgia, and William Booth of General Electric Company, Albany, New York, for appellant.
Thomas J. Miller, Attorney General, and James D. Miller, Assistant Attorney General, for appellee.
LARSON, Justice.
General Electric Company (GE) applied for a refund on its 1993 Iowa income tax based on a carryback of a capital loss sustained in 1995. The Iowa Department of Revenue and Finance (department) denied the refund, and GE appealed to the Iowa State Board of Tax Review. The board affirmed the denial of the refund, and GE petitioned for judicial review. The district court agreed with the board, and GE appealed to this court. We affirm.
I. Facts and Prior Proceedings.
GE is a New York corporation doing business in Iowa. In 1993 it sold one of its subsidiaries, an aerospace business, realizing roughly $557,000,000 in capital gain. GE reported the capital gain on its federal and Iowa income tax returns. However, for Iowa tax purposes, this capital gain was classified as "nonbusiness," a term we discuss later, and therefore was allocated to, and taxed by, another state. The full amount of the capital gain in 1993 was deducted in calculating GE's Iowa taxable income; as a result, it was not taxed by Iowa.
*487 In 1995 GE sold another subsidiary, a chemical business, and this time it realized a capital loss of almost $1.2 billion. Because, under federal tax law, a corporation's capital losses may only be recognized in an amount equal to its capital gains, see I.R.C. § 1211(a) (1995), the federal tax code allows corporations to "carry back" capital losses to previous tax years and offset the losses against capital gains recognized in those prior years. Id. § 1212(a)(1)(A). In this case, GE's only capital gain to which the carryback could be applied was the $557,000,000 gain in 1993. Accordingly, GE amended its federal 1993 return by carrying back $557,000,000 of its 1995 capital loss to offset the 1993 gain. This carryback reduced GE's federal taxable income in 1993 from $2,554,466,349 to $1,992,452,524. In 1995 GE also amended its 1993 Iowa return to reflect the $557,000,000 capital loss carryback. It sought a tax refund of $555,320, based on its amended return (roughly the tax on $557,000,000).
II. Iowa's Income Tax Scheme.
We believe that a brief description of Iowa's income tax scheme is helpful to understand the issues in this case. Iowa's income tax scheme for corporations that derive income from Iowa and other states was explained in Kraft, Inc. v. Iowa Department of Revenue & Finance, 465 N.W.2d 664, 666 (Iowa 1991), reversed on other grounds by 505 U.S. 71, 112 S. Ct. 2365, 120 L. Ed. 2d 59 (1992):
Iowa income tax is imposed upon the portion of a taxpayer's "net income" attributable to its trade or business within Iowa. Iowa Code § 422.33. Section 422.35 defines "net income" as "the taxable income before the net operating loss deduction, as properly computed for federal income tax purposes. . . ."
If a corporation has income sources from several states, Iowa splits the items comprising its net income into two types: business income and nonbusiness income.[1] The distinction between business and nonbusiness income is important because it determines whether an item of income is "allocated" to one specific state or "apportioned" among several states. See Iowa Code § 422.33(2)(a)-(b) (1993).
When income is allocated, it is attributed to the particular state or states that are considered to be the source of the income, often on the basis of the location of the property that gave rise to the income or on the basis of the taxpayer's commercial domicile. . . .
When income is apportioned, on the other hand, it is divided among the various states in which the taxpayer derives such apportionable income. The mechanism for apportioning income among the states [is an apportionment formula].
Jerome R. Hellerstein & Walter Hellerstein, State Taxation ¶ 9.02 (3d ed.1999) (footnotes omitted). In general "all `business income' is apportioned; all `nonbusiness income' is allocated." Id.; accord Iowa Code § 422.33(2).
III. The Argument.
Three lines in GE's original and amended 1993 returns are involved in this appeal. Line 1, entitled "Net Income From Federal *488 Return," is the starting point for computing the Iowa income tax. See Iowa Code § 422.35; First Nat'l Bank of Ottumwa v. Bair, 252 N.W.2d 723, 725 (Iowa 1977). Line 8, entitled "Net Income After Reductions," shows the net income from line 1, less adjustments not relevant here. Line 9, entitled "Nonbusiness Income," provides the basis for apportioning and allocating taxable income. The amount shown there that is allocable to other states is deducted from line 8 to determine Iowa's taxable share.
Line 1 of GE's original 1993 return showed federal taxable income of $2,549,466,349. Line 1 of the amended return showed $1,992,452,524, which reflected the $557,000,000 loss carried back from 1995. The parties agree that line 1 of the amended return properly reported GE's net income for 1993 based on the loss carryback on the federal return.
Line 8, "net income," shown on GE's original return at $2,119,227,623, was reduced in its amended return to $1,562,213,798 to reflect the $557,000,000 reduction. Again, the parties agree that this figure is correct.
At line 9, the argument begins. The parties agree that the $557,000,000 capital gain was nonbusiness income, allocable in full outside of Iowa. The parties disagree, however, about whether line 9 on GE's amended return should include that gain. GE's figures on the original and amended returns at line 9 were identical, showing $768,051,794 as nonbusiness income. The department argues that, on the amended return, this amount must be reduced by the $557,000,000 loss carryback. GE disagrees; for purposes of allocating income away from Iowa in line 9, the $557,000,000 capital gain must remain included. This is so, it argues, because Iowa law mandates that this nonbusiness capital gain must be allocated in its entirety outside of Iowa. In other words, the $557,000,000 in question, as part of line 9, must be subtracted from line 8 and allocated outside of Iowa, even though that amount had already been deducted at line 1 by adopting the federal taxable income amount.
The department contends that the nonbusiness-allocation rulesused to calculate the line 9 figureonly apply to items of income contained in the taxpayer's Iowa net incomethe figure found on line 8. In this case, because the $557,000,000 capital gain was completely offset at the federal level, none of that gain was included in GE's Iowa net income on line 8. The department argues that GE cannot allocate gain that was not included in the first instance. Allowing allocation of such items, according to the department, would amount to a double deduction and would also have the effect of offsetting capital loss against ordinary income, which is not permitted.
According to GE, the department's position ignores "the State's strong commitment to conformity to federal taxable income as the starting point for the determination" of Iowa income tax. GE asserts that this is
a commitment that sometimes creates "inequities" for taxpayers and sometimes creates "inequities" for the State. But these "inequities" are simply the cost of conforming the Iowa statute to the federal income taxa cost that is far outweighed by the gains in administrative simplicity for both taxpayers and the state implementing Iowa's income tax system.
For the reasons to be discussed, the "inequity" in this case would fall on the state if GE's argument prevails.
IV. Standard of Review.
Review of agency action is limited to correction of errors at law. Iowa R.App. P. *489 6.4; IBP, Inc. v. Harpole, 621 N.W.2d 410, 414 (Iowa 2001). "In reviewing the district court's decision, we apply the standards of Iowa Code [chapter 17A] to determine whether our conclusions are the same as those of the district court." Grundmeyer v. Weyerhaeuser Co., 649 N.W.2d 744, 748 (Iowa 2002). If they are the same, we affirm; if not, we reverse. Id.
In reviewing agency action, this court gives deference to the agency's statutory interpretation, provided that the power to interpret the statute "has clearly been vested by a provision of law in the discretion of the agency." Iowa Code § 17A.19(10)(l) (2003). In City of Marion v. Iowa Department of Revenue & Finance, 643 N.W.2d 205, 206-07 (Iowa 2002), we concluded that the legislature had vested in the director of the department of revenue the power to interpret tax statutes. Thus, we accorded the lenient deference described in section 17A.19(10)(l) to the agency's official interpretation as reflected in its regulations. City of Marion, 643 N.W.2d at 207; accord Iowa Code § 17A.19(11)(c). In this case, however, neither party has identified an agency regulation that is directly on point. The agency has no official interpretation to which this court should defer; thus, we will reach our own conclusion regarding the proper interpretation of the relevant statutes.
V. Statutory Interpretation.
This court considers several rules when construing statutes:
(1) In considering legislative enactments we should avoid strained, impractical or absurd results.
(2) Ordinarily, the usual and ordinary meaning is to be given the language used but the manifest intent of the legislature will prevail over the literal import of the words used.
(3) Where language is clear and plain, there is no room for construction.
(4) We should look to the object to be accomplished and the evils and mischiefs sought to be remedied in reaching a reasonable or liberal construction which will best effect its purpose rather than one which will defeat it.
(5) All parts of the enactment should be considered together and undue importance should not be given to any single or isolated portion.
(6) We give weight to the administrative interpretation of statutes, particularly when they are of longstanding.
(7) In construing tax statutes doubt should be resolved in favor of the taxpayer.
Welp v. Iowa Dep't of Revenue, 333 N.W.2d 481, 483-84 (Iowa 1983); accord Gen. Elec. Co. v. Iowa State Bd. of Tax Rev., 492 N.W.2d 417, 420 (Iowa 1992).
This case turns on the interplay between the statutory definition of "net income" and the statutory rules regarding apportionment and allocation. The department contends that the only items of income subject to allocation and apportionment are those items included in GE's Iowa net income. GE, conversely, argues that the statute imposes no such limitation; according to GE, the deciding factor is the label of "nonbusiness income" assigned to the 1993 capital gain. GE asserts that, because the gain is nonbusiness and originated in another state, the allocation-apportionment rules mandate that such gain be allocated to that state and deducted from GE's Iowa net income.
A. Plain meaning of the statute. The department argues, and the district court ruled, that GE's interpretation conflicts with the plain language of the statute. The statute's plain language creates a natural order of calculation. First, a taxpayer *490 must determine its Iowa "net income," as all Iowa taxes are based on that figure. See Iowa Code § 422.33(1). Section 422.35 defines "net income" as "the taxable income before the net operating loss deduction, as properly computed for federal income tax purposes. . . ." We have interpreted this language to mean that the starting point for calculating a corporation's Iowa net income is its federal taxable income. See First Nat'l Bank, 252 N.W.2d at 725.
Section 422.35 then provides a number of "adjustments," which modify the federal taxable income figure. See Iowa Code § 422.35(1)-(16). After these adjustments are made, the resulting figure is the taxpayer's Iowa "net income."
Finally, after the taxpayer calculates its Iowa "net income," the process of allocating and apportioning that income begins. This is so because the legislature specifically provided that the allocation-apportionment rules are used to calculate the "portion of the [taxpayer's] net income reasonably attributable" to sources within Iowa. Iowa Code § 422.33 (emphasis added). As a matter of linguistic logic, a portion of the whole cannot be allocated before "the whole" has been identified. Thus, by employing the statutorily defined term "net income" in section 422.33, the legislature obviously intended to delay the application of the allocation-apportionment rules until after the taxpayer's "net income" has been calculated. In so doing, the legislature limited the rule's applicability to only those items of income included in the net income figure. In other words, only those items that make up the taxpayer's "net income" are subject to allocation and apportionment.
B. Statutory purpose and legislative intent. This interpretation reinforces the legislature's goal in enacting the statutethe creation of an efficient yet constitutional corporate tax system. The legislature met its efficiency goal by basing Iowa taxes on the taxpayer's federal taxable income. See Iowa Code § 422.35. Our system
is convenient for the taxpayer, prevents the taxpayer from spending time and money on complex forms, provides a saving to the state, allows the state to rely on federal regulation and interpretation, and provides the state with an inexpensive and quick way of verifying the accuracy of taxpayers' returns.
Kraft, 465 N.W.2d at 669, rev'd on other grounds by 505 U.S. 71, 112 S. Ct. 2365, 120 L. Ed. 2d 59; see also Comptroller of Treasury Income Tax Div. v. Am. Satellite Corp., 312 Md. 537, 540 A.2d 1146, 1150 (1988) (citing efficiency as one reason the legislature adopted the taxpayer's federal taxable income as the base figure in determining state income tax liability).
If we were to adopt GE's interpretation, it would hinder this efficiency objective because taxpayers and taxing entities alike would be forced to look beyond the taxpayer's federal taxable income and consider each item of gain and loss used in calculating that figure. See Am. Satellite Corp., 540 A.2d at 1150 (stating that the comptroller's interpretationwhich was quite similar to GE'swould frustrate the legislature's goal of efficiency). Certainly this is not the result the legislature intended.
Moreover, GE's interpretation does nothing to further the legislature's goal of constitutionality. The statute classifies income as either business or nonbusiness income simply to avoid unconstitutionally taxing taxpayers' extraterritorial income. However, if an item of extraterritorial income is not included in the taxpayer's Iowa net income to begin with, there is no risk of overtaxing, and thus allocation is no longer necessary.
C. The department's long-standing interpretation. The department has a longstanding *491 rule regarding capital-loss carrybacks that supports its interpretation. See Iowa Admin. Code r. 701-53.3(1). That rule states:
Capital losses shall be allowed or allowable for Iowa corporation income tax purposes to the same extent they are allowed or allowable for federal corporation income tax purposes. Capital loss carrybacks shall be treated as an adjustment to federal taxable income to arrive at net allocable and apportionable income.
Id. (emphasis added). Again, this rule contemplates a scheme in which only items of income included in the taxpayer's federal taxable income are subject to allocation and apportionment. This rule supports the department's position in this case.
D. Avoidance of strained or absurd results. In interpreting statutes, "we should avoid strained, impractical or absurd results." Gen. Elec. Co., 492 N.W.2d at 420. GE argues that, if the department's view prevails, it would result in unfortunate and "unintended" consequences. For example, if a taxpayer who has a capital gain otherwise taxable to Iowa also has a capital loss in another state in a larger amount, Iowa would receive no tax because the capital loss from the other state would wipe out the Iowa gain in the taxpayer's federal taxable income figure at line 1. The department concedes that this could happen, but observes that this is simply a cost of adopting a taxing scheme that relies on conformity with federal tax law. See Kraft, 465 N.W.2d at 669 (explaining advantages of conformity).
The hypothetical offered by GE is not involved in this case; however, a Maryland court, applying similar federal conformity law, considered such a case and reached exactly the conclusion advanced by the department. See Am. Satellite Corp., 540 A.2d 1146. Maryland's tax scheme, like Iowa's, uses the corporation's federal taxable income as the starting point. In American Satellite Corp., the taxpayer realized a capital gain of $5,000,000, all of which was allocable to Maryland. 540 A.2d at 1148. However, the company had federal net-operating losses of over $51,000,000 from previous years, which completely offset the capital gain and reduced the taxpayer's federal taxable income to zero. Thus, the taxpayer reported Maryland net income of zero and did not pay any state tax. The Maryland comptroller determined a deficiency because, in his opinion, the $51,000,000 of offsetting net-operating loss was apportionable among the states. Id. The comptroller found that only $1,300,000 of the net operating loss was allocable to Maryland, so the taxpayer owed state tax on the remaining $3,700,000. Id.
The Maryland Court of Appeals did not agree with the comptroller's calculation and, instead, found for the taxpayer. Under its reading of the statute, "the federal taxable base [is] a ceiling on net income subject to Maryland tax." Id. at 1149. Moreover, the court criticized the comptroller's strained interpretation:
The statute clearly imposes a tax only on "such portion [of net income] as is allocable to this State under the [allocation-apportionment rules]." (Emphasis added.) [The allocation-apportionment rules] cannot be used to create additional net income as a `portion' cannot be more than the whole.
Id. at 1151.
We find this logic equally applicable here. Our allocation-apportionment rules cannot be used to allocate a "portion" of the whole if that portion was never part of the whole in the first place. In other words, if an item of the taxpayer's federal gross income is completely offset in calculating its federal taxable incomeand therefore is not part of its Iowa net income *492 then that item is not subject to Iowa's allocation-apportionment rules.
GE raises other hypothetical scenarios that, it contends, would make the department's interpretation of our tax statutes unworkable. We disagree. In any event, the facts in those scenarios are not before us now, and we need not speculate how those cases would be resolved. One scenario that requires no speculation, however, is the effect in this case if we adopted GE's argument: GE would obtain a "refund" of taxes that it had never paid to Iowa. That is so because, as the parties agree, the entire 1993 capital gain from the sale of GE's aerospace business was allocated away from Iowa in its original 1993 return.
It is true that generally in construing tax statutes doubts will be resolved in favor of the taxpayer. Gen. Elec., 492 N.W.2d at 420. We do not believe that the meaning of the tax statutes here is in doubt; in fact, their language is quite clear. Moreover, as we noted in General Electric, other rules of construction also apply, one of which is to avoid strained, impractical, or absurd results. Id. At least impliedly based in part on this rule of construction, we held in General Electric that an income-tax refund, admitted by the taxpayer to be a windfall, would not be allowed. Id. at 421-22. Here, the "refund" requested by GE, amounting to over $550,000, would be a windfall not mandated or even permitted by our law. The department properly denied the claim, and we affirm the district court's decision so holding.
AFFIRMED.
All justices concur except STREIT, J., who takes no part.
NOTES
[1]  Iowa Code section 422.32 (1993) defines both terms:
2. "Business income" means income arising from transactions and activity in the regular course of the taxpayer's trade or business and includes income from tangible and intangible property if the acquisition, management, and disposition of the property constitute integral parts of the taxpayer's regular trade or business operations.
. . . .
7. "Nonbusiness income" means all income other than business income.

=== CASE 2230166 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:38.558255+00 ===

702 N.W.2d 217 (2005)
In re PETITION FOR DISCIPLINARY ACTION AGAINST John T. ANDERSON, Jr., a Minnesota Attorney, Registration No. 2549.
No. A05-335.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
August 11, 2005.
ORDER
The Director of the Office of Lawyers Professional Responsibility has filed a petition for disciplinary action against respondent John T. Anderson, Jr. This court's referee filed findings of fact, conclusions of law and a recommendation for discipline. The referee appointed to hear the matter found that respondent committed professional misconduct warranting public discipline, namely, failing to act with reasonable promptness and diligence in the representation of a client, failing to keep the client reasonably informed about the status of the matter, making misrepresentations to his client about the status of the matter and failing to cooperate with the investigation of the client's complaint, in violation of Minn. R. Prof. Conduct 1.3, 1.4, 3.2, 8.1(a)(3) and 8.4(c) and (d).
Respondent and the Director have entered into a stipulation in which they jointly recommend that the appropriate discipline is a 60-day suspension pursuant to Rule 15, RLPR, effective 14 days from the date of this order. The parties recommend that the reinstatement hearing provided for in Rule 18(a) through (d), RLPR, be waived; that respondent be required to successfully complete the professional responsibility portion of the state bar examination within one year from the date of this order; that respondent comply with Rule 26, RLPR; and that respondent pay $900 in costs and disbursements pursuant to Rule 24, RLPR. The parties further recommend that respondent be reinstated following the expiration of the suspension provided that at least 15 days before the expiration of the suspension period, respondent files an affidavit with the Clerk of Appellate Courts and the Director's Office establishing that respondent is current with Continuing Legal Education, has fully complied with Rules 24 and 26, RLPR, and has satisfactorily completed all other conditions imposed by the court in its decision, and that upon reinstatement, respondent be placed on probation for two years, supervised by a lawyer appointed by the Director, to review and monitor respondent's office practices and procedures, including respondent's books and records.
This court has independently reviewed the file and approves the jointly recommended disposition.
Based upon all the files, records and proceedings herein,
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that respondent John T. Anderson, Jr., be, and the same is, suspended from the practice of law for 60 days, effective 14 days from the date of this order, that the reinstatement hearing provided for in Rule 18(a) through (d), is waived, that upon reinstatement respondent shall be placed on supervised probation for a period of two years from the date of the reinstatement order upon the terms and conditions set forth above, that respondent shall successfully complete the professional responsibility portion of the bar examination, and that respondent shall comply with Rule 26, RLPR. Respondent shall pay $900 in costs and disbursements under Rule 24(a), RLPR.
BY THE COURT:
/s/Alan C. Page
Associate Justice
*218

=== CASE 2230167 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:38.609213+00 ===

702 N.W.2d 681 (2005)
266 Mich. App. 557
Daniel SCOTT, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
FARMERS INSURANCE EXCHANGE, Defendant-Appellee.
Docket No. 251559.
Court of Appeals of Michigan.
Submitted May 3, 2005, at Detroit.
Decided May 26, 2005, at 9:05 a.m.
Released for Publication August 3, 2005.
*682 Turner and Turner, P.C. (by Matthew L. Turner and Devlin K. Scarber), Southfield, for the plaintiff.
Cory & Wesley (by Tracey L. Merithew), Troy, for the defendant.
Before: O'CONNELL, P.J., and MARKEY and TALBOT, JJ.
PER CURIAM.
Plaintiff appeals as of right the trial court's order granting plaintiff's insurance company's motion for summary disposition on his claim for "uninsured motorist" benefits. We reverse. The underlying facts are largely undisputed.
On November 11, 1999, David Steele was driving a car owned by Noah Beatte. Plaintiff rode in the back seat and Beatte rode in the front passenger seat. Steele drove Beatte's vehicle into a tree, and plaintiff was injured in the accident. Beatte's insurance policy on the vehicle had lapsed, but Steele was the named insured on a Titan Insurance no-fault automobile insurance policy. Plaintiff resided with his mother, who was the named insured on a no-fault policy issued by defendant. His mother's policy provided "uninsured motorist" coverage for injuries arising from the use, ownership, or maintenance of an uninsured or underinsured vehicle.
Plaintiff made a claim for uninsured motorist benefits under his mother's policy. On March 14, 2002, plaintiff initiated negotiations with defendant in a letter demanding arbitration if the policy required it. While plaintiff's claim was pending, defendant contacted plaintiff's counsel to request documentation that Beatte's vehicle was uninsured and explain that arbitration was not mandatory. Defendant stated in this correspondence:
Prior to entertaining an Uninsured Motorist Claim, we trust that you will file litigation against the wrongdoer in order to properly protect your client's statute of limitations in the event that insurance is found at some later date. If insurance is not found, and we become obligated under the Uninsured Motorist provision of our policy, then we would have the opportunity to exercise our subrogation rights which are set forth in your client's policy of insurance.
On October 18, 2002, plaintiff's counsel notified defendant that if defendant did not acknowledge that plaintiff was eligible for uninsured motorist benefits by the end of the month, plaintiff would file suit against the driver and the owner. Defendant offered to settle plaintiff's claim for $11,000 on December 9, 2002, after the three-year *683 limitations period for any claim against Steele had expired. Plaintiff rejected the offer as inadequate. Defendant failed to pay plaintiff's claim, and plaintiff brought this action to recover "uninsured motorist benefits" under his mother's policy. Plaintiff filed a separate action against Steele after the expiration of the three-year limitations period, and Steele defaulted.
Defendant moved for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(10), raising two defenses. First, defendant claimed that plaintiff did not have a viable claim for uninsured motorist benefits because Steele, the driver of the vehicle, was insured. Second, defendant claimed that by failing to file a timely action against Steele contrary to the policy requirements, plaintiff prejudiced defendant's subrogation rights so it should be relieved of any obligation to pay benefits. In response to the second argument, plaintiff asserted that the action against Steele was still viable because of tolling principles. Plaintiff also argued that defendant could not raise a policy defense for the first time in a summary disposition motion when the insurance claim had been pending for years. Plaintiff also argued that Beatte's vehicle was an uninsured vehicle for the purpose of the policy's coverage, notwithstanding any insurance policy covering Steele's liability, so, according to the policy's plain terms, he was entitled to uninsured motorist benefits.[1]
The trial court rejected defendant's argument that the policy obligated plaintiff to file a lawsuit against Beatte or Steele in order to preserve defendant's subrogation rights because the contract's language did not support a finding that recovery was conditioned on plaintiff's filing suit against the owner and the driver. However, the trial court agreed that plaintiff failed to present a valid uninsured motorist claim because Steele, the driver of the automobile, was insured.[2]
We review de novo a trial court's resolution of a motion for summary disposition. Veenstra v. Washtenaw Country Club, 466 Mich. 155, 159, 645 N.W.2d 643 (2002). Summary disposition should be granted if there is no genuine issue of any material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. MCR 2.116(C)(10).
Uninsured motorist coverage is optional and is not mandated by the no-fault act. Rohlman v. Hawkeye-Security Ins. Co., 442 Mich. 520, 525, 502 N.W.2d 310 (1993). Accordingly, the policy language governs the coverage and is subject to the rules of contract interpretation. Id. at 525, 502 N.W.2d 310. We read insurance contracts as a whole and accord their terms their plain and ordinary meaning. Auto-Owners Ins. Co. v. Churchman, 440 Mich. 560, 566, 489 N.W.2d 431 (1992). We will not strain to find ambiguity, id. at 567, 489 N.W.2d 431, but we ultimately *684 strive to enforce the agreement intended by the parties. Engle v. Zurich-American Ins. Group (On Remand), 230 Mich.App. 105, 107, 583 N.W.2d 484 (1998). A contract is ambiguous when its words may be reasonably understood in different ways. Raska v. Farm Bureau Mut. Ins. Co. of Michigan, 412 Mich. 355, 362, 314 N.W.2d 440 (1982) (opinion of Coleman, C.J.). If an ambiguous term exists in the contract, courts should generally construe the term against the contract's drafter, unless the drafter presents persuasive extrinsic evidence that the parties intended a contrary result. Id.; Klapp v. United Ins. Group Agency, Inc., 468 Mich. 459, 470-471, 663 N.W.2d 447 (2003).
Defendant's insurance policy contained the following pertinent provisions for "uninsured motorist" coverage:
PART II  UNINSURED MOTORIST
Coverage C  Uninsured Motorist Coverage
We will pay all sums which an insured person is legally entitled to recover as damages from the owner or operator of an uninsured motor vehicle because of bodily injury sustained by the insured person. The bodily injury must be caused by accident and arise out of the ownership, maintenance or use of the uninsured motor vehicle.
* * *
3. Uninsured motor vehicle means a motor vehicle which is:
a. Not insured by a bodily injury liability bond or policy at the time of the accident.
* * *
d. Insured by a bodily injury liability bond or policy at the time of the accident but the Company denies coverage or is or becomes insolvent.
The provision's title, "Uninsured Motorist," suggests that the section deals with the actions of an "uninsured motorist." Nevertheless, the substantive language focuses exclusively and unambiguously on whether the vehicle was insured at the time of the accident.[3] While the title gives no guidance, the substantive portion of the provision contains a seemingly exhaustive explanation of what that portion of the policy does and does not cover. Under the circumstances, we will not assume that the parties agreed to make plaintiff's recovery contingent on the lack of any relevant insurance simply because defendant assigned a common name to its provision and now insists that the parties understood all the substantive nuances of that heading. Rather, the heading creates a tenuous, but plausible, ambiguity that will likely be resolved against the drafter. Klapp, supra at 470-471, 663 N.W.2d 447.
Our Supreme Court has cautioned us against reading provisions or undocumented intent into a contract or statute simply because we are tempted by politically charged "policy" preferences or our own personal distaste for a case's outcome. See Terrien v. Zwit, 467 Mich. 56, 65-72, 648 N.W.2d 602 (2002); Mayor of Lansing v. Pub. Service Comm., 470 Mich. 154, 164-166, 680 N.W.2d 840 (2004). Therefore, we will not follow the example of the trial court and several appellate panels and hold, contrary to the express terms of the contract, that the existence of any other insurance coverage suffices to render the "vehicle" insured. See, e.g., Citizens *685 Ins. Co. of America v. Povey, 114 Mich.App. 395, 319 N.W.2d 341 (1982). Rather, we strive to apply the language that the parties originally agreed upon. The plain language of the "uninsured motorist" provision makes coverage contingent on whether the vehicle is insured, not on whether the driver is insured. Therefore, we will not insert the contingency on the insurance company's behalf. The trial court erred when it ruled that the contract did not cover accidents in which the driver was insured and granted defendant's motion for summary disposition on these grounds.
Nonetheless, we acknowledge that some car insurance policies are designed to cover a vehicle when, as here, the person they insure does not own it, but is merely driving it with the permission of the owner. Under these circumstances, the vehicle is insured under the driver's policy at the time of the accident, and defendant would be entitled to summary disposition if the driver's insurer pays plaintiff's claims. Other policies only insure the driver, however, and if Steele were covered by such a policy here, then defendant would be bound by the contract's terms to pay plaintiff's claim and could pursue Steele under a subrogation theory. We mention this because a considerable dispute existed below regarding which of two potential car insurance policies covered Steele at the time of the accident, and the policies differ in their approach to special trips taken with the owner's permission.[4] Moreover, we note that, according to the policy's plain language, defendant is presumably liable if Steele's insurance company denies coverage.
The trial court's decision to grant defendant summary judgment preempted resolution of these and other factual issues. After removing the legal misunderstanding that the existence of any other insurance coverage absolutely negated defendant's liability for benefits, we can see many issues of material fact that render the grant or affirmation of summary disposition inappropriate. MCR 2.116(C)(10). Because some of these factual disputes relate to the parties' other arguments on appeal, our resolution of those issues is also unwarranted.[5] We recommend, however, that the trial court and the parties look closely at the contract's arbitration provision on remand, as it appears to require arbitration to resolve such disputes. But because we do not have the benefit of briefing and developed argument on this issue, we merely note our impressions on this point.[6]
*686 Reversed and remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. We do not retain jurisdiction.
NOTES
[1]  All parties agree that Beatte failed to insure his motor vehicle at the time of the accident. A disagreement exists concerning whether Steele, the driver of the vehicle, was insured at the time of the accident. There is also an issue concerning whether Steele's insurer will deny coverage for this accident. If coverage is denied, then it may be an uninsured vehicle. Defendant's insurance policy reads in part as follows:
3. Uninsured motor vehicle means a motor vehicle which is:
* * *
d. Insured by a bodily injury liability bond or policy at the time of the accident but the Company denies coverage or is or becomes insolvent.
[2]  The trial court concluded that Steele was covered under a separate policy and, therefore, Beatte's vehicle was not an uninsured motor vehicle. However, the lower court record is unclear regarding Steele's coverage.
[3]  The substantive portion of this clause focuses on the motor vehicle. Plainly speaking, if the motor vehicle is not insured, it is an uninsured motor vehicle and the provision applies. However, the section is entitled "Uninsured Motorist." The trial court will have to resolve the discrepancy in this language on remand.
[4]  In fact, plaintiff advanced, but did not support with evidence, the theory that Steele's coverage under either of the policies was questionable because he may have sold his own car, which was the car that the policies potentially insured. Policy exclusions may also have applied to preclude coverage. All these issues should be fully developed on remand.
[5]  For example, defendant argues that plaintiff failed to preserve its subrogation claim against Steele, but this argument depends on the unresolved issue whether it can recover from Steele. Likewise, plaintiff's argument that defendant should be estopped from denying coverage also depends, in part, on the undeveloped factual question of prejudiceanother issue contingent on plaintiff's ultimate success in its suit against Steele. It is clear from the record that the trial court only granted summary disposition because of its mistaken legal conclusion that evidence of Steele's insurance precluded coverage. Having dispelled this notion, any further action by us would be presumptuous. We also note that defendant delayed paying its claim for a period of three years which may, in part, be the reason that the statute of limitations now jeopardizes defendant's subrogation claim.
[6]  We note that defendant's policy states, "Determination as to whether an insured person is legally entitled to recover damages or the amount of damages shall be made by agreement between the insured person and us. If no agreement is reached, the decision will be made by arbitration."

=== CASE 9742182 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:08:11.03742+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE BOWMAN delivered the opinion of the court: Defendants, Louis Capuzi, Paul Koroluk, and Frank Perez, were indicted for residential burglary (720 ILCS 5/19 — 3(a) (West 1996)). They moved to quash search warrants for their residences and to suppress evidence seized pursuant to the search warrants. The trial court granted defendants’ motions on the grounds that the descriptions of property to be seized contained in the warrants were too general and that the judge who issued the warrants was not a neutral and detached magistrate. The State filed a certificate of impairment, and this appeal ensued. The State contends that (1) each defendant had standing to challenge only the search of his own residence and lacked standing to contest the search of any other residence; (2) the search warrants’ general descriptions of the property to be seized were appropriate under the circumstances; (3) even if the search warrants were too general, the officers who executed the warrants were entitled to rely in good faith on their validity; and (4) there was no evidence that the judge who issued the search warrants was biased against defendants. The warrants at issue were based on a sworn complaint dated November 19, 1997, and executed by Sergeant Thomas West of the Chicago police department. West stated that he belonged to a multijurisdictional task force that was investigating over 100 residential burglaries committed in Chicago and surrounding counties between September 1996 and November 1997. The task force had focused its investigation on Koroluk and Capuzi. Both Koroluk’s residence at 2153 West Race Street in Chicago and Capuzi’s residence at 702 North Rockwell in Chicago, which was also the residence of Capuzi’s stepson Perez, had been under surveillance. West alleged that on November 14, 1997, Koroluk, Capuzi, and Perez were observed loading a large dark bag into a maroon GMC Jimmy truck at Capuzi’s residence. Defendants left in the truck and returned three hours later in a different vehicle. West further alleged that on November 15, 1997, the homes of Kun Ho Kim and Alan and Camy Gould, both of Long Grove, were burglarized. At both the Kim and the Gould homes, the burglars cut telephone wires to circumvent the alarm systems, opened doors with pry bars, disabled the motion sensors, and then went to the attics to further dismantle the alarm systems. Police officers found similar sets of footprints outside both homes. The complaint did not set forth the items that were stolen from the Gould and Kim residences other than to say that a set of golf clubs was taken from the Kim residence. On the evening of November 15, the Goulds arrived at their home to find a “red Blazer type” vehicle parked in their driveway. The Goulds were able to see the driver of the vehicle, whom they later identified as Koroluk. Approximately IV2 hours after the Gould and Kim burglaries, Koroluk and Capuzi were videotaped at Capuzi’s home unloading a set of golf clubs and a black bag from the maroon GMC Jimmy. After leaving 702 North Rockwell, Koroluk and Perez drove to Koroluk’s home in the GMC Jimmy and took items into Koroluk’s house. On November 19, 1997, Judge Booras signed warrants authorizing searches of defendants’ persons and their residences. The portions of the warrants relevant to the issues before us are identical and provided for the seizure of the following items: “Jewelry; United States currency; golf clubs; firearms; proof of residency or occupancy; any and all documents from National Car Rental System, Inc.; and any and all stolen property, shoes, masks, gloves, burglary tools and all instrumentalities used in furtherance of the offense of Burglary.” Defendants moved to quash the search warrants and suppress all evidence seized as a result of the warrants on the grounds that probable cause was lacking, the description of items to be seized was impermissibly general, and the issuing judge, Judge Booras, was not a neutral and detached magistrate. On appeal, the State challenges the trial court’s rulings on the latter two grounds. On June 11, 1998, a hearing was held on the motions to quash and suppress evidence. Perez and Koroluk testified about remarks Judge Booras made about Koroluk. Koroluk testified that in 1985 he was tried in Lake County for a criminal offense. Judge Booras, who at that time was an assistant State’s Attorney, prosecuted Koroluk. Koroluk was convicted, but his conviction was reversed on appeal. Koroluk testified that the first time he appeared before Judge Booras in the matter at issue, Judge Booras said, “I’ve been waiting for you, Paul. You remember me, don’t you?” The second time he appeared before Judge Booras, Judge Booras said, “I call old friends by their first names, right Paul?” Judge Booras also stated that he and Koroluk “went back a while” and that he was the prosecutor on a case against Koroluk about 10 years ago. Perez testified that he heard Judge Booras say that he remembered Koroluk and was waiting for him. The trial court also heard testimony from Sergeant West pertaining to the search warrants. West testified that he prepared the warrants with help from a Lake County assistant State’s Attorney. In West’s view, the warrants were not limited to recovering property stolen from the Gould and Kim residences. They also included property stolen in the approximately 100 other burglaries between September 1996 and November 1997 in which defendants were suspects. West testified that, at the time he prepared the complaint for the search warrants, he did not have a list of the property taken from the Gould and Kim residences in his possession. West admitted that other officers, however, did have detailed descriptions of the stolen property. West further testified that on the night of November 15 the members of the jurisdictional task force communicated to each other what had been found at the Gould and Kim residences. He stated, “We had numerous devices of communication between us and between the various jurisdictions.” West also testified that prior to seeking the search warrants he had spoken with Officer Pranke of the Lake County sheriffs department, the investigating officer for the Gould and Kim burglaries, who had given him information that he included in the complaint for the search warrants. Pranke had talked with the Goulds and the Kims about the burglaries. West also testified that there were several suburban investigators who had “much more detailed knowledge than [he] did of specific types of shoes to be seized.” West stated that he was aware that the officers had this specific information before he signed the complaint. When asked about “burglary tools,” West said, “[I]n this particular investigation, there were pry bars and sledge hammers used at various locations so that could be — in the investigation that could be described as a burglary tool.” On July 30, 1998, the trial court issued a written order granting defendants’ motion to quash the search warrants and suppress the evidence seized pursuant to those warrants. The State then timely filed a certificate of impairment, and this appeal followed.  The State argues first that Koroluk lacked standing to contest the search of Capuzi and Perez’s residence, and Capuzi and Perez had no standing to contest the search of Koroluk’s residence. Defendants argue that the State waived this argument by failing to raise it in the trial court. We agree with defendants. The case of People v. Holloway, 86 Ill. 2d 78 (1981), is controlling on this issue. Like the matter before us, Holloway involved an appeal by the State after the trial court granted the defendants’ motion to suppress. One of the defendants orally joined in the other defendant’s motion to suppress, and the State failed to raise the issue of standing until the appeal. Holloway, 86 Ill. 2d at 91. In holding that the State waived its right to challenge the defendant’s standing, the court noted that the principle of waiver applies to the State as well as the defendant and that by failing to raise its objection in the trial court the State deprived the defendant of the opportunity to establish that he did in fact have a sufficient interest in the premises to create standing. Holloway, 86 Ill. 2d at 91. The same considerations apply here. The State never objected to defendants’ standing in the trial court, so defendants did not have an opportunity to present any evidence in rebuttal. The State’s argument that the standing issue was raised by virtue of defendants’ burden to establish standing is without merit. While defendants may have the burden of establishing standing, the burden of objecting to standing is the State’s. Accordingly, we find that the State has waived this issue. Next, the State asserts that the descriptions of the property contained in the search warrants were proper under the circumstances and that the trial court erred in ruling that they were impermissibly general. Before reaching the merits of the State’s argument, it is necessary to address the standard of review. The State contends that no facts pertaining to the search warrants are in dispute and urges us to apply a de novo standard of review to the trial court’s ruling. Defendants argue that we should not overturn the trial court’s ruling unless it is manifestly erroneous.  The case of People v. Mabry, 304 Ill. App. 3d 61 (1999), is instructive with respect to the appropriate standard of review. In Mabry, this court held, pursuant to the supreme court’s ruling in People v. Gonzalez, 184 Ill. 2d 402 (1998), that a reviewing court must conduct a two-part analysis of a trial court’s decision to suppress evidence. Mabry, 304 Ill. App. 3d at 64. The first step is to determine whether the trial court relied on any factual findings in making its decision, and, if so, whether those findings were clearly erroneous or against the manifest weight of the evidence. Mabry, 304 Ill. App. 3d at 64. If they were not clearly erroneous or against the manifest weight of the evidence, they will not be disturbed on appeal. Mabry, 304 Ill. App. 3d at 64. Next, the reviewing court must apply de novo review to the legal question of whether the evidence should be suppressed. Mabry, 304 Ill. App. 3d at 64. Here, the trial court did rely on certain factual findings in suppressing the fruits of the search warrants. After a review of the record, we conclude that those findings were not clearly erroneous or against the manifest weight of the evidence for the following reasons.  The trial court found that Sergeant West had time to obtain more specific descriptions of the property stolen from the Gould and Kim residences. The trial court also found that West had access to the officers who interviewed the Goulds and Kim and therefore could have obtained more specific information about the items stolen from them. In this regard, the court stated: “He had over three days to obtain specific lists of items which certainly at a minimum could have been broken down by size, color, stones and content, as to the jewelry. He had access to the information necessary to provide denominations as to ‘United States Currency’ if any was in fact stolen in the burglaries, to provide brand name, club size and type, bag size and color, to provide the size of the ‘shoes’ being sought, the type of ‘masks,’ the type of ‘gloves,’ and what was meant by ‘burglary tools.’ ” These findings were not clearly erroneous. The State did not present any evidence suggesting that no description of the property stolen from the Goulds and Kim existed at the time West was preparing the warrant. Although West testified that he did not have specific information about the items stolen from the Goulds and Kims in his possession at the time he was preparing the complaint, there is ample evidence that demonstrates that West could have obtained specific information from other officers involved in the investigation. West admitted that other officers involved in the investigation had detailed descriptions of the property taken from the Gould and Kim residences. West also testified that other officers had specific information about the shoeprints and the shoes to be seized. West’s testimony also indicated that he was aware of certain burglary tools, including pry bars and sledge hammers, that had been used in the burglaries. West’s testimony supports the trial court’s finding that it was possible to describe the items to be seized with more particularity. It appears from the record that West had a significant amount of information at his disposal but chose not to include it in the warrants. Accordingly, we find that the trial court’s findings of fact were not erroneous or against the manifest weight of the evidence.  Next, we turn to the legal question of whether the court should have suppressed evidence in the cause before us. The United States and Illinois Constitutions (U.S. Const., amend. IV; Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, § 6), as well as section 108 — 7 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 (725 ILCS 5/108 — 7 (West 1996)), require that a search warrant describe with particularity the person or place to be searched as well as the property to be seized. It is not necessary to give a “minute and detailed” description of the property to be seized, but “ ‘the property must be so definitely described that the officer making the search will not seize the wrong property.’ ” People v. Batac, 259 Ill. App. 3d 415, 420 (1994), quoting People v. Prall, 314 Ill. 518, 523 (1924). Put another way, the warrant should provide the executing officer with sufficient information “by which he could select certain property within the description in the warrant and refuse to take other property equally well described in the warrant.” Prall, 314 Ill. at 523.  Courts must determine whether warrants are sufficiently specific on a case-by-case basis. People v. Allbritton, 150 Ill. App. 3d 545, 547 (1986). In so doing, a court should consider what degree of descriptive detail is reasonable given the nature of the items involved and the progress of the police investigation at the time the warrant was issued. People v. Rende, 253 Ill. App. 3d 881, 886 (1993). Courts have held that generic descriptions are sufficient in some instances, such as when more specific descriptions are not available or when detailed descriptions are intrinsically difficult and there is a probability that the items sought will constitute a large portion of the inventory to be searched. Rende, 253 Ill. App. 3d at 886. However, a general description of the items to be seized is not appropriate if a specific description is available to the investigating authorities. Batac, 259 Ill. App. 3d at 420. As we have noted, the court found that specific descriptions of the stolen jewelry, golf clubs, currency, firearms, shoes, masks, gloves, and burglary tools to be seized were available to West had he chosen to seek out that information. The court also determined that more specific descriptions were necessary, citing Allbritton and cases cited therein for the proposition that “jewelry” and “currency” are not sufficiently descriptive terms on their own. In Allbritton, the State procured a warrant to search the defendant’s home for “ ‘jewelry, chains, cuff-links, sweater-closers and diamonds.’ ” Allbritton, 150 Ill. App. 3d at 545. The court held that this list of items provided the executing officers little guidance as to the physical appearance of the items to be seized and provided no basis for the officers to determine whether pieces of jewelry found at the defendant’s home were covered by the scope of the warrant. All-britton, 150 Ill. App. 3d at 547-48. Likewise, in People v. Holmes, 20 Ill. App. 3d 167, 172 (1974), the court found the description an “ ‘undetermined amount of United States Currency’ ” to be “meaningless” because it failed to distinguish between funds obtained in the robbery defendant was accused of committing and funds from any other source. Similarly, the court found the term “weapon” provided the executing officers unlimited discretion as to what they could seize. Holmes, 20 Ill. App. 3d at 172.  Like the trial court, we find that more description was necessary to avoid violating the fourth amendment. In drafting the warrants, the State made little effort to limit in any meaningful way the items to be seized. As the trial court recognized, many, if not most, homes will contain jewelry, currency, shoes, and gloves. Many homes also contain golf clubs and firearms. The warrants also authorized the executing officers to seize “any and all stolen property” without providing any information upon which the executing officers could distinguish between stolen property and property that belonged to defendants. In short, with the exception of the rental car documents from National Rental Car, the warrants left the items to be seized largely within the discretion of the executing officers. West admitted as much in his testimony. Given that West had the resources of the task force at his disposal, including all of the information that the other members of the task force had collected over the course of their investigation, the search warrants’ lack of detail was not reasonable under the circumstances. The State’s argument that further description was impracticable because defendants were suspects in a large number of burglaries is unavailing for several reasons. In some cases, it may be impractical to require substantial description when a large number of crimes are involved, but this is not one of those cases. A task force had been in place for some time investigating the burglaries. Throughout the investigation, officers prepared reports of the burglaries that took place. West testified that he had read the burglary reports, although not immediately before executing the complaint. Furthermore, requiring the warrants to describe more particularly the items to be seized does not mean that the State must list and describe every single stolen item. The amount of description that is reasonable and necessary will depend on the facts of the case. Here, though, the State made a minimal effort to describe the items to be seized, despite having more specific information in its possession. We conclude, therefore, that the trial court did not err in quashing the search warrants and suppressing the items seized. Parenthetically, we note that, in addition to the overly general descriptions of items to be seized that we have addressed, the warrants also sought “all documents from National Car Rental System, Inc.” The trial court’s ruling with respect to this portion of the warrants is ambiguous. The trial court noted in its order that “[ojutside of the description of ‘all documents from National Car Rental System, Inc.’ there was no specificity.” The court went on, however, to order “that the items seized during the execution of the search warrants issued in this case are suppressed from evidence in these proceedings.” A court may sever the valid portion of a warrant from the invalid portion. Rende, 253 Ill. App. 3d at 885. However, because the parties did not raise this issue, we have not addressed it and leave it to the trial court to determine whether the car rental documents should be admissible at trial. We next consider the State’s argument that, even if the search warrants were improper, the evidence obtained as a result of the warrants is admissible under the good-faith exception to the exclusionary rule. Defendants argue that the State waived this argument by failing to raise the good-faith exception in the trial court. The State contends that the issue is not waived because the good faith of Sergeant West was explored in the record. The record indicates that defendants argued that probable cause was lacking because West made certain statements in the complaint in bad faith, and West was questioned in that regard. It is undisputed, however, that the State did not raise the good-faith exception in the proceedings below, thus depriving the court of the opportunity to determine whether the exception applied. In People v. Damian, 299 Ill. App. 3d 489, 494 (1998), the court held that the failure to argue the good-faith exception at the trial court level resulted in the waiver of that issue on appeal. We agree and consequently find that the State waived the issue of whether the good-faith exception applies in this matter. The State’s final argument is that the trial court erred in ruling that Judge Booras, who issued the search warrants, was not a neutral and detached magistrate. We need not address this issue, as we have already determined that the trial court did not err in finding the search warrants defective because they were too general. For the reasons stated, we affirm the order of the circuit court of Lake County granting defendants’ motions to quash the search warrants and suppress the evidence seized pursuant to the warrants. Affirmed. GEIGER, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9742183 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:08:11.041772+00 ===

JUSTICE GALASSO, specially concurring in part and dissenting in part: The majority has prepared a well-reasoned decision on all issues raised by the State with the exception, in my humble opinion, of whether all the property descriptions contained in the search warrants were impermissibly general. On the issue, I concur with the majority in setting forth the appropriate standard of review. Applying that standard to the items set forth in the search warrants, I cannot conclude that the term “golf clubs” is impermissibly general. If this warrant required the seizing of a baseball bat, must it state Louisville Slugger and size? If this warrant required the seizing of a tennis racquet, must it give the brand name and size? I think not. In this case, the warrants were issued based upon a sworn complaint dated November 19, 1997, four days after the burglary of the Kim residence, from which a set of golf clubs was taken. “Jewelry” may be impermissibly broad, as would be “currency,” “burglary,” and “sporting equipment,” but I believe “golf clubs” is sufficiently descriptive and that the trial court abused its discretion in not permitting the warrants to stand as to the term “golf clubs.” My dissent is limited to the term “golf clubs” as contained in the search warrants.

=== CASE 9742184 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:08:11.31945+00 ===

JUSTICE HEIPLE delivered the opinion of the court: The question presented by this appeal is whether the Illinois State Board of Elections (the Board) must conduct a public hearing on a complaint when the Board fails to determine in a closed preliminary hearing that the complaint was not filed on justifiable grounds. We hold that it must. BACKGROUND On February 19, 1997, the Illinois Republican Party filed two complaints with the Board. One complaint alleged that the Democratic Party of Illinois had violated sections 9 — 10 and 9 — 11 of the Election Code (the Code) (10 ILCS 5/9 — 10, 9 — 11 (West 1996)) by filing inaccurate reports of campaign contributions received and made by it during 1996. The other complaint alleged that the United Democrats of Illinois had violated sections 9 — 3, 9 — 4, and 9 — 10 of the Code (10 ILCS 5/9 — 3, 9 — 4, 9 — 10 (West 1996)) by failing to file a statement of organization with the Board and by failing to report its contributions received and expenditures made during 1996. Upon receiving the complaints, the Board scheduled a closed preliminary hearing for March 11, 1997, and appointed a hearing examiner. At the closed preliminary hearing, the Republican Party (hereinafter, complainant) offered exhibits supporting the allegations of its complaints. The Democratic Party of Illinois and United Democrats of Illinois (hereinafter, respondents) submitted written objections to the complaints. Following the hearing, the hearing examiner concluded that the complaints were filed on justifiable grounds and recommended to the Board that the complaints be docketed for public adjudicative hearings. The Board’s general counsel then notified the Board that he agreed with the recommendation of the hearing examiner. On March 17, 1997, four members of the Board voted to find that the complaints were filed on justifiable grounds. Three Board members voted against making such a determination.1 Because a five-vote majority of the eight-member board had not been achieved, the Board’s general counsel then recommended that the Board enter an order “dismissing the complaints for grounds of procedure and not on the merits” so that an appeal might be taken from the Board’s action. The Board then voted unanimously to enter the following order: “The Board is unable to reach a decision by vote of 5 members with respect to any matter raised by the record at closed preliminary hearing and the Board makes no determination as to whether complaint [sic] was filed upon justifiable grounds. IT IS HEREBY ORDERED: 1. No further action is to be taken. 2. That the complaint is dismissed on procedural grounds, the Board being unable to achieve a vote of 5 members with respect to any issue raised by the record.” Complainant appealed this order directly to the appellate court as provided by section 9 — 22 of the Code (10 ILCS 5/9 — 22 (West 1996)). In a published opinion, the appellate court remanded the cause to the Board, ordering that those members who voted that the complaints were not filed on justifiable grounds state of record their reasons for so voting. 294 Ill. App. 3d 915. Respondents petitioned this court for leave to appeal, which we granted. 177 Ill. 2d R. 315(a). ANALYSIS Section 9 — 21 of the Code provides, in relevant part, as follows: “Upon receipt of [a] complaint, the Board shall hold a closed preliminary hearing to determine whether or not the complaint appears to have been filed on justifiable grounds. *** If the Board determines that the complaint has not been filed on justifiable grounds, it shall dismiss the complaint without further hearing. Whenever in the judgment of the Board, after affording due notice and an opportunity for a public hearing, any person has engaged or is about to engage in an act or practice which constitutes or will constitute a violation of any provision of this Article or any regulation or order issued thereunder, the Board shall issue an order directing such person to take such action as the Board determines may be necessary in the public interest to correct the violation.” 10 ILCS 5/9 — 21 (West 1996). In addition, section 1A — 7 of the Code provides that “[flive members of the Board are necessary to constitute a quorum and 5 votes are necessary for any action of the Board to become effective ***.” 10 ILCS 5/1A — 7 (West 1996). Respondents contend that if the Board is unable to achieve a majority determination as to whether or not a complaint has been filed on justifiable grounds following the closed preliminary hearing, the Board is prohibited from taking further action on the complaint. Respondents assert that because five votes are necessary for any action of the Board to become effective, the Board may not conduct a public hearing on a complaint unless five of its members determine that the complaint was filed on justifiable grounds. Respondents’ arguments are based on an incorrect reading of the relevant statutory provisions. Section 9 — 21 of the Code requires the Board to hold a closed preliminary hearing upon receipt of a complaint alleging a violation of the Code. 10 ILCS 5/9 — 21 (West 1996). This same section then requires that the Board dismiss the complaint without further hearing if, at the conclusion of the closed preliminary hearing, the Board determines that the complaint has not been filed on justifiable grounds. Because five votes are necessary for any action of the Board to become effective, the Board may not dismiss a complaint after the closed preliminary hearing unless at least five members vote to do so. Respondents suggest that because five votes are needed to dismiss a complaint after the closed preliminary hearing, five votes are also required to proceed with a public hearing on a complaint. Nothing in the Code, however, supports such a requirement. Respondents appear to be laboring under the belief that, at the conclusion of the closed preliminary hearing, the Board is required to vote on whether the complaint was filed on justifiable grounds. On the contrary, the only requirement in the statute is that the Board dismiss the complaint if it determines that the complaint was not filed on justifiable grounds. 10 ILCS 5/9 — 21 (West 1996). The statute thus does not require any majority vote by the Board prior to a public hearing on the complaint. Furthermore, it is clear that the statute contemplates a public hearing for those complaints not dismissed by the Board. In the sentence which immediately follows the description of the procedure for dismissing a complaint, section 9 — 21 requires that the Board afford “an opportunity for a public hearing” before taking any action to correct an alleged violation of the Code. 10 ILCS 5/9 — 21 (West 1996). This requirement of a public hearing is consistent with the broader purposes of the Code’s campaign finance disclosure provisions. See 10 ILCS 5/9 — 10 et seq. (West 1996) (mandating the filing of reports listing the source and amount of campaign contributions and expenditures). By requiring that every complaint not dismissed by a majority of the Board proceed to a public hearing, the Code effectively promotes the goals of candor and openness underlying these substantive provisions. At the conclusion of the preliminary hearing in the instant case, the Board failed to achieve a vote of five members to dismiss the complaints as not filed on justifiable grounds. For the reasons stated above, the complaints were then required to proceed to a public hearing. The Board thus lacked authority to enter its subsequent order dismissing the complaints without reaching their merits. Accordingly, the judgment of the Board is set aside and the complaints are remanded to the Board for a public hearing. Respondents also contend that the appellate court erred in addressing a number of defenses raised by respondents in their objections to the complaints filed with the Board. Because we have concluded that the Board’s action on the complaints was unauthorized, we agree with respondents that it was improper for the appellate court to address these additional matters. Therefore, the appellate court’s judgment remanding the proceeding to the Board is affirmed but the remainder of its opinion is vacated. Appellate court judgment affirmed in part and vacated in part; Board decision set aside; cause remanded.   By statute, the Board is composed of eight members. 10 ILCS 5/1A — 2 (West 1996). At the time of the vote in the instant case, however, there was one vacancy on the Board.

=== CASE 9742185 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:08:11.323521+00 ===

JUSTICE RATHJE, specially concurring: I agree entirely with the majority’s conclusion that, unless five Board members conclude during the closed preliminary hearing that a complaint was not filed on justifiable grounds, the Board must conduct a public hearing on that complaint. I write separately only to underscore the disastrous public policy consequences associated with the contrary result. The State Board of Elections, unlike most other state agencies, boards, and commissions, is constitutionally mandated. Article III, section 5, of the Illinois Constitution provides: “A State Board of Elections shall have general supervision over the administration of the registration and electian laws throughout the State. The general assembly by law shall determine the size, manner of selection and comprehension of the Board. No political party shall have a majority of members of the Board.” To this end, the General Assembly has provided that the Board membership shall consist of eight members, four from each of the two major political parties. 10 ILCS 5/1A — 2 (West 1998). In addition, “5 votes are necessary for any action of the Board to become effective.” 10 ILCS 5/1A — 7 (West 1998). In construing the legislature’s intent with respect to these provisions, this court has held that “the General Assembly obviously sought to negate partisanship as much as possible and to guarantee the Board’s political independence.” (Emphasis added.) Lunding v. Walker, 65 Ill. 2d 516, 527 (1976). With these principles in mind, consider the following question: Whose reading of section 9 — 21 does a better job of negating partisanship and guaranteeing the Board’s political independence, the majority’s or the dissent’s? A simple hypothetical provides the answer. Assume that a verified complaint is filed against a Republican candidate. Assume next that, during the closed preliminary hearing, the Board membership votes along strict party lines on whether the complaint was “filed on justifiable grounds.” Under the majority’s construction of section 9 — 21, these facts would lead to a public hearing on the verified complaint. Partisanship goes unrewarded, and the investigation continues. By contrast, under the dissent’s construction of section 9 — 21, a strict party line vote precludes any further inquiry into the verified complaint. Thus, as long as partisanship prevails and the two sides never break ranks, no complaint will ever be considered on its merits in a public forum. Were the dissent’s view to prevail, the Board might as well pack up and go home, as no complaint would ever receive a public hearing. Again, in designing the Board membership, the General Assembly “sought to negate partisanship as much as possible and to guarantee the Board’s political independence.” Lunding, 65 Ill. 2d at 527. The dissent’s reading of section 9 — 21, while perhaps expedient under the particular facts presented, makes a mockery of the General Assembly’s designs. The majority, by contrast, not only construes section 9 — 21 consistently with its plain language, but it also ensures that the public policies that inspired the Board are vindicated.

=== CASE 9742186 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:08:11.327953+00 ===

CHIEF JUSTICE FREEMAN, dissenting: I join in Justice Bilandic’s dissent. Like Justice Bilandic, I believe that a determination to hold a public hearing is an action of the Board. Pursuant to section 1A — 7 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/1A — 7 (West 1996)), “5 votes are necessary for any action of the Board to become effective.” The majority holds that five members of the Board must find that a complaint is not filed on justifiable grounds in order for the Board to dismiss the complaint. However, the majority holds that the Board is not required to find that a complaint is filed on justifiable grounds in order to proceed to a hearing. Thus, one action of the Board, a determination that a complaint is not filed on justifiable grounds and must be dismissed, requires five votes to become effective, whereas another action of the Board, a determination that a complaint is filed on justifiable grounds and merits a public adjudicative hearing, does not require a vote. The majority’s holding ignores the plain language of section 1A — 7, which mandates five votes for any action of the Board to become effective. I believe that the majority is mistaken in its selective application of section 1A — 7. I also believe that the legislative history supports Justice Bilandic’s position. As originally conceived, the Board consisted of four members appointed by the Governor. The speaker of the House of Representatives, the House Minority Leader, the President of the Senate and the Senate Minority Leader each designated two nominees to serve on the Board. The Governor chose one member from the nominees designated by each leader. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 46, par. 1A — 3. Three members of the Board were necessary to constitute a quorum and a majority of the members voting was necessary for any action of the Board to become effective. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 46, par. 1A — 7. Since the membership of the Board was divided equally between the Republican Party and the Democratic Party, any action of the Board required the votes of two members of one party, plus the vote of one member of the opposite party. In 1974, the legislature enacted Senate Bill 1568 as Public Act 78 — 1183.2 See Pub. Act 78 — 1183, eff. September 3, 1974. Public Act 78 — 1183 amended the Code, adding thereto article 9, “Disclosure of Campaign Contributions and Expenditures.” As introduced in the General Assembly, Senate Bill 1568 contained the following provision: “Sec. 9 — 19. Any person who believes a violation of this Article has occurred may file a formal complaint with the Board, in a manner prescribed by the Board. Upon receipt of such complaint, the Board shall expeditiously make an investigation of the matter complained of.” 78th Ill. Gen. Assem., Senate Bill 1568, 1974 Sess. Various legislators proposed amendments to Senate Bill 1568. Senate amendment 9 reflected the concerns of members of the General Assembly that the Board might be used as a forum in which baseless complaints are filed against a candidate and/or a political committee associated with the candidate during the course of an election: “Partee: ‘Amendment No. 9 is an amendment which Senator Roe has seen which is just an extension of the concept for what to do when a complaint is filed during a campaign. And, this amendment simply says that the Board shall neither accept nor publicize a complaint unless three members believe that a reasonable basis exists for making an initial determination if there are reasonable grounds to believe that the complaint can be verified. Now what we seek to do here is the same kind of thing they do in the Judicial Inquiry Board and many other of our statutory areas where complaints are filed. And, so that you can keep scurrilous complaints from being filed for the purpose of publicity, the three members of the Board must first make a determination that there is some reasonable basis for it. And, that fact is suppressed so that nobody files against you simply because he’s looking for a newspaper headline three or four days before the election. I think, I state the fact correctly when I say that there is acceptance of this amendment. Is that right Senator Roe?’ ” 78th Ill. Gen. Assem., Senate Proceedings, June 6, 1974, at 205-06 (statement of Senator Partee). Representative Shea proposed a similar amendment in the House. The following exchange then took place: “Shea: ‘Bill, I’ll tell you what my problem is and perhaps when Returns is drawing another Amendment he can put this one in it and that it’s very easy to make accusations and it’s the accusation that hits the front page; it’s the accusation that makes the big dent and then when and [if] I prove or somebody proves that they’re right, you find it someplace back buried and the damage has been done. Now all I want to do is protect people. I want to say if somebody wants to make [an] accusation against [you] before we start publicizing it, before we make it public knowledge, let’s find out if there is, in fact, some basis to that complaint.’ Collins: ‘I couldn’t agree with you more as far as it goes, Jerry. However, I do think we’re opening our sel [yes] up for criticism that it is our desire right from the start to conduct things in secret and I just, I don’t think [it’s] a good idea. If we can achieve. . . If we can achieve what you desire and phrase it differently, I don’t know ah. . . maybe we could get together on this. ***’ *** Shea: ‘*** All I want to do is insure that you’re not going to do to the Members of this House, to other political candidates, just open up another avenue to blast them and then don’t give them a chance to respond in kind.’ ” 78th Ill. Gen. Assem., House Proceedings, June 11, 1974, at 37-38 (statements of Representatives Shea and Collins). Senate Bill 1568 was redrafted to address these concerns. The version of Senate Bill 1568 adopted by the Legislature contains the following provisions. “§ 9 — 20. Any person who believes a violation of this Article has occurred may file a verified complaint with the Board. *** * * * § 9 — 21. Upon receipt of such complaint, the Board shall hold a closed preliminary hearing to determine whether or not the complaint appears to have been filed on justifiable grounds. Such closed preliminary hearing shall be conducted as soon as practicable after affording reasonable notice, a copy of the complaint, and an opportunity to testify at such hearing to both the person making the complaint and the person against whom the complaint is directed. ^ ^ $ § 9 — 26. *** Willful filing of a false complaint under this Article shall constitute a Class B misdemeanor.” Pub. Act 78 — 1183, §§ 9 — 20, 9 — 21, 9 — 26, eff. September 3, 1974. The redrafted version of Senate Bill 1568 made it more difficult to file a false complaint against a candidate. By requiring that a complaint be verified, and criminalizing the filing of a false complaint, the legislature sent a message that the filing of a false complaint would not be tolerated. By requiring that the Board hold a closed preliminary hearing on a complaint, the legislature sent a message that a false complaint would not be publicized by the Board. The Board would not be used as a forum to attack candidates during the course of an election. A House debate on July 1, 1974, illustrates the concerns of the members of the General Assembly, and how the redrafted version of Senate Bill 1568 addressed those concerns. Representative Murphy gave a hypothetical regarding a letter that is sent via registered mail, return receipt requested, which does not contain a cash contribution as claimed by the sender: “Murphy: ‘But how would you prove that that’s a false complaint, though, that’s what I’m saying?’ Collins: ‘Well, how, how [sic] would he prove this...’ Murphy: ‘Circumstantial evidence, he withdrew the money, he got a receipt that you accepted, the letter..... It’s a dangerous area, that’s all I’m saying.’ Collins: ‘Perhaps, of course the State Board of Elections would have a preliminary hearing in a closed session on something like this and long before it ever got near a court it would be heard and considered by the State Board of Elections.’ ” 78th Ill. Gen. Assem., House Proceedings, July 1, 1974, at 45 (statements of Representatives Murphy and Collins). In 1978, the General Assembly changed the membership of the Board from four members to eight members (10 ILCS 5/1A — 2 (West 1996)), changed the quorum requirement from three members to five members of the Board and inserted the requirement that five votes are necessary for any action of the Board to become effective (10 ILCS 5/1A — 7 (West 1996)). Section 9 — 18 (10 ILCS 5/9 — 18 (West 1996)) was amended in 1979 to change from three to five the number of votes required for the Board to issue a subpoena in the process of an investigation, inquiry or hearing.3 Thus, the amendment reflected the changes in the Board membership and voting require-merits. In the Senate debates Senator Rock described the changes that the amendment would effectuate: “Rock: ‘Thank you, Mr. President. House Bill 1914 makes, I think, three or four important changes to the Election Code as we know it. *** [A]nd thirdly, it mandates or calls upon the State Board of Election to have hearings to require five members instead of three.’ ” 81st Ill. Gen. Assem., Senate Proceedings, July 1, 1979, at 186-87 (statement of Senator Rock). Senator Rock’s statement reflects the legislature’s belief that five votes are required in order for the Board to hold a public hearing and to issue subpoenas for such a hearing. I believe the legislature intended that the Board hold a closed preliminary hearing, followed by a determination that the complaint has been filed on justifiable grounds prior to holding a public hearing. Requiring that the Board determine that the complaint has been filed on justifiable grounds is consonant with the concerns expressed by the members of the General Assembly. On the other hand, holding, as the majority does, that the Board is required to proceed to a public hearing on a complaint without a determination that the complaint is based on justifiable grounds completely ignores the concerns of the members of the General Assembly. As an example, a baseless complaint, filed against a candidate in an election year, may proceed to a public hearing simply because the Board, split along party lines, cannot garner the five votes required to dismiss the complaint. The effect of the majority’s holding is to defer, but not foreclose, a public airing of a baseless complaint. In his special concurrence, Justice Rathje gives a hypothetical of a verified complaint filed against a Republican candidate which, under the majority’s holding, proceeds to a public hearing despite the opposition of Republican members of the Board. Justice Rathje believes that a public hearing is the correct outcome and “ensures that the public policies that inspired the Board are vindicated.” 188 Ill. 2d at 77. However, consider the case where the verified complaint is not based on justifiable grounds. The Republican members of the Board oppose the complaint, and justly so. The complaint proceeds to a public hearing at which baseless charges are leveled against the Republican candidate, severely damaging his campaign days before the election. I believe the members of the General Assembly did not intend that the Board become a forum in which complaints, not based on justifiable grounds, are “filed for the purpose of publicity.” In arriving at its holding today, it seems that the majority has read section 9 — 21 of the Code in isolation. It is generally recognized that sections of a code are to be construed in reference to one another in order to give harmonious meaning to the act as a whole. Sulser v. Country Mutual Insurance Co., 147 Ill. 2d 548, 555 (1992); Matter v. Chicago Board of Education, 82 Ill. 2d 373, 389 (1980). Section 1A — 7 of the Code (10 ILCS 5/1A — 7 (West 1996)) requires five votes for any action of the Board to become effective. Additionally, the fact that five votes are required to issue subpoenas (10 ILCS 5/9 — 18 (West 1996)) is an indication that the Board must determine, by five affirmative votes, that a complaint is filed on justifiable grounds and merits a public adjudicative hearing. There are further problems with the majority’s holding which I must highlight. First, the majority remands this cause for a public adjudicative hearing; however, the Board may find it impossible to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents at such a hearing. In the present case four members of the Board voted to find that the complaints were filed on justifiable grounds and the Board should hold public adjudicative hearings. Three members of the Board voted to find that the complaints were not filed on justifiable grounds and should be dismissed. Will the Board find the five votes necessary to issue subpoenas? If it does not, will the Board be able to hold a meaningful adjudicative hearing? Second, the majority’s holding deprives the Board of the discretion not to act on a complaint and is contrary to section 9 — 22 of the Code (10 ILCS 5/9 — 22 (West 1996)). Section 9 — 22 provides in part: “Any party to a Board hearing, any person who files a complaint on which a hearing was denied or not acted upon within the time specified in Section 9 — 21 of this Act, and any party adversely affected by a judgment of the Board may obtain judicial review ***.” 10 ILCS 5/9 — 22 (West 1996). Thus, section 9 — 22 affords administrative review to a person whose complaint is not acted upon or who is denied a hearing on a complaint. Since the majority requires that the Board hold a public adjudicative hearing on any complaint the Board fails to dismiss, the Board does not have the discretion to deny a public adjudicative hearing on a complaint. Consequently, the provision allowing administrative review of the denial of a hearing is superfluous. When a court engages in statutory construction, its sole task is to ascertain and give effect to the intent of the legislature. Henrich v. Libertyville High School, 186 Ill. 2d 381, 387 (1998); Texaco-Cities Service Pipeline Co. v. McGaw, 182 Ill. 2d 262, 270 (1998). As noted above, sections of a code must be construed in reference to one another in order to give harmonious meaning to the act as a whole. Matter, 82 Ill. 2d at 389. The court should construe the statute, if possible, so that no term is rendered superfluous or meaningless. Texaco, 182 Ill. 2d at 270. The majority’s ruling that the Board is required to hold public adjudicative hearings if it cannot determine that a complaint is not filed on justifiable grounds renders superfluous the provision for an appeal from a denial of a hearing. Third, the majority opinion may be interpreted to say that the Board cannot dismiss a complaint on procedural grounds. The majority notes: “At the conclusion of the preliminary hearing in the instant case, the Board failed to achieve a vote of five members to dismiss the complaints as not filed on justifiable grounds. For the reasons stated above, the complaints were then required to proceed to a public hearing. The Board thus lacked authority to enter its subsequent order dismissing the complaints without reaching their merits.” 188 Ill. 2d at 74-75. Thus, the majority seems to foreclose the possibility that the Board might dismiss a complaint because the complaint is deficient, albeit filed on justifiable grounds. The requirements for a complaint are found in section 9 — 20 of the Code (10 ILCS 5/9 — 20 (West 1996)). A complaint must be in writing, state the name of the candidate or chairman of the political committee against whom the complaint is directed, state the statutory provisions which are alleged to have been violated, state the time, place, and nature of the alleged offense, and be verified, dated and signed by the person filing the complaint. 10 ILCS 5/9 — 20 (West 1996). A complaint is procedurally deficient if it does not comply with section 9 — 20. The majority’s broad statement might be taken to mean the Board lacks authority to dismiss a complaint for failure to comply with section 9 — 20. In the instant case, the Illinois Republican Party filed a letter of complaint with the Board on November 4, 1996 (hereinafter, the November complaint). The November complaint was in writing, identified the United Democrats of Illinois and the Democratic Party of Illinois as the parties against whom it was directed, stated the statutory provisions which were allegedly violated, stated the time, place, and nature of the alleged offenses, and was verified, dated and signed by the executive director of the Illinois Republican Party. The Board did not take any action on the November complaint or vote to dismiss the November complaint as not filed on justifiable grounds. The Illinois Republican Party then filed the complaints at bar, using Form D-4 Complaint for Violation of the Campaign Disclosure Act, and attaching thereto the November complaint. The United Democrats of Illinois and the Democratic Party of Illinois argued before the Board that the Illinois Republican Party could not file the complaints at bar because the Illinois Republican Party had failed to appeal the denial of a hearing by the Board on the November complaint. The Illinois Republican Party then introduced a letter from the Board’s general counsel to show the Board did not consider the November complaint to be a proper complaint because it was not filed on the Board’s form D-4. In light of the majority’s holding, should the Board have held a closed preliminary hearing on the November complaint, followed by a public adjudicative hearing? In the absence of a vote to dismiss the November complaint as not filed on justifiable grounds, does not the majority require that the Board hold a public adjudicative hearing? The majority states that “the only requirement in the statute is that the Board dismiss the complaint if it determines that the complaint was not filed on justifiable grounds” (emphasis in original) (188 Ill. 2d at 74), failing to recognize that a vote on whether a complaint is not filed on justifiable grounds is also a vote on whether the complaint is filed on justifiable grounds. Section 9 — 21 of the Code provides that “the Board shall hold a closed preliminary hearing to determine whether or not the complaint appears to have been filed on justifiable grounds.” 10 ILCS 5/9 — 21 (West 1996). I believe that the Board is required to find that a complaint is filed on justifiable grounds in order to proceed to a public adjudicative hearing. I respectfully dissent. JUSTICES BILANDIC and McMORROW join in this dissent.   A bill identical to Senate Bill 1568 was introduced in the House as House Bill 2825. For purposes of this dissent, I will refer to both Senate Bill 1568 and House Bill 2825 as Senate Bill 1568.    As introduced in the General Assembly, Senate Bill 1568 authorized the Board to issue subpoenas “signed by the chairman or by a member designated by the Board.” 78th Ill. Gen. Assem., Senate Bill 1568, 1974 Sess. The redrafted version of Senate Bill 1568 authorized the Board to issue subpoenas “by a vote of 3 members of the Board.” Pub. Act 78 — 1183, § 9 — 18, eff. September 3, 1974. Thus, the Board could issue a subpoena only if two members of one party and one member of the opposite party so voted.

=== CASE 9742187 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:08:11.331958+00 ===

JUSTICE BILANDIC, also dissenting: The majority requires the Illinois State Board of Elections (the Board) to conduct a public hearing on complaints filed with the Board even though the Board unanimously decided to dismiss the complaints because the Board was not able to determine with five affirmative votes that the complaints were filed on justifiable grounds. This determination conflicts with the provisions of the Election Code that govern the Board’s actions, and with a prior decision of this court. For these reasons, I respectfully dissent. The Board is an administrative agency created by the Illinois Constitution of 1970. The Illinois Constitution, in creating the Board, specifically contemplated that the Board would operate by consensus across political party lines by requiring that “[n]o political party shall have a majority of members of the Board.” Ill. Const. 1970, art. Ill, § 5. The General Assembly, pursuant to the bipartisan mandate of the Illinois Constitution, determined that the Board shall consist of eight members split equally between two political parties. 10 ILCS 5/1A — 2 (West 1996). Four members of the Board must be affiliated with the same political party as the Governor, and four members must be affiliated with the political party whose nominee for Governor in the most recent general election received the second highest number of votes. 10 ILCS 5/1A — 2 (West 1996). Consequently, the Board currently is comprised of members whose political affiliation is allocated equally between the Republican Party and the Democratic Party. Moreover, to ensure bipartisan cooperation among the Board members, the General Assembly determined that five votes are required for any action of the Board to become effective. 10 ILCS 5/1A — 7 (West 1996). In this case, after a closed preliminary hearing, the complainant did not convince the required five members of the Board that there were justifiable grounds to proceed on its complaints. Accordingly, the Board unanimously decided not to take further action and dismissed the complaints on procedural grounds. Section 1A — 7 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/1A — 7 (West 1996)) dictates that five votes are necessary for effective Board action. The Board’s dismissal of the complaints comports with that section because there were insufficient votes to support a finding that the complaints were filed on justifiable grounds. I disagree with the majority’s determination that, because the Board failed to achieve a vote of five members to dismiss the complaints as not filed on justifiable grounds, the Board was required to proceed with a public hearing. A decision to proceed with a public hearing on a complaint constitutes an action of the Board. It therefore follows that, under section 1A — 7 of the Election Code, such a decision requires five affirmative votes of the Board members. The Board did not have the requisite number of votes, as required by section 1A — 7, to take any further action, including conducting a public hearing. Instead, the Board unanimously voted not to take further action. Thus, the majority’s holding is contradicted by the statutory mandate that five votes are necessary for any action of the Board to become effective. The plain language of section 9 — 21 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9 — 21 (West 1996)) likewise does not support remanding this cause for a public hearing. There is nothing in the language of section 9 — 21 that requires the Board to hold a public hearing where there are not sufficient votes to determine that a complaint was filed on justifiable grounds. The Board’s obligation under section 9 — 21 is to hold a closed preliminary hearing to determine whether the complaint was filed on justifiable grounds. 10 ILCS 5/9 — 21 (West 1996). The Board fulfilled that duty. At the conclusion of the closed preliminary hearing, the statute authorizes the Board to “dismiss the complaint without further hearing” if it determines that the complaint has not been filed on justifiable grounds. 10 ILCS 5/9 — 21 (West 1996). This authorization to dismiss a complaint at an early stage, in the absence of justifiable grounds, does not mandate that the Board hold a public hearing if it deadlocks on this issue. Section 9 — 21 does not mention such a requirement, and such a requirement cannot be created or implied. See Kraft, Inc. v. Edgar, 138 Ill. 2d 178, 189 (1990) (stating that “a court is not at liberty to depart from the plain language and meaning of the statute by reading into it exceptions, limitations or conditions that the legislature did not express”). Moreover, as noted by the appellate court in rejecting this interpretation of section 9 — 21, requiring the Board to proceed with a public hearing on every complaint absent five votes to dismiss would thwart the purpose of the statute: “[T]he purpose of a closed preliminary hearing is ‘to prevent the Board being made an instrument for the transmission of unfair accusations of wrongdoing made by political partisans against their opponents under circumstances in which the accused have an unfair and inadequate opportunity to defend themselves, such as untrue or ill-founded accusations filed a scant few days before an election.’ Such purpose might be subverted were all complaints subject to public scrutiny absent a five-vote bipartisan consensus.” 294 Ill. App. 3d at 924. As a final matter, the majority fails to recognize that the Board is entitled to deadlock on issues where it cannot obtain the five votes necessary to take further action. The Election Code does not require the Board’s deadlock to be broken in favor of proceeding on the complaints. In fact, this court found unconstitutional a previous legislative attempt to break a Board deadlock. See Walker v. State Board of Elections, 65 Ill. 2d 543 (1976). In Walker, the plaintiffs challenged the constitutionality of certain provisions of the Election Code, including a provision which established a method to resolve tie votes of the Board. The challenged tie-breaker section of the Election Code provided that, in the event of a tie vote on the Board with respect to proposed Board action, one Board member’s name would be drawn randomly by lot, and that Board member would be disqualified from voting on the proposed action. Walker, 65 Ill. 2d at 562-63. This court held that the tie-breaker provision, which resulted in the removal of a Board member for purposes of one deadlock vote, violated the mandate of article III, section 5, of the Illinois Constitution, which provides that no political party have a majority on the Board. Walker, 65 Ill. 2d at 565. The Walker court reasoned that if one Board member was removed from the Board by random draw, the removed Board member’s political party would then be a minority on the Board. Walker, 65 Ill. 2d at 564-65. Likewise here, the majority improperly attempts to break the Board’s deadlock by remanding for a public hearing. Such judicial intervention in a Board deadlock was not intended by the drafters of our state constitution. Nor, as earlier discussed, is this contemplated in the Election Code. For these reasons, I would find that the Board’s unanimous dismissal of the complaints and decision not to take further action were in full compliance with constitutional and statutory mandates and, therefore, should be affirmed. CHIEF JUSTICE FREEMAN and JUSTICE McMORROW join in this dissent.

=== CASE 9742188 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:08:11.593879+00 ===

JUSTICE RATHJE delivered the opinion of the court: Defendant, Julius Kuntu, was charged with 28 counts of first degree murder (720 ILCS 5/9 — 1(a)(2), (a)(3) (West 1998)), 14 counts of aggravated arson (720 ILCS 5/20 — 1.1(a) (West 1998)), and 1 count of arson (720 ILCS 5/20 — 1 (West 1998)). Subsequently, the State nol-prossed 14 counts of first degree murder, 11 counts of aggravated arson, and the arson count. A jury convicted defendant of seven counts of first degree murder and one count of aggravated arson. The same jury found that there were no mitigating factors sufficient to preclude a sentence of death, and the trial court sentenced defendant to death. Defendant’s execution has been stayed pending direct review by this court. Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, § 4(b); 134 Ill. 2d Rs. 603, 609(a). On appeal, defendant raises numerous allegations of error arising during his trial and sentencing hearings. However, we need only address defendant’s first contention of error: whether the cause should be remanded for an evidentiary hearing to determine the relationship between the jury foreman and Cook County State’s Attorney Richard Devine. The basis for this argument arises from a letter written by attorney Paul Kosin, the jury foreman, to State’s Attorney Devine. Defendant asserts that this letter reveals the possibility of a relationship between Kosin and State’s Attorney Devine that Kosin failed to reveal during voir dire. The letter is written on Kosin’s law firm’s stationery, and the salutation reads “Dear Dick.” Kosin begins by explaining that he has just finished serving as a juror in defendant’s trial. He notes that, because the assistant State’s Attorneys who presented the case had trouble opening evidence cans, Kosin had considered sending, in jest, paint can openers to State’s Attorney Devine to give to the assistant State’s Attorneys. Kosin also explains that he was upset to discover that the assistant State’s Attorneys had given information to the media that was not available to the jury. The two-page letter then concludes, “Once again congratulations on being where I can write this letter to someone I know and please consider a lengthy tenure in office because, if I ever get into a jury selection for a capital crime again, I’m going to tell the judge that you’re my brother.” Although the letter was written the day after the jury voted to sentence defendant to death, the State did not disclose the letter until one month later, after the trial court had already considered and denied defendant’s post-trial motions. After receiving the letter, defendant asked the court to grant him a new trial based on Kosin’s failure to reveal his relationship with State’s Attorney Devine. The trial court denied defendant’s motion. Defendant asserts that this letter provides evidence of a personal relationship between Kosin and State’s Attorney Devine. Defendant further contends that, if such a relationship exists, Kosin had a duty to disclose this relationship during voir dire, when he was questioned about his relationships with other attorneys. Because the letter indicates the possibility of a relationship, defendant concludes that this cause must be remanded for an evidentiary hearing to determine if a relationship exists between Kosin and State’s Attorney Devine. Defendant concedes that, in the trial court, he should have requested an evidentiary hearing. He argues, however, that the letter is sufficient evidence to require the trial court to conduct sua sponte an evidentiary hearing. The State does not argue that defendant has waived his right to request an evidentiary hearing. Instead, it argues only that, under the facts presented, an evidentiary hearing is not warranted. Because the State does not argue that defendant has waived review of this issue and because we may review- errors affecting substantial rights (see 134 Ill. 2d R. 615(a)), we find this to be an appropriate circumstance in which to relax the waiver rule and consider the issue on its merits. See People v. Hamilton, 179 Ill. 2d 319, 323 (1997) (explaining that waiver is a limitation on the parties, not on the court). The right to a jury trial is a fundamental right that guarantees a defendant a trial by a panel of impartial jurors. People v. Peeples, 155 Ill. 2d 422, 462 (1993). The failure to afford a defendant a fair trial “violates even the minimal standards of due process” and requires a reversal. People v. Cole, 54 Ill. 2d 401, 411 (1973). Here, we do not know whether defendant was denied his right to a fair tribunal because we do not know what relationship, if any, exists between Kosin and State’s Attorney Devine. Both defendant and the State agree that the question of whether a hearing is necessary is determined by applying the test set forth in People v. Towns, 157 Ill. 2d 90 (1993). In Towns, this court held that “[wjhere a defendant does not learn of facts which might support a finding of partiality by a juror until after a verdict, a post-trial evidentiary hearing may be necessary.” Towns, 157 Ill. 2d at 102. In order to obtain such a hearing, the defendant must produce “specific, detailed and nonconjectural evidence in support of his position.” Towns, 157 Ill. 2d at 102. Here, defendant has produced a letter that, on its face, reveals that Kosin not only knows State’s Attorney Devine, but also that he knows him well enough to address him not as “State’s Attorney Devine” or even “Mr. Devine,” but as “Dick.” An additional indication of a personal relationship between the two is Kosin’s statement that he considered sending, in jest, a gift to State’s Attorney Devine. Moreover, the letter demonstrates that Kosin felt comfortable enough to joke that, if he were again called for a capital case, he would tell the judge that he was State’s Attorney Devine’s brother. Finally, and most importantly, Kosin explicitly states that he’s glad that he can write the letter to “someone I know.” Although we acknowledge that these facts do not provide conclusive evidence that Kosin and State’s Attorney Devine have a relationship that prejudiced defendant’s right to a fair trial, we believe that they are sufficiently specific, detailed, and nonconjectural to require the trial court to hold an evidentiary hearing to determine whether such a relationship exists. We therefore choose to retain jurisdiction over this matter and to remand the cause for an evidentiary hearing at which the trial court shall determine whether a relationship exists between Kosin and State’s Attorney Devine, and, if such a relationship exists, whether that relationship prejudiced defendant’s right to a fair trial. After holding this factual inquiry, the trial court shall transmit to the clerk of this court, within 120 days of this decision, a report of the court’s findings and a record of the proceedings on remand. In the exercise of this court’s supervisory authority, we retain jurisdiction over this appeal and remand this action to the circuit court of Cook County to conduct a hearing in accordance with the foregoing directions. Cause remanded with directions; jurisdiction retained.

=== CASE 9742189 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:08:11.597772+00 ===

CHIEF JUSTICE FREEMAN, specially concurring: I agree that the matter must be remanded to the circuit court for an evidentiary hearing concerning the nature of the relationship, if any, between the jury foreman and State’s Attorney Richard Devine. I write separately because I believe that the court’s discussion of waiver is unnecessarily confusing. Defendant concedes in his brief that his trial attorney did not specifically ask the circuit court to conduct the evidentiary hearing that he now seeks in this court. Defendant argues that notwithstanding this failure, the circuit court should have ordered the hearing sua sponte. He also asserts that if counsel’s failure to request an evidentiary hearing results in a procedural default of the issue in this court, then his trial attorney rendered him ineffective assistance of counsel with respect to this aspect of the proceedings. In the alternative, he asks this court to review the matter under Supreme Court Rule 615(a). In responding to this contention, the court states that: “[t]he State does not argue that defendant has waived his right to request an evidentiary hearing. Instead, it argues only that, under the facts presented, an evidentiary hearing is not warranted. Because the State does not argue that defendant has waived review of this issue and because we may review errors affecting substantial rights (see 134 Ill. 2d R. 615(a)), we find this to be an appropriate circumstance in which to relax the waiver rule and consider the issue on its merits. See People v. Hamilton, 179 Ill. 2d 319, 323 (1997) (explaining that waiver is a limitation on the parties, not on the court).” 188 Ill. 2d at 160-61. This treatment is problematic, in my view, because it conflates several distinct bases for reaching the merits. Specifically, it cannot be discerned from this analysis whether the court has chosen to (i) reach the merits because the State has not raised waiver, (ii) excuse the procedural default under our Rule 615(a), (iii) hold the matter not waived pursuant to our decision in Hamilton, or (iv) reach the merits under some combination of these aforementioned three considerations. The court notes that the State does not argue that defendant has waived this issue. Nevertheless, the court does not expressly hold that, by not making this argument, the State has opened the door for review of the claim on the merits. The court also notes that Rule 615(a) permits review of errors affecting substantial rights, but it does not offer any analysis as to how this error affects a substantial right such that the procedural default is excused. Notwithstanding the references to both the State’s failure to argue and to Rule 615(a), the court concludes its waiver analysis with the citation to Hamilton. Hamilton states the general proposition that a court of review may overlook a procedural default on two distinct bases. The first basis is that the waiver doctrine serves as a limitation on the parties and not the court; the second basis is that the court can choose to address arguments not raised in order to maintain a sound and uniform body of law. See Hamilton, 179 Ill. 2d at 323. Hamilton does not speak in terms of Rule 615(a) and therefore cannot serve as support for the court’s earlier reference to Rule 615(a). Nor does Hamilton support the inference that the court should consider the issue because the State has failed to argue waiver, unless the court is using the case as justification for considering the claim waived despite the State’s failure to so argue. I find the court’s waiver discussion confusing because the basis upon which the court has “relax[ed] the waiver rule” cannot be identified. 188 Ill. 2d at 161. If the court is reaching the issue based on the State’s failure to press the procedural default, then the court should expressly say so. Likewise, if the court is reaching the procedurally defaulted claim under Rule 615(a), the court should explicitly so state. I have previously cautioned against the nonchalant invocation of our plain error rule. Neither the term “Rule 615(a)” nor the term “plain error” has “talisman-like effect” to transform claims which have been otherwise procedurally defaulted into claims which are automatically subject to substantive review. See People v. Terrell, 185 Ill. 2d 467, 524 (1998) (Freeman, C.J., specially concurring, joined by McMorrow, J.). Rule 615(a) states that “[a]ny error, defect, irregularity, or variance which does not affect substantial rights shall be disregarded. Plain errors or defects affecting substantial rights may be noticed although they were not brought to the attention of the trial court.” 134 Ill. 2d R. 615(a). This court has consistently interpreted Rule 615(a) to allow a court of review to consider substantively an error that has not been properly preserved when (i) the evidence is closely balanced or (ii) the purported error is of such magnitude as to deny defendant a fair and impartial trial. People v. Vargas, 174 Ill. 2d 355, 363 (1996). As to errors affecting substantial rights, this court has observed that “before plain error can be considered as a means of circumventing the general waiver rule, it must be plainly apparent from the record that an error affecting substantial rights was committed.” People v. Precup, 73 Ill. 2d 7, 17 (1978). Short of a conclusion that an asserted error is a plain one, the plain error doctrine offers no basis to excuse a procedural default. People v. Keene, 169 Ill. 2d 1, 17 (1995). The court today states that it “may review errors affecting substantial rights” (188 Ill. 2d at 161), but' how the error at issue here is one which affects substantial rights such that the procedural default can be excused is not set out within the context of the court’s waiver discussion. Instead, the court cites to a case, Hamilton, that has nothing to do with our plain error rule. If the court wants to utilize Hamilton to reach the substantive merits of the claim, then it should do so without injecting the plain error rule into its analysis. The considerations which underscore the holding in Hamilton are very different from those which attend to Rule 615(a), and the court should be careful so as not to suggest that the concepts are interchangeable, when, in fact, they are not. In my view, the fact that the State has not argued that waiver precludes this court’s review of the issues suggests that we need not consider the procedural bar that might otherwise exist in this case. See People v. O’Neal, 104 Ill. 2d 399, 407 (1984) (noting that principles of waiver apply to the State as well as to defendants in criminal cases); People v. Holloway, 86 Ill. 2d 78, 91 (1981) (same). If the State does not take the position that a waiver has even occurred in this case, then the court would not be obliged to “relax the waiver rule.” In other words, the court would be justified reaching the merits of the claim directly. Nevertheless, if the court wishes to resolve this issue as it was framed by defendant in his brief, i.e., that the claim has been procedurally defaulted, then the court should do so in a straightforward analysis. Defendant concedes, and the record establishes, that defense counsel did not ask the court to hold the evidentiary hearing defendant now requests this court to order on direct review. The issue has, therefore, been procedurally defaulted. This court, however, can reach the matter if the error constitutes plain error under Rule 615(a). Keene, 169 Ill. 2d at 10; People v. Enoch, 122 Ill. 2d 176, 190 (1988). As I stated previously, without a conclusion that an asserted error is a plain one, the plain error doctrine offers no basis to excuse a procedural default. Keene, 169 Ill. 2d at 17. A defendant’s right to a fair and impartial jury is the “constitutional cornerstone of our judicial system.” People v. Gaston, 125 Ill. App. 3d 7, 11 (1984). As the appellate court in Gaston stated, “[t]his right should be guarded zealously; neither a trial judge’s inadvertent omissions nor a juror’s failure to divulge possibly pertinent information nor a trial attorney’s laxness can be allowed to impair this fundamental right.” Gaston, 125 Ill. App. 3d at 11. In addition, although the United States Supreme Court has recognized that due process does not require a new trial every time a juror is in “a potentially compromising situation,” due process does require both a jury capable and willing to decide the case on only the basis of the evidence before it, and a “trial judge ever watchful to prevent prejudicial occurrences and to determine the effect of such occurrences when they happen. Such determinations may properly be made at a [post-conviction] hearing.” Smith v. Phillips, 455 U.S. 209, 217, 71 L. Ed. 2d 78, 86, 102 S. Ct. 940, 946 (1982). In this case, the trial judge believed that the letter, in and of itself, did not establish that any relationship existed between the juror and State’s Attorney Devine and that a new trial was not necessary. The letter is a part of the record on review. The letter does not show conclusively that the two men do not have a friendship. Given both our state decisional law on this subject and that of the United States Supreme Court, in addition to the ambiguous tone of the letter in question, the trial judge should have ordered some type of adjudicative proceeding with respect to this issue, notwithstanding defense counsel’s failure to specifically request one. The right to an impartial trial guarantees defendants the preservation of the opportunity to prove actual bias. See Smith, 455 U.S. at 216, 71 L. Ed. 2d at 86, 102 S. Ct. at 945, quoting Dennis v. United States, 339 U.S. 162, 171-72, 94 L. Ed. 734, 742, 70 S. Ct. 519, 523 (1950). The forum in which the trial judge made his finding — a hearing on the reconsideration of motions for a new trial and for judgment n.o.v. — did not provide defendant with an opportunity for any meaningful inquiry into the relationship in question in order to show bias. Without some evaluation of the juror, whether by affidavit or testimony, the trial judge was unable to conclusively determine whether that juror was in fact so biased that a new trial would be necessary. The lack of this opportunity adversely impacts upon defendant’s right to a fair and impartial jury. For these reasons, the second prong of our plain error rule would justify the court’s excusai of the procedural default in this case. I believe that the court should clearly express the basis upon which it is addressing defendant’s contention of error. To do otherwise serves only to muddy this area of our jurisprudence. In all other respects, I join in the court’s decision today. JUSTICE McMORROW joins in this special concurrence.

=== CASE 2230174 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:38.860189+00 ===

702 N.W.2d 613 (2005)
266 Mich. App. 290
PEOPLE of the State of Michigan, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
Elijah COOK, Defendant-Appellee.
Docket No. 251167.
Court of Appeals of Michigan.
Submitted April 12, 2005, at Detroit.
Decided May 5, 2005, at 9:10 a.m.
Released for Publication July 26, 2005.
*614 Michael A. Cox, Attorney General, Thomas L. Casey, Solicitor General, Kym L. Worthy, Prosecuting Attorney, Timothy A. Baughman, Chief of Research, Training, and Appeals, and Carolyn M. Breen, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
Richard L. Cunningham, Detroit, for the defendant on appeal.
Before: SAAD, P.J., and FITZGERALD and SMOLENSKI, JJ.
SAAD, P.J.
The prosecution appeals the trial court's order that granted defendant an evidentiary hearing pursuant to People v. Pearson, 404 Mich. 698, 715, 273 N.W.2d 856 (1979). Our Supreme Court remanded this case to us to consider the question whether Pearson remains good law in light of the 1986 amendment of M.C.L. § 767.40a.[1] We hold that Pearson is no longer good law in light of the statute, and, thus, we reverse.
I
The trial court convicted defendant on two counts of assault with intent to commit murder and on one count each of possession of a firearm during the attempt or commission of a felony and possession of a firearm by a convicted felon after a bench trial. The prosecution failed to produce two witnesses who the prosecution listed on its witness list and does not appear *615 to have attempted to strike those witnesses from the list pursuant to M.C.L. § 767.40a(4). The trial court concluded that the prosecution failed to exercise due diligence to produce the two witnesses[2] and, further, took note of CJI2d 5.12,[3] which allows a fact-finder to draw an inference that the failure of the prosecution to produce res gestae witnesses means that the witnesses would have presented testimony harmful to the prosecution's case.[4]
After trial, defendant filed a motion for an evidentiary hearing pursuant to Pearson, in which case our Supreme Court held that where the prosecution fails to exercise due diligence to produce res gestae witnesses, a posttrial evidentiary hearing should be held to determine the existence, and extent, of prejudice, as well as an appropriate remedy. See Pearson, supra at 715, 273 N.W.2d 856. The trial court wrongly asserted that the prosecution's failure to produce the witnesses necessarily invited a negative inference. The trial court also opined that in a best-case scenario, the witnesses might have testified that someone other than defendant committed the crimes. However, the trial court further ruled that it found the other witnesses credible and convicted defendant on the basis of their testimony. The trial court then inappropriately expressed its "abiding distaste" for the "new statute,"[5] but stated "[t]o the extent that there is the possibility that [defendant] was wrongfully convicted, I think the Court ought to ... require a hearing." The hearing itself has been stayed pending the outcome of this appeal.
This Court initially denied the prosecutor's delayed application for leave to appeal, but our Supreme Court, in lieu of granting leave to appeal, remanded to this Court for consideration, as on leave granted, of the issue "whether the holding in Pearson [supra], that a postjudgment evidentiary hearing is required when a prosecutor fails to produce an endorsed res gestae witness, remains good law in light of the Legislature's amendment of M.C.L. § 767.40a." People v. Cook, 469 Mich. 905, 669 N.W.2d 816 (2003).
II
Before it was amended in 1986, M.C.L. § 767.40a was interpreted to require the prosecution to locate, list, and *616 produce at trial all persons, known or unknown, who might be res gestae witnesses. See People v. Burwick, 450 Mich. 281, 287-290, 537 N.W.2d 813 (1995). Our Supreme Court in Pearson held that where a trial court ruled that the prosecution failed to produce a res gestae witness, and where the prosecution failed to exercise due diligence to locate the res gestae witness, a posttrial hearing should be held to determine the extent of any prejudice and, where necessary, an appropriate remedy for any prejudice caused by the prosecution's lack of due diligence. Pearson, supra at 715, 273 N.W.2d 856. However, after the 1986 amendment of M.C.L. § 767.40a, our Supreme Court held that the Legislature "eliminated the prosecutor's burden to locate, endorse, and produce unknown persons who might be res gestae witnesses...." Burwick, supra at 289, 537 N.W.2d 813; see also People v. Perez, 469 Mich. 415, 670 N.W.2d 655 (2003). Instead, the prosecution must notify a defendant of all known res gestae witnesses and all witnesses that the prosecution intends to produce.[6]Burwick, supra at 289, 537 N.W.2d 813. "The prosecutor's duty to produce witnesses has been replaced with an obligation to provide notice of known witnesses and reasonable assistance to locate witnesses on defendant's request." Id. (emphasis added).
Because Pearson mandated hearings for the prosecution's breach of a duty that has been abolished in the amended M.C.L. § 767.40a, we hold, in answer to the question posed to us by our Supreme Court, that Pearson is no longer good law.[7] We further hold that an evidentiary hearing is no longer required simply because the prosecution did not produce a res gestae witness.
Here, the trial court ordered a Pearson hearing. However, because we have already held that such hearings are no longer required, and because the trial court, which was also the fact-finder here, already determined on the record that defendant had not been prejudiced by the prosecution's failure to call the two listed witnesses, we hold that the trial court erred when it granted defendant's motion to a hearing pursuant to Pearson.
Reversed and remanded for further proceedings consistent with our opinion. We do not retain jurisdiction.
NOTES
[1]  M.C.L. § 767.40a, provides:
(1) The prosecuting attorney shall attach to the filed information a list of all witnesses known to the prosecuting attorney who might be called at trial and all res gestae witnesses known to the prosecuting attorney or investigating law enforcement officers.
(2) The prosecuting attorney shall be under a continuing duty to disclose the names of any further res gestae witnesses as they become known.
(3) Not less than 30 days before the trial, the prosecuting attorney shall send to the defendant or his or her attorney a list of the witnesses the prosecuting attorney intends to produce at trial.
(4) The prosecuting attorney may add or delete from the list of witnesses he or she intends to call at trial at any time upon leave of the court and for good cause shown or by stipulation of the parties.
(5) The prosecuting attorney or investigative law enforcement agency shall provide to the defendant, or defense counsel, upon request, reasonable assistance, including investigative assistance, as may be necessary to locate and serve process upon a witness. The request for assistance shall be made in writing by defendant or defense counsel not less than 10 days before the trial of the case or at such other time as the court directs. If the prosecuting attorney objects to a request by the defendant on the grounds that it is unreasonable, the prosecuting attorney shall file a pretrial motion before the court to hold a hearing to determine the reasonableness of the request.
(6) Any party may within the discretion of the court impeach or cross-examine any witnesses as though the witness had been called by another party.
[2]  Here, the trial court conflated and confused case law that interpreted the abolished res gestae witness rule, along with the related (and also abolished) due diligence rule. As we will discuss in greater detail later, the prosecution has neither the obligation to produce at trial, nor the obligation to call as a witness at trial, a res gestae witness. There are other rules of evidence, court rules, constitutional obligations, statutes, and ethical rules that deal with the obligations regarding the production of evidence, but M.C.L. § 767.40a imposes no duty to produce all res gestae witnesses.
[3]  CJI2d 5.12 reads:
[State name of witness] is a missing witness whose appearance was the responsibility of the prosecution. You may infer that this witness's testimony would have been unfavorable to the prosecution's case.
Because this case involved a bench trial, the instruction is inapplicable because the trial court presumably does not need to instruct itself.
[4]  As we will discuss in greater detail later, the prosecution is no longer required to produce res gestae witnesses at trial. See People v. Burwick, 450 Mich. 281, 287-290, 537 N.W.2d 813 (1995). However, if the prosecutor fails to call a listed witness and has failed to delete that witness from its witness list, see M.C.L. § 767.40a(4), it may nonetheless be appropriate for the trial court to read CJI2d 5.12. See People v. Perez, 469 Mich. 415, 420, 670 N.W.2d 655 (2003).
[5]  In reality, the current statutory provisions came about as the result of a 1986 amendment.
[6]  The prosecuting attorney or investigative law enforcement agency shall provide to the defendant, or defense counsel, upon request, reasonable assistance, including investigative assistance, as may be necessary to locate and serve process upon a witness. The request for assistance shall be made in writing by defendant or defense counsel not less than 10 days before the trial of the case or at such other time as the court directs. If the prosecuting attorney objects to a request by the defendant on the grounds that it is unreasonable, the prosecuting attorney shall file a pretrial motion before the court to hold a hearing to determine the reasonableness of the request. [M.C.L. § 767.40a(5).]
[7]  We note that there may be times when such a hearing may be appropriate. For example, M.C.L. § 767.40a(5) does require the prosecution to provide reasonable assistance in locating witnesses whose presence defendant specifically requests. A hearing of the type described by our Supreme Court in Pearson might be appropriate if the prosecution is found to have breached this duty.

=== CASE 2230176 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:38.946454+00 ===

720 N.E.2d 302 (1999)
308 Ill. App.3d 456
241 Ill.Dec. 847
Jonathan Spafford WHITLOCK, as Trustee of the Spafford Estate Trust Dated October 23, 1987, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
HILANDER FOODS, INC., Defendant-Appellee and Third-Party Plaintiff (Scandroli Construction Company et al., Third-Party Defendants).
No. 2-98-1421.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Second District.
October 29, 1999.
*303 Elmer C. Rudy, Williams & McCarthy PC, Rockford, for Jonathan Spafford Whitlock.
Robert W. Gosdick, Kim M. Casey, Holsmtrom & Kennedy, Rockford, for Hilander Foods, Inc.
Presiding Justice BOWMAN delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiff, Jonathan Spafford Whitlock, as land trustee, holds the title to property directly south of property on which defendant, Hilander Foods, Inc., has long operated a grocery store. Recently, defendant built an addition to the store. The south retaining wall of the addition is on defendant's property, but the underground footings of the wall encroach on plaintiff's property. Plaintiff sued for a mandatory injunction compelling defendant to remove the encroachment and for other relief. The trial court granted defendant summary judgment (see 735 ILCS 5/2-1005(c) (West 1998)), holding that, (1) as a matter of law, plaintiff was guilty of laches; and (2) on the merits, plaintiff could not make out a sufficient case for a mandatory injunction. Plaintiff appeals. We reverse and remand the cause.
The facts require recitation in some detail. On March 11, 1997, plaintiff filed a complaint alleging the following facts. Plaintiff is the trustee of land (the Spafford property or plaintiff's property) adjacent to the land defendant leases. Defendant operates a supermarket on its land. In September 1996, defendant started building an addition to its store. The south retaining wall of the addition borders the north line of plaintiff's property. Although plaintiff allowed defendant to use his property during the construction, defendant made several unauthorized incursions. In particular, the footings for the south retaining wall encroached about 1.7 feet onto plaintiff's property. When plaintiff complained, defendant assured him that it would agree to compensate him for the encroachment. However, defendant had refused to do so. Plaintiff asked the court to order the removal of the footings, to enjoin defendant from constructing or maintaining improvements on plaintiff's property, and to require defendant to pay for past encroachments.
Defendant's answer admitted that the footings were on plaintiff's land, but it denied that plaintiff had objected to the encroachment. Defendant also asserted the defenses of laches, waiver, and estoppel, alleging that plaintiff had known of defendant's plans and did not object as the construction was taking place. Also, according to defendant, the new footings simply took the place of ones that had been there for the old south wall for 40 years without protest. Defendant claimed that plaintiff sought to interfere with the construction only after it had been completed *304 at a cost of about $1.5 million; that plaintiff's six-month delay in filing suit was unreasonable; and that plaintiff's conduct in that interim was inconsistent with his demand for injunctive relief.
Defendant also filed a third-party complaint against a variety of contractors. All of these, except Scandroli Construction Company, were eventually dismissed from the suit before the final judgment on appeal here.
In ruling on defendant's request for summary judgment, the trial court considered the depositions of plaintiff, his wife, Nancy Whitlock, and defendant's treasurer, Joseph Castrogiovanni. Also before the court was correspondence between John Kinley, plaintiff's attorney, and Robert Gosdick, defendant's attorney.
At his deposition, plaintiff testified as follows. He is a beneficiary of the trust that owns the Spafford property, where he has lived since 1989. In February 1996, at the first of two zoning hearings where defendant sought a variance for the project, Gosdick and Joseph Castrogiovanni told plaintiff that defendant wished to build up to the boundary line but that the addition would not affect plaintiff's property at all. Having received this assurance, plaintiff did not object to the variance request then or at the second hearing a week or two later.
As plaintiff expected, defendant began construction work in the second full week of September 1996. About a week into the process, however plaintiff noted with surprise that the footings for the new south wall were clearly on his property. Plaintiff's wife had noticed the new footings somewhat earlier. Concerned, plaintiff and Nancy Whitlock met the next business day with Joseph Castrogiovanni at the site. Plaintiff told Castrogiovanni that, if the footings stayed, plaintiff was "going to have a lease." Castrogiovanni replied that they could work something out, whether at "`a dollar a year or a thousand dollars a month.'" Believing defendant was willing to pay for the encroachment, plaintiff contacted Kinley but did not try to stop defendant from building the addition. Plaintiff knew he had a legal right to tell defendant to get off of his property, but he wanted to be a good neighbor, and he trusted Castrogiovanni's assurances that his property would not be harmed.
About a week or two after the meeting at the site, plaintiff and John Castrogiovanni, defendant's secretary, happened to meet at defendant's store. Kinley had sent defendant a proposed lease, and plaintiff told John Castrogiovanni he would like to get the lease signed as soon as possible. Castrogiovanni replied only that he had talked to Gosdick, who was researching the matter, and that defendant would "work it out to [plaintiff's] satisfaction."
Aside from expressing concern about the encroaching footings, plaintiff complained repeatedly that defendant was exceeding its permission to use plaintiff's land and that the project was causing various kinds of property damage. On October 14, 1996, Kinley sent Gosdick a letter stating, in part, that, as of noon the next day, plaintiff's authorization for defendant to use the property would be withdrawn and any incursion onto the property would be a trespass. Furthermore, according to the letter, defendant's right to use the property would be suspended until a number of matters were resolved, including compensation for the permanent encroachment caused by the footings for the new south wall. On October 15, 1996, plaintiff attended a meeting at Gosdick's office. In his deposition, plaintiff conceded that he did not regard the October 14 letter as a demand to remove the footings; rather, the intention of the letter was to insist that defendant get its people, trucks, and scaffolding off his property. Plaintiff also allowed that, at the October 15 meeting, the parties may not have discussed the footings issue at all.
In November 1996, plaintiff obtained a survey that showed that, although the new south wall was on defendant's property, *305 the footings extended at least 18 inches onto his land. Plaintiff could not say how far underground the footings were placed. The new wall was three feet farther south than the old retaining wall. Plaintiff never saw any paperwork showing that the old wall's footings had been on his property. About three or four weeks after the construction began, Joseph Castrogiovanni told him that the old footings had been on plaintiff's side. Plaintiff doubted this, as the old wall had appeared to be at least a half foot north of the boundary line. However, plaintiff, admittedly not an expert in construction, did not know whether the old footings had been on his side of the line. He had never seen the footings for the old wall.
When asked what damage he believed the encroaching footings caused, plaintiff responded that he believed they interfered with his ability to develop his land, although he had not thought seriously about developing the property in the immediate future. Plaintiff never gave defendant permission to place the footings on his property. However, he did not flatly tell defendant to stop doing so, or to remove the footings, because he was counting on the Castrogiovannis' word that something would be worked out.
Nancy Whitlock provided the following testimony at her deposition. She has no legal interest in the property but has lived there about a decade. Before the construction started, defendant's agents never told her that defendant would have to come onto the Spafford property. Although Whitlock attended neither zoning meeting, Joe Castrogiovanni told her the project would not interfere with the Spafford property. Relying on this assurance, Whitlock did not object beforehand to the construction. However, right after the footings were poured, she saw that they encroached on the Spafford property. From September 1996, she wanted defendant to tear down the property, but plaintiff continued to hope the parties could work things out.
Starting in August 1996, Whitlock and Joe Castrogiovanni spoke at least six times, discussing both the encroaching footings and the harm defendant was doing to the soil and the vegetation. Whitlock repeatedly told defendant's agents that the footings were on the Spafford property. Asked at her deposition whether she ever demanded that defendant remove the footings, Whitlock replied that, early on, she told Joseph Castrogiovanni, "I believe these are on our side." Whitlock never saw or learned of the footings for the original south wall. Assuming they had been south of the boundary line, Whitlock could not say whether they had damaged the Spafford property. She conceded that the new footings did not interfere with her use of the property. To her knowledge, the Whitlock family had never tried to develop, subdivide, or sell the property.
We summarize Joseph Castrogiovanni's deposition testimony. In February 1996, defendant applied for a zoning variance so it could build to the south property line. At the zoning hearing, plaintiff told Castrogiovanni that he had no objection to defendant building up to the line or coming onto his property during the construction. However, at that time, Castrogiovanni was not aware that the footings would encroach on plaintiff's property, and he and plaintiff did not discuss the footings at all.
When plaintiff and Castrogiovanni first met at the construction site, the old retaining wall had been removed and the footings for the new wall had been poured. Plaintiff pointed out that the new footings were on his property. Castrogiovanni agreed. This was the first time he knew of the encroachment. He did not ask plaintiff whether plaintiff would allow it, and he never tried to get plaintiff's written permission to put the footings on plaintiff's property. However, as plaintiff never objected to the footings, defendant proceeded apace with the project.
*306 The next meeting was at plaintiff's house. Castrogiovanni and the Whitlocks discussed the above-ground damage the construction was causing, but they did not discuss the footings. At a second meeting at the site, the Whitlocks told Castrogiovanni that defendant had until noon the next day to remove its equipment from the property. Defendant complied.
Castrogiovanni admitted he had no physical documentation of the location of the footings for the old south wall. However, he was present when the old retaining wall was removed, and he had seen the old footings. He noted that the new footings were in the same place as the ones that had been there for 40 years.
We summarize the correspondence between the parties' lawyers. On September 23, 1996, Gosdick wrote Kinley that the new footings appeared to be 18 inches over the boundary line. As he understood, plaintiff did not object to the footings but was concerned that defendant might make some sort of adverse possession claim. Therefore, plaintiff could consider any such claim waived.
On September 25, 1996, Kinley wrote that he had sent plaintiff a proposed lease dealing with both the encroachment and the temporary use of the Spafford property for construction. Kinley enclosed a copy of the proposal, which would charge defendant $100 a year for 20 years to place its footings on the Spafford property.
A letter from Kinley to Gosdick, dated October 10, 1996, stated that the Whitlocks wanted a prompt meeting so they could learn (in part) "what compensation will be provided if the encroachment involves more than the building footings." Also, plaintiff would not sign the lease Kinley had sent Gosdick. By a letter dated October 10, 1996, Gosdick requested that the parties' scheduled meeting be delayed for two weeks until some of the work was finished. On October 14, 1996, Kinley faxed Gosdick that the requested delay was unacceptable and that, as of noon the next day, defendant's permission to use the Spafford property was suspended until the parties decided, among other issues, what compensation plaintiff would receive for the footings' permanent encroachment on plaintiff's property.
On November 5, 1996, Kinley wrote Gosdick that a survey showed that the footings encroached on plaintiff's property. He enclosed a copy of the survey. On November 8, 1996, Gosdick acknowledged receipt of the survey but said that he was not surprised; the old footings had been in exactly the same place, so defendant had made no new encroachment. On January 9, 1997, Gosdick wrote Kinley about a recent meeting and to reply to a "settlement proposal." The communication discusses various areas of disagreement but never specifically mentions the footings. It does state that defendant is willing to pay $10,000 "as a full and final settlement for any damages done during the course of construction."
On February 14, 1997, Kinley replied that the Whitlocks remained firm in demanding (1) $30,000 for the use of the Spafford property during construction and the reimbursement of various expenses and (2) $2,000 per year for 20 years as compensation for the encroaching footings. Kinley added that, should defendant decline these terms, the Whitlocks would sue for a mandatory injunction to remove the footings. On February 21, 1997, Gosdick replied that defendant stood by its settlement offer. On March 11, 1997, plaintiff filed this suit.
In granting summary judgment for defendant, the trial court ruled first that defendant's encroachment was not the sort of "intentional" interference against which plaintiffs could seek a mandatory injunction regardless of the balance of equities or hardships. The court stressed that plaintiff did not initially object to the addition and that, when plaintiff became aware of the location of the new footings, he did not demand that they be removed but only that he be paid for the encroachment. *307 Also, the new footings simply took the place of the old ones and did not interfere with plaintiff's use of the property. The court ruled second that laches barred the suit for injunctive relief because plaintiff waited six months to bring the suit, meanwhile allowing defendant to construct the addition at a cost of $1.5 million. The court allowed plaintiff to proceed on a complaint for money damages, but plaintiff elected to forgo any suit for money damages. The court entered an order dismissing the complaint and defendant's third-party complaint against Scandroli. Plaintiff timely appeals.
On appeal, plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in granting summary judgment on either substantive grounds or equitable grounds such as laches, waiver, or estoppel. For the reasons that follow, we agree with plaintiff that the trial court erred in resolving these issues by summary judgment.
Summary judgment is proper when the pleadings, depositions, and other matters on file establish that there is no genuine issue of material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. 735 ILCS 5/2-1005(c) (West 1998). Summary judgment is a drastic measure and should be granted only if the moving party is clearly entitled to it. In re Estate of Constantine, 305 Ill.App.3d 256, 259, 238 Ill.Dec. 529, 711 N.E.2d 1190 (1999). The trial court must construe all the evidence strictly against the movant and liberally in favor of the nonmovant. Espinoza v. Elgin, Joliet & Eastern Ry. Co., 165 Ill.2d 107, 113, 208 Ill.Dec. 662, 649 N.E.2d 1323 (1995). A plaintiff seeking to avoid summary judgment must provide some factual basis that arguably would entitle him to recover, but he need not prove his case at this preliminary stage. Allegro Services, Ltd. v. Metropolitan Pier & Exposition Authority, 172 Ill.2d 243, 256, 216 Ill.Dec. 689, 665 N.E.2d 1246 (1996). Our review is de novo. Espinoza, 165 Ill.2d at 113, 208 Ill.Dec. 662, 649 N.E.2d 1323.
We agree with plaintiff that the trial court erred in concluding that, as a matter of law, the encroachment on plaintiff's property was not intentional. Whether to categorize defendant's encroachment as intentional or unintentional is potentially of crucial significance. Ordinarily, in deciding whether to order a defendant to remove an offending structure, the trial court must balance the hardship to the defendant against the benefit to the plaintiff; if the former is great and the latter slight, the court will ordinarily leave the plaintiff to his remedy at law. Nitterauer v. Pulley, 401 Ill. 494, 505, 82 N.E.2d 643 (1948); Crain Enterprises, Inc. v. City of Mound City, 189 Ill.App.3d 130, 144, 136 Ill.Dec. 554, 544 N.E.2d 1329 (1989); Calhoon v. Communications Systems Construction, Inc., 140 Ill.App.3d 1012, 1016, 95 Ill.Dec. 71, 489 N.E.2d 23 (1986). However, if the encroachment is deliberate, the court may issue the injunction without considering the relative hardships. Ariola v. Nigro, 16 Ill.2d 46, 51-52, 156 N.E.2d 536 (1959); Calhoon, 140 Ill.App.3d at 1016, 95 Ill.Dec. 71, 489 N.E.2d 23.
Here, the balance of hardships decisively favors defendant, as a mandatory injunction would require it to undo at least in large part a $1.5 million construction project, while the benefit to plaintiff would at most be far less clear. Thus, if the trial court correctly decided that, as a matter of law, the footings were not an intentional or deliberate encroachment, it acted properly in granting defendant summary judgment. However, we believe there is a genuine factual issue of whether defendant acted deliberately.
One who knows of a claim to land that he proposes to use as his own proceeds at his peril if he goes forward in the face of protest or warnings from the owner and places a structure on the land. Ariola, 16 Ill.2d at 52, 156 N.E.2d 536; Calhoon, 140 Ill.App.3d at 1016, 95 Ill.Dec. 71, 489 N.E.2d 23. Here, it is undisputed that the footings encroach on plaintiff's property *308 and that, at some point, plaintiff told defendant that he would not simply accept the encroachment. The evidence suggests that plaintiff did not protest the encroachment until after the footings were poured. However, this proves little in itself, as the evidence suggests equally that plaintiff and perhaps defendantdid not know in advance that defendant would encroach on plaintiff's property at all.
A fact finder could infer that, when defendant's agents started to put in the footings, they knew or could easily have learned that they were standing on plaintiff's land as they worked. In any event, a mistaken belief by defendant that it was on the right side of the line would not save it from an injunction if it could have ascertained the truth by using reasonable care. See Ariola, 16 Ill.2d at 53, 156 N.E.2d 536. There is also a factual basis to conclude that, soon after plaintiff realized that defendant intended to make permanent use of his property, he protested and put defendant on notice that it proceeded at its peril. Joseph Castrogiovanni admitted that, after plaintiff made his displeasure known, defendant kept on building the new south wall even though it had not obtained a lease or other permission to use the property.
The record provides a basis to find that defendant knew that it was appropriating plaintiff's property and pressed ahead anyway. Thus, the trial court erred in granting summary judgment on this basis. We turn to the second ground on which the trial court relied: that, as a matter of law, plaintiff's suit for injunctive relief was barred by laches. We hold that this ground is also insufficient to support the judgment.
Laches will bar relief where, as a result of the plaintiff's unreasonable delay in asserting his right, the defendant has been misled or prejudiced. Tully v. State, 143 Ill.2d 425, 432, 158 Ill.Dec. 546, 574 N.E.2d 659 (1991); Pettey v. First National Bank, 225 Ill.App.3d 539, 545, 167 Ill.Dec. 771, 588 N.E.2d 412 (1992). Whether to apply laches rests within the trial court's discretion. Pettey, 225 Ill. App.3d at 545-46, 167 Ill.Dec. 771, 588 N.E.2d 412. There are no fixed rules for when laches applies (Ole, Ole, Inc. v. Kozubowski, 187 Ill.App.3d 277, 286, 134 Ill.Dec. 895, 543 N.E.2d 178 (1989)), and the court must examine all the circumstances, including the defendant's conduct (Baylie v. Swift & Co., 283 Ill.App.3d 421, 431, 219 Ill.Dec. 94, 670 N.E.2d 772 (1996)). Thus, the court must ask whether the defendant has contributed to the delay of which it complains (Baylie, 283 Ill.App.3d at 431, 219 Ill.Dec. 94, 670 N.E.2d 772) and whether the defendant knew it was violating a right and went ahead anyway in disregard of the consequences (Pettey, 225 Ill.App.3d at 545, 167 Ill.Dec. 771, 588 N.E.2d 412).
Given these standards, the trial court erred in holding that, as a matter of law, plaintiff's delay in bringing suit bars it from obtaining any relief. This question turns on factual and equitable issues that ought not to have been resolved at the summary judgment stage. Weighing in defendant's favor is that plaintiff did wait six months between discovering the existence of the footings and filing suit to have them removed and that, in this time, plaintiff could see that defendant continued to build its addition at a substantial cost. However, weighing in plaintiff's favor is that there is at least a factual issue of whether defendant contributed to this delay by incorrectly assuring plaintiff, perhaps in bad faith, that he would be suitably compensated for the permanent encroachment. Also, there is some issue whether the equities favor defendant, in that it was aware early on of plaintiff's protests against the encroachment yet continued apace on the construction work without obtaining plaintiff's permission to do so. The existence of such genuine factual issues casts doubt on defendant's right to invoke the equitable doctrine of laches and thus bars summary judgment on this ground.
*309 As did the trial court, defendant emphasizes the evidence that the footings for the new wall simply occupy the same space as those for the old wall and that it is not clear how plaintiff will be harmed. However, whether the two sets of footings are equally intrusive, as well as the circumstances surrounding the existence of the old footings, are not well developed in the record before us. Moreover, if plaintiff establishes that the encroachment was deliberate or intentional, he need not show that he will suffer substantial immediate harm from the violation of his property right. See Pradelt v. Lewis, 297 Ill. 374, 377, 130 N.E. 785 (1921); Pacemaker Food Stores, Inc. v. Seventh Mont Corp., 117 Ill.App.3d 636, 647, 72 Ill.Dec. 931, 453 N.E.2d 806 (1983).
The judgment of the circuit court of Winnebago County is reversed, and the cause is remanded.
Reversed and remanded.
GEIGER and GALASSO, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9742190 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:08:12.992077+00 ===

JUSTICE HARRISON delivered the opinion of the court: Claimant, Thomas Lefler, filed an application for adjustment of claim pursuant to the Workers’ Occupational Diseases Act (Act) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 48, par. 172.36 et seq.) alleging that he had contracted an occupational disease, coal worker’s pneumoconiosis (black lung disease), arising out of and in the course of his employment with Freeman United Coal Mining Company (the employer). The arbitrator denied Lefler’s claim, finding that Lefler had failed to prove that he had been exposed to coal dust, the hazard upon which his claim was based, or that coal dust exposure was causally related to the impairment he claimed. The Industrial Commission affirmed the arbitrator’s decision, with one commissioner dissenting. On administrative review, the circuit court of Franklin County set aside the Commission’s decision, holding that “the decision of the arbitrator was against the manifest evidence on the issue of exposure and disease.” The court then remanded the cause to the Industrial Commission for reconsideration. On remand, the Industrial Commission reversed the arbitrator’s decision. It ruled that Lefler’s condition was, in fact, causally related to an occupational disease arising out of and in the course of his employment and that he was permanently totally disabled. Accordingly, the Commission ordered the employer to pay Lefler $261.57 per week for life and awarded him other relief. The circuit court subsequently confirmed the Commission’s decision. Over the dissent of two justices, the Industrial Commission Division of the appellate court reversed. No. 5 — 97—0354WC (unpublished order under Supreme Court Rule 23). In its order, as modified on denial of rehearing, the court held that the Commission’s initial decision denying Lefler’s claim based on the arbitrator’s findings regarding lack of exposure and causation was not against the manifest weight of the evidence and should not have been set aside. It therefore reversed the circuit court’s judgment and reinstated the Commission’s initial decision. The two dissenting appellate court justices filed a statement that the case involves a substantial question which warrants consideration by our court. Lefler then petitioned us for leave to appeal. 177 Ill. 2d R. 315(a). We granted review. For the reasons that follow, we now reverse the judgment of the appellate court and remand the cause to the appellate court for further proceedings. Before a reviewing court may overturn a decision of the Industrial Commission, it must find that the award was contrary to law or that the Commission’s factual determinations were against the manifest weight of the evidence. Fitts v. Industrial Comm’n, 172 Ill. 2d 303, 307 (1996). In this case, the Industrial Commission’s initial decision denying Lefler’s claim was contrary to law, as the circuit court correctly determined. As we have indicated, the Industrial Commission based its original determination on the decision of the arbitrator, who held that Lefler had adduced no evidence regarding the duration, extent or frequency of his exposure to coal dust and had failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that he was exposed to coal dust. Under the Workers’ Occupational Diseases Act, however, Lefler was not required to present evidence regarding the amount, time and duration of his exposure to the hazards of an occupational disease. Section 1(d) of the Act expressly provides that an employee “shall be conclusively deemed to have been exposed to the hazards of an occupational disease when, for any length of time however short, he or she is employed in an occupation or process in which the hazard of the disease exists ***.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 48, par. 172.36(d). These conditions were satisfied here. There is no dispute that coal mining is an occupation in which the hazard of coal worker’s pneumoconiosis is present. There is also no dispute that Lefler was employed as a coal miner. According to the record, Lefler worked as a coal miner for 33 years and was employed at a mine operated by Freeman United Coal Mining Company at the time he stopped working. Under these circumstances, the arbitrator should have taken Lefler’s exposure to the hazard of coal worker’s pneumoconiosis as having been conclusively established. Lefler was not obligated to present further evidence on the point, and it was not subject to challenge by the employer. See U.S. Industrial Chemical Co. v. Industrial Comm’n, 143 Ill. App. 3d 881, 890-91 (1986). In an effort to validate the arbitrator’s decision, the employer argues that evidence as to the timing and extent of Lefler’s exposure was properly considered because he was required to establish that he suffered medically significant exposure to coal dust on the final day of his employment. We disagree. The Act does specify that compensation is only payable where disablement “occurs within two years after the last day of the last exposure to the hazards of the disease,” except in circumstances not relevant here. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 48, par. 172.36(f). In addition, where the disability was caused by coal worker’s pneumoconiosis, the law provides that the application for compensation must be filed with the Commission within five years after the employee was last exposed where no compensation has been paid, or within five years after the last payment of compensation where such payments have been made. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 48, par. 172.41(c). Nothing in the Act, however, makes an employer’s liability contingent on a claimant’s ability to link his condition to exposure on the final day of his employment with that employer. Claimants such as Lefler are apt to have been exposed to the hazards of coal worker’s pneumoconiosis over a prolonged period of time in a variety of work settings. Under the Act, they are not required to establish which exposure led to their disease. They are not even required to identify the employer for whom they were working when they sustained the exposure that produced their disease. The employer who is liable is simply the “employer in whose employment the employee was last exposed to the hazard of the occupational disease claimed upon regardless of the length of time of such last exposure.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 48, par. 172.36(d). There is no dispute that the employer in this case met that description. Freeman United Coal Mining Company was “the employer in whose employment the employee was last exposed to the hazard of the occupational disease claimed” within the meaning of the Act. Accordingly, whether Lefler was actually exposed to coal dust on his last day of work and whether that exposure, if any, was medically significant, are not determinative of the employer’s liability. Thermos Co. v. Industrial Comm’n, 83 Ill. 2d 54 (1980), cited by the employer, does not mandate a contrary result. In that case it was necessary to determine “the date of the last exposure which caused the claimant’s incapacity.” Thermos Co., 83 Ill. 2d at 58. Such a determination, however, was not necessary in order to„ impose liability on the employer. It pertained to the wholly separate issues of when compensation should commence and which of the employer’s multiple insurance carriers were required to pay that compensation. See H&H Plumbing Co. v. Industrial Comm’n, 170 Ill. App. 3d 706, 719 (1988). Those matters are not in dispute here. Because the Industrial Commission based its original determination on an arbitration decision that was incorrect as a matter of law, the circuit court properly reversed that decision and remanded the cause to the Commission for further consideration. There is no merit to the appellate court’s view that the Commission’s decision should have been sustained despite this error on the grounds that Lefler had failed to prove that his exposure was the proximate cause of his physical ailments. Although the Commission was initially willing to accept the arbitrator’s conclusion that Lefler’s physical condition was not causally related to his exposure to coal dust while working for the employer, it squarely rejected that conclusion in its subsequent decision based on the same evidence. To accept the appellate court’s position would require us to hold, in effect, that the Commission’s initial factual determination is entitled to greater deference than the factual determination it made following remand from the circuit court. We know of no principle of logic or judicial review that would support such a result. Where the Commission has had the opportunity to review the evidence in a proceeding for a second time, it is the Commission’s ultimate determination that should be accorded deference, not the determination it made initially. That is particularly true in the case before us today. As we have noted, the Commission’s initial decision was based on the legally erroneous determination that Lefler had not even been exposed to coal dust. Because the Commission believed that Lefler had not been exposed, it could never have found that Lefler’s condition was caused by coal dust exposure. Without exposure, causation would be impossible, medically and as a matter of law. The Commission’s erroneous finding as to exposure was therefore inextricably linked to its initial finding as to causation. As a result, once the Commission’s original determination as to exposure was rejected, as the law required it to be, its finding as to causation could no longer stand. The connection between the Commission’s view on exposure and its original finding as to causation was confirmed by the subsequent proceedings in the case. Once the Commission applied the law correctly on remand and recognized that there had been exposure, it reversed its initial holding and found that Lefler’s “present condition of ill-being was causally connected to his exposure to coal dust while working for [the employer].” That finding underlies the decision which gave rise to this appeal, and there is no basis for setting it aside. The determination of causation is a question of fact for the Commission. Beattie v. Industrial Comm’n, 276 Ill. App. 3d 446, 449 (1995). The Commission’s determination in this case was amply supported by the record. Where a miner suffering from pneumoconiosis was employed in one or more coal mines for 10 years or more, as Lefler was, there is a statutory presumption that his pneumoconiosis arose out of his employment. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 48, par. 172.36(d). Under the terms of the statute, the presumption is rebuttable. The employer in this case, however, failed to rebut the presumption. Although a physician who examined Lefler on behalf of the employer testified in his deposition that Lefler suffered from asthma and emphysema caused by smoking rather than from coal worker’s pneumoconiosis caused by exposure to coal dust, two other physicians diagnosed Lefler as having coal worker’s pneumoconiosis in addition to other lung conditions, including emphysema and bronchitis. Moreover, those doctors opined that while smoking was a factor in producing Lefler’s other lung conditions, exposure to coal dust was responsible for those conditions as well. The appellate court was therefore wrong to reverse the circuit court’s judgment on the grounds that Lefler had failed to prove that his physical ailments were causally related to coal dust exposure. In the appellate court, the employer argued, in the alternative, that even if the Commission was correct in finding exposure and causation following remand, the record failed to support its determination that Lefler was permanently and totally disabled. Because the appellate court agreed with the employer that Lefler had failed to properly establish coal dust exposure and causation, the court did not reach this argument. Now that we have found the appellate court’s treatment of the exposure and causation issues to be incorrect, however, the Commission’s finding as to Lefler’s permanent and total disability is subject to review. Accordingly the matter is remanded to the appellate court for consideration of that issue. Waste Management of Illinois, Inc. v. Illinois Pollution Control Board, 145 Ill. 2d 345, 352 (1991). For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the appellate court is reversed, and the cause is remanded to the appellate court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. Appellate court judgment reversed; cause remanded.

=== CASE 9742191 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:08:12.995989+00 ===

JUSTICE MILLER, dissenting: I do not agree with the majority’s conclusion that the Industrial Commission’s second decision in this case, on remand from the circuit court, is entitled to greater deference than its initial decision. For that reason, I respectfully dissent. In this case, the circuit court reversed the Commission’s initial decision, finding that it was against the manifest weight of the evidence, and remanded the matter to the Commission for further proceedings. On reconsideration of the same record — the parties did not present any additional evidence — the Commission then reached a different result. The majority concludes from this chronology that the Commission’s later decision is entitled to greater deference because it represents the Commission’s last word on the subject. I do not agree. Reading the circuit court’s initial order, the Commission understandably believed that it was to reach a different result on remand, and it did so. Accordingly, I do not agree with the majority that the Commission’s later decision should command more deference than its original one. In my view, the Commission’s first decision, which represents the Commission’s original view of the evidence, is entitled to greater deference. In its first decision, the Commission affirmed and adopted the decision of the arbitrator, who concluded that the claimant’s respiratory condition was not caused by exposure to coal dust. The arbitrator’s decision carefully reviewed the testimony of the three expert witnesses in the case, who disagreed on the question whether the claimant was suffering from coal worker’s pneumoconiosis, but who all found the claimant’s history of smoking to be significant. It is within the province of the Commission to judge the credibility of witnesses, to draw reasonable inferences from their testimony, and to determine what weight the testimony is to be given. Parro v. Industrial Comm’n, 167 Ill. 2d 385, 396 (1995). Accordingly, the decision of the Industrial Commission on a question of fact will not be disturbed unless it is contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. Lee v. Industrial Comm’n, 167 Ill. 2d 77, 82 (1995); Brady v. Louis Ruffolo & Sons Construction Co., 143 Ill. 2d 542, 549 (1991); Orsini v. Industrial Comm’n, 117 Ill. 2d 38, 44 (1987). I do not believe that the Commission’s first decision was against the manifest weight of the evidence. For these reasons, I would affirm the judgment of the appellate court, Industrial Commission division, which upheld the Commission’s original decision in this case.

=== CASE 9742192 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:08:13.261896+00 ===

OPINION
BAILEY, Judge
Case Summary
Appellants-Plaintiffs John Bryant, Jr., individually and on the behalf of others similarly situated (referred to herein as “Remonstrators”), appeal the trial court’s grant of summary judgment in favor of Appellees-Defendants County Council of Lake County, Indiana; John Aquilera, Frances Dupey, Morris Carter, and Troy Montgomery, as Members of the Lake County' Council (collectively referred to herein as “County Council”); and, Hickory Hills Development Co., L.L.C., USA Waste Serviees-Hickory Hills, Inc. (collectively referred to herein as “Developer”) on Bryant’s petition for the judicial review of the County Council’s enactment of an ordinance which approved Developer’s application to rezone a certain parcel of real estate in order to establish a landfill. We affirm.
Issues
Bryant raises two issues which we restate as follows:
I. Whether the trial court erred by determining that the County Council had the authority to approve Developer’s zoning application which included an amendment which had not been presented during the earlier proceedings before the Plan Commission to the effect that the County would receive an eight cents *3(8$) per ton tipping fee from the operation of the landfill.
II. Whether the trial court erred by determining that the County Council paid reasonable regard to the five statutory criteria prescribed by Ind.Code § 36-7-4-603 in approving the rezoning application.
Facts/Procedural History
The designated evidence is virtually undisputed. In 1993, the Board of the Lake County Solid Waste Management District (“District”) recognized the need for a new solid waste landfill. (R. 834, 966). In early 1994, the District issued a request for proposals for the development of a new landfill. (R. 834). Developer responded by proposing to develop and operate a landfill on its property. (R. 834). The District determined that Developer’s proposed site for the landfill was the most suitable site available in the county. (R. 836). In 1995, after negotiations and a public hearing, the contract for the new landfill was awarded to Developer. (R. 835, 965). Among other things, the contract provided that Developer was to obtain all necessary permits and approvals to construct the new landfill. (R. 835).
In 1996, Developer filed an application for the rezoning required to operate the proposed landfill on its property. (R. 834). In August of 1996, the Lake County Plan Commission (“Plan Commission”) held a hearing on Developer’s application. (R. 1028). Developer presented evidence in support of its application and Remon-strators presented evidence against it. (R. 1029). At the conclusion of the hearing, the Plan Commission voted to certify the proposed rezoning application to the County Council with an unfavorable recommendation. (R. 1029).
In September of 1996, the County Council held a public meeting to consider Developer’s rezoning application. (R. 510-11). Developer and the Remonstrators were each afforded one and one-half hours to present their cases. (R. 510). In the minutes taken of the hearing, the County Council noted in its “Review of Procedure” section that: “[u]nder current case law, the Council may adopt the proposal with conditions and stipulations. (See Brown v. Lake County Council).” (R. 510).1 During the hearing, the Developer’s attorney argued as follows:
As you’ll recall, when [County Council’s attorney] was reading off your options, he said that you were free to reject the proposal, you were free to adopt the proposal, or you could place conditions upon it. The ... law of rezoning in the state of Indiana provides for written commitments. And what we have attached here is a written commitment that has been repeatedly requested and discussed for a long time with members of the Solid Waste District, and in particular with ... a member of your Board who has insisted throughout that ... the disposition of fees was not fair ... to the citizens in the unincorporated area. To try and address and remedy that issue, we have set forth a commitment ... which addresses that issue and creates an additional fund of money that doesn’t change anything.... It simply creates an additional amount of money that would be placed in a special account with the County that would be distributed and budgeted and appropriated by the fiscal body of this county for legitimate needs of this county and the unincorporated area.
(R. 179-80). After the presentation of evidence, the County Council passed a motion to amend the proposed rezoning ordinance *4“to include an 8[<f]2 tipping fee generated from waste.” (R. 511). At the close of the hearing, the County Council voted to grant Developer’s rezoning petition and enacted the proposed zoning ordinance. (R. 511).
In November of 1996, the Developer and the County entered into a written “Commitment Concerning the Use or Development of Real Estate Made in Connection with Grant of Rezoning.” (R. 702-03). The Commitment provided that the Developer would “deposit ... an amount equal to Eight Cents (8<t) for each ton of waste which originates outside of Lake County....” (R. 702).
On December 2, 1996, Remonstrators initiated the present litigation challenging the County Council’s enactment of the rezoning ordinance. (R. 1460-66). Developer intervened. (R. 1405). On November 5, 1997, Developers served Remonstrators with Requests for Admissions which included a request that Remonstrators admit that:
the County Council has the authority to require the special commitment made by [Developer] concerning the use and development of its real estate.
(R. 222). The Request for Admissions also requested Remonstrators to admit that the County Council paid reasonable regard to each of the five statutory criteria required to approve a rezoning application. (R. 219-21).
Remonstrator’s response was originally due on December 8, 1997. (R. 217). Developer agreed to a thirty day extension of time to January 7, 1998, on the condition that the extension would be the only extension sought. (R. 217). Remonstrator failed to respond to the requests for admissions in a timely manner and submitted their response on January 15, 1998, one day before the expiration of the then existing discovery deadline (cut-off) date. (R. 218, 226). Remonstrator filed a motion to withdraw the admissions established by its untimely response by operation of Ind. Trial Rule 36(A). (R. 236-39).
Remonstrators and Developers filed cross-motions for summary judgment. (R. 269, 335). The trial court denied Remon-strator’s motion and granted Developer’s motion. (R. 18-32). In conjunction with its order on the cross-motions for summary judgment, the trial court denied Re-monstrator’s request to withdraw the admissions. (R. 32). This appeal ensued.
Discussion and Decision
A. Overview — Landfill Litigation
We note that there has been a great deal of litigation over the location of landfills in Indiana in recent years. See e.g. Ailes, Thaddeus R., Not in My Backyard: A Critique of Current Indiana Law on Land Use Moratoria, 72 Ind. L.J. 809 (1997). In fact, the present dispute has generated two earlier published opinions from this court. See Lake County Plan Com’n v. County Council of Lake County, 706 N.E.2d 601 (Ind.Ct.App.1999), trans. pending; Hickory Hills Development Co., L.L.C. v. Coffman, 699 N.E.2d 1214 (Ind.Ct.App.1998), trans. denied.
B. County’s Authority to Enact A Rezoning Ordinance
The statutory provisions regulating municipal zoning ordinances and the procedures prescribed for amending those ordinances (rezoning) are found at Ind.Code § 36-7-4-600 through 699, known as the “600 SERIES — ZONING ORDINANCE.” Ind.Code § 36-7-4-600. Rezoning is a legislative process. Rush v. Elkhart County Plan Com’n, 698 N.E.2d 1211, 1218 (Ind.Ct.App.1998), trans. denied. Where a rezoning proposal has received an unfavorable recommendation from the *5Plan Commission, as in the present case, Ind.Code § 36-7-4-608(g) provides:
ADVISORY-AREA. This subsection applies if the proposal receives either an unfavorable recommendation or no recommendation from the plan commission:
(1) At the first regular meeting of the legislative body after the proposal is certified ... (or at any subsequent meeting within ninety (90) day period), the legislative body may adopt or reject the proposal....
(2) If the legislative body adopts (as certified) the proposal, it takes effect as other ordinances of the legislative body.
(3) If the legislative body rejects the proposal, it is defeated.
(4) If the legislative body fails to act on the proposal within ninety (90) days after certification, it is defeated.
Indiana Code § 36-7-4-603 provides:
In preparing and considering proposals [regarding rezoning], the plan commission and the legislative body shall pay reasonable regard to:
(1) The comprehensive plan;
(2) Current conditions and the character of current structures and uses in each district;
(3) The most desirable use for which the land in each district is adapted;
(4) The conservation of property values throughout the jurisdiction; and
(5) Responsible development and growth.
C.Judicial Review of a County’s Enactment of a Rezoning Ordinance
The determination regarding whether to rezone a particular piece of property is a matter left to the sound discretion of the local legislative body. Town of Schererville v. Vavrus, 180 Ind.App. 500, 389 N.E.2d 346, 351 (1979). The Plan Commission’s role in the rezoning process is merely advisory as the county’s legislative body (in the present case, the County Council) has the ultimate authority to enact or reject the proposed ordinance. Rush, 698 N.E.2d at 1218. The courts may not inquire into the motives of the members of a local legislative body when acting in its legislative capacity. Town of Schererville, 389 N.E.2d at 351. The courts may reverse the county’s decision regarding rezoning only if it is arbitrary or capricious; that is, the county has taken willful and unreasonable action without consideration and in disregard of the facts or circumstances of the case. Id. We will not intervene in the local legislative process as long as it is supported by some rational basis. Id. at 351-52.
D.Parties’ Contentions
As set out in the Issues section, Remon-strators claim (1) that the County Council lacked the authority to enact the ordinance in question with the addition of the 8<t a ton tipping fee amendment; and (2) that the County Council did not pay reasonable regard to the five statutory factors prescribed by Ind.Code § 36-7-4-603 in approving the rezoning application. While Developer addresses these matters on the merits, it further contends that these matters were conclusively established in its favor by operation of T.R. 36(A) due to Remonstrators’ failure to timely respond to its Request for Admissions. Nowhere in either its Appellants’ brief or its Reply brief do Remonstrators address the matter of the trial court’s denial of their request for the withdrawal of the matters established by operation of T.R. 36.
E.Standard of Review— Summary Judgment
As stated in Barnes, as Mayor of the City of Gary v. Antich, 700 N.E.2d 262, 264-65 (Ind.Ct.App.1998), trans. denied:
In reviewing a motion for summary judgment, this court applies the same standard as the trial court. We must determine whether there is a genuine issue of material fact and whether the *6law has been correctly applied by the trial court. Summary judgment is appropriate only if no genuine issues of material fact exist and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Neither the trial court, nor the reviewing court, may look beyond the evidence specifically designated to the trial court. Once the movant for summary judgment has established that no genuine issue of material fact exists by submission of materials contemplated by T.R. 56, the nonmovant may not rest on his pleadings but must set forth specific facts, using supporting materials contemplated under the rule, which show the existence of a genuine issue for trial. A trial court’s grant of summary judgment is ‘clothed with a presumption of validity,’ and the appellant bears the burden of demonstrating that the trial court erred.
F. Admissions Conclusively Established by Operation of Ind. Trial Rule 36(A)
Under Ind. Trial Rule 36, a request for admissions may be directed toward an opinion, a contention, or a legal conclusion if the request is related to the facts of the case. General Motors Corp. v. Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co., 573 N.E.2d 885, 888 (Ind.1991); Corby v. Swank, 670 N.E.2d 1322, 1325 (Ind.Ct.App.1996). Moreover, ‘the failure to respond in a timely manner to a request for admissions causes those matters to be admitted and conclusively established by operation of law.’ Corby, 670 N.E.2d at 1324 (quoting Henrichs v. Pivarnik, 588 N.E.2d 537, 543 (Ind.Ct.App.1992); emphasis added in Cor-by ). Once such an admission is obtained, the need to prove that matter is eliminated. Id.
G. Standard of Review — Denial of Motion for the Withdrawal of Admissions Established by Operation of T.R. 36
When a motion seeking the withdrawal of admissions has been made, the trial court must consider 1) whether the presentation of the merits will be sub-served by permitting withdrawal, and 2) whether the party who obtained the admission will be prejudiced by withdrawal. General Motors, 573 N.E.2d at 888-89; Corby, 670 N.E.2d at 1326. Moreover, the party moving for the withdrawal of admissions established by operation of T.R. 36 does not meet its burden of showing that withdrawal will subserve the presentation of the merits simply by demonstrating that the admissions go to the core issues to be litigated. Royalty Vans Inc. v. Hill Bros. Plumbing and Heating, Inc., 605 N.E.2d 1217, 1221 (Ind.Ct.App.1993). Even if both conditions have been satisfied, the trial court is not compelled to grant withdrawal of the admissions, but may, in the exercise of its discretion, deny the request for withdrawal. General Motors, 573 N.E.2d at 889-90; Corby, 670 N.E.2d at 1326-27.
H.Entitlement to Summary Judgment Based on Matters Deemed Admitted by Operation of T.R. 36
Admission by operation of T.R. 36 of all facts material to a cause of action by the failure of the admitting party to timely answer requests for admissions leaves nothing more to litigate and will entitle the party who requested the admissions to summary judgment. General Motors, 573 N.E.2d at 889-90; Royalty Vans, 605 N.E.2d at 1221; Henrichs, 588 N.E.2d at 543.
I.Analysis
As noted above, the Requests for Admissions submitted by Developer included a request that Remonstrators admit that:
the County Council has the authority to require the special commitment made by [Developer] concerning the use and development of its real estate.
(R. 222). Additionally, the Request for Admissions requested that Remonstrators admit that the County Council paid rea*7sonable regard to each of the five statutory-criteria required to approve a rezoning application. (R. 219-21). As Remon-strators failed to respond in a timely manner to these Requests for Admissions, these issues have been conclusively established in Developer’s favor by operation of T.R. 36. See Corby, 670 N.E.2d at 1324.
Also, as noted above, Remonstrators did not address the trial court’s denial of their request to withdraw the matters established by operation of T.R. 36. Accordingly, any argument Remonstrators might have made that the trial court abused its discretion by denying their request for the withdrawal of the admissions has been waived. See Corby, 670 N.E.2d at 1327 n. 6 (holding that when a party makes no effort to discuss an issue in its appellate brief, any argument which could have been made has been waived).
Thus, the issues that Developer has raised in this appeal, which are dispositive of this litigation, have been conclusively established by operation of T.R. 36. Accordingly, there remain no genuine issues of material fact to be litigated and Developer has demonstrated its entitlement to judgment as a matter of law. General Motors, 573 N.E.2d at 889-90; Royalty Vans, 605 N.E.2d at 1221; Henrichs, 588 N.E.2d at 543. Therefore, the trial court correctly entered summary judgment in favor of the Developer and we find no error. See id.
Affirmed.
HOFFMAN, Sr.J., concurs.
GARRARD, J., concurs with separate opinion
. From an examination of the record and the arguments made by the parties, it is clear that the case referred to above is Brown v. Lowell Mining Co., Inc., 636 N.E.2d 154, 156-57 (Ind.Ct.App.1994) which held that the Lake County Council could appropriately attach a series of regulations to the grant of rezoning in order to protect the public health, safety, comfort, and general welfare consistent with the mandate imposed by Ind.Code § 36-7-4-601(c)(3).
. The minutes of the meeting read "to include an 8% tipping fee” rather than an 8<t tipping fee. However, there has been no dispute that the written "Commitment” as set out herein memorialized the intended amendment to the proposed zoning ordinance passed and enacted during the County Council meeting. (R. 702). Therefore, we are satisfied that the reference to "8%” in the minutes was merely a misstatement or scrivener's error.

=== CASE 2230191 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:39.675989+00 ===

720 N.E.2d 7 (1999)
Paul GUTHRIE, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 49A02-9902-CR-110.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
November 17, 1999.
Transfer Denied January 19, 2000.
*8 William F. Thoms, Jr., Thoms & Thoms, Indianapolis, Indiana, Attorney for Appellant.
Jeffrey A. Modisett, Attorney General of Indiana, James B. Martin, Deputy Attorney General, Indianapolis, Indiana, Attorneys for Appellee.
OPINION
RUCKER, Judge
Defendant Paul Guthrie was charged with resisting law enforcement as a Class A misdemeanor[1] and refusal to provide identification as a Class C misdemeanor.[2] After a bench trial, he was found guilty of resisting law enforcement. He was sentenced to 365 days with 351 days suspended. Guthrie appeals contending the evidence was insufficient to sustain the conviction. We disagree and therefore affirm.
The facts most favorable to the judgment reveal that on June 27, 1998, Guthrie was present at Broad Ripple Park in Indianapolis, Indiana. Park Ranger Robert Turner was summoned to investigate a person vending without a license. Upon arrival, he observed Guthrie sitting on a blanket with several items offered for sale. After ascertaining that Guthrie did not have a vending permit, Turner informed Guthrie that he could no longer vend in the park, but he was free to remain. Guthrie packed up his wares and then requested to see the ordinance requiring a permit. Turner did not have a copy of the ordinance, so he summoned his supervisor.
Captain Jeffrey Ward arrived and showed Guthrie the ordinance in question. After some discussion, Ward requested that Turner issue a citation for vending without a permit. Turner then asked Guthrie for his name and Guthrie refused. After requesting and being refused three times, Guthrie was placed under arrest for Refusal to Identify Self, handcuffed and transported to the Marion County lockup.
Upon arrival, Guthrie was asked to step out of the vehicle, but he refused claiming his arrest was illegal. Officer Nuckols, who had transported Guthrie to the lockup, sought assistance to remove Guthrie from the vehicle. Two officers then physically removed Guthrie and placed him on the ground. They requested that he stand up, but he continued to refuse. Police lifted Guthrie to his feet, but he refused to walk. He leaned back and kept his legs straight. The officers had to carry Guthrie to the central receiving area.
The State charged Guthrie with refusal to provide identification and resisting law enforcement. A bench trial was held on November 12, 1998. At the conclusion of the State's case in chief, the defense moved for a directed verdict on both counts. The court granted the motion as to the refusal to provide identification charge. Guthrie was convicted of resisting law enforcement and sentenced to 365 days in jail, with 351 days suspended and remaining, 10 days stayed and 351 days probation. This appeal followed.
In reviewing a claim of sufficiency of the evidence, our standard of review is well settled. We will neither reweigh the evidence nor judge the credibility of the witnesses. Moore v. State, 652 N.E.2d 53, 55 (Ind.1995). We examine only the evidence most favorable to the State along with all reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom, and if there is substantial evidence *9 of probative value to support the conviction, it will not be set aside. Id.
Resisting law enforcement is defined in Ind.Code § 35-44-3-3, in pertinent part, as follows:
(a) A person who knowingly or intentionally:
(1) forcibly resists, obstructs, or interferes with a law enforcement officer or a person assisting the officer while the officer is lawfully engaged in the execution of his duties as an officer.
Guthrie challenges the sufficiency of the evidence to sustain his conviction. He specifically alleges that he did not use the requisite force to sustain a conviction for resisting law enforcement. Rather, his argument continues, he passively resisted the officers' attempts to remove him from the police vehicle.
Our supreme court has found that a person forcibly resists "when strong, powerful, violent means are used to evade a law enforcement official's rightful exercise of his or her duties." Spangler v. State, 607 N.E.2d 720, 723 (Ind.1993). Guthrie relies on Spangler, which reversed the defendant's conviction for resisting law enforcement finding insufficient evidence of force where the defendant resisted service of process by turning and walking away. Here, Guthrie did more than passively resist. He refused to get out of the jail wagon. He was forcefully removed from the wagon and placed on the ground. When asked to get up, he refused. He was lifted to his feet but refused to walk. He resisted the officers' efforts by leaning his body back and stiffening his legs. Ultimately, the officers had to carry Guthrie to the central receiving area.
Guthrie also directs us to White v. State, 545 N.E.2d 1124 (Ind.Ct.App.1989), Braster v. State, 596 N.E.2d 278 (Ind.Ct.App. 1992), and Ajabu v. State, 704 N.E.2d 494 (Ind.Ct.App.1998), all of which support his assertion that mere passive resistance is not sufficient to sustain a conviction of resisting law enforcement. In White, the court reversed a conviction for resisting law enforcement where the defendant blocked his driveway and refused to allow a tow truck to enter a parking lot to retrieve a vehicle that contained stolen goods. White, 545 N.E.2d at 1125. Similarly, in Braster, this court reversed a conviction where the only evidence of resisting law enforcement was defendant's failure to obey the officer's demand to lie on the ground. "While defendant's failure to obey [the officer's instructions] is a definite resistance, obstruction, and interference with law enforcement, there was no force involved on defendant's part." Braster, 596 N.E.2d at 280. Finally, in Ajabu, this court overturned a conviction where the defendant resisted police efforts to remove a flag from his possession and the record revealed that he "twisted and turned a little as he held onto his flag." Ajabu, 704 N.E.2d at 495.
However, these cases are distinguishable from the case at bar because Guthrie did resist in some meaningful way that extended beyond mere passive resistance. These facts are similar to those in Wellman v. State, 703 N.E.2d 1061 (Ind.Ct. App.1998), where the court found sufficient evidence that a defendant acted with the requisite force in resisting an officer, so as to sustain a conviction for resisting law enforcement, where defendant physically resisted leaving his house by placing his hands against the door frame. The officer was forced to shove defendant through the doorway in order to get him outside, and once outside, the defendant refused to get up and walk, forcing the officer to lift defendant onto his feet. Id. at 1064.
Judgment affirmed.
STATON, J., and NAJAM, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Ind.Code § 35-44-3-3(a)(1)
[2]  Ind.Code § 34-4-32-3

=== CASE 9742194 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:08:15.098061+00 ===

OPINION
HALBROOKS, Judge.
Relator challenges the decision by the senior-unemployment-review judge (SURJ), affirming a decision by the unemployment-law judge (ULJ), that she was disqualified from receiving unemployment benefits because she was discharged for misconduct. Although relator was eligible for work release under Minn.Stat. § 631.425 (2002) while she was incarcerated, the ULJ found that her employer was not obligated to call and verify her employment in order to allow her continued attendance at work. Relator argues that the employer’s failure to call and verify her employment under Minn.Stat. § 631.425 does not constitute fault attributable to the employee, and, therefore, her absence from work under these circumstances should not constitute misconduct. We affirm.
FACTS
Relator Cassandra Jenkins was employed as an insurance specialist by respondent American Express Financial Corporation (employer). In January 2004, she was convicted of assaulting a nurse while being treated for a broken ankle and was sentenced to 30 days in jail. The district court in the criminal matter was aware that relator was employed and, consequently, committed her to work release pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 631.425 (2002), also known as a “Huber law” work release. Relator was ordered to begin her sentence on April 18, 2004.
Relator states that she met with her supervisor, Joel Hansen, twice prior to April 18 and explained her situation. She further states that Hansen told her that “American Express had had other employees do work release and [that] he would be willing to accommodate [relator] and verify her employment for work release purposes.” Both relator and respondent agree that, at the time relator reported to the workhouse, she understood that her employer was going to cooperate in her work release.
Relator presented herself to corrections officials on April 18 and unsuccessfully attempted to contact Hansen the next day, so that he could verify her employment. She testified that she called Hansen every day that week, left multiple messages asking him to call the work-release program to verify her employment, and had both a friend and relator’s social worker, David Huberty, call Hansen on relator’s behalf. According to relator, she reached Hansen on one occasion, but was told that he would get back to her. Huberty stated that he left Hansen a voicemail “clearly outlining that all [Hansen] had to do was make one phone call to the [w]orkhouse to facilitate [relator’s] ‘work release!.’] [Huberty] even left the name of the contact person at the [w]orkhouse and that person’s direct phone number.”
*911On April 22, 2004, Hansen sent relator a letter advising that she had been absent from work since April 19 and informing her that if she did not return to work on April 26, the employer would assume that she had voluntarily resigned. The letter did not mention relator’s work release. When relator failed to report for work on April 26, she was discharged.
Relator subsequently applied for unemployment benefits, and an account was opened on August 15, 2004. An adjudicator for the Minnesota Department of Employment and Economic Development (department) found that relator was disqualified from receiving benefits because she was discharged for misconduct. Relator appealed, and a telephone hearing was held before a ULJ on October 20. The employer did not appear at the hearing or present any evidence.
The ULJ found that relator was “unavailable for work due to her incarceration” and that “[although [relator] was eligible for work release under the Huber law, her employer was not obligated to call and verify her employment in order to allow her to eontinue[ ] attendance at work.” The ULJ further found that it was relator’s conduct that led to her incarceration and that this conduct “was intentional and displayed clearly a substantial lack of concern for her employment.” Consequently, the ULJ concluded that relator was disqualified from receiving unemployment benefits. Relator then appealed to the SURJ,1 who issued an order pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 268.105, subd. 2a(a) (2004),2 declining to conduct further proceedings and adopting the findings of fact and decision of the ULJ as final. This certiorari appeal follows.
ISSUE
Did the SURJ err by holding that relator was disqualified from receiving unemployment benefits based on misconduct when relator’s employer failed to call to verify her employment for purposes of work release under Minn.Stat. § 631.425 (2002)?
ANALYSIS
On appeal, we review the decision of the SURJ rather than that of the ULJ.3 Weaver v. Minn. Valley Labs., Inc., 470 N.W.2d 131, 133 (Minn.App.1991). The standard of review in unemployment-benefit cases is narrow. McGowan v. Executive Express Transp. Enters., 420 N.W.2d 592, 594 (Minn.1988). The factual findings of the SURJ are “viewed in the light most favorable to the decision, and if there is evidence reasonably tending to sustain them, they will not be disturbed.” White v. Metro. Med. Ctr., 332 N.W.2d 25, 26 (Minn.1983). On questions of law, we are not bound by the SURJ’s conclusions, but exercise our own independent judgment. Market v. City of Circle Pines, 479 N.W.2d 382, 384 (Minn.1992). Whether an *912employee committed a specific act is a question of fact. Scheunemann v. Radisson S. Hotel, 562 N.W.2d 32, 34 (Minn.App.1997). But whether specific acts constitute misconduct is a question of law, which we review de novo. Id. at 34.
When employees are discharged for employment misconduct, they are disqualified from receiving unemployment benefits.4 Minn.Stat. § 268.095, subd. 4 (Supp.2003). Under Minnesota law, employment misconduct is “any intentional, negligent, or indifferent conduct, on or off the job (1) that evinces a serious violation of the standards of behavior the employer has the right to reasonably expect of the employee, or (2) that demonstrates a substantial lack of concern for the employment.” Id., subd. 6(a) (Supp.2003). On appeal in unemployment cases, we do not determine whether the employee should have been terminated, but whether the employee should receive unemployment benefits. Ress v. Abbott NW Hosp., Inc., 448 N.W.2d 519, 523 (Minn.1989); see also Windsperger v. Broadway Liquor Outlet, 346 N.W.2d 142, 143 (Minn.1984) (explaining that the issue in economic-security cases “is not whether [relator] should have been terminated, but whether, now that she is unemployed, she should be denied unemployment compensation benefits as well”).
Relator first argues that the ULJ5 erred by concluding that incarceration bars receipt of benefits as a matter of law and notes that the supreme court in Grushus v. Minn. Mining & Mfg. Co., 257 Minn. 171, 100 N.W.2d 516 (1960), did not establish a per se rule of disqualification whenever an employee is incarcerated. Indeed, the Grushus court stated that the department bears the responsibility of making a fact determination in each case regarding whether an employee’s conduct, including conduct leading to incarceration, caused his or her inability to work.6 Id. at 176, 100 N.W.2d at 520.
Contrary to relator’s argument, there is no indication that the ULJ concluded “as a matter of law” that incarceration disqualifies an employee from receiving benefits. Instead, the department did what the Gru-shus court indicated that it should do — it made a fact determination regarding misconduct. Id. At the hearing, relator testified regarding the circumstances surrounding her incarceration and sentencing under Minn.Stat. § 631.425 (2002), as well as promises allegedly made to her by Hansen. The findings of the ULJ also outline the relevant facts, including relator’s conviction and incarceration, her claim concerning the employer’s duty to call to verify her employment and the fact that the employer did not do so, and her subse*913quent discharge for absenteeism. Because there is evidence in the record to reasonably support these findings, we will not disturb them. White, 332 N.W.2d at 26.
Whether relator’s absence from work due to her incarceration constitutes employment misconduct is a question of law. See Scheunemann, 562 N.W.2d at 34 (stating that whether specific acts constitute misconduct is a question of law). In cases such as this, “[t]he critical factor is whether the employee’s behavior caused [her] failure to report to work.” Winkler v. Park Refuse Serv., Inc., 361 N.W.2d 120, 124 (Minn.App.1985). In general, absences resulting from “circumstances within the control of the employee” are misconduct. Id. We have previously held that “[ajbsence from work due to incarceration for criminal acts is misconduct sufficient to disqualify an employee from receiving unemployment compensation benefits.” Smith v. Am. Indian Chem. Dependency Diversion Project, 343 N.W.2d 43, 46 (Minn.App.1984). It is not the incarceration per se that constitutes the misconduct; rather, the misconduct is the absence from work resulting from criminal activities. Id.; cf. Grushus, 257 Minn. at 176, 100 N.W.2d at 520 (noting that it was relator’s illegal act resulting in arrest and incarceration that was the cause of his failure to accept suitable work when it was offered to him).
Relator contends that her inability to get to work was not her fault and argues that Smith is inapposite because she was “[f]or all purposes ... able to work and her confinement in the workhouse posed no obstacle to her employment.” (Emphasis added.) We disagree. Relator’s confinement did pose an obstacle to her employment. It is true that, had her employer called to verify her employment, relator would have presumably participated in the work-release program and been present for work as required. But it is also true that her employer did not call and that relator remained incarcerated and unable to attend work. As in Smith, relator did not intend to disqualify herself from receiving benefits. Nonetheless, her conduct led to her incarceration, which, in turn, caused her absence. It was this conduct that the ULJ determined to be intentional and which “displayed clearly a substantial lack of concern for [relator’s] employment.”
Relator implies that affirming the SURJ’s decision would fail to “effectuate the public policy” underlying unemployment benefits. The stated public purpose of the unemployment-insurance program is to provide benefits for “workers who are unemployed through no fault of their own.” Minn.Stat. § 268.03, subd. 1 (2004) (emphasis added). Here, it cannot be said that relator bears “no fault” for her unemployment. Although the inaction of her employer may have played a role, the fact remains that relator engaged in the behavior that led to her incarceration. Because relator’s own actions ultimately caused her failure to report for work, her absence was misconduct sufficient to disqualify her from receiving unemployment benefits. Winkler, 361 N.W.2d at 124; Smith, 343 N.W.2d at 46.
Finally, in her reply brief, relator challenges the ULJ’s conclusion that the “employer was not obligated to call and verify [relator’s] employment,” arguing that the employer’s promise to verify her employment created a duty that was then breached by the employer’s failure to follow through on that promise. Relator’s argument fails.
Citing several decisions from this court, relator suggests that an employee is entitled to unemployment benefits whenever an employee quits due to an employer’s failure to honor a promise to that employ*914ee. But the authority cited by relator is inapposite. In each of these cases, we found good cause for an employee to resign when the employer breached a promise contained in an employment agreement and “concerning the terms or conditions of employment.” Hayes v. K-Mart Corp., 665 N.W.2d 550, 553-54 (Minn.App.2003) (citing Krantz v. Loxtercamp Transp., Inc., 410 N.W.2d 24, 27 (Minn.App.1987); Baker v. Fanny Farmer Candy Shops No. 154, 394 N.W.2d 564, 566 (Minn.App.1986)), review denied (Minn. Sept. 24, 2003). Moreover, in none of these cases is there any indication of misconduct on the part of the employee.
Here, the alleged promise had nothing to do with the “terms or conditions” of relator’s employment. More importantly, the circumstances necessitating the promise resulted from relator’s own actions and, as discussed above, ultimately caused her failure to report to work. Although we cannot condone the actions of the employer, it was under no duty to call and verify relator’s employment. As the Colorado Court of Appeals stated under similar circumstances,
[w]e are unaware of any requirement that an employer participate in a work release program in order to allow employees to continue to work during periods of incarceration. Absent such a requirement, we perceive no basis to impute fault upon the employer for an employee’s separation from work caused by his incarceration.
Smith v. Indus. Claim Appeals Office of the State of Colorado, 817 P.2d 635, 636 (Colo.Ct.App.1991). Accordingly, the SURJ did not err by concluding that relator’s actions constituted misconduct disqualifying her from receiving unemployment compensation.
DECISION
Because relator’s actions led to her incarceration, which, in turn caused her failure to report to work, her absence was misconduct sufficient to disqualify her from receiving unemployment benefits. Contrary to relator’s argument, her employer was under no duty to call to verify her employment for purposes of work release under Minn.Stat. § 631.425 (2002).
Affirmed.
. Effective August 1, 2004, the statutory title of the individual conducting review proceedings under Minn.Stat. § 268.105, subd. 2 (2004), was changed to "senior unemployment review judge.” Compare Minn.Stat. § 268.105, subd. 2 (2004), with Minn.Stat. § 268.105, subd. 2 (2002) (referring to the representative of the commissioner).
. Minnesota law permits the SURJ to adopt the findings of fact and decision by the ULJ as the final findings of fact and decision of the Department of Employment and Economic Development. Minn.Stat. § 268.105, subd. 2a(a) (2004). This new procedure "applies to all decisions issued by the department on or after [August 1, 2004].” 2004 Minn. Laws ch. 183, § 71.
.Of course, when, as here, the SURJ adopts the decision of the ULJ pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 268.105, subd. 2a(a), those decisions are identical.
.The revisor's office inadvertently substituted the term ‘'ineligible for” for the term "disqualified from” in Minn.Stat. § 268.095, subds. 1, 4, 7, 8(a) (Supp.2003). See Minn. Stat. § 268.095, subds. 1, 4, 7, 8(a) (2002) (using term "disqualified from”); 2003 Minn. Laws 1st Spec. Sess. ch. 3, art. 2, § 11 (making other changes to Minn.Stat. § 268.095, subd. 1, but retaining term "disqualified from”); 2003 Minn. Laws 1st Spec. Sess. ch. 3, art. 2, § 20(j), (k) (directing revisor to change the term "disqualified from” to "ineligible for” only in Minn.Stat. § 268.095, subd. 12, and then to renumber the subsection to Minn.Stat. § 268.085, subd. 13b).
. Because the SURJ adopted the findings and determination of the ULJ, we review the ULJ's decision.
. As the supreme court recognized, there may be situations in which unemployment does not result from the employee's "fault,” such as when "an employee is illegally detained by prosecuting authorities or [when] ... he may be released without prosecution or his innocence [is] finally determined.” Gmshus, 257 Minn, at 176, 100 N.W.2d at 520.