=== CASE 9741126 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:49.92218+00 ===

T. G. Kavanagh, C. J.
The application by plaintiff-appellant for leave to appeal is considered and, in lieu of appeal, pursuant to GCR 1963, 853.2(4), this Court hereby reverses the decision of the Court of Appeals and reinstates defendant’s conviction of the crime of larceny from the person.
Defendant was charged with armed robbery1 and had a jury trial before Recorder’s Court Judge Joseph A. Gillis. Over defense counsel’s objection, the jury was instructed on the lesser included offenses of unarmed robbery2 and larceny from the *414person.8 The jury found defendant guilty of the larceny offense and a sentence of from one to ten years imprisonment was imposed. The Court of Appeals reversed the conviction, concluding that there was no evidence produced to establish the crime for which defendant was convicted, and that the jury should have returned a verdict of either guilty or not guilty of armed robbery.3
4
The complaining witness testified that during the afternoon of October 24, 1973 he and the defendant had an argument over some "paraphernalia” that had been brought into complainant’s house. Later that evening he saw defendant and two other men approaching his house. Fearful of what they were going to do, he called the police. The men went around to the back of the house and, although the victim tried to hold the door shut, the trio broke it down and forced their way in. Defendant came through the doorway second. The first man through said something to complainant and then struck him across the head with a pistol, knocking him unconscious. The complainant said that when he regained consciousness, he saw the first man counting money in his hand. After complainant ran into the living room, the first individual gave defendant the gun and picked up a cane that was in the room and struck complainant with it. The police then arrived, saw the defendant passing money to the first man, and arrested the men upon the victim’s representations that he had just been robbed of some $180 that had been in his pocket.
Defendant took the stand and testified that during the afternoon argument the complainant had hit him with the cane. When defendant told his *415older brother about the incident, his brother became furious and insisted, over defendant’s objection, on going over to the complainant’s house. Defendant maintained that he did not want to go, that he did not know his brother had a pistol, and that he did not intend nor expect that anyone would be robbed. He testified that he was still at the front of the house when the other two broke into the back. Defendant did say that he was the one who hit the complainant with the cane and explained his possession of the money by saying that the complainant voluntarily gave it to him.
I.
Defense counsel’s objection to the giving of the instruction on lesser included offenses is not controlling. It is the duty of the trial court to instruct the jury as to the law applicable to the case. MCLA 768.29; MSA 28.1052. Neither the defense nor the prosecution has the option of precluding the court from carrying out this duty in hopes of forcing an "all or nothing” verdict.
In Hanna v People, 19 Mich 316 (1869), defendant was charged with assault with intent to commit murder. Defense counsel requested the trial court to charge the jury: "That if they should find the said respondent not guilty of the offense charged in said information, they must acquit him”. The court refused this request. The prosecutor requested an instruction on the lesser offense of assault and battery, and the judge so charged. The jury found defendant "not guilty of assault with intent to kill * * * but guilty of assault and battery”.
This Court affirmed the conviction, holding that the statute allowing conviction for lesser included offenses (now MCLA 768.32; MSA 28.1055) "must *416* * * be construed as extending to all cases in which the statute has substantially, or in effect, recognized and provided for the punishment of offenses of different grades, or degrees of enormity, wherever the charge for the higher grade includes a charge for the less”. Id. at 322.
In People v Milhem, 350 Mich 497; 87 NW2d 151 (1957), defendant was charged with first degree murder. At trial, testimony was presented which could have substantiated a verdict of guilty on that charge. The trial judge also instructed the jury on second-degree murder and manslaughter, as well as justifiable and excusable homicide. Defense counsel took exception to the charge on manslaughter, claiming that no competent testimony upon which a verdict of guilty of manslaughter could be based had been presented. Defendant was convicted of manslaughter, and this Court affirmed after determining that such a verdict was supported by the evidence.
In People v Phillips, 385 Mich 30, 36-37; 187 NW2d 211 (1971), no requests to charge on lesser offenses were made by defendants Phillips and Lengyel. Defendant Lee did make such a request. Nonetheless, the trial judge instructed as to all three defendants on the lesser included offenses. This Court held:
"This was not error. Where no request to charge has been made but there is evidence during the trial which would support a conviction of a lesser offense, the trial judge may, sua sponte, instruct on the lesser offense. People v Milhem * * * . Even though the evidence for the people, if believed, shows the defendant to be guilty of the offense charged, this does not preclude a conviction of a lesser offense. People v Blanchard (1904), 136 Mich 146 [98 NW 983] * * * .”
We adopt the view expressed by the California *417Supreme Court in People v St Martin, 1 Cal 3d 524, 533; 83 Cal Rptr 166, 170; 463 P2d 390, 394 (1970):
"The requirement of instructions on lesser included offenses is based on the elementary principle that the court should instruct the jury on every material question. * * * The state has-no interest in a defendant obtaining an acquittal where he is innocent of the primary offense charged but guilty of a necessarily included offense. Nor has the state any legitimate interest in obtaining a conviction of the offense charged where the jury entertains a reasonable doubt of guilt of the charged offense but returns a verdict of guilty of that offense solely because the jury is unwilling to acquit where it is satisfied that the defendant has been guilty of wrongful conduct constituting a necessarily included offense. Likewise, a defendant has no legitimate interest in compelling the jury to adopt an all or nothing approach to the issue of guilt. Our courts are not gambling halls but forums for the discovery of truth.”
We do not say here that a trial judge must instruct sua sponte on a lesser included offense,5 but simply that he may do so if the evidence adduced at trial would warrant conviction of the lesser charge and defendant has been afforded fair notice of those lesser included offenses.6
*418There are, of course, no "fair notice” problems presented in a case such as this, where the lesser offense is one "necessarily included” within the greater. People v Ora Jones, 395 Mich 379; 236 NW2d 461 (1975).
Every defendant charged with armed robbery must necessarily be prepared to defend against the included charges of unarmed robbery and larceny from the person.
We can perceive of situations, however, where instructions on lesser included offenses categorized as "cognate” might violate a defendant’s right to be adequately apprised of the charges against which he must defend.
"As a caveat, we note that in a situation where the lesser included offense statute under which a defendant was convicted is relatively remote textually from the greater offense statute under which he was charged or where the logical connection between the statutes is not so obvious or well established, we might well hold that the lesser included offense conviction could not stand for want of proper notice in the indictment. In such a situation, our holding would depend on the precise record of the case and the terms of the specific statutes involved.” United States v Brewster, 165 US App DC 1, 14, fn 32; 506 F2d 62, 75, fn 32 (1974).
To assure defendant’s due-process rights to fair notice, the trial judge may not instruct on lesser included offenses over defendant’s objection unless the language of the charging document "be such as to give the defendant notice that he could at the same time face the lesser included offense charge”. United States v Whitaker, 144 US App DC 344, 350; 447 F2d 314, 320 (1971).7
We in no way preclude or limit the defendant *419from requesting an instruction on a cognate lesser included offense justified by the evidence adduced at trial, even where the specific language of the charging document does not mention each fact required to convict of the lesser offense.
"The defense ought not to be restricted by the stringent constitutional limits upon the prosecutor’s right. If the proof at trial would support a finding of guilt on a lesser included offense * * * , doubt as to whether the prosecutor could rightfully have requested such a charge should not bar the charge being given at the request of the defense. This gives no unfair option to the defense over the prosecution. In most cases the prosecution can foresee whether the proof is likely to develop strongly favoring a verdict on a lesser included offense, in which event the indictment should so charge, which is the prosecutor’s option.” United States v Whitaker, 144 US App DC 344, 351; 447 F2d 314, 321 (1971).
II.
When does the "evidence adduced at trial” warrant conviction of the lesser charge?
The duty of the trial court to instruct on lesser included offenses is determined by the evidence. People v Phillips, supra. While there has been little dispute over the correctness of that rule, there is much disagreement over what the rule means when applied to a particular factual situation. People v Gregory Thomas, 38 Mich App 777, 779; 197 NW2d 97, 98 (1972), states:
"The rule is that entitlement to a charge on a lesser included offense largely turns on whether, on view of the evidence favorable to the defendant, there is evidence which would justify the jury in concluding that the greater offense was not committed and a lesser included offense was committed.” (Emphasis added).
*420The emphasised language highlights the issue. The jury is the sole judge of all of the facts presented. It may choose to believe or disbelieve any or all of the evidence. That is the essence of the right to a jury trial. To speak of a requirement that the jury "justify” its conclusion that the defendant is not guilty of the higher charge before "allowing” it to convict of the lesser is antithetical to the nature of a jury trial. See People v Reed, 393 Mich 342; 224 NW2d 867 (1975).
Directed verdicts of guilt in criminal jury trials are forbidden by the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments:
"Once a plea of not guilty is entered, the defendant 'has an absolute right to a jury determination upon all essential elements of the offense. This right, emanating from the criminal defendant’s constitutional right to trial by jury, is neither depleted nor diminished by what otherwise might be considered the conclusive or compelling nature of the evidence against him * * * . [Furthermore, in a situation wherein an understandingly tendered waiver is not forthcoming from the defendant, under no circumstances may the trial court usurp this right by ruling as a matter of law on an essential element of the crime charged.’ ” People v Reed, supra at 349.
Because the jury is the sole judge of all the facts, it can choose, without any apparent logical basis, what to believe and what to disbelieve. What may appeal to the judge as "undisputed” need not be believed by a jury.
"When [defendant] exercised his constitutional right to a jury, he put the government to the burden of proving the elements of the crimes charged to a jury’s satisfaction, not to ours or to the district judge’s.” *421United States v Howard, 506 F2d 1131, 1134 (CA 2, 1974).8
Certainly no one would deny the jury’s absolute right to disbelieve all the "undisputed evidence” and acquit the defendant altogether. A "jury has the power to bring in a verdict in the teeth of both law and facts”. Horning v District of Columbia, 254 US 135, 138; 41 S Ct 53; 65 L Ed 185 (1920).
"It is the policy of the law to allow juries a latitude which is not hemmed in by absolute logic. Many considerations enter into a jury’s verdict which cannot be itemized and weighted in a chart of legal instructions. A jury is expected to stay within the bounds of reason, yet they may indulge tender mercies even to the point of acquitting the plainly guilty. Similarly they may, on almost any excuse, convict of a lower degree of crime although conviction of a higher degree is clearly warranted.” People v Clemente, 285 App Div 258, 264; 136 NYS2d 202, 207 (1954).
The judge may not instruct the jury that if it *422believes a witness’ evidence on one element it must believe that witness’ evidence as to another element, even though in the judge’s view any other finding would be inconsistent or illogical.
"The rule that a directed verdict of guilty is invalid is enforced no matter how conclusive the evidence in the case may be. While the judge in this case did not direct a verdict of guilty in form, that is the substantive effect of the instruction given. The rule against directed verdicts of guilt includes perforce situations in which the judge’s instructions fall short of directing a guilty verdict but which nevertheless have the effect of so doing by eliminating other relevant considerations if the jury finds one fact to be true. As the Supreme Court said in Bollenbach v United States, 326 US 607, 614; 66 S Ct 402, 406; 90 L Ed 350 (1946), 'the question is not whether guilt may be spelt out of a record, but whether guilt has been found by a jury according to the procedure and standards appropriate for criminal trials * * * United States v Hayward, 136 US App DC 300, 302; 420 F2d 142, 144 (1969).
The judge’s right and obligation to charge does not depend upon whether there is a conflict or rebuttal or impeachment of the people’s evidence. In determining whether to instruct on a lesser included offense, the judge should recognize the jury’s right to believe or disbelieve any or all of a witness’ testimony.
"Admitting that the jury could possibly accept the state’s evidence in part and reject it in part, it would seem that, in most cases, convicting defendant of the lesser offense while finding him not guilty of the greater would be a possibility. If this view of the jury function is taken, it becomes apparent that virtually every case will involve possible convictions on lesser offenses. So, although the only evidence in the case is presented by the state, the logical application of the doctrine of lesser offenses and of the independent evi*423dence test would require that an instruction be given. Likewise, in the case where the defense is an 'affirmative’ one such as insanity or an alibi, most states allow alternative pleas of general denial of the act. Thus, although the jury completely rejects the defense, it can still reject part of the state’s evidence and convict of a lesser offense. Even when the only evidence in the case is the testimony of one witness, the jury might theoretically convict of a lesser offense on the ground that it believes only a part of his testimony.” Comment, Jury Instructions On Lesser Included Offenses, 57 Nw U L Rev 62, 67 (1962).
The fact that the evidence would also support conviction of the greater charged offense does not preclude the giving of the lesser included offense instruction.
In determining whether the instruction should be given, the trial court should consider whether, if the defendant had been originally charged only on the lesser offense, the evidence adduced at trial would have supported a guilty verdict on that charge. If it would have, the requested instruction must be given.
"The court instructed the jury that they could find all or any of the defendants guilty of murder in the second degree or not guilty. She persisted in her refusal to give the requested instruction on manslaughter and the requested instruction on assault with intent to do great bodily harm less than murder, explaining her refusal by her analysis of the evidence. This was error for the evidence would have supported a verdict on either of these crimes.” People v Fountain, 392 Mich 395, 402; 221 NW2d 375 (1974). (Emphasis added).
In People v Ora Jones, 395 Mich 379; 236 NW2d 461 (1975), released today, we set out the definition of lesser included offenses. If the lesser offense is of the same class or category, or closely related to *424the originally charged offense, so as to provide fair notice to the defendant that he will be required to defend against it, the lesser offense is or may be included within the greater. Unarmed robbery is a lesser included offense of armed robbery. It is armed robbery absent the element of use of a weapon. If there is evidence to allow the case to go to the jury on the higher armed robbery offense, there must necessarily be evidence adduced at trial to support a charge of unarmed robbery.
If the prosecutor had initially charged defendant with larceny from the person, would the evidence produced at trial sustain a jury verdict of guilty of that charge? If it would, the instruction was properly given.
The offense of larceny from the person is defined in the statute as follows:
"Any person who shall commit the offense of larceny by stealing from the person of another shall be guilty of a felony, punishable by imprisonment in the state prison not more than 10 years.” MCLA 750.357; MSA 28.589.
Larceny from the person is "robbery” absent the element of force.
Part of the confusion concerning lesser included offenses appears to result from analysis which treats as positive elements of a crime such negative concepts as "unarmed”. Considered in the context of lesser included offenses, "unarmed” is the absence of the element of use of a weapon. It is not a distinct, separate element. Elements are, by definition, positive. A negative element of a crime is a contradiction in terms. Adding the description "unarmed” to robbery adds nothing. "Robbery” and "unarmed robbery” are the same offense.
The same analytical problem appears when con*425sidering whether larceny from the person is a lesser included offense of robbery or armed robbery. Robbery is committed only when there is larceny from the person, with the additional element of violence or intimidation. Perkins on Criminal Law (2d ed), pp 279, 281. We are committed to the view that the crime of larceny from the person embraces the taking of property in the possession and immediate presence of the victim. People v Gould, 384 Mich 71; 179 NW2d 617 (1970). If such taking be by force and threat of violence, it is robbery, and hence every robbery would necessarily include larceny from the person and every armed robbery would necessarily include both unarmed robbery and larceny from the person as lesser included offenses. "Without force” is the absence of an element in this context, it is not an additional element.
In light of the evidence adduced at trial, the jury could have believed defendant’s story that he was reluctant to return to the house and intended to rob no one, and that the initial pistol crack across complainant’s head by the brother was in retribution for the earlier cane beating defendant had suffered. They could have believed the complainant became unconscious and the men only then decided to take his money. If the money were taken from the complainant under those circumstances, the offense would be larceny from the person. MCLA 750.357; MSA 28.589.
Such a theory is supported by competent evidence and the Court of Appeals was in error in concluding otherwise. People v Gould, 384 Mich 71; 179 NW2d 617 (1970).
III.
We are aware that often both parties prefer that *426compromise verdicts be avoided. We do not deny that the possibility of compromise exists. However, as Justice Holmes noted in Dunn v United States, 284 US 390, 394; 52 S Ct 189; 76 L Ed 356 (1932): "That the verdict may have been the result of compromise, or of a mistake on the part of the jury is possible. But verdicts cannot be upset by speculation or inquiry into such matters.”
While we will not "speculate”, as an appellate court it is our responsibility to review jury verdicts to determine whether they are supported by evidence. If the evidence shows that the defendant committed a crime of lesser degree than that with which he was charged, he should be found guilty of that offense. He should not escape punishment for lack of evidence of an element not required to convict of the lesser offense. Nor should he be convicted of a higher offense because the jury recognizes that he did commit some offense. Society has a legitimate interest in the jury’s freedom to act according to the evidence.
Whenever a court instructs on lesser included offenses, it makes possible compromise verdicts.
Juries in criminal cases often find defendants not guilty or find persons who have committed the charged greater offense guilty of only a lesser offense in the face of the evidence for reasons satisfactory to them. "The very essence of the jury’s function is its role as spokesman for the community conscience in determining whether or not blame can be imposed.” United States v Dougherty, 154 US App DC 76, 105; 473 F2d 1113, 1142 (1972) (Bazelon, C. J., dissenting). The observation was made by the United States Supreme Court in Duncan v Louisiana, 391 US 145, 157; 88 S Ct 1444; 20 L Ed 2d 491 (1968) that:
"the most recent and exhaustive study of the jury *427[Kalven and Zeisel, The American Jury (1966)] in criminal cases concluded that juries do understand the evidence and come to sound conclusions in most of the cases presented to them and that when juries differ with the result at which the judge would have arrived, it is usually because they are serving some of the very purposes for which they were created and for which they are now employed.”
The fact of the jury’s "exercise of conscience” was recognized by Justice Campbell in Hamilton v People, 29 Mich 173, 189-190, 193 (1874):
"It is true that juries in criminal cases cannot properly find a conviction against their consciences. * * * '[T]t is the conscience of the jury that must pronounce the prisoner guilty or not guilty.’ ”
This exercise of power by the jury in convicting of a lesser offense than may be justified by the court’s view of the evidence is another instance of the discretion we see in the daily exercise of power by magistrates, judges, prosecutors and police officers who "divert” and "screen out” apparently guilty persons from the full strictures of the law.9
At common law, although the general concept of lesser included offenses was clearly recognized, a person accused of a felony could not be convicted of a misdemeanor.10 This was due to the fact that persons on trial for misdemeanors were granted certain procedural advantages, "such as the right to make a full defense by counsel, to have a copy of the indictment, and a special jury — rights not allowed when the charge was for a felony”. Hanna v People, 19 Mich 316, 318-319 (1869). That rule has now disappeared, *428as have those reasons for it. It is now generally held that under an indictment for a felony, conviction may be had for any lesser included offense, including a misdemeanor. Indeed in Hanna, supra, the Court upheld a jury verdict of guilty of a simple assault and battery upon an original charge of assault with intent to kill.
While the technical reasons that existed for the common law rule have disappeared, we see strong policy reasons which still support that common law qualification on the doctrine of conviction of lesser included offenses. "There would be a great difference between a conviction for manslaughter under an indictment for second degree murder, and a conviction for disturbing the peace under the same charge. Does not the policy against harassment and a continual seige of accusations and charges seem to have some application?” Comment, 57 Nw U L Rev 62,73 (1962). We answer in the affirmative.
We are convinced that the cause of justice is not well served by convicting of assault and battery a defendant charged with murder. As a matter of policy people who commit serious crimes should be punished for those offenses, and those who did not commit such serious crimes should not be tried for those crimes only to be found guilty of a much lower offense. In the example cited, if the most serious offense for which a jury feels conviction is justified is assault and battery, the original charge of murder appears to bear no realistic relationship to the offense committed, and no good purpose would be served by allowing such an instruction.
At some point, both the defendant and the prosecution should be able to prevent any further potential for "compromise”. This view
"is not consistent with the underlying principle of the lesser included offense doctrine. It is clearly not undue *429harassment of an accused to instruct on an included crime which approaches the one charged in seriousness and which is not characterized by a wide discrepancy in the severity of punishment allowed.
"In reply to the argument that the statutes permitting conviction of lesser offenses allow conviction of 'any’ lesser offense which is included in the one charged, it might be said that the legislature did not contemplate that defendants would be forced to defend against an array of charges which might technically include any number of crimes.” Id. at 73.
We are establishing a rule today, as a matter of policy, limiting the extent of compromise allowable to a jury in deciding whether to convict of a lesser included offense. In any case wherein the charged offense is punishable by incarceration for more than two years, the court, whether or not requested, may not instruct on lesser included offenses for which the maximum allowable incarceration period is one year or less.
In the case at bar, defendant was tried for armed robbery, an offense punishable by life imprisonment as a maximum.11 Over objection of defendant, the trial court instructed on two lesser offenses: unarmed robbery and larceny from the person. Unarmed robbery is punishable by a term of imprisonment not to exceed 15 years.12 Larceny from the person is punishable by imprisonment not to exceed ten years.13 Thus, these instructions were properly given, notwithstanding objections.
The opinion of the Court of Appeals is reversed, and defendant’s conviction of larceny from the person is reinstated.
Williams, Levin, and Fitzgerald, JJ., concurred with T. G. Kavanagh, C. J.
*430Ryan, J. took no part in the decision of this case.
MCLA 750.529; MSA 28.797.
MCLA 750.530; MSA 28.798.
MCLA 750.357; MSA 28.589.
60 Mich App 721; 231 NW2d 527 (1975).
In People v Henry, released today, it was held that there is no requirement that the court instruct sua sponte on lesser included offenses, with the sole exception of all first-degree murder cases, wherein an instruction must be given on second-degree murder. 395 Mich 367; 236 NW2d 489 (1975). See also, People v Jenkins, 395 Mich 440; 236 NW2d 503 (1975).
"In addition to close identity of the elements of the lesser offense to those of the greater * * * there must be sufficient notice to the defendant when the indictment charges only the greater offense, to enable him to know that he may face a charge of the lesser offense as well.” United States v Brewster, 165 US App DC 1, 13; 506 F2d 62, 74 (1974).
We intend by this no change in the law regarding amendments to an indictment or information.
In Duncan v Louisiana, 391 US 145, 156; 88 S Ct 1444; 20 L Ed 2d 491 (1968), the United States Supreme Court reaffirmed the faith that our entire Republic has in the jury as an institution:
"The framers of the constitutions strove to create an independent judiciary but insisted upon further protection against arbitrary action. Providing an accused with the right to be tried by a jury of his peers gave him an inestimable safeguard against the corrupt or overzealous prosecutor and against the compliant, biased, or eccentric judge. If the defendant preferred the common-sense judgment of a jury to the more tutored but perhaps less sympathetic reaction of the single judge, he was to have it. Beyond this, the jury trial provisions in the Federal and State Constitutions reflect a fundamental decision about the exercise of official power — a reluctance to entrust plenary powers over the life and liberty of the citizen to one judge or to a group of judges. Fear of unchecked power, so typical of our State and Federal Governments in other respects, found expression in the criminal law in this insistence upon community participation in the determination of guilt or innocence. The deep commitment of the Nation to the right of jury trial in serious criminal cases as a defense against arbitrary law enforcement qualifies for protection under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, and must therefore be respected by the States.”
Such "diversion” and "screening” are well recognized exercises of prosecutorial discretion, and the police officer on the street of any major city makes numerous decisions each week on whether or not certain individuals should ever be placed into the criminal justice system. See, e.g., Michigan Advisory Commission On Criminal Justice, Criminal Justice Standards & Goals for the State of Michigan, 59, 60, 92-95 (1974). ABA Project on Standards For Criminal Justice, Standards Relating to the Urban Police Function (1973).'
4 Wharton, Criminal Law & Procedure, § 1888 (1957).
MCLA 750.529; MSA 28.797.
MCLA 750.530; MSA 28.798.
MCLA 750.357; MSA 28.589.

=== CASE 9741127 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:49.927835+00 ===

M. S. Coleman, J.
(concurring). I concur in reversing the Court of Appeals and reinstating defendant’s conviction.
The question of whether unarmed robbery and larceny from a person are degrees of armed robbery within the meaning of MCLA 768.32; MSA 28.1055 has been troublesome, but I agree that they are "necessarily included offenses”.
MCLA 750.529; MSA 28.797 says in part:
"Any person who shall assault another, and shall feloniously rob, steal and take from his person, or in his presence, any money or other property, which may be the subject of larceny, such robber being armed with a dangerous weapon, or any article used or fashioned in a manner to lead the person so assaulted to reasonably believe it to be a dangerous weapon, shall be guilty of a felony, punishable by imprisonment in the state prison for life or for any term of years.”
It is the taking of "any money or other property, which may be the subject of larceny” which distinguishes this offense from the varieties of assault. Unarmed robbery [MCLA 750.530; MSA 28.798] uses the same language of taking but provides for an assault by one "not being armed with a dangerous weapon” (absent the element of dangerous weapon, as the majority states). MCLA 750.357; MSA 28.589 provides the penalty for those committing "the offense of larceny by stealing from the person of another” ("robbery” absent the element of force).
The trial judge gave proper instructions.
The judge is responsible for submitting the case to the jury. Although advice of counsel may be requested, the judge alone has the authority to decide what is to be submitted. Indeed, the judge may give an "all or nothing” instruction upon *431request of defense counsel (see People v Henry, 395 Mich 367; 236 NW2d 489 [1975]), but I cannot agree with Justice Lindemer that the judge must give such an instruction if so requested.
In People v Ora Jones, 395 Mich 379; 236 NW2d 461 (1975), I said the trial judge need not grant defendant’s request for an instruction on offenses only vaguely related to the initial charge or without evidentiary support. Similarly, the judge is not restricted in his charge by counsel’s demand that the jury consider only the offense charged.
Reluctantly, I agree with Justice Lindemer’s analysis of the majority’s opinion as to cutting off included offenses instructions according to penalty. I agree with him because I believe him to be right. The reluctance is born of the foreseeably lengthened "laundry list” of offenses and jurors who would be required to absorb possibly dozens of pages of instructions regarding the many offenses possible under the "cognate”, "related” or "allied” offense theory of Ora Jones.

=== CASE 9741128 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:49.931422+00 ===

Lindemer, J.
(dissenting). The majority opinion elicits my dissent.
I differ as to the propriety of the instruction on larceny from a person being given to the jury over defense counsel’s objection that "I don’t want to give the jury a chance to compromise”, and with the majority rule that "[t]he duty of the trial court to instruct on lesser included offenses is determined by the evidence. People v Phillips, [385 Mich 30; 187 NW2d 211 (1971)]”.
The majority opinion cites three Michigan cases in support of the theory that defense counsel may not direct attention solely to the offense charged or a verdict of not guilty. The first case is Hanna v People, 19 Mich 316 (1869). The language cited by *432the majority is from the statement of facts printed prior to Justice Christiancy’s opinion. The opinion then states, at 318:
"The exceptions taken on the trial raise only the question, whether under this information (which is for an offense not a felony at common law, but made so by our statute), it was competent to find the defendant guilty of a simple assault and battery?”
At that time the courts were divided on whether a verdict of guilty to a misdemeanor would lie in a trial brought on a felony charge. In discussing and resolving that issue the Court never addressed the problem of the trial court giving the objected-to instruction. In People v Milhem, 350 Mich 497; 87 NW2d 151 (1957), a trial on a charge of first degree murder, defense counsel’s objection to a charge on manslaughter was that there was no evidence to support that charge. The Court quite properly found that evidence did exist to support the charge, but it said nothing of the propriety of giving a charge on a lesser included offense over the objection of defense counsel asserting a compromise-protection purpose. Finally, in People v Phillips, supra, at 36, there was no objection by any of three codefendants and, in fact, one defendant requested the lesser included offense instructions. In short, these cases do not support the majority proposition.
The majority view is supported by language in People v St Martin, 1 Cal 3d 524; 83 Cal Rptr 166; 463 P2d 390 (1970). That discussion arose after reversal on another issue as one of the other issues that might have arisen on retrial. Further, it arises there in the context of defendant’s entitlement to a request on necessarily included offenses. Even if the language were decisional, it is not binding on this Court, and I respectfully disagree with the conclusions reached therein.
*433As has been demonstrated, the informed choice of defense counsel to restrict attention to the principal charge has not been foreclosed by the majority’s cases; neither is it prohibited by statute. MCLA 768.32; MSA 28.1055, simply speaks to the possibility that the jury may find the accused not guilty of an offense in the degree charged in the indictment while still allowing a guilty verdict of any inferior degree of such offense. It does not speak to instructions on lesser included offenses. MCLA 768.29; MSA 28.1052, says that the court shall instruct the jury as to the law applicable to the case, but does not mandate what law is applicable to the case.
In the context of our adversary system of justice, there may be times when, for an attorney to protect his client’s interests, he must insist that an "all or nothing” choice be made. To dismiss such trial strategy as gambling, as does the majority, ignores the facts of life about our present criminal justice system.
Aside from the foregoing, the majority has ventured, by way of dicta, into areas of jurisprudence not presented by this case. Its magic wand answers are to questions not asked, on issues not briefed and arguments, not made. This Court would be better advised to adopt theories which are propounded and tested below and to which the learned adversaries have directed their attention and talents. I refer specifically to the discussion of instructions on lesser included cognate offenses, to the rule cutting off lesser included offense instructions for which the maximum allowable incarceration period is one year or less when the charged offense is punishable by incarceration for more than two years, and to the policy limitation on the extent of compromise allowable.
The Court of Appeals should be affirmed.

=== CASE 9741129 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:51.603745+00 ===

J. W. Fitzgerald, J.
Defendant was jury-tried and convicted of unarmed robbery.1 Evidence introduced by the people at trial indicated that defendant, at the time 17 years of age, spent the late evening hours of August 25-26, 1971, in the company of complainant John Gregorich and others eating and drinking. In the morning defendant and complainant visited downtown Ontonagon where complainant, planning to go to Detroit to get on a freighter as a sailor, withdrew $215 from the bank. Defendant and complainant continued drinking at the home of defendant’s mother, where they were visited by two girls. After the girls departed from the home, defendant demanded complainant’s money. Complainant balked and defendant beat and kicked him. Defendant obtained complainant’s wallet but did not discover $184 which was hidden in a secret compartment in the wallet. He did, however, take from $14 to $18 which complainant had not placed in the secret compartment.
Defendant denied that he had beaten and robbed the complainant, testifying that complainant fell on several occasions, injuring himself.
*487Defendant’s conviction was affirmed by the Court of Appeals in a short memorandum opinion.2 We granted leave to appeal. 392 Mich 785 (1974).
Before this Court, defendant raises eight allegations of error, the most significant of which allege trial court error in rendering supplemental instructions to a divided jury and ineffective assistance of counsel. We find no instance of reversible error and affirm, remanding to the trial court for an evidentiary hearing respecting defendant’s allegation that Ifis conviction resulted from serious error of trial counsel.
I
Defendant assigns error in three respects concerning the trial court’s instructions to the jury.
It is first alleged that the court did not adequately instruct on the specific intent required to be guilty of unarmed robbery. Second, it is argued that the instructions on the other elements of the offense were confusing. Defense counsel made no objection to these instructions at trial. Third, it is contended that the trial court "affirmatively excluded” lesser included offenses from the jury’s consideration.
Unarmed robbery is a specific intent crime. People v McKeighan, 205 Mich 367; 171 NW 500 (1919). The instruction objected to as failing to adequately instruct on the specific intent element reads as follows:
*488"You are, therefore, advised that the essential elements of robbery unarmed are: One, that the defendant by force and violence, assault, or putting in fear — two, feloniously took any property from the person of the complainant or in his presence — and three, that the defendant was not armed with a dangerous weapon.”
Also, during the charge to the jury, the court instructed:
"In order to warrant a conviction under this statute, it must appear first that the defendant feloniously— without any claim or color of right — stole or took money or property, which may be the subject of larceny, from the person of the complaining witness or in his presence.”
The prosecution contends that the charge adequately instructed the jury on specific intent due to the use of the term "feloniously”, citing People v Gregg, 170 Mich 168; 135 NW 970 (1912), and 4 Gillespie, Michigan Criminal Law and Procedure (2d ed), §§ 2219, 2231. The instruction given is an almost verbatim reading of the suggested Gillespie instruction of "Form No. 968. Instruction On Robbery Armed”. We again must caution members of the bench and bar against using the "form instructions” of Gillespie (and indeed, any other treatise) without an independent determination of the accuracy of these suggested instructions. We do not wish to be seen as stamping our imprimatur on the instruction given. Nevertheless, our responsibility as a reviewing court is limited to determining whether a defendant received a fair trial.
The charge to the jury must be considered in its entirety, and
"[w]here the charge of the judge to which exception is taken is not strictly correct, but the court can clearly *489see that the jury could not have been misled by it, to the injury of the party excepting a new trial will not be granted for that error.” People v Scott (syllabus), 6 Mich 287 (1859).
We are not persuaded that the instruction given was so deficient as to mislead the jury or to leave them in doubt about their responsibility. People v Schwitzke, 316 Mich 182; 25 NW2d 160 (1946).
The allegation regarding the "confusing and conflicting” instruction on the elements of the offense is also without merit.
Defendant also alleges error in the failure of the court to instruct on lesser included offenses. Defendant did not request instructions on lesser included offenses. There was no reversible error. People v Henry, 395 Mich 367; 236 NW2d 489 (1975).
II
Defendant contends jurisdiction to try him was not properly in the circuit court in light of the decision of this Court in People v Fields, 388 Mich 66; 199 NW2d 217 (1972), aiFd on rehearing 391 Mich 206; 216 NW2d 51 (1974). Defendant’s argument is intricate and its suggested resolution— that jurisdiction in this case should of necessity have resided in the probate court — untenable. The facts of this case and those of Fields are distinguishable. Here defendant, a 17-year-old, was originally charged in the circuit court. In Fields defendant was under 17 years of age and the question of waiver from probate court was involved. The precise question in Fields was "whether the lack of standards in the [waiver] statute preclude a waiver proceeding”. 388 Mich 66, 75; 199 NW2d 217, 221 (1972). No such question of waiver is here involved. Jurisdiction legally resided in the circuit *490court. Const 1963, art 6, § 13; and MCLA 712A.2; MSA 27.3178(598.2). See, also, Downs, Michigan Juvenile Court; Law and Practice § 4.12.
III
Defendant complains that his counsel was not permitted to inspect the presentence report prior to sentencing as provided in GCR 1963, 785.12 (effective Sept 1, 1973).3 He asks that we remand for resentencing.
In People v Martin, 393 Mich 145; 224 NW2d 36 (1974), this Court ruled that defendants were not entitled as a matter of right to inspect the presentence report prior to the effective date of the new court rule. Defendant’s sentencing occurred prior to this date.
Reviewing this record we further note that defendant’s appellate counsel was afforded opportunity to review the presentence report at the hearing held on defendant’s motion for new trial in the court below. The record indicates that counsel reviewed the presentence report and offered no objection to the contents thereof. Remand for re-sentencing is not warranted.
IV
Defendant contends the evidence presented at trial was insufficient to permit jury determination of his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. It has been said that the question defendant raises, properly stated, "is whether the evidence was ample to warrant a finding of guilty beyond a reasonable doubt of the crime charged”. People v Williams, 368 Mich 494, 501; 118 NW2d 391 (1962), emphasis *491supplied. For explication see People v Palmer, 392 Mich 370; 220 NW2d 393 (1974), and People v Howard, 50 Mich 239; 15 NW 101 (1883), quoted therein. The testimony of complainant John Gregorich supplies ample evidence upon each element of the crime of unarmed robbery, thereby indicating the sufficiency of the evidence to sustain the verdict of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
V
Defendant argues that the following supplemental charge, given the jury after the trial court had learned that the jury was deadlocked, was coercive:
"The Court: All right. And it’s my understanding that there are some of you who are in favor of a not guilty verdict, and some of you who are in favor of a guilty verdict.
"I simply want you to understand this — that each of you, as jurors, are charged with the responsibility of attempting to arrive at a verdict. There’s nothing compulsive about your arriving at a verdict, but you should understand that, if there’s a hung jury, this case will, in all likelihood, be retried and there will be twelve citizens of Ontonagon County who will be called to sit as jurors, to hear the evidence and have this matter submitted to them. And, while I am not directing you that any of you need to change your minds from any position that you presently have, because that’s not my function — and it is your function to render a verdict which you honestly believe in. The fact is that, if we bring twelve more people in here, they’re not going to be any more intelligent or any more capable jurors than you people are, and if there is any way of resolving this matter — one way or the other — it ought to be done.
"Now, I want it understood that I am not compelling you to arrive at a verdict, but I am suggesting to you that — as reasonable people, you’ve heard the evidence, *492and you’ve heard the law as it applies to this case — if it can be resolved, it should be resolved. The inconvenience and so forth to all the parties involved in trying this case once, and retrying it a second time — If there’s no way that you can arrive at a verdict, then that’s what you should report — that you’ve got a hung verdict —a hung jury, but I would simply suggest to you that the twelve of you aren’t any different than the next twelve people that we may bring in for a jury, so that if there is any way of your resolving this, the Court is desirous of having you do so, and I would simply like to suggest that you retire to your jury deliberation room, discuss this matter, and if it’s possible for you to arrive at a verdict, fine; if it isn’t, then let us know that it’s a hung jury and we’ll call you back in here, and make the necessary disposition. But I would like you to simply understand that each of you are just as capable as the next twelve citizens of determining this issue, and I would like to have you simply consider the matter, and there is nothing compulsive about any member of the jury changing their verdict, but I do want you to do as much as you can to arrive at what you consider to be an honest verdict. If you can’t do that, why, then there will be some other disposition made. But I would like to have you go back in, and attempt to arrive at some decision. If you can’t arrive at it within a reasonable time, why, advise the Court that you can’t and we’ll have you back out here, and dispose of the matter.”
Subsequent to the rendering of the instruction the jury returned a verdict of guilty. Defendant contends that the rendering of the instruction constitutes reversible error.
This issue requires our revisitation of People v Sullivan, 392 Mich 324; 220 NW2d 441 (1974). In Sullivan, this Court thoroughly discussed the subject of supplemental Allen4 charges of the nature *493present in this case and prospectively adopted ABA jury standard 5.4 to cover the circumstance of supplemental Allen charging arising after decision in Sullivan. With respect to cases such as the present, involving the propriety of pre-Sullivan supplemental instruction, the Court by its analysis indicated that the presence or absence of coercion would be determined on a case-by-case basis. In Sullivan, the Court did not find the supplemental charge given coercive, commenting:
"Concluding from the standards generally approved by both Federal and state courts and by Michigan precedent, we cannot find the supplemental charge given herein coercive per se. Nor can we objectively say that it was applied coercively in this case or resulted in a coerced verdict. In fact, the great care insured by the trial judge and the extensive thought evidenced by the jury in asking for re-instructions as to particular verdicts produced a verdict quite appropriate to the admitted facts. The totality of this long trial based upon the state of the law at that time precludes any finding of error by the judge or deprivation of constitutional rights of the defendant.” supra, 341-342.
Reviewing the instruction rendered in this case we note that the trial court expressed concern that the individual jurors not "compulsively” abdicate individual judgment in favor of unanimity but rather bring in a verdict based upon "honest belief’ cognizant of the need for dispositional unanimity. We are convinced that, given the background of pre-Sullivan Michigan law, the instruction in this case was not so inherently coercive as to mandate reversal. Sullivan, supra. See, also, MCLA 769.26; MSA 28.1096.
VI
Defendant alleges that he was denied effective *494assistance of trial counsel. His contention is principally5 based upon the assertion that court-appointed counsel did not produce at trial a witness, Harry Thompson, whose testimony, it is argued, might have indicated that the money which defendant is charged with taking from complainant was in fact given by complainant to Thompson for the purpose of purchasing liquor. Defendant argues that Thompson’s testimony "could have corroborated the defendant’s story” — presumably supporting his denial of robbery. In other words, ineffective assistance of trial counsel may have resulted in defendant’s conviction.
As part of the record before us there is the transcript of a post-trial hearing on defendant’s motion for a new trial at which defendant’s court-appointed counsel, under questioning by defendant’s present appellate counsel, recites the facts regarding his failure to contact Harry Thompson and utilize him as a witness. The testimony of trial counsel on this record indicates that the failure to call Thompson was accomplished with defendant’s knowledgeable concurrence. Moreover, the record, while exploring the knowledge of defendant’s trial counsel respecting witness Harry Thompson, does not indicate the significance of Harry Thompson’s testimony to defendant’s cause.* ****6 In short, given the present record, we have no commodity to weigh upon the scales of justice — no capability of assessing the gravity of the asserted error of counsel.
*495The present record does not permit determination of whether trial counsel’s failure to call Harry Thompson as a defense witness is sufficient to warrant a new trial. The people point out, and we agree, that defendant must demonstrate the gravity of alleged error before appellate or other relief may be granted. Cognizant that ineffective assistance of trial counsel conceivably could have resulted in defendant’s conviction, we hesitate to lightly dismiss defendant’s contention. In our view the appropriate remedy in this instance is remand for. an evidentiary hearing in the trial court for presentation of defendant’s proofs7 and decision on whether or not there was such ineffective assistance of trial counsel as to entitle defendant to a new trial. People v Ginther, 390 Mich 436, 443-445; 212 NW2d 922 (1973); and People v Dallas Craig Brown, 393 Mich 756; 223 NW2d 293 (1974).
Affirmed and remanded to the trial court for proceedings in accordance with VI hereof. This Court does not retain jurisdiction.
T. G. Kavanagh, C. J., and Williams and Levin, JJ., concurred with Fitzgerald, J.
Lindemer and Ryan, JJ., took no part in the decision of this case.
MCLA 750.530; MSA 28.798.
The Court of Appeals dismissed all but one of defendant’s contentions upon appeal with the dispositive comment that the contentions were "without merit”. While time limitation does not permit the Court of Appeals the extensive elucidation generally obtainable in this Court, descriptive construction of decisional reasoning would not only better serve the interests of justice but would also aid this Court in its supervisory capacity. See People v Auer, 393 Mich 667, 671; 227 NW2d 528, 530 (1975).
The passage of this court rule was anticipated by People v McFarlin, 389 Mich 557; 208 NW2d 504 (1973).
The popular denomination "Allen charge” is derived from the approval of a charge of the substantive nature here treated by the United States Supreme Court in Allen v United States, 164 US 492; 17 S Ct 154; 41 L Ed 528 (1896). See Sullivan, supra, 330.
Defendant asserts that his trial counsel made other errors — failure to object to instructions, to request instruction on lesser included offenses, and to request transfer of the case to probate court — which buttress his claim that his representation by trial counsel was constitutionally defective. We do not, however, regard these asserted errors as compelling indicia of representation violative of due process, given the record before us.
Would Harry Thompson’s testimony have assisted defendant’s cause? We are unable to premise disposition upon an unsupported assumption of prejudice made by defendant after the fact of conviction.
These proofs should address the prejudice to the defense resulting from failure to present Harry Thompson as a witness and in this respect will likely require examination of witness Harry Thompson to establish the nature of his testimony. The proofs should also address the question of whether non-production of witness Thompson was reasonably attributable to defendant’s informed exercise of a client’s prerogative or to a lack of diligence and competence on the part of trial counsel.

=== CASE 9741168 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:31.699534+00 ===

Mr. JUSTICE BURMAN delivered the opinion of the court: Plaintiff, Sylvia Roberts, appeals from a summary judgment entered in favor of defendants, Arlene Dahl et al., in an action to recover damages for the infringement of a common law copyright in certain unpublished scripts for a television series on beauty hints. In addition to Miss Dahl, defendants are: American Broadcasting Companies, Inc., the broadcaster of the allegedly infringing television show; Clairol, Inc. and Clairol, a division of Bristol-Myers Co., the sponsors of the show; Foote, Cone & fielding, Inc., the advertising agency for Clairol; Ruder & Finn of Chicago, Inc., a public relations firm of which Clairol was a client; Gamut Productions, the producer of the allegedly infringing television series and Victor Morris. Plaintiff, who resides in Chicago, Illinois, alleged in her complaint that prior to March 28, 1966, she created a series of television scripts entitled “The Beauty Spot”; that the scripts were her original creation and of substantial value to her; that she never published or consented to the publication of the scripts; that prior to March 28, 1966, the defendants come into possession of the detailed contents of the scripts without the knowledge or consent of plaintiff, and that on March 28, 1966, and for approximately sixteen weeks subsequent thereto, defendants caused substantially similar scripts to be published on a nationwide television show known as “Arlene Dahl’s Beauty Spot”. Plaintiff further alleged that as a direct and proximate result of the acts of defendants, she had been deprived of her literary property, and prayed for $500,000 damages. The defendants filed answers denying plaintiff’s charges. The record reveals that plaintiff, Sylvia Roberts, is an accomplished beauty and fashion consultant, a former model and an expert in the field of cosmetics and hairstyling. She has appeared on several television shows and has traveled throughout the United States as a fashion and modeling consultant Plaintiff has been employed by various large cosmetic manufacturers, has held executive positions at the Patricia Stevens School for Models in Chicago, and has had experience in both copy-writing and script work. She testified on deposition that she studied advertising, journalism, drama and television writing at Northwestern University. Miss Roberts has been involved in the field of fashion and beauty consultation for approximately twenty years. Plaintiff stated that in 1960, she began to think about a television series involving beauty hints for women. By April, 1963, she had completed several scripts and had conceived of the idea of calling her series “The Beauty Spot.” In July, 1964, plaintiff met defendant, Victor Morris in Detroit. Morris was a frequent visitor in her home until the fall of 1965. Plaintiff testified that Victor Morris saw her scripts at least a dozen times and that she had discussed the format and outline of the show with him. In September, 1965, Morris was employed by defendant, Ruder & Finn, a public relations agency which represented defendant Clairol. In his deposition, Morris testified that he had never worked on the Clairol account. He stated that Miss Roberts told him of her idea for a television beauty show, but denied ever seeing plaintiff’s scripts or knowing where she kept them. When plaintiff asked him in 1966 if he had ever spoken to anyone at Ruder & Finn about her idea for a television series, he assured her that he had not. Defendant, Arlene Dahl, a resident of Hollywood, California, is the movie and television personality featured on the “Beauty Spot” television show broadcast on ABC-TV from March 28, 1966, to June 24, 1966. Her affidavit discloses that she has been active in the beauty consulting field for the past fifteen years and has become known as a beauty and fashion expert. Since 1954, she has written syndicated feature articles dealing with a variety of beauty tips for women. In 1960-61, Miss Dahl began began working on a book, “Always Ask a Man — The Key to Femininity,” which was published by Prentice-Hall in 1965. In 1962, she began giving beauty clinics for women in which she offered advice and counsel on beauty and fashion, using women from the audience as models. In April, 1965, Arlene Dahl conceived of the idea of a television show featuring her beauty consulting services and disclosed the idea and format to Noel Rubaloff, her agent. She and Rubaloff contacted defendant, Gamut Productions, which taped a beauty clinic given by Miss Dahl in San Francisco in June, 1965. From the tape, Gamut made five 30-minute shows which were telecast in San Francisco on station KGO-TV. From the five 30-minute shows, a single 30-minute pilot film was made. Television networks, television stations and advertising agencies were contacted. In June or July, 1965, defendant Dahl’s show was presented to Foote, Cone & Belding, an advertising agency whose clients included defendants Clairol and Clairol, a division of Bristol-Myers. Foote, Gone & Belding was not interested in the half-hour format, but was interested in a five-minute format. In December, 1965, defendant Foote, Cone & Belding bought Miss Dahl’s beauty program, comprising 65-five-minute shows. Various topics were selected from defendant’s syndicated newspaper articles and from her book. These topics were submitted to Foote, Cone & Belding, which made the final selection. The scripts were written between January and March, 1966, by the same writers Miss Dahl had used to help her write her newspaper features and her book. From March 28 through June 24, 1966, defendant’s television shows were broadcast on ABC-TV. Miss Dahl’s account of the development of her television program was substantially corroborated by the affidavits of Noel Rubaloff, her agent; Richard Gottlieb, a principal in Gamut Productions; John Owen, Vice President and Director of Broadcast for Foote, Cone & Belding; Jack Shor, Vice President and Director of Public Relations for Clairol; David Sacks, General Manager of KGO-TV, and James Shaw, a sales account executive at ABC. In her affidavit, Miss Dahl further stated that since 1946 she has used a beauty spot and lip imprint as her personal “logo” and that she first used tire name “Beauty Spot” on her syndicated feature articles in 1963. It was her idea to use the same name for the television program in order to continue her personal “logo”. She also asserted that prior to the filing of this action, she was never aware of the existence of Sylvia Roberts or of Miss Roberts’ idea for a television show. Nor was she aware of the existence of Victor Morris. She stated that her television series was conceived solely by her and developed completely independently of and without knowledge of Sylvia Roberts’ idea or scripts. She also asserted that the idea and format for the Arlene Dahl beauty show was original with her and in no way derived from either Sylvia Roberts or Victor Morris, and that the format was substantially identical to that which she had used in her beauty clinics throughout the United States. In their affidavits, Richard Gottlieb, Jack Shor, John Owen, Noel Rubaloff, David Sacks and James Shaw, each denied being aware of the existence of either Sylvia Roberts or Victor Morris, and stated that to the best of the affiant’s knowledge, the Arlene Dahl television beauty show was created and developed by Arlene Dahl independently of and without knowledge of Sylvia Roberts’ idea or scripts. Harry F. Hunter testified on deposition that he was employed by the firm of Ruder & Finn from 1957-1970 as Vice President and General Manager of the Chicago office, and that he hired Victor Morris in September of 1965 as account executive. In his affidavit, Hunter stated that Morris was under his supervision and that at no time did Morris report to anyone but him. He also asserted that Morris had never had contact with the Clairol account. He said, “in fact, the Clairol account was serviced exclusively from the New York office.” Hunter stated that prior to the filing of this lawsuit, he was unaware of the existence of Sylvia Roberts or of her idea for a television beauty series. Dee Granger testified on deposition that she was employed by the firm of Ruder & Finn from 1964-1970 as an account executive. From 1964-66, she worked on the Clairol account, including the Clairol Color Carousel, a massive promotion at the Randhurst Shopping Center. She testified that Victor Morris had driven her to the Randhurst Center in a company car because he had an account located beyond Randhurst, but she denied being aware of the existence of Sylvia Roberts or of her idea for a beauty show prior to the filing of this lawsuit. The trial court considered the entire record, including the pleadings, depositions of the respective parties, and affidavits of the defendants. In granting summary judgment to the defendants, it held, in a comprehensive memorandum opinion, that Miss Dahl had independently developed her scripts without the benefit of plaintiff’s ideas or scripts. Furthermore, the court found that Miss Dahl and the persons who assisted her did not have access to plaintiff’s scripts, and that there was no evidence that Victor Morris had disclosed the contents of plaintiff’s scripts to anyone involved in developing Arlene Dahl’s television series. The court went on to say that, “Where, as here, there is clear evidence of independent development’ and no ‘access’, summary judgment must be granted.” Although the court noted that because of the foregoing conclusions, any discussion of the similarities between the two sets of scripts was moot, it asserted that a side-by-side comparison of plaintiffs scripts with those of defendant, revealed that much of what was common was either old and therefore in the public domain or was the subject of Miss Dahl’s proprietary rights in her own published works. Specifically, the court found that nearly all the similar language could be found in Miss Dahl’s book, “Always Ask a Man — The Key to Femininity,” which was published before Victor Morris was employed at Ruder & Finn; that Miss Dahl had written syndicated newspaper articles on the identical subjects covered in plaintiffs scripts long before plaintiff claims she authored her scripts, and that much of the language in plaintiffs scripts was part of the routine phraseology used in the beauty consulting field. Plaintiff contends that summary judgment was improperly entered in this case because there are issues of material fact which should have been determined by a jury. She argues that whether the two sets of scripts are substantially similar, whether defendants had access to plaintiff’s work and whether defendants copied from plaintiff, are issues of fact. Defendants counter that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that they are therefore entitled to judgment as a matter of law. They contend that no amount of similarity between two literary works can give rise to an inference of copying when the undisputed facts show that the allegedly appropriated material was independently developed. Defendants claim further that plaintiffs access argument is based on unsupported speculation and that there is no evidence that the similarities in the scripts are the result of anything other than the nature of the subject matter of Miss Dahl’s use of her own earlier published materials. The record establishes that plaintiff did have a common law copyright in her scripts since she had not published them or consented to their publication. For proposes of their motion for summary judgment, defendants did not contest plaintiff’s ownership of the scripts. Illinois courts have not been the forum for extensive copyright litigation. Plaintiff’s counsel states that he is unaware of an Illinois case which disposes of the precise questions before us on this appeal, other than those dealing in general with the propriety of summary judgment. Both parties have cited numerous opinions on the subject of copyrights from other jurisdictions.  Plaintiff recognizes that the basic legal proposition which she must establish in order to sustain her action for common law copyright infringement is proof of copying by defendants. She argues that copying is often impossible to establish directly. Therefore, the cases have established the rule that an inference of copying arises upon the showing of a substantial similarity between the two works and access to plaintiff’s work by tire defendants. Where there is strong evidence of substantial similarity, a lesser showing of access will suffice. Conversely, if the evidence of access is weak, stronger proof of substantial similarity will be required. Moreover, access can, in some cases, be inferred from substantial similarities. Arnstein v. Porter, 154 F.2d 464; Christie v. Harris, et al., 47 F.Supp. 39, aff’d. 154 F.2d 827; cert. den. 329 U.S. 734; Golding v. RKO Pictures, 221 P.2d 95; Kovacs v Mutual Broadcasting System, 221 P.2d 108.  In the field of common law copyright, however, the concept of copying coexists with a related legal concept known as independent development. As stated by Judge Learned Hand in Fred Fisher, Inc. v. Dillingham, 298 F. 145, 147. "* * * the law imposes no prohibition upon those who, without copying, independently arrive at the precise combination of words or notes which have been copyrighted.” The record reveals that Arlene Dahl’s use of a beauty spot and lip imprint as her personal logo, the publication of her newspaper articles, the initial work on her book, and her beauty clinic activities all took place long before any personal relationship developed between plaintiff and Victor Morris. Moreover, Miss Dahl had conceived the disclosed her idea and format for a television program, the five 30-minute tapes were broadcast on KGO-TV and the Arlene Dahl beauty show concept was presented to Foote, Cone & Belding before Morris was employed by Ruder & Finn.  As stated in O’Rourke v. RKO Radio Pictures, 44 F.Supp. 480, 482, * * even an exact counterpart of another’s work does not constitute plagiarism, providing that such counterpart was arrived at independently and without in fact resorting to the other’s work.” In the instant case, the uncontradicted affidavits of the defendants establish that the Arlene Dahl television beauty program was developed independently and without knowledge of plaintiff’s work. Thus, even if plaintiff on defendants’ motion for summary judgment presented sufficient evidence of similarity and access to raise an inference of copying, that inference was necessarily dispelled by defendants’ uncontradicted evidence of independent development. (Teich v. General Mills, Inc., 339 P.2d 627.) Where a defendant interposes an absolute defense involving no triable issue of fact, the court may enter summary judgment in his favor. Rock Finance Co. v. Central Nat. Bank, 339 Ill.App.319, 89 N.E.2d 828.  We agree with the court below, however, that the evidence of similarity and access presented by plaintiff was insufficient to raise an inference of copying. On the matter of access, it is uncontested that plaintiff informed Victor Morris of her idea and scripts for a television show on beauty counseling. Plaintiff contends that Victor Morris, as an employee of Ruder & Finn, initiated a chain which eventually led to the disclosure of her idea and the contents of her scripts to Arlene Dahl. As the trial court pointed out, however, there is no evidence that Morris disclosed or communicated his knowledge of plaintiff’s idea and scripts to anyone. Plaintiff stated on deposition that Arlene Dahl came into possession of the detailed contents of her scripts, but when pressed to be more specific, she admitted that she did not know when, under what circumstances, or to whom Morris had disclosed this information. When asked if she had any tangible evidence that Morris had transmitted the contents of her scripts to Arlene Dahl, plaintiff replied, “The scripts themselves/’Conversely, those individuals responsible for writing and producing the Arlene Dahl scripts all stated on affidavit that they had no knowledge of Victor Morris or plaintiff, or of plaintiff’s idea or scripts for a television beauty program.  It is well established that the courts will not engage in speculation or conjecture in order to make a finding of access. (Alexander v. Irving Trust Co., 132 F.Supp. 364, affd. 228 F.2d 221; Sarkadi v. Wiman, 43 F.Supp. 778, affd. 135 F.2d 1002.) Moreover, the courts have refused to find access where, as here, the uncontroverted evidence of the persons directly involved in the preparation of defendant’s work was that they had never seen or heard of plaintiff’s scripts. (Lapsley v. American Institute of Certified Public Account., 246 F.Supp. 389; Columbia Pictures Corporation v. Krasna, 65 N.Y.S.2d 67.) Thus in Lapsley, Judge Sirica, granting defendant’s motion for a directed verdict on the ground that no evidence of access had been presented, noted, “As indicated earlier, the defendant corporation had access to the plaintiff’s manual when it was submitted to its employee, Mr. Hickey. However, the plaintiff has introduced no evidence tending to show that the persons directly involved in the preparation of the defendant’s publications had ever seen or heard of the plaintiff’s manuscript. In fact, the persons who wrote the defendant’s publications testified that they had neither seen nor heard of the plaintiff’s material until after they had completed their assignments for the defendant.” 246 F.Supp. 389, 390. In Jacobs v. Hill, 26 Cal.Rptr. 591, plaintiff brought an action for damages for infringement of her common law copyright in a literary composition. Defendants filed a motion for summary judgment on the grounds “(1) that as a matter of law there is no similarity between plaintiff’s manuscript and anything in the alleged infringing production, (2) that none of the defendants, except Medford [a literary agent], had access to the manuscript and that Medford had nothing to do with the creation of the alleged infringing production; and, therefore, there is no triable issue of fact and the action has no merit.” 26 Cal. Rptr. 591, 592. The Appellate Court, affirming the trial court’s entry of summary judgment for defendants, stated, “Plaintiff has not contradicted the statements of Catto [author of the alleged infringing script] or Medford regarding non-access to the manuscript, and has not shown by affidavit or deposition that there was a triable issue as to access.” 26 Cal. Rptr. 591, 593.  Plaintiff stresses that proof of substantial similarities can in some cases give rise to an inference of access. (Kovacs v. Mutual Broadcasting System, 221 P.2d 108.) She has presented to this court a side-by-side comparison of both sets of scripts in an effort to show substantial similarities. We have also been presented by defendants with a side-by-side comparison of Arlene Dahl’s scripts with her book entitled “Always Ask A Man — The Key to Femininity,” which was published in May, 1965. We find virtually all of the similar language relied on by plaintiff can be found in Miss Dahl’s book. In addition, Miss Dahl had been writing syndicated newspaper articles on the identical subjects covered in plaintiff’s scripts long before plaintiff claims she authored her scripts. Moreover, certain descriptive words claimed by plaintiff to be original are but the routine phrases commonly used in the beauty consulting field. The inference of copying does not exist “where the similarity between the two works arises because of the nature of the subject matter and the fact that both authors used materials available to all.” Greenbie v. Noble, 151 F.Supp. 45, 68.  Plaintiff claims that substantial similarity is a fact issue which cannot be decided as a matter of law. (Kovacs v. Mutual Broadcasting System, 221 P.2d 108; Golding v. RKO Pictures, Inc., 221 P.2d 95; Stanley v. Columbia Broadcasting System, 221 P.2d 73.) Plaintiff fails to note, however, that in Weitzenkorn v. Lesser, 256 P.2d 947, the Supreme Court of Californial specifically considered the Kovacs, Golding and Stanley decisions, and determined that the question of similarity could be dealt with as a matter of law. There the court stated, “# * * whether there is any question to present to the trier of fact is, in the first instance, a question of law. # # # Having both productions before it * * *, the court may determine whether there is substantial similarity between them. If, as a matter of law, there is no such similarity, no question of fact is in issue and the demurrers to each count of the complaint were properly sustained.” 256 P.2d 947, 956-7. Similarly, in Gethers v. Blatty, 283 F.Supp. 303, Judge Whelan granted defendants’ motion for summary judgment, stating, “The issue before the Court on such motion is: is there substantial similarity between plaintiff’s play and Blatty’s novel? This Court answers the question in the negative; thus as a matter of law defendants are entitled to summary judgment.” 283 F.Supp. 303, 305. Plaintiff in the instant case neither filed supporting affidavits nor took depositions of witnesses she believed could refute the defense of independent development.  She filed no affidavits to support her allegation that Mr. Morris disclosed the contents of her scripts to any of the defendants. She filed no affidavits of persons who could even substantiate the existence of her unpublished scripts. Thus there is simply nothing of record that could be considered to link plaintiffs disclosure to her friend, Mr. Morris, with any of the persons actually responsible for the creation, writing and production of Arlene Dahl’s scripts. As stated in Pefferle v. Prairie Mills, Inc., 72 Ill.App.2d 440, 443, 218 N.E.2d 247, 249, ‘Where the movant in support of his motion [for summary judgment] supplies facts which, if uncontradicted, entitles [sic] him to judgment, the opposing party cannot rely alone on his complaint or answer even though the complaint and answer standing alone do present a genuine issue of a material fact.” We reject plaintiff’s contention that the Circuit Court erred in accepting the truth of defendants’ affidavits. Plaintiff argues that since each affiant was substantially interested in the outcome of this litigation, the credibility of each was a question of fact which should have been submitted to a jury. Plaintiff, however, did not seek to challenge the credibility of the defendants’ witnesses although there was ample time to do so. Her argument, if accepted, would mean that the summary judgment procedure in Illinois could only be used when the moving party relied solely on documentary evidence. This theory, however ignores Supreme Court Rule 191, ch. 110A, Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, par. 191, which prescribes standards for affidavits in summary judgment proceedings.  The right to summary judgment is established by statute to enable the court to dispose of a case in a speedy and inexpensive manner when there is no genuine issue of material fact to be resolved, (ch. 110, Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, par. 57.) Of course it is error to deny a trial when there remains a genuine dispute as to a material fact, but it is likewise error to postpone judgment when the ultimate legal result is clear. For the reasons stated in the opinion, we find that there was no genuine issue of material fact in the case at bar. Therefore, the trial court properly sustained defendants’ motion for summary judgment. Judgment affirmed. ADESKO, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9741169 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:31.705544+00 ===

Mr. PRESIDING JUSTICE DIERINGER dissenting: I respectfully dissent to the holding affirming summary judgment in favor of the defendants. I believe the impact of the majority opinion will foreclose the right to trial by jury in copyright cases. In conjunction with the facts mentioned in the majority opinion, the following are pertinent. Miss Roberts’ television scripts for the five minute segments were completed prior to April, 1963, at which time a pilot television tape of these segments was made. For the purposes of this appeal, defendants have admitted that Miss Roberts’ scripts were original and were authored and owned by Miss Roberts. Also, there is no dispute concerning the contents of the plaintiff’s scripts. Miss Roberts’ scripts for these segments were about one page of single space type, each containing dialogue, camera directions, theme song choice, opening logo, and time allotment. There were six scripts. Miss Roberts testified on deposition that she kept her scripts in a white cabinet in her apartment. Defendant Victor Morris became acquainted with Miss Roberts in 1964 and thereafter became a regular visitor to her home. Admittedly, he had regular access to the plaintiff’s apartment, both when the plaintiff was home as well as when she was not. Miss Roberts testified that Morris saw her working on her scripts from time to time and actually viewed tire scripts themselves. Morris admitted having discussed the idea for the TV show with the plaintiff, and that he knew of the pilot tape of her series. In August of 1965, Morris, who had previously been active in advertising and public relations, secured employed with the Chicago office of Ruder & Finn, which represented the Clairol account in Chicago. A regular working relationship existed between the defendant Clairol and the Chicago office of Ruder & Finn, whose chief executive assigned to the Clairol account was in New York. Ruder & Finn’s Chicago office directed numerous Clairol activities, including “a rather massive promotion” during the summer of 1966. Tire Ruder & Finn account executive in charge of the Chicago based Clairol promotion had direct contact with the Clairol Account Supervision in New York as well as direct personal contract with the defendant Morris, who also on occasion traveled to New York on business for Ruder & Finn. The head of Ruder & Finn also admitted that the Clairol account was frequently serviced out of the Chicago office. Morris admits this in his deposition and says he went to work for Ruder & Finn in September 1965. He said he knew about plaintiffs script and the taping of the show in Milwaukee, but denied telling anyone in his organization about it. How many other people he knows in the advertising field or in show business or if he talked to them is not disclosed. Turning now to Miss Dahl’s works. In April, 1965 (two years after Miss Roberts’ segments had been completed), Miss Dahl conceived of a television show featuring her beauty consulting services. Miss Dahl taped five 30-minute shows, which were later discarded. In December of 1965 (four months after Morris joined Ruder & Finn), the 5-minute format was selected by the New York advertising firm of Foote, Cone & fielding, for use on behalf of their client, the defendant Clairol. It is also noteworthy that Ruder & Finn was the public relations firm for Foote, Cone & fielding and that there was considerable contact between personnel of the two firms. The scripts for Miss Dahl’s 5-minute segments were written during January-March, 1966, by the same writers who had helped Miss Dahl write her book (published in 1965) entitled “Always Ask A Man — The Key To Femininity.” The majority opinion refers to Arlene Dahl’s scripts with her book published in May, 1965, and says the language is similar. This applies to the general ordinary language, but does not explain the ten verbatim quotes from the plaintiffs script which appear in the Dahl script as follows: “1. Is your face your fortune? 2. The darker shade should never be * * *. 3. You apply the darker foundation * * *. 4. So there is no line of demarcation. 5. Remember * # *. No matter how busy you are, take time for beauty, (repeated at the close of each script) 6. Bed time. 7. * * * The boudoir. 8. * * # It’s really your fault if your husband 9. Today we are going to concentrate on eyes 10. We are going to apply an eyeliner.” Every word in every sentence appears in exactly the same form in defendants’ script and can hardly be called accidental or a coincidence. Furthermore, there are 43 instances of similar sentences of clauses appearing in plaintiff’s script that also appear in defendants’ script. In addition, the similarities of format must be noted as follows: TIME: Both shows are 5 minutes in length OPENING BILLBOARD: Both shows open with camera closeup of “Beauty Spot” logo OPENING SHOT: Both shows open with short introduction by star (Miss Roberts or Miss Dahl) followed by a commercial. BODY OF SHOW: Both shows have a body of dialog of about 3Vz minutes MUSIC: Both shows end with the same theme song. FINAL REMARK: Both shows are ended with the identical remark made by the stars, “Remember ladies, no matter how busy you are, take time for beauty.” TIME SLOT: Both shows were to be programmed for a mid-day audience, to be presented 5 days a week. Defendants’ show was actually aired at 11:55 A.M. Again, this format appearing in plaintiff’s work, later is used on defendants’ show. A comparison between the six one-page scripts of Miss Roberts with the scripts of Miss Dahl reveals astonishing similarity. The plaintiff has demonstrated fifty-three separate examples of either identical or substantially identical excerpts. When we consider that these fifty-three examples of identical or substantially identical language occur in as few as six pages of script, one is inescapably led to the conclusion that there could be a closer connection than mere coincidence and customary phraseology within the industry. In addition to identical words and phraseology, the scripts appear similar in exact continuity, sequence of thought and presentation. This even includes the same opening logo, the same closing remarks and the same theme song. Although defendants argue that some of the language contained in Miss Dahl’s scripts is also contained in her book (which was written, in part, by the same writers who collaborated in Miss Dahl’s television scripts and was published after Miss Roberts’ scripts were written) tire argument is not convincing. For one example, it does not explain where (if not from Miss Roberts’ scripts) Miss Dahl obtained the “key phrase,” used at the end of each of Miss Dahl’s segments: “In the meantime, remember no matter how busy you are, take time for beauty.” This “key phrase” admittedly does not appear in Miss Dahl’s books or other works. This “key phrase” does appear in Miss Roberts’ scripts, written some two years before Miss Dahl’s. Neither does it explain that concurrent with defendants’ change from a half-hour show to a five-minute segment there was a title change from “Let’s Be Beautiful” to “Beauty Spot.” This is the title of Miss Roberts’ originally conceived five-minute show. Nor does it explain that this significant change took place after Morris’ association with Ruder & Finn. Bearing in mind that Miss Dahl’s book was copyrighted in 1965, two years after Miss Roberts’ TV scripts, the book would not support defendants’ claim to originality. Miss Dahl’s book consists of 209 pages, each page having approximately 35 to 40 lines of print. It would be strange indeed, considering the mass of verbiage, if some of the language did not appear in the book. On the other hand, the numerous and striking similarities (not only in language and syntax, but in order and treatment of ideas and sequence and manner of expression as well) between Miss Roberts’ six one-page scripts and Miss Dahl’s scripts, casts extreme doubt if not impossibility upon defendants’ claim that the similarities arise by coincidence or independent creation. Defendants argue vehemently that plaintiff has not shown their access to the Roberts’ scripts. However, in so arguing, they overlook Morris’ admitted access to them as well as his relationship to the other defendants. A jury would be entirely justified in finding that defendants, and each of them, had access to the contents of the scripts through Morris, who was employed by the public relations firm of Clairol, whose product Miss Dahl was advertising. The jury would not be required to believe the self-serving and subjective denials of knowledge of defendants and their agents. Turning now to the applicable law. Summary judgment can be entered only when there is no genuine issue as to any material fact. It should not be entered where to do so would require the trial judge to decide controverted questions of fact. Borgeson v. Fairhaven Christian Home (1971), 1 Ill.App.3d 323; Giampa v. Sunbeam Corp. (1966), 68 Ill.App.2d 425. In determining the right to summary judgment, all doubts must be resolved against the moving party. (Breen v. Peck (1958), 28 N.J. 351, 146 A.2d 665.) The burden of proof is on the moving party. (Monmouth Lumber Co. v. Indemnity Ins. Co. of N. America (1956), 21 N.J. 439, 122 A.2d 604.) There is no burden on the plaintiff, upon a motion for summary judgment by the defendant, to establish his entire case by depositions and affidavits. (Champlin v. Oklahoma Furniture Mfg. Co. (1959), 269 F.2d 918 (10th Cir.).) The purpose of summary judgment procedure is not to try an issue of fact, but rather to determine whether there is an issue of fact. Moroni v. Gulf, Mobile and Ohio R.R. Co. (1967), 86 Ill.App.2d 426; Frick v. O’Hare-Chicago Corp. (1966), 70 Ill.App.2d 303. The majority opinion says the defendants’ affidavits are uncontradicted. All they do is deny the allegations in the complaint and the plaintiff is not required to deny a denial to create an issue of fact. The majority opinion also says the plaintiff’s argument that the credibility of each affiant is a jury question ignores Supreme Court Rule 191. That statement, in my opinion, is incorrect. The rule states: “Affidavits shall not consist of conclusions, but of facts admissible in evidence.” The affidavits were self-serving and as to those parts relating to affiants’ coworkers was hearsay. How much are facts that are admissible in evidence is decided at the trial by the trial judge when the testimony is offered. The credibility of the witness is determined by the jury, after cross-examination. The affiants are interested parties; therefore the plaintiff has the right to have their credibility judged by a jury. In Sartor, et al. v. Arkansas Natural Gas Corporation (1944), 321 U.S. 620, the United States Supreme Court said: “It may well be that the weight of the evidence would be found on trial to be with defendant. But it may not withdraw these witnesses from cross-examination, the best method yet devised for testing trustworthiness of testimony. And their credibility and the weight to be given to their opinions is to be determined, after trial, in the regular manner.” Recently the Illinois Appellate Court, in State Farm Mutual Auto. Ins. Co. v. Short (1970), 125 Ill.App.2d 97, in reversing a summary judgment, discussed the principles involved and the use of supporting affidavits. On page 106, the court said: “A judge may not, on a motion for summary judgment, draw fact inferences. Such inferences may be drawn only on a trial. Cross v. United States, 336 F.2d 431, 433; Empire Electronics Co. v. United States, 311 F.2d 175, 180.” On page 107, the court said: “Clearly these affidavits are admissible to impeach Loren’s testimony and the question of Loren’s credibility is raised. Under these circumstances summary judgment is inappropriate. Cross v. United States, supra, Arnstein v. Porter, 154 F.2d 464. Courts cannot overestimate the importance of having the witness examined and cross-examined before the court and jury.” On page 108, the court also said: “The right of the moving party to summary judgment must be free from doubt. Miller v. Owens-Illinois Glass Co., 48 Ill.App.2d 412, 199 N.E.2d 300. The affidavits filed in support of a motion for summary judgment will be strictly construed and must leave no question of the movant’s right to judgment, but the affidavits filed in opposition thereto will be liberally construed. Tansey v. Robinson, 24 Ill.App.2d 227, 164 N.E.2d 272.” In my opinion, summary judgment should not be granted in favor of the defendants because, to say the least, factual issues are present in regard to the following elements of the case, among others: substantial similarity between the scripts of plaintiff and defendants; defendants’ access to plaintiff’s scripts; credibility of witnesses and defendants’ alleged independent development. Copying is often impossible to establish directly. It would be absurd to hold, as a prerequisite to recovery, that a plaintiff must produce a witness who actually saw the very act of defendants’ copying or require an admission from defendants that they copied the work. To require by affidavit a denial of a denial would be equally absurd. The plaintiff has a right to prove her allegations by circumstantial evidence. There is no question circumstantial evidence is competent evidence in that circumstantial evidence, like any evidence, depends on its tendency to prove an ultimate fact in issue. (Ladd v. Ruck (1969), 108 Ill,App.2d 379.) Where there is no eyewitness, a fact in issue may be proved by circumstantial evidence; such evidence consists of proof of facts and circumstances from which the court may infer other connected facts which usually and reasonably follow. (Golden v. Big Bear Foods, Inc. (1968), 102 Ill.App.2d 237.) In a summary judgment proceeding it is not the function of the motion judge to weigh the evidence as was done in the instant case, and is being concurred in by the majority opinion here. The common law copyright cases have established that an inference of copying can be established by a showing of substantial similarity and access (both of which plaintiff had demonstrated). Going even further, the cases hold that, in some situations, access itself can be inferred from substantial similarities. Christie v. Harris (1942), 47 F.Supp. 39, aff'd. 154 F.2d 827, cert. den., 329 U.S. 734; Arnstein v. Porter (2d Cir., 1946), 154 F.2d 464; Golding v. RKO Pictures (1950), 35 Cal.2d 690, 221 P.2d 95; Kovacs v. Mutual Broadcasting System (1950), 99 Cal. App.2d 56, 221 P.2d 108. The point is demonstrated in Kovacs v. Mutual Broadcasting System, 221 P.2d 108, as follows: “There was no direct evidence of access. Defendants denied access and copying. Access may, however, be proved indirectly. A charge of piracy does not fail merely because the infringer was not caught in the act of copying. Access may be inferred from the surrounding circumstances or it may be found from similarities in the plan, arrangement, and combination of the materials, or from the identity of phraseology or from other evidentiary facts. Ball, Law of Copyright and Literary Property, 601, Section 263; Wilkie v. Santly Bros., 2d Cir., 91 F.2d 978, 979; Dam v. Kirk LaShelle Co., 2d Cir., 175 F. 902, 907, 41 L.R.A.N.S. 1002, 20 Ann. Cas. 1173; Christie v. Harris, D.C.N.Y., 47 F.Supp. 39, 40; Simonton v. Gordon, D.C.N.Y. 12 F.2d 116, 123. In Wilkie v. Santly Bros., supra 2d Cir., 91 F.2d 978, although there was no direct evidence of access, it was held that access could be inferred, the court saying 91 F.2d at page 979: ‘Where similarities or identities are relied upon they must do more than engender a suspicion of piracy; they must establish piracy with reasonable certainty. There was some evidence here of the possibility of physical access by the appellants; the court below did not so find. But the charge of infringement does not fail merely because the infringer is not caught in the act, for access may be inferred or found circumstantially from the plan, the arrangement, and the combination of materials contained in the composition. Edwards & Deutsch Lithographing Co. v. Boorman (7th Cir.) 15 F.2d 35, certiorari denied 273 U.S. 738, 47 S.Ct. 247, 71 L.Ed. 867 * * *. Internal proof of access may rest in an identity of words or in the parallel character of incidents or in a striking similarity which passes the bounds of mere accident. General Drafting Co. v. Andrews (2d Cir.) 37 F.2d 54; W. H. Anderson Co. v. Baldwin Law Publishing Co. (6 Cir.) 27 F.2d 82; Simonton v. Gordon, D.C.S.D. N.Y., 12 F.2d 116.” Also see Arnstein v. Porter, 154 F.2d 464. Such similarity exists in this case. Defendants’ defense of independent development is, at most, an issue of fact to be determined upon a proper trial of this cause. Considering the striking similarities between plaintiff's admittedly original scripts and defendants’ scripts, at this point the defense would appear doubtful at best. But this dissent could not make this factual determination at this stage. However, to the contrary, the motion judge below and the majority here give complete credence to the defense of independent development. Independent development is a proper defense only where there is little or no similarity in the contested literary product. (Weitzenkorn v. Lesser (Supreme Ct. Calif. 1953), 256 P.2d 947; Kovacs v. Mutual Broadcasting System, 221 P.2d 108; Jacobs v. Hill (1962), 26 Cal. Rept. 591.) The majority here says the plaintiff’s evidence of similarity was insufficient. However, in a motion for summary judgment we are not to test the sufficiency of the evidence. Ruby v. Wayman (1968), 99 Ill.App.2d 146; Lumbermans Mutual Casualty Co. v. Poths (1968), 104 Ill.App.2d 80. Defendants take the position that their admittedly self-serving affidavits denying knowledge of the plaintiff’s scripts prove beyond all doubt that Miss Dahl’s scripts were the product of independent development. This argument overlooks the admitted knowledge of the defendant Morris and his close relationship with other defendants. It overlooks the obvious fact that most of defendants’ affidavits were made by persons who had not taken part in the actual writing of the defendants’ scripts and therefore they would not necessarily know from whence came the material for the Dahl scripts. Granting Miss Dahl has been active in the beauty consulting field for the past fifteen years and that she has become known as a beauty and fashion expert, and that since 1954 she has written syndicated feature articles dealing with beauty tips for women, Miss Dahl has admitted that the television scripts in question were written in collaboration with other writers. It is entirely possible that Miss Dahl knew nothing of the Roberts’ scripts; nevertheless, the Roberts’ scripts might still have been used in the creation of the Dahl scripts. In the case of Weitzenkorn v. Lesser, 256 P.2d 947, upon which both plaintiff and defendants rely, the court stated: “Having both productions before it * * * the court may determine whether there is substantial similarity between them. If, as a matter of law, there is no such similarity, no question of fact is in issue and the demurrers to each count of the complaint were properly sustained. But if, from a comparison of the two productions, such similarity reasonably might be found, that issue, and also the question as to copying, should have been submitted to the jury for determination.” 256 P.2d at 957. The motion judge wrote a lengthy opinion in which he weighed the “evidence” as if there had been a trial. For example, he writes: “Plaintiff has developed no evidence to the contrary,” and also says: “Furthermore, plaintiff has not established that Victor Morris disclosed her idea or her scripts for a television show on beauty to anyone,” thus applying the Pedrick standards for a directed verdict. He was not sitting as a trial judge who heard the case and could look at the “evidence,” but only as a motion judge to consider whether there were facts alleged and denied to join the issue for a jury to decide. He further wrote in his opinion: “Thus the fact that Victor Morris had access to plaintiff’s scripts and worked for the public relations firm of Ruder and Finn, who had a client named Clairol, is not determinative of the access question.” This is an issue to be decided by a jury. The defendants admit in their brief that Morris had access to plaintiff’s scripts. In the majority opinion is cited the case of Lapsley v. American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (1965), 246 F.Supp. 389, where the judge granted a motion for directed verdict on the ground that no evidence of access had been presented. A directed verdict is not in point in the instant case; however, that is what the motion judge did. In the instant case, substantial similarity exists. Under the facts present here (notwithstanding defendants’ denial) a jury should determine whether or not the plaintiff’s scripts were copied. The trial judge erroneously weighed the evidence in rendering his opinion. I would reverse the summary judgment entered by the trial court and remand the cause for trial.

=== CASE 9742804 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:20:43.105071+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE COUSINS, dissenting: I dissent. In the case sub judice, the verified complaint for injunction and imposition of trust filed by State Farm Insurance Co., as subrogee of Vito DeFrancesco, against Nancy Stewart alleges inter alia: "At the time of the execution of the real estate contract, Stewart paid $6,000.00 as a down payment and DeFrancesco transferred possession of the property in accordance with the terms of the contract. On or about May 11, 1990, the apartment building located at 5125 West Cermak Road, Cicero, Illinois, was destroyed in a fire. At the time of the fire, and to the present time, the balance owed by Stewart pursuant to the terms of the real estate contract was $69,000. Stewart further agreed to assume an alleged loan to a third-party named Billy Eaton. Pursuant to the Conditions and Stipulations in paragraph 4 of the contract, risk of loss by fire is determined according to the provisions of the Uniform Vendor and Purchaser Risk Act [(111. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 29, par. 8.1). Section 1(b)] of the Act provides as follows: (b) If, when either the legal title or the possession of the subject matter of the contract has been transferred, all or any part thereof is destroyed without fault of the vender or is taken by eminent domain, the purchaser is not thereby relieved from a duty to pay the price, nor is he entitled to recover any portion thereof that he has paid ***.” The deposition of Stewart included the following testimony regarding the contract: "Q. What was the sale price of the building? * * * A. Seventy-five thousand. Q. And what specifically did you discuss in any of these conversations in December of 1989 or January of 1990 regarding the nature of the sale that would be completed? A. Well, we discussed that the building in its current condition, that I wouldn’t be able to get a loan, so we wouldn’t make the sale contingent on a mortgage, that he would sell me the building, I would repair it, and then I would get a loan on it and I would pay him the money. Q. Were there any time parameters set for you doing that? A. That I would apply for the loan in three months. That was the only frame. Q. Did you and Mr. DeFrancesco ever discuss when the balance of the purchase price would be paid? A. Yes. Q. What was said about that? A. It was to be paid when I got the loan that I applied for within the three months.” On the same date the property was destroyed by fire, Stewart obtained financing in the sum of $80,000. Stewart subsequently received $130,000 for the fire loss from Hartford Insurance Company of Illinois. DeFrancesco also insured the property in question. He was the named insured with State Farm General Insurance Co. with liability limits of $79,000 covering the premises. The policy covered the period beginning July 10, 1989, and ending July 10, 1990. The policy contained the following subrogation clause: "7. Subrogation. a. In the event of any payment under this policy, the Company shall be subrogated to all the insured’s rights of recovery against any person or organization and the insured shall execute and deliver instruments and papers and do whatever else is necessary to secure such rights. The insured shall do nothing after loss to prejudice such rights.” State Farm Insurance contended below and also on appeal that Stewart breached the terms of the January 1990 contract. Also, pursuant to the equitable conversion doctrine, Stewart held her insurance proceeds in trust for the benefit of State Farm. We should affirm the trial court’s grant of summary judgment in the instant case because the record supports State Farm’s contention and the trial court’s decision. Stewart posits that the trial court erred in granting summary judgment because triable issues remained to be decided. It is the province of the appellate court to review the record to determine whether a trial court has erred in granting summary judgment. See Espinoza v. Elgin, Joliet & Eastern Ry. Co., 165 Ill. 2d 107, 113, 649 N.E.2d 1323 (1995). However, we should affirm the trial court in the instant case because an examination of the record reveals that the trial court considered the pleadings, affidavits, depositions, and arguments by the parties and did not err in granting summary judgment. Stewart also contends that DeFrancesco had no insurable interest in the property. However, the indisputable facts in the instant case establish that Stewart is clearly wrong on this issue. The law is clear that one need not even own property to have an insurable interest in the property. See Hawkeye-Security Insurance Co. v. Reeq, 128 Ill. App. 3d 352, 355, 470 N.E.2d 1103 (1984); International Insurance Co. v. Melrose Park National Bank, 145 Ill. App. 3d 286, 290, 495 N.E.2d 1197 (1986); IMM Acceptance Corp. v. First National Bank & Trust Co., 148 Ill. App. 3d 949, 954, 499 N.E.2d 1012 (1986). Stewart further contends that the doctrine of equitable conversion is inapplicable to the facts of this case. Stewart’s view is not well founded. The doctrine of equitable conversion is set forth in Shay v. Penrose, 25 Ill. 2d 447, 449, 185 N.E.2d 218, 219-20 (1962). Shay holds: "Equitable conversion is the treating of land as personalty and personalty as land under certain circumstances. Hence, as between the parties and those claiming through them, when the owner of land enters into a valid and enforceable contract for its sale he continues to hold the legal title, but in trust for the buyer; and the buyer becomes the equitable owner and holds the purchase money in trust for the seller. The conversion takes place at the time of entering into the contract. It stems from the basic equitable principle that equity regards as done that which ought to be done. The doctrine of equitable conversion has been recognized in Illinois, as it has been in practically every other jurisdiction.” Shay, 25 Ill. 2d at 449. Finally, the majority in the case sub judice concludes that the prerequisites for subrogation were not met in the instant case. I disagree. The majority correctly states: "The prerequisites of subrogation are: (1) a third party must be primarily liable to the insured for the loss; (2) the insurer must be secondarily liable to the insured for loss under an insurance policy; and (3) the insurer must have paid the insured under that policy, thereby extinguishing the debt of the third party. [Citations].” See 288 Ill. App. 3d at 686-87. However, although the majority correctly states the law relating to subrogation, a proper analysis of the record in the instant case evinces that the majority decision misapplies the rule of law in the instant case. As stated by the majority, there are no Illinois cases directly on point and the decisions among various jurisdictions are divided as to the right of an insurer to be subrogated to an insured’s collateral contract rights. Relative thereto, the majority also writes: "Having reviewed these authorities, we favor the view that an insurer that indemnifies its insured for property damage may not be subrogated to the collateral contractual rights of the insured against a third-party purchaser of the subject property. .[Citation].” 288 Ill. App. 3d at 688. However, the record in the instant case establishes that Stewart received $130,000 for a building that she never paid for; that Stewart owed Vito DeFrancesco a balance of $69,000 on the building when the same was destroyed by fire; and that State Farm Insurance Company paid DeFrancesco $84,649.78 after the fire. Accordingly, State Farm Insurance Company was the subrogee of Vito De-Francesco. The case of Twin City Fire Insurance Co. v. Walter B. Hannah, Inc., 444 S.W.2d 131 (Ky. 1969), is analogous to the instant case and is instructive. In Twin City, the insurer issued a fire policy to third parties who thereafter deeded the insured property to a corporate party, which, in turn, entered into a contract with vendees under which vendees promised to pay $4,500 for the property. The property was partially destroyed by fire, at which time the vendees still owed the corporate party $3,450 on the purchase price. The court in Twin City held that the insurer was entitled to be subrogated to the rights of the corporate party against the vendees and wrote: "Had Twin City [the insurer] at once paid Hannah [the corporate party] $3450.00, representing the balance owed by Dunaway [the vendee], it would have succeeded to Hannah’s rights against Dun-away.” Twin City Fire Insurance Co. v. Walter B. Hannah, Inc., 444 S.W.2d at 136. Similarly, in the instant case, as the trial court ruled, State Farm Insurance Co. at once paid DeFrancesco the $69,000 balance owed by Stewart and became entitled to succeed to DeFrancesco’s rights. Perforce, I dissent.

=== CASE 2226267 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:04.944237+00 ===

236 N.W.2d 837 (1975)
195 Neb. 93
STATE of Nebraska, Appellee,
v.
Larry L. KOLZOW, Appellant.
No. 40266.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
December 24, 1975.
*838 Ernest H. Addison, James M. Tyler, Omaha, for appellant.
Paul L. Douglas, Atty. Gen., Bernard L. Packett, Asst. Atty. Gen., Lincoln, for appellee.
Heard before WHITE, C. J., and SPENCER, BOSLAUGH, McCOWN, NEWTON, CLINTON and BRODKEY, JJ.
SPENCER, Justice.
Defendant, Larry L. Kolzow, entered a plea of nolo contendere to a charge of embezzlement. The court accepted his plea and after a presentence investigation sentenced him to confinement in the Nebraska Penal and Correctional Complex for a period of 3 years. The sole issue presented on this appeal is whether the trial judge abused his discretion in sentencing the defendant to prison rather than placing him on probation. We affirm.
Defendant embezzled approximately $25,000 while employed as a bookkeeper for the Record Printing Company, Inc. Defendant admitted embezzling funds from a previous employer, Vickers Oil Company of Des Moines, Iowa. He was not charged with this crime and agreed to repay the amount embezzled, about $16,000 or $17,000. A portion of the money embezzled herein was used to repay Vickers' Oil Company.
No purpose will be served by a further discussion of the facts. The determination of whether to grant probation to one convicted of a crime is a matter within the sound discretion of the trial court; and the denial of probation will not be disturbed on appeal in the absence of a showing of abuse of judicial discretion. State v. Ward (1974), 191 Neb. 421, 216 N.W.2d 163. We find no abuse of discretion herein.
Defendant suggests that the sentence imposed is harsh and excessive. A flat 3 year sentence under the statute in question is the equivalent of a 1 to 3 year sentence. It is well within the limit of 1 to 7 years. Where the punishment of an offense is left to the discretion of a court to be exercised within certain statutorily prescribed limits, a sentence imposed within such limits will not be disturbed on appeal unless there appears to be an abuse of discretion. State v. Johnson (1974), 191 Neb. 54, 213 N.W.2d 716. There was no abuse of discretion therein.
The judgment is affirmed.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 2226277 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:05.162271+00 ===

30 Ill. App.2d 361 (1961)
174 N.E.2d 897
People of the State of Illinois, ex rel. Eunice Karr, the Mother of Baby Boy Karr, Also Known as Douglas Daniel Karr, Jr., a Minor, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
Rev. LeRoy F. Weihe, Executive Director of the Nachusa Lutheran Home for Children, a Charitable Corporation, Harry R. Bates and Anna Lou Bates, Respondents-Appellees.
Gen. No. 11,480.
Illinois Appellate Court  Second District, Second Division.
May 16, 1961.
Rehearing denied June 7, 1961.
*362 *363 Edward Keefe, of Rock Island, for appellant.
Besse & Besse, of Sterling, and Harold R. Nettles, of Freeport, for appellee.
CROW, P.J.
The petitioner-appellant, Eunice Karr, the natural mother of Baby Boy Karr, also known as Douglas Daniel Karr, Jr., initiated proceedings for a writ of habeas corpus on March 17, 1960, the writ being returnable March 24, 1960, to recover custody of her infant son from an Illinois licensed child welfare agency, the Nachusa Lutheran Home for Children, which had received custody of the child four days after his birth by virtue of purported surrenders and consents executed by both natural parents. Rev. Leroy Weihe, Executive Director of the Nachusa Home is one of the respondents-appellees. The natural father is not a party. The petitioner does not question the form of the surrenders or consents, and admits signing the same, but alleges that the document bearing her signature is void for fraud and duress, or, by analogy to the language of Section 11 of the Adoption Act of 1959, Ch. 4 Ill. Rev. Stats. 1959, par. 9.1-11, that it is revocable for such cause; that she is a fit person to have the care and control of her son; and that she is entitled to his custody. After service upon it of the writ which duly issued herein the agency, *364 the Nachusa Home, by its executive director, Rev. Weihe, entered an appearance in an adoption cause pending elsewhere and consented to the child's adoption by persons unknown to the petitioner herein to whom the agency had delivered custody prior to her application for the writ herein. Subsequently, by an amended return to the writ in this cause, the agency concerned, Nachusa Home, set forth that custody of the child had been given by it to adoptive parents and that an interim order of adoption entered by the County Court of Stephenson County, Illinois on April 1, 1960 had terminated the parental rights of the petitioner herein. Thereafter, on the petitioner's motion, the purported adoptive parents, Harry R. Bates and Anna Lou Bates, were made additional respondents to the present proceedings. In her denials of the respondents' amended returns, the petitioner reasserts that her surrender or consent is void for fraud and duress, and that she is a fit person to have the care and control of her baby, and alleges that the interim order of adoption purporting to terminate her rights is void for lack of jurisdiction. This cause was tried before the court upon the petition, the respondents' amended returns, and the petitioner's denial thereof. The court found that the petitioner had failed to establish that her surrender and consent given to the agency was obtained by fraud or duress and that the writ herein should be quashed. A judgment was entered accordingly, July 7, 1960, and custody was remanded to the respondents Harry R. Bates and Anna Lou Bates. The petitioner appeals. There was no evidence that the petitioner was an unfit person.
In the petition for writ of habeas corpus, the petitioner alleges that her surrender and consent is void (or revocable) for one or more of the following reasons:
(a) At the time she signed, she was a patient at Community General Hospital in Sterling, Ill., *365 under the influence of drugs, in a mental and emotionally unstable condition, recovering from the effects of her first child-birth, and by reason thereof she was unable to comprehend the significance of her act.
(b) She was misinformed as to the nature and effect of said instrument and was without advice, and believed she could reacquire custody of her child.
(c) While in said condition, her husband represented he was unable to afford said child, etc., and that it was in the child's best interest that he be given up, thereby fraudulently inducing or unduly influencing her to sign a surrender and consent, well knowing she was at that time misinformed as to the nature and effect of such act and believed that she could later reacquire custody; that she would not have signed said instrument except for her weakened mental and physical condition, her misinformation as to the nature and effect of said instrument, her lack of advice, and the fraud or undue influence or duress of her husband.
The petitioner-appellant's theory is that the finding and judgment are contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence and to the law, and, there being no evidence of her unfitness, her fitness is presumed, and hence it was error to remand custody to the respondents Harry R. and Anna Lou Bates. The respondents-appellees' theory is that the finding and judgment on the issue of fraud and duress is supported by the manifest weight of the evidence and the law, the petitioner's surrender or consent was irrevocable, no showing or finding of her unfitness is necessary, and though she be a fit person she is not absolutely entitled to custody, the best interests and *366 welfare of the child being the paramount consideration, and it was proper to remand custody to the respondents Harry R. and Anna Lou Bates.
The petitioner was married to Douglas Karr on September 7, 1957 upon his graduation from high school and at the completion of her sophomore year. She was then 16 years old. During 1959 they lived in an apartment in Sterling, which they rented for $65 per month, and Douglas Karr worked in Rock Falls, where he earned $59.00 per week. On March 30, 1959 she learned she was pregnant. The child was to be their first. When she told her husband that evening he said they could not afford a baby at the present time because he was obligated to buy a house (which they were at that time, though later released). He then left the apartment to see if the Mt. Carmel Home for Children, at Morrison, would keep the child. At that time the Karrs indicated they simply wanted to place the child temporarily in a home until their financial condition should improve, and nothing was said by them then about adoption.
On October 12, 1959 they visited the Nachusa Lutheran Home for Children at Nachusa and talked with a caseworker. There Mr. Karr again told of his financial problems and asked if the home took in infants. He stated that he did not want children, but that he and Mrs. Karr sought only a temporary placement of the child. Later, October 16, 1959, the Karrs returned to the Nachusa Home and had a lengthy interview with Rev. Weihe, the Executive Director. The Home is a duly licensed child welfare agency. Rev. Weihe explained that to place the child in a foster home on a temporary basis would cost the parents approximately $75.00 per month, and that the only alternative, in fairness to the child, would be to place the child for adoption. The Karrs agreed that they could not afford a foster home and Mrs. Karr *367 indicated that she was willing to go along with her husband in the matter. Nothing was settled. That was the last time Mrs. Karr saw Rev. Weihe until November 30th at the hospital after the child was born when her surrender or consent was signed.
Rev. Weihe testified that he discussed the matter of adoption with Mr. Karr on October 30; that Mr. Karr came alone; and Mr. Karr told him that he and Mrs. Karr had discussed the matter at home and had decided to place the child for adoption. Karr made inquiry regarding the adoptive parents' paying for the doctor and hospital bills, and Rev. Weihe told him he thought that adoptive parents could be found that would pay such, and that the Nachusa Home would pay the bills and the adoptive parents in turn would pay the Home. At another meeting, November 13th, with Mr. Karr he said that Karr told him they had reached a decision, and Karr wanted to know if his wife could have a private room at the Sterling Hospital when she was taken there for confinement because he thought it would be embarrassing for her to be in a hospital ward where the other mothers were keeping their babies. Rev. Weihe called the Hospital office and made appointments for November 27th.
On November 26, 1959 the petitioner entered Community General Hospital in Sterling. That same evening of November 26th, at about 9 p.m., the baby was born. The attending physician, Dr. Redmond, stated the birth was an uneventful one. However, he further stated that the delivery was not routine because it was necessary to remove the placenta manually and that this is not normal. The drugs prescribed for Mrs. Karr were routine, according to the physician, excepting the cyclopropane which was administered for the removal of the placenta. This is a potent gaseous agent administered by a mask and its administration is exacting. In his own practice the doctor said he *368 does not always use it for a manual removal of the placenta. He leaves the decision to an anesthetist. He testified that incisions were made for the childbirth, and that they were closed with sutures. He also testified that involution, during which the uterus, having been enlarged to admit a six-pound baby, contracts to its normal size over a six week period, becomes painful to the mother after a few days.
On November 27th, the next day after the baby was born, the Rev. Elmer Dadisman, Mrs. Karr's pastor, called at the hospital to see her. Rev. Dadisman testified that he told her he had heard that she and her husband did not want to keep their child. She replied that this was not correct. Mrs. Karr shed tears and said it was simply that they could not afford to. She explained that when she got out of the hospital she intended to get a job and hoped to get the baby back, and that she would have a year's time to do so.
Rev. Dadisman left the hospital after that visit with the petitioner and later that evening he conferred with Rev. Weihe. He told Rev. Weihe of his conversation with Eunice (Mrs. Karr); that she expressed an intention of getting the baby back by acting within a year; and he inquired of Rev. Weihe as to whether it was correct that Mrs. Karr would have a year to do so. Rev. Weihe advised that it was not correct.
Rev. Dadisman then contacted Douglas Karr, the father, and told him of his wife's apparent misinformation as to the possibility of her getting the child back within a year, and of his (Rev. Dadisman's) conversation with Rev. Weihe. Rev. Dadisman never had occasion to visit with Mrs. Karr again while she was in the hospital. Douglas Karr, the father, testified that he did not tell his wife about the conversation he had had with Rev. Dadisman because "it would make it easier for her to sign if she did not know."
On November 30, 1959, in the evening, about 96 hours or a little less after the birth of the child, Rev. *369 Weihe took the surrender or consent papers to the petitioner at the hospital. He arrived at 8:30 p.m., had the papers signed by both Mr. and Mrs. Karr, and he had departed by 8:45 p.m.  the whole operation evidently requiring about 15 minutes. Walking at that time was not easy for her and it was difficult when she walked a short ways to an ante-room with her husband and Rev. Weihe. He did not tell Mrs. Karr of his conversation with Rev. Dadisman on November 27th, or that she did not have a year to get the baby back. He testified, however, that he told both parties that the papers were final, and both parties read them, or he read the papers to them. Mrs. Karr testified that she couldn't remember whether there was any discussion about the papers being final. The written surrenders or consents for adoption had been prepared by Rev. Weihe's attorney. According to Rev. Weihe, the petitioner was never invited by him to consult with his or any other counsel. Although both Rev. Weihe and Douglas Karr admitted they fully knew of Mrs. Karr's misapprehension or mistaken belief that she had a year to get the child back, and that she intended to get a job when she got out of the hospital and hoped to get the baby back, both of them admitted that they did not advise her to the contrary as to the possibility of her getting the child back.
There are some other facts in evidence, of lesser present importance, which need not be here detailed  some regarding the administration of drugs in the hospital to Mrs. Karr in connection with and after the birth, and some concerning the fitness of the petitioner and Harry R. and Anna Lou Bates. There was no evidence of unfitness of any party.
We believe from reading the evidence that Douglas Karr, the father, knew and comprehended that the consents or surrenders for adoption were final. His testimony is reasonably clear that at the time he did *370 not want the child, that he wanted to place it out for adoption, and that he understood fully that the signing of the adoption surrender or consent by him on November 30th was final.
Mrs. Karr left the hospital December 1, 1959 without the child and without ever having seen the baby. She testified that no one ever offered to bring the baby to her and she never told any one in the hospital that she did not want to see him and that she did not ask to see the baby.
On December 3, 1959 Douglas Karr telephoned Rev. Weihe and asked if the baby was still in the Nachusa Home. Rev. Weihe told him that the child was not  that the child had already been placed for adoption. It appears from the evidence that Rev. Weihe had told Harry R. and Anna Lou Bates, respondents and purported adopting parents, that on the night of November 30th the baby was available to them and had placed the child December 2, 1959 with them for adoption.
Section 3-7 of the Adoption Act of 1945, as amended, Ch. 4 Ill. Rev. Stats., 1959, par. 3-7, which was in effect at the time this surrender or consent was executed, provided that:
"A consent to adoption or a surrender to a licensed child welfare agency for the purpose of adoption by a parent or parents including any who are minors executed and witnessed or acknowledged in accordance with the provisions of Section 3-6 of this Act shall be irrevocable unless it shall have been obtained by fraud or duress and a court of competent jurisdiction shall so find. The consent of a parent who is a minor shall not be voidable because of such minority."
The Adoption Act of 1959, Ch. 4 Ill. Rev. Stats., 1959, pars. 9.1-1 to 9.1-24, effective January 1, 1960, *371 repealed the Adoption Act of 1945, as amended, but pars. 9.1-23 and 9.1-11 of the Adoption Act of 1959 provide:
"9.1-23. Sec. 23. REPEAL  SAVING.) `An Act in relation to the adoption of children and to repeal an Act therein named', approved June 30, 1945, as amended is repealed.
Such repeal shall not in any way affect an act done or a right, power or remedy given or accrued under any statute in force prior to the effective date of this Act.
The execution of a consent or surrender, prior to the effective date of this Act, shall not affect its validity for use in a proceeding under this Act, if such consent or surrender was executed in accordance with law then in effect."
"9.1-11. Sec. 11. CONSENTS  IRREVOCABILITY.) A consent to adoption by a parent, including a minor, executed and acknowledged in accordance with the provisions of Section 8 of this Act, or a surrender of a child by a parent, including a minor, to an agency for the purpose of adoption shall be irrevocable unless it shall have been obtained by fraud or duress and a court of competent jurisdiction shall so find. The consent of a parent who is a minor shall not be voidable because of such minority."
[1, 2] The issue that is presented is whether the findings of the trial court on the question as to alleged fraud and duress with respect to the purported surrender or consent of the present petitioner, Eunice Karr, the natural mother, are or are not against the manifest weight of the evidence, or the law. Was her consent or surrender "obtained by fraud or duress"? The burden of proving fraud or duress rested upon *372 the petitioner and the findings of fact of the trial court against the petitioner may not be set aside unless clearly and palpably erroneous and against the manifest weight of the evidence.
[3, 4] The general principles as to fraud are set out in People v. Gilmore (1931) 345 Ill. 28, 177 N.E. 710, where, at page 46, the Court stated:
"Fraud includes anything calculated to deceive, whether it be a single act or combination of circumstances, whether the suppression of truth or the suggestion of what is false, whether it be by direct falsehood or by innuendo, by speech or by silence, by word of mouth or by look or gesture, . .. If fraud be proved it vitiates all transactions touched by it...."
[5] We have carefully reviewed the testimony and conclude that there was not sufficient evidence for the trial court to find that the petitioner's surrender or consent to adoption was signed at a time when she was under the influence or effect of drugs and medications, though the time and place of the signing thereof and her then physical condition, which was obviously weakened and not normal, are material, relevant facts and circumstances bearing on the ultimate question of fact. But we also conclude that the evidence is uncontradicted that she signed her surrender or consent under the mistaken belief and misapprehension that she had one year to get the baby back. That was certainly a material, relevant fact and circumstance so far as she was concerned, and was undoubtedly a material inducement to her execution thereof. Her husband knew of her mistaken belief or misapprehension. Rev. Weihe knew of it. This mistaken belief or misapprehension was communicated by her to her Minister, Rev. Dadisman, and he, in turn, immediately communicated such to Rev. *373 Weihe. Neither her husband or Rev. Weihe made any effort to clarify or dispel that mistaken notion, belief, or misapprehension after they knew thereof. They remained silent in that regard though they had ample opportunities to say something in that respect to her. It is apparent that although she read this surrender or consent and was told that it was final, she did not know or adequately understand or comprehend the drastic final effect of signing the same. Rev. Weihe was familiar with the laws of adoption. He had the services of an attorney in preparing the surrender or consent. He had discussed the laws of adoption with Douglas Karr but not with or in the presence of Mrs. Karr. We cannot escape the conclusion that both Rev. Weihe and Douglas Karr knew of her mistaken belief or misapprehension that she had one year to obtain a return of the baby. By their silence, with such knowledge, at the critical time of the signing of the surrender or consent by Mrs. Karr, so far as she is concerned, they suppressed the truth concerning her mistaken belief or misapprehension. The circumstances cried out that, knowing what they knew, they then and there correct her mistaken belief and misapprehension on that highly important point. They did nothing. Presumably that was because, as Mr. Karr testified, "it would be easier for her to sign it if she did not know."
[6] The rights of the petitioner, the natural mother of this child, to the custody of the child are superior to those of other persons, when and if she is a fit person to have custody, has not forfeited that right by some act of her own, and is so circumstanced that she can provide the necessaries of life and administer to the requirements of such a charge: People v. Bell (1959) 20 Ill. App.2d 82, 155 N.E.2d 104; People v. Sheehan (1940) 373 Ill. 79, 25 N.E.2d 502; Cf. Cormack v. Marshall (1904) 211 Ill. 519, 71 N.E. 1077; *374 Stafford v. Stafford (1921) 299 Ill. 438, 132 N.E. 452; the interests and welfare of the child are presumed to be best served in the custody of the parent: People v. Hoff (1944) 323 Ill. App. 535, 56 N.E.2d 324.
[7] The only claims of the respondents are under the Adoption Act of 1945, as amended, or the Adoption Act of 1959, and the only basis for their claims is the document called a surrender or consent executed by the petitioner November 30, 1959 which they urge is "irrevocable", under Ch. 4 Ill. Rev. Stats., 1959, par. 3-7 or par. 9.1-11. The respondents have no vested interest in the child, and, the petition herein having been filed March 17, 1960, less than 4 months after the birth of the child, they had little or no opportunity of developing love, affection, and attachment for the child, or the child for them. The petitioner acted reasonably promptly to try to obtain the child back: People v. Bell, supra.
It is not without significance that this purported surrender or consent was taken the evening of November 30, 1959, barely 96 hours or possibly less, after the birth of the child. Although the present Adoption Act of 1959 was not effective until January 1, 1960 it had been approved July 17, 1959 and doubtless was familiar to those particularly concerned with adoption matters. Under Section 9 thereof, par. 9.1-9, "No consent or surrender shall be taken until the passage of 72 hours after the birth of the child." The present surrender or consent was taken barely 24 hours, or less, beyond the 72 hours after the birth of the child within which, after January 1, 1960, no such consent or surrender in the form used herein could legally have been taken under any circumstances. That legislative emphasis upon one important fact and circumstance, namely timing, and that public policy determination and absolute statutory inhibition, though *375 technically not in effect until January 1, 1960, should not go unnoticed when the consent or surrender here was taken barely 24 hours, or less, beyond the time absolutely forbidden as of January 1, 1960.
[8] We have considered the age of the petitioner and the other applicable facts and circumstances as to time, place, her physical condition, and others, under which this surrender or consent was signed. Mrs. Karr had quit high school and married when she was in her sophomore year. At that time she was only 16. She was only 18 when this child was born. Taking into consideration her age and experience, the time and place where the signing occurred, her then physical condition, that she'd never been in a hospital before, and this being her first child, and the fact that she was obviously not familiar with the laws of adoption, though Rev. Weihe and her husband who were asking her to sign the surrender or consent were, we are of the opinion that, under the circumstances, the failure of Douglas Karr, her husband, and Rev. Weihe fully to inform her in the respect concerned and remove the mistaken belief or misapprehension on a material point under which she, to their knowledge, labored, was calculated to deceive and amounted to deception and fraud. This surrender or consent to adoption by Mrs. Karr was obtained by fraud within the meaning of the statute and, hence, was revocable.
We have considered all the cases referred to by the respondents, namely, Giacopelli v. Florence Crittenton Home (1959) 16 Ill.2d 556, 158 N.E.2d 613, Huber v. Huber (1960) 26 Ill. App.2d 207, 167 N.E.2d 431, Kokotekian v. Kokotekian (1959) 23 Ill. App.2d 171, 161 N.E.2d 712, In re Petition of Simaner (1959) 15 Ill.2d 568, 155 N.E.2d 555, People v. Gusterine (1958) 16 Ill. App.2d 336, 148 N.E.2d 1, In Matter of Petition of Balota (1955) 7 Ill. App.2d 178, 129 *376 N.E.2d 234, and In Matter of Petition of Wojtowiak (1957) 14 Ill. App.2d 344, 144 N.E.2d 760. We do not believe they militate against our views in the case at bar.
Under the circumstances, the decision of the Trial Court was, in this case, against the manifest weight of the evidence and the law. The Order will be reversed and the cause remanded with directions to enter a judgment for the petitioner and that the respondents deliver the child to the petitioner.
Reversed and remanded with directions.
SPIVEY, J. and WRIGHT, J., concur.

=== CASE 9741133 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:53.739047+00 ===

Heffernan, J.
This case presents the question of whether this court should abrogate the heretofore existing common-law immunities of the owners and occupiers of land. We conclude that the distinction between the duty heretofore owed by a land occupier to licensees and to invitees should be abolished, and that the duty of the land occupier be that required in any negligence action— ordinary care under the circumstances. We decline, however, to change the immunities which a land occupier enjoys in respect to trespassers.
This case arises upon demurrer. The court interpreted the allegations of the complaint to demonstrate that the plaintiff had the status of a licensee and, under existing law, there would be liability only where a trap exists upon the property, i.e., a hazard known to the landowner but concealed and unknown to the licensee, or, alternatively, where there has been active operational negligence. The trial judge concluded that, although the law heretofore existing in Wisconsin precluded the plaintiff from recovery, such law was archaic and no rational basis existed for denying liability to the plaintiff in the circumstances set forth. He held that the duty which de*840volves upon a landowner, irrespective of the common-law status of the person who comes upon the land, ought to be that of ordinary care under the circumstances. The trial judge correctly interpreted the status of the law and the result that would be reached were prior law applied.
The complaint alleges that the plaintiff, Dean Anton-iewicz, went to the home of the defendant, Anne Reszezyn-ski, on the evening of February 16, 1978, for the purpose of giving the defendant’s daughter a ride to a friend’s house; and that on the back porch there was an icy patch, which was known to the defendant but was unknown to the plaintiff and upon which ice the plaintiff slipped and was injured. It is alleged that the defendant was guilty of negligence for failing to warn the plaintiff of the condition of the porch, for the failure to provide proper lighting, and for the failure to prevent the accumulation of ice on the back porch.
The trial judge in his memorandum opinion stated the arguments of the defendant. He said:
“Defendant contends that the injured plaintiff was a licensee; that the alleged defect was unconcealed; and therefore, there was no duty to warn, and that the condition complained of was not the product of active negligence. If one concedes the injured plaintiff’s status as a licensee and that the condition was not alleged to be concealed, then the defendant’s position is substantiated by the precedent she relies upon.”
The judge then restated the common-law distinctions between the status of trespasser, licensee, and invitee and the tests this court applies for holding a landowner liable when an injury is done to a plaintiff in any of those legal categories. He pointed out that the common-law status of a licensee is important in determining the sufficiency of the cause of action only were common-law *841distinctions to be retained. He posed the question: Should the trend toward the rule of ordinary negligence be adopted in Wisconsin? He answered that question by concluding that it was time that the antiquated common-law distinctions be rejected and a single negligence standard, that of the duty of ordinary care, govern an owner’s liability for any injuries on his premises.
In the recent case of Terpstra v. Soiltest, Inc. (1974), 63 Wis. 2d 585, 218 N. W. 2d 129, the plaintiff urged that we abandon the existing rules for predicating liability upon an owner or occupier of land and substitute therefor the standard of ordinary care. We declined that request and stated:
“We are aware of the recent trend in other states toward the abolition of the common law distinctions between trespasser, licensee, and invitee in terms of the landowner’s obligations ....
“We choose, however, not to consider the abandonment of the traditional rule in this case. If a change is to be considered, it should be on the basis of a record made at trial, where appropriate motions are made and instructions requested that will trigger the exercise of the trial judge’s decision on the question as it may apply to a particular case.” (Pp. 593, 594)
Ordinarily, as we said in Gonzales v. Wilkinson (1975), 68 Wis. 2d 154, 158, 227 N. W. 2d 907, we will not consider the abandonment of a traditional rule unless there has been a full trial and full consideration of the issues. In many cases where there has been an order entered on a demurrer, the trial judge may fail to address himself directly to the question of whether an existing rule of law should be abandoned.
As a matter of judicial policy, this court believes it important to have the expression of a trial judge’s reason*842ing on the particular case before him. In the instant case, however, it is apparent that the trial judge specifically and painstakingly addressed himself to the policy considerations underlying the existing law and the approach that he espoused. His reasoning was explicated in a scholarly and exhaustive opinion. There is no doubt that, in light of this record, the trial judge squarely found the issue presented and dealt with it. He has fully informed this court why, in his opinion, the law applying to this case should be changed. The case is in a proper posture for the consideration of the issue upon which the trial judge made his decision and ordered that the demurrer be overruled.
The present law in Wisconsin in respect to the duties of owners and occupiers of land is outlined in Szafranski v. Radetzky (1966), 31 Wis. 2d 119, 125, 126, 141 N. W. 2d 902. We stated that, in respect to a trespasser, the owner of land has only the duty to refrain from wilful and intentional injury. He is not ordinarily liable to trespassers for the failure to exercise ordinary care to put his land in a safe condition, nor is he obliged to refrain from activities that might cause injury, although in some circumstances there may be a duty to warn known trespassers of highly dangerous conditions.
On the sliding scale of increased duty, as determined by the status of a person who comes upon the land, greater obligations are owed to a licensee. The land occupier may be liable to a licensee if the injury is caused by a trap — a dangerous condition that is known to the landowner but concealed from the licensee. In such circumstance, there is a duty to warn. A cause of action by a licensee may also be spelled out when the injury is caused by the active or operational negligence of the land occupier. Under such circumstances, the active or operational activity must be carried on in the exercise of ordinary care.
*843The highest duty is owed to the invitee, that of ordinary care under the circumstances.
A trespasser is defined by Restatement, 2 Torts 2d, p. 171, sec. 329, as:
a person who enters or remains upon land in the possession of another without a privilege to do so created by the possessor’s consent or otherwise.”
A trespasser, however, is not ipso facto an outlaw, unless he is in fact on the premises for illegal purposes. That this is true is demonstrated by the numerous rules stated in Prosser, Torts (hornbook series, 4th ed.), which afford some protection under particular circumstances to “frequent trespassers,” “anticipated trespassers” in respect to dangerous activities, “discovered trespassers,” and “physically trapped” trespassers. There are also exceptions to the general rule of liability involving trespassing children of tender years.
Nevertheless, the trespasser’s status is entirely different than that of either a licensee or an invitee, both of whom enter the property with knowledge and consent of the landowner. While a convincing argument can be made to demonstrate that the numerous exceptions to the trespasser rule vitiate its effect and warrant an abrogation of the rule and the substitution therefor of a duty of ordinary care that recognizes the peculiar circumstances surrounding the trespass, we conclude that the distinction is so great between that legal status and that of the licensee-invitee that we ought not consider now the abrogation of the rule in regard to trespassers. Under the facts of this case, the plaintiff was not a trespasser, but was a licensee. The duty to a trespasser is not raised.
In light of the factual situation herein, we agree with the Minnesota Supreme Court in Peterson v. Balach (1972), 294 Minn. 161, 199 N. W. 2d 639, in which, discussing a case in which the injured party was a licensee, *844it declined to rule on a landowner’s duty to trespassers. The Minnesota court said:
“Judicial restraint suggests that this question be deferred to a later day and to another case. Our judgment dictates that rules which have evolved over decades of common-law experience in this state should not be summarily abrogated except in an adversary setting after a thorough and careful presentation by litigants who have a stake in the outcome.
“. . . Sweeping away all distinctions between trespassers and social guests and business invitees is a drastic step to take because there may be, and often is, good reason to distinguish between a trespasser and a social guest. There is little or no reason to distinguish between a social guest and a business invitee.” (Pp. 164, 165)
The Massachusetts Supreme Court in Mounsey v. Ellard (1973), 363 Mass. 693, 297 N. E. 2d 43, followed a similar rationale in refusing to abrogate the trespasser rule. That court said in footnote 7, page 707:
“We feel that there is significant difference in the legal status of one who trespasses on another’s land as opposed to one who is on the land under some color of right — such as a licensee or invitee. For this reason, among others, we do not believe they should be placed in the same legal category.”1
Whatever logic there may be for the total abolition of all classifications of those who come upon the land of *845another, we are satisfied that the merits of total abolition should be considered by a common-law court only in a case involving a trespasser. Accordingly, we do not by this opinion intend to make any disposition of the immunity rule in respect to trespassers. On the facts before us, we are concerned only with the distinction between invitees and licensees.
In Copeland v. Larson (1970), 46 Wis. 2d 337, 174 N. W. 2d 745, this court discussed the standard for determining the status of an invitee to whom is owed the duty of ordinary care. Two theories have been developed— the “economic-benefit” theory which embraces a business visitor and the “invitation” theory. As Copeland points out:
“The economic-benefit test imposes an obligation upon the occupier of land when he receives- some actual or potential benefit as a result of the entry. The invitation theory imposes a duty based upon a holding out of the premises as suitable for the purpose for which the visitor entered.” (P. 342)
Copeland reiterates that the economic-benefit theory is not followed in Wisconsin and that this state finds liability to the invitee in a representation implied from an encouragement the landowner gives to others- to further one of his purposes.
. “To this court, the terms ‘business invitee,’ ‘business visitor,’ and ‘invitee’ are synonyms and we have held that when a person enters upon the premises of another and there is a benefit to the other person by the entry or some mutuality of interest, the visitor is an invitee.” (Pp. 342, 343)
It is apparent from the discussion in Copeland that, with the discarding of the economic-benefit theory, it is logically impossible to set realistic standards for the exclusion of a social guest from the category of invitee. As we said in Szafranski, supra, one of the enigmas of common-law parlance is that a social guest, no matter *846how cordially he has been invited, is nevertheless not an invitee but a licensee, to whom the lesser duty of care is required.
It is this blurring of distinctions and the absence of a sound rationale for imposing liability in one case and not in another that has impelled common-law courts to abolish the distinctions between licensee and invitee as determinative of liability. The trend toward the enlargement of the duty of landowners for negligence and the minimization of the importance of common-law status categories has been noted in both Copeland, supra, and Terpstra, supra.
The first significant change in this direction was made by the United States Supreme Court in Kermarec v. Compagnie Generale (1959), 358 U. S. 625, 79 Sup. Ct. 406, 3 L. Ed. 2d 550, a case in which the court considered whether the common-law rules of status in respect to one who comes upon the property of another should be applied to maritime law. Upon the premise that it is a settled principle of maritime law that a shipowner owes the duty of exercising reasonable care toward those lawfully aboard the vessel who are not members of the crew, the court concluded that it was inappropriate to hold that a different and lower standard of care is required when the ship’s visitor is a “licensee.” The court in rejecting that separate standard of care stated:
“The distinctions which the common law draws between licensee and invitee were inherited from a culture deeply rooted to the land, a culture which traced many of its standards to a heritage of feudalism. In an effort to do justice in an industrialized urban society, with its complex economic and individual relationships, modern common-law courts have found it necessary to formulate increasingly subtle verbal refinements, to create sub-classifications among traditional common-law categories, and to delineate fine gradations in the standards of care which the landowner owes to each. Yet even within a single jurisdiction, the classifications and subclassifica-tions bred by the common law have produced confusion *847and conflict. As new distinctions have been spawned, older ones have become obscured. Through this semantic morass the common law has moved, unevenly and with hesitation, towards ‘imposing on owners and occupiers a single duty of reasonable care in all the circumstances.’ ” (Pp. 630, 631)
Nine years later, Rowland v. Christian (1968), 69 Cal. 2d 108, 117, 70 Cal. Rptr. 97, 443 Pac. 2d 561, relying in part upon Kermarec, abolished the common-law status categories and stated:
“There is another fundamental objection to the approach to the question of the possessor’s liability on the basis of the common law distinctions based upon the status of the injured party as a trespasser, licensee, or invitee. Complexity can be borne and confusion remedied where the underlying principles governing liability are based upon proper considerations. Whatever may have been the historical justifications for the common law distinctions, it is clear that those distinctions are not justified in the light of our modern society and that the complexity and confusion which has arisen is not due to difficulty in applying the original common law rules — ■ they are all too easy to apply in their original formulation — but is due to the attempts to apply just rules in our modern society within the ancient terminology.” (P. 117)
“A man’s life or limb does not become less worthy of protection by the law nor a loss less worthy of compensation under the law because he has come upon the land of another without permission or with permission but without a business purpose. Reasonable people do not ordinarily vary their conduct depending upon such matters, and to focus upon the status of the injured party as a trespasser, licensee, or invitee in order to determine the question whether the landowner has a duty of care, is contrary to our modern social mores and humanitarian values. The common law rules obscure rather than illuminate the proper considerations which should govern determination of the question of duty.” (P. 118)
Following this rationale, the California court concluded that continued adherence to the common-law dis*848tinctions would lead only to further injustice and additional legal fictions, with the resulting complexity and blurring of categories, except in the most obvious cases. It concluded that in all instances the proper standard to be applied in determining the liability of an occupier of land in respect to one who comes upon it is whether in the management of the property the occupier:
“. . . has acted as a reasonable man in view of the probability of injury to others, and, although the plaintiff’s status as a trespasser, licensee, or invitee may in the light of the facts giving rise to such status have some bearing on the question of liability, the status is not determinative.” Rowland, page 119.
It should be noted that Rowland did what we do not do in this case — it abolished the special rules in respect to trespassers.
A year later, the state of Hawaii followed Rowland and in Pickard v. City and County of Honolulu (1969), 51 Hawaii 134, 135, 452 Pac. 2d 445, abolished the common-law distinctions. The Hawaiian court stated:
“We believe that the common law distinctions between classes of persons have no logical relationship to the exercise of reasonable care for the safety of others. We therefore hold that an occupier of land has a duty to use reasonable care for the safety of all persons reasonably anticipated to be upon the premises, regardless of the legal status of the individual.”
In 1971, the Supreme Court of Colorado in Mile High Fence Co. v. Radovich (1971), 175 Colo. 537, 489 Pac. 2d 308, also ruled that the liability of a land occupier for those injured upon his property did not rest solely on the common-law status of the entrants. It concluded that the existing classifications created confusion and judicial waste and prevented the jury from applying ordinary community standards of negligence to a landowner’s duty. It stated that the perpetuation of the common-law distinctions resulted in a harshness that is inappropriate *849to a modern legal system. The Colorado court adopted the reasonable-man standard in view of foreseeability of injury to others. It acknowledged, however, that it was proper for the jury to predicate the question of liability on the circumstances of the individual’s entry upon the land, i.e., whether, in common-law parlance, he was a trespasser, licensee, or invitee, but those distinctions were not to be conclusive.
In 1972, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia in Smith v. Arbaugh’s Restaurant, Inc. (D. C. Cir. 1972), 152 U. S. App. D. C. 86, 469 Fed. 2d 97, adopted a similar rule and held that it was appropriate to apply ordinary principles of negligence to a landowner’s conduct.
The District of Columbia Court of Appeals emphasized that landowners are not to be insurers but are expected only to respond in liability if there is a failure to exercise due care under the circumstances.
The most recently reported case which completely adopted the Rowland rationale is Mariorenzi v. Diponte, Inc. (R. I. 1975), 333 Atl. 2d 127. The Rhode Island court said:
“The time has come to extricate ourselves from a semantical quagmire that had its beginning in ancient and misleading phraseology. Mr. Justice Sutherland has emphasized the judiciary’s duty to bring the common law into accord with present day standards of wisdom and justice rather than to continue with some outmoded and antiquated rule of the past. . . . The judiciary gave birth to the invitee, licensee, trespasser trio" and the judiciary can lay this triptych to rest. Accordingly, we now give a final but fitting interment to the common-law categories of invitee, licensee, internment and trespasser as well as their extensions, exceptions, and extrapolations.
“As we assign the trichotomy to the historical past, we substitute in its place the basic tort test of reasonableness. Hereafter, the common-law status of an entrant onto the land of another will no longer be determinative of the degree of care owed by the owner, but rather the *850question to be resolved will be whether the owner has used reasonable care for the safety of all persons reasonably expected to be upon his premises. Evidence of the status of the invitee may have some relevance to the question of liability but it no longer will be conclusive. The traditional tort question of foreseeability will become important.” (P. 133) (Atl. 2d)2
In addition to these cases which have totally abolished the common-law distinctions, a number of other courts, including Minnesota in Peterson, supra, and Massachusetts in Mounsey, supra, have abolished the traditional distinctions between licensees and invitees, but have declined to rule on the question of the landowner’s duty toward trespassers.
Additionally, a number of courts since Rowland have declined to abolish the common-law categories but hold that social guests should be considered as invitees and the duty of reasonable care be required in respect to those persons who under the common-law categories fall into the class of either social guests or invitees. This trend in some cases preceded Rowland, supra.3 A number *851of post -Rowland, decisions have also expanded the category of invitees to include social guests.4
Prior to the trend of the change set in motion by Rowland and its progeny and concommitant with it, a number of writers of legal treatises and law reviews have pointed out the tenuous basis for the common-law categories that determine the responsibilities of occupiers of land.
2 Harper & James, in the treatise, The Law of Torts, p. 1432, sec. 27.1, stated the medieval origin of these rules. They said:
“But the consensus of modern opinion is that the special privilege these rules accord to the occupation of land sprang from the high place which land has traditionally held in English and American thought and the still continuing dominance and prestige of the landowning class in England during the formative period of this development. This sanctity of land ownership included notions of its economic importance and the social desirability of the free use and exploitation of land. Probably it also included, especially in England, more intangible overtones bound up with the values of a social system that traced much of its heritage of feudalism.”
After discussing the application of the rules in respect to owners and occupiers of land, Harper and James concluded:
“. . . the traditional rule confers on an occupier of land a special privilege to be careless which is quite out of keeping with the development of accident law generally and is no more justifiable here than it would be in the case of any other useful enterprise or activity. As we have suggested, this special privilege is receding . . . .” P. 1440, sec. 27.3.
In 1959, Graham Hughes in Duties to Trespassers: A Comparative Survey and Revaluation, 68 Yale Law *852Journal 688, in commenting upon the English statute which abolished the distinction between licensees and invitees, stated:
“This legislation sprang from a feeling, strongly expressed in recent years, that the character of the plaintiff in his lawful entry on the defendant’s premises should be no more than a relevant circumstance in determining whether the defendant has discharged his duty of care. It ought not to be imported into the law as a categorical proposition, for the answer to the question of whether the defendant has discharged his duty should depend on the totality of the circumstances. The mechanical application of the traditional categories of visitor, and of such concepts as traps and unusual dangers, is a manifestation of the lamentable tendency to transmute propositions of fact into propositions of law, which Glanville Williams has called the ‘besetting sin of the law of tort.’ ”
A writer in 18 Univ. of Kansas Law Review (1969), 161, 162, stated:
“. . . [T]he existing exceptions and judicial extensions which pervade the common-law rules manifest a basic confusion surrounding the application of those rules and are symptomatic of an attempt to attain justice in the individual case while working within a system of law which frustrates the attainment of that end. This confusion and inequity in the area of occupier’s liability stems from an attempt to apply old common-law principles in a society which no longer holds the landowner sacrosanct.” Stites, Comment: Liability of a Land Occupier to Persons Injured on His Premises: A Survey and Criticism of Kansas Law.
The English Law Reform Committee Report, out of which grew the British revision eliminating the separate categories, concluded by saying:
“[The present law embarrasses justice] ‘by requiring what is essentially a question of fact to be determined by reference to an artificial and irrelevant rule of law.’ ” Cited in McDonald & Leigh, The Law of Occupiers’ Liability and the Need for Reform in Canada, 16 U. of Toronto Law Journal (1965), 55, 65.
*853The unsatisfactory condition of the common law was recognized by the legislature of Wisconsin as long ago as the enactment of the safe-place statute, sec. 101.11, Stats., first adopted by the legislature in 1911. The safe-place statute in effect abolished the traditional common-law classifications in respect to those who come upon public buildings and places of employment. The purpose of the safe-place statute was capsulized by Mr. Justice Crownhart in a dissent to the majority opinion in Lewko v. Krause Milling Co. (1922), 179 Wis. 83, 94, 190 N. W. 924. He said in reference to the safe-place statute:
“In other words, it put into the statutes the humane doctrine of the courts, and wiped out the Draconian doctrine so far as licensees or invitees are concerned.”
Despite the enlightened legislation adopted in 1911 applicable to public buildings and places of employment, this court has never seen fit to adopt the policy toward which the legislature led the way, but instead has continued to follow the unrealistic and Draconian rules referred to in Lewko.
This court in McConville v. State Farm Mut. Automobile Ins. Co. (1962), 15 Wis. 2d 374, 113 N. W. 2d 14, saw fit, however, to abolish the analogy of the licensor-licensee relationship in respect to the condition of an automobile in which a gratuitous guest may ride, and held that the licensor duty and its outgrowth — assumption of risk — should be discarded in favor of the principle that the driver of an automobile owes his guest the same duty of ordinary care that he owes to others. The MeCon-ville Case rested upon the rationale that the burden of injuries falling upon the community, as well as upon the individual injured parties, ought rather to be borne by the tort-feasor. McConville also placed heavy reliance upon the fact that automobile liability insurance was generally available to spread the cost of the risk. That factor is also present in respect to real property where *854liability insurance is available to protect the property owner and those who come upon his premises. Moreover, it should be borne in mind that in McConville the court was dealing with a plaintiff who proceeded voluntarily in the face of a known risk. This is, of course, but rarely the situation in respect to either a licensee or an invitee on an occupier’s property.
The reasoning of McConville, as applied to the occupier-of-land situation, means that both the occupier of land and one who comes upon it are charged with the duty of ordinary care, and even though the owner be found negligent, his liability may well be reduced by the negligence of the plaintiff under the familiar principles of our comparative-negligence law.
It would appear, therefore, that there is little to commend the continued use of the categories of licensee or invitee in respect to the liability of the occupier of property. As we have noted, the factual distinctions between licensees and invitees are hazy and the law blurred. There is no reason why one who invites a guest to a party at his home should have less concern for that guest’s safety than he has for the welfare of an insurance man who may come to the home to deliver a policy. Is the life or welfare of a friend who comes as a guest to be more lightly regarded than the life or welfare of a casual business acquaintance? To state the question is to answer it. There is no good reason why the business guest should be afforded greater protection than the social guest. Particularly in Wisconsin, where the economic-benefit theory has been discarded in respect to invitees, no logical basis for any dichotomy remains.
While the common-law categories may have had some virtue under the feudal system of land tenures, when the lord of the land had complete and autocratic control of his property irrespective of harm to the community, such concept of land holding has long since vanished. We recognize numerous limitations upon the right to use *855real property, most of which are imposed by the police power. An owner for many decades, in Wisconsin, has been unable to determine the use to which his property shall be put without reference to the needs of the community, usually expressed through police power zoning regulations. More recently, in Just v. Marinette County (1972), 56 Wis. 2d 7, 201 N. W. 2d 761, we have approved additional curtailment of the right of unbridled use of private property when it may affect the ecological balance of the area. The state’s concern with the welfare of its citizens who may come by consent upon the property of another ought to be equally grave.
The only present merit that the rule in respect to licensees and licensors has is that it is old, and as Holmes said:
“It is revolting to have no better reason for a rule of law than that so it was laid down in the time of Henry IY. It is still more revolting if the grounds upon which it was laid down have vanished long since, and the rule simply persists from blind imitation of the past.” Holmes, The Path of the Law, 10 Harvard Law Rev. (1897), 457, 469.
It is the tradition of common-law courts to reflect the spirit of their times and discard legal rules when they serve to impede society rather than to advance it. This principle, which has always been the guide of the courts, was well stated by Mr. Chief Justice Winslow in Borgnis v. Falk Co. (1911), 147 Wis. 327, 133 N. W. 209, in which the constitutionality of the workmen’s compensation law was upheld. Although he spoke in reference to constitutional interpretation, the rationale is appropriate to any change in the common law. He said:
“. . . the conditions and problems surrounding the people, as well as their ideals, are constantly changing. The political or philosophical aphorism of one generation is doubted by the next, and entirely discarded by the third; the race moves forward constantly, and no Canute can stay its progress.” (P. 349)
*856In finding the workmen’s compensation law constitutional, although the authors of our Wisconsin Constitution could not have dreamed of such legislation, Mr. Chief Justice Winslow went on to say:
“When an eighteenth century constitution forms the charter of liberty of a twentieth century government must its general provisions be construed and interpreted by an eighteenth century mind in the light of eighteenth century conditions and ideals? Clearly not. This were to command the race to halt in its progress, to stretch the state upon a veritable bed of Procrustes.” (P. 349)
While we deal in this case not with a constitution, but with a venerable principle of the common law, the rationale for our departure from that outmoded creed remains the same. Whatever utility the dichotomy between licensors and licensees may once have had has long ago ended. The common-law process itself has preserved its viability only by the mending and shaping of substantially inapplicable principles to the case at hand. The exceptions to the rule and the difficulty in applying the rule demonstrate that the rule itself is worthless. As the Supreme Court of Massachusetts said in Mownsey, supra, pages 706, 707:
_ “We can no longer follow this ancient and largely discredited common law distinction which favors the free use of property without due regard to the personal safety of those individuals who have heretofore been classified as licensees. The problem of allocating the costs and risks of human injury is far too complex to be decided solely by the status of the entrant, especially where the status question often prevents the jury from ever determining the fundamental question whether the defendant has acted reasonably in light of all the circumstances in the particular case.”
We therefore, on the basis of the analysis contained herein and assisted materially by the excellent and scholarly opinion of the trial judge, abolish the special immunities that heretofore applied to licensees and in*857vitees. The duty toward all persons who come upon property with the consent of the occupier will be that of ordinary care. By such standard of ordinary care, we mean the standard that is used in all other negligence cases in Wisconsin. Typical of such formulations is that appearing in Osborne v. Montgomery (1931), 203 Wis. 223, 236, 234 N. W. 372. See also: Pfeifer v. Standard Gateway Theater, Inc. (1952), 262 Wis. 229, 55 N. W. 2d 29; Schilling v. Stockel (1965), 26 Wis. 2d 525, 133 N. W. 2d 335. Under that test, as we have repeatedly stated, negligence is to be determined by ascertaining whether the defendant’s exercise of care foreseeably created an unreasonable risk to others. That test is to be applied at the negligence phase of the analysis to the world at large and not to the particular plaintiff. In this respect, our analysis of negligence does not follow the Cardoza majority opinion in Palsgraf v. Long Island R. R. Co. (1928), 248 N. Y. 339, 162 N. E. 99. We rather rely upon the Andrews dissenting rationale that, if the defendant has been negligent under that standard, the question is one of cause — substantial factor, i.e., cause in fact, and proximate cause, which may include policy factors that may exclude liability in the particular circumstances. Under the licensor-licensee, invitor-invitee rationale heretofore prevailing, were there a legal finding that there was no violation of duty of any kind to the entrant on the property, the question of contributory negligence did not arise. Scheeler v. Bahr (1969), 41 Wis. 2d 473, 164 N. W. 2d 310. Under the ordinary-care standard, which we hold to be applicable to the occupier of land, a duty of ordinary care falls also upon the entrant, and his negligence must be considered by the jury as in any other negligence case.
Although in this opinion we decline to go the full route followed by the trial judge and do not change the existing rule in respect to trespassers, the standard of ordinary care was properly imposed upon the defendant Reszczyn-*858ski, and it was on the alleged violation of that duty to the plaintiff that the trial judge properly overruled the demurrer.
Although we apply the duty of ordinary care to the defendant in this case, in respect to all other defendants in similar circumstances, the duty shall be prospective only and affect only those cases in which injuries occur following the date of this mandate. State v. Michels Pipeline Construction, Inc. (1974), 63 Wis. 2d 278, 303b, 217 N. W. 2d 339, 219 N. W. 2d 308.5
By the Court. — Order affirmed.
We are not unmindful of the concurring- opinion of Mr. Justice Kaplan in Mounsey, who felt that the logic of the argument abolishing the distinction between licensees and invitees was equally persuasive in respect to trespassers. He said:
“For it is sometimes just as hard to distinguish trespassers from licensees and invitees, as to distinguish licensees from invitees; and the class of trespassers is probably just as various as either of the other classes.” (pp. 717, 718)
It is also interesting to note that the Massachusetts court, although retaining the trespasser status, later adopted the reasonable-care standard for “physically trapped” trespassers. Pridgen v. Boston Housing Authority (Mass. 1974), 308 N. E. 2d 467.
For other cases adopting the Rowland test, see Rosenau v. City of Estherville (Iowa 1972), 199 N. W. 2d 125; Sargent v. Ross (1973), 113 N. H. 388, 308 Atl. 2d 528; Ives v. Swift & Co. (Iowa 1971), 183 N. W. 2d 172, 178 (concurring opinion); Martinez v. Kaufman-Kane Realty Co., Inc. (1974), 34 N. Y. 2d 819, 316 N. E. 2d 336 (concurring opinion); Williams v. Town of Silver City (1972), 84 N. M. 279, 602 Pac. 2d 304; Taylor v. New Jersey Highway Authority (1956), 22 N. J. 454, 126 Atl. 2d 313; Cunningham v. Hayes (Mo. App. 1971), 463 S. W. 2d 555; Heald v. Cox (Mo. App. 1972), 480 S. W. 2d 107; Louisville Trust Co. v. Nutting (Ky. 1969), 437 S. W. 2d 484.
See, e.g., Alexander v. General Accident Fire & Life Assurance Corp. (La. App. 1957), 98 So. 2d 730, approved by the Louisiana Supreme Court in Foggin v. General Guaranty Ins. Co. (1967), 250 La. 347, 195 So. 2d 636; Preston v. Sleziak (1969), 16 Mich. App. 18, 167 N. W. 2d 477, citing Polston v. S. S. Kresge Co. (1949), 324 Mich. 575, 578, 37 N. W. 2d 638; Bramble v. Thompson (1972), 264 Md. 518, 287 Atl. 2d 265; Snyder v. I. Jay Realty Co. (1959), 30 N. J. 303, 153 Atl. 2d 1; Scheibel v. Lipton (1951), 156 Ohio St. 308, 328, 102 N. E. 2d 453.
Wood v. Camp (Fla. 1973), 284 So. 2d 691; Sideman v. Guttman (1972), 38 App. Div. 2d 420, 330 N. Y. Supp. 2d 263; Hix v. Billen (Fla. 1973), 284 So. 2d 209; Mangione v. Dimino (1972), 39 App. Div. 2d 128, 332 N. Y. Supp. 2d 683; DiGildo v. Caponi (1969), 18 Ohio St. 2d 125, 247 N. E. 2d 732.
The dissent misstates the effect of the majority’s opinion. The result of what the court does is not a merger of the licensee or invitee categories but the abolition of them as relevant legal distinctions. No category of licensee-invitee is created; both are discarded as determinative of liability. Ordinary tort law applies.
The dissent apparently asserts that there is a right to be unreasonably careless to social guests. It also overlooks, of course, numerous persons heretofore classified as licensees, frequently denied recovery under the ancient rules. Police and firefighters in the course of their duties are among those heretofore denied recovery. See: Hass v. Chicago & North Western Ry. Co. (1970), 48 Wis. 2d 321, 325, 179 N. W. 2d 885; Note, 52 Marquette Law Rev. (1969), 431. While denial of liability to these public servants is hardly rational, the situation is the direct result of the attempt to use ancient categories for modern conditions.
It is false to assert that the balancing of interests between land occupiers and those who come upon the land “has been up to now ... a matter for legislative action.” It has been wholly a matter of court-made common law, with the exception of the safe-place statute and the recreational-use statute; and, as the dissent states, the latter statute is obviously unaffected by this decision. The present chaotic condition of the law is the fault of the courts and not of the legislature. Courts have the initial responsibility to correct the ocmmon-law rules which they have established.
Moreover, the ringing and significant words of Lord Chatham would better and more correctly be employed by the dissenter in a case involving the trespass of state officials upon private property. The reference is to searches and seizures and is irrelevant to the duty toward one who enters by consent.

=== CASE 9741134 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:53.747249+00 ===

*859Eobert W. Hansen, J.
(dissenting). Two basic issues are raised by the majority opinion in this case:
(1) What is the proper balance between the rights and duties of host and guest when a social guest is injured on the premises of the host?
(2) Who is to do the balancing of the rights and duties involved — this court or the legislature ?
The majority concedes that, up to now, the duty owed by the owner, lessee or occupant of land or living quarters to a social visitor has been “. . . limited to keeping the property safe from traps and to refraining from active negligence ....”1
The majority abandons this standard as to duty owed by host to guest and puts in its place the higher standard of “duty of ordinary care,”2 adding a duty to inspect the premises in advance to the duty to warn of traps or concealed hazards.3
When a duty owed is thus broadened, somebody wins and somebody loses. Here every owner, every lessee and every occupant of land or living quarters loses by the greater exposure to liability. Every social guest, injured while on the premises of the host, gains in the broadened *860opportunity to seek and secure damages for the injury sustained.
The majority accomplishes placing a heavier burden on owners and occupiers of property in a two-stage operation:
(1) It abolishes the distinction between a business visitor, heretofore considered an invitee,4 and a social visitor, heretofore considered to be a licensee.5
(2) It imposes, as to the new class of “invitee-licensee,” not the lower duty owed to a social guest,6 but the broader duty, heretofore owed only to business invitees.7
This dissent rests primarily on who — court or legislature — ought to do the balancing rather than on where a proper balance of rights and duties ought be struck. However, as to the first step of the two-step operation, it can be noted that the category of business visitor or invitee has shrunk to a shadow of its former self. With the passage of a safe-place statute in 1911, entrants onto public buildings, commercial establishments and places of employment came under the statute, no longer in the common-law category.8 Left in the classification were hardly more than baby-sitters,9 a doctor making a sick call or, as the majority suggests, “. . . an insurance man who may come to the home to deliver a policy.” To merge the two categories, which the writer contends is *861properly a matter for the legislature to consider and determine (as it did by enacting a safe-place statute), is here to do no more than place a pygmy and a giant in the same bed. However, that does not mean that the nightshirt that fit the pygmy is the one to be put on the giant.
Whether a homeowner or occupant of premises ought owe the same duty to a business visitor as to a social guest is one question. Answered affirmatively, it leaves entirely open the question of whether, the two combined, a lower duty is to be imposed as to business visitors or a higher duty imposed as to social guests. Opting for a wider exposure to liability on the part of owner or occupant, the majority sets forth its reasons concluding that placing a heavier burden as to liability on the host is appropriate. Such reasons appear to be four in number:
(1) Consistent with Legislative Policy? The majority finds its placing a higher duty on homeowners and householders as to social guests as consistent with the legislative policy expressed by enactment of the safe-place statute in 1911.10 That reckons without the public policy expressed by the enactment of the duty-to-recreational-users statute in 1963.11 This legislative enactment provided that in the absence of a “valuable consideration,” the owner, lessee or occupant of premises “. . . owes no duty to keep the premises safe for entry or use . . .” as to persons coming on to the premises for certain recreational-type purposes, even if they have permission for entry from the possessor.12 The legislature placed a very high duty on owners of public buildings, commercial establishments and places of employment. It established a very low duty of a landholder to persons, licensees or trespassers alike, who come on to the premises for the purposes listed in the statute. The majority opinion increases the disparity between the duty owed to a visitor *862or licensee who comes under the provisions of sec. 29.68, Stats., and a visitor who does not. Carrying out an evident legislative purpose can hardly be claimed for such result.
(2) Times are A-Changing ? The times, they are a-changing, writes the majority, and common-law courts are “. . . to reflect the spirit of their times, . . .” including evidencing “. . . the state’s concern with the welfare of its citizens who may come by consent upon the property of another. . . .” Concern for owners, lessees and occupants of premises is also a proper concern. That is what the legislature considered when it provided that an owner, lessee or occupant of premises, in absence of “valuable consideration,” had no duty to keep the premises safe for “. . . hunting, fishing, trapping, camping, hiking, snowmobiling, berry picking, water sports, sightseeing or recreational purposes. . . .”13 It evidences a state of concern as well for the welfare of those upon whose land the campers, hunters, snowmo-bilers, berry pickers, water sports enthusiasts and recreation seekers come. The majority’s authority for moving in a contrary direction is based on a claimed “. . . additional curtailment of the right of unbridled use of private property, . . .” in a recent case dealing with police power zoning regulations related to the ecological balance of the area.14 Not only did that case involve only the zoning or police power of the state, but any limitation on the rights or use of the property by its owner must be seen as reluctantly invaded because of the need to protect the environment, not enthusiastically abandoned. What had to be done there hardly supports what need not have been done here.
(3) Escape from Feudalism? The majority relates the control of property one owns or occupies and “the rule in *863respect to licensees and licensors” to the feudal system of land tenure, “. . . when the lord of the land had complete and autocratic control of his property. . . The owner of an unimproved 40 acres in the north woods or the owner of a mortgage-encumbered house in city or village may be flattered by being compared to a lord of a feudal estate. The concept that “a man’s home is his castle” has deeper roots, and can hardly be said, as the majority claims, to have “long since vanished,” in the light of sec. 29.68, Stats., providing certain permitted entrants or users take the premises, as does the owner or occupant, as they find them.,15 It is true that the Magna Carta was wrung from a reluctant king by lords and nobles.16 But that brake on the divine right of kings went far beyond an assertion of rights by the holders of large estates. It became the shield of protection for the humblest cottager as well as the holders of large estates.17 As important, it became the foundation for the first ten amendments to our United States Constitution, and es*864pecially the ninth amendment.18 Whatever balance is struck between rights and duties of landowners and person permitted on premises, feudalism has little to do with the balancing of the factors to be considered.
(4) Why Not the Same? The majority rhetorically asks whether the welfare of one who comes as a guest is to be more lightly regarded than the welfare of a casual business acquaintance, and answers: “There is no good reason why the business guest should be afforded greater protection than the social guest.” The answer begs the question. As to the duty to be owed by the host to both, the question is not whether a difference in treatment is warranted but what is the duty of the host to be as to both social guest and business visitor. The majority does not discuss the difference between the duty heretofore owed to a business visitor, and as compared to the duty heretofore owed to a social guest. The additional burden, now imposed by the majority as to both business visitor and social guest, appears to be that of a duty of prior inspection so that either the premises are in a safe condition or visitors can be warned of latent or concealed hazards.19 With no specific reason stated by the majority as to why the higher duty, not the lower, is found to be appropriate, it is difficult to join issue as to which standard should be here applied. A case for a choice of the alternative option can be made. Obviously, it would include the regressive nature of the widened exposure to liability of owner or occupant to a guest that is being mandated. The property or ad valorem tax has been criticized as regressive, but it at least is related to the value of the property owned. Here the owner of a small cottage has the same risk of added liability as does the owner, free and clear, of a mansion. The lessee or renter *865of a small apartment has as great a risk of added liability to a guest as does the owner of an expensive split-level home. Guests are as likely to slip on a throw rug on a bathroom floor in humble surroundings as in. the plushest of living arrangements. However, this dissent goes more to who should do the balancing, not to where the balance point is placed. So the dissent need go no further here than to point out that a persuasive case for choosing the higher standard as to the duty owed by a householder host to his social guest has not here been established.
As to the second question raised by this appeal — Who is to do the balancing of the rights and duties here involved? — the writer submits that a broadened liability of owners, lessees and occupants of premises to social guests should result from legislative action, not judicial edict.
After this majority holding, as before, it will continue to be true that the duty of a possessor or owner of property with respect to those who come upon his premises will vary with the legal status of the person who suffers an injury on the premises. True it is that this variance as to duty owed derives from the common-law delineations of the statuses of trespasser, licensee and invitee. However, for nearly three-quarters of a century, the only changes made as to such categories or the duty owed as to each have been made in this state by its legislature. There are two such changes, legislatively enacted:
(1) The Safe-Place Statute. Enacted in 1911, this statute changed the duty owed by owners of public buildings and places of employment to persons coming on such premises to the duty to “. . . so construct, repair or maintain such place of employment or public building as to render the same safe.”20
(2) Liability of Landowners Statute. Enacted in 1963, this statute provides that, as to persons given permission for entry but not for a valuable consideration: "An *866owner, lessee or occupant of premises who gives permission to another to hunt, fish, trap, camp, hike, snowmobile, sightsee, berry pick or to proceed with water sports or recreational uses upon such premises does not thereby extend any assurance that the premises are safe for such purpose, or constitute the person to whom permission is granted an invitee to whom a duty of care is owed. . . .”21 Whether narrowly construed or not, this statute clearly establishes a group of licensees or guests to whom no standard of host care is applicable, and to which the majority’s establishment of such standard of care as to guests or licensees does not apply.22
With the only changes in the common-law standard of landowner or occupier liability to those who come upon his premises thus made by the legislature, the writer would see the merging of the categories of business visitor and social guest, except as sec. 29.68, Stats., applies, as well as the choice of the appropriate standard as to duty owed to the partially-combined “invitee-licensee” class to be a matter for the legislature to consider and determine. Something more than continued deference to the legislative branch to do the balancing of the rights and interests involved and to determine an appropriate public policy is involved.
In part, the writer’s conclusion that only legislative action is here appropriate, rests on the tripartite nature *867of our government, with its division of authority for the conduct of public affairs between three coordinate branches of government, i.e., legislative, executive and judicial.23 This has been termed a system of “checks and balances,” with the legislative branch to set the public policy, the executive branch to administer the public policy thus set, and the judicial branch to interpret such public policy enactment and to test its being within constitutional limits.24 However, more is involved than “checks and balances” upon any one branch of government seeking to alone determine, administer and review what is to be the public policy.
The wisdom and vision of the founders of this republic enabled them to see the setting of public policy as most satisfactorily and democratically accomplishable by the legislative branch, the administering of such policy as best conducted by the executive branch and the review and interpreting of such public policy as best done by the judicial branch. The case before us is a classic illustration of why this is so. Here is involved a balancing, or a re-balancing, of the respective rights and duties of *868those who own, lease or occupy land or home, and of the rights and duties of those who enter on such land or home and are injured. If striking the balance between the rights and interests involved were left, as it has been up to now, as a matter for legislative action, those individuals and groups who identify with the entrants upon premises who sustain injury (or who believe that everybody everywhere owes to everybody else a standard of ordinary care) would appear at committee meetings, write to their assemblymen and state senators, and seek public support for their point of view. Similarly, those who identify with the owner, lessee or occupant of premises (or who believe that home ownership ought not be saddled with additional burdens or liabilities) would do exactly the same, seeking to have their point of view made the law of the state. Such legislative process, while it may have its detractors, insures the widest possible input of individuals or groups affected or concerned in the establishment of an appropriate public policy on issues of public concern.
In contrast, when resort, as here, is to the courts to do the balancing of the rights and interests involved (with the court to locate and establish the appropriate public policy), there is no way of providing any similar opportunity for public participation in the decision-reaching process. Here we have before us, as did the trial court, only the slender briefs and brief oral arguments of the attorney for the plaintiff and the attorney for the defendant. In one brief-enough court opinion conference a vote of the seven justices was taken, and, by majority vote, a result is reached that determines the public policy and affects the rights and duties of very nearly all of the citizens of our state. Where the vote is four-to-three, this means that one member of this court has decided where the balance is to be struck between the contending rights, duties and interests of two large segments of our citi*869zenry. That is indeed a fragile basis for deciding an issue of public policy in a democratic republic, and particularly so in an area of concern that has traditionally been one considered a part of the legislative, not the judicial, process.
As to the general matter of this court altering long-established common-law or court-made rules or standards, our court recently held:
“ ‘Moreover, we have made it clear that this court, in general, would depart from stare decisis only where unintentional conduct was involved and then only when there were compelling reasons for altering a court-made rule. Estate of King (1965), 28 Wis. (2d) 431, 137 N. W. (2d) 122. In Wilcox v. Wilcox (1965), 26 Wis. (2d) 617, 623, 133 N. W. (2d) 408, we pointed out our reluctance to deviate from precedent where rules of contract or property were involved.’ ” (Emphasis supplied.)25
In the writer’s opinion, such compelling reasons do not here exist for altering the common-law rule, either as to a partial merger of “invitee” and “licensee” categories or in selecting an appropriate standard of duty to be owed by owners, lessees and occupants to the “invitees-licensees.” So the writer would reverse, finding the complaint de-murrable for failure to allege a breach of the duty owed by the defendant-host to the plaintiff-social guest, with leave granted to the plaintiff to plead over if a cause of action for active negligence or failure to keep the property safe from a trap or concealed hazard can be and is pleaded.26
*870I am authorized to state that Mr. Justice Leo B. Hanley and Mr. Justice Connor T. Hansen join in this dissent.
Copeland v. Larson (1970), 46 Wis. 2d 337, 341, 174 N. W. 2d 745.
Id. at page 342.
Balas v. St. Sebastian’s Congregation (1975), 66 Wis. 2d 421, 426, 427, 225 N. W. 2d 428, this court stating: “At common law, the highest duty owed by an owner of land toward someone on the premises was that of ordinary care, owed to an invitee. This duty could be satisfied by alternative means. The landowner might either have his premises in a reasonably safe condition or give the invitee adequate and timely warning of latent and concealed perils which are known to the invitor but not to the invitee. Another way of stating this same proposition is that there is no duty to inspect and warn unless it is shown that the premises were not in a reasonably safe condition.”
Copeland v. Larson, supra, footnote 1, at page 342, this court holding: “To this court, the terms ‘business invitee,’ ‘business visitor,’ and ‘invitee’ are synonyms . . . .”
Flintrop v. Lefco (1971), 52 Wis. 2d 244, 247, 190 N. W. 2d 140, this court holding: “At the time of the accident, the plaintiff was a social guest of the defendant and between them the duty owed was that of licensor to .licensee.”
See: Footnote 1.
See: Footnotes 2, 3.
See: Sec. 101.11, Stats.
See: Schlicht v. Thesing (1964), 25 Wis. 2d 436, 438-440, 130 N. W. 2d 763.
Sec. 101.11, Stats.
Sec. 29.68, Stats.
Id.
Id.
Just v. Marinette County (1972), 56 Wis. 2d 7, 201 N. W. 2d 761.
Thus sec. 29.68, Stats., gives to certain entrants with permission no greater landowner duty than that owed to trespassers. See: Copeland v. Larson, supra, footnote 1, at page 341, this court summarizing the common-law rule as to landowner liability to trespassers as follows: “He [the owner of the land] is not liable for injury to trespassers, as a general rule, caused by his failure to exercise reasonable care to put his land in safe condition for them, nor is he obliged to refrain from operations or activities that might cause injury [text authority cited], at least until the trespasser is discovered.”
See generally, Holt, Magna Carta (Cambridge University Press, 1965), ch. VI.
“The poorest man may in his cottage bid defiance to all the force of the Crown. It may be frail, its roof may shake; the wind may blow through it; the storms may enter, — the rain may enter, — but the King of England cannot enter; all his forces dare not cross the threshold of the ruined tenement!” William Pitt (Earl of Chatham) — Speech on the Excise Bill. Roberts, Hoyt’s New Cyclopedia of Practical Quotations (Funk & Wagnalls Company, 1923), at page 371.
Art. IX, U. S. Const., providing: “The enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people.”
See: Footnote 3.
Sec. 101.11, Stats.
Sec. 29.68 (2), Stats.
See: Copeland v. Larson, supra, footnote 1, at page 343, this court holding: “An examination of sec. 29.68, Stats., indicates the landowner owes the ordinary duty of reasonable care to those entering upon his land for certain recreational purposes only if the permission to enter the land is granted for a valuable consideration. To a licensee the liability for ‘traps’ and ‘active negligence’ was altered by this statute to a liability for ‘willful or malicious failure to guard or to warn against a dangerous condition, use, structure or activity,’ and therefore the statute is in derogation of the common law and requires a strict construction.”
See; Art. I, U. S. Const., as to legislative powers; Art. II, as to executive powers; and Art. Ill, as to judicial powers. See also: Art. IV, Wis. Const., as to the legislative power, Art. V, as to the executive power; and Art. VII, as to the judicial power.
See:. State ex rel. Broughton v. Zimmerman (1952), 261 Wis. 398, 405, 52 N. W. 2d 903, overruled on other grounds, State ex rel. Reynolds v. Zimmerman (1964), 22 Wis. 2d 544, 126 N. W. 2d 551, where the court stated: “‘The legislative department determines what the law shall be, the executive department executes or administers the law, and the judicial department construes and applies the law. Neither one of these departments can arrogate to itself any control over either one of the other departments in matters which have been solely confided by the constitution to such other department.’ ” See also: Department of Revenue v. Nagle-Hart, Ine., ante, p. 224, 226, 234 N. W. 2d 350, this court holding: “It is not the function of the tax department to locate, define and enforce an appropriate public policy. That is the law-maMng function of the state legislature.”
State v. Michels Pipeline Construction, Inc. (1974), 63 Wis. 2d 278, 296, 217 N. W. 2d 339, 219 N. W. 2d 308, quoting irom Gottlieb v. Milwaukee (1967), 33 Wis. 2d 408, 431, 147 N. W. 2d 633.
Footnote 5 of the majority opinion states that the “result of what the court does is not a merger of the licensee or invitee categories but the abolition of them as relevant legal distinctions.” This cannot be done completely because of sec. 29.68, Stats. (See: *870Footnote 11.) To the extent that it ean be partially accomplished, it creates a new class that can be termed either “invitee-licensee” or “nontrespasser.”' To such nontrespassers (not covered by sec. 29.68) the majority applies “. . . the highest duty owed by an owner of land towards someone on the premises. . . .” Even under this “highest duty,” heretofore applied only to invitees, it is to be noted that this complaint is still demurrable because it does not allege that the condition was “latent or concealed.” (See: Footnote 3.) The complaint alleges the icy patch plaintiff slipped on was known to the defendant. If the condition was concealed, the defendant had the same duty to warn the plaintiff whether he was a licensee or an invitee. (See: Szafranski v. Radetzky (1966), 31 Wis. 2d 119, 126, 141 N. W. 2d 902 and footnote 3.) Since a defendant landowner has no duty to warn of a condition that is not latent or concealed, the failure to allege the latency or concealment of the condition is fatal, and the complaint is demurrable. See: Schutt v. Schmid (1973), 60 Wis. 2d 173, 175, 208 N. W. 2d 306, the court holding, in reference to a licensor-licensee situation where concealment of the condition is also a prerequisite for the landowner’s duty to warn: “Since there is no allegation that the condition was concealed, the demurrer to the complaint should have been sustained.”

=== CASE 9741135 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:55.822167+00 ===

V. J. Brennan, J.
Defendant was convicted on July 2, 1974, in Detroit Recorder’s Court of larceny by conversion under $100 in violation of MCLA 750.362; MSA 28.594. He brings this appeal as a matter of right. We affirm.
Defendant was an employee of the Wayne County Road Commission. He was instructed by his supervisor on May 21, 1974, to deliver certain guardrails which had been removed from a section of 1-94 to the Wyoming yard of the Wayne County Road Commission. An employee of a private junkyard in Detroit testified that on that day a Wayne County Road Commission truck with two occupants entered the junkyard and sold certain metal guardrails and were given a receipt therefor. When asked by the prosecuting attorney if he saw the person in court who had sold him the guardrails, the witness replied, "I can’t identify anybody.”
The testimony of an expert witness tended to show that the signature on the receipt was that of the defendant. A police officer testified that, after being advised of his rights, the defendant made an oral confession.
Defendant brings several allegations of error. Defendant contends that plaintiff failed to establish the corpus delicti aliunde the confession, and that the admission of the confession was, therefore, error. Defendant next contends that the receipt from the junkyard was erroneously admitted into evidence because of the absence of proper authentication as a business record qualifying as an exception to the hearsay rule. Defendant fur*507ther contends that documents which were admitted to serve as a standard of comparison for the handwriting expert to use in identifying the signature of defendant on the receipt were not authenticated by any foundation which would show that the specimen signatures were genuine.
The corpus delicti of a crime may be established by circumstantial evidence and reasonable inferences. People v Allen, 390 Mich 383; 212 NW2d 21 (1973), Peterson v Oceana Circuit Judge, 243 Mich 215; 219 NW 934 (1928). In the instant case, the defendant’s supervisor ordered the defendant to load the guardrails onto a Wayne County Road Commission truck, and to deliver the guardrails to the "Wyoming yard” of the Commission. The supervisor observed the defendant loading the guardrails as ordered. An employee at a private junkyard in Detroit testified that later the same day a Wayne County Road Commission truck entered the junkyard, loaded with guardrails and occupied by two men who sold the guardrails, and signed a receipt for the money received. A reasonable inference to be drawn at this point is that property of the Wayne County Road Commission had been unlawfully converted. The patent unwillingness of the witness to attempt to identify the occupants of the truck (duly noted by the trial judge) does not bear on the question of the corpus delicti, because it is elementary that the identity of the perpetrators of a crime is not an element of the corpus delicti. We find, therefore, that the evidence submitted and reasonable inferences therefrom were sufficient to establish the corpus delicti aliunde the confession. Accordingly, it was not error to admit the confession of the defendant as evidence against him.
Defendant contends that the receipt was not *508properly authenticated as a business record. The record shows that the court suggested to the prosecutor that he ask the witness who kept and produced the receipt if it was the receipt he gave. The witness responded, "That particular item, there, that’s part two of a three-part copy. That’s the third part, right. The original goes to the people that brought the stuff in.” We think that this statement by the witness was sufficient reasonably to convince the court that the document was entitled to be admitted as a business record exception to the hearsay rule. Whether or not a sufficient foundation has been laid for the admission of evidence is a matter addressed to the discretion of the trial court and its determination as to this matter should not be lightly set aside. People v Krulikowski, 60 Mich App 28; 230 NW2d 290 (1975), Champion v Champion, 368 Mich 84, 97; 117 NW2d 107, 109 (1962).
Finally, defendant contends, in substance, that the use of timesheets purportedly signed by defendant as a standard of comparison by an expert witness to show that it was defendant who signed the receipt at the junkyard was error because a proper foundation had not been laid establishing that it was in fact the defendant whose signature appeared on the timesheets. Upon careful examination of the record we find that defendant did not preserve this error for appeal. While defendant did make a general objection to the admission of the documentary evidence when first offered, and later argued that the evidence did not "tie up the defendant with any crime * * * ”, we find that the defendant did not object with enough specificity to give the court notice of his grounds, so as to afford the court opportunity to cure or obviate the error. People v Kowalek, 296 Mich 714; 296 NW *509856 (1941), People v Hallman, 299 Mich 657; 1 NW2d 28 (1941). Brown v Brown, 338 Mich 492, 503; 61 NW2d 656, 661 (1953), cert den, 348 US 816; 75 S Ct 26; 99 L Ed 644 (1954). The record gives no indication that the plaintiff was unable to produce a witness who could have testified to the genuineness of the defendant’s signature on the timesheets if defendant had clearly objected on this ground. We will not consider on appeal error which, upon proper objection, might have been cured in the court below.
Having examined defendant’s other allegations of error, we find them to be harmless. Defendant is not entitled to a perfect trial, only to a fair one. Michigan v Tucker, 417 US 433, 446; 94 S Ct 2357, 2365; 41 L Ed 2d 182, 194 (1974).
MCLA 769.26; MSA 28.1096 provides,
"No judgment or verdict shall be set aside or reversed or a new trial granted by any court of this state in any criminal case, on the ground of * * * improper admission or rejection of evidence * * * unless in the opinion of the court, after an examination of the entire cause, it shall affirmatively appear that the error complained of has resulted in a miscarriage of justice.”
The Michigan Supreme Court has consistently followed this policy. People v Howard, 391 Mich 597; 218 NW2d 20 (1974), People v Kregger, 335 Mich 457; 56 NW2d 349 (1953), People v Cooper, 328 Mich 159; 43 NW2d 310 (1950), People v Hawks, 206 Mich 233; 172 NW 405 (1919). We agree. People v Keiswetter, 7 Mich App 334; 151 NW2d 829 (1967), People v Carr, 2 Mich App 222; 139 NW2d 329 (1966).
Affirmed.
Bronson, P. J., concurred.

=== CASE 9741136 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:55.826813+00 ===

*510D. E. Holbrook, Jr., J.
(dissenting). The testimony of the police handwriting expert was essential to the prosecution in convicting the defendant. Without it the prosecution could not prove that the defendant was the person who delivered the guardrails to the scrapyard and received the money. Whether or not the trial court considered the scrapyard employee a perjurer, his testimony that he could not identify who delivered the guardrails must be controlling unless the handwriting analysis is admissible.
It is a general rule that this Court will not review a claimed error unless a timely objection is made. GCR 1963, 516.2. It is also a rule that an objection without specifying the grounds will not preserve the issue for appeal. Campbell v Charles J Rogers Construction Co, 58 Mich App 411, 416; 228 NW2d 398, 401 (1975). In the present case, although only a general objection was made when the police expert testified, the objection was renewed when the documents were admitted, and in another context, in detail. Furthermore, the documents that the expert relied on were not admitted until the close of the people’s proofs and defense counsel during cross-examination of the police expert challenged the expert’s basis for relying on the documents.
Turning to the merits of the defendant’s claim, I conclude that the prosecution failed to establish that the signature on the receipt was the defendant’s. Before a comparison of handwriting can be made it is necessary that there be at least one genuine handwriting sample. MCLA 600.2144; MSA 27A.2144. The police expert acknowledged on cross-examination that he was not familiar with the defendant’s handwriting. Champion v Champion, 368 Mich 84; 117 NW2d 107 (1962), Vinton v *511Peck, 14 Mich 287 (1866), see McCormick, Evidence (2d ed), § 221, p 547. Furthermore, unlike People v Lambath, 297 Mich 349; 297 NW 519 (1941), there was no proof that the defendant signed the receipt, in fact that is what the prosecution was seeking to prove. Consequently, in order to establish that the signature on the receipt was the defendant’s the prosecution was required first to show that the signatures on the time sheet were the defendant’s. Without establishing that, all the prosecution is able to show is that the signature on the receipt is the same as the signatures on the time sheet. Flickema v Henry Kraker Co, 252 Mich 406, 410; 233 NW 362, 363 (1930), First National Bank of Houghton v Robert, 41 Mich 709, 711; 3 NW 199 (1879). Since the signatures are the only way to link the defendant to the crime, this is not enough to support a conviction.
The relevancy of the time sheet depends on the fact that signatures on the time sheet are in fact the defendant’s. Because the statements are being used to prove the truth of the matter asserted, i.e., that the signature is the defendant’s, it is necessary to find a hearsay exception. McCormick, Evidence, § 246. The applicable exception in this case is the business records exception to the hearsay rule since the time sheets are kept as a normal course of the employer’s business. MCLA 600.2146; MSA 27A.2146, People v Kirtdoll, 391 Mich 370; 217 NW2d 37 (1974). However, it is necessary that a business record be authenticated before it is admitted into evidence. People v Kirtdoll, supra, at 387, Flickema v Henry Kraker Co, supra, at 409.
In this case, the time sheets that were introduced did not have a proper foundation. In order to lay the proper foundation for the admission of the time sheets, the prosecution should have pro*512duced the person in charge of the employment records. This would have permitted defense counsel the opportunity to challenge the authenticity of the records and the methods by which they were kept. People v Kirtdoll, supra.
In order to use an expert in handwriting analysis it is necessary to have a proven genuine signature. First National Bank of Houghton v Robert, supra. In this case there is no proven signature of the defendant so that the expert had nothing on which to base his opinion. Without either the expert’s opinion or the time sheets as evidence, the trier of fact could not have found through competent evidence that the defendant in fact made the delivery of the guardrails to the scrapyard.
I would reverse and remand for a new trial.

=== CASE 2226286 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:05.391774+00 ===

557 N.W.2d 645 (1997)
251 Neb. 372
R.H. MELICK, Personal Representative of the Estate of Elvera Laursen, deceased, Appellant,
v.
Pete R. SCHMIDT and United Materials Incorporated, a Nebraska Corporation, Appellees.
Travis LEISY, Appellant,
v.
Pete R. SCHMIDT and United Materials Incorporated, a Nebraska Corporation, Appellees.
Becky LEISY, Appellant,
v.
Pete R. SCHMIDT and United Materials Incorporated, a Nebraska Corporation, Appellees.
Nos. S-94-1173 to S-94-1175.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
January 3, 1997.
*647 Terry Curtiss, of Curtiss, Moravek & Curtiss, P.C., Alliance, for appellants.
James L. Zimmerman, of Sorensen & Zimmerman, P.C., and Stacy C. Nossaman-Petitt, of Nossaman Petitt Law Firm, Scottsbluff, for appellees.
WHITE, C.J., and CAPORALE, FAHRNBRUCH, LANPHIER, WRIGHT, CONNOLLY, and GERRARD, JJ.
LANPHIER, Justice.
Plaintiffs, Travis Leisy, Becky Leisy, and R.H. Melick, the personal representative of the estate of Elvera Laursen, appeal the granting by the Box Butte County District Court of motions for summary judgment in favor of defendants, Pete R. Schmidt and United Materials Incorporated.
In these consolidated proceedings, plaintiffs seek damages sustained in a July 24, 1990, motor vehicle accident. The accident occurred on a highway north of Alliance, Nebraska, and involved a tractor pulling a baler, driven by Travis Leisy, and a semi-trailer truck hauling gravel, driven by Schmidt. Travis Leisy's tractor was attempting a left turn into a driveway at the Laursen farmstead when it was struck from behind by the semi-trailer truck, which was attempting to pass. Actions were filed by Travis Leisy for personal injuries; by Becky Leisy, the mother of Travis Leisy and the owner of the baler, which was destroyed in the accident; and by Melick, as personal representative of the estate of Elvera Laursen, *648 the owner of the tractor, which was also destroyed in the accident. Elvera Laursen, who was Travis Leisy's grandmother, died after the accident, but before suit was filed for the damages.
Defendants were Schmidt and United Materials, the owner of the semi-trailer truck and employer of Schmidt. Defendants deposed Travis Leisy and moved for summary judgment, arguing that Travis Leisy had demonstrated contributory negligence to a degree greater than slight and was therefore barred from recovery as a matter of law. Defendants further asserted that Travis Leisy's contributory negligence was imputed to the other plaintiffs and also barred them from recovery. The trial court granted the motions. Plaintiffs appealed, alleging that the trial court erred in finding Travis Leisy guilty of contributory negligence greater than slight as a matter of law for turning his vehicle left after duly signaling the turn and checking for traffic to the rear; in finding that Travis Leisy should not have turned left without first pulling his tractor off the road and turning the tractor to get a safe view of the road behind him; in finding that Travis Leisy was the proximate cause of the accident; in finding that there was no genuine issue of material fact given the circumstances of the accident and the inferences drawn from them when considered in the light most favorable to plaintiffs; in imputing the negligence, if such existed, of Travis Leisy to Elvera Laursen, now deceased, since the evidence completely failed to demonstrate an agency relationship, family purpose relationship, or joint venture arrangement. We removed the causes from the Court of Appeals docket pursuant to our power to regulate the dockets of the appellate courts. We reverse the trial court's judgments and remand the causes for a new trial.
BACKGROUND
Travis Leisy, in his deposition and in his affidavit in opposition to defendants' motions for summary judgment, stated that on July 24, 1990, he was driving an International 1086 tractor that belonged to Elvera Laursen, pulling an International 8460 round baler that belonged to Becky Leisy north on Highway 385 about 3½ miles north of Alliance. He had just completed a custom-baling job and was returning to the Laursen farm. Travis Leisy was paid a percentage of the work actually done in such situations. He was driving the tractor with its signal flashers on, and the baler had a slow-moving-vehicle sign on its rear. Travis Leisy was in the northbound lane on the east side of Highway 385 with the tractor and baler "as far on to the shoulder as [he] could get." Just prior to the turn-in to the Laursen farm, Highway 385 descends into a valley. The turn-in to the Laursen farm is at the crest of the hill ascending out of the valley. Past the turn-in to the Laursen farm, the ground is flat for approximately 2 miles. There is no turnoff of any kind to the right ascending the hill or at the crest of the hill. Travis Leisy stated, "The hill is not marked with a no-passing zone, but should be." Travis Leisy stated that he normally travels on the right shoulder in that area "because people pass the slow moving machinery [he] operate[s] ... without being able to see the oncoming south bound traffic at and over the crest of the hill."
As Travis Leisy neared the turn-in to the Laursen farm, which was to the west of Highway 385 (a left-hand turn), he turned on the signal for a left-hand turn. He stated that he checked the turn signals before he left the field the day of the accident.
Travis Leisy stated that he checked for traffic behind him as he started his turn. He stated that he saw a small red car behind him and halted his turn to let the car pass. The car then passed him. He did not see any other vehicles, but is unable to recall if he looked to the rear before he started for the second time to make the left-hand turn.
Travis Leisy then began to turn left into the driveway of the Laursen farm. A truck driven by Schmidt, and owned by United Materials, struck the baler and the left rear wheel of the tractor when the front of the tractor crossed onto the west (left) shoulder of the turn-in.
The first time Travis Leisy remembers seeing the truck was when it was about a foot away from hitting him. He does not recollect the collision; after seeing the *649 front of the truck, his next recollection was of being placed in an ambulance. Travis Leisy stated that the slope of the hill and the baler blocked his vision of the truck coming up the hill. On flat ground, the baler would not have blocked the vision of a semi-trailer truck behind him in his lane.
The trial court examined Travis Leisy's deposition and his affidavit in opposition to the motions for summary judgment to determine if, under the holding of Petersen v. Schneider, 153 Neb. 815, 46 N.W.2d 355 (1951), modified 154 Neb. 303, 47 N.W.2d 863, Travis Leisy had failed, as a matter of law, to exercise reasonable care for his own safety and that of others by failing to look to the front and rear prior to turning. The court granted defendants' motions for summary judgment as to all of the plaintiffs. It found that Travis Leisy's deposition demonstrated that he did not look to the rear before he made his turn and that if he did so, he looked in a negligent manner. The court stated that Travis Leisy should have pulled off the road and turned his tractor to get a safe view of the road behind him before turning. The court found that Travis Leisy was the proximate cause of the accident and that his failure to see the truck before turning amounted to negligence as a matter of law.
The court also found that Travis Leisy was in the employ of Becky Leisy and that he was in the scope and course of his employment at the time of the accident. The court stated that Travis Leisy's negligence was imputed to Becky Leisy and that there was no genuine issue of material fact in that regard, so that summary judgment as to Becky Leisy was also required.
Finally, the court found as to the estate of Elvera Laursen that Travis Leisy was employed by Richard Laursen, the son of Elvera Laursen; that Richard Laursen was farming Elvera Laursen's farm; and that the tractor, which was owned by Elvera Laursen, was used in the farming operation. Therefore, Travis Leisy was Elvera Laursen's agent, and his negligence was imputed to her and her estate. Again, based on this imputed contributory negligence, the court found that there was no genuine issue of material fact and granted defendants' motions as a matter of law.
ASSIGNMENTS OF ERROR
In their briefs, all of the plaintiffs assigned the following as errors:
1. The District Court erred in finding Plaintiff Travis Leisy guilty of contributory negligence greater than slight as a matter of law for turning his vehicle left after duly signaling the turn and checking for traffic to the rear.
2. The District Court erred in finding that Plaintiff [Travis Leisy] should have not turned left without first pulling his tractor off the road and turning his tractor to get a safe view of the road behind him.
3. The District Court erred in finding that Travis Leisy was the proximate cause of the accident.
4. In granting Defendants' Motion[s] for Summary Judgment the District Court erred in finding there was no genuine issue of material fact given the circumstances of the accident and the inferences drawn from them when considered in the light most favorable to the Plaintiff[s].
Additionally, the personal representative of the estate of Elvera Laursen assigned the following as error:
5. The District Court erred in imputing the negligence, if such existed, of Travis Leisy to Elvera Laursen, now deceased, as the evidence completely failed to demonstrate an agency relationship, family purpose relationship or joint venture arrangement.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
Summary judgment is proper only when the pleadings, depositions, admissions, stipulations, and affidavits in the record disclose that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact or as to the ultimate inferences that may be drawn from those facts and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Harrison v. Seagroves, 250 Neb. 495, 549 N.W.2d 644 (1996); Lockard v. Nebraska Pub. Power Dist., 249 Neb. 971, 546 N.W.2d 824 (1996).
*650 ANALYSIS
On a motion for summary judgment, the question is not how a factual issue is to be decided, but whether any real issue of material fact exists. Kocsis v. Harrison, 249 Neb. 274, 543 N.W.2d 164 (1996).
In reviewing a summary judgment, an appellate court views the evidence in a light most favorable to the party against whom the judgment is granted and gives such party the benefit of all reasonable inferences deducible from the evidence. Lockard v. Nebraska Pub. Power Dist., supra.
The party moving for summary judgment has the burden to show that no genuine issue of material fact exists and must produce sufficient evidence to demonstrate that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Kocsis v. Harrison, supra. A movant for summary judgment makes a prima facie case by producing enough evidence to demonstrate that the movant is entitled to a judgment if the evidence were uncontroverted at trial. At that point, the burden of producing evidence shifts to the party opposing the motion. Washa v. Miller, 249 Neb. 941, 546 N.W.2d 813 (1996). The opposing party has the burden to present evidence showing an issue of material fact which prevents judgment as a matter of law for the moving party. Zion Wheel Baptist Church v. Herzog, 249 Neb. 352, 543 N.W.2d 445 (1996).
In the absence of a prima facie showing by the movant that he or she is entitled to summary judgment, the opposing party is not required to reveal evidence which he or she expects to produce at trial to prove the allegations contained in his or her petition. Roubideaux v. Davenport, 247 Neb. 746, 530 N.W.2d 232 (1995).
Applying these standards to the facts of this case, we conclude that genuine issues of material fact exist as to the existence of both Travis Leisy's and Schmidt's negligence and the degree of negligence in comparison.
The statute applicable to this cause of action is Neb.Rev.Stat. § 25-21,185 (Reissue 1995), which provides that in a cause of action for negligence accruing before February 8, 1992, the plaintiff's negligence will not bar recovery if his or her negligence is only slight and the defendant's negligence is gross in comparison.
Therefore, in order for defendants to be entitled to summary judgment in this case, they have the burden of proving, under the facts viewed most favorably to plaintiffs, that (1) Travis Leisy's contributory negligence was more than slight as a matter of law or (2) Schmidt's negligence was not gross in comparison to Travis Leisy's negligence as a matter of law. See Harrison v. Seagroves, supra. If reasonable minds might draw different conclusions from the facts thus resolved, the issues of negligence and contributory negligence are for the jury. Parmenter v. Johnson, 213 Neb. 725, 331 N.W.2d 263 (1983). We find that several different conclusions can be drawn from the evidence presented in this case.
Regarding Travis Leisy's alleged negligence, he testified that he is not certain whether, after the small red car passed him, he checked to the rear for other vehicles. Yet, he also stated that he saw no other traffic after the small red car passed him. This court has held that a left-turning motorist has the duty not to turn unless and until the movement can be made with reasonable safety. Huntwork v. Voss, 247 Neb. 184, 525 N.W.2d 632 (1995). One turning left must exercise reasonable care under all of the circumstances. Id.
The exercise of reasonable care includes the requirement that a left-turning motorist maintain a proper lookout by looking both to the front and to the rear before executing a left turn between intersections. [Citation omitted.] "... The observations must be made immediately before the impending movement; otherwise ... the observation would be completely ineffective for the accomplishment of the purpose intended."
Id. at 188, 525 N.W.2d at 635.
If a driver who is turning left across a highway fails to look at a time when looking would be effective, he or she is negligent as a matter of law. See id. However, if the driver looks but does not see an approaching automobile because of unusual conditions or circumstances, the question of the driver's negligence is usually one for the jury. See id.
*651 Travis Leisy testified that he looked to his rear and saw a small red car attempting to pass and that he saw no traffic after the small red car. He also testified that he was turning left at the crest of a hill ascending from a valley, a hill which could obstruct his view of traffic approaching in the same lane from the rear. Finally, he testified that his tractor had reached the other side of the highway and was struck in the rear by the semi-trailer truck.
We find that reasonable minds could draw different conclusions from this evidence. For example, one could conclude that Travis Leisy failed to look when it would have been effective to do so. On the other hand, one could conclude that Travis Leisy's failure to see the truck approaching was due to the obstructed view and that the truck pulled out to pass at the last second.
Defendants' motions for summary judgment, arguing that Travis Leisy demonstrated contributory negligence to a degree greater than slight and was therefore barred from recovery as a matter of law, were incorrectly granted. In so ruling, we need not reach defendants' further assertion that the contributory negligence was imputed to the other plaintiffs and also barred them from recovery.
CONCLUSION
In conclusion, we find that the evidence in this case is such that reasonable minds could draw different conclusions and inferences from the evidence as to the negligence of Schmidt and the contributory negligence of Travis Leisy, and as to the degree thereof, when each is compared with the other. In such a case, the issue must be submitted to the jury. See, Harrison v. Seagroves, 250 Neb. 495, 549 N.W.2d 644 (1996); Schmidt v. Orton, 190 Neb. 257, 207 N.W.2d 390 (1973).
For the reasons stated above, we reverse the district court's judgments and remand the causes for a new trial.
REVERSED AND REMANDED FOR A NEW TRIAL.

=== CASE 9741137 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:59.259611+00 ===

Sharp, J.
This action, initiated by Dwight Smoker (Smoker), plaintiff-appellee, against the First National Bank of Elkhart County (Bank), defendant-appellant, is for an alleged conversion by the Bank of sides of beef and hides from 85 head of cattle and for misappropriation of the proceeds from the sale of said cattle. The conversion allegedly occurred when the Bank exerted dominion and control over the cattle when they were in the hands of its debtor, J. L. Whisler and Sons, Inc. (VYhisler) but when title to said cattle remained with Smoker. Trial was had before the court without the intervention of a jury and resulted in a judgment for Smoker in the sum of $17,576.40.- The Bank duly filed its motion to correct errors, which was overruled, and this appeal was then taken.
*74In this case counsel for both parties have filed excellant briefs and have made helpful oral arguments.
The specifications of error, as presented by the Bank’s motion to correct errors, are:
(1) The judgment is contrary to law.
(2) Certain conclusions of the trial court are legally erroneous.
(3) Certain Findings of Fact are not supported by sufficient evidence.
(4) The trial court erroneously allowed certain witnesses to testify when the names of said witnesses had not been disclosed to the Bank, contrary to IC 1971, 26-1-1-205; Ind. Ann. Stat. § 19-1-205(6) (Burns 1964).
The trial court, upon request, made special Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, which read as follows:
“FINDINGS OF FACT
I
The Plaintiff, Dwight Smoker, is now and was prior to April 19, 1967, a producer of fat cattle, who, beginning in September 1966 and continuing until April 19, 1967, sold to J. L. Whisler and Sons, Inc., over fifteen hundred (1500) head of said cattle on a grade-and-weight basis.
II
Throughout the course of dealing between the Plaintiff and the said J. L. Whisler and Sons, Inc., the transactions between the parties had been in accordance with the recognized custom and usage in the trade, to-wit: cattle were delivered live by the Plaintiff, slaughtered by the packer; shrouded and hung to chill and then approximately twenty-four (24) hours later were graded by the Government grader and, at that time, the United States Department of Agriculture price list for the day of delivery, which was published the day after delivery, was applied to the grade and weight of Plaintiff’s cattle in order to determine the price to be paid Plaintiff and then a check was issued in payment thereof.
*75III
On April 19, 1967, pursuant to a telephone request of the previous day, the Plaintiff delivered to J. L. Whisler and Sons, Inc., eight-five (85) head of cattle to be sold on a grade-and-weight basis in keeping with the course of dealing between the parties and the custom and usage of the trade.
IV
It was the intention of the Plaintiff and J. L. Whisler and Sons, Inc., to be bound by their course of dealing and the custom and usage in the trade as to the shipment delivered April 19,1967.
V
After delivery on the morning of April 19, 1967, the cattle were slaughtered, shrouded and placed in the cooler at J. L. Whisler and Sons, Inc., but were not graded or priced.
VI
On the 19th of April 1967, the Defendant, First National Bank of Elkhart County, who had in full force and effect, security agreements and financing statements on the inventory of J. L. Whisler and Sons, Inc., which was, according to the terms of said instruments, owned by J. L. Whisler and Sons, Inc., made a demand for the payment of all sums due it from J. L. Whisler and Sons, Inc. Upon failure of the said J. L. Whisler and Sons, Inc., to meet the demand, the First National Bank of Elkhart County, by and through its agent, Clayton Emmert, offset all corporate bank accounts of J. L. Whisler and Sons, Inc., against said indebtedness and instructed J. L. Whisler and Sons, Inc., to proceed to liquidate all meat held by said packer on said date in the normal course of business, but to surrender all sums received to the Defendant.
VII
Thereafter, pursuant to the direction and orders of the Defendant, the carcasses of the eighty-five (85) head of cattle delivered by the Plaintiff on April 19th were sold and the proceeds therefrom placed under the control of the Defendant who applied these sums and all others received to the payment of certain administrative expenses; payment for certain other cattle received the 19th day of April, after the shipment delivered by the Plaintiff; and, to the liquidation of the debt of J. L. Whisler and Sons, Inc., to the Defendant.
*76VIII
The Plaintiff never received any payment for the eighty-five (85) head of cattle delivered April 19,1967.
IX
At the time the Defendant made its demand of J. L. Whisler and Sons, Inc., the eighty-five (85) carcasses, representing the cattle delivered by the Plaintiff, had neither been graded nor priced.
X
The title to and ownership of the eighty-five (85) carcasses delivered by the Plaintiff on April 19, 1967 to J. L. Whisler and Sons, Inc., remained at all times in the Plaintiff.
XI
The Defendant converted the property of the Plaintiff to its own use and benefit.
XII
At the time of said conversion by Defendant the value of said cattle was $20,679.80.
XIII
Plaintiff recovered from a bond of J. R. Whisler and Sons, Inc., because of their failure to pay for said cattle, $3,103.40 and the damage to Plaintiff is thus mitigated by that amount. Upon the foregoing findings of fact, the Court states the following:
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
I
The law is with the Plaintiff, Dwight Smoker, and against the Defendant, First National Bank (formerly known as First National Bank of Elkhart County).
II
Ownership of and title to the eighty-five (85) head of cattle delivered April 19,1967 by the Plaintiff to J. L. Whisler and Sons, Inc., remained at all times in the Plaintiff.
III
The Defendant, First National Bank of Elkhart County, converted to its own use and benefit the proceeds from the sale of Plaintiff’s cattle.
*77IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED, That the Defendant is indebted to the Plaintiff in the sum of Seventeen Thousand Five Hundred Seventy-six Dollars and Forty cents ($17,576.40), and that judgment is hereby entered against the defendant First National Bank (formerly known as First National Bank of Elkhart County) for said amount.
Costs of this action are charged to the Defendant.”
In determining whether a decision is contrary to law, this court may only consider the evidence most favorable to the Appellee together with all reasonable inferences which may be drawn therefrom
“It is only where the evidence is without conflict and can lead to but one conclusion, and the trial court has_ reached an opposite conclusion, that the decision of the trial court will be set aside on the ground that it is contrary to law.” Pokraka, et al. v. Lummus Co. (1952), 230 Ind. 523, 104 N. E. 2d 669; Menze v. Clark (1968), 142 Ind. App. 385, 387, 235 N. E. 2d 69.
There are two separate and distinct transactions which precipitated this action. The first involves the perfected security agreement between the bank and Whisler creating a security interest in all the invnetory, accounts receivable, after acquired property and proceeds of Whisler. The second transaction is the oral contract for sale of eighty-five head of cattle to Whisler by Smoker, said oral contract being based upon custom and usage in the trade and the course of dealing between the immediate parties. We are concerned with the interrelation of these two separate transactions and the legal efficacy of each vis-a-vis the interests of third parties. The issue is one of priority of interests between a secured party with a “floating lien” and a supplier of raw materials to the debtor. The fundamental issue is whether an oral agreement between a buyer and seller, relying heavily on custom and usage in the trade, can delay the passage of title to' goods already delivered to the buyer so as to defeat the rights of third party secured creditors of the buyer and *78transform such a creditor into a convertor of goods in the possession of the buyer. To put it another way, will a secured party holding a perfected security interest in a buyer’s inventory, accounts receivable, after-acquired property and proceeds, when liquidating the buyer’s inventory upon default, be deemed to have converted the property of a subsequent unperfected seller who delivers goods to the buyer before default but who reserved title until a specified time after delivery? Although we are concerned with the common law action of conversion, we must look to the Uniform Commercial Code, IC 1971, 26-1-101, et seq.; Ind. Ann. Stat. § 19-1-101, et seq. (Burns 1964), to determine the legal effect of the transactions and to ascertain the respective rights and interests of the parties involved. Once the respective rights of the parties have been established, we must then apply the applicable principles embodied in the action for tortious conversion.
The argument advanced by Smoker in favor of the judgment below is essentially that the parties to the contract for the sale of the cattle intended title to pass only after the cattle had been graded on the day following delivery. Smoker contends that the law prior to the passage of the Uniform Commercial Code was that passage of title depended upon the intentions of the parties to the contract, and that custom and usage in the trade and course of dealing, when applicable, were to be given effect in determining the intentions of the parties. Allegedly, the Code left this prior law unchanged and thus title remained in Smoker at the time the Bank made demand for payment of its note. The subsequent exercise of dominion or control by the Bank over the cattle was a conversion by the Bank.
Smoker’s argument, bereft of glossing and reduced to essentials, is that custom and usage in the trade plus the course of dealing between Smoker and Whisler amounted to an express agreement as to when title to the goods was to pass. This explicit agreement, because it is based on the above in*79gredients, negates and prevents the application of IC 1971, 26-1-2-401; Ind. Ann. Stat. § 19-2-401 (Burns 1964), and the applicable sections of the Article on Secured Transactions (Article 9). An ancillary argument is that the cattle, although in the possession of Whisler, were not identified to the contract prior to grading. Since goods must be identified to the contract before the buyer can obtain a special property in the goods and before title passes, Whisler did not have an interest in the cattle at the time of demand so as to allow the security interest to attach under IC 1971, 26-1-9-204; Ind. Ann. Stat. § 19-9-204 (Burns 1964).
On February 16, 1966, Whisler executed a Security Agreement in favor of the Bank whereby Whisler granted to the Bank a security interest in all inventory then owned and thereafter acquired and all accounts receivable, then existing and thereafter arising, other collateral and proceeds and products of the foregoing categories of collateral. The Bank duly perfected its security interests by filing a Financing Statement with the Secretary of State of Indiana on February 18, 1966, in accordance with IC 1971, 26-1-9-401; Ind. Ann. Stat. §19-9-401 (Burns 1965). The Bank, thereafter made a series of working capital loans to Whisler based on its secured position as evidenced by a promissory note dated March 31, 1966 which was secured by the above-mentioned security agreement.
Under IC 1971, 26-1-9-204; Ind. Ann. Stat. § 19-9-204 (Burns 1964), a security interest cannot attach to specific goods or collateral until there is an agreement that it attach and value is given and the debtor acquires rights in the collateral. It is uncontroverted that the first two requiremnets were met by the bank in this case. Nor does Smoker specifically and directly argue that Whisler did not have such rights in the cattle as to allow the Bank’s security interest to attach thereto. Thus, although not specifically mentioned by either party, we deem it necessary to determine what rights Whisler had in the cattle and whether the rights *80were sufficient to allow the Bank’s security interest to attach to the same.
Several courts have considered the question in the context of whether absolute ownership in and title to collateral was the requisite right necessary to permit the attachment of the secured creditor’s interest. They uniformly have held that the location of the nebulous concept “title” was immateral in ascertaining whether a debtor had sufficient rights in specific collateral. In James Talcott, Inc. v. Franklin Nat. Bank (1972), Minn., 194 N. W. 2d 775, the court stated:
“Thus the draftsmen of the code intended that its provisions should not be circumvented by manipulation of the locus of title. For this reason, consignment sales, conditional sales, and other arrangements or devices whereby title is retained in the seller for a period following possession by the debtor are all treated under Art. 9 as though title had been transferred to the debtor and the creditor-seller had retained only a security interest in the goods. See Sussen Rubber Co. v. Hertz (1969), 19 Ohio App. 1, 249 N. E. 2d 65, involving a consignment sale. For the purposes of answering rights of ownership under Art. 9, we hold, based upon the stipulated facts of this case, that defendant had only a security interest in the equipment despite a purported reservation of title and that debtor ‘owned’ the equipment at the time that the extension agreement was executed.”
Also, in Cain v. Country Club Delicatessen of Saybrook, Inc. (1964), Conn., 203 A. 2d 441, the court, in attempting to ascertain when a buyer obtained rights in the collateral, observed that mere possession was insufficient to constitute such rights in the collateral. The court held that it was only when the conditional sales contract was executed some time after possession that the debtor acquired rights in the collateral so as to allow the security interest to attach. See Herington Livestock Auction Company v. Verschoor (1970), Iowa, 179 N. W. 2d 491; Evans Products Company v. Jorgensen (1966), 245 Ore. 362, 421 P. 2d 978; 30 ALR 3d 9, § 13 and § 33.
*81Thus, it would follow that when a debtor acquires possession of collateral under a contract, he has acquired such rights in the collateral as to allow the security interest of his creditor to attach to the collateral, and this is true regardless of who may be deemed to have title to and ownership of such collateral.
This line of reasoning is further supported by the fact that once the cattle come into the possession of Whisler, they cease to be classified as “farm products” and become “inventory.” The official comments to IC 1971, 26-1-9-109; Ind. Ann. Stat. § 19-9-109, while not binding, are persuasive and read in pertinent part as follows:
“Goods are ‘farm products’ only if they are in the possession of a debtor engaged in farming operations.
* * *
“When crops or livestock or their products come into the possession of a person not engaged in farming operations they cease to be ‘farm products.’ If they come into possession of a marketing agency for sale or distribution or a manufacturer or processor as raw materials, they become ‘inventory.’ ”
Thus, regardless of whether Whisler had obtained title to the cattle, they became part of his inventory upon their coming into his possession pursuant to a contract for sale. As inventory, Whisler acquired such rights in and to the cattle so that the security interest of the Bank attached.
Having determined that the Bank had a perfected security interest in the eighty-five head of cattle as part of the inventory of Whisler, it remains to be determined if the oral agreement between Smoker and Whisler, in conjunction with the provisions of Article 2, in any way negate or vitiate the security interest of the bank. We must determine the legal efficacy of the retention of title by a seller after delivery of goods upon a prior perfected security interest.
*82In this regard, we must look to IC 1971, 26-1-2-401, Ind. Ann. Stat. § 19-2-401 (Burns 1964), which reads as follows:
“Each provision of this Article [Chapter] with regard to the rights, obligations and remedies of the seller, the buyer, purchasers or other third parties applies irrespective of title to the goods except where the provision refers to such title. Insofar as situations are not covered by the other provisions of this Article [Chapter] and matters concerning title become material the following rules apply:
(1) Title to goods cannot pass under a contract for sale prior to their identification to the contract (section [19-] 2-501), and unless otherwise explicitly agreed the buyer acquires by their identification a special property as limited by this Act [Chapters 1 to 9 of this title]. Any retention or reservation by the seller of the title (property) in goods shipped or delivered to the buyer is limited in effect to a reservation of a security interest. Subject to these provisions and to the provisions of Article [Chapter] on Secured Transactions (Article 9 [§§ 19-9-101 — 19-9-507]), title to goods passes from the seller to the buyer in any manner and on any conditions explicitly agreed on by the parties.
(2) Unless otherwise explicitly agreed title passes to the buyer at the time and place at which the seller completes his performance with reference to the physical delivery of the goods, despite any reservation of a security interest and even though a document of title is to be delivered at a different time or place; and in particular despite any reservation of a security interest by the bill of lading
(a) if the contract requires or authorizes the seller to send the goods to the buyer but does not require him to deliver them at destination, title passes to the buyer at the time and place of shipment; but
(b) if the contract requires delivery at destination, title passes on tender there.
(3) Unless otherwise explicitly agreed where delivery is to be made without moving the goods
(a) if the seller is to deliver a document of title, title passes at the time when and the place where he delivers such documents; or
(b) if the goods are at the time of contracting already identified and no documents are to be delivered, title passes at the time and place of contracting.
*83(4) A rejection or other refusal by the buyer to_ receive or retain the goods, whether or not justified, or a justified revocation of acceptance revests title to the goods in the seller. Such revesting occurs by operation of law and is not a ‘sale.’ ”
Also relevant are IC 1971, 26-1-1-201; Ind. Ann. Stat. § 19-1-201(3) and (37) (Burns 1964) which read as follows:
“ (3) ‘Agreement means the bargain of the parties in fact as found in their language or by implication from other circumstances including course of dealing or usage of trade or course of performance as provided in this Act (sections [19-] 1-205 and [19-] 2-208). Whether an agreement has legal consequences is determined by the provisions of this Act, if applicable; otherwise by the law of contracts (section [19-] 1-103).” (our emphasis)
“ (37) ‘Security interest’ means an interest in personal property or fixtures which secures payment or performance of an obligation. The retention or reservation of title by a seller of goods notivithstanding shipment or delivery to the buyer (section [19-] 2-401) is limited in effect to a reservation of a 'security interest’.” (our emphasis)
The above provisions are supported and reaffirmed by IC 1971, 26-1-9-113; Ind. Ann. Stat. § 19-9-113 (Burns 1964) and IC 1971, 26-1-9-202; Ind. Ann. Stat. § 19-9-202 (Burns 1964), which read as follows:
“Section 19-9-113. A security interest arising solely under the Article on Sales (Article 2 [§§ 19-2-101 — 19-2-725] is subject to the provisions of this Article [Chapter] except that to the extent that and so long as the debtor does not have or does not lawfully obtain possession of the goods
(a) no security agreement is necessary to make the security interest enforceable; and
(b) no filing is required to perfect the security interest; and
(c) the rights of the secured party on default by the debtor are governed by the Article on Sales (Article 2 [§§ 19-2-101 — 19-2-725] ). [Acts 1963, ch. 317, § 9-113, p. 539.]”
*84“Section 19-9-202. Each provision of this Article with regard to rights, obligations and remedies applies whether title to collateral is in the secured party or in the debtor.”
Absent an explicit agreement, title to goods under § 19-2-401(2), supra, passes to the buyer at the time and place at which the seller completes his performance with reference to physical delivery of the goods. Thus, if Smoker and Whisler had not entered into an explicit agreement concerning when title was to pass, said title would have passed upon the physical delivery of the goods and Smoker would have had, at most, a purchase money security interest, IC 1971, 26-1-9-107; Ind. Ann. Stat. § 19-9-107 (Burns 1964). But, as was pointed our earlier, Smoker argues that there was an explicit agreement based on custom and usage in the trade and the course of dealing between the parties, and that this explicit agreement prevents the application of § 19-2-401 (2) supra, and allows title to remain in Smoker after delivery.
The evidence introduced at trial showed an oral agreement by telephone between Whisler and Smoker with respect to sale of the cattle in controversy. The record is devoid of any evidence indicating an explicit oral or written agreement between Whisler and Smoker concerning the retention of title in the cattle after they were delivered to Whisler, except as reference may be made to custom and usage of the trade. However, the drafters of the Uniform Commercial Code recognized that when dealing with a usage of the trade, it should be incorporated into a contract, whether oral or written, as an explicit agreement only:
“where a usage of the trade has been previously made explicit by reduction to a standard set of ‘rules and regulations’ currently incorporated by reference into the contract for the parties, a relevant provision of those ‘rules and regulations’ is ‘explicit’ within the meaning of the second.” (Comment 3 to the official text of the Uniform Commercial Code following Burns Ind. Stat. Annot. § 19-2-501, 1964 Repl.)
*85Nowhere in the record of this case is there found any evidence relating to a standard set of “rules and regulations” in the packing industry with respect to the retention of title in a farmer after the cattle have been delivered to a packer. The most we have in this case is an implicit understanding between the parties, as well as within the industry as a whole, as to when title is to pass. The implicit understanding is insufficient to meet the demands of the provisions of the Code and we, therefore, hold that there was not an explicit agreement between the parties as to when title would pass so as to remove the oral contract from the provisions of § 19-9-401 (2).
But even assuming that the evidence of custom and usage and the course of dealing between the parties was sufficient to establish an explicit agreement, it is of no avail to Smoker. The argument of Smoker ignores the sentences in § 19-2-401(1), supra, regarding explicit agreements concerning retention of title to the effect that “any retention or reservation by the seller of the title (property) in goods shipped or delivered to the buyer is limited in effect to a reservation of a security interest.” The definition of “agreement” as found in §19-1-201(8), supra, now becomes important since it specifically states that whether any agreement, even those based upon course of dealing or usage of trade, has legal consequences is determined by the provisions of the Act. Thus, the legal effect of retention of title by a seller is only the reservation of a security interest and therefore, the seller must comply with the provisions of Article 9, wherein § 19-9-202 specifically states that each provision of the article apply whether title to the collateral is in the secured party or the debtor. James Talcott, Inc. v. Franklin Nat. Bank, supra, Cain v. Country Club Delicatessen of Saybrook, Inc., supra, Herington Livestock Auction Company v. Verschoor, supra; 17 ALR 1018, 1081, § 29.
The final question to be answered concerns the definition and scope of the term “identification,” and whether the cattle *86in question were identified to the contract prior to grading. IC 1971, 26-1-2-501, Ind. Ann. Stat. § 19-2-501 (Burns 1964), reading as follows:
“(1) The buyer obtains a special property and an insurable interest in goods by identification of existing goods as goods to which the contract refers even though the goods so identified are nonconforming and he has an option to return or reject them. Such identification can be made at any time and in any manner explicitly agreed to by the parties. In the absence of explicit agreement identification occurs
(a) when the contract is made if it is for the sale of goods already existing and identified;
(b) if the contract is for the sale of future goods other than those described in paragraph (c), when goods are shipped, marked or otherwise designated by the seller as goods to which the contract refers;
(c) when the crops are planted or otherwise become growing crops or the young are conceived if the contract is for the sale of unborn young to be born within twelve [12] months after contracting or for the sale of crops to be harvested within twelve [12] months or the next normal harvest season after contracting whichever is longer.
(2) The seller retains an insurable interest in goods so long as title to or any security interest in the goods remains in him and where the identification is by the seller alone he may until default or insolvency or notification to the buyer that the identification is final substitute other goods for those identified.
(3) Nothing in this section impairs any insurable interest recognized under any other statute or rule of law.”
Title cannot pass before identification but the two are not synonymous. Identification is of limited importance under the Code although it does determine the earliest point at which title may pass. While § 19-2-501 does provide that identification may be made at any time and in any manner explicitly agreed to by the parties; this does not mean that the parties may delay the passage of title by the simple expedient of agreeing that the goods are not yet identified to the contract when, in fact, they have already been *87delivered to the buyer. Identification refers to when the goods are still in the possession of the seller. Thus, by explicit agreement, the parties may decide that the goods are identified at a point in time earlier than those enunciated in § 19-2-501, but in no event can they delay such identification after the goods are in the possession of the buyer. This case does not deal with identification but rather with IC 1971, 26-1-2-305; Ind. Ann. Stat. 19-2-305 (Burns 1964) concerning open price terms. Our view is supported by other sections of the Code dealing with the remedies of the seller upon default by the buyer.
Pursuant to the above cited provisions, we hold, as a matter of law, that Smoker retained only a purchase money security interest in the eighty-five head of cattle upon the delivery of such cattle to Whisler under an oral contract for sale. To have effectively reserved his rights, Smoker would have had to proceed under Article 9, § 19-9-101 et seq., concerning secured transactions, specifically IC 1971, 26-1-9-312(3) ; Ind. Ann. Stat. § 19-9-312(3). Since Smoker failed to perfect his security interest in the inventory of Whisler, his rights in the eighty-five head of cattle or the proceeds thereof are subordinated to the rights of the Bank, which had a prior perfected security interest, §19-9-312(5), and this is true regardless of whether Smoker, by explicit agreement, retained title to the goods. In Herington Livestock Auction Company v. Verschoor (1970), Iowa, 179 N. W. 2d 491, 495, it was stated:
“Thus for any purposes controlled by expicit agreement between the parties or by provisions of the Act which make passage of title a material factor, intent of the parties is relevant. But for purposes of determination of when an interest becomes a security interest, the prior metaphysical concept of title has been abandoned and analysis of the steps taken by the parties is substituted.”
In Herington the seller was asserting an explicit agreement which wasn’t based on custom and usage. There the position *88of the seller was factually stronger than here and there the position of the seller was held legally untenable under the Uniform Commercial Code. Herington thus represents a strong and persuasive precedent for reversal here.
We must now apply the definition of tortious conversion to the rights heretofore enunciated. In Monarch Buick Co., Inc. v. Kennedy (1965), 138 Ind. App. 1, 209 N. E. 2d 922, this court reaffirmed the rule that a:
“Tortious conversion is:
‘The exercise of dominion over personal property to the exclusion and in defiance of the rights of the owner or withholding it from his lawful possession under a claim of title inconsistent with the owner’s (title) . . .’ Hardy v. Heeter (1950), 120 Ind. App. 711, 717, 96 N. E. 2d 682, citing Prudential Ins. Co. v. Thatcher (1937), 104 Ind. App. 14, 20, 4 N. E. 2d 574.”
Prior to the adoption of the Uniform Commercial Code, ownership of goods and the rights incident thereto were defined by the location of title and the intentions of the parties v/as the primary test as to who had title. Jones et al. v. Kilborn et al. (1954), 125 Ind. App. 88, 122 N. E. 2d 739. The parties to a contract could delay the passage of title to a time subsequent to the delivery of the goods to the buyer. The Uniform Commercial Code, however, has established the rule that title to goods is no longer determinative once a seller has delivered the goods to a buyer and to the extent that situations arise in which there is a conflict between the prior holdings and the application of the Code which makes title and intent irrelevant after delivery, such prior authority must give way to the statute. This was explicitly recognized in Evans Products Company v. Jorgensen, supra, when that court, at page 981 of 421 P. 2d, stated:
“It is defendants’ theory of the case that this transaction constituted what would have been known in pre-UCC law as a cash sale. ‘It is further defendants’ theory that if the transaction is viewed by the court as a cash sale, then the veneer did not become a part of Coos’ inventory until it was actually paid for.’
*89Prior to the adoption of the UCC we had held that a seller could retain title until the purchase price was paid, (citations omitted)
$ ^
Because of the passage of the UCC the above-cited cases are no longer applicable.” (footnote omitted)
In Evam the Supreme Court of Oregon was compelled to reverse a trial court’s decision in favor of a seller of raw materials under factual circumstances similar to the ones in this case because to do otherwise would violate the letter and intent of the Uniform Commercial Code. This court finds itself in the same position.
We, therefore, hold that Smoker retained only an unperfected purchase money security interest in the eighty-five head of cattle upon their delivery to Whisler and that the Bank, in ordering the liquidation of the inventory of Whisler, did not exercise dominion over the cattle in defiance of the rights of Smoker. The decision of the trial court is contrary to law under the undisputed facts of this case. The .judgment of the trial court must be and hereby is reversed and remanded with instructions to enter judgment for the Defendant-Appellant.
Hoffman, C.J., not participating; Staton, J., concurs; Lybrook, J. (by designation), concurs.
Note. — Reported in 286 N. E. 2d 203.

=== CASE 9741138 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:49:59.264593+00 ===

On Petition for Rehearing
Sharp, J.
We deny rehearing on the above case but deem it advisable to address ourselves to several of the arguments raised by the Petitioner-Appellee, Dwight Smoker.
Smoker strenuously advances the argument that this court has given an overly broad interpretation to IC 1971, 26-1-2-401, Ind. Ann. Stat. § 19-2-401 (Burns 1964), and thereby unduly restricted the application of other sections of the Uniform Commercial Code. The contention centers on the *90proper construction to be given that portion of the introductory paragraph of § 19-2-401 which, in part, states that “insofar as situations are not governed by other provisions of this Article [Chapter]” §19-2-401 applies. Smoker contends that since the sections on custom and usage in the trade and the course of dealings between the parties are relevant and applicable to the present situation, said sections must be considered and they prevent the application of § 19-2-401.
The fallacy in the above line of reasoning is that the above-quoted portion of a sentence from the introductory paragraph to § 19-2-401 refers to and is limited by both the preceding sentence of said paragraph and by the second portion of the same sentence. The introductory paragraph reads in its entirety as follows:
“Each provision of this Article [Chapter] v/ith regard to the rights, obligations and remedies of the seller, the buyer, purchasers or other third parties applies irrespective of title to the goods except where the provision refers to such title. Insofar as situations are not covered by the other provisions of this Article [Chapter] and matters concerning title become material the following rules apply:”
The rules enumerated in the remaining provisions of § 19-2-401 are to govern all situations in which title become material and where other provisions of the chapter do not specifically cover the situation and do not refer to such title. The provisions of the chapter dealing with custom and usage in the trade and the course of dealings between the parties do not specifically refer to title and so cannot be construed as covering such situations when title becomes material. It therefore becomes necessary to examine § 19-2-401 to determine the applicable rule for the specific situation which was done in the previous opinion.
Smoker next tries to argue that IC 1971, 26-1-1-102, Ind. Ann. Stat. § 19-1-102 provides that the effect of the provisions of the Act may be varied by agreement. Once again, however, *91said section contains several important qualifications, one of which is that the provisions may be varied only when it is not otherwise expressly provided in the Act. It is expressly provided in § 19-2-401 that any agreement concerning the passage of title is subject to the provisions of § 19-2-401(1) and the provisions of the Article [Chapter] on Secured Transaction. Thus any agreement concerning the passage of title, whether oral or written, is subject to the provision in § 19-2-401 limiting retention of title by the seller in goods delivered to the buyer to a reservation of a security interest.
Finally, Smoker contends that our initial decision imposes serious limitations on well-established and customary commercial transactions in this area. In his Brief in Support of Rehearing, Smoker urges that the method of financing used by cattle producers is serious endangered and states:
“Where, as in this case the producer operates on borrowed capital secured by a lien on the cattle, which liens are paid as the cattle are sold, the ultimate result of the Court’s decision is that this method of financing will no longer be available, since it would be practically impossible for the institution financing the producer to protect itself.”
Smoker’s argument might have some validity if it were not for IC 1971, 26-1-9-307, Ind. Ann. Stat. § 19-9-307(1) (Burns 1964), which reads as follows:
“A buyer in ordinary course of business (subsection (9) of section [19] 1-201) other than a person buying farm products from a person engaged in farming operations takes free of a security interest created by his seller even though the security interest is perfected and even though the buyer knows of its existence.”
For a comprehensive examination of the above section and its ramifications for secured creditors financing a farmer, see Hawland, Financing the Farmer (1971), 76 Com. L. J. 416. Other articles concerning this provision are Farm Financing Under the Uniform Commercial Code (1969), 44 N. D. Law Rev. 553; Farm Secured Transactions Under the UCC (1967), *9223 Bus. Law J. 195; and Sorelle, “Farm Products" Under the UCC — Is a Special Classification Desirable? (1969), 47 Texas Law Rev. 309.
Smoker, as a seller of goods, is placed in the same position as any other seller. Chapter 2 of the Code does not make any differentiations based on the type of industry in which a seller is engaged. Chapter 9, however, does make a distinction in regard to financing farming operations by providing that a security interest in farm products created by the farmer are not destroyed when the products are purchased by a buyer. This provision, § 19-9-307, was created to help the farmer obtain the necessary financing and our opinion in no way negates the operation of said provision.
In addition to § 19-9-307, Smoker had all the protective devices afforded by Chapter 9 if he wished to avail himself of them. Furthermore, he had the remedies of a seller afforded by Chapter 2, specifically IC 1971, 26-1-2-702, Ind. Ann. Stat. § 19-2-702 (Burns 1964), which provides for reclamation of the goods upon insolvency of the buyer.
Smoker, in the instant case, did not avail himself of any of the protective devices or remedies provided by the Code, but rather relied upon the common law action of conversion, which as was pointed out in the earlier opinion, is not available under the facts of this case.
The Petition for Rehearing should be and hereby is denied.
Staton, J., concurs; Lybrook, J. (by designation), concurs.
Note. — Reported in 287 N. E. 2d 788.

=== CASE 2226288 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:05.444938+00 ===

286 N.E.2d 844 (1972)
Walter James BAYNARD, Jr., Appellant,
v.
The STATE of Indiana, Appellee.
No. 671S173.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
September 15, 1972.
Rehearing Denied November 2, 1972.
Larry S. Pugh, Indianapolis, for appellant.
Theodore L. Sendak, Atty. Gen., William D. Bucher, Deputy Atty. Gen., for appellee.
PRENTICE, Judge.
Defendant (Appellant) was convicted by jury of the offense of Robbery under Acts of 1941, ch. 148, § 6, 1956 Repl.Burns Ind. Stat. Ann. § 10-4101, IC 1971, XX-XX-X-X. He was sentenced to imprisonment for not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) years and disfranchised for the term *845 of his confinement. His appeal challenges (1) the sufficiency of the evidence and (2) the ruling of the trial court denying a motion for mistrial predicated upon misconduct of counsel.
(1) The sufficiency of the evidence herein cannot be seriously disputed. The testimony of David Law, manager of the victimized food market, disclosed that the defendant and an accomplice entered the store, that the defendant pointed the gun at him and ordered him to open the cash drawers, which he did because he was in fear and that while the defendant so held him at gunpoint, the accomplice removed the money from the cash drawers and that the two robbers departed together. Mr. Law's testimony was corroborated by the accomplice, who testified as a State's witness but admitted under cross examination that, at the time of the crime, he was under the influence of narcotics. The defendant challenged the credibility of Mr. Law's identification and the entire testimony of the accomplice by reason of his admitting to having been under the influence of narcotics. These challenges, however, go only to the weight of the testimony, which is the province of the trier of the facts. We hold that there was sufficient evidence presented upon each element of the crime charged to support the verdict. This Court, on appeal, will not weigh the evidence nor determine the credibility of witnesses; and when the sufficiency of the evidence is raised as an issue upon appeal, we will consider only that evidence most favorable to the State, together with all logical and reasonable inferences which may be drawn therefrom. The conviction will be affirmed if, from that viewpoint, there is substantial evidence of probative value from which the trier of the facts could reasonably infer that the appellant was guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. Cravens v. State (1971), Ind., 275 N.E.2d 4; Potter v. State (1971), Ind., 274 N.E.2d 699; Fuller v. State (1971), Ind., 271 N.E.2d 720.
(2) The charge of prejudicial misconduct of counsel arose from an offer into evidence by the prosecutor of a police photograph of the defendant referred to as a "mug shot." The defendant objected, and the prosecutor immediately withdrew the offer. The defendant moved for a mistrial, which was argued outside the presence of the jury. The court overruled the motion but admonished the jury that the photograph was not in evidence and that in the event any juror had caught a glimpse of it, it was to be disregarded and not considered in any manner. It is the defendant's contention that the prior interrogation of the identifying witness had been calculated to inform the jury that the photograph offered was a "mug shot" and further that one or more of the jurors might have seen the photograph immediately prior to the offer and recognized it as a "mug shot", notwithstanding the prosecutor's proper handling of the exhibit while it was being identified and offered. The offer of the photograph came during redirect examination of the witness. On direct examination of this witness, he had testified that he had previously identified a photograph of the defendant selected from approximately twenty or twenty-five photographs tendered him by the investigating officer. There was no objection to such testimony, and the defendant cross examined extensively concerning it. The photograph was not admissible in evidence, as it indicated that the defendant had a criminal record. Vaughn v. State (1939), 215 Ind. 142, 19 N.E.2d 239; United States v. Silvers, 7th Ct. of Appeals (1967), 374 F.2d 828, certiorari denied 389 U.S. 888, 88 S.Ct. 128, 19 L.Ed.2d 189; Blue v. State (1968), 250 Ind. 249, 235 N.E.2d 471, 30 A.L.R.3d 902.
There are, of course, exceptions to the rule that the prosecution cannot introduce evidence to show the bad character or reputation of the accused, such as where the character or reputation are legitimately in issue or relevant as bearing upon credibility. However, the case at bar does not fall within such exceptions. We will not hesitate, *846 in a proper case, to order a mistrial for misconduct of counsel prejudicing or likely to prejudice the rights of the accused. White v. State (1971), Ind., 272 N.E.2d 312.
The determination, however, generally lies within the sound discretion of the trial court and will not be lightly disturbed upon appeal. The trial judge noted that the defendant had opened the door to the proffered evidence by his cross examination and further that the prosecutor had held the exhibit at great care to avoid exposure to the jury and that, in his opinion, it was unlikely that the jury could have been improperly influenced. We here find neither the deliberate misconduct indicated by the record in White v. State (supra) nor the imperiled position of the defendant that prompted our reversal in that case.
Finding no error, the judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
ARTERBURN, C.J., and DeBRULER, GIVAN and HUNTER, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9741139 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:00.103874+00 ===

Mr. PRESIDING JUSTICE GEORGE J. MORAN delivered the opinion of the court: This action for injunctive and declaratory relief was brought against the defendant, Dr. Franklin Yoder, Director of the Illinois Department of Public Health and the Alton Water Company. The defendant filed a motion to strike and dismiss the complaint and the lower court, upon consideration of the pleadings, granted defendant’s motion and ruled that the complaint failed to state a cause of action. An appeal was taken from the order. The plaintiffs are the Illinois Pure Water Committee, Inc., Ruby N. Hale, individually and as an officer of the corporation plaintiff, J. O. Bear, mayor and chief executive officer of the Village of Pesotum, Illinois, and George Edward Hiscott, IV, a Christian Scientist and resident of Highland Park, Illinois. The plaintiffs brought the action individually and as representatives of all citizens of the State of Illinois and all users of public water supplies in the State. The plaintiffs sought the following relief: (1) A temporary injunction pending the outcome of the litigation; (2) a declaration that Chapter 111½, Section 121(b)(1) which provides for compulsory fluoridation of water supplies, is unconstitutional, or in the alternative; (3) a declaration that Dr. Yoder and his department have failed to adopt rules and regulations in accordance with statutory mandate; (4) a declaration that the defendants have usurped legislative function by adopting rules which do not conform to the statutory mandate; and (5) after a hearing on the cause a permanent injunction restraining defendants from (1) introducing fluorine into the water supplies and (2) enforcing or complying with the provisions of Chapter 111½, Section 121(g)(1).  Motions to dismiss or strike a pleading admit facts well pleaded, but not conclusions of law or conclusions of facts unsupported by allegations of specific facts upon which such conclusions rest and when constitutional issues are involved, facts relied upon to rebut the presumption of constitutionality must be specifically set forth. Pierce v. Carpenter, 20 Ill.2d 526, 169 N.E.2d 747; Heyman v. Mahin, 49 Ill.2d 284, 275 N.E.2d 421. In amended Count I the plaintiffs allege the following: 1. That fluorine is being injected into the water system pursuant to Chapter lll½, Sec. 121, and it is a poisonous, noxious and deleterious element; 2. That the defendant has not promulgated any rules nor provided for any facilities which will assure all of the citizens of the State of Illinois that poisonous or noxious substances, dangerous to the health of the citizens will not be introduced into the water supply of this State — Section 121(g)(1) requires all public supplier of water in this State to introduce the element “fluorine” into the water supply of this State under conditions which render the consumption of public water supply by tire citizens of this State, potentially hazardous and dangerous to the lives, health and welfare of the citizens consuming said water; 3. That there are no provisions for trained technicians who have ability to watch the system; 4. That there are no safe tests to regulate the level of fluorine and testing on a monthly basis is inadequate. 5. That the compulsory introduction of fluorides into the water supplies of this state is so hazardous by reason of its poisonous nature to the human body, that the level of concentration must be held to less than 1.2 milligrams per liter under the provisions of Chapter IIIV2, Section (gl), but neither said statute nor the regulations of the Department of Public Health attempt to take into consideration the environmental exposure of citizens of this state to fluorides from sources other than the levels provided to be maintained in the water supplies hereof and by reason thereof, citizens of this state will be forced to submit their bodies to hazardous and dangerous levels of fluorides, if the water supplies of the State are polluted by the introduction of this noxious substance purportedly under the provisions of said statute and the regulations of the Department of Public Health. 6. That scientific knowledge has greatly expanded since 1964. (In this year the Illinois Supreme Court in Shuringa v. City of Chicago, 30 Ill.2d 501, 198 N.E.2d 326 (1964) ruled that fluoridation was not unhealthy and was a proper exercise of the police power of the municipality) which evidences that fluorides are harmful and injurious. As a result of this the plaintiffs contend that (1) the statute is unconstitutional because it denies plaintiffs due process of law and places their lives and health in jeopardy without due process of law by forcing the plaintiffs to consume the tainted water; (2) the statute is so vague and uncertain and lacks requisite safeguards as to render it unconstitutional; (3) that the statute is an unconstitutional delegation of authority. The merits of the case may prove the well pleaded portions of these contentions to be false, but this case was decided on the pleadings and one must assume these facts as true. Making such an assumption, one must conclude that the plaintiffs did state a cause of action and it was error to dismiss their complaint.  Plaintiff Bear, as mayor, alleges only that the fluoridation requirement would necessitate great investments that would be financiaHy ruinous to his vfflage. There are no allegations of specific facts alleged which support this claim. The motion to strike and dismiss pointed out that in such capacity he has failed to aHege his authority in his official capacity to join his village in this action. Therefore as to plaintiff Bear as mayor, the action was properly dismissed, and paragraph eight of amended Count I should be stricken.  In Count II of the amended complaint the plaintiff George Edward Hiscott IV alleged that he is a member of the Christian Science Church and that the compulsory introduction of fluorides into the water supplies forces him to subject himself to therapeutic treatment by the uses of medicine in direct contradiction to the tenets of his faith. He further aHeged that this prohibits him and others of his faith from the free exercise of his refigion. This question has not been determined in this jurisdiction and if this case had been decided on the merits, the court might well find that fluoridation is not medication as courts in other jurisdictions have. (See Graybeal v. McNevin (Ky.Ct.App. 1969), 439 S.W.2d 323 and the compHation of cases therein.) But this question was decided on the pleadings and assuming the facts are true, then the plaintiff has stated a cause of action. Plaintiffs, Illinois Pure Water Committee, Inc., Ruby N. Hale, George Edward Hiscott IV and J. O. Bear individually, did aHege sufficient facts to state a cause of action and the order of the lower court dismissing their complaint is reversed. Plaintiff J. O. Bear as mayor did not allege facts sufficient to state a cause of action and the order of the lower court as to him in that capacity is affirmed. Affirmed in part and reversed in part. EBERSPACHER, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9741140 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:00.108303+00 ===

Mr. JUSTICE JONES dissenting: I must respectfully dissent from the majority opinion. The plaintiffs are a committee, organized in corporate form, which claims as its concern water quality throughout the State of Illinois, an individual customer of the defendant Alton Water Company, J. O. Bear, who claims to sue as an individual and as “Mayor” of the VHIage of Pesotum, and George Edward Hiscott, IV, a resident of Highland Park, in Cook County, and a member of the Christian Science Church. All of the plaintiffs have commenced an action against Dr. Franklin Yoder, Director of the Department of Public Health of the State of Illinois, and all except Hiscott have brought an action against the Alton Water Company. It is not clear what action J. O. Bear, individually, or as Mayor of Pesotum, claims against the Alton Water Company but it appears that all of the plaintiffs claim some representative capacity except Ruby N. Hale, who, at least in part, is supplied water by the Alton Water Company. No one of these persons or plaintiffs are individually affected by fluoridation of water supply unless it would be Ruby N. Hale, and with respect to her, no special allegations of immediate personal effect upon her health are made. In substance, the allegations of all of the plaintiffs are based upon their general concern for the health and welfare of residents of the State of Illinois. None of the plaintiffs have any special standing other than what has been set forth above. Apparently leave was given the plaintiff Hiscott to intervene in order to assert that his religious rights are involved. Mr. Hiscott’s position is indeed a special one in that he claims that the statute of the State of Illinois violates his constitutional right of freedom of religion, in that it violates the tenents of his faith as practiced by him as an individual. He does not allege that the Christian Science faith is religiously opposed to the use of medicine and pharmaceutical compounds, but apparently that is his own personal religion. All of the plaintiffs ask for a temporary and permanent injunction against the fluoridation of public water supplies in the State and the declaration of a statute governing fluoridation unconstitutional or, alternately, to enjoin the enforcement of tire statute until the Director of the Department of Public Health and the Department of Public Health have adopted rules and regulations in conformity with the mandate of the statute. The complaint also asks an injunction against the Department of Public Health, which is not made a party to the proceeding. Motions to dismiss were filed by the Director of the Department of Public Health and by the Alton Water Company. As a part of the Directors motion an exhibit was attached setting forth certain rules which were adopted on January 27, 1969, following the complaint, which was filed on August 1, 1968, after which the plaintiffs filed an amendment to the amended complaint alleging that the defendants “intend” to introduce into the public water supply of citizens of the State, fluorine, which is “poisonous, noxious and deleterious,” that scientific knowledge has been greatly expanded since 1964 which evidences that fluorides in the quantities being introduced into public water supplies are harmful and injurious; that the present method of fluoridation fails to appreciate variations in fluorine concentrations, as same depends on temperature and variations in fluorine ingestion in that individuals consume more water in hot weather than in cold, and said variations produce dangerous concentrations of fluorine. I would affirm the action of the trial judge in granting the motion to dismiss. The plaintiffs, after two amendments, have not asked for further right to amend and the appeal is taken strictly and solely from the order of the trial court dismissing the amended complaint, upon the finding that the complaint fails to state a cause of action upon which the relief sought “should be granted.” I understand that the trial court has considered that in taking the allegations of the plaintiffs’ complaint as confessed where they are well pleaded he has determined that this is not a case in which plaintiffs are entitled to injunctive relief. In the traditions of the law it is not every case, even of alleged unconstitutionality, where an injunction will be issued, particularly against state officers in the performance of a public duty. To issue the injunction sought in this case would have the effect of denying all of the citizens of this State fluoridation of public water supplies. The legislature of our State has determined that fluoridation should be permitted, and this determination has withstood lengthy and thoroughgoing legal attack in which all of the points raised in tire plaintiffs’ complaint, as amended, were raised, except those raised by the plaintiff Hiscott. An attempt by the other plaintiffs to raise a question of deprival of religious freedom is not accompanied by any allegation of fact which puts this matter in issue as to them. I am persuaded that all of the points pertaining to constitutionality of fluoridation have been raised and decided unfavorably to the plaintiffs in Schuringa v. City of Chicago (1964), 30 Ill.2d 504, 198 N.E.2d 326 and other cases. The allegation that scientific knowledge has greatly expanded since 1964 is tire baldest sort of conclusion. It is common knowledge that scientific tests and information are constantly being accumulated and with respect to any matter it could be said that scientific knowledge has greatly expanded since 1964. That such scientific knowledge “evidences that fluorides in the quantities introduced into public water supplies are harmful and injurious” is totally conclusionary. It does not say in what quantities the plaintiffs claim that fluorides are being introduced into public water supplies nor does it speak to any methodology that may be involved. It does not allege any particular scientific finding which has changed or revealed previous scientific knowledge to be erroneous and unreliable, and it does not say harmful and injurious to whom and on what account. It is abundantly apparent that certain scientists believed that fluorides, under certain circumstances, were harmful and injurious to the health of persons ingesting them in water. The passage of the legislation considered in the Schuringa case itself did not resolve this scientific controversy. It simply made a choice based on what was determined to be the better view. To say that on the suit of one private citizen, who is directly affected by one water company, that it is necessary for the Director of Public Health to enter into lengthy litigation based upon such a conclusion as is set forth in the plaintiffs’ complaint does not seem legitimate or in accordance with logic. Any citizen of this State could make a similar allegation one day after the previous case so that the matter of fluoridation would be under litigation until the end of time. I do not contend, of course, that further scientific consideration of the propriety of fluoridation should be foreclosed. Some future revelation may disprove the currently accepted thought on the matter. The process is not unknown in the field of public health. My point is that the plaintiffs’ complaint is silent as to any fresh scientific discovery that bears on the question. After all, this is not litigation between private persons. The entire concern of the plaintiffs is that there is a possibility that some person or persons in this State will be injured if presently contemplated steps are carried out. It has been an equitable rule from the earliest days that the power to grant injunctive relief is never exercised to ally mere apprehension of injury, or against something merely feared as liable to occur at some indefinite time in the future. “It must appear to the satisfaction of the court that the apprehension is well grounded, and that there is a reasonable probability that a real injury, for which there is no adequate remedy at law, will occur if the injunction is not granted. * * * The court ought not to interfere, however, where the injmy apprehended is of a character to justify conflicting opinions as to whether it will in fact ever be realized, or where nothing more than a mere opportunity to do wrong is disclosed.” Forty-two American Jurisprudence 2d, Injunctions, Section 31. Similarly, “As a general rule, equity does not undertake the revision or supervision of governmental action lawfully exercised through the legislative, or executive or administrative, departments of the government. It will not interfere by injunction with the duties of any department of the government except under special circumstances and when necessary to the protection of property or other rights against irreparable injury.” (Forty-two American Jurisprudence 2d, Injunctions, Section 175.) Further at page 943, “Where a public officer essays to exercise the jurisdiction conferred upon him, his errors, although subject to subsequent correction, cannot be enjoined as an arbitrary exercise of his authority. Particularly will courts hesitate to interfere by injunction where the acts complained of are essential to the health and comfort of the people at large.” It should also be noted that the statutory scheme involved provided for hearings with respect to the safety of public water supply when tire health of water customers is or may become endangered, under the terms of ch. 111½, sec. 121K, Ill. Rev. Stat., 1967. Such a request could have been made in this particular instance, but there was none. The only semi-factual allegation contained in the complaint with respect to the direct deficiencies in the present plan for fluoridation is that the proper officials have failed to take into consideration the environmental exposure of citizens of this State to fluorides from sources other than the levels provided to be maintained in the public water supplies. Clearly, if fluorides were found to be present in a water supply because of naturally occurring conditions, and, as a result of the mechanical addition of fluoride as provided by the statute and rules, a dangerous or deleterious concentration of fluoride was created, then this could specifically be presented to the Director with the request that he consider whether fluorine should not be reduced under the particular circumstances. There would be no necessity of enjoining the application of fluorides throughout the State. It seems to me that one would be wholly unjustified in assuming that a majority of a quorum of the legislature which enacted the legislation, the Governor who signed the legislation into law, and the Director of Public Health are in some sort of a conspiracy to poison the citizens of the State while their backs are turned. I can see no reason for assuming, as the plaintiffs do, that the Director of Public Health would not respond at once if there was some reason for believing that fluorides were about to injure the health of any persons in this State. The complaints of the plaintiffs would, it seems to me, best be directed to the legislature again, rather than directed to the courts who do not have an exclusive corner upon truth. It is not claimed that the Director is acting beyond the legislative mandate and that there is a lack of power. The basic question raised is the wiseness of the legislative enactment and of the effectuating rules as they now stand. It was originally contended by the plaintiffs that the Director had failed to establish proper implementation of the statute by adoption of rules. From the attachment made to the motion to dismiss filed by the Director it appears that such rules have been adopted. Therefore, this particular point has become moot. If any one particular rule exposed the public to danger this could be alleged, together with factual circumstances which would make it applicable, and a cause of action for a legal and, if necessary, equitable action, stated. I have already eliminated any basis for considering the constitutional claims with respect to violation of freedom of religion on the part of all of the plaintiffs except Hiscott. Hiscott s complaint is only against the defendant Yoder and, therefore, should not be used as a basis for sustaining a right of action against the Alton Water Company. Hiscott is only an intervenor and under the rules applicable to intervention where his claim is not based upon a common question of law he is not entitled to intervene. (Section 26.1 of the Civil Practice Act; Ill. Rev. Stat., ch. 110, sec. 26.1.) Further, an intervenor does not have the right to raise new issues. (Chapter 110,section 26.1(6); Ill. Rev. Stat.,ch. 110,sec.26.1(6).) Therefore, the intervenor’s claims cannot be the basis for this action. With respect to claims of loss of freedom of religion it seems apparent that claims of religious right which conflict with the general or common health and good must yield to the common health and good. One can readily visualize a religious belief which would oppose a central government or any practice having to do with public health or, as is contended here, is opposed to any “use of * * * pharmaceutical compounds.” It is obvious that no introduction of pharmaceuticals into the public water supply can meet the requirements of this religious belief. Under such contention treatment of public water supplies becomes an impossibility. It seems to me that this particular plaintiff may have full religious freedom only if he does not make use of a public water supply. His objection to consuming treated water from the public supply can easily be met by his use of untreated water from readily available private sources. In the same maimer consumption of foodstuffs from ordinary sources of the public food supplies are avoided by those whose religious beliefs permit the consumption of only those foodstuffs prepared by persons possessing particular religious qualifications. Even if it be conceded (which I do not) that plaintiff Hiscott has standing to raise his point, I would still uphold the trial court in its dismissal of the Hiscott portion of the complaint. It is unnecessary to have an evidentiary hearing on the issue in order to resolve it. In the posture it is presented it is purely a question of law. Simply stated, the issue raised by plaintiff Hiscott is whether it is the law in Illinois that fluoridation of a public water supply deprives plaintiff of his constitutionally guaranteed freedom of religion. Manifestly it does not. It was so determined in Graybeal v. McNeven (Ky.Ct. of Appeals, 1969), 439 S.W.2d 323 and in fourteen other States (as cited in the Graybeal case). While it is true that these cases are not binding on Illinois comts they nevertheless foretell the determination here. Tatty v. Schoenholz, 323 Ill. 232, 154 N.E. 139; Illinois Law & Practice, Courts, Sec. 84. In short, the legitimate contentions of the plaintiffs can only be carried out by the abolition of fluoridation or by the assumption that either the Director of the Department of Public Health or those persons charged with the processing of water will behave unlawfully or so as to expose the public to poisoning. No tribunal can rule out the possibility that someone, somewhere might not be exposed to fluorine in unhealthy concentrations. The best that can be done is to establish a policy of permissible concentrations and then adopt rules intended to carry out this plan. It appears on the face of the matter that such has been done. As was quoted in Sutton v. Findlay Cemetery Association, 270 Ill. 11, 110 N.E. 315, “Relief by injunction is so severe in its consequences that it is not to be granted in such a case except when the right to it is clearly and conclusively made out." In this way, the trial court, being confronted with the question of balancing the public health and safety, as defined in a statute and statutory regulations, against the claim of constitutional invasions, is placed in the position of weighing right against right. Where the party against whom the action is brought is a public officer acting within the framework of the statutory plan, which has been previously tested for its constitutionality, and the rights sought to be protected are alleged as conclusions, the damage or injury described appears relatively improbable of occurrence, and the interests of the parties plaintiff do not involve major invasions but are only those held by any member of the public, the complaint does not state a cause of action nor evidence plaintiffs’ right to injunctive relief. Therefore, under the allegations of the complaint here I would affirm that the complaint does not set up circumstances under which the use of injunctive power is clearly justified. The point involved is not only one of pleading, it is also one of the balance of constitutional rights. As was said in an earlier case from Madison County, Illinois (Spalding v. City of Granite City, 415 Ill. 274, 113 N.E.2d 567): “The constitutional guaranties that no person shall be deprived of life, liberty, or property without due process of law, and that no State shall deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws, were not intended to limit the subjects upon which the police power of the State may lawfully be asserted in matter's of health protection any more than in any other connection. It has been almost universally held in this country that the constitutional guaranties, including the prohibition of deprivation of property without due process, must yield to the statutes and ordinances designed to promote the public health as a part of the police powers of the State. (People ex rel. Baker v. Strautz, 386 Ill. 360; People v. Anderson, 355 Ill. 289; City of Evanston v. Wazau, 364 Ill. 198.)" Further, in People ex rel. Baker v. Strautz, 386 Ill. 360, 54 N.E.2d 441, our Supreme Court said: “ ‘Generally speaking, what laws or regulations are necessary to protect public health and secure public comfort is a legislative question, and appropriate measures intended and calculated to accomplish these ends are not subject to judicial review. The exercise of the police power is a matter resting in the discretion of the Legislature or the board or tribunal to which the power is delegated, and the courts will not interfere with the exercise of this power except where the regulations adopted for the protection of the public health are arbitrary, oppressive and unreasonable. The court has nothing to do with the wisdom or expedience of the measures adopted. People v. Weiner, 271 Ill. 74, 110 N.E. 870, L.R.A. 1916C, 775, Ann.Cas. 1917C, 1065; State v. Morse, 84 Vt. 387, 80 A. 189, 34 L.R.A., N.S., 190, Ann. Cas. 1913B, 218; State v. Superior Court, 103 Wash. 409, 174 P. 973.’ It has almost universally been held in this country that constitutional guaranties must yield to the enforcement of the statutes and ordinances designed to promote the public health as a part of the police powers of the State.”

=== CASE 9741141 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:01.508554+00 ===

WILLIAM A. BABLITCH,J.
¶1. Darryl J. Hall challenges the constitutionality of the drug tax stamp law ("the stamp law"), cited in full below.1 Hall was *62convicted and sentenced to two consecutive three-year sentences under the stamp law, and, concurrently, two *63consecutive 30-year sentences for delivery of cocaine base convictions. The delivery convictions, and their *6430-year sentences, are not before us. The stamp law requires dealers to purchase tax stamps for illegal drugs in their possession and affix the stamps to the *65drugs. Hall argues that the stamp law is unconstitutional because it violates his privilege against self-incrimination under both the federal and the Wisconsin constitutions. The State of Wisconsin (State) argues that the stamp law provides protection that is coextensive with the privilege against self-incrimination and therefore is constitutional. We conclude that because the stamp law fails to protect against the derivative use, in a criminal proceeding, of information it compels, it violates the privilege against self-incrimination and is therefore unconstitutional. Although identifying and prosecuting drug dealers is a laudable purpose which this court whole-heartedly applauds, the legislature failed to use constitutional means to achieve this purpose. We therefore reluctantly strike down the drug tax stamp law as unconstitutional. Accordingly, we reverse.
¶ 2. The facts are undisputed. The State enacted a law requiring "dealers" to purchase tax stamps for the drugs in their possession and to affix the stamps to *66their illegal drugs. The statute defines "dealer," as "a person who in violation of ch. 161 possesses, manufactures, produces, ships, transports, delivers, imports, sells or transfers to another person more than. . .7 grams of any other schedule I controlled substance or schedule II controlled substance." Wis. Stat. § 139.87(2). The drug tax is paid by purchasing stamps issued by the Department of Revenue (DOR). Wis. Stat. § 139.89. Drug tax stamps must be affixed to the drugs for which the tax has been paid. § 139.89. Failure to pay the required tax subjects the violator to incarceration for a term not to exceed five years, a fine of not more than $10,000, or both. § 139.95.
¶ 3. Hall was arrested, charged, and convicted of two counts of delivering cocaine base, contrary to Wis. Stats. §§ 161.41(l)(cm)4, 161.48, and 161.49, and two counts of failing to comply with the drug tax stamp law, contrary to Wis. Stat. ch. 139, subch. IV. On December 3, 1993, in the circuit court of Dane County, Judge Richard J. Callaway sentenced Hall to two consecutive three-year sentences for the stamp law convictions and, concurrently, two consecutive 30-year sentences for the delivery convictions.
¶ 4. Affirming Hall's stamp law convictions, the court of appeals concluded that the statute would be unconstitutional if the State could use information it compelled either directly or derivatively against the dealer in a criminal proceeding and, on its face, the statute failed to protect against derivative use of compelled information. State v. Hall, 196 Wis. 2d 850, 867-68, 540 N.W.2d 219 (1995). However, the court of appeals applied a "saving construction" to the statute, interpreting the confidentiality provision to prohibit both direct and derivative use of compelled information *67and consequently providing Hall with protection coextensive to the privilege against self-incrimination.
¶ 5. Both the United States and Wisconsin Constitutions protect persons from state compelled self-incrimination. Whether or not a statute violates these constitutional provisions presents a question of law that we review de novo. State v. McManus, 152 Wis. 2d 113,129, 447 N.W.2d 654 (1989).
¶ 6. This case presents three issues: (1) whether Wis. Stat. § 139.89 of the stamp law unconstitutionally compels self-incrimination; and if so, (2) whether Wis. Stat. § 139.91, the confidentiality provision of the stamp law, on its face, provides Hall with protection as broad as the protection offered by the privilege against self-incrimination; and if not, (3) whether the confidentiality provision may be construed in a manner which provides protection coextensive with the privilege.2 We conclude that the stamp law unconstitutionally compels self-incrimination, the confidentiality provision of the stamp law fails to provide protection coextensive with the privilege, and the stamp law cannot be construed to provide constitutional protection.
I.
¶ 7. First, we consider whether Wis. Stat. § 139.89 of the stamp law unconstitutionally compels Hall to incriminate himself. The right against self-*68incrimination is a fundamental right guaranteed by both the United States and the Wisconsin Constitutions. In re Grant, 83 Wis. 2d 77, 80, 264 N.W.2d 587 (1978). Under the Fifth Amendment's self-incrimination clause, "[n]o person. . .shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself...." U.S. Const., amend. V. Our state constitution provides that "[n]o person. . .may be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself or herself." Wis. Const. art. I, § 8(1). Although much of the analysis of this opinion is derived from United States Supreme Court decisions construing the Fifth Amendment privilege, the same analysis applies in determining the protection afforded by Hall's state privilege. State v. Schultz, 152 Wis. 2d 408, 416, 448 N.W.2d 424 (1989); State v. Sorenson, 143 Wis. 2d 226, 259-60, 421 N.W.2d 77 (1988).
¶ 8. The privilege against self-incrimination may be invoked whenever a person has a real and appreciable apprehension that information compelled by the state could be used against him or her in a criminal proceeding. Grant, 83 Wis. 2d at 81. The privilege extends not only to the direct use of information which would support a conviction, but also to derivative use of such evidence, i.e., using compelled information to furnish a link in the chain of evidence necessary for prosecution. Id. Darryl Hall contends that his compliance with the tax law would have provided the State with information that he reasonably supposed could have been used against him in a prosecution for violation of any one of several crimes contained in Wis. Stat. ch. 161, Wisconsin's Uniform Controlled Substances Act. We agree.
*69¶ 9. The United States Supreme Court has carefully considered the impact of tax laws on Fifth Amendment guarantees against self-incrimination. Leary v. United States, 395 U.S. 6 (1969); Marchetti v. United States, 390 U.S. 39 (1968); Grosso v. United States, 390 U.S. 62 (1968). In Marchetti, the defendant was convicted of violating federal wagering statutes which required persons engaged in professional gambling to pay an occupational tax and to register with the Internal Revenue Service. Marchetti complained that these statutory obligations violated his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination because they significantly enhanced the likelihood that those who complied with the provisions would be successfully prosecuted for violating state and federal anti-gambling laws. The Court agreed, identifying the following criteria for determining the constitutionality of a tax statute challenged on Fifth Amendment grounds: (1) whether the regulated activity is in an area "permeated with criminal statutes," and the tax aimed at individuals "inherently suspect of criminal activities;" (2) whether an individual is required, under pain of criminal prosecution, to provide information which a person might reasonably suppose would be available to prosecuting authorities; and (3) whether such information would provide a significant link in a chain of evidence tending to establish guilt. Sisson v. Triplett, 428 N.W.2d 565, 571 (Minn. 1988) (explaining Marchetti). These criteria form the three prongs of the Marchetti test. If all three are met, the tax statute violates the privilege against self-incrimination.
¶ 10. The fear of self-incrimination must be real and appreciable, not merely an imaginary possibility of *70danger. In re Grant, 83 Wis. 2d at 82. The danger should be appraised with reference to the ordinary operation of law in the ordinary course of things, not danger of an imaginary or insubstantial character. Id. This court has liberally construed the privilege in favor of the right which it was intended to protect. Id. We analyze the stamp law in light of these principles, and apply the three-prong Marchetti test.
¶ 11. Hall contends that two requirements of the stamp law violate his privilege against self-incrimination: (1) the purchase requirement; and (2) the requirement that tax stamps must be affixed to a dealer's drugs. He argues that these requirements violate his privilege in two ways: (1) by requiring a dealer, when purchasing stamps, to provide incriminating information that may be used by prosecutors against him in a criminal proceeding; and (2) by providing vital evidence in a prosecutor's case against a dealer who complies with the statute and affixes the stamps to illicit drugs because such acts show: (a) knowledge that the items are controlled substances, and (b) intent to possess controlled substances.
¶ 12. Our analysis begins with the first prong of Marchetti - whether the regulated activity is in an area " 'permeated with criminal statutes,'" and the tax aimed at individuals " 'inherently suspect of criminal activities.'" Marchetti, 390 U.S. at 47 (citation omitted). Few would disagree that the stamp law meets this criterion. State and federal law are permeated with criminal statutes addressing the issue of controlled substances. See, e.g., Wis. Stat. ch. 161; 21 U.S.C. §§ 801, et seq. Moreover, the tax is imposed only upon "dealers" which, by its definition, includes only those persons who possess drugs in violation of ch. 161. Persons lawfully in possession of controlled substances are *71specifically exempted from the tax provisions. Wis. Stat. § 139.87(2). Legally held controlled substances are not subject to taxation. Wis. Stat. § 139.88. Without question, the stamp law is directed toward a select group inherently suspect of criminal activities.
¶ 13. We turn to the second prong of Marchetti: whether the dealer might reasonably suppose that information provided by either the purchase, or affix and display requirements requires a person, under pain of criminal prosecution, to provide information which the individual might reasonably suppose would be available to prosecuting authorities. Here, we analyze separately the purchase, and the affix and display requirements of the stamp law.
¶ 14. First, we examine the purchase requirement. In State v. Heredia, 172 Wis. 2d 479, 493 N.W.2d 404 (Ct. App. 1992), cert. denied, 113 S.Ct. 2386 (1993), the court of appeals distinguished Marchetti and held that the payment provision of Wisconsin's drug tax stamp statute, on its face, does not violate a defendant's constitutional privilege against compelled self-incrimination. The Heredia court concluded that, unlike the wagering tax in Marchetti, the stamp law "both contemplates and permits the anonymous payment of the tax ..." and, therefore, does not subject those who comply with its provisions to compelled self-incrimination. Heredia, 172 Wis. 2d at 485. In so concluding, the court of appeals relied on the stamp law's confidentiality provision, Wis. Stat. § 139.91, which provides that "[d]ealers may not be required to provide any identifying information in connection with the purchase of stamps." We agree with the Heredia court's conclusion that the stamp purchase requirement is *72constitutional. However, we arrive at our conclusion for different reasons.
¶ 15. The incriminating nature of the compelled information under the purchase requirement is evident. The requirement that dealers purchase tax stamps compels them to incriminate themselves by telling the government that they are drug dealers. Requesting tax stamps in the amount required of a dealer is, in and of itself, an admission that one possesses drugs illegally or intends to do so. In this case, the statute required Hall to purchase more than $20,000 in tax stamps. Contrary to the State's contention that not all tax stamp purchasers are dealers, it defies common sense to suppose that a person buying more than $20,000 worth of tax stamps does not possess or contemplate possession of illegal drugs. Consequently, a tax stamp purchase expresses the dealer's involvement with at least the quantity of controlled substances commensurate with the number of stamps purchased.
¶ 16. The fact that a dealer purchases drug tax stamps also indicates his or her knowledge of the nature of the substance possessed and of the fact of possession. Under our controlled substances statutes, proof that the defendant knew or believed that the substance was a controlled substance is an element of the crime that must be proved by the state. State v. Poellinger, 153 Wis. 2d 493, 451 N.W.2d 752 (1990). Thus, compliance with the stamp law's purchase requirement involves the incriminating admission of crucial elements of the crime of possession of controlled substances.
¶ 17. It is, of course, irrelevant that the purchaser might never give this information verbally. Actions speak as loud as words under the Fifth Amend*73ment. Doe v. United States, 487 U.S. 201, 210 (1988). In Fisher v. United States, 425 U.S. 391, 410 (1976), the Court acknowledged that the act of producing physical evidence in response to a subpoena has communicative aspects of its own because compliance with the subpoena tacitly concedes that the taxpayer believes that the papers are those described in the subpoena. The act of purchasing tax stamps similarly discloses the taxpayer’s knowledge and intent. The incriminating communication is compelled because the statute mandates that a dealer purchase the stamps upon pain of criminal punishment. Wis. Stat. § 139.95(2).
¶ 18. Next, we consider whether the purchase requirement creates a substantial danger that the information will be available for criminal prosecution. Under the stamp law, a tax is imposed on drug dealers that must be paid immediately upon acquisition or possession of a controlled substance. Wis. Stat. § 139.89. Failure to pay the tax exposes the dealer to a five year prison term, a fine, or both. Wis. Stat. § 139.95(2). The DOR has established two methods of purchasing the stamps. Dealers must either purchase the stamps in person at a DOR location, or dealers may purchase the stamps by mail. Under the mail order option, dealers must supply the DOR with a name and address. The stamps are not transferable. § 139.89. The determinative question is whether the DOR provides a method of purchasing stamps that does not compel dealers to provide information available against them in a criminal proceeding, thereby allowing the stamp law to pass constitutional muster.
¶ 19. The stamp law provides an exception for "independently obtained information." Wis. Stat. § 139.91. Independently obtained information may be used against taxpayers in any criminal proceeding. *74§ 139.91. For example, nothing in the stamp law prohibits the State from using information independently obtained by placing a law enforcement agent outside the location where drug stamps are sold. Consequently, a law enforcement agent surveilling the DOR's tax stamp purchase outlet could photograph, identify, or follow taxpayers to their car, to their home, even to their drug manufacturing plant. The information this officer gathered could then be used in any criminal proceeding against the taxpayer. § 139.91. A dealer purchasing drug stamps in person faces a serious risk of providing prosecutors with incriminating information.
¶ 20. Nonetheless, by allowing tax stamps to be purchased by mail, the DOR offers a means by which dealers may purchase drug stamps without providing prosecutors with incriminating information. Therefore, the danger that the information will be available for criminal prosecution is not substantial. The purchase by mail provision allows the dealer to select a method of payment that will reveal his or her name (or pseudonym) and address only to the DOR. The confidentiality provision of the statute expressly prohibits the DOR from revealing facts, such as the dealer's name and address, obtained in administering the tax stamp. Wis. Stat. § 139.91. Therefore, this information is not available to prosecutors in a criminal proceeding. Consequently, the statute provides an avenue by which dealers may purchase the stamps without incriminating themselves. Although a dealer unavoidably runs the risk of incriminating himself or herself when he or she purchases the tax stamp in person, the payment by mail procedure coupled with the confidentiality provision assures the dealer of constitutional protection against self-incrimination. By providing a dealer with *75protection coextensive to that offered by the privilege against self-incrimination, the purchase requirement of the stamp law, standing alone, would pass constitutional muster.
¶ 21. However, it does not stand alone. Purchasing the stamps is but the first step in the statutory process. Once purchased, drug tax stamps must be affixed to and displayed on the dealer's illegal drugs. Wis. Stat. § 139.89. We must therefore consider the constitutionality of this affix and display requirement. The incriminating nature of the affix and display requirement is without question. The act of affixing and displaying the tax stamps is an incriminating testimonial communication that the dealer knowingly and intentionally possesses a particular quantity of unlawful drugs. Possession of the stamp signifies the possessor's knowledge of the nature of the substance he or she possesses - an element of a drug possession charge - and thus requires self-incrimination. In Marchetti, the United States Supreme Court struck down the federal wagering tax law on self-incrimination grounds. The Court recognized that evidence of possession of a federal wagering tax stamp is highly incriminating testimonial evidence. Likewise, the affix and display requirement of the stamp law has the direct and unmistakable consequence of incriminating any dealer who complies with the law.
¶ 22. The danger that the information will be available for criminal prosecution is also evident. Tax stamps are readily available to assist the State in establishing that defendants knew that the substance in their possession was a controlled substance. Under our controlled substances statutes, proof that the defendant knew or believed that the substance was á controlled substance is an element of the crime that *76must be proved by the State. Poellinger, 153 Wis. 2d at 493.
¶ 23. The confidentiality provision does not prevent the State from using the presence of affixed drug stamps against dealers and therefore does not save the stamp law. As the court of appeals recognized, while Wis. Stat. § 139.91 prohibits the use of information obtained by the DOR in administering the tax, the presence of affixed tax stamps is not "information obtained by the Department." Hall, 196 Wis. 2d at 865. The stamp law does not prohibit the State from using tax stamps to prove a taxpayer's knowledge of the nature of the controlled substance. Nor does acquisition of tax stamps create immunity for a dealer from criminal prosecution. Wis. Stat. § 139.90.
¶ 24. Furthermore, nothing in the statute prohibits the State from using the stamps affixed to controlled substances in a prosecution for unstamped drugs. For example, if the State found stamped and unstamped drugs during an arrest, the stamp law would not prevent the State from using the stamps to establish the defendant's knowledge of the illegal nature of and intent to possess the unstamped drugs. Consequently, Hall was required, under pain of criminal prosecution, to affix drug stamps to his illegal drugs, and he could reasonably have supposed that the presence of the affixed stamps could be used against him by prosecuting authorities. Accordingly, Hall has satisfied the second prong of the Marchetti test.
¶ 25. Finally, we consider the third prong of Marchetti, whether the compelled information could provide a significant link in a chain of evidence tending to establish guilt. In other words, does the statute protect dealers from derivative use of the compelled *77information? The court of appeals acknowledged that the stamp law, on its face, only provides a dealer with protection from direct - not derivative - use of information obtained by the DOR through compliance with the statute. Hall, 196 Wis. 2d at 866-68. We agree. The stamp law allows the State to use compelled information as an investigative lead to information used against dealers in a criminal proceeding. Thus Hall has satisfied the third prong of Marchetti. Having satisfied all three prongs oí Marchetti, we conclude that the drug tax stamp law unconstitutionally compels self-incrimination, absent some preexisting statutory confidentiality or immunity provision providing protection equivalent to that of the Fifth Amendment.
II.
¶ 26. This brings us to our second issue: whether Wis. Stat. § 139.91, the confidentiality provision of the stamp law, on its face, provides Hall with protection as broad as the protection offered by the privilege against self-incrimination.
¶ 27. The privilege can be replaced by a sufficient grant of immunity. Kastigar v. United States, 406 U.S. 441 (1972). Therefore, the question becomes whether the stamp law provides such immunity. The privilege against self-incrimination may not properly be asserted if other protection is granted which " 'is so broad as to have the same extent in scope and effect' as the privilege itself." Marchetti, 390 U.S. at 58 (quoting Counselman v. Hitchcock, 142 U.S. 547, 12 S.Ct. 195, 206 (1892)). If coextensive protection exists, the taxpayer could not reasonably suppose that the incriminating information would be available for use in a criminal proceeding. The State argues that the stamp *78law's confidentiality provision provides Hall with coextensive protection. We disagree with the State.
¶ 28. First, we examine the extent of the privilege. The scope of the privilege against self-incrimination requires protection against derivative as well as direct use of incriminating information. This privilege protects against any disclosure that the witness reasonably believes could be used, or could lead to other evidence that could be used, in a criminal prosecution. Kastigar, 406 U.S. at 444-45. The information need only furnish a "link in the chain of evidence ..." against the defendant. Hoffman v. United States, 341 U.S. 479, 486 (1951); Kastigar, 406 U.S. at 460 (an investigatory lead). Where compliance with the requirements of a statute necessarily would result in self-incriminating communications, a proper claim of the constitutional privilege against self-incrimination provides a full defense to prosecutions under that statute.
¶ 29. Although the court in Heredia relied on the anonymity requirement of the confidentiality provision to find legislative intent of confidentiality, a closer examination of the statute reveals the inaccuracy of that interpretation. As acknowledged by the court of appeals, the confidentiality provision of the drug tax stamp law, on its face, bars only the direct use of information against a dealer in a criminal prosecution. Hall, 196 Wis. 2d at 867-68. The stamp law exhibits a lack of protection from derivative use in several ways.
¶ 30. The breadth of the immunity exception in Wis. Stat. § 139.91 creates a real danger that the information will be used in situations in which taxes are not at issue. The first sentence of the confidentiality provision prohibits the DOR from revealing facts obtained in *79the administration of the stamp law. However, the statute provides no penalty for unlawful dissemination. Furthermore, the last sentence of the same provision allows information obtained by the DOR to be used "in connection with a proceeding involving possession of schedule I. . .or schedule II controlled substances on which the tax has not been paid. . ." as well as "in connection with taxes due under s. 139.88 from the dealer." § 139.91. Thus, in a prosecution for possession with intent to deliver cocaine for which no tax has been paid, any information learned from a defendant who had paid the tax on other, stamped, cocaine could be used against him or her as long as he or she had paid no tax on the cocaine directly involved in the possession charge. For example, if a dealer possesses 25 grams of cocaine, but buys tax stamps for only 15 grams, the statute does not bar the DOR clerk from identifying the dealer as having admitted, by application for the stamps, to possession of 15 grams of cocaine, and thus knowledge and intent that the unstamped 10 grams are illegal cocaine and the dealer intended to possess them. The ability of the State to use the information obtained even when the payment of taxes is not at issue distinguishes the statute from statutes which have been upheld in other states. For a discussion of these statutes and cases, see below.3
*80¶ 31. We conclude that, while providing some protection, the stamp law, on its face, fails to provide *81the taxpayer with protection coextensive with the privilege against self-incrimination. Because the confidentiality provision does not provide adequate protection, the stamp law does not meet Hall's constitutional challenge.
*82III
¶ 32. The above conclusion leads us to the third issue: whether the confidentiality provision may be construed in a manner which provides protection coextensive with the privilege against self-incrimination. The State urges us to "save" this unconstitutional statute by construing it to provide both direct and derivative use immunity.
¶ 33. We recognize the strong presumption of constitutionality that must guide our examination of this statute. This presumption requires Hall to demonstrate the statute's unconstitutionality beyond a reasonable doubt. Brandmiller v. Arreola, 199 Wis. 2d 528, 544 N.W.2d 894, (1996). But the presumption of constitutionality presents a high hurdle, not an insurmountable barrier. Although this court will strive to construe legislation so as to save it against constitutional attack, it must not and will not carry this to the point of perverting the purpose of a statute. The statute before us cannot be construed as the State argues.
¶ 34. The crux of the problem is this: the language of the stamp law fails to provide taxpayers with any protection against derivative use of incriminating information.
¶ 35. While a statute should be held valid whenever by any fair interpretation it may be construed to serve a constitutional purpose, courts cannot go beyond the province of legitimate construction to save it, and where the meaning is plain, words cannot be read into it or out of it for the purpose of saving one or other possible alternative. Heimerl v. Ozaukee County, 256 Wis. 151, 155 (1949) (citing State ex rel. Reynolds v. Sande, 205 Wis. 495, 501, 503 (1931). On its face, a *83plain reading of the statute provides no protection against derivative use
¶ 36. The State argues that the Court's decision in United States v. X-Citement Video, Inc., 115 S.Ct. 464 (1994), allows this court to bridge the great gap between the plain meaning of this statute and the presumption of constitutionality. Indeed, the court of appeals applied a "saving" construction to this statute. Hall, 196 Wis. 2d at 867-68. It ruled that Wis. Stat. § 139.91 precludes the State from using information gained as a result of a tax stamp purchaser's compliance with the statute, either directly or derivatively, including the presence of affixed stamps, in a subsequent drug prosecution against the taxpayer. Id. Although the court of appeals justifies this construction in a well-written and well-reasoned opinion, we must reluctantly conclude that in the exercise of judicial restraint we cannot leap that far.
¶ 37. To read the stamp law to bar derivative, as well as direct use, would be rewriting the statute, not merely correcting a scrivener's error. X-Citement Video, 115 S.Ct. at 474 (Scalia, J., dissenting) Rather than the State's argument, we prefer the Court's reasoning in United States v. Albertini, 472 U.S. 675, 680 (1985), where the Court refused to add language to an unambiguous statute:
Statutes should be construed to avoid constitutional questions, but this interpretative canon is not license for the judiciary to rewrite language enacted by the legislature. Any other conclusion, while purporting to be an exercise injudicial restraint, would trench upon the legislative powers vested in Congress. . . .Proper respect for those powers implies that '[statutory construction must begin with the language employed by Congress and the assump*84tion that the ordinary meaning of that language accurately expresses the legislative purpose.' (Cite omitted.)
¶ 38. Presented as we are with every indication in the statute itself that the legislature had no purpose to bar derivative use, nevertheless, this court's primary purpose in interpreting a statute is to effectuate the legislature's intent. State v. Hopkins, 168 Wis. 2d 802, 814, 484 N.W.2d 549 (1992).
¶ 39. The court need not look to the history of a statute clear on its face, Grosse v. Protective Life Ins. Co., 182 Wis. 2d 97, 117, 513 N.W.2d 592 (1994) (Steinmetz, J. dissenting). However, even the legislative history of the statute supports the conclusion that the legislature intended to bar direct use, but not derivative use.
¶ 40. The legislative history supports the legislative intent to bar direct, but not derivative, use for several reasons: (1) Legislative history reveals that the legislature's purpose for drafting the original drug stamp tax bill was to learn the identity of drug dealers. Had the legislature intended to bar both direct as well as derivative use, that purpose could not have been effectuated. (2) Even in early drafts, the legislature knew that the stamp law presented self-incrimination problems of constitutional dimension, yet chose not to revise the bill. (3) The legislature was aware of how to draft a clear, unambiguous statute providing both direct and derivative use immunity, yet chose not to do so.
¶ 41. The stamp law is the product of several attempts by the Senate and Assembly to create a drug tax stamp statute. It was enacted during a special ses*85sion of the legislature as part of 1989 Wis. Act 122, a wide-ranging amalgamation of anti-drug measures.
¶ 42. History reveals that the legislature's purpose for drafting the original drug stamp tax bill was to learn the identity of drug dealers. In 1987, Representative Foti asked the Legislative Reference Bureau to draft a drug tax statute. Draft Request Form for 1987 AB 519. He sought to solve the problem of "hav[ing] no control over drug dealers or knowledge of who they are" by "[making] them pay a tax on their drugs." 1987 AB 519 Draft Request Form. The following excerpt from a memorandum attached to the draft request acknowledges the bill's supporters' intent to allow the State to use the drug tax law to obtain information about drug dealers.
The only real objection anyone had to it was its constitutionality but they have gotten around that. A drug dealer, according to the bill, can go to the Department of Revenue and obtain a stamp and the information has to be kept confidential. They cannot call the police and tell them that so and so has a drug tax stamp. It gives them 5th amendment protection. It does not legalize possession. If a dealer is caught selling a drug the law enforcement people can then contact the revenue department and obtain any information on file. The idea behind the bill is to get at the dealers.
¶ 43. Compelling drug dealers to provide self-incriminating information is an unconstitutional means of "knowing who the drug dealers are." The unlawfulness of an activity does not prevent the activity from being taxed. However, a statute imposing a tax on unlawful activity cannot be sustained when the methods of collecting the tax are in conflict with the *86privilege against self-incrimination. Marchetti, 390 U.S. at 44. While the State may lawfully tax controlled substances, the means used must be constitutional.
¶ 44. The lack of a revenue raising purpose underlying this act adds further weight to the legislative history expressing the unconstitutional purpose of "knowing who [drug dealers] are" and "get[ting] at [them]." The drug stamp tax law is a tax law. Yet the legislature never expected this tax law to raise revenue. The fiscal estimate of every draft of the drug tax bills exhibits a lack of revenue producing purpose. 1989 Act 122 Fiscal Estimate ("[b]ased on the experience of other states.. .revenues from sales of tax stamps would likely be minimal [and] actual tax collections generally amount to only a small portion of the total assessments since collection of the controlled substances tax is difficult."); 1989 AB 633 Fiscal Estimate (estimating "minimal" sales revenues); 1989 SB 356 Fiscal Estimate (anticipating minimal sales and minimal collection of penalties); 1989 SB 295 Fiscal Estimate (anticipating that this bill would have "no fiscal impact on state or local government."); 1987 AB 519 Fiscal Estimate ("likely that that [sic] the revenue from the tax would be very small."). We must pause and reflect when legislative history reveals that a tax statute was enacted without the expectation that it raise revenue.
¶ 45. Finally, most troubling is the revelation in the legislative history that the legislature was well aware of how to craft a confidentiality provision that would provide dealers with both direct and derivative use immunity. Not only does the Minnesota statute, attached to the draft request form of 1989 Bill 633, provide the legislature with a model of a confidentiality provision that prohibits both the direct and derivative use of information compelled by the stamp law, the *87legislature itself, in the same act as the stamp law, created an immunity clause that provides both direct and derivative use immunity. Wis. Stat. § 972.085.
¶ 46. A copy of the confidentiality provision for the Minnesota drug tax statute § 297D was attached to the bill request form for 1989 Assembly Bill 633. This Minnesota confidentiality provision states that
[no] information contained in such a report or return or obtained from a dealer be used against the dealer in any criminal proceeding, unless independently obtained, except in connection with a proceeding involving taxes due under this chapter from the dealer making the return.
Compare this with the last sentence of Wis. Stat. § 139.91:
No information obtained by the department may be used against a dealer in any criminal proceeding unless that information has been independently obtained, except in connection with a proceeding involving possession of schedule I controlled substances or schedule II controlled substances on which the tax has not been paid or in connection with taxes due under s. 139.88 from the dealer. (Emphasis added.)
¶ 47. The Minnesota statute prohibits the use of information compelled by its drug tax stamp law except in a proceeding involving taxes due against the dealer making the return. In contrast, Wis. Stat. § 139.91 allows the use of information compelled by the stamp law in proceedings involving taxes due from the dealer and in proceedings involving controlled substances on which the tax has not been paid. Consequently, the stamp law allows prosecutors to use information compelled by the act - the affixed stamps - against dealers *88in criminal proceedings involving unstamped drugs. Herein lies the stamp law's fatal flaw.
¶ 48. The legislature ratified this constitutionally flawed provision despite awareness that it posed potential problems, and in light of a solution to these problems. A memorandum to the Legislative Reference Bureau ("LRB") from the DOR regarding the confidentiality provision directs the drafters' attention to the potential for claims of the self-incrimination privilege by drug dealers:
The difficulty in maintaining confidentiality could result in dealers claiming that the requirement to pay the controlled substances tax violates their constitutional right against self-incrimination. There have been successful challenges of similar taxes on illegal activities in both state and federal courts.
¶ 49. Memo from DOR's Eng Braun to the LRB. June 17,1987. The legislators knew they were treading constitutionally treacherous waters. And, when enacting the stamp law, they had before them a statute which had been scrutinized and upheld by the Minnesota Supreme Court just the year before. Sisson, 428 N.W.2d 565. Yet they chose not to follow this model. Instead, our legislature chose to enact the stamp law's confidentiality provision as originally written.
¶ 50. Finally, the most striking illustration of legislative intent is the contrast between the "use" language in Wis. Stat. § 139.91 and the "use" language in Wis. Stat. § 972.085 of the same act which clearly provides direct and derivative use immunity. Section 972.085 provides:
Immunity from criminal or forfeiture prosecution under [listed provisions - not listing § 139.87 et seq.] provides immunity only from the use of the com*89pelled testimony or evidence in subsequent criminal or forfeiture proceedings, as well as immunity from the use of evidence derived from that compelled testimony or evidence.
¶ 51. This statute, included in the same act as the stamp law, provides both direct and derivative use immunity. Obviously, the legislature knew how to immunize dealers under Wis. Stat. § 139.91 from direct and derivative use, yet chose different language. Consequently, we arrive at the inevitable conclusion that the legislature knew how to craft a confidentiality provision prohibiting derivative use, yet deliberately chose not to do so.
¶ 52. We find no basis in the language of the statute nor in its legislative history for the saving construction applied by the court of appeals.
'A statute must be construed, if fairly possible, so as to avoid not only the conclusion that it is unconstitutional, but also grave doubts upon that score.'. . .But avoidance of a difficulty will not be pressed to the point of disingenuous evasion. Here the intention of the Congress is revealed too distinctly to permit us to ignore it. . . ,[T]he problem must be faced and answered.
Welsh, II v. United States, 398 U.S. 333, 355 (1970) (Harlan, J., concurring) (quoting J. Cardozo in Moore Ice Cream Co. v. Rose, 289 U.S. 373, 379 (1933). In this case, the language and history of the drug tax stamp law plainly demonstrate that the legislature never intended to prohibit derivative use of information compelled by the stamp law.
¶ 53. A properly drafted drug tax stamp law is constitutional and will serve the societal purposes for *90which it is intended without violating constitutional protections. See State Drug Taxes: A Tax We Can't Afford, Rutgers L.J., Vol. 23:657 (analyzing the challenges facing a legislature in drafting a drug tax stamp law and proposing a model law that meets the constitutional challenges) (1992). The Wisconsin Drug Tax Stamp Law is not such a statute. We agree that if the legislature had written the statute the way that the court of appeals rewrote it, it would likely resolve the constitutional infirmities. However, the remedy rests with the legislature. It is the legislature's function to amend the statute where amendment is found necessary. Where a statute plainly includes, as this one does, only immunity from direct use of compelled incriminating information, we fail to see how the court would be justified in adding thereto the following limitation, 'furthermore, we provide immunity from derivative use.' This in effect is what the State would have us do. Tempted as we may be to rewrite the confidentiality provision, as the court of appeals did and as the legislature very likely will, we would be setting a dangerous precedent to allow such a judicial usurpation of the legislature's role. The checks and balances needed to sustain a democratic government stay our hands from the pen.
¶ 54. We hold that Wis. Stat. § 139.91, plainly and unambiguously provides direct, but not derivative use immunity. Consequently, the statute fails to provide Hall with protection coextensive with the privilege against self-incrimination. Accordingly, we reject the court of appeals' construction of the statute and conclude that the stamp law violates Hall's privilege against self-incrimination.
*91By the Court. — The decision of the court of appeals is reversed.
Tax on Controlled Substances.
139.87 Definitions. In this subchapter:
(2) "Dealer" means a person who in violation of ch. 161 possesses, manufactures, produces, ships, transports, delivers, imports, sells or transfers to another person more than 42.5 grams of marijuana, more than 5 marijuana plants, more than 14 grams of mushrooms containing psilocin or psilocybin, more than 100 milligrams of any material containing lysergic acid diethylamide or more than 7 grams of any other schedule I controlled substance or schedule II controlled substance. "Dealer11 does not include a person who lawfully possesses marijuana or another controlled substance.
(3) "Department" means the department of revenue.
(4) "Marijuana" has the meaning under s. 161.01(14).
(5) "Schedule I controlled substance" means a substance listed in s. 161.14.
(6) "Schedule II controlled substance" means a substance listed in s. 161.16.
139.88 Imposition. There is imposed on dealers, upon acquisition or possession by them in this state, an occupational tax at the following rates:
(1) Per gram or part of a gram of marijuana, whether pure or impure, measured when in the dealer's possession, $3.50.
*62(Id) Per marijuana plant, regardless of weight, counted when in the dealer's possession, $1000.
(lg) Per gram or part of a gram of mushrooms or parts of mushrooms containing psilocin or psilocybin, whether pure or impure, measured when in the dealer's possession, $10.
(Ir) Per 100 milligrams or part of 100 milligrams of any material containing lysergic acid diethylamide, whether pure or impure, measured when in the dealer's possession, $100.
(2) Per gram or part of a gram of other schedule I controlled substances or schedule II controlled substances, whether pure or impure, measured when in the dealer's possession, $200.
139.89 Proof of payment. The department shall create a uniform system of providing, affixing and displaying stamps, labels or other evidence that the tax under § 139.88 has been paid. Stamps or other evidence of payment shall be sold at face value. No dealer may possess any schedule I controlled substance or schedule II controlled substance unless the tax under § 139,88 has been paid on it, as evidenced by a stamp or other official evidence issued by the DOR. The tax under this subchapter is due and payable immediately upon acquisition or possessing of the schedule I controlled substance or schedule II controlled substance in this state, and the department that time has a lien on all of the taxpayer's property. Late payments are subject to interest at the rate of 1% per month or part of a month. No person may transfer to another person a stamp or other evidence of payment.
139.90 No immunity. Acquisition of stamps or other evidence that the tax under s. 139.88 has been paid does not create immunity for a dealer from criminal prosecution.
139.91 Confidentiality. The department may not reveal facts obtained in administering this subchapter, except that the department may publish statistics that do not reveal the identities of dealers. Dealers may not be required to provide any identifying information in connection with the purchase of stamps. No information obtained by the department may be used against a dealer in any criminal proceeding unless that information has been independently obtained, except in connection with a proceeding involving possession of schedule I controlled substances or schedule II controlled substances on which the tax has not been paid or in connection with taxes due under s. 139.88 from the dealer.
*63139.92 Examination of records. For the purposes of determining the amount of tax that should have been paid, determining whether or not the dealer should have paid taxes or collecting any taxes under s. 139.88, the department may examine, or cause to be examined, any books, papers, records or memoranda that may be relevant to making those determinations, whether the books, papers, records or memoranda are the property of or in the possession of the dealer or another person. The department may require the attendance of any person having knowledge or information that may be relevant, compel the production of books, papers, records or memoranda by persons required to attend, take testimony on matters material to the determination, issue subpoenas and administer oaths or affirmation.
139.93 Appeals, presumption, administration. (1) The taxes, penalties and interest under this subchapter shall be assessed, collected and reviewed as are income taxes under ch. 71.
(2) If the department finds that the collection of the tax under this subchapter is jeopardized by delay, the department may issue, in person or by registered mail to the last-known address of the taxpayer, a notice of its intent to proceed under this subsection, may make a demand for immediate payment of the taxes, penalties and interest due and may proceed by the methods under s. 71.91(5) and (6). If the taxes, penalties and interest are not immediately paid, the department may seize any of the taxpayer's assets. Immediate seizure of assets does not nullify the taxpayer's right to a hearing on the department's determination that the collection of the assessment will be jeopardized by delay, nor does it nullify the taxpayer's right to post a bond. Within 5 days after giving notice of its intent to proceed under this subsection, the department shall, by mail or in person, provide the taxpayer in writing with its reasons for proceeding under this subsection. The warrant of the department shall not issue and the department may not take other action to collect if the taxpayer within 10 days after the notice of intent to proceed under this subsection is given furnishes a bond in the amount, not exceeding double the amount of the tax, and with such sureties as the department of revenue approves, conditioned upon the payment of so much of the taxes as shall finally be determined to be due, together with interest thereon. Within 20 days after notice of intent to proceed under this subsection is given by the department of revenue, the person against whom the depart*64ment intends to proceed under this subsection may appeal to the department the department's determination that the collection of the assessment will be jeopardized by delay. Any statement that the department files may be admitted into evidence and is prima facie evidence of the facts it contains. Taxpayers may appeal adverse determinations by the department to the circuit court for Dane County.
(3) The taxes and penalties assessed by the department are presumed to be valid and correct. The burden is on the taxpayer to show their invalidity or incorrectness.
(4) The department may request the department of administration to. sell, by the methods under s. 125.14(2)(f), all assets seized under sub. (2).
(5) No court may issue an injunction to prevent or delay the levying, assessment or collection of taxes or penalties under this subchapter.
(6) The department shall enforce, and the duly authorized employes of the department have all necessary police powers to prevent violations of, this subchapter.
139.94 Refunds. If the department is determined to have collected more taxes than are owed, the department shall refund the excess and interest at the rate of 0.75% per month or part of a month when that determination is final. If the department has sold property to obtain taxes, penalties and interest assessed under this subchapter and those taxes, penalties and interest are found not to be due, the department shall give the former owner the proceeds of the sale when that determination is final.
139.95 Penalties. (1) Any dealer who possesses a schedule I controlled substance or schedule II controlled substance that does not bear evidence that the tax under s. 139.88 has been paid shall pay, in addition to the tax under s. 139.88, a penalty equal to the tax due. The department shall collect penalties under this sub-chapter in the same manner as it collects the tax under this subchapter.
(2) A dealer who possesses a schedule I controlled substance or schedule II controlled substance that does not bear evidence that the tax under s. 139.88 has been paid may be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned for not more than 5 years or both.
*65(3) Any person who falsely or fraudulently makes, alters or counterfeits any stamp or procures or causes the same to be done or who knowingly utters, publishes, passes or tenders as true any false, altered or counterfeit stamp or who affixes a counterfeit stamp to a schedule I controlled substance or schedule II controlled substance or who possesses a schedule I controlled substance or schedule II controlled substance to which a false, altered or counterfeit stamp is affixed may be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned for not less than one year nor more than 10 years or both.
139.96 Use of revenue. If taxes, penalties and interest are collected under this subchapter as a result of an arrest, the department of revenue shall pay the taxes, penalties and interest to the state or local law enforcement agency that made the arrest associated with the revenue.
Wis. Stat. ch. 139, subch. IV (1991-92) (all further references are to the 1991-92 Statutes unless otherwise noted.
Hall also challenges the stamp law on double jeopardy grounds. Because we hold the stamp law unconstitutional on self-incrimination grounds, we need not address the double jeopardy issue.
In its brief, the State contends that the Wisconsin stamp law is constitutional because § 139.91 "guarantees the same protection given by the confidentiality provisions in other states where the drug tax stamp laws were found to be in compliance with fifth amendment requirements." A comparison of the Wisconsin stamp law and the statutes upheld in the cases cited by the State's illustrates the fallacy of this assertion.
Section § 139.91 lists two criminal proceedings in which information obtained by the department may be revealed: (1) *80proceedings involving possession of controlled substances on which the tax has not been paid, and (2) proceedings in connection with taxes due under the stamp law. The confidentiality provisions of the stamp laws upheld in the cases cited by the State all include the second exception. However, none of the stamp laws referred to by the State, that have been upheld as constitutional, allow compelled, self-incriminating information to be used in proceedings involving possession of drugs on which the tax has not been paid. Thus, none of the cases cited by the State involve statutes that allow derivative use to the extent allowed by the Wisconsin stamp law.
We quote these cases, cited by the State, and the statutes which they upheld to make plain the fallaciousness of the State's argument: "[N]or can any information contained in such a report or return be used against a dealer in any criminal proceeding, except in connection with a proceeding involving taxes due under this chapter, unless such information is independently obtained." Briney v. State Dept. of Revenue, 594 So. 2d 120, 122 (Ala. Civ. App. 1991) (quoting Ala. Code § 40-17A-13 1975 (Cum. Supp. 1990)). Clifft v. Ind. Dept. of State Revenue, 660 N.E.2d 310 (1995), upheld Indiana's stamp law which provides, in pertinent part: "Confidential information acquired by the department may not be used to initiate or facilitate prosecution for an offense other than an offense based on a violation of this chapter." Ind. Code Ann. 6-7-3-9 (West. Supp. 1994). Iowa's stamp law "explicitly prohibits any information obtained from a dealer, pursuant to compliance with 421A, from being released or used against the dealer in any criminal proceeding except in connection with a proceeding involving taxes due under chapter 421A." State v. Godbersen, 493 N.W.2d 852, 857 (1992) (citing Iowa Code § 421A.10).
The stamp law at issue in State v. Davis, 787 P.2d 517 (Utah 1990), failed to contain a confidentiality provision. The Utah Court of Appeals upheld the stamp law because it made no *81provision for disclosure of any identifying information to prosecuting authorities. However, when reviewing the stamp law, the Utah court had the benefit of subsequent legislation to aid its interpretation of legislative intent. The 1989 amendment to Utah's stamp law provides: "None of the information contained in a report, form, or return or otherwise obtained from a dealer in connection with this section may be used against the dealer in any criminal proceeding unless it is independently obtained, except in connection -with a proceeding involving taxes due under this chapter from the dealer making the return." Id. (quoting Utah Code Ann. § 59-19-105 (1989)). This amendment, significantly different from Wisconsin's confidentiality provision, was upheld by the Utah Supreme Court in Zissi v. State Tax Comm'n of Utah, 842 P.2d 848 (1992).
Finally, the State contends that the Kansas stamp law, upheld by the Kansas Supreme Court, is "almost identical" to the Wisconsin stamp law because "information obtained' through compliance with the act could not be used in any criminal proceedings, except those involving violations of the act itself." State's Brief at 12. The State is correct that the Kansas stamp law explicitly prohibits information contained in a report or return required by the Kansas act to be used "against the dealer in any criminal proceeding, unless independently obtained, except in connection with a proceeding involving taxes due under this act from the taxpayer making the return." State v. Durrant, 769 P.2d 1174, 1178 (1989) (quoting Kan. Stat. Ann. § 79-5206 (1988 Supp.)) As we have explained, this confidentiality provision is not "identical" or even "almost identical" from the stamp law before us.

=== CASE 9741142 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:01.518388+00 ===

JON P. WILCOX, J.
¶ 55. 0dissenting.) I dissent because I conclude that this court must construe the confidentiality provision found in Wis. Stat. § 139.91 (1993-94)1 (the "confidentiality provision") to provide protection coextensive with the Fifth Amendment. I agree that the affix and display requirement of the drug tax stamp law2 (the "stamp law") would unconstitutionally compel self-incrimination if it allowed the State to use a drug tax stamp as evidence in any criminal proceeding not related to payment of the tax. However, the majority misinterprets the legislative history of the stamp law and fails in its duty to preserve the statute.
¶ 56. The majority concludes that "the affix and display requirement of the stamp law has the direct and unmistakable consequence of incriminating any dealer who complies with the law." Majority op. at 75. It further asserts that the confidentiality provision does not provide protection coextensive with the Fifth Amendment. Majority op. at 76, 82. The majority interprets the confidentiality provision to allow the State to use the stamps found on some illegal drugs to establish the defendant's knowledge of the illegal nature of and intent to possess other illegal unstamped drugs. Majority op. at 78-79. The majority bases this conclusion on the language of the confidentiality provision. Id.
¶ 57. The confidentiality provision of Wis. Stat. § 139.91 provides:
*92The department may not reveal facts obtained in administering this subchapter, except that the department may publish statistics that do not reveal the identities of dealers. Dealers may not be required to provide any identifying information in connection with the purchase of stamps. No information obtained by the department may be used against a dealer in any criminal proceeding unless that information has been independently obtained, except in connection with a proceeding involving possession of schedule I controlled substances or schedule II controlled substances on which the tax has not been paid or in connection with taxes due under s. 139.88 from the dealer.
(Emphasis added.) The majority reads the emphasized exception to mean that the State may use any information obtained through the administration of this subchapter in a prosecution for criminal possession of illegal drugs that were not stamped. Majority op. at 78-79. Therefore, according to the majority, affixing and displaying the stamps would constitute incriminating oneself. I believe that the majority misinterprets this provision.
¶ 58. First, the language of the confidentiality provision does not unambiguously create an exception for criminal proceedings for possession of illegal drugs. The legislature did not state: "except in connection with a proceeding for possession," instead the legislature stated: "except in connection with a proceeding involving possession of [illegal drugs] on which the tax has not been paid. ..." (Emphasis added.) Wis. Stat. § 139.91. The logical meaning of this passage is that information not independently obtained can be used, not in a criminal possession proceeding, but in a proceeding under § 139.95. This section provides:
*93(1) Any dealer who possesses a schedule I controlled substance or schedule II controlled substance that does not bear evidence that the tax under s. 139.88 has been paid shall pay in addition to any tax under s. 139.88, a penalty equal to the tax due. The department shall collect penalties under this subchapter in the same manner as it collects tax under this subchapter.
(2) A dealer who possesses a schedule I controlled substance or schedule II controlled substance that does not bear evidence that the tax under s. 139.88 has been paid may be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned for not more than 5 years or both.
(3) Any person who falsely or fraudulently makes, alters or counterfeits any stamp or procures or causes the same to be done or who knowingly utters, publishes, passes or tenders as true any false, altered or counterfeit stamp or who affixes a counterfeit stamp to a schedule I controlled substance or schedule II controlled substance or who possesses a schedule I controlled substance or Schedule II controlled substance to which a false, altered or counterfeit stamp is affixed may be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned for not more than 10 years or both.
(Emphasis added.) The purpose of this section is to set forth the penalties for violations of the stamp law.
¶ 59. In addition to these penalties, a dealer who does not comply with the stamp law will have to pay the taxes due under § 139.88. Proceedings for unpaid taxes are referred to in the second part of the exception to the confidentiality provision: "... or in connection with taxes due under s. 139.88 from the dealer." Wis. Stat. § 139.91. Accordingly, under this interpretation, each of the exceptions serves a distinct purpose.
*94¶ 60. This construction of the confidentiality provision is also supported by legislative history. To lay the groundwork for our analysis we must first present an overview of the legislative history of the stamp law. The drug tax stamp bill that eventually passed was the result of several attempts to enact such a law. The first bill introduced in Wisconsin on this subject was 1987 AB 519. The legislative history of this bill is relevant to 1989 Wis. Act 122 because the confidentiality provision has similar language3 and because it may have been the original source for much of the language in the stamp law. In 1989, several more bills on this subject were proposed: (1) 1989 SB 295, introduced on October 3, 1989, (2) Oct. 1989 Spec. Sess. SB 6, introduced on October 12,1989, (3) Oct. 1989 Spec. Sess. AB 6, introduced on October 24,1989, (4) 1989 SB 356, introduced on November 1, 1989, (5) 1989 AB 633, introduced on November 2,1989, and (6) Oct. 1989 Spec. Sess. AB 12 (the "Governor's 1989 budget bill"), introduced on November 8, 1989. Each of these bills included confidentiality provisions similar to the one found in Wis. Stat. § 139.91.4 Finally, on November 9, 1989, Oct. *951989 Spec. Sess. Substitute Amend. 1 to Oct. 1989 Spec. Sess. AB 12 (the "substitute amendment to the *961989 budget bill") was introduced and eventually enacted as 1989 Wis. Act 122.5 In considering the legislative history of 1989 Wis. Act 122, a review of each of these bills is relevant as each used similar language and many directly used the drafts of earlier bills.6
¶ 61. The majority contends that the legislative history supports its conclusion that the confidentially provision does not bar the use of derivative information in criminal proceedings not related to the tax. Majority op. at 84. The majority bases this conclusion on three points: "(1) Legislative history reveals that the legislature's purpose for drafting the original drug stamp tax bill was to learn the identity of drug dealers. ... (2) Even in early drafts, the legislature knew that the stamp law presented self-incrimination problems of constitutional dimension, yet chose not to revise the bill. (3) The legislature was aware of how to draft a clear, unambiguous statute providing both direct and derivative use immunity, yet chose not to do so." Id. at 84. In using these bases to reach such a conclusion, the majority misinterprets and overemphasizes some por*97tions of the legislative history while ignoring other, more pertinent, information.
¶ 62. The majority's first point, that the legislature's purpose in drafting the stamp tax bill was to learn the identity of drug dealers, is based on the draft request form and a supporting memorandum found in the drafting record of 1987 AB 519. Majority op. at 85. In support of the majority's assertion, the majority cites the following description of the problem that the bill sought to address from the Drafting Request Form: "We have no control over drug dealers or knowledge of who they are." Id. at 85. The majority also cites part of a memorandum that was attached to the draft request. Id. The memorandum states:
I talked to Mark Warnsing, Legislative Assistant to Sen. Barkhausen in Illinois about the drug bill. . . . He said it is a bill that is pretty hard to vote against. The only real objection anyone had to it was its constitutionality but they have gotten around that. A drug dealer, according to the bill, can go to the Department of Revenue and obtain a stamp and the information has to be kept confidential. They cannot call the police and tell them that so and so has a drug stamp. It gives them 5th amendment protection. It does not legalize possession. If a dealer is caught selling a drug the law enforcement people can then contact the evenue [sic] department and obtain any information on file. The idea behind the bill is to get at the dealers. They are not concerned with an individual who has drugs in his possession because it would fill up the courts. An amendment would make the cost of the stamps 4 times the face value of each stamp instead of 100%. He said if you have any questions to call him.
*98When the information from the drafting record cited by the majority is read in isolation, it appears that the confidentiality provision of 1987 AB 519 was not intended to provide protection coextensive with the Fifth Amendment. However, the majority fails to fully consider the legislative history of 1987 AB 519.
¶ 63. A consideration of all the material contained in the drafting record reveals that Representative Foti intended to introduce a bill that mirrored the one that had been introduced in Illinois. This is significant because the Illinois confidentiality provision provides protection coextensive with the Fifth Amendment in the clearest of terms. The language of the Illinois confidentiality provision can be found in the drafting record for 1987 AB 519. The Illinois provision provided:
Section 13. Neither the Director nor a public employee may reveal facts contained in a report or return required by this Act, nor can any information contained in such a report or return be used against the dealer in any criminal proceeding, unless such information has been independently obtained, except in connection with a proceeding involving taxes due under this Act from the taxpayer making the return.
This provision, which unambiguously precludes the use of direct and derivative information, was the basis for the confidentiality provision in 1987 AB 519.
¶ 64. Further indications that this bill was intended to mirror the Illinois bill can be found in the previously mentioned drafting request form and in the memorandum which accompanied the drafting request form. Contrary to the majority's interpretation, the apparent purpose of the memorandum was to para*99phrase an explanation of the Illinois drug tax stamp bill given by Mark Warnsing, a legislative assistant to Illinois State Senator Barkhausen. In the closing line of the memorandum, the drafting attorney is told: "[Warnsing] said if you have any questions to call him." A phone number was written next to Mark Warnsing's name in the typed memorandum. Additionally, in response to a question in the drafting request which asked "Provide names and phone numbers of persons we may contact for more information," the following response was typed in: "Sen. Barkhausen, State of Illinois." This evidence suggests that the drafting attorney was told to draft a bill similar to the one from Illinois. This is significant because it suggests that Representative Foti wanted the hill to include a confidentiality provision that provided the same protection as the one in the Illinois bill — a confidentiality provision that provided protection coextensive with the Fifth Amendment.
¶ 65. Additional evidence of the legislature's intention to provide protection coextensive with the Fifth Amendment can be found in the drafting record of 1987 AB 519. First, after the above quoted memorandum was written on May 20, 1987, and after the Draft Request Form was filled out on May 21, 1987, the Department of Revenue (DOR) sent a memorandum to the Legislative Reference Bureau (LRB) drafting attorney for 1987 AB 519. This memorandum addressed several technical problems with an earlier draft of the bill including problems with the confidentiality provision. The memorandum stated in relevant part:
The confidentiality provision should clearly specify how the rules for the controlled substances tax differ from the general confidentiality rules for the *100department under s. 71.11(44). Under the general confidentiality rules for other state taxes, law enforcement officials can request access to the department's records.
The difficulty in maintaining confidentiality could result in dealers claiming that the requirement to pay the controlled substances tax violates their constitutional right against self-incrimination. There have been successful challenges of similar taxes on illegal activities in both state and federal courts.
This shows a concern over confidentiality and a desire to ensure that the statute did not violate the Fifth Amendment.
¶ 66. An even stronger indication of the legislature's intent can be found in the Analysis by LRB. Part of this analysis stated: "Information from a return is confidential and may not be used in any criminal proceeding except those related to the tax itself." This statement was included as an explanation at the beginning of the bill draft which was circulated to all legislative offices. The analysis was written by the attorney who drafted the bill; he should have known what was intended by Representative Foti.7 This same language was used in the LRB analysis of the Governor's 1989 budget bill and the substitute amendment to the 1989 budget bill which is the direct source of Wis. Stat. § 139.91. It is likely that almost every legislator read this analysis before voting on the stamp tax bill. Accordingly, this is very strong evidence that the legislature intended that the confidentiality provision *101preclude the use of information in any criminal proceeding not related to the tax.
¶ 67. The majority's assertion that 1987 AB 519 was enacted for an unconstitutional purpose, to learn the identity of dealers for use in criminal prosecutions not related to the tax, is not only in conflict with the legislative history of that statute, but is also in conflict with logic. This is because the majority's theory fails to explain why the statute included a confidentiality provision. If the purpose of the statute was to learn the identity of dealers in violation of the Fifth Amendment, there would have been no need for any confidentiality. In fact, the direct use of information, which the majority concedes is precluded by the confidentiality provision, would be the best means of identifying dealers. The absence of an explanation for the presence of the confidentiality provision casts serious doubts on the majority's assertion that 1987 AB 519 was drafted and that the stamp law was enacted for the purpose of identifying dealers and using that information in criminal proceedings not related to the tax.
¶ 68. Asa side point, the majority argues that the lack of revenue raising purpose underlying the act suggests that the purpose of the bill was to identify drug dealers. Majority op. at 85-86. On the contrary, this information merely tells us that the purpose was not to raise revenue. It is just as likely that the purpose was simply to provide additional penalties for drug dealers as that it was to identify them.
¶ 69. Finally, the majority contends that further evidence of the unconstitutional purpose of the legislature is provided by the fact that the legislature knew how to craft a confidentiality provision that would provide dealers with both direct and derivative use immunity. Majority op. at 86-89. In support of this *102contention the majority cites (1) the fact that the Minnesota confidentiality provision can be found in the drafting record of 1989 AB 633, (2) the fact that the legislature was aware of the potential constitutional problems through a memorandum from DOR that is in the drafting record of 1987 AB 519, and (3) the language used to provide for direct and derivative use immunity in Wis. Stat. § 972.085. Id.
¶ 70. Certainly, the confidentiality provision in Wis. Stat. § 139.91 could have been more artfully drafted; however, the fact that it differs from the Minnesota provision and the immunity provisions of Wis. Stat. § 972.085 does not prove that the legislature had an unconstitutional purpose in enacting the stamp law. In fact, a review of the drafting record of 1989 SB 295 indicates that the legislature intended to enact a law that mirrored the Minnesota stamp law. The bill draft request from Senator Te Winkle's office to the LRB drafting attorney states:
In reference to our discussion earlier today, and further discussion with Senator Te Winkle, I submit this request.
We would like legislation drafted to place a stamp tax on cocaine and marijuana that is similar to Minnesota's law, with the same penalty provisions.
The exception is that we would like to send the revenue from this tax directly to the Metropolitan Enforcement Groups (MEG's) or multi-jurisdic-tional groups (MJG's) in proportion to the incidence of drug crime in each group's area during the previous year.
The drafting request makes no mention of changing the confidentiality provision or of using the information in a criminal prosecution for possession.
*103¶ 71. Additionally, the DOR memorandum from the drafting record of 1987 AB 519 that the majority quotes does show that the legislature was aware of the potential for a conflict with the Fifth Amendment; however, it does not prove that the legislature chose to ignore these constitutional concerns. Instead, the legislative history of the stamp law demonstrates that the legislature attempted to provide protection coextensive to the Fifth Amendment in the confidentiality provision and believed that this had been done.
¶ 72. The strongest evidence of this intention is the language from the LRB analysis which states: "Information from a return is confidential and may not be used in any criminal proceeding except those related to the tax itself." This statement was included as part of the circulated bill draft for the first drug tax stamp bill, 1987 AB 519, the Governor's 1989 budget bill, and the substitute amendment to the 1989 budget bill, which was the version enacted as the stamp law.8 Additional evidence of this intention can be found in the drafting records for the various drug tax stamp bills that were introduced in 1989.
¶ 73. The drafting record for Oct. 1989 Spec. Sess. AB 6 contained as part of the drafting instructions a DOR memorandum entitled "Summary of Controlled Substances Tax Proposal." This memorandum stated in relevant part:
Confidentiality: Tax information may not be revealed or used against a dealer in a criminal proceeding, unless the information was independently obtained. This restriction does not apply to proceed*104ings involving the possession of untaxed controlled substances or other tax-related proceedings.
A similar description of the confidentiality provision is found in the drafting record for the Governor's 1989 budget bill: "Under your proposal, information from a controlled substance tax return would be confidential and could not be used in any criminal proceeding, except those relating to the tax itself."
¶ 74. Finally, an examination of the drafting record of the substitute amendment to the 1989 budget bill itself and a comparison of the language of that bill with the language in the Governor's 1989 budget bill reveals that the legislature attempted to craft an adequate confidentiality provision. The confidentiality provision of the Governor's 1989 budget bill, which was introduced on November 8,1989, provided:
77.97 CONFIDENTIALITY. The department may not reveal facts contained in a return required under s. 77.94, except that the department may publish statistics that do not reveal the identities of dealers or the contents of individual returns. Dealers may not be required to provide any identifying information on returns. No information contained in a return may be used against the dealer in any criminal proceeding, unless that information has been independently obtained, except in connection with a proceeding involving possession of untaxed controlled substances or taxes due under s. 77.93 from the dealer making the return.
In the drafting record for the substitute amendment there is a memorandum dated November 8,1989, from DOR to the Legislative Fiscal Bureau suggesting changes to the drug stamp tax provisions in the Governor's 1989 budget bill. This memorandum makes *105specific suggestions for changes in the confidentiality-provision:
In order to preserve confidentiality, the return requirement should be eliminated. Dealers should be able to purchase drug tax stamps on a cash basis in person or through the mail without having to submit a return which could identify them as a drug dealer.
Giving the Department of Revenue police powers with respect to the drug tax would allow the Department to enforce the fax directly without involving law enforcement authorities. This would simply [sic] administrative [sic] of the tax and ensure a higher level of confidentiality.
Also included in this drafting record is a written motion by Representative Kunicki that follows the suggestions of DOR:
Move to make the following modifications relating to administration and enforcement of the drug tax:
1. Require the Department of Revenue to enforce the provisions of the tax, and specify that duly authorized employes of the Department would have all necessary police powers to prevent violation of these provisions.
2. Delete the requirement that dealers must complete and submit tax returns in order to purchase drug stamps, and amend the bill's confidentiality provision to eliminate references to returns.
Finally, the language of the substitute amendment reflects these changes:
The department may not reveal facts obtained in administering this subchapter, except that the *106department may publish statistics that do not reveal the identities of dealers. Dealers may not be required to provide any identifying information in connection with the purchase of stamps. No information obtained by the department may be used against a dealer in any criminal proceeding unless that information has been independently obtained, except in connection with a proceeding involving possession of untaxed marijuana or controlled substances or taxes due under s. 139.88 from the dealer.
The deletion of references to returns in the confidentiality provision in response to the concerns expressed by DOR provides further evidence that the legislature intended to provide complete confidentiality.
¶ 75. I believe that the information contained in the various drafting records is more than sufficient to support the conclusion that the legislature intended to provide protection coextensive with the Fifth Amendment. However, despite the legislature's efforts to provide protection coextensive with the Fifth Amendment, I believe that there is an ambiguity in the language of the confidentiality provision. As the court of appeals astutely pointed out, "While § 139.91, STATS., prohibits the use of information obtained by the Department of Revenue in administering the tax, the presence of affixed stamps is not 'information obtained by the department.'" State v. Hall, 196 Wis. 2d 850, 865, 540 N.W.2d 219 (Ct. App. 1995). Although this could be read to allow the unconstitutional use of information gained by anyone other than the department, this court can only declare a statute unconstitutional if there is no viable alternative.
¶ 76. In determining whether a statute violates the constitution, the court must give the statute a great *107deal of deference. The party challenging the constitutionality of a statute has the burden to prove that the statute is unconstitutional beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Carpenter, 197 Wis. 2d 252, 263, 541 N.W.2d 105 (1995). Constitutional challenges to a statute must overcome a strong presumption of constitutionality. State v. Theil, 188 Wis. 2d 695, 706, 524 N.W.2d 641 (1994). In addition, the United States Supreme Court has stated that it must not construe a statute to violate the Constitution if another reasonable construction is available. United States v. X-Citement Video, Inc., 513 U.S. 64, 78, 115 S.Ct. 464, 472 (1994); Edward J. DeBartolo Corp. v. Florida Gulf Coast Building and Construction Trades Council, 485 U.S. 568, 575 (1988); National Labor Relations Board v. Catholic Bishop of Chicago, 440 U.S. 490, 500 (1979).9 The Wisconsin Supreme Court has also recognized this principle. Demmith v. Wisconsin Judicial Conference, 166 Wis. 2d 649, 665 FN 13, 480 M.W.2d 502 (1992) ("The court must interpret a statute, if at all possible, in a manner that will preserve the statute as a constitutional enactment."); State v. Cissell, 127 Wis. 2d 205, 215, 378 N.W.2d 691 (1985) (There is a strong presumption favoring the constitutionality of a legislative enact*108ment, and "[t]his court will construe the statute to preserve it if it is at all possible."); Browne v. Milwaukee Bd. of Sch. Directors, 83 Wis. 2d 316, 331, 265 N.W.2d 559 (1978) (When a legislative enactment is attacked as being unconstitutional, "the cardinal rule of statutory construction is to preserve a statute and to find it constitutional if it is at all possible to do so." (Citations omitted.)); State ex. rel. Harvey v. Morgan, 30 Wis. 2d 1, 13, 139 N.W.2d 585 (1966) ("the duty of this court is not to impugn the motives of the legislature, but rather, if possible, to so construe the statute as to find it in harmony with accepted constitutional principles.")
¶ 77. The courts of other states have used this canon of construction as a basis for upholding similar tax stamp laws. See State v. Durant, 769 P.2d 1174, 1183 (Kan. 1989) ("This court not only has the authority, but also the duty, to construe a statute in such a manner that it is constitutional if the same can be done within the apparent intent of the legislature in passing the statute."); State v. Garza, 496 N.W.2d 448, 454 (Neb. 1993) ("State statutes are presumed to be constitutional, and when a law is constitutionally suspect this court will endeavor to interpret the statute in a manner consistent with the Constitution."); Zissi v. State Tax Comm'n, 842 P.2d 848, 857 (Utah 1992) ("[W]e are mindful of our power to save a statute from unconstitutionality by imposing on it a limiting construction. This power permits us to uphold an otherwise questionable statute by tailoring it to conform to the Constitution, which is what we must presume the legislature intended."); State v. Davis, 787 P.2d 517, 523 (Utah App. 1990) ("Based upon the foregoing, we find the pre-amendment Utah Drug Stamp Tax Act can be 'found to come within a constitutional *109framework,' by construing it to prohibit the use of any information gained as a result of a purchaser's compliance with the act to establish a link in the chain of evidence in a subsequent drug prosecution." (citation omitted)).10 Accordingly, the majority's declaration that the stamp law is unconstitutional is tantamount to declaring that it is not at all possible for this court to give the stamp law a constitutional construction. I disagree.
¶ 78. I believe that a construction of Wis. Stat. § 139.91 consistent with the intent of the legislature would render the stamp law constitutional. It is clear from an examination of the legislative history that the confidentiality provision was intended to provide protection coextensive with the Fifth Amendment. Accordingly, I would construe the confidentiality provision to preclude the use of any information not independently obtained in any proceeding except those related to the tax itself.
¶ 79. I am authorized to state that Justice Donald W. Steinmetz and Justice N. Patrick Crooks join this dissenting opinion.
Unless otherwise stated, all future statutory references are to the 1993-94 volume.
Wis. Stats, ch. 139, subch. IV (1993-94).
The confidentiality provision of 1987 AB 519 stated:
77.97 CONFIDENTIALITY. The department may not reveal facts contained in a return required under s. 77.94. No information contained in such a return may be used against the dealer in any criminal proceeding, unless that information has been independently obtained, except in connection with a proceeding involving possession of untaxed controlled substances or taxes due under s. 77.93 from the dealer making the return.
The following confidentiality provision was included in 1989 SB 295 and 989 AB 633:
77.97 CONFIDENTIALITY. The department may not reveal facts contained in a return required under s. 77.94, except that the department may publish statistics that do not reveal the identities *95of dealers or contents of individual returns. Dealers may not be required to provide any identifying information on returns. No information contained in a return may be used against the dealer in any criminal proceeding, unless that information has been independently obtained, except in connection with a proceeding involving possession of untaxed controlled substances or taxes due under s. 77.93 from the dealer making the return.
1989 SB 356 contained a slightly different provision:
77.97 CONFIDENTIALITY. The department may not reveal facts contained in a return required under s. 77.94. No information contained in a return may be used against the dealer in any criminal proceeding, unless that information has been independently obtained, except in connection with a proceeding involving possession of untaxed controlled substances or taxes due under s. 77.93 from the dealer making the return.
The confidentiality provision found in Oct. 1989 S.S. SB 6 and Oct. 1989 S.S. AB 6 provided:
139.91 CONFIDENTIALITY. The department may not reveal facts obtained in administering this subchapter, except that the department may publish statistics that do not reveal the identities of dealers. Dealers may not be required to provide any identifying information in connection with the purchase of stamps. No information obtained by the department may be used against a dealer in any criminal proceeding unless that information has been independently obtained, except in connection with a proceeding involving possession of untaxed controlled substances or taxes due under s. 139.88 from the dealer making the return.
Finally, the Governor's budget bill contained the following provision:
77.97 CONFIDENTIALITY. The department may not reveal facts contained in a return required under s. 77.94, except that the department may publish statistics that do not reveal the identities of dealers or the contents of individual returns. Dealers may not be required to provide any identifying information on returns. No information contained in a return may be used against the dealer in any criminal proceeding, unless that information has been independently obtained, except in connection with a proceeding *96involving possession of untaxed controlled substances or taxes due under s. 77.93 from the dealer making the return.
Although the confidentiality provision was slightly amended by 1991 Wis. Act 39, these changes do not affect our analysis.
Oct. 1989 S.S. AB 12 contains previous drafts that can be traced through the LRB reference number to 1989 SB 295, and Oct. 1989 S.S. Substitute Amendment 1 to AB 12 uses language from Oct. 1989 S.S. SB 6 and Oct. 1989 S.S. AB 6. The drafting record of 1989 SB 295 contains a draft of 1989 AB 633. Similarly, the drafting record, of Oct. 1989 S.S. AB 6 contains a draft of 1989 SB 295. Finally, according to the drafting record 1989 SB 356 is a redraft of 1987 AB 519 and also uses language from a draft of 1989 AB 633.
A handwritten draft of the analysis was included with the drafting record.
It was also included in 1989 SB 295, 1989 SB 356, and 1989 AB 633.
See also Patricia A. Burke, Note, United States v. X-Citement Video, Inc.: Stretching the Limits of Statutory Interpretation?, 56 La. L. Rev. 937,943 (1996) ("The elementary rule is that every reasonable construction must be resorted to, in order to save a statute from unconstitutionality. This approach not only reflects the prudential concern that constitutional issues not be needlessly confronted, but also recognizes that Congress, like this Court, is bound by and swears an oath to uphold the Constitution. The courts will therefore not lightly assume that Congress intended to infringe constitutionally protected liberties or usurp power constitutionally forbidden it.").
A number of states have upheld drug tax stamp laws without relying on the constitutional construction argument. Briney v. State Dept. of Revenue, 594 So. 2d 120 (Ala. Civ. App. 1991); Clifft v. Indiana Dept. of State Revenue, 641 N.E.2d 682 (Ind. Tax 1994); Sisson v. Triplett, 428 N.W.2d 565 (Minn. 1988); State v. Godbersen, 493 N.W.2d 852 (Iowa 1992).

=== CASE 9741143 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:01.798417+00 ===

Hunter, J.
This is an appeal by Ovel Emler, Jr., appellant (defendant below), from a conviction for second degree murder.* On March 31, 1969, an indictment was returned charging appellant with first degree murder. Appellant entered a plea of not guilty and trial to a jury commenced on January 12, 1970. The jury returned a verdict of guilty to second degree murder and appellant was sentenced to the Indiana State Prison for life. A duly filed motion to correct errors was overruled and this appeal followed.
Appellant sets forth two main contentions of error.
(1) He claims the “Miranda” warnings were insufficient making appellant's signed confession inadmissible.
(2) He claims the evidence was insufficient to support a conviction for second degree murder. In particular, he contends there was insufficient proof of a specific intent to kill.
The rights form used in this case was as follows:
“The Indianapolis Police Department advises as follows:
(1) You have a right to remain silent.
(2) Anything which you say can be used against you in court.
(3 You have a right to have a lawyer present now.
(4) If you do not have the money to retain a lawyer, you have the right to have one appointed for you by the court.
I have read the above and understand it fully. I wish to make a voluntary statement and I do not want a lawyer. No force, threats or promises have been used by anyone in any way to make me sign this, and I sign this statement of having been advised of the above rights before any questions have been asked of me.” (our emphasis)
*243The rights required to be given a defendant are set out by former Chief Justice Warren in Miranda v. Arizona (1966), 384 U.S. 436, 444:
“Prior to any questioning, the person must be warned that he has a right to remain silent, that any statement he does make may be used as evidence against him, and that he has a right to the presence of an attorney, either retained or appointed. The defendant may waive effectuation of these rights, provided the waiver is made voluntarily, knowingly and intelligently.”
We are of the opinion the rights form used in this instance adequately informed appellant of those rights set out in Miranda.
Appellant claims the portion of the form which reads, “If you do not have the money to retain a lawyer, you have the right to have one appointed for you by the court,” is misleading because it implies that if a party cannot afford an attorney he will not get one until he goes to court. We do not read such an implication into the statement. It is, in fact, true that only the court can appoint counsel for him. As Chief Justice Arterburn stated in a unanimous decision of this Court:
“It is contended that the waiver which was read and explained to the appellant only told him that he was entitled to a lawyer, but that the court would appoint the lawyer, inferring that he was prejudiced because he would have to wait for the lawyer. The waiver properly stated the law. No one can appoint a lawyer but the trial court. Regarding this point the court in Miranda stated: ‘This does not mean, as some have suggested, that each police station must have a ‘station house lawyer’ present at all times to advise prisoners.’” Thompson v. State (1971), 256 Ind. 48, 54, 267 N. E. 2d 49, 52.
See also, Robbins v. State (1968), 251 Ind. 313, 241 N. E. 2d 148. The form states unambiguously that a defendant has the right to an attorney now.
Appellant also contends that the waiver was not made volun*244tarily, knowingly, and intelligently. The waiver form was read to him, he then read the waiver form, and he signed it. Each of the eleven pages of his statement contained the following paragraph:
“I Ovel Elmer Junior . . . make the following written statement voluntarily to Detective Joseph White and —, who have identified themselves to me as members of the Indianapolis Police Department.
I have been advised that I have the right to remain silent and now have a right to have counsel. I have been advised that anything I say in the following statement may be used against me in future criminal proceedings. I have not been promised any reward or leniency and I have not been threatened or abused in any way to make me give this statement. I make the following statement of my own free will.”
In each instance this was followed by appellant’s signature. Then the following paragraph appeared at the bottom of each of the eleven pages :
“The above statement has been read to me and given to me to read. I can read and hear and the facts and matters which are typewritten above are all true and correct and were stated by me voluntarily without any promise or threats whatsoever being made to me. I understand that this statement can be used against me in court and that I did not have to make any statement at all.”
This too was followed by appellant’s signature in each instance. A signed waiver is not conclusive, Dickerson v. State (1972), 257 Ind. 562, 276 N. E. 2d 845, but there is simply no evidence to refute it in this instance. Appellant had not been held in jail for an extended period nor is there any evidence of any form of coercion. In the course of lengthy direct and cross examination, appellant never even hinted that the confession was anything but voluntary. The objection at trial was not based on the circumstances surrounding the interrogation but went only to the form of the waiver. Since the appellant was sufficiently in*245formed of his rights and the evidence indicates the waiver was made voluntarily, knowingly and intelligently, the statement made by appellant to the police was properly admitted into evidence.
Appellant’s second contention is that the evidence was insufficient to show the requisite intent to kill. He claims the evidence shows that he was too intoxicated to properly appreciate what he was doing.
In reviewing sufficiency of the evidence, this Court will not weigh the evidence nor determine the credibility of witnesses. Only the evidence most favorable to the State and the reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom will be considered. As long as there is substantial evidence of probative value sufficient to establish every material element of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt, the verdict will not be disturbed. Jackson v. State (1971), 257 Ind. 477, 275 N. E. 2d 538.
The facts are as follows. The decedent, Steve, and his common law wife, Jackie, were in a bar and Steve was playing pool. Appellant entered and wished to play as well. When appellant reached for a pool cue the cue apparently caught in Jackie’s hair. Words were exchanged between Jackie and appellant, including some name calling. Steve intervened and told appellant to cease his derogatory remarks. A fracas erupted between appellant and Steve, including swinging pool cues. The fight lasted about five minutes and appellant, bloodied in the face, left with the warning, “I’ll be back.” He then drove home, got his shotgun, and returned, the trip taking about thirty minutes. He entered the bar and told Steve to come outside but Steve refused. The woman who owned the bar then coaxed appellant outside and pleaded with him to go home. Appellant told her, “I am going to kill the son-of-a-bitch in there just as sure as the world.” He took his shotgun from his car, pushed the woman aside and entered the bar. Appellant stood at the front near the bar *246with Steve at the rear. He told Steve, “If you don’t come outside I’ll kill you here.” He then raised the shotgun, aimed it at Steve, and shot him in the back.
When questioned, none of the witnesses could tell whether appellant was intoxicated or not. A woman who had been with him for part of the evening testified that she saw him have three drinks. At trial appellant testified that he had twenty to thirty drinks the day of the shooting but in his statement to the police he said, “I had a couple of beers, I mean you know, but I wasn’t no way near tight.” He said in his statement that he had control of his emotions and knew exactly what he was doing. He stated that he did intend to kill the decedent. At trial, although admitting that he told the police he intended to kill the decedent, he said his statement was incorrect and that he did not so intend.
Normally voluntary intoxication is not a defense in a criminal proceeding. In order for intoxication to relieve appellant from responsibility the crime charged must have involved specific intent and he must have been so intoxicated as to be incapable of entertaining the required specific intent. New v. State (1970), 254 Ind. 307, 259 N. E. 2d 696; Storie v. State (1970), 254 Ind. 301, 258 N. E. 2d 849; Davis v. State (1968), 249 Ind. 373, 232 N. E. 2d 867; Cotton v. State (1965), 247 Ind. 56, 211 N. E. 2d 158; Hunter v. State (1965), 246 Ind. 494, 207 N. E. 2d 207; Yarber v. State (1962), 242 Ind. 616, 179 N. E. 2d 882; Dobbs v. State (1957), 237 Ind. 119, 143 N. E. 2d 99. This is a question of fact for the trier of facts. New v. State, supra; Cotton v. State, supra.
In the case at bar, although appellant changed his story at trial, he admitted to having the requisite intent and that he was not intoxicated at the time. He made statements at the scene, which he did not deny at trial, indicating clearly he intended his acts. No one who testified noticed any outward signs of intoxication on the part of appellant. The evidence *247was surely sufficient for the jury to find that appellant was not so intoxicated that he could not form the required specific intent.
For the foregoing reasons the judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
Arterburn, C.J., Givan and Prentice, JJ., concur; DeBruler, J., dissents with opinion.
This case was reassigned to this office on June 29, 1972.

=== CASE 9741144 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:01.802632+00 ===

Dissenting Opinion
DeBruler, J.
I dissent. The advice of rights contained in the police form used in this case does not meet requirements of Miranda v. Arizona (1966), 384 U.S. 436, 86 S. Ct. 1602, 16 L. Ed. 694. The appellant was not informed that if he did not have sufficient funds to hire a lawyer, one will be furnished him before any questions are asked or the interrogation begun. He was not advised that he had a right to have a lawyer present during the interrogation. This advice form is deficient in my view as I have previously indicated in Jones v. State (1969), 253 Ind. 235, 252 N. E. 2d 572, and Dickerson v. State (1972), 257 Ind. 562, 276 N. E. 2d 845. This advice form suffers from an additional defect not considered in prior cases, and that is it makes two statements which are contradictory, and would be very confusing to the average accused. He, the appellant, sitting in the police station, about to be interrogated, is advised that: “You have a right to have a lawyer present now.” In the next sentence he is told that if he is poor he does not have the right to have a lawyer present now. He is told that if he is poor, the only right he has is to have a lawyer appointed for him by some unidentified court at some unspecified time in the future. In my view, an accused without money would not know after reading this form whether or not he had a right to the services of a lawyer at that point. He clearly did have that right under the standards set forth in *248the Miranda case, and the failure of this form to state that right clearly and understandably renders it defective.
Note.—Reported in 286 N. E. 2d 408.

=== CASE 2226300 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:05.719425+00 ===

286 N.E.2d 840 (1972)
Warren L. LEE, Appellant
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee.
No. 571S133.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
September 8, 1972.
*841 Chester R. Hobbs, Salem, for appellant.
Theo. L. Sendak, Atty. Gen., Paul Frazier, Deputy Atty. Gen., for appellee.
PRENTICE, Justice.
Defendant (Appellant) was charged by affidavit with First Degree Burglary in violation of Acts 1941, ch. 148, § 4, 1956 Repl. Burns' Ind. Stat. Ann. § 10-701, IC 1971, XX-XX-X-X. In a trial before a jury he was convicted of the lesser included offense of entering to commit a felony in violation of Acts 1941, ch. 148, § 5, 1956 Repl. Burns' Ind. Stat. Ann. § 10-704, IC 1971, XX-XX-X-X. He was sentenced to the Indiana State Prison for not less than one (1) year nor more than ten (10) years, disfranchised and rendered incapable of holding any office of trust or profit for a period of five (5) years, and ordered to pay costs taxed at $36.00. The statute, in relevant parts, is as follows:
"Whoever enters any dwelling-house * * *, with the intent to commit a felony therein, shall, on conviction, be imprisoned *842 for not less than one (1) year nor more than ten (10) years, * * *."
This appeal is addressed solely to the sufficiency of the evidence upon the issue of the identification of the defendant.
When the sufficiency of the evidence is raised as an issue on appeal, this Court will consider only that evidence most favorable to the State together with all logical and reasonable inferences which may be drawn therefrom. Coleman v. State (1971), Ind., 275 N.E.2d 786; Gibson v. State (1971), Ind., 271 N.E.2d 706; Fuller v. State (1971), Ind., 271 N.E.2d 720.
The conviction will be affirmed if, from that viewpoint, there is substantial evidence of probative value from which the trier of the fact could reasonably infer that the appellant was guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. Coleman v. State (supra); Gibson v. State (supra); Fuller v. State (supra).
This Court, on appeal, will not weigh the evidence nor determine the credibility of witnesses. Coleman v. State (supra); Fuller v. State (supra); Sanchez v. State (1971), Ind., 267 N.E.2d 374.
Viewed most favorably to the State, the evidence adduced at the trial revealed the following.
At approximately 10:00 p.m. on December 27, 1969, Kellis Couch, Jr., along with certain members of his family, returned to his father's house in rural Washington County, Indiana. Shortly after they returned, his mother, Esma Couch, saw a man in the kitchen and cried out. The intruder fled to his car in the driveway with young Couch in pursuit. He had a brief physical encounter with the intruder but was unable to prevent his escape or to see him well enough to enable him to identify him as being the defendant. He did, however, obtain the license number of the car and a description of the vehicle and subsequently reported the incident to the Sheriff's office. The following day it was determined that two ladies' purses were missing from the Couch residence, one of which contained a ring designated a "Mother" ring. A short time earlier, the defendant, accompanied by several companions was driving around in the general area of the Couch premises, stopped at the residence of Flossie Wilson and the defendant requested the use of their telephone but was refused. He requested and received directions to the Lloyd residence, but when he drove away, he turned not in the direction of the Lloyd residence but in the opposite direction, towards the Couch residence. Mrs. Wilson was suspicious of the defendant's actions, took the license number and description of the automobile driven by him and reported them to the Sheriff. In court, Mrs. Wilson identified the defendant as the same person. The defendant's companions related that on the night in question they were drinking and riding around the area with the defendant driving. They stopped at one house in the country, where the defendant alighted, went to the door briefly and returned. From there they went to another house, where the defendant backed into the driveway. He left the car and went into the house where he remained for a period of ten to twenty minutes. When he returned, he was running, and a blonde headed man who pursued him overtook him and struck him. However, the defendant managed to get in the car, threw something in the back seat, and drove off with his lights off. One of the companions thereafter saw two purses on the back seat and later in the evening the defendant gave her a ring, also designated as a "Mother" ring.
From the foregoing, the jury was warranted in finding the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
From the foregoing, we cannot say that the evidence was insufficient. There is an apparent conflict in the evidence which the defendant contends compels a reversal. The defendant's companions testified that the defendant was in the Couch house for *843 ten to twenty minutes, during which time they were in the auto which was parked in the Couch driveway. The members of the Couch family testified that there was no vehicle in the driveway when they arrived, and their testimony indicates that the presence of unauthorized person was discovered immediately upon their entry. If so, the testimony of the Couch family members would repudiate that of the defendant's companions; and from this, the defendant insists, we would have to disregard their other testimony. We say that the testimony of the Couch family members "indicates" that the discovery was made immediately, because such is a reasonable inference, but it does not necessarily compel that conclusion. Another reasonable inference, from all the testimony, is that the defendant and his companions arrived after the Couch family had returned and entered their home. We do not regard this as determinative upon the question, however. Admitting the inconsistencies in the testimony, arguendo, such would go only to undermine the credibility of the witnesses. Their credibility has been determined by the jury and will not be here disturbed. Coleman v. State (supra); Fuller v. State (supra); Sanchez v. State (supra).
The defendant's sentence, however, is excessive and unconstitutional. Entering to commit a felony is a lesser included offense of second degree burglary. Easton v. State (1972), Ind., 280 N.E.2d 307; Hobbs v. State (1969), 253 Ind. 195, 252 N.E.2d 498. A sentence for a lesser included offense may not exceed that provided for the greater offense. Easton v. State (supra); Hobbs v. State (supra); Dembowski v. State (1968), 251 Ind. 250, 240 N.E.2d 815.
In Heathe v. State (1971), Ind., 274 N.E.2d 697 we extended the rule from Dembowski (supra) to apply notwithstanding that the greater offense was not charged, saying:
"The State in this case makes no attack on these prior rulings, but attempts to limit their application to the situation, as in Hobbs, where the higher offense was in fact charged and the defendant was found guilty of a lesser included offense. However, such a limitation would lead to the result that the statute in question would have two different maximum sentences depending on the manner in which the State proceeded to trial, and would allow the State to systematically increase the maximum penalty for second degree burglary by charging the lesser included offense of entering with intent to commit a felony in every case. We cannot condone such a result. Entering to commit a felony in this case is a lesser included offense of second degree burglary whether or not second degree burglary was charged in the case. The constitutional mandate that `all penalties shall be proportioned to the nature of the offense' requires that the maximum for a lesser offense be less than the maximum for a higher offense. The same result is mandated by the Constitution of the United States. Dembowski v. State, supra; Willoughby v. Phend, 301 F. Supp. 644 (N.D.Ind. 1969)." 274 N.E.2d at 698.
An indeterminate sentence is for the maximum time prescribed by the statute. Easton v. State (supra); Hobbs v. State (supra).
The defendant's sentence cannot be greater than that for second degree burglary which is not less than two nor more than five years. The sentence should have been for not less than one nor more than five years, and the cause is accordingly remanded to the trial court, sua sponte, with instructions to enter a corrected judgment and commitment order nunc pro tunc for not less than one nor more than five years.
ARTERBURN, C.J., and DeBRULER, GIVAN and HUNTER, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9741145 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:03.927554+00 ===

Givan, J.
The appellant was committed to the Indiana State Farm on June 26,1970, with a release date of November *24921,1970, with allowance for good behavior, with the maximum release date of January 31,1971.
On July 30, 1970, the appellant disappeared from his work detail at the Farm. On August 16, 1970, he was arrested in Rushville, Indiana, as an escapee. He was charged by affidavit with the crime of escape from the Indiana State Farm, to which charge he entered a plea of not guilty. A jury trial resulted in a verdict of guilty. The court sentenced the appellant to the Indiana State Prison for a period of not less than one nor more than five years.
Appellant attempted to defend the charge of escape, first by showing that not only during his immediate past incarceration at the Farm, but on four previous occasions while incarcerated, he had been a model prisoner and had been permitted to drive State Farm trucks throughout the State of Indiana making deliveries to the other state institutions, and that he had a pass which permitted him to go about the State Farm without the accompaniment of an officer.
Appellant took the witness stand in his own behalf and testified that on the day of his alleged escape he was suffering from a severe headache, and that he took two capsules he described as being blue on one end and white on the other, with a gold band. These capsules were obtained from another inmate and taken by the appellant for his headache. Later in the day after taking the capsules, the appellant stated that he found himself in a wood area near Interstate Highway 70 between Putnamville and Indianapolis; that he had no recollection of what had occurred from shortly after taking the capsules until awaking and finding himself in the wooded area. He stated that he walked to Road 70 where he hitchhiked a ride to Indianapolis Airport. From there he walked to the home of his brother in Indianapolis where he stayed three or four days.
Approximately a week after leaving the Farm, he hitchhiked to Rushville, Indiana, where he went to the home of *250Rev. Charles Wooley, Pastor of the Rushville Church of Christ. He advised Rev. Wooley that he was absent without leave from the State Farm, and that he wished counsel on that problem as well as problems he was having with his wife and children.
Appellant further testified that Rev. Wooley obtained the services of an attorney, one James Kelly, who also counseled with the appellant.
Appellant testified that he was seeking this counseling from Rev. Wooley and Mr. Kelly in order to determine the best way to have himself returned to the State Farm with the least consequences to himself for his actions.
On cross-examination of the appellant the State brought out further facts that subsequent to appellant’s first conversation with Rev. Wooley, he had obtained an automobile from Callahan Ford in Indianapolis by giving a fraudulent check. He drove this car to the rural home of his former wife near Rushville, Indiana, and parked it in a cornfield near her home because “I didn’t want to be seen there by the law.”
Appellant further testified that he did not have any trouble with his wife during the visit, and that he did not see any police officers while he was there.
In rebuttal the State called as witnesses both the appellant’s former wife and his daughter, who was at home during appellant’s visit. Both the former wife and daughter testified that the appellant came to their trailer home; that he caused trouble, including striking his former wife and his daughter; that the daughter went next door and called the sheriff; that the appellant was still in the trailer at the time the sheriff arrived. When appellant saw the sheriff drive into the driveway, he left by the back door of the trailer and escaped through a cornfield. It was shortly after this episode that appellant was apprehended and returned to the State Farm.
*251*250It is appellant’s contention that the court erred in allowing the State’s rebuttal witness, Sharon Henderson, the former *251wife of the appellant, to testify concerning the struggle above described. It is appellant’s position that this was evidence of a collateral matter which was in no way connected with the escape for which appellant was being prosecuted, and that the admission of such evidence is reversible error under the authority of Hensley v. State (1971), 256 Ind. 258, 268 N. E. 2d 90, 25 Ind. Dec. 220. However, there is a marked difference between the facts of the Hensley case and the facts of the case at bar. In Hensley the appellant was on trial for an attack on a young woman. The State introduced evidence of a previous attack on another woman, which attack was in no way connected with the crime charged, and was not introduced in an attempt to show a scheme or plan, but solely for the purpose of discrediting the appellant as a witness. In the case at bar the appellant had injected the defense of an involuntary leaving of the State Farm while in a condition of “blackout” induced by a drug. His direct testimony was obviously calculated to convince the jury that he was shocked and alarmed on finding himself away from the Farm without leave, and that his main purpose was to attempt to get back to the State Farm in the best possible manner. He had conveniently omitted the fact that he had improperly obtained an automobile during the period of escape, and that he had driven to his former wife’s home where he had caused trouble. In view of the appellant’s direct testimony, the State was well within its right to introduce rebuttal testimony to show that appellant did in fact have other things than returning to the State Farm on his mind during the two week period he was at large, and that his protestations of only wanting to do the right thing were placed in doubt by the fact that he had pursued a course of unlawful behavior during this period of escape. We do not perceive the facts elicited by the State on cross-examination of the appellant and the rebuttal testimony of his wife and daughter as being collateral to the issue of his escape. Those facts were properly submitted for the consideration of the jury in view of the de*252fense presented by the appellant. Baker v. State (1967), 249 Ind. 117, 231 N. E. 2d 21,12 Ind. Dec. 4.
Appellant next claims the trial court erred in the exclusion of the conversation between the appellant, Rev. Wooley and the attorney, James Kelly. An examination of the record discloses the trial court permitted the appellant to testify concerning his conversation with Rev. Wooley because Rev. Wooley was in the court room and did in fact testify himself. However, the court excluded any evidence as to any statements made by Mr. Kelly to the appellant on the ground that Mr. Kelly was not in court and available for cross-examination and further that there was no showing that Mr. Kelly was unavailable. An offer to prove was made to the effect that the appellant would testify that Mr. Kelly told him that he should return to the State Farm, but that he should remain at large and allow Mr. Kelly to contact the authorities at the State Farm and to make arrangements for his return. We hold the trial court was correct in excluding such testimony. In 31A C.J.S., Evidence, § 193(b) it is stated:
“The rule excluding hearsay is a basic, rather than a technical, rule. The reason for the rule is that the unsworn statements of a person not called as a witness or subjeeted to the test of cross-examination is not recognized as having a sufficient probative effect to raise an inference that the fact is as stated; and the rule is particularly applicable when such a person can be summoned and sworn as a witness. The right of a party to test by cross-examination the veracity and accuracy of the person making the statement offered in evidence has been said to be the principal reason for the hearsay rule; the reason for the exclusion is that the test of cross-examination of the person making the statements out of court, at the time they are made, is unavailable as a guard against falsification or inaccuracy.”
We would further observe that although the trial court did exclude testimony by the appellant as to the specific statements made to him by Mr. Kelly, there was further testimony by both the appellant and Rev. Wooley that he did in fact counsel with Mr. Kelly for the purpose of deter*253mining how best to return himself to the State Farm, and that Mr. Kelly advised him in this regard; that following this advice Mr. Kelly was going to contact the authorities and that appellant remained at large. Thus we find that although the exact statements of Mr. Kelly were correctly excluded from the evidence, the jury was certainly informed, at least as to appellant’s version of the outcome of his consultation with Mr. Kelly. Thus, even if we would assume for the sake of argument that the evidence had been improperly excluded, such exclusion would not be reversible error for the reason that the same facts were placed in evidence by other testimony. Smith v. State (1969), 250 Ind. 125, 235 N. E. 2d 177, 13 Ind. Dec. 560. We find no error in the record of this case.
The trial court is, therefore, affirmed.
Arterburn, C.J., and Hunter and Prentice, JJ., concur; DeBruler, J., concurs in result with opinion.

=== CASE 9741146 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:03.931457+00 ===

Opinion Concurring in Result
DeBruler, J.
In my view, the trial court committed error in refusing to permit the appellant to testify as to what Mr. Kelly advised him about returning to the State Farm. The purpose of this evidence was to show the state of mind of the appellant and to support his defense that he did not intentionally flee the State Farm but did so unintentionally under the influence of drugs, and to further explain his reasons for not deciding at that point to immediately surrender himself to the police.
The statements were not offered as proof of the truth of the assertions they contained, and they therefore were not hearsay, and should not have been excluded as hearsay. Harvey v. State (1971), 256 Ind. 473, 269 N. E. 2d 759; Wells v. State (1970), 255 Ind. 608, 261 N. E. 2d 865; Indianapolis Newspapers, Inc. v. Fields (1970), 255 Ind. 219, 259 N. E. 2d 651. I concur with the majority that exclusion of this evidence was harmless error and should not result in a reversal of this *254conviction in light of the subsequent testimony of the witness Wooley at the trial which described the consultation of the appellant with Mr. Kelly.
Note.—Reported in 286 N. E. 2d 398.

=== CASE 2226314 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:06.095274+00 ===

6 Ill. App. 3d 909 (1972)
286 N.E.2d 812
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Respondent-Appellee,
v.
CLARENCE W. WALKER, Petitioner-Appellant.
No. 57382.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District.
July 26, 1972.
*910 Michael T. Hannafan, of Chicago, for appellant.
William J. Scott, Attorney General, of Springfield, and Edward V. Hanrahan, State's Attorney, of Chicago, (James B. Zagel, Assistant Attorney General, and Robert A. Novelle and Robert C. Samko, Assistant State's Attorneys, of counsel,) for the People.
Judgment affirmed.
Mr. JUSTICE BURMAN delivered the opinion of the court:
This is an appeal from an order dismissing a petition for post-conviction relief without an evidentiary hearing. The defendant, Clarence W. Walker, was indicted and charged with the offenses of rape, armed robbery, and attempt murder. After a bench trial, he was found guilty on all three charges and sentenced to the penitentiary. He took an appeal to this Court in which he contended (1) that the State withheld evidence favorable to him, (2) that statements were elicited from him in violation of his Fifth Amendment rights, (3) that evidence obtained in an illegal search and seizure was used against him, (4) that he received ineffective assistance of counsel, and (5) that he was erroneously sentenced to serve three consecutive sentences. In an opinion filed on November 17, 1971, the conviction was affirmed. (People v. Walker, 2 Ill. App. 3d 1026, 279 N.E.2d 23.) Petition for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court was denied.
During the pendency of the defendant's appeal from his conviction, he filed a lengthy pro se petition seeking post-conviction relief. The petition was denied without an evidentiary hearing. Notice of appeal was filed and new counsel was appointed. This appeal was originally taken to the Supreme Court, but was transferred here by order of that Court.
The defendant, on appeal, contends (1) that he received inadequate assistance of counsel in presenting his post-conviction petition, (2) that he was coerced into waiving trial by jury through reliance upon representations *911 of his court appointed counsel who informed him that the trial judge threatened to commit him to a mental institution if he did not waive trial by jury, and (3) that he did not understandingly, intelligently, and expressly waive trial by jury.
We consider first the adequacy of representation given the defendant in presenting his post-conviction petition. The State filed a written motion to dismiss the petition on the ground that the allegations in the petition failed to raise appropriate Constitutional questions. At the hearing on the motion, an Assistant Public Defender informed the Court that (1) he visited and consulted with the defendant at the penitentiary at Menard, Illinois, (2) that he read the pro se petition, and (3) that he reviewed the voluminous trial transcript and the brief and abstract filed on direct appeal from the conviction. After this examination he concluded that there was no support for the allegations in the petition. The cause was then transferred to Judge Holzer who had presided at the defendant's trial. At a hearing before Judge Holzer, an Assistant Public Defender, after reviewing the facts, stated "that there are no Constitutional issues that could be raised in a post-conviction proceeding and those that could have already been raised in the brief and argument for the appeal to the Appellate Court." He then moved to withdraw as attorney for the defendant under Anders v. California, 386 U.S. 738, because in his opinion the allegations of the petition were frivolous. The motion to withdraw was denied, and the State's motion to dismiss was granted.
 1, 2 Nearly two months prior to the hearing on the motion to dismiss the post-conviction petition, the Public Defender filed a brief in the original appeal which set forth grounds for reversal based on Constitutional deprivations. It is now argued, "Walker's counsel should have at least presented constitutional claims identical to those presented on direct appeal at the post-conviction proceeding by amendment or otherwise." It is well established that where a direct appeal from a conviction has been taken, a defendant cannot raise in a post-conviction petition those issues which were or could have been reviewed in the direct appeal (People v. Derengowski, 44 Ill. 2d 476, 256 N.E.2d 455; People v. Dale, 406 Ill. 238, 92 N.E.2d 761), unless it is fundamentally unfair to prevent a consideration of the issue. (People v. Ikerd, 47 Ill. 2d 211, 265 N.E.2d 120.) The scope of review permitted in a post-conviction proceeding is not expanded simply because the petition is filed before a reviewing court hands down an opinion. Once an issue is presented on direct appeal to a court of review, it cannot properly be considered at a post-conviction hearing even though at the time of the hearing the reviewing court has not passed upon the question.
*912  3 It is further argued that "The lack of amendments alone requires reversal of the petitioner's dismissal below as a matter of law." It is urged that the unamended petition is inartfully drafted, grammatically disastrous and incoherent. There is, however, no showing by present counsel and no indication in the record of the existence of facts which would warrant an amendment. As the Supreme Court pointed out in People v. Stovall, 47 Ill. 2d 42 at 46, 264 N.E.2d 174 at 176, "Where there is not a showing that sufficient facts or evidence exist, inadequate representation certainly will not be found because of an attorney's failure to amend a petition or, when amended, failing to make the petitioner's allegations factually sufficient to require the granting of relief."
In conformity with Supreme Court Rule 651(c), (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1969, Ch. 110A, par. 651(c)), the Assistant Public Defender consulted with the defendant and read the transcript and documents filed on appeal. After this examination was completed, he determined that there were no Constitutional questions presented in addition to the ones raised on direct appeal, and he decided to stand on the original petition. Even though appointed counsel did not find merit and argue the points raised in the petition we cannot say that the defendant was given incompetent representation by appointed counsel where there was consultation with the defendant and a thorough examination of all possible questions.
In People v. Hawkins, 44 Ill. 2d 296, 255 N.E.2d 456; People v. Craig, 40 Ill. 2d 466, 240 N.E.2d 588; and People v. Wilson, 40 Ill. 2d 378, 240 N.E.2d 583, cited by the defendant, appointed counsel failed to consult with the petitioner to ascertain his grievances before formulating a trial strategy, and counsel made no attempt to prepare and present the claims of the defendant. While it is true that appointed counsel in the present case did not amend the petition, the decision to stand on the unamended pleading was made only after consultation with the defendant and after an examination of the petition, the transcript, and the brief presented on direct appeal.
Paragraph 6 of the Petition alleges, "Petitioner was denied and deprived of trial by a Jury where he was forced to sign a jury waiver by threat of being committed to a mential hospital by the Court threw counsel who stated if Petitioner seek a jury it was the Judge intention to commit him as a Court case * * *." It is contended that this allegation of coercion in the inducement of the jury waiver raises a constitutional question which can only be resolved after an evidentiary hearing.
The record reveals that when the cause was called for trial, defense counsel announced that the matter would be heard as a bench trial. The following exchange then occurred:
*913 "MR. LAMPKIN: [Defense counsel]: Do you understand that if you sign a jury waiver, you are waiving your right to a trial by jury and submitting yourself to trial by this Court?
THE DEFENDANT: Yes.
MR. LAMPKIN: Is that what you want to do?
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, sir.
THE COURT: Mr. Walker, by signing this document, you have waived a right to a jury. That means that you give up your right to a jury. You request to be tried by this Court, do you understand that, sir?
THE DEFENDANT: Yes, sir, yes, sir."
The prosecutor then sought to read into the record a report returned from the Behavior Clinic of Cook County from Dr. W.H. Haines concerning the defendant's competency to stand trial. While counsel and the Court were discussing the necessity of conducting a competency hearing the defendant stated:
"Well, I took a competency hearing and I have talked to Dr. Haines and this Court ordered it and the Judge read into the record he knew that I was able to get along with counsel and everything and I don't see why it is necessary so I don't think that is that important. I have already talked to the doctor by order of this Court."
A lengthy discussion ensued, and at the end of it the Court decided to conduct a competency hearing. A jury waiver was given to the defendant and the following colloquy occurred:
"THE COURT: Mr. Walker, the document that is now being handed to you is to the effect that once signed, you empower this Court to determine whether you are competent to stand trial. This jury waiver is only a waiver of a jury for purposes of conducting a competency hearing.
THE DEFENDANT: I am not too familiar. If there is any way for you to break it down a little smaller for me, I would appreciate it.
THE COURT: Mr. Lampkin?
MR. LAMPKIN: Mr. Walker, in the case of a competency hearing as in the case of a criminal trial or any other trial before a Court, you have a right to have a jury determine the facts of the case. That includes the right of a jury to determine as to the facts concerning your actions and your capabilities as such, that you are competent to understand the nature of the occurrence with which you are charged with and to cooperate with your counsel.
THE DEFENDANT: Oh, I understand it now. I understand it. [Jury waiver signed.]
*914 THE COURT: Now, then I will explain it again to you. I will break it down real good before I finally accept this. I know you signed it but I want to make sure that you know what you did.
THE DEFENDANT: Yes."
After a hearing the defendant was found competent to stand trial.
 4, 5 The trial judge in ruling on a motion to dismiss a petition for post conviction relief must consider the allegations contained in the pleading in conjunction with the transcripts of prior proceedings. (People v. Morris, 43 Ill. 2d 124, 251 N.E.2d 202; People v. Slicker, 42 Ill. 2d 307, 247 N.E.2d 407.) In the instant case the answers given by the defendant in response to questions and the statements made by him belie the allegation that he waived trial by jury as a result of threats of commitment to a mental hospital. When asked whether he understood the significance of signing the jury waiver form he responded affirmatively. Since the transcript itself refutes the allegation of coercion, it was not necessary to conduct an evidentiary hearing on the question.
 6 It is finally contended that the defendant did not understandingly, intelligently, and expressly waive his right to jury trial. It is argued (1) that the defendant was never asked whether he desired to waive trial by jury, (2) that a full explanation of the jury trial was never given to him, (3) that he was never asked whether he read and understood the jury waiver form which he signed, and (4) that he never expressly waived trial by jury. The record clearly established that the defendant was adequately admonished by both his counsel and the Court as to his right to trial by jury and that he knowingly, voluntarily, and understandingly waived that right. (See: People v. Sailor, 43 Ill. 2d 256, 253 N.E.2d 397; People v. King, 4 Ill. App. 3d 1066.) Moreover, this contention is not properly before the Court on review of a dismissal of a petition for post-conviction relief since the contention could have been raised in the direct appeal. People v. Doherty, 36 Ill. 2d 286, 222 N.E.2d 501.
The petition was properly dismissed and the judgment of the Circuit Court is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
DIERINGER, P.J., and ADESKO, J., concur.

=== CASE 9742932 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:22:54.569737+00 ===

Armstrong, J.
This case is before us on two appeals, which were argued at different sittings. The first, by the plaintiff, was taken from an order of a probate judge made on October 3, 1975, which modified a preliminary injunction so as to permit shares of the Park National Bank of Holyoke to be exchanged for shares of the Western Bank & Trust Company of West Springfield pursuant to a plan of exchange approved by the boards of directors of both banks. The second appeal was taken by the defendant Anne E. Mahoney from the final judgment, which declared that she did not own those shares outright but rather held them subject to a trust.
The controversy has its origins in an instrument drawn by one Stephen A. Mahoney of Holyoke, not a lawyer, which was executed on September 1, 1961. It was entitled “Stephen A. Mahoney Testamentary Trust.” The opening paragraph states, “I... make this my last will and hereby revoke all testamentary dispositions heretofore made by me,” and the first numbered clause nominates “my wife, Anne Elizabeth Mahoney, and my son Stephen Andrew Mahoney III to be executors of my will.” The fourth numbered clause “give[s] [and] devise [s] ... [a] 11 of my estate ... to my wife, Anne Elizabeth Mahoney, IN TRUST for the... purposes... [of] provid[ing] continued operation of the Park National Bank of Holyoke... of which I own the controlling interest, and to provide an income for my wife, Anne Elizabeth Mahoney, for her life as well as an income, if possible, for my sons, Douglas Mahoney ... and Stephen A. Mahoney, III____” The greater part of the instrument dealt with the trust thereby created, one clause *722of which provided that should Stephen A. Mahoney, III, wish to assume responsibility for the management of the bank, the voting power of the shares held in trust should be used to elect him to the board of directors and to the presidency of the bank; and if Stephen should not wish to assume that responsibility, “then the Trustee has the power and right to appoint Douglas Mahoney an officer and director of said bank; upon demonstration of his ability to assume a responsible position therein, the Trustee may then, in her sole discretion,” employ the voting power of the shares so as to cause Douglas Mahoney to be made president of the bank. The trustee was given a broad power to sell both real and personal property in the trust fund, and “[t]o exchange property for other property on such terms as she deems advisable.” The trustee was also given discretionary authority “to participate in any plan of reorganization or consolidation or merger involving any company... whose stock... shall be part of the fund____”
Stephen A. Mahoney died on November 27, 1969. The instrument described was allowed as his will on December 30, 1969, and the defendant Anne E. Mahoney qualified as executrix of the will. She filed an inventory on November 30, 1970, which indicated that most of the estate’s assets were held in the form of shares of corporate stock, with the shares of the Park National Bank accounting for approximately one third of the total value of the estate. Even before that date, however, she had embarked on a program of distributing all assets of the estate to herself, not as trustee, but as an individual, taking from the outset, apparently, a position pressed in this action in the Probate Court: namely, that the “trust” mentioned in the will was not such in legal contemplation, and that any obligation imposed on her by the will was moral rather than legal in nature.
This action was commenced by a bill in equity filed by Douglas S. Mahoney on July 25, 1972. The action sought to establish the existence of a trust, to compel Anne E. Mahoney to transfer the assets of the estate from herself to the trust, and to remove her as trustee. The plaintiff *723sought and obtained a preliminary injunction restraining her from transferring or disposing of any property described in the inventory. On April 18, 1973, after a hearing at which evidence was taken, the probate judge found and ruled that the defendant Anne E. Mahoney held the property described in the inventory as constructive trustee, and ordered that she “hold the same for the purpose of transferring all said property to a trustee under the express trust” established by the will. A further evidentiary hearing was held on September 24,1974.
On June 6, 1975, Anne E. Mahoney filed a motion that the preliminary injunction be modified so as to permit the shares of Park National Bank to be exchanged for shares of the Western Bank & Trust Company, which shares, when acquired, were to be subject to the injunction. The motion was allowed on October 3, 1975. That action was apparently taken without any notice to the plaintiff and without a hearing. The plaintiff filed a notice of appeal from the order allowing the motion. He also filed in the Probate Court a motion for a stay of the order, but there is nothing in the record to indicate that that motion was ever pressed to a hearing or decision; nor does the record indicate that the plaintiff ever sought a stay in an appellate court under G. L. c. 215, § 9 or § 23; nor does the record indicate that the trial judge was asked to report his order for appellate review pursuant to the provisions of G. L. c. 215, § 13. Although the record before us does not reflect the fact, the parties agreed at oral argument that the exchange of shares and the merger of the two banks took place in the autumn of 1975.
On April 30, 1976, a final judgment was entered declaring that the testamentary disposition described above created a trust, appointing a person other than Anne E. Mahoney to act as trustee, and ordering her to convey all the trust property standing in her name to the trustee thus appointed. She appealed from the judgment; the plaintiff did not.
1. In her appeal from the final judgment Anne E. Ma-honey argues that the trust created by the will was one *724in name only and that the terms of the so called trust evidence an intention by the testator that she have full ownership and control of the trust property. The argument, spun around two provisions taken out of context, is without merit. The provision authorizing the trustee to invade principal “for the necessity of providing for [Anne’s] comfort and happiness if the income proves to be insufficient” does not enable Anne to call down the principal at will. Any question in that regard has been settled by Nexon v. Boston Safe Deposit & Trust Co., ante, 493 (1977), which was decided after the instant appeal was briefed. The words “without imposing any trust or obligation on my wife, Anne Elizabeth Mahoney, as a beneficiary hereunder”, refer only to her power to pay trust income over to Douglas and Stephen, III, or either of them. In context the words mean that she is under no legal obligation to make such payments, and do not carry any suggestion that she is at liberty to disregard the language creating the trust. The instrument, read as a whole, unmistakably indicates an intention to create a trust.
There was no error in the judge’s refusal to approve the appointment of Anne E. Mahoney as trustee. The judge found that she “cannot be relied upon to act fairly and dispassionately in the administration of said trust with regard to the interest” of Douglas, she “lacks the knowledge and competence to act as trustee, and she is unsuitable to properly administer said trust.” These findings are not clearly erroneous and, coupled with her diversion of trust assets to herself without consideration and without petitioning for instructions (see 1 and 3 Newhall, Settlement of Estates §§ 30 & 431 [4th ed. 1958]), warranted the judge’s decision to appoint another as trustee. Compare Billings v. Billings, 110 Mass. 225 (1872); Sparhawk v. Sparhawk, 114 Mass. 356 (1874); Gordon v. Gordon, 332 Mass. 210, cert. denied, 349 U. S. 947 (1955), and cases cited. The matter lay wholly within the reasonable discretion of the judge. 3 Newhall, supra § 421. Nor was there error in the award of counsel fees to the attorney for Douglas for services which clearly had the effect of pre*725serving the trust estate. G. L. c. 215, § 39A. Compare Brayton v. Stoughton, 335 Mass. 321, 326-327 (1957). Contrast Miller v. Stern, 326 Mass. 296 (1950); Lane v. Cronin, 345 Mass. 52 (1962).
2. The plaintiff’s appeal from the order which modified the preliminary injunction presents a threshold procedural question. The defendant Anne E. Mahoney argues that the order was interlocutory in nature and that it must therefore be dismissed for the reasons stated in such cases as Giacobbe v. First Coolidge Corp., 367 Mass. 309, 312-313 (1975), Foreign Auto Import, Inc. v. Renault Northeast, Inc., 367 Mass. 464, 467-468 (1975), and Rollins Environmental Servs., Inc. v. Superior Court, 368 Mass. 174, 178-179 (1975). The plaintiff contends that the case falls within an exception to the usual rule2 of nonappealability of interlocutory orders, namely, that decrees authorizing or confirming sales by fiduciaries are considered to be final for appellate purposes. See Weil v. Boston Elev. Ry., 216 Mass. 545, 548 (1914); Plumer v. Houghton & Dutton Co., 277 Mass. 209, 212-213 (1931); Vincent v. Plecker, 319 Mass. 560, 564 n.2 (1946); Lynde v. Vose, 326 Mass. 621, 622-623 (1951); Zottu v. Electronic Heating Corp., 334 Mass. 442, 446 (1956). The plaintiff’s position, in other words, is that we should treat the order modifying the preliminary injunction as if it were an order licensing a sale of property entered upon a petition under G. L. c. 203, §16.
The plaintiff’s contention is not without superficial appeal, but on careful consideration a majority of the court think that much unnecessary confusion would result from blurring in this fashion the distinction between the lifting *726of an injunction prohibiting a transfer of property, and the granting of a license to transfer property. In the case of a license to sell property under G. L. c. 203, § 16, the sale is made under an authority given by the court, while in a case (such as this) where the court has declined to restrain a sale, the sale is not thereby made under the court’s authority, but under such authority as the trustee is given by the terms of the trust under which he acts. See Bremer v. Hadley, 196 Mass. 217, 219-220 (1907). The distinction is one with important consequences to the trustee and beneficiaries and to a purchaser with notice of the facts. See Batt v. Mallon, 151 Mass. 477, 480 (1890); Hutchinson v. Blanchard, 247 Mass. 288, 291 (1924); Cleval v. Sullivan, 258 Mass. 348, 353 (1927); Loring, Trustee’s Handbook § 40 (Farr rev. 1962); Restatement (Second) of Trusts § 283, Comment a (1965). The modification of the injunction was not essentially different from an order denying an interlocutory injunction against a sale or an order denying continuation of a temporary restraining order against a sale; in those cases it could hardly be contended that the denial was other than interlocutory. A majority concludes therefore, that the appeal from the instant order falls within the authority of Foreign Auto Import, Inc. v. Renault Northeast, Inc., supra, which held that an order denying a preliminary injunction is not subject to appellate review except by way of report by the trial judge or by leave of the appellate court.
The plaintiff’s contention that the order should be held to be final because any exchange of shares consummated thereafter would be irremediable is unsound. The plaintiff might have protected his legal rights by (1) joining the Western Bank & Trust Company as a party defendant (or otherwise notifying the appropriate officers of that bank of this litigation) and (2) claiming an appeal or cross appeal from the final judgment. The plaintiff is not entitled to have the orders or rulings of the trial court revised in his favor on the appeal of another party. Donnelly v. Glacier Sand & Stone Co., 2 Mass. App. Ct. 368, 371-372 (1974). Baldwin v. Pisacreta, post, 810 (1977). White v. Spence, *727ante, 679, 681 n.4 (1977). The plaintiff’s procedurally improper appeal from the interlocutory order could not obviate the necessity of his taking a cross appeal from the judgment under Mass.R.A.P. 4, 365 Mass. 846 (1974). Compare Check v. Kaplan, 280 Mass. 170, 175 (1932); Radio Corp. of America v. Raytheon Mfg. Co., 300 Mass. 113, 120 (1938); Fusaro v. Murray, 300 Mass. 229, 231 (1938); Broderick v. Broderick, 325 Mass. 579, 583 (1950) ; Turgeon v. Turgeon, 330 Mass. 402, 408-409 (1953); Massa v. Stone, 346 Mass. 67, 76 (1963). As noted earlier, the plaintiff also failed to seek the discretionary relief available from a single justice under G. L. c. 215, § 23.
The plaintiff’s appeal from the interlocutory order modifying the preliminary injunction is dismissed. The final judgment is affirmed.
So ordered.
These cases were initially heard by two panels composed of Hale, C.J., Keville, Armstrong, and Brown, JJ., and was thereafter submitted on the record and briefs to the other Justices, all of whom took part in this decision in accordance with the provisions of Mass.R.A.P. 24 (a), 365 Mass. 872 (1974).
Because the appeal in this case was claimed, docketed and argued before the effective date of St. 1977, c. 405, which has amended G. L. c. 231, 1118, so as to permit appeals as of right from interlocutory orders of the Superior Court or a Housing Court granting, continuing, modifying, refusing, dissolving, or refusing to dissolve preliqaánary injunctions, and perhaps also because the case was brought in a Probate Court (but cf. G. L. c. 215, § 9, and Lynde v. Vose, 326 Mass. 621, 622 [1951]), the passage of that statute does not affect the disposition of the plaintiff’s appeal.

=== CASE 9741150 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:21.028821+00 ===

*149Concurring Opinion
Staton, J.
I concur in result for the reason that State’s Exhibit No. 1 was received in evidence without objection. No error was preserved regarding its admissibility. Chimel v. California (1969), 395 U.S. 752, 80 S. Ct. 2034, 23 L. Ed. 2d 685 does not support the proposition that a warrantless search at the police station after arrest can be made. The search in the present case was not contemporaneous with the arrest. In Preston v. United States (1964), 376 U.S. 364, 84 S. Ct. 881, 11 L. Ed. 2d 777, the United States Supreme Court expressly held that “Once an accused is under arrest and in custody, then a search made at another place, without warrant, is simply not incident to the arrest.” Preston, supra, 376 U.S. at 367. The warrantless search does not appear to have been initiated for any other reasons than custody. Brett v. United States (5th Cir. 1969), 412 F. 2d 401. No question has been raised regarding the defendant’s constitutional rights under the Fourth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States.
Note. — Reported in 286 N. E. 2d 219.

=== CASE 2226354 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:07.094235+00 ===

286 N.E.2d 170 (1972)
Margaret R. LIES, Plaintiff,
v.
ORTHO PHARMACEUTICAL CORPORATION et al., Defendants.
No. 572S66.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
August 7, 1972.
*172 James H. Kelly, Martinsville, for plaintiff.
William F. Landers, Jr., William L. Soards, William P. Woods, Robert J. Shula, Indianapolis, for defendants.
OPINION ON PETITION FOR WITHDRAWAL OF ORDER APPOINTING SPECIAL JUDGE
PRENTICE, Justice.
This matter is before us upon the petition of the defendants for withdrawal of our opinion and order of July 18, 1972, 284 N.E.2d 792, appointing a special judge under Trial Rule 53.1, IC 1971, 34-5-1-1 the removed judge having joined in said petition. Said petition and the response of the plaintiff presents the following issues relative to Trial Rule 53.1:
1. The proper period for consideration of post-trial motion when all interested parties have filed legal memoranda bearing on the motion, and
2. Whether a motion pursuant to Trial Rule 53.2(A) may be withdrawn once filed, and
3. Whether the Court can and should grant a motion filed pursuant to an improper rule where the moving party is herself seeking an extremely strict application of the rules, and
4. Whether the motion pursuant to Trial Rule 53.2(A) violated Rule 6 of the Rules of the Circuit and Superior Courts of Marion County, Indiana.
On April 4, 1972, Plaintiff filed her motion to correct errors, together with a supporting brief. Briefs in opposition thereto were filed by the defendants on April 24, 25 and 27, and on May 9, the plaintiff filed a reply brief. Thereafter, on May 10, Plaintiff filed her praecipe for the issuance of a notice pursuant to Trial Rule 53.1(A)[1], upon which day we were also notified by letter from Plaintiff's counsel that he regarded the prospects as unlikely that counsel would agree upon a special judge. We are without information concerning the reasons for the delay of the Clerk in making the determination required of him and issuing the appropriate notice to us; and although the delay of two weeks appears to us to be excessive, it is not material to our determination. On May 19, the trial judge entered his ruling denying the plaintiff's motion to correct errors, and on June 2, the plaintiff filed with the trial court clerk, as one document, a withdrawal of Trial Rule 53.1(A) notice and praecipe for transcript. Nothing was filed with this Court regarding the withdrawal of the notice, and while the matter was thusly pending, this Court issued its order withdrawing submission from the trial judge and appointing the special judge.
(1) The filing of briefs or memoranda relative to motions does not in itself extend the time permitted the trial judge under Trial Rule 53.1(A) for ruling upon said motion. If additional time is likely to be required for proper briefing and consideration, counsel should agree under Trial Rule 53.1(A) (3), and the ruling date should be extended to a date certain by order book entry in accordance with such agreement. Otherwise, the trial judge has no alternative but to rule, to the best of his ability, without a full consideration of the briefs, or, if he deems it appropriate, apply to this Court for an extension under Trial Rule 53.1(A) (4).
(2) Since the purpose of Trial Rule 53 is to expedite litigation, no reason appears why a praecipe for a Trial Rule 53.1(A) notice may not be withdrawn by the party who filed it. Such withdrawal, of course, would not affect a notice issuable *173 in accordance with a praecipe of any other party. The notice, however, once filed with this Court, may be quashed only by motion filed in this Court and addressed to its discretion by the party who caused its issuance.
(3) Defendants further urge that inasmuch as the praecipe of the plaintiff filed May 10 called for a notice under Trial Rule 53.2(A), rather than Trial Rule 53.1(A), the time permitted for ruling upon the motion to correct errors should be extended to ninety (90) days, in accordance with the time provisions of Rule 53.2(A). We see no merit to this contention. The error, as Defendants concede, was probably due to the recent renumbering of the two rules. Nevertheless, the time permitted by the rules for the judge to rule upon the motion is and was thirty (30) days. The praecipe and notice were sufficient to advise the trial court clerk, the trial judge and this Court that the plaintiff desired to withdraw the submission and have a special judge appointed.
(4) Rule 6 of the rules of the Circuit and Superior Courts of Marion County adopted April 6, 1970, provide the following:
"Any action under Rule 53.2 of the Indiana Rules of Procedure shall be taken only upon written notice of counsel of record, served personally on the judge involved at least five (5) days prior to the expiration of the thirty (30) day period and then upon failure of the judge to act within the said thirty (30) day period, written request shall be served by counsel of record upon the Clerk to perform his duties under said Rule."
In view of the renumbering of our rules, this Rule number 6 would be applicable to our present Rule 53.1. Defendants assert that the trial court's rules have been approved by this Court, indicating that they are in some way binding upon us. Trial Rule 81 provides for the trial courts to adopt rules not inconsistent with our rules and requires such local rules to be filed with the Clerk of this Court. We do not agree, however, that we have in any way approved such rules. We must further point out that said Rule 6 is not consistent with Trial Rule 53.1 but is an impingement thereon, in that it purports to attach a condition to its application. It is the duty of the trial judge to rule upon motions covered by Trial Rule 53.1 within thirty (30) days. Courtesy and discretion may dictate that counsel remind the judge that the time is about to expire, but our rule does not, and the trial court's may not, require it.
It is indicated that the confusing state of affairs leading to this opinion was wrought by a failure of Plaintiff's counsel to comprehend certain amenities and trial rules; and we think further comment is appropriate in hopes of avoiding future conflicts of a similar nature. We are perplexed by his filing of a praecipe to withdraw the submission only one day after having filed a reply brief. But for our insistence upon strict applications of Trial Rules 53.1 and 53.2 in order to expedite litigation and facilitate the appeals process, we would agree with counsel for the defendants that such activity was tantamount to an agreement; and we believe that the trial judge, under the circumstances, acted promptly and reasonably, although erroneously.
Contemporaneously with the filing of his praecipe for withdrawal of submission, counsel wrote a letter to the trial judge, with copies to opposing counsel, calling for a conference to attempt to reach an agreement as to the selection of a special judge under sub-section (3) of Rule 53.1(A), and subsequently, by letter to our Court Administrator, alluded to an attempt to reach such an agreement under said sub-section. The selection of special judges under Trial Rules 53.1 and 53.2 is the exclusive province of this Court. Sub-section (3) relates only to the parties agreeing to extend the time permitted the judge for ruling and not to the manner of selecting a special judge.
*174 Having been served with notice of the plaintiff's move to effect a withdrawal of submission, the trial judge should have taken no further action until he was apprised of our action thereon, and doubtlessly he would not have ruled upon the motion to correct errors, except in reliance upon the aforementioned local Rule No. 6. Being unsure of whether the trial judge did or did not have jurisdiction to enter the ruling, counsel for Plaintiff understandably considered that his appeal's time might be running and felt compelled to praecipe for the transcript. Apparently he was of the opinion that he could not do so while the case was lying dormant for want of a judge. A party is entitled to a certified transcript at any time, and the filing of a praecipe is merely a request to the clerk for the same. It is also a preliminary step to an appeal, and for such purposes, must be filed within thirty (30) days after the ruling upon the motion to correct errors. (Appellate Rule 2). Neither the praecipe nor the certification, however, requires any approval or action by the judge. It was in this context that counsel undertook to withdraw the notice to withdraw the submission and appoint a special judge, but as previously set forth, this was no longer his prerogative.
The petition to withdraw the opinion and order of July 18, 1972 is denied.
The Honorable William L. Soards appointed by the aforesaid order of July 18 is directed to qualify forthwith as special judge in this cause, to vacate the ruling upon the motion to correct errors entered by the regular judge on May 19, 1972, to rule upon said motion and to proceed thereafter according to law.
This Court now being fully and satisfactorily advised with regard to the nature of the proceedings and the cause of delay by the regular judge in ruling upon the aforesaid motion, that portion of our said order of July 18 requiring his report under Trial Rule 53.1(D) is hereby vacated and set aside.
ARTERBURN, C.J., and DeBRULER, GIVAN and HUNTER, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Although the praecipe was designated "Praecipe for Issuance of TR 53.2(A) Notice," it is obvious that a TR 53.1(A) notice was intended, and it has been so regarded both in the opinion and order of July 18, 1972 and herein.

=== CASE 9741151 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:24.990986+00 ===

Brickley, C.J.
These cases were combined for review because they all concern allegations of negligence on the part of a power company resulting in harmful contact with uninsulated overhead power lines. Each of the cases against Detroit Edison was decided on summary disposition regarding the issue of duty. This Court reviews summary judgments de novo and must review the entire record to see if the defendant was entitled to summary disposition. Adkins v Thomas Solvent Co, 440 Mich 293, 302; 487 NW2d 715 (1992). The existence of a legal duty is a question of law for the Court to decide. Trager v Thor, 445 Mich 95; 516 NW2d 69 (1994).
Also before the Court is Barbara Bohnert’s suit against defendant Carrington Homes, Inc. This suit alleges that Carrington is also liable for the electrocution death of her husband under Funk v General Motors Corp, 392 Mich 91; 220 NW2d 641 (1974). This case was also decided by a grant of summary judgment for the defendant, which was reversed by the Court of Appeals. Therefore, the standard of review is *650also de novo. The issues relating to Carrington will be discussed separately from those concerning Edison.
I. FACTS
A. PARCHER v DETROIT EDISON
Theodore Parcher1 was electrocuted while moving a twenty-nine-foot high scaffold on a forklift on July 25, 1990. He was twenty-nine years old at the time of the accident and was working as a forklift operator at the construction of a supermarket. The power lines were sixty-five feet from the building, and thirty-five feet above the ground. The accident occurred as Mr. Parcher attempted to reverse around a pile of debris, bringing the scaffolding into contact with the power lines. Edison owned and operated the lines at the time of the accident, knew of the ongoing construction, and had agreed to move one of the poles to accommodate a parking lot that was being built along with the building. The power lines had been in place for a number of years before the construction began. Further, Mr. Parcher’s employer had warned workers at the site of the presence of the power lines. Mr. Parcher’s injuries resulted in the amputation of his right arm, right leg, and left foot.
The defendant was granted summary disposition on December 23, 1992. This decision was affirmed by the Court of Appeals on January 24, 1995. In its opinion, the Court of Appeals found that the accident was not legally foreseeable and therefore, the defendant owed the plaintiff no legal duty. 209 Mich App 495; 531 NW2d 724 (1995).
*651B. GRONCKI v DETROIT EDISON
Gerald Groncki was a maintenance supervisor at a condominium complex and was injured when a ladder that he was moving came into contact with an uninsulated overhead electrical line. As a result, the plaintiff went into cardiac arrest and suffered bums of his left foot. He remained in the hospital for approximately ten days and a toe on his left foot was amputated. Mr. Groncki also alleges that various cognitive difficulties and personality changes resulted from his injuries. Mr. Groncki’s wife has also filed a loss of consortium claim.2
On the day of the accident, Mr. Groncki was working on the roof of a condominium with another employee. The men were using a twenty-four-foot aluminum ladder to gain access to the roof. Mr Groncki had warned the other worker about the danger of working near the power lines. After the other employee left to work in a different area, Mr. Groncki attempted to move the ladder by himself. Unfortunately, he lost control of the ladder, which fell onto the power lines. The power lines where twenty-one feet high and 14V2 feet from the building. The lines had been in place for six years before the portion of the complex on which Mr. Groncki was working had been built. Further, Mr. Groncki worked on the construction of the complex and was familiar with its facilities.
Edison was awarded summary disposition by the circuit court on May 27, 1992. The Court of Appeals reversed this decision on December 27, 1994, in an *652unpublished opinion per curiam (Docket No. 153538). The Court of Appeals determined that it was foreseeable that someone using an aluminum ladder could be injured by the power lines. This ruling is now appealed by the defendant to this Court.3
C. BOHNERT v DETROIT EDISON
This case concerns the fatal electrocution of Wendell Bohnert on October 10, 1989, at a home construction site.4 Mr. Bohnert was a delivery man for National Cement Products of Toledo, Ohio. At the time of the accident, he was fifty-eight years old and had been delivering masonry supplies for National Cement Products for forty years. On October 10, 1989, Mr. Bohnert was delivering a load of cement blocks that had been ordered by the president of Carrington, Stephen Dick. No one was at the site when Mr. Bohnert arrived, so he began to unload his truck unsupervised. In doing so, despite the presence of specific warnings on the truck, Mr. Bohnert deployed the boom of his truck beneath power lines. Unfortunately, the boom touched the power lines and Mr. Bohnert was killed. The electrical lines were located *653twelve feet from the house and at a height of twenty-six feet. The power lines were uninsulated. Edison, who owned and controlled the lines, was aware of the construction and had inspected the site. Edison refused to insulate or move the power lines free of expense, but informed the homeowner that this could be done for a fee. However, Edison reviewed the planned location of the house and requested that the homeowners move it four feet farther away from the lines in order to achieve a twelve-foot clearance. The homeowners complied with this request.
The plaintiff, Mr. Bohnert’s wife, alleges that Edison was negligent in failing to insulate, relocate, or deenergize the wires, and in failing to warn her husband of their presence. Mrs. Bohnert also alleges that Carrington, a licensed general contractor, is liable as a general contractor under this Court’s decision in Funk. Carrington disputes this and claims to have been one of many subcontractors performing work on a “cost plus” basis. Carrington argues that it only performed construction as requested by the homeowners, who were their own general contractors. However, a local ordinance requires a licensed general contractor to manage the construction. Furthermore, Mr. Dick, the president of Carrington, gave deposition testimony that Carrington was the general contractor. Further, Carrington claimed to have been the general contractor during oral argument before the circuit court.
Both Edison and Carrington were awarded summary disposition in circuit court. However, these decisions were reversed by the Court of Appeals in an unpublished opinion per curiam (Docket No. 158314). The Court of Appeals found that there was a question *654of fact regarding whether the injury was foreseeable by Edison and whether the site was a common work area under the authority of Carrington. Both defendants Edison and Carrington appeal this ruling.
n. CLAIMS ASSERTED AGAINST DETROIT EDISON
A. STATEMENT OF LAW APPLICABLE TO EACH PLAINTIFF
The scope of the duty owed by electrical companies to move, insulate or de-energize overhead power lines is a question of foreseeability. Schultz v Consumers Power Co, 443 Mich 445, 452; 506 NW2d 175 (1993). Utility companies, particularly electric companies, are charged with a duty to protect against foreseeable harm. Id.
In Dees v L F Largess, 1 Mich App 421; 136 NW2d 715 (1965), the plaintiff was electrocuted when a crane came into contact with overhead power lines owned by Detroit Edison. The plaintiff, a construction worker, was holding a hook hanging from a crane when the crane’s cable contacted a power line. The Court of Appeals upheld a directed verdict for Detroit Edison. The Court found that Detroit Edison was not negligent in failing to anticipate that a skilled workman, with full knowledge of the wires, would come into contact with these wires through the cable of a crane. Id. at 427.
In Koehler v Detroit Edison Co, 383 Mich 224; 174 NW2d 827 (1970), the plaintiff was killed while riding on the arm of a crane as part of his employment at a construction site, when the crane’s arm came into contact with overhead electrical cables. This Court upheld the trial court’s determination that the electrical company owed no duty to the plaintiff, despite its *655knowledge of the construction. Id. at 231. In reaching this conclusion, this Court stated:
The mere fact that Detroit Edison knew a building was under construction near its power line and that, from time to time, mobile cranes were being brought upon the premises to be used in construction work, would not, standing alone, create a duty upon Detroit Edison to remove the charge, insulate the line, or notify the parties of a dangerous condition. [Id.]
Thus, because Detroit Edison could not anticipate that cranes on construction sites would contact its power lines, it owed no duty to that plaintiff.
The Court of Appeals revisited the issue in Ransford v Detroit Edison Co, 124 Mich App 537; 335 NW2d 211 (1983). In that case two men were electrocuted, and the plaintiff’s decedent killed, when the wire-guided model planes they were flying crashed into electrical wires. Id. at 541-542. The Court found that there was no duty on the part of the power company because the occurrence was completely unforeseeable. Id. at 546. Rather, it stated that liability could not be based on such purely fortuitous circumstances. Id. Further, the Court explained that the issue of foreseeability should be determined at the time the lines were installed. Id.
This Court last spoke on this issue in Schultz v Consumers Power Co, supra. That case involved the death of a homeowner when a ladder that he was holding came into contact, either directly or through an electric arch, with a power Une. The electric line had been placed 15V2 feet away from the preexisting house. At the time of the accident, the line was frayed and pitted. In finding a duty, this Court noted that *656electrical companies occupy a special role as providers of an essential, yet extremely dangerous commodity. Id. at 450-451. This special relationship with the public was found to impose a duty upon electrical companies to “reasonably inspect and repair wires and other instrumentalities in order to discover and remedy hazards and defects.” Id. at 451. The Court also formulated a test to determine when this duty existed in a particular case:
The. test to determine whether a duty was owed is not whether the company should have anticipated the particular act from which the injury resulted, but whether it should have foreseen the probability that injury might result from any reasonable activity done on the premises for business, work, or pleasure. [Id. at 452.]
The Court determined that an accident involving a homeowner was foreseeable, given the location and disrepair of the power line.
The plaintiffs in Parcher and Bohnert also allege that Edison owed a duty to warn of the presence of dangerous power lines.5 However, there is no duty to warn someone of a risk of which that person is aware. Bullock v Gulf & Western Mfg, 128 Mich App 316; 340 NW2d 294 (1983). Specifically, there is no duty to warn of known overhead power lines. Wilhelm v Detroit Edison Co, 56 Mich App 116; 224 NW2d 289 (1974) (finding no duty to warn severally, but finding a question of fact because the plaintiff believed the lines to be insulated). Further, the duty to warn only arises when there is a foreseeable vic*657tim. Thus, this duty, like the duty to inspect and repair, does not arise where it is not foreseeable to Edison that the plaintiff would come into harmful contact with the wires.
B. APPLICATION
1. PARCHER v DETROIT EDISON
The Court of Appeals correctly found that no duty arose on the part of Edison to protect Mr. Parcher. This case is closely analogous to Dees and Koehler. Edison, like the defendant in Dees, could not have reasonably foreseen that a skilled workman, with full knowledge of the power lines, would bring a crane into contact with those power lines. As in Koehler, Edison knew that there was ongoing construction, but had no reason to know that any high profile machinery would be used near its power lines. Therefore, under Dees and Koehler, Edison did not owe a duty to Mr. Parcher.
Similarly, the circumstances of Mr. Parcher’s accident are fortuitous. The forklift Mr. Parcher was driving only came into contact with the wire because Mr. Parcher was transporting an uncollapsed scaffold while reversing around a pile of debris. Edison could not have reasonably foreseen that a worker would reverse around a pile of debris and bring a twenty-nine-foot high uncollapsed scaffold into contact with its electric wire. Thus, summary disposition was appropriate because these events were not foreseeable, and, therefore, no duty arose. Ransford, supra.
Further, this was not a poorly maintained wire that had been placed close to a home as in Schultz. Rather, this wire was on a commercial construction site and was sixty-seven feet from the building at a *658height of thirty-five feet. Not only is there no evidence showing that this wire was not adequately maintained, but the distance from the building is sufficient to make this accident unforeseeable. Thus, Schultz is easily distinguishable from this case.
Finally, Edison did not owe Mr. Parcher a duty to warn. Mr. Parcher’s contact with the wire was clearly unforeseeable, and, thus, no duty to warn arose. Further, Mr. Parcher had been warned about the wires by supervisors on the job site. Thus, Mr. Parcher was fully aware of the presence of the wires. Edison owed no duty to warn about a known danger. Wilhelm, Bullock, supra.
2. GRONCKI v DETROIT EDISON
Mr. Groncki alleges that Edison owed him a duty to: inspect, repair, and insulate the power lines; place the lines in a safe location; and erect safety barriers around them. Similar to the allegations of Mr. Parcher, Mr. Groncki’s claim rests on the question of foreseeability. The Court of Appeals reversed the trial court’s grant of summary judgment, finding that Edison owed a duty to Mr. Groncki. We disagree and restore the award of summary disposition for Edison.
Mr. Groncki bases his claim on Schultz’ language that a power company owes a duty on the basis of “the probability that injury might result from any reasonable activity done on the premises for business, work or pleasure.” Schultz at 452. Mr. Groncki claims that he was engaged in reasonable activity while repairing the roof of the condominium and, therefore, was owed a duty by Edison. However, there are several facts that distinguish this case from Schultz. In Schultz, the probability of injury was based upon a *659frayed line that had been placed next to a preexisting structure. Further, the plaintiff in Schultz was a homeowner making repairs to his own home. In this case, there is no evidence suggesting that the line was in poor condition or was not properly maintained. Further, Mr. Groncki was not a homeowner unfamiliar with the dangers of electric lines. Rather, he was an experienced workman who was fully aware of the presence of the wires. Indeed, he warned a coworker to take exceptional care around the power lines. Thus, it was not foreseeable that he would ignore his own warnings and attempt to move the fully extended metal ladder himself,6 and Edison owes no duty to Mr. Groncki.
3. BOHNERT v DETROIT EDISON
The Court of Appeals erred in overturning the grant of summary disposition on Mrs. Bohnert’s claim against Edison. Mr. Bohnert’s injury was not foreseeable to Edison. Therefore, Edison owed no duty to warn Mr. Bohnert or to move, insulate, or de-energize the power lines. As in Dees, Mr. Bohnert was a skilled and experienced workman with years of experience. Indeed, Mr. Bohnert had been delivering masonry supplies for forty years. Further, Mr. Bohnert had knowledge of the dangers of operating the boom on his truck near power lines. Indeed, there was a warning *660against such operation only a few inches above the boom’s controls. Simply put, it was not foreseeable to Edison that an experienced, skilled workman would disregard clear instructions and operate his delivery vehicle directly beneath power lines. Thus, no duty arose on the part of Edison to plaintiff.
Further, Edison had not been notified that any type of machinery would be operating at that location on that day. It clearly had no knowledge that a large delivery truck equipped with a boom would be operated directly beneath its lines. While Edison did know that a house was being built at that location and could reasonably expect that machinery would be used, this degree of knowledge was found insufficient to create a duty in Koehler. Plaintiff’s argument that the driveway was the only place where such material could be delivered does not change this conclusion. Edison cannot be expected to know all probable delivery locations on any given construction site. Rather, it can reasonably expect that trained workmen will not operate delivery vehicles directly under power lines or, if such operation is required, will properly inform Edison.
The mere location of the power line does not impose a duty on Edison. While this line was closer than that in Schultz, there are significant factors that distinguish this case. First, there is no evidence that the power line in this case was in disrepair. In Schultz, the wire was pitted and frayed and susceptible to arching. Secondly, the power line had been placed in its location by Edison before the commencement of construction. In Schultz, the power company had placed the line dangerously close to a preexisting house. Indeed, Edison had informed the *661homeowners in this case of the danger of building too close to power lines, and had convinced them to move the structure several feet to achieve additional clearance. These factors weigh in favor of not imposing a duty on Edison.
c. public policy considerations
Public policy also mitigates against the imposition of a duty in these cases. Sound public policy is a factor in deciding duty. Sizemore v Smock, 430 Mich 283, 293; 422 NW2d 666 (1988); Antcliff v State Employees Credit Union, 414 Mich 624, 630-631; 327 NW2d 814 (1982), see also Prosser & Keeton, Torts (5th ed), § 53, p 358. As this Court has recognized, “Social policy must intervene at some point to limit the extent of one’s liability.” Sizemore at 293. Further, these plaintiffs contend that the duty to inspect and repair imposed by Schultz includes the duties to relocate, insulate, de-energize, warn, and erect safety barriers around power lines. Schultz at 455. Inasmuch as such a holding would expand Schultz, it is proper that this Court consider the public policy ramifications of such a decision.
The social policy at issue is the public’s need for electric power at a reasonable cost. To impose a duty to relocate, insulate, or de-energize power lines whenever third parties construct buildings near power lines would interfere with this policy. The costs of insulating or moving these lines would be significant. Edison alone has over 35,000 miles of power lines in this state. To impose the duty the plaintiffs request would certainly amount to a huge cost that would be passed on to the consuming public. Further, it may *662often be impossible for Edison and other power companies to move power lines away from new construction without moving them closer to preexisting structures. In any event, the costs of injuries such as those suffered by these plaintiffs will have to be met in another societal forum.
HI. BOHNERT v CARRINGTON HOMES
The Court of Appeals correctly overturned the award of summary disposition for Carrington. The liability of Carrington is governed by Funk, supra. Funk involved an elevated work area shared by many subcontractors and created an exception to the general rule that a general contractor is not liable for the injuries of a subcontractor’s employee.
We regard it to be a part of the business of a general contractor to assure that reasonable steps within its supervisory and coordinating authority are taken to guard against readily observable, avoidable dangers in common work areas which create a high degree of risk to a significant number of workmen. [Id. at 104.]
Thus, for there to be liability under Funk, there must be: 1) a general contractor with supervisory and coordinating authority over the job site, 2) a common work area shared by the employees of more than one subcontractor, and 3) a readily observable and avoidable danger in that common work area, 4) that creates a high degree of risk to a significant number of workers.
Carrington seeks to avoid liability by arguing that it was not a general contractor with supervisory control over the work area. It claims merely to be one of *663many subcontractors hired by the homeowners. However, the president of Carrington stated in his deposition that Carrington was the general contractor. Furthermore, he admitted that he ordered the supplies Mr. Bohnert was delivering and normally supervised this type of delivery. Finally, Carrington took the position that it was the general contractor before the circuit court. Thus, considering these facts in the light most favorable to the nonmoving plaintiff, there' is a genuine question of material fact with regard to whether Carrington was the general contractor and had supervisory and coordinating control over the workplace.
Further, a question of fact exists regarding the presence of a common work area. In Erickson v Pure Oil Corp, 72 Mich App 330; 249 NW2d 411 (1976), the Court of Appeals found that for a common work area to exist there must be an area where the employees of two or more subcontractors will eventually work. This holding was reaffirmed by the Court of Appeals in Phillips v Mazda Motor Mfg, 204 Mich App 401, 408; 516 NW2d 502 (1994). Carrington argues that this rule unduly extends Funk, creating liability any time employees of different contractors will eventually work in the same location. The common work area, however, is only one element of Funk. The mere presence of a common work area, without supervisory control by the general contractor and a readily observable and avoidable risk to a significant number of workers, will not necessarily impose liability. Thus, Erickson was not an improper extension of Funk, but merely established the test for one of Funk’s four elements.
*664However, there is a question of fact regarding whether employees of other subcontractors would be working in this area. The area in question appears to be the main driveway into the construction site. Mrs. Bohnert claims that this was used by all workmen on the project. Carrington simply asserts that Mr. Bohnert was the only person who worked in that area because he was the only person injured there. This dispute presents an unresolved factual question. Therefore, summary judgment is not appropriate at this juncture.
We also note that a factual question exists regarding the presence of a readily observable, avoidable risk to a significant number of workmen. Carrington argues that the line was in the plain view of Mr. Bohnert. Therefore, there is at least a question of fact with respect to whether it was observable to Carrington. The parties also dispute the feasibility of safety precautions that may have avoided any risk posed by the power line. Finally, there is a dispute about the number of employees exposed to any such risk. Mrs. Bohnert claims that most, if not all, the workers and their equipment passed along this driveway and directly beneath the power line. To support this claim, Mrs. Bohnert alleges that this driveway was the only feasible means of access to the construction site. Carrington asserts that this is not the case. Once again, this conflict demonstrates a question of fact that renders summaiy disposition inappropriate.
It is consistent to impose a duty for this accident on Carrington, but not on Edison. Edison could not foresee the accident because it was not informed that Mr. Bohnert would be operating a crane-like delivery *665track beneath its wires. However, if Carrington is shown to have had sufficient control of the job site, it may have been aware of the likelihood of this accident. Further, when the elements of Funk are satisfied, a general contractor is presumed to have been able to foresee that readily observable and avoidable risks will lead to accidents and injuries. Thus, this accident may have been foreseeable with respect to Carrington, but not to Edison. However, at this juncture there are material questions of fact with respect to each of the elements of Funk. Thus, summary disposition was not proper and the Court of Appeals decision reversing the judgment of the trial court is correct.
CONCLUSION.
Therefore, I would affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeals in Parcher, reverse in Groncki, and affirm in part and reverse in part in Bohnert. The claims against Edison should be dismissed, and Mrs. Bohnert’s suit against Carrington remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Boyle, J., concurred only in the result.
To avoid confusion, all plaintiffs will be referred to by surname.
As this opinion addresses the duty of Edison to Mr. Groncki, Mrs. Groncki’s derivative claim does not require separate treatment.
Edison claims that the Court of Appeals expanded the scope of Mr. Groncki’s allegations. It asserts that Mr. Groncki only alleged negligence in the placement of the wires, while the Court of Appeals determined that Edison was also negligent in failing to properly insulate the lines, not properly inspecting and repairing the lines, and failing to erect barriers around the lines. However, Mr. Groncki’s complaint alleges that the defendant was negligent in its “construction, maintenance, operation, repair and/or inspection” of the lines. Given the requirements for pleading, the claims cited by the Court of Appeals were encompassed by the broad language of Mr. Groncki’s complaint.
The owners of the home, Roy and Ernestine Adkins, were initially codefendants in the suit. However, unlike Carrington and Detroit Edison, the plaintiff did not appeal the award of summary disposition for them. Thus, the Adkinses are no longer parties to this lawsuit.
At oral argument, Mr. Groncki’s counsel stated that her case did not involve a duty to warn.
Edison also argues that it met applicable safety standards set forth by the National Electric Safety Commission and adopted by the Michigan Public Service Commission. 1991 AACS, R 460.813. However, as recognized in Schultz, “An argument on the basis of industry standards, therefore, goes to the question whether a defendant breached its duty of ordinary care, not whether a duty existed.” Schultz at 456. Thus, the NESC standards are not applicable to the appeal before this Court, which solely concerns the issue of duty.

=== CASE 9741152 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:24.998412+00 ===

Mallett, J.
(concurring in part and dissenting in part). I concur with the lead opinion’s holdings in both Parcher v Detroit Edison and Bohnert v Detroit Edison. However, I disagree with the lead opinion’s conclusion that Detroit Edison is not liable for the injuries in Groncki because it was not foreseeable that this plaintiff would come into harmful contact with the overhead power lines. I' agree with the Court of Appeals holding reversing the grant of summary *666disposition in favor of the utility, and would remand to the trial court for further fact finding with regard to the general negligence claim. A more complete record from which to assess the liability of the utility in this case needs to be provided concerning the proximity of the wires to the building and to the ground. Groncki v Detroit Edison Co, unpublished opinion per curiam, issued December 27, 1994 (Docket No. 153538), slip op at 1, 3. In holding that there is no duty in Groncki, the Court gives too narrow a reading to our holding in Schultz v Consumers Power Co, 443 Mich 445; 506 NW2d 175 (1993). Such restriction is inconsistent with basic principles of negligence law that the lead opinion fails to address.
“A negligence action may only be maintained if a legal duty exists which requires the defendant to conform to a particular standard of conduct in order to protect others against unreasonable risks of harm.” Riddle v McLouth Steel Products Corp, 440 Mich 85, 96; 485 NW2d 676 (1992). In assessing whether to impose a duty courts must evaluate several factors, among which are the relationship of the parties, the foreseeability of harm, and the nature of the risk itself. Buczkowski v McKay, 441 Mich 96, 100; 490 NW2d 330 (1992). Whether a duty will be found to exist is a question of law for the court. Trager v Thor, 445 Mich 95, 105; 516 NW2d 69 (1994). Once a legal duty is established, a breach of that duty is required for liability to attach. Whether the duty has been breached is a question of fact for the jury. Riddle, supra at 96.
In determining whether the relationship between the parties is sufficient to establish a duty, the proper *667inquiry is “ ‘whether the defendant is under any obligation for the benefit of the particular plaintiff’ . . . Buczkowski, supra at 100, quoting Friedman v Dozorc, 412 Mich 1, 22; 312 NW2d 585 (1981). This analysis concerns whether the relationship of the parties is such that a legal obligation should be imposed on one for the benefit of another. Id., citing Prosser & Keeton, Torts (5th ed), § 53, p 356. “Only if the law recognizes a duty to act with due care arising from the relationship of the parties does it subject the defendant to liability for negligent conduct.” Friedman, supra at 22. In assessing the sufficiency of the relationship and whether to impose a duty, this Court has noted that “[i]t is well established that those who undertake particular activities or enter into special relationships assume a distinctive duty to procure knowledge and experience regarding that activity .. . .” Schultz, supra at 450.
This inquiry is of critical importance where a company is involved in an inherently dangerous enterprise such as the delivery of electricity. The necessary relationship arises out of the nature of the activity. The provision of electricity and electric power is one of those particular activities in which the provider assumes a distinctive duty. Accordingly, we held that it is the responsibility of the electric company, as a provider of an inherently dangerous commodity, in its superior position of knowledge and expertise, to execute its activities through the exercise of reasonable care to reduce the risk of harm as far as practicable. Id. at 451. We noted in Schultz that, “[w]here service wires erected and maintained by an electric utility company carry a powerful electric current, so that persons coming into contact with or proximity to *668them are likely to suffer serious injury or death, the company must exercise reasonable care to protect the public from danger.” Id. at 453-454.
Even though the reasonable person is charged with the knowledge of the dangerous propensities of electricity, the utility still has the duty and obligation “to reasonably inspect and repair wires and other instrumentalities in order to discover and remedy hazards and defects.” Id. at 451. Indeed, other courts have similarly held that, “ ‘where high-voltage lines were strung between closely spaced private residences, the risk to be foreseen was of the highest order; thus, the corresponding duty devolving upon the power company must be considered equally great.’ ” Id. at 455, quoting Miner v Long Island Lighting Co, 40 NY2d 372, 379; 353 NE2d 805 (1976).
In addition is the requirement of foreseeability, that is, whether the reasonable person not only could anticipate the likelihood that a particular event would occur, but that such an event would pose a risk of injury or harm to a person or property. Samson v Saginaw Professional Bldg, Inc, 393 Mich 393, 406; 224 NW2d 843 (1975). In Samson, we stated:
Foreseeability . . . depends upon whether or not a reasonable man could anticipate that a given event might occur under certain conditions. But the mere fact that an event may be foreseeable does not impose a duty upon the defendant to take some kind of action accordingly. The event which he perceives might occur must pose some sort of risk of injury to another person or his property before the actor may be required to act. . . . Negligence ... is not found to exist unless an actor, who is under a duty to act, fails to act after he has perceived or should have perceived an unreasonable risk of harm to another.
*669Consequently, as pointed out in Schultz, it is altogether possible for a reasonable person to anticipate both that an individual performing routine maintenance on his home could become electrocuted if his aluminum ladder came into contact with the overhead power line and that this could cause serious injury or death. Id. at 452. The message in Schultz is clear that “[t]hose engaged in transmitting electricity are bound to anticipate ordinary use of the area surrounding the lines and to appropriately safeguard the attendant risks.” Id. The appropriate test is not “whether the company should have anticipated the particular act from which the injury resulted, but whether it should have foreseen the probability that injury might result from any reasonable activity done on the premises for business, work, or pleasure.” Id. Accordingly, we held that Consumers Power owed “a duty to reasonably install its power lines so as to safeguard the public from foreseeable injuries.” Id. at 458. Thus, it was determined that it was foreseeable that a homeowner could become injured while performing routine maintenance on his dwelling and that the utility is duty bound to safeguard against such risks as far as practicable.
In holding that the utility has no duty in Groncki, the lead opinion interprets too narrowly our holding in Schultz. The lead opinion places far too much emphasis on the fact that, like the plaintiffs in Bohnert and Parcher, the plaintiff in Groncki was an experienced maintenance worker who knew about the dangers of power lines and had even warned *670other workers about them.1 Ante at 660-661. Accordingly, the lead opinion posits that Groncki should be governed by Koehler v Detroit Edison Co, 383 Mich 224; 174 NW2d 827 (1970), and its progeny, like Parcher and Bohnert, rather than Schultz,2 These cases really represent a continuum of liability with Koehler, finding no duty, on one end, and Schultz, imposing a duty, on the other. However, there are significant differences between Groncki, on the one hand, and Parcher, Bohnert, and Koehler, on the other, that the opinion fails to consider, which bring it closer to the holding in Schultz.
The Koehler-Bohnert-Parcher trilogy involved construction sites where new building was taking place. The work space in which the construction activities took place was ample for the activities to occur. The victims in these cases were extremely experienced at operating heavy equipment, whether a forklift, masonry delivery truck, or crane, and ignored their *671own occupational safety instructions and warnings. They knew about the danger and the need to stay away from overhead wires. Ante at 650, 652, and 654-655. Accordingly, in Koehler, we held that
[t]he mere fact that Detroit Edison knew a building was under construction near its power line and that, from time to time, mobile cranes were being brought upon the premises to be used in construction work, would not, standing alone, create a duty upon Detroit Edison to remove the charge, insulate the line, or notify the parties of a dangerous condition. We agree with the finding of the trial judge that there was no negligence on the part of Detroit Edison. [Id. at 231.]
Clearly, under these circumstances, the injuries were not foreseeable, but the result of fortuitous events not readily anticipated or caused in any way by the negligence of the utility, and thus liability could not attach.
On the other side of the spectrum is Schultz, which involved a homeowner and his friend, who was electrocuted while house painting. The lead opinion notes that we found this kind of incident to be “foreseeable, given the location and disrepair of the power line.” Ante at 656. This is only partially correct. By restricting the holding in Schultz to homeowners repairing their homes, the lead opinion misses the greater significance of Schultz. In Schultz, the critical factors to finding a duty were the placement and condition of the wires, whether it was foreseeable that reasonable maintenance would take place, and whether this maintenance could be executed with reasonable safety given the placement and condition of the *672wires.3 In Groncki, as in Schultz, even though there was no allegation that the wire was in disrepair, and in spite of his alleged experience, it is still altogether possible that the plaintiff simply could not perform routine maintenance tasks without confronting an unreasonable risk of harm because of inadequate work space. Therefore, Edison breached its duty to reasonably inspect and install its lines. This is underscored by the fact that the condominium complex grew up among the original wires and that with subsequent construction the distances between the wires and the buildings decreased to a point where repairs could not reasonably be undertaken and that injuries were therefore foreseeable.
Notwithstanding Groncki’s knowledge and experience or the fact that the power lines complied with the Public Safety Commission regulations, the Court of Appeals charged the electric company with the duty that it “must exercise reasonable care to reduce potential hazards as far as practicable.”4 Schultz at *673451. As the lead opinion notes, “electrical companies occupy a special role as providers of an essential, yet extremely dangerous commodity.” Ante at 656, citing Schultz. Therefore, it is incumbent upon the utility to “reasonably inspect and repair wires and other instrumentalities in order to discover and remedy hazards and defects.” Id. In this case, the proximity of the power lines to the condominium may have created such a hazardous condition. There simply may not have been ample space for the work to reasonably have been completed. Edison is under a duty to inspect and remedy such hazards as far as practicable where it is foreseeable that a maintenance worker or homeowner could become electrocuted while performing routine maintenance tasks.
The utility is charged with the responsibility and duty to inspect, discover, and remedy hazardous conditions to prevent foreseeable injuries. Both public policy and the protection of the public command this result. I disagree that this will have the dire economic consequences asserted of by the lead opinion. Therefore, I respectfully dissent from the lead opinion’s position in Groncki v Detroit Edison, and would remand this case to the trial court for further fact *674finding to determine whether the injury was foreseeable, and whether Edison’s conduct fell below the standard of care. This evaluation should include an analysis of the type of activity performed, the distance of the power lines from the activity, and whether the activity could be performed or carried out with reasonable safety within that space.
Cavanagh, J., concurred with Mallett, J.
Counsel for the plaintiffs-appellees disputed that Mr. Groncki was truly experienced. Noting that he had only a high school education and was a laborer, albeit with some construction experience, counsel charged that he could not be
saddle[d] . . . with the knowledge, the cumulative knowledge that Detroit Edison has in dealing with power lines. ... Mr. Groncki was and is a maintenance man. Mr. Groncki never took any formal courses or had any specific training in the area of electricity, and he has no specialized knowledge or expertise as to the hazards of uninsulated electrical lines, beyond that which all persons are generally aware.
Koehler was electrocuted while riding on a sling or wire cable attached to a crane in order to perform two tasks at a time on a construction site with too few workers. He was attaching a hook on the end of the crane to material in a truck and riding up with it to the wall or roof where the material was attached and then riding down. He repeated this several times, in spite of several warnings, and was electrocuted. Koehler, supra at 229.
In a separate concurrence, Chief Justice Cavanagh, joined by Justice Levin, emphasized that, in addition to the duty to inspect and maintain, the utility must exercise reasonable care in positioning its uninsulated power lines.
[I]n resolving this case, I would focus less on the condition of the wire and more on its position. [Schulte at 460.]
Chief Justice Cavanagh noted that the house in this case was built before the wires were brought into the area and that the utility should have “anticipated that someone might attempt the not unusual task of painting that home,” with a tall ladder when installing the lines. Id. (citation omitted).
The power lines were in place six years before the condominium on which Groncki was working was built. The lines were twenty-one feet high, and 14% feet away from the building. Ante at 651. This is closer to the building than the wire in Schultz, which was 15% feet from the house and twenty-four feet high. Id. at 448. Even though these distances com*673plied with the Michigan Public Safety Commission regulations (or the National Electric Safety Code, which the MPSC has adopted), the Court of Appeals noted that this does not preclude the plaintiffs claim. This Court has held that compliance with industry standards is not an absolute claim of defense to a claim of negligence. Id. at 456. Compliance is evidence of due care and “whether a defendant breached its duty of ordinary care, not whether a duty existed.” Id. Whether the defendant was negligent or breached its duty is a factual issue for the trier of fact to determine. See Groncki v Detroit Edison Co, unpublished opinion per curiam, slip op at 3 (citation omitted). Further, it is important to note that the safety standards represent only the minimum requirements and that circumstances might exist requiring a higher standard. Schultz at 456-457 (citations omitted).

=== CASE 9741153 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:25.004223+00 ===

Riley, J.
(concurring in part and dissenting in part). I agree with the lead opinion that defendant Detroit Edison did not have a duty as a matter of law to any of the three plaintiffs because it could not have reasonably foreseen that someone would be injured in the particular circumstances of each case. Therefore, I join part n of the opinion, which concludes that the trial court properly granted summary disposition in favor of defendant Detroit Edison in all three cases.
However, I cannot join part m of the lead opinion regarding the issue of general contractor liability in Bohnert v Detroit Edison. Because I agree with the lead opinion that Wendell Bohnert’s injury was not foreseeable to defendant Detroit Edison as a matter of law, I further conclude that there was not a “high degree of risk” presented by the overhead electrical lines to Bohnert for defendant Carrington Homes, the general contractor, as a matter of law. Hence, I respectfully dissent. I would reverse the Court of Appeals decision and reinstate the trial court’s grant of summary disposition in favor of Carrington.
*675I
As the lead opinion states, this Court has established that a general contractor has a duty on a construction project (1) to take reasonable steps within its supervisory and coordinating authority (2) to guard against readily observable, avoidable dangers (3) in common work areas that- (4) create a high degree of risk to a significant number of workers. See Funk v General Motors Corp, 392 Mich 91, 104; 220 NW2d 641 (1974). See also Plummer v Bechtel Construction Co, 440 Mich 646, 666 (Levin, J.), 669 (Boyle, J.); 489 NW2d 66 (1992) (affirming Funk). I do not believe that there is an issue regarding whether the electrical power lines created a high degree of risk to Bohnert.
In examining whether there was a foreseeable risk to Bohnert for defendant Detroit Edison, the lead opinion concludes that “it was not foreseeable to Edison that an experienced, skilled workman would disregard clear instructions [on the boom] and operate his delivery vehicle directly beneath power lines.” Ante, p 660. For the same reason, I also believe that these power lines, which were not obscured by visual obstructions, did not present a high degree of risk to plaintiff as a matter of law when Stephen Dick of Carrington asked National Cement Products to deliver materials to the site.
The lead opinion claims that its conclusion that the electrical lines both (1) did not create a foreseeable risk of harm, but (2) did create a high degree of risk is “consistent” because Detroit Edison was not “informed that Mr. Bohnert would be operating a crane-like delivery truck beneath [the electrical power] wires.” Ante, pp 664-665. Yet, this Court has *676previously stated that even if an electric company “knew a building was under construction near its power line and that . . . mobile cranes were being brought upon the premises,” this would not by itself indicate to the company that there was a reasonably foreseeable risk to an employee performing work involving the crane. See Koehler v Detroit Edison Co, 383 Mich 224, 231; 174 NW2d 827 (1970) (emphasis added). Likewise, whether Carrington knew that Bohnert would be bringing a truck with a boom onto the worksite would not determine whether there was a high degree of risk created by the electrical power lines. Even if it were a factor to consider, there was no dispute that National Cement Products did not call Stephen Dick of Carrington to inform him that Bohnert was coming to the site to deliver the cement blocks on the day he attempted to deliver the materials. Consequently, there is no dispute that Carrington did not know that Bohnert was coming to the work-site when he did.
The lead opinion also claims that “when the elements of Funk are satisfied, a general contractor is presumed to have been able to foresee that readily observable and avoidable risks will lead to accidents and injuries.” Ante, p 665 (emphasis added). Yet, this analysis assumes its conclusion by asserting that when the elements of the standard are met, i.e., when there is a high risk of danger, the general contractor is then presumed to foresee that these risks will lead to accidents and injuries, i.e., that there is a high risk of danger. This reasoning is circular.
Instead, this Court should recognize that, although electrical power lines are “inherently dangerous” requiring expertise, see Schultz v Consumers Power *677Co, 443 Mich 445, 451; 506 NW2d 175 (1993), there was not a high degree of risk of injury for a delivery worker who had delivered concrete block for forty years when he drove onto a worksite with his truck that had two signs on its boom that read “Waming[:] Do Not Operate Within 10 Feet of Electric Power Lines.” The electrical power lines were not obscured. In fact, the owners of the property, the Adkinses, had asked Detroit Edison to move the lines before the accident “mostly for looks.”
The fact that the risk was not unreasonably high is underscored by plaintiffs own arguments and allegations. In Barbara Bohnerfs first amended complaint, she does not allege how Carrington could have made the worksite safe from the alleged hazard. Plaintiff relies on the sworn affidavit of her expert, William Heilman, arguing that Carrington was obligated to “delay commencement of construction until such time as the overhead lines were covered, moved, buried, de-energized, or made safe by some other means . . . .” Yet, the authority to take such action rested with defendant Detroit Edison. Detroit Edison had already moved the electrical power lines a further distance away from the worksite at the request of the Adkins family. In concluding that there was an issue of fact regarding whether there was a high risk of danger with respect to only Carrington, the lead opinion’s analysis thereby suggests that Carrington may have had a duty to have the electrical power lines moved or insulated to ensure that the worksite was reasonably safe even though Detroit Edison did not have a duty to move or insulate them because there *678was no foreseeable risk of harm to anyone. I do not think such reasoning withstands close scrutiny.
n
Wendell Bohnert’s death was a tragedy. However, it did not result, as a matter of law, from Carrington’s failure to take some particular action at the worksite where the danger was not unreasonably high for an experienced delivery worker like Bohnert. I would reverse the Court of Appeals decision and reinstate the trial court’s grant of summary disposition in favor of Carrington.

=== CASE 9741154 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:25.008199+00 ===

Weaver, J.
(concurring in part and dissenting in part). I agree with Justice Riley’s partial dissent and partial concurrence and concur with her conclusion, regarding part in of the lead opinion, that, as a matter of law, there was not a “high degree of risk” to Bohnert presented by the overhead electrical lines that would render defendant Carrington Homes, the general contractor, liable. Therefore, I agree with Justice Riley that we should reverse the Court of Appeals decision and affirm the trial court’s grant of summary disposition for this general contractor, Carrington Homes.
I write separately because I disagree with and would not follow Funk v General Motors Corp, 392 Mich 91; 220 NW2d 641 (1974), and its progeny Plummer v Bechtel Construction, 440 Mich 646; 489 NW2d 66 (1992). The lead opinion’s disposition of this case on the basis of Funk exemplifies Justice Coleman’s concerns about the unwarranted expansion of tort law, which were voiced in her dissent in Funk, as follows:
*679The majority opinion creates concepts which represent a significant departure from time tested theories of tort liability. .. . General contractors must now be prepared to assume responsibility for any iryury received by the employee of a subcontractor, no matter how negligent the employee may be. [Id. at 116.]
Riley J., concurred with Weaver, J.

=== CASE 9741155 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:25.012471+00 ===

Levin, J.
(dissenting). The lead opinion combines the separate questions of duty, negligence, and comparative negligence, and concludes prematurely on woefully inadequate summary disposition records and incomplete factual assessment that Detroit Edison could not have been expected to do anything to protect the injured and deceased workmen who, further, could have avoided injury had they been more alert and careful.
Koehler v Detroit Edison Co, 383 Mich 224, 231; 174 NW2d 827 (1970), although it speaks in negligence terminology, was decided at a time when any contributory negligence of the injured person precluded recovery. Now, the injured person’s comparative negligence reduces, but does not preclude, recovery. The lead opinion defines duty to include in the calculus the fault of the particular injured person, here a worker, holding, in effect, that Detroit Edison has no duty to the comparatively negligent.
This redefinition of “duty” is brought about by asking, not whether injury to some person (worker— skilled or not — or nonworker) from unintentional contact with uninsulated electrical lines is foreseeable under ordinarily foreseeable circumstances, but rather whether negligent contact with uninsulated lines by a skilled worker should have been foreseen. *680The lead opinion then conclusorily responds in the negative, ignoring that most injuries, including most workplace injuries, even of skilled workers, could be avoided if the injured person was at all times alert and careful and never made a mistake due to fatigue, momentary lapse, distractions, or other cause.
In Schultz v Consumers Power Co, 443 Mich 445, 452-454; 506 NW2d 175 (1993), this Court said:
Those engaged in transmitting electricity axe bound to anticipate ordinary use of the area surrounding the lines and to appropriately safeguard the attendant risks. The test to determine whether a duty was owed is not whether the company should have anticipated the particular act from which the injury resulted, but whether it should have foreseen the probability that injury might result from any reasonable activity done on the premises for business, work, or pleasure. . . .
Where service wires erected and maintained by an electric utility company carry a powerful electric current, so that persons coming into contact with or proximity to them are likely to suffer serious injury or death, the company must exercise reasonable care to protect the public from danger. The degree of care required is that used by prudent persons in the industry, under like conditions and proportionate to the dangers involved, to guard against reasonably foreseeable or anticipated contingencies.[1]
*681The Court concluded that “a power company has a duty to reasonably install its power lines so as to safeguard the public from foreseeable injuries.” Id. at 458.
I would hold on the authority of Schultz that Detroit Edison had a duty to exercise due care to protect against reasonably foreseeable contact by workers, skilled and unskilled, as well as homeowners, with uninsulated lines.2
Clearly Detroit Edison is not required, as its counsel and amicus curiae extravagantly argue, to post guards twenty-four hours a day along over thirty thousand miles of uninsulated electrical lines. Nor should it be required to bury underground electrical lines at prohibitive cost and resulting excessive increase in utility costs to consumers, businesses, and others.
The lead opinion speaks of the cost of recognizing a duty in these three cases. The record indicates that temporary sleeves could be installed on wires near construction sites or streamers could be hung from uninsulated lines during the times of construction involved in Bohnert and Parcher. In both cases, Detroit Edison was made aware, well in advance of *682the commencement of construction, that there would be the kind of construction that would bring to the site heavy equipment with cranes and booms. Detroit Edison had ample time to install plastic sleeves or streamers or otherwise temporarily mark these uninsulated lines.
The record is silent whether installing temporary sleeves, streamers, or other temporary measures are practical and effective, and is also silent concerning the cost of such installations in the instant cases.3
The record contains nothing about the frequency of the kind of accidents that occurred in these cases; how many homeowners, maintenance, construction, delivery men are injured or die as the result of accidental contact with uninsulated electrical lines in a year, two years, or five years. The record is silent concerning the number of times a year Detroit Edison might be called upon to install temporary sleeves, streamers, or take other temporary measures, and the cost of doing so.
The lead opinion, absent such record evidence, finds that the potential cost to Detroit Edison is so great that it relieves it of any duty to safeguard a “skilled” worker who knows of the risk and by mistake encounters an uninsulated line. No thought is given to other alternatives. This Court could appropriately suggest that Detroit Edison seek the approval of the Public Service Commission to assess the cost of temporary sleeves, streamers, or other measures against the business or other consumer of electricity as part of the installation cost of the new electrical *683service to the newly constructed structure. It might persuasively appear from a more complete record and thorough analysis that a different result might be required.
A different question would be presented if Detroit Edison were not aware of the new construction and had no time to take temporary measures in the areas where cranes and booms might encounter uninsulated lines.
Groncki does not involve new construction. I agree with my dissenting colleague that there is need for further factual development before this Court could properly consider and decide that all reasonable persons would conclude that Detroit Edison should not have been required to do more to safeguard against the risk of mishaps of the kind that here occurred.4
Whenever this Court rules as a matter of law that there is a duty or an absence of duty, it makes a policy assessment regarding the allocation of risk of loss, sometimes imposing it entirely on the injured person, other times transferring it to the defendant. However the Court decides, it has a choice and the choice is in a sense legislative. The Legislature has the last word, but until it acts, the Court’s decision, either for or against the recognition of liability, is judicial lawmaking. In my opinion, the Court’s obligation is to hold *684that Detroit Edison, like every other seller of potentially dangerous products, has a duty to take reasonable — not ruinous — precautions to protect the public from known, and thus foreseeable, risks of harm.
The Court continued:
Compliance with the NESC of an industry-wide standard is not an absolute defense to a claim of negligence. While it may be evidence of due care, conformity with industry standards is not conclusive on the question of negligence where a reasonable person engaged in the industry would have taken additional precautions under the circumstances. Owens v Allis-Chalmers Corp, 414 Mich 413, 422-423; 326 NW2d 372 (1982); 2 Restatement Torts, 2d, § 295A, p 62. An argument on the basis of industry standards, therefore, goes to the question whether a defendant breached its duty of ordinary care, not whether a duty existed. If the plaintiff can convince a jury that a reasonably prudent company would have *681taken auxiliary measures beyond those required by industry standards, then the jury is clearly at liberty to find that the defendant breached its duty, regardless of the industry’s guidelines. [Id. at 456.]
Because homeowners as well as workers are entitled to maintain an action, the concern addressed in Funk v General Motors Corp, 392 Mich 91, 112; 220 NW2d 641 (1974), is not present. See also Smith v Allendale Mut Ins Co, 410 Mich 685, 739; 303 NW2d 702 (1981).
There was deposition testimony from a Detroit Edison employee indicating that the cost of moving lines was not prohibitive.
In Groncki and Bohnert, the uninsulated lines were less than fifteen feet from the building — the width of a small room.
One can visualize other cases where the uninsulated lines are hundreds or a greater number of feet from any facility and are hung at great height, and there is no indication that there will be construction activity in the area. That is not the situation in these cases.

=== CASE 9741156 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:50:25.593645+00 ===

Givan, J.
Appellant was charged by two separate affidavits, one for dispensing of heroin in violation of the 1935 *255Narcotics Act and the other for possession of heroin in violation of said Act. The cases were consolidated for trial before the court without a jury. There was a finding of guilty as charged in both cases. Appellant was sentenced to the Indiana State Prison for not less than five years nor more than 20 years on the charge of dispensing and for not less than two years nor more than 10 years on the charge of possession.
The record reveals the following:
At approximately 5:00 P.M. on May 12, 1971, appellant and Robert Swanigan were observed by Indianapolis Detective Sgt. Mukes in a 1965 gray Cadillac which Sgt. Mukes had been seeking. Sgt. Mukes was accompanied by Officers Crawford and Coombs. When they observed appellant in the Cadillac, they entered the alley where he was parked. Headed in the opposite direction, they stopped beside the car. Both Officers Crawford and Coombs displayed their identification to the appellant; however, the appellant backed his car out of the alley, closely followed by Sgt. Mukes, who was blowing his horn and motioning for the appellant to stop. Appellant backed his car from the alley into Camp Street and drove off at a high rate of speed. Sgt. Mukes followed in pursuit. When appellant got to Ninth Street and Camp, he stopped and Mr. Swanigan got out. As Swanigan was getting out of the car, Sgt. Mukes observed appellant hand Swanigan a brown envelope. The appellant drove off. Sgt. Mukes stopped and both Officer Crawford and Officer Coombs got out of the car to apprehend Swanigan. Sgt. Mukes continued in his pursuit of the appellant, who failed to stop for several preferential streets. At that time Sgt. Mukes radioed for assistance. Appellant was finally stopped by two patrol cars answering Sgt. Mukes’ call for assistance. Meanwhile Officers Crawford and Coombs pursued Swanigan on foot and observed him throw the brown envelope, which he had received from the appellant, to the ground.
*256Officer Crawford recovered the envelope, and the officers performed two separate field tests on the contents of the envelope, each of which disclosed the contents to be heroin.
After these tests were made, the envelope and its contents were taken to the police property room, where it was placed in a lock box. It was later removed from the lock box and placed in the narcotic vault, after which it was taken to the laboratory and again tested, the test revealing the contents to be heroin.
Appellant first argues the trial court erred in admitting the envelope and its contents into evidence, challenging the sufficiency of the chain of custody. There does appear to be some confusion in the testimony of the officers as to the exact chain of possession from the time the envelope and its contents entered the property room until they arrived at the court room. However, we point out that if there was error in the failure to maintain a chain of possession, this error was harmless in that the officers did perform tests on the contents of the envelope at the scene at the time of the arrest of the appellant. Both of these tests revealed the contents to be heroin. This alone was sufficient evidence to support the court’s finding that the appellant was in possession of and was dispensing heroin. There was no objection by the appellant to the testimony of the officers concerning the field tests. The police laboratory test which was later performed which might possibly have been affected by a break in the chain of possession was merely cumulative evidence that the content of the envelope was heroin. See Rector v. State (1971), 256 Ind. 634, 271 N. E. 2d 452, 26 Ind. Dec. 335.
Appellant next argues that the evidence is insufficient in that it is based solely upon evidence which is contrary to the laws of nature. It is his contention that the police officers’ testimony is unreliable because at the time they claimed to have seen the appellant hand the brown envelope to Swanigan they were at a distance of at least 25 *257feet and could not possibly have seen inside appellant’s automobile. We do not agree with the appellant that such an observation is so impossible as to be inadmissible. At the point in time of the observation, the officers’ interest in the appellant was by no means casual. The trier of fact was justified in believing from the evidence of the case that the officers were keenly intent on observing the conduct of the appellant and Swanigan. We certainly cannot say that it was impossible for the officers to have seen the transfer of the envelope from appellant to Swanigan. It was their testimony that they did see it. This Court will not weigh such testimony nor will we determine the credibility of the police officers who testified in the presence of the trial court. Coleman v. State (1971), 257 Ind. 489, 275 N. E. 2d 786, 28 Ind. Dec. 37.
Appellant also contends there was no evidence of probative value establishing that he was in possession or control of the package of heroin. With this we disagree. Although Swanigan testified at the trial that he was the one who possessed the heroin and appellant did not give it to him, it was within the province of the trial court to weigh Swanigan’s testimony with that of the police officers and make a determination thereon. Black v. State (1971), 256 Ind. 487, 269 N. E. 2d 870, 25 Ind. Dec. 637.
The trial court is affirmed.
Arterburn, C.J., and Prentice, J., concur; Hunter, J., concurs in result; DeBruler, J., dissents with opinion.