=== CASE 9738872 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:43.168533+00 ===

On Petition For Rehearing.
Hunter, J.
On March 25, 1969, this court affirmed the appellant’s conviction for Armed Robbery and being an Habitual Criminal. Johnson v. State (1969), 252 Ind. 70, 245 N. E. 2d 659. In this petition for rehearing, the appellant correctly points out that we did not discuss the contention raised in Point Four of his brief. We acknowledge the omission and propose now to discuss this issue.
Under Point Four, the appellant asserts that the judgment should be reversed because the form of the jury’s verdict did not follow the exact language of the Habitual Criminal Count of the charging affidavit. In Count Two of this affidavit, appellant was charged with having previously committed two felonies: interstate transportation of a stolen *78motor vehicle and second degree burglary. During the trial, certified records showing these two convictions as well as two other unrelated convictions were admitted into evidence without proper objection from the appellant’s trial counsel. Thus, there was some evidence from which the jury could have found that the appellant had been previously convicted of four felonies, instead of two. The verdict of the jury reads as follows:
“We, the jury, find that the defendant, Aaron Virl Johnson, has been twice previously convicted, sentenced and imprisoned in penal institutions for felonies.”
The appellant now contends that, unless the jury is required to specifically state which two convictions were being referred to in their verdict, it is possible that the appellant has been found guilty of something for which he was not charged. From this premise, the appellant argues that the failure of the jury to follow the exact language of the Habitual Criminal charge should constitute a reversible error. The appellant has found dictum in one case to the effect that the verdict of the jury should follow “the exact language of the habitual criminal portion of the indictment.” C.f., Kelley v. State (1933), 204 Ind. 612, 185 N. E. 453.
We do not believe that this statement in KeUey should be interpreted to mean that the jury must expressly specify the two felonies for which they find the appellant to have been convicted. The law has always been that a jury in a criminal proceeding may return a general verdict of “guilty as charged”, and there is no requirement that the verdict must recite the entire charge. Siple v. State (1900), 154 Ind. 647, 57 N. E. 544. There is no justification for a different rule in an habitual criminal proceeding. A proper and timely objection, by the appellant in the case at bar, could have kept the jury from learning of the two additional crimes, ■and he should not now be allowed to attack the lack of specificity of the jury’s verdict on the grounds that the jury *79might have considered this extra evidence. With the proper objection, the jury would only have had evidence of the two previous felonies which were charged in the affidavit, and the specificity, in the wording of the verdict required by the rule proposed by the appellant, in that instance, would only be a needless technicality.
“Unless the verdict is so defective and uncertain that no judgment can be rendered thereon, a motion for a venire de novo will not be sustained.” Grazer v. State (1941), 219 Ind. 46, 36 N. E. 2d 279.
Rehearing denied.
DeBruler, C.J., Arterburn, Givan, and Jackson, JJ. concur.
Note.—Reported in 247 N. E. 2d 212.

=== CASE 9738873 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:46.464649+00 ===

HOFFMAN, Judge.
In a trial to the court, Williams was found guilty of the unlawful possession of heroin and sentenced to a term of five years in prison. The sole issue presented in this appeal is whether the trial court erred when it overruled Williams’ motion to suppress the heroin as the fruit of an illegal search.
On February 8, 1974, at approximately 9:00 P.M., six police officers went to the residence of Williams and one Beverly Smith in order to serve a warrant for Smith’s arrest. Three of the officers went to the rear of the residence and knocked at the door. When Smith answered she held a paring knife in her hand. The officers asked Smith to put the knife down, which she did. Upon being informed that there was another person in the house, two officers, Colby and York, proceeded to walk through the house to check for other persons who might have firearms or other weapons which might endanger their safety. In so doing they discovered Williams cutting heroin in the bedroom. Williams stood up and abruptly moved toward Officer Colby, but Colby leveled his gun at Williams and ordered him to stop.
*1089Meanwhile, another officer, Roberts, had taken up a position at the front of the house in order to prevent anyone from escaping from the house. Next to the front door was a window with its shade almost completely drawn. Roberts bent over and looked through the waist-high, three-inch gap between the bottom of the shade and the window frame. When he did so he was able to see Williams cutting heroin in the bedroom. Moments later York opened the front door and Roberts informed him of his observations, but not before Colby had entered the bedroom and discovered Williams himself.1
On these facts Williams argues that the heroin discovered by the officers is inadmissible as the product of an illegal search. In support of that argument he relies on the rule in Chimel v. California (1969), 395 U.S. 752, 89 S.Ct. 2034, 23 L.Ed.2d 685, which limits the scope of a search incident to an arrest to the person of the arrestee and the area within his immediate control.
But the rule in Chimel is not without exception. This Court has recently held that police officers may justifiably enter areas, of a house other than that where an arrest occurs when they have reason to believe that other persons on the premises may pose a threat to their safety. See: Ingle v. State (1978), Ind.App., 381 N.E.2d 887.
Other courts have reached similar conclusions in such situations. See: U. S. v. Broomfield (E.D.Mich., 1972), 336 F.Supp. 179; People v. Mann (1969), 61 Misc.2d 107, 305 N.Y.S.2d 226. Indeed, a protective search of areas within the control of persons other than the arrestee was upheld in U. S. v. Manarite (S.D.N.Y., 1970), 314 F.Supp. 607, affirmed 448 F.2d 583 (2nd Cir., 1971), cert. den. 404 U.S. 947, 92 S.Ct. 287, 30 L.Ed.2d 264. But see: U. S. v. Gamble, 473 F.2d 1274 (7th Cir., 1973); U. S. v. Cooks, 493 F.2d 668 (7th Cir., 1974).
This is a case where such protective measures were reasonable, and the court below so found. According to the testimony of Officer Colby, he and his partner had previously experienced problems posed by persons whose presence was unknown to them at the time they sought to make arrests. As a result Colby thought it necessary, upon learning of Williams' presence, to locate him in order to prevent any threat to the personal safety of himself and the other officers. This evidence, the credibility of which this Court cannot weigh on appeal, plainly establishes circumstances permitting a protective sweep of the house. U. S. v. Manarite, supra. Consequently, the court below committed no error when it concluded that the officers properly entered the bedroom and seized the heroin which was in plain view.
It is necessary to emphasize, however, as did the courts in Broomfield, supra, and People v. Block (1971), 6 Cal.3d 239, 103 Cal.Rptr. 281, 499 P.2d 961, that had the officers been conducting an evidentiary search rather than a limited protective sweep when they discovered the incriminating evidence, their actions would have exceeded the bounds of Chimel. Under such circumstances the seized evidence would be rendered inadmissible. But such a search was not conducted in this case; rather, the heroin was discovered during the course of the protective sweep before Officer Colby learned that a fellow officer had observed Williams cutting the heroin by peering through the bedroom window.
• Accordingly, the judgment below is affirmed.
Affirmed.
GARRARD, P. J., concurs.
STATON, J., dissents with opinion.
. Because the heroin was admissible on the basis of Colby’s discovery, it is unnecessary for this Court to decide whether Roberts’ discovery alone would have been a sufficient basis for its admissibility.

=== CASE 9738874 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:46.468473+00 ===

STATON, Judge,
dissenting.
I agree that police officers may justifiably conduct a protective sweep of areas of a house other than the particular area where an arrest is made when they have *1090reason to believe that other persons on the premises may pose a threat to their safety. The police officers’ belief in the existence of the threat to their safety must, however, be based upon specific and articulable facts known to them at the time the protective sweep is initiated.
The circumstances of the case before us did not warrant a protective sweep. For while Officer Colby did have reason to believe that there was another person on the premises, he had no reason to believe that that person was a threat to his safety. Accordingly, I dissent.
The majority opinion relies exclusively on the following “evidence” in concluding that Officer Colby, as he stood in the kitchen, had reason to believe that other persons on the premises might pose a threat to his safety: (1) Officer Colby had previously experienced problems effecting arrests; (2) Officer Colby was informed of the presence of another person; and (3) Officer Colby “thought it necessary” to locate that person.1
The fact that Officer Colby had experienced problems with different people at different locations on different occasions is in no way logically or legally relevant to the matter in dispute. While the previous problems may have given Officer Colby reason to be alert, they did not give him reason to believe that he would experience similar problems at Williams’ house.
The fact that Officer Colby was informed of the presence of another person shows only that he had reason to believe that another person was present. It does not show that Officer Colby had reason to believe that the person was a threat to his safety.
Similarly, Officer Colby’s conclusory opinion that he “thought it necessary” to locate Williams is nothing more than an “inarticulate hunch,” and our courts have consistently refused to sanction police searches based merely on such hunches.
The majority opinion thus explicitly sanctions protective sweeps whenever an arrest is made at a hoüse and the police are told that another person is present. The implications and ramifications of that holding are shocking. The justification for a protective sweep is that it allows the police to protect themselves against attacks from persons in rooms other than that where the arrest is made. Are the police in any less danger or is the threat of such attacks any less when the police are not informed of the presence of other persons? Wouldn’t the police, because of the element of surprise, actually have been in more danger if Smith had not advised them of Williams’ presence? The rationale of the majority opinion, then, would allow protective sweeps whether or not the police had knowledge of the presence of other persons.
And what are the limits of the protective sweeps? Presumably the police will be allowed, for example, to open doors and check closets, because someone who might be hiding in a closet and might have a gun is just as potentially dangerous as someone who might be standing in the middle of a room and might have a gun.
The majority opinion, therefore, obliquely sanctions the canvassing of an entire house whenever the police make an arrest at the house. I cannot concur in the carte blanche which the majority opinion bestows upon the police or in the resulting emasculation of the Fourth Amendment.
The State’s argument that the heroin was discovered in plain view by the officer who peered into the bedroom window must also fail.
In order to properly invoke the plain view doctrine, the officer discovering the evidence must have rightfully been in the position where he had that view. Coolidge v. New Hampshire (1971), 403 U.S. 443, 91 S.Ct. 2022, 29 L.Ed.2d 564. And while the discovery of evidence in plain view does not, in and of itself, constitute a search, Alcorn v. State (1970), 255 Ind. 491, 265 N.E.2d 413, *1091very often the conduct of the officer which puts him in a position to make the discovery does constitute a search. In those instances, the legality of the plain view seizure is dependent upon the validity of the search.
The test for determining whether the police conduct in question constitutes a search is whether that conduct violated the defendant’s reasonable expectation of privacy. Katz v. United States (1967), 389 U.S. 347, 88 S.Ct. 507, 19 L.Ed.2d 576. The conduct of the officer who originally took a position at the front door consisted of leaving the area of the front door, walking around the house, approaching a window and then bending over and peering through a waist-high three-inch gap between the bottom of the almost completely-drawn window shade and the window sill. Clearly, that conduct constituted a search. Because that search was not conducted pursuant to a warrant and because the circumstances do not fit into one of the exceptions to the warrant requirement, the seizure of the heroin cannot be justified as having been discovered in plain view by that officer.
The motion to suppress should have been granted.
. I do not read the majority opinion as attaching any significance to the fact that Smith was holding a knife when she answered the door. She was using the knife to prepare dinner . a fact that the police became aware of as they entered the kitchen.

=== CASE 9738875 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:46.70122+00 ===

AMUNDSON, Justice.
Emily LaBore (LaBore) appeals from a circuit court decision affirming a no probable cause determination issued by the State Division of Human Rights, Department of Commerce and Regulation (Department) in response to her charge of discrimination against Michael C. Muth (Muth) and Sylvester’s Inc. (Sylvester’s). We affirm.
FACTS
The facts of this case are undisputed. In May, 1989, LaBore initiated a civil action alleging a claim of defamation of character (slander) against Candyce Lehr and Lisa Stenvold, both whom were employees of Sylvester’s. Sylvester’s is a bar and restaurant located east of Britton, South Dakota, and Muth is its President. Prior to the commencement of the slander action, LaBore had been a frequent customer of Sylvester’s. On June 18, 1989, when La-Bore went to Sylvester’s, she was told to leave or the police would be called. The reason she was told to leave the premises was that her presence in the establishment created an uncomfortable and tense situation for the employees and other patrons of the bar as a result of the pending slander suit against the two Sylvester’s employees. There was no allegation that LaBore’s conduct was unacceptable, that she caused any disturbances, or that she was acting in a disorderly manner while on the premises.
LaBore then brought a charge of discrimination before Department alleging that Muth and Sylvester’s were guilty of adverse, unlawful, or unequal treatment regarding the availability of public accommodations, pursuant to SDCL 20-13-23. She did not allege discrimination on the basis of race, color, creed, religion, sex, ancestry, disability, or national origin. On November 3, 1989, Department issued a determination of no probable cause and a decision finding that no probable cause existed to believe that Muth and Sylvester’s were in violation of the South Dakota Human Relations Act of 1972, SDCL ch. 20-13. LaBore appealed to the circuit court. The circuit court affirmed Department’s decision, and this appeal followed.
ISSUES
1. Did Department and circuit court err in concluding that LaBore is not a protected person within the meaning of SDCL 20-13-23?
2. Did the action of Sylvester’s Inc., by and through its president Michael C. Muth, accord adverse, unlawful, or unequal treatment to LaBore with respect to the availability of services and facilities, the scope and equality thereof, or the terms and conditions under which the same are made available to her?
ANALYSIS
1. SDCL 20-13-23.
LaBore contends that the decision of both Department and the circuit court that she is not a protected person within the meaning of SDCL 20-13-23 (the statute) is erroneous. In its decision accompanying the determination of no probable cause, Department ruled that LaBore had “not established a prima facie case as she has not shown that her harm was caused by her membership in a protected class. The *487basis for the charge is not one of those delineated by SDCL 20-13.” The circuit court ruled “[t]hat LaBore’s charge of public accommodation discrimination does not fall within statutory limitations” and affirmed the decision of Department.
On appeal, LaBore argues that Department and circuit court erroneously interpreted the statute to exclude her from its protection. The construction and interpretation of a statute presents a question of law. In re Famous Brands, Inc., 347 N.W.2d 882, 884 (S.D.1984). “When we are called upon to evaluate questions of law, legal conclusions of both Department and the circuit court are fully reviewable.” Wessington Springs Educ. Ass’n v. Wessington Springs School Dist. #36-2, 467 N.W.2d 101, 103 (S.D. 1991) (citing Permann v. Department of Labor, 411 N.W.2d 113, 117 (S.D.1987)).
The statute reads:
It shall be an unfair or discriminatory practice for any person engaged in the provision of public accommodations because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, ancestry, disability or national origin, to fail or refuse to provide to any person access to the use of and benefit from the services and facilities of such public accommodations; or to accord adverse, unlawful, or unequal treatment to any person with respect to the availability of such services and facilities, the price or other consideration therefor, the scope and equality thereof, or the terms and conditions under which the same are made available, including terms and conditions relating to credit, payment, warranties, delivery, installation, and repair.
SDCL 20-13-23. In State ex rel. Ewing v. Prudential Insurance Co., 273 N.W.2d 111 (S.D.1978), we construed this section of the Human Relations Act in the context of an exclusion of benefits to unmarried persons for pregnancy and pregnancy-related disabilities under a group health insurance plan.1 In reaching our decision, we observed: “The legislature’s policy is clear, 1.e., to eliminate discrimination based upon race, color, creed, religion, sex, ancestry or national origin in the areas of employment, labor unions, housing, education, property rights, public accommodations and public services. SDCL 20-13.” 273 N.W.2d at 114 (emphasis added). We held that the exclusion at issue did not violate SDCL 20-13-23 because, although such a policy discriminates on the basis of marital status, it does not discriminate based on sex or any gender-based classification.2
The Human Relations Act in general and SDCL 20-13-23 in particular prohibit only the types of discrimination enumerated by the statute, not all possible forms of discrimination. The definition of an unfair or discriminatory practice, as enumerated in SDCL 20-13-1(16) states:
“Unfair or discriminatory practice” means any act or attempted act which because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, ancestry, disability or national origin results in the unequal treatment or separation or segregation of any person, or denies, prevents, limits, or otherwise adversely affects, or if accomplished would deny, prevent, limit, or otherwise adversely affect, the benefit or enjoyment by any person of employment, labor union membership, housing accommodations, property rights, education, public accommodations, and public services.
(Emphasis added). By definition an unfair or discriminatory practice must be an act or refusal to act based on, or “because of,” membership in one of the specified classes. This policy is further evidenced by the enacting language employed by the legisla*488ture when enacting the Human Relations Act of 1972:
AN ACT Entitled, An Act providing for equality of opportunity and prohibiting discriminatory practices based on race, color, creed, religion, sex, ancestry or national origin, with respect to employment, labor union membership, housing accommodations, property rights, education, public accommodations, and public services; prescribing the powers and duties of the state commission on human relations; and providing enforcement procedures and prescribing penalties and remedies for violations, and to provide an appropriation therefor, and to repeal SDCL 1-31.
1972 S.D.Sess.L. ch. 11 (emphasis added). There is no indication in the Human Relations Act that the legislature intended to prohibit any and all forms of discrimination, only those “discriminatory practices based on race, color, creed, religion, sex, ancestry [, disability] or national origin.3 When called upon to construe statutes, this court may look to the legislative history, title, and the total content of the legislation to ascertain the meaning. In re Certification of Question of Law, 402 N.W.2d 340 (S.D.1987); Oahe Conservancy Subdistrict v. Janklow, 308 N.W.2d 559 (S.D.1981); Elfring v. Paterson, 66 S.D. 458, 285 N.W. 443 (1939).
LaBore’s charge of discrimination did not assert that she was the victim of discrimination based on any of the classes set forth in the statute and listed on the complaint form. She does not contend that she is a member of any racial, ethnic, religious or other enumerated group, nor does she contend that she was asked to leave based on her gender. Notwithstanding these admitted deficiencies, LaBore asserts that she does not have to fall within one of the classes enumerated by the statute to invoke the protection of SDCL 20-13-23.
Specifically, LaBore contends that the second portion of the statute following the semicolon and using the disjunctive “or” indicates that the second part of the statute is an independent clause which stands separate and apart from the first half of the statute. She argues “it is reasonable to assume that, by including the [class membership] restrictions in the first half of the statute and setting it apart by a semicolon, a different, broader interpretation was intended to be given to the second half of the statute which, by its terms, applied to ‘adverse, unlawful or unequal treatment' directed toward ‘any person.’ ” For this construction of the statute, LaBore relies on Justice Henderson’s dissent in Light v. Elliot, 295 N.W.2d 724, 725 (S.D.1980), in which he expressed his opinion that
[I]f the letter, intent and spirit of SDCL 20-13-23 does not protect all persons against unfair or discriminatory practices in administration of public accommodations, the statute is by its limited application discriminatory. Consequently, such a limited application of SDCL 20-12-23 would violate the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, requiring states to insure equal protection and administration of their laws. The Human Rights statutes of this state are not just applicable to minorities, certain classes, or select individuals.
In Light, however, we declined to address the merits of appellant’s charge of discrimi*489nation, and thus did not reach the question regarding the interpretation of the statute. Id.
Our review of the statute makes it clear that SDCL 20-13-23 and the Human Relations Act in general were intended to address discrimination because of class membership. See Prudential, 273 N.W.2d at 114. LaBore’s contention that only the first half of the statute relates to class based discrimination, and that the second half of the statute applies to any adverse, unlawful or unequal treatment directed toward any person, is based on an erroneous belief that the second portion of the statute, set apart by a semicolon, is an independent clause unrelated to the first half of the statute. To begin, we reiterate the rule that punctuation shall not control the construction of a statute to cause an interpretation that is inconsistent with the purpose of the statute. SDCL 2-14-8. An examination of the statute indicates that the clause to which LaBore refers is in fact a dependent clause, not an independent clause. We set forth the statute again, with emphasis, to indicate this:
It shall be an unfair or discriminatory practice for any person engaged in the provision of public accommodations because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, ancestry, disability or national origin, to fail or refuse to provide to any person access to the use of and benefit from the services and facilities of such public accommodations; or to accord adverse, unlawful, or unequal treatment to any person with respect to the availability of such services and facilities, the price or other consideration therefor, the scope and equality thereof, or the terms and conditions under which the same are made available, including terms and conditions relating to credit, payment, warranties, delivery, installation, and repair.
Each of the dependent clauses relates back to the provision prohibiting discrimination “because of” class membership. Thus, to establish a prima facie case under SDCL 20-13-23, the charging party must establish (1) that he or she is a member of a protected class, (2) that he or she has been denied access to and use of, or accorded adverse, unlawful, or unequal treatment with respect to public accommodations, and (3) that there is a causal connection between class membership and the denial or adverse treatment. Because LaBore does not contend she was subjected to discrimination based on her membership in any of the classes enumerated in the statute, Department properly determined that she had failed to establish a prima facie case and issued its no probable cause determination.
The interpretation urged by LaBore is inconsistent with the legislative intent of the Human Relations Act as a whole. In addition to the express language of SDCL 20-13-23 and SDCL 20-13-1(16), and our ruling in Prudential, the language of the legislature in enacting the Human Relations Act expressly states the Act’s purpose “to prohibit discriminatory practices based on race, color, creed, religion, sex, ancestry [, disability] or national origin[.]” 1972 S.D.Sess.L. ch. 11 (emphasis added). While it might be desirable to protect all citizens of our state from every possible unfair or discriminatory practice in the administration of public accommodations, we are bound by the actual language of the statute. See Wessington Springs Educ. Ass’n, 467 N.W.2d at 105. Any expansion of the protection afforded by the statute must be left to the state legislature, as to adopt LaBore’s proposed interpretation would be tantamount to judicial legislating. Id.
Because we have concluded that LaBore failed to establish a prima facie case for a charge of discrimination against Muth and Sylvester’s Inc., it is unnecessary to address the merits of LaBore’s second issue. The decisions of Department and the circuit court are affirmed.
MILLER, C.J., and WUEST and SABERS, JJ., concur.
HENDERSON, J., dissents.
. The statute at issue in Prudential, SDCL 20-13-23, is substantially similar to the form of the statute today. 273 N.W.2d at 113 n. 2. Subsequent to our decision in Prudential, in 1986 the Human Relations Act, SDCL ch. 20-13, was amended to include discrimination based on disability, and SDCL 20-13-23 was amended accordingly. 1986 S.D.Sess.L. ch. 170, § 17.
. The specific maternity benefits of the policy at issue in Prudential were not available to single females, nor were they available to single males who, as we pointed out, "also may have to bear the medical costs and expenses of a pregnancy and childbirth.” 273 N.W.2d at 115.
. Under the Federal Civil Rights Act of 1964, which is substantially similar to the South Dakota Human Rights Act of 1972, federal courts have also refused to apply such statutes to apply to all types of discrimination. See Regents of University of California v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 265, 98 S.Ct. 2733, 57 L.Ed.2d 750 (1978) (Title VI of Civil Rights Act of 1964 proscribes only those racial classifications that violate equal protection clause of 14th Amendment); Blum v. Gulf Oil Corp., 597 F.2d 936 (5th Cir.1979) (discharge of employee for homosexuality not prohibited by Title VII of Civil Rights Act of 1964); Seidenberg v. McSorleys' Old Ale House, Inc., 308 F.Supp. 1253 (S.D.N.Y.1969) (Title II of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 does not proscribe gender based discrimination); Bonomo v. Louisiana Downs, Inc., 337 So.2d 553 (La.App.2d 1976) (42 U.S.C. § 2000a does not proscribe exclusion of convicted bookmakers from racetracks where such exclusion is without regard to race, religion, or national ancestry). See also Sedlacek v. S.D. Teener Baseball Program, 437 N.W.2d 866 (S.D.1989) (Human Rights Act provision exempting certain programs and activities from Act’s sex discrimination prohibition does not violate equal protection).

=== CASE 9738876 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:46.70579+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(dissenting).
Under South Dakota law, is discrimination restricted to discrimination based upon *490race, color, creed, religion, sex, ancestry, disability or national origin? No.
Under South Dakota law, has the majority opinion forsaken a reasonable interpretation of the express language in SDCL 20-13-23 to apply . for any person1 .. or to accord adverse, unlawful or unequal treatment to any person ... ?” Yes.
Has the majority opinion relied upon erroneously applied federal law? Yes.
Accordingly, I respectfully dissent.
Sylvester’s, Inc. is a “public accommodation” as defined by SDCL 20-13-1(12). It is open to the public as a bar and restaurant. It further hosts live entertainment and dances. Apparently, the only limitation placed on use of the facility by the public would be that of age.
LaBore has been a regular patron of Sylvester’s. At no time, while therein, has she engaged in conduct which would have been an annoyance to the other members of the public or the management.
The source of her problem stems from a slander suit that she filed against two employees of Sylvester’s. The management refused to serve her and asked her to leave, as she was told it was an uncomfortable situation for her to remain in Sylvester’s, and for her to be in contact with two of Sylvester’s employees whom she was suing. Commission dismissed LaBore's complaint. LaBore responds that the portion of SDCL 20-13-23 which follows the semi-colon stands on its own and prohibits any type of discrimination. I agree. La-Bore has acknowledged that she has not been, per se, the victim of any discrimination based on race, color, creed, religion, sex, ancestry, disability or national origin. All parties agree that the source of her banishment from Sylvester's is her suit against two of its employees. Britton, South Dakota, is not Minneapolis, Chicago, New York, Atlanta, Seattle, or San Antonio. It is a small agricultural town and community, on the prairie of South Dakota, without great population and public accommodations. It has a population of 1,394.2 Banishment from this public accommodation is meaningful to LaBore. She should not be humiliated or disgraced because she sued two of the workers for defamation. She is entitled to equal protection of the law. (Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution). Apparently, under the reasoning of the majority opinion, Emily LaBore is not a “person.” I believe she is a “person.” You do not have to be a member of a minority race to be a “person.” You do not have to be Norwegian, Jewish or Italian to be a “person.” You do not have to be a Methodist or a Catholic to be a “person.” You can be an agnostic and still be a “person.” You can be a Hindu, in America, and you are still a “person.” To be a favored person, apparently you must belong to a certain favored class. Discrimination may exist only, by the majority opinion, by class. The United States Constitution centers on individual rights. Indeed, the Fourteenth Amendment was deliberately formulated to prohibit precisely such classifications. The Constitution must be color blind, religion blind, sex blind, ancestry blind, disability blind, national origin blind and class blind. We have, before us, a young, white, female “person” who is refused food or drink in a restaurant/cocktail lounge because, apparently, she had the audacity to retain counsel and bring suit for defamation. Having hired counsel, to protect her name, a right guaranteed to her under the state and national constitutions, she is now publicly disgraced by being refused service in a public accommodation. In 1748, de Montesquie admonished: “The deterioration [of government] begins with the decay of the principles upon which it was founded.”
Do you believe that an individual in a society — such as America — millions strong — has worth? I do. Early generations were subjugated to the divine rights of Kings and Caesars. We Americans expressed that each individual had certain inalienable rights, among these being that all men [women] are created equal, and are endowed with the rights of Life, Liberty, *491and the Pursuit of Happiness. Shaming this young lady in public is not permitting her to pursue happiness. In South Dakota, my forefathers apparently took it upon themselves to read the Declaration of Independence for they incorporated expressly some of its language in the State Constitution, Article VI § 1. This includes the Pursuit of Happiness. Article VI § 26 addresses the proposition that all free government is instituted for the people’s equal protection and benefit. LaBore is not being equally protected. She is cast out in the outer darkness of the law because she is not a “person” of a favored class.
Under the terms of the two key statutes in South Dakota, SDCL 20-13-23 and SDCL 20-13-1(16), the rights of LaBore are quite explicit. Our lawmakers went far beyond the Federal Civil Rights Act of 1964. Lawyers can read; so can professors; so can the academe. The word “or” is in both statutes. Majority pays it no heed. In North Dakota, “or” means something. Hooray for the North Dakotans! See, State v. Silseth, 399 N.W.2d 868 (N.D.1987). The North Dakotans reasoned that “or” is a disjunctive conjunction. Yes, a conjunction reflecting an alternative between different things or actions. “Or” must mean something. It cannot mean nothing. If the intent, as the majority opinion instructs us, was to limit the application of the entire statute to discrimination based upon race, color, creed, etc., it certainly would not have been necessary to set forth these restrictions in the first half of the statute. Rather, the Legislature (not an agency of government like the Division of Human Rights within another agency — the Department of Commerce and Regulation), expressing the mil of the people, saw fit to legislate far more broadly. And the language is there. SDCL 20-13-23 is there for all to see and all to read. It reads, after the semi-colon:
[O]r to accord adverse, unlawful, or unequal treatment to any person with respect to the availability of such services and facilities, the price or other consideration thereof, or the terms and conditions under which the same are made available, including terms and conditions relating to credit, payment, warranties, delivery, installation, and repair, (emphasis supplied).
If that is not clear enough, the second portion of SDCL 20-13-1(16) provides:
..., or otherwise adversely affects, or if accomplished would deny, prevent, limit, or otherwise adversely affect, the benefit or enjoyment by any person of employment, labor union membership, housing accommodations, property rights, education, public accommodations, and public services, (emphasis supplied).
Construction of a statute is a question of law. Petition of Famous Brands, 347 N.W.2d 882 (S.D.1984). Here, the majority construes one-half of the statute and holds the second half of the statute to be meanr ingless. All of the provisions of this statute are needed by each person in this state; the provisions are good; nothing is fair about them — nothing is good — if some are honored and some are dishonored.
Civil rights statutes should not have restrictive applications. We have, before us, a classic example of reverse discrimination. There is no doubt that the human rights statutes of this Nation were enacted to afford those rights and privileges to classes of people which were traditionally discriminated against. But it does not make common sense to hold that everyone else, who does not fit squarely in a class, is a fair target for discriminatory conduct.
Here, we have “sensitivities” of employees in public accommodation exalted and, supposedly, providing a lawful reason to refuse service; but what of the “sensibilities” of this young, white lady who sits down and orders her dinner? Her “sensibilities” are totally disregarded. As an old fella sitting on a bench in front of a country store might well muse “it ain’t right!”
. A corporation, such as Sylvester's, Inc., is a "person” under the law.
. Judicial notice is taken thereof via SDCL 19-10-2.

=== CASE 2218025 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:39.432786+00 ===

397 N.E.2d 1024 (1979)
Calvetta BAILEY, Defendant-Appellant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Plaintiff-Appellee.
No. 3-778A166.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Third District.
December 13, 1979.
Rehearing Denied February 5, 1980.
*1025 Goldsmith, Goodman, Ball & Van Bokkelen, Highland, for defendant-appellant.
Theodore L. Sendak, Atty. Gen., Joel Schiff, Deputy Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for plaintiff-appellee.
GARRARD, Presiding Judge.
Appellant Calvetta Bailey was convicted of entering to commit a felony and was sentenced to an indeterminate term of one to five years imprisonment.
Bailey first contends that the trial court erred in denying her motion to dismiss. She contended in the motion that a delay between August 29, 1975 and July 1977 denied her right to a speedy trial. On appeal, she attempts to assert that the delay from her arrest in September 1972 to her trial in March 1978 violated her right to a speedy trial pursuant to Indiana Rules of Procedure, Criminal Rule 4 and her right guaranteed by the Sixth Amendment. The right to a speedy trial may be waived. Bailey has waived her objection to all delays except the 23 month time span asserted as unconstitutional delay in her motion to dismiss. She has expressly waived applicability of CR 4. By expressly asserting unconstitutional delay in the specified time frame when she was in possession of all the facts, she precluded herself from now alleging a different time period. We will, therefore, limit our review to the 23 month delay which was questioned to determine if Bailey was denied her right to a speedy trial as guaranteed by the Sixth Amendment.
In making this determination we must consider the totality of the circumstances of this particular case, including the length of the delay, the reason for the delay, the assertion of a desire for a speedy *1026 trial and the prejudice arising from the delay. Barker v. Wingo (1972), 407 U.S. 514, 92 S.Ct. 2182, 33 L.Ed.2d 101; Springer v. State (1978), Ind. App., 372 N.E.2d 466; Collins v. State (1975), 163 Ind. App. 72, 321 N.E.2d 868.
Bailey was charged by information with 1st degree burglary on September 15, 1972. She was arrested on November 22, 1972 following her release from the Women's Prison and was subsequently released on bail. Trial was set on November 6, 1974 for November 14, 1974 following a prolonged attempt by Bailey to take depositions of the state's witnesses. Bailey failed to appear for trial and a bench warrant was issued for her arrest on November 15, 1974. In August 1975 defense counsel filed a motion to withdraw because Bailey was uncooperative. This motion was denied by the trial court after it became aware of the whereabouts of Bailey. The Gary Police Department was notified on August 29 of her then current address. Bailey was not arrested until July 1977 and her trial took place in March of 1978.
Bailey asserts that the delay of 23 months (from August 1975 until her re-arrest in July of 1977) was caused by the failure of the state to use reasonable diligence in arresting her. The record does not reveal that the blame lies entirely with the state. On August 29, 1975 the state was aware of Bailey's address. However, Bailey admits that in this 23 month period she had three different addresses. The state asserts, and Bailey does not deny, that she was employed outside the jurisdiction of the Gary Police Department. In addition, when arrested Bailey gave the police a different name. In view of the fact that Bailey would have been tried in November of 1972, if she had appeared, any difficulties encountered by the state in locating her and bringing her to trial must be weighed against her. During this 23 month period, neither Bailey nor her counsel requested that a trial date be set or that Bailey be afforded a speedy trial. Objections to the delay were not made until after Bailey was taken into custody. As was stated in Barker v. Wingo, supra, 92 S.Ct. at 2193 "failure to assert the right will make it difficult for a defendant to prove that he was denied a speedy trial." Prejudice to Barker as a result of the 23 month delay was minimal. There is no claim that any of the defense witnesses died or otherwise became unavailable owing to the delay. The trial transcript reveals only minor lapses of memory which were in no way significant to the outcome.[1]
In view of the totality of the circumstances, we are unable to say that Bailey was deprived of her constitutional rights to a speedy trial. The trial court did not err in denying the motion to dismiss.
Bailey next contends that the trial court erred in allowing a change in judge over her objection after the trial had begun. Although Indiana has not yet considered this issue, the general rule is that a judge cannot be substituted during the course of a criminal trial over the objection of counsel. See Durden v. People (1901), 192 Ill. 493, 61 N.E. 317; State v. Gossett (1974), 11 Wash. App. 864, 527 P.2d 91; 75 Am.Jur.2d Trial § 48; 83 A.L.R.2d 1032.
In Freeman v. U.S. (2d Cir.1915), 227 F. 732, it was held that the Constitution does not permit substitution of a judge during a criminal trial even with the consent of the defendant. The court held that in a criminal case "trial by jury means trial by a tribunal consisting of at least one judge and twelve jurors, all of whom must remain identical from the beginning to the end." It is now accepted that the defendant may waive this right either by consent to the substitution or by failure to object. Patton v. U.S. (1930), 281 U.S. 276, 50 S.Ct. 253, 74 L.Ed. 854; Randel v. Beto (5th Cir.1965), 354 F.2d 496; Simons v. U.S. (9th Cir.1941), 119 F.2d 539, cert. denied 314 U.S. 616, 62 S.Ct. 78, 86 L.Ed. 496.
*1027 Indiana has consistently adopted the position that where a case is tried to a judge and the issues remain undetermined at his death, resignation or expiration of his term, a successor judge may not decide the case or make findings without a trial de novo. Dawson et al. v. Wright et al. (1955), 234 Ind. 626, 129 N.E.2d 796; State ex rel. Harp v. Vanderburgh Circuit Court (1949), 227 Ind. 353, 85 N.E.2d 254; Wainwright v. P.H. & F.M. Roots Co. (1912), 176 Ind. 682, 97 N.E. 8. Indiana Rules of Procedure, Trial Rule 63(A) provides that a successor judge may perform the duties to be performed by the predecessor after the verdict is returned or the findings or decision of the court is filed. See Ruby v. State (1975), 166 Ind. App. 310, 335 N.E.2d 635. However, the rule does not purport to apply where the judge becomes unavailable before the verdict, findings or decision is made.
Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, Rule 25(a) provides:
"(a) During Trial. If by reason of death, sickness or other disability the judge before whom a jury trial has commenced is unable to proceed with the trial, any other judge regularly sitting in or assigned to the court, upon certifying that he has familiarized himself with the record of the trial, may proceed with and finish the trial."
The constitutionality of the rule has been questioned by several commentators. 2 C. Wright, Federal Practice and Procedure § 392; Orfield, Disability of the Judge in Federal Criminal Procedure, 6 St. Louis U.L.J. 150, 151 (1960). Professor Wright states that Rule 25(a) poses no constitutional problem if the defendant consents to the substitution of judges during trial, but in the absence of consent Rule 25(a) cannot be applied and the death or disability of the judge requires that a mistrial be granted.
The second circuit interpreted Rule 25(a) as authorizing a successor judge to decide purely legal matters while reserving to the original judge any question of fact. U.S. v. Sundstrom (2d Cir.1973), 489 F.2d 859, cert. denied 419 U.S. 934, 95 S.Ct. 205, 42 L.Ed.2d 163. In this case the original judge died after making findings of fact but before rendering a final verdict. The government conceded that had the original judge died before making the findings, a mistrial would have been mandated.
We conclude that where the defendant does not waive his right to trial before the same judge, a mistrial must be declared if the original judge is unable to continue after the trial has begun but before the verdict is returned or the findings or decision of the court is filed. Here the trial commenced, the jury was empanelled and the first witness was called and examined. At this point the state requested a continuance because a material witness had failed to appear. The request was granted and trial was continued until March 13th. The judge advised the parties that he would be unavailable on that date and that a judge pro tem. would sit for the remainder of the trial. The defendant promptly objected, but the court denied the objection. In so doing, reversible error was committed.
The judgment is reversed and the cause is remanded for a new trial.
HOFFMAN and STATON, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Leesester Chandler, a co-participant, could not remember where the other participants were seated in her car after the burglary. The victim could not recall the exact date of the burglary. Officer Ford did not recall when Sam Bailey was arrested or who arrested Chandler.

=== CASE 9738877 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:50.034668+00 ===

Per Curiam.
Plaintiff-appellant, Daniel J. Vencil, asserts, in summary, that the court below wrongly interpreted the applicable law and further erred in concluding that the evidence failed to establish he was entitled 'to workers’ compensation benefits from his employer, defendant-appellee Valmont Industries, Inc. We affirm.
Vencil, having been born on March 9, 1961, is 30 years old. He graduated from high school on May 16, 1979, and began working for Valmont on August 27 of that year. He continued in this employment, his first and only full-time job, until July 31,1989. Although he performed various duties, his work at all times required continuous bending, twisting, stooping, and the lifting and pushing of items weighing up to 200 pounds.
He began having low back pain in 1986 or 1987 which, over time, increased both in frequency and severity. He first consulted a physician in late 1988 or early 1989. By then, the pain was both intense and constant. On February 15, 1990, *32after a course of conservative treatment, surgery was performed on his low back, and he began to experience some relief.
There is general agreement among the various examining and treating physicians, including the surgeon who performed the surgery, -that although it cannot be said with reasonable medical certainty that Vencil’s back condition was the direct result of his employment, his work activity contributed to and aggravated his condition. In the surgeon’s view, although there was no specific instance of trauma or injury, the condition was consistent with the “kind of repetitive ongoing trauma that gradually caused deterioration of the fibers around the disk that then eventually allowed it to bulge out.”
The disposition of Vencil’s argument that his condition is compensable either as being the result of an accident or an occupational disease, or some hybrid of the two, is controlled by the recently decided Maxson v. Michael Todd & Co., 238 Neb. 209, 469 N.W.2d 542 (1991). We therein held that the compensability of a condition resulting from the cumulative effects of repeated work-related trauma is to be tested under the definition of accident contained in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 48-151(2) (Reissue 1988). That statute requires, among other things, that there be an injury which happens “suddenly and violently . . . producing at the time objective symptoms of an injury.” The cumulative effects of repeated work-related trauma which do not at an identifiable moment produce objective symptoms requiring, within a reasonably limited period of time, medical attention and the interruption or discontinuance of employment are not the product of an accidental injury.within the purview of § 48-151(2). Maxson, supra.
Vencil developed his symptoms over a period of not less than 7 years, and they required no interruption or discontinuance of his employment until almost 10 years had elapsed. Thus, the record fails to sustain either of Vencil’s summarized assignments of error.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9738878 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:50.039072+00 ===

Shanahan, J.,
dissenting.
To understand Vencil’s case, and attempt to comprehend the majority’s decision, one must start with the Nebraska Workers’ *33Compensation Act and the fact that Vencil asserted alternative bases for compensability of his claim: an injury caused by a work-related accident or an occupational disease.
Neb. Rev. Stat. § 48-101 (Reissue 1988) of the act provides:
When personal injury is caused to an employee by accident or occupational disease, arising out of and in the course of his or her employment, such employee shall receive compensation therefor from his or her employer if the employee was not willfully negligent at the time of receiving such injury.
Thus, by virtue of § 48-101, compensability of a worker’s claim may be alternatively based on a work-related accident or an occupational disease. In view of the alternative bases for compensability, the Nebraska Workers’ Compensation Act, in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 48-151(2) (Reissue 1988), supplies the definition of “accident,” namely, accident shall “mean an unexpected or unforeseen injury happening suddenly and violently, with or without human fault, and producing at the time objective symptoms of an injury.” Consistent with § 48-101 and alternative compensability, § 48-151(3) states: “The term occupational disease shall mean only a disease which is due to. causes and conditions which are characteristic of and peculiar to a particular trade, occupation, process, or employment and shall exclude all ordinary diseases of life to which the general public is exposed.”
Since § 48-151(3) offers a definition which includes the very thing to be defined, that is, “occupational disease shall mean only a disease,” this court, in Maxson v. Michael Todd & Co., 238 Neb. 209, 212, 469 N.W.2d 542, 544 (1991), recognized the following definition for “disease”: “ ‘[A]n impairment of the normal state of the living animal . . . body or of any of its components that interrupts or modifies the performance of the vital functions, being a response to environmental factors [such as] industrial hazards The preceding definition substantially coincides with the standard medical definition of “disease,” namely: “[A]ny deviation from or interruption of the normal structure or function of any part, organ, or system (or combination thereof) of the body that is manifested by a characteristic set of symptoms and signs and whose etiology, *34pathology, and prognosis may be known or unknown.” Dorland’s Illustrated Medical Dictionary 385 (26th ed. 1981). Also, from a medical standpoint, an “occupational disease” is “due to factors involved in one’s employment, e.g., various forms of pneumoconiosis or dermatitis.” Id. at 392. “Trauma” means “a wound or injury, whether physical or psychic.” Id. at 1388. Thus, an occupational disease is a condition which causes impairment, deviation, or interruption of the normal structure or function of a worker’s body and which results from hazards or conditions peculiar to a particular occupation or employment.
Referring to “occupational disease” in § 48-151(3), this court noted in Ritter v. Hawkeye-Security Ins. Co., 178 Neb. 792, 795, 135 N.W.2d 470, 472 (1965):
The requirement of the statute is that the cause and conditions of the disease be characteristic of and peculiar to the employment and that the disease be other than an ordinary disease of life. The statute does not require that the disease be one which originates exclusively from the employment. The statute means that the conditions of the employment must result in a hazard which distinguishes it in character from employment generally.
As Professor Larson points out:
[T]he two crucial points of distinction between accident and occupational disease were the element of unexpectedness and the matter of time-definiteness. What set occupational disease apart from accidental injuries was both the fact that they could not honestly be said to be unexpected, since they were recognized as inherent hazard of continued exposure to conditions of the particular employment, and the fact that they were gradual rather than sudden in onset.
IB A. Larson, The Law of Workmen’s Compensation § 41.31 at 7-491 to 7-492 (1991).
In line with the foregoing characterization and observations regarding an occupational disease, this court has recognized compensability in the following occupational disease cases: Osteen v. A. C. and S., Inc., 209 Neb. 282, 307 N.W.2d 514 (1981) (peritoneal mesothelioma, a rare form of abdominal *35cancer caused by protracted exposure to asbestos particles); Ritter v. Hawkeye-Security Ins. Co., supra (a dishwasher’s contact dermatitis caused by repeated exposure to solvents and cleaning agents); Riggs v. Gooch Milling & Elevator Co., 173 Neb. 70, 112 N.W.2d 531 (1961) (millworker’s inhaling wheat dust over an extended period resulted in emphysema, with secondary polycythemia, pneumoconiosis, and a decompensated heart); and Hauff v. Kimball, 163 Neb. 55, 77 N.W.2d 683 (1956) (granite cutter’s contraction of pneumoconiosis silicosis, an inflammatory disease of the lungs due to silica dust inhaled during nearly 40 years’ employment). In each of the foregoing cases, a worker sustained work-related bodily injury (trauma) and eventual disability or death from the accumulation of repeated trauma, although the injury was not dramatically and immediately discernible when any individualized trauma recurred to the body.
In Vencil’s case the uncontradicted medical evidence definitely established the causal connection between Vencil’s repeated lifting, bending, and twisting, which were present in an unusual degree in Vencil’s employment at Valmont, and the back problem, which is the basis for Vencil’s claim for compensation. Vencil, 28 years old when his disabling condition prevented his further working, had no back injury before his employment with Valmont. In light of Vencil’s 10-year work history of repetitive activity which placed extraordinary stress on his back, the neurosurgeon who attended Vencil stated that “most degenerative lumbar disk problems that I see are caused by repetitive heavy lifting, bending, twisting at work and activities in the course of daily living. I expect that Mr. Vencil’s job, which includes lots of bending and lifting, has contributed to his problem.” According to the neurosurgeon, Vencil’s “degenerative lumbar disk disease” was attributable to the “repetitive motion injury” which resulted from “frequent lifting” at Valmont. Another of Vencil’s physicians, an orthopedic surgeon, testified that there was no specifically indicated trauma to Vencil, before or after Vencil commenced working for Valmont, but that the particular type of work had a “considerable effect” on Vencil, that is, “but for” the work activity at Valmont, Vencil would not have suffered the back *36condition which is the basis for his compensation claim. The orthopedist likened VenciPs condition to carpal tunnel syndrome, “an appropriate comparison” in view of the repeated trauma and persistent stress on VenciPs back, and concluded that “if [Vencil] had not been involved in this heavy type of work, there’s a good probability that he would not have developed the problems he did,” since it was more probable than not that Vencil would not have developed the back condition in the absence of the work-related “repetitive ongoing trauma” to VenciPs back. In the orthopod’s opinion, “[I]t’s a lot less likely that [Vencil] would have developed [his back condition] in the foreseeable future if it hadn’t been for his work.”
At the rehearing in VenciPs case, the compensation court found that there was no accident to afford compensability inasmuch as Vencil failed to prove that his injury occurred at a definite time or resulted in objective symptoms at “an identifiable point.” In sustaining the decision by the compensation court, the majority falls back on Maxson v. Michael Todd & Co., 238 Neb. 209, 469 N.W.2d 542 (1991), for the proposition “[C]ompensability of a condition resulting from the cumulative effects of repeated work-related trauma is to be tested under the definition of accident contained in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 48-151(2) (Reissue 1988).” (Syllabus of the court.) True, in Maxson, to which Judges Shanahan and Grant dissented, this court stated:
While it is thus quite clear that a condition resulting from the cumulative effects of repeated work-related trauma has some characteristics of both an accidental injury and an occupational disease, this court has concluded that the compensability of such a condition is to be tested under the statutory definition of accident. Crosby v. American Stores, 207 Neb. 251, 298 N.W.2d 157 (1980).
Maxson, supra at 212, 469 N.W.2d at 544.
However, as the reader will readily discern, the Maxson rule for compensability of cumulative effects from repeated work-related trauma is not a quotation, that is, a verbatim excerpt, from Crosby v. American Stores, 207 Neb. 251, 298 N.W.2d 157 (1980), which involved a claim for compensation *37based on carpal tunnel syndrome caused by work-related tasks — assembling boxes and stacking boxes filled with meat. At the one-judge hearing in the compensation court, the judge held that Crosby’s carpal tunnel syndrome was an occupational disease and, therefore, compensable. In a de novo determination on rehearing, the compensation court found that Crosby “had suffered an ‘accident and injury, as a result of’ repeated trauma to her hands.” 207 Neb. at 253, 298 N.W.2d at 159. American Stores appealed and contended that “the compensation court, on rehearing, erred in finding that [Crosby] suffered carpal tunnel syndrome as the result of an accident arising out of her employment” with American Stores. Id.
In Crosby, this court stated:
Part of the difficulty in this case is that the plaintiff’s injury has some of the characteristics of both an accidental injury and an occupational disease.
The plaintiff’s use of her hands to strike the pallets and boxes caused an injury which produced objective symptoms at the time. Each striking was a sudden and violent event. Although no one blow produced an injury severe enough to be compensable by itself, the cumulative effect of the repeated trauma resulted in an injury which produced disability. Most jurisdictions regard the time of . accident as sufficiently definite if either the cause is reasonably limited in time or the result materializes at an identifiable point. IB Larson, Workmen’s Compensation Law § 39.00 (1980). The facts in this case satisfied both tests. The plaintiff’s difficulty with her hands commenced immediately after she was transferred to stack and record. In that respect, this case may be distinguished from cases involving chronic conditions which develop over a period of many years where the injury cannot be traced to a particular job or activity of the workman.
The plaintiff’s injury involved in this case resembles an occupational disease in that it developed over a period of time in a manner in which many diseases develop. There is some evidence that the temperature conditions which prevail in a packing plant contribute to the development *38of the injury which is found among employees in packing plants. There is other evidence that the injury has many possible causes and may be considered to be an ordinary disease of life.
We think the analysis made by the compensation court, on rehearing, was correct on the facts in this case. The judgment is, therefore, affirmed.
Crosby, supra at 254-55, 298 N.W.2d at 159.
Apparently, the digressive discussion about occupational disease, a nonissue in Crosby, decoyed Larson to view Crosby as Nebraska’s acknowledgment that carpal tunnel syndrome may be an occupational disease, as reflected in Larson’s statement in reference to Crosby:
Claimant suffered from carpal tunnel syndrome, an occupational disease. The court held that claimant had suffered an accident and injury as a result of repeated trauma to her hands. An accident need not be a single traumatic event. The injury resembled an occupational disease in that it developed over a long period of time and was peculiar to claimant’s type of occupation. Therefore, she was entitled to compensation under the theory of occupational disease.
IB A. Larson, supra, § 41.33(b) n.45 at 7-534.
Although the work-related carpal tunnel syndrome in Crosby was obviously compensable as an occupational disease, the Crosby court allowed compensability on the basis of an “accident” characterized in § 48-151(2). Therefore, since the Crosby court affirmed an award in which the only issue was whether the injury was caused by a work-related accident, Crosby can only be read as recognition that under the particular facts in Crosby, the compensation court correctly concluded that Crosby’s injury resulted from an accident, and cannot realistically be read to preclude compensability based on the cumulative effect of repetitive work-related trauma characterized as an “occupational disease.”
Therefore, the Maxson rule, that is, “[C]ompensability of a condition resulting from the cumulative effects of repeated work-related trauma is to be tested under the definition of accident contained in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 48-151(2) (Reissue *391988),” is an obvious misreading and unfortunately consequential misinterpretation of Crosby and is irreconcilable with the Nebraska Workers’ Compensation Act. Consequently, while evidence may fáil to substantiate Vencil’s claim based on a work-related accident, the undisputed evidence establishes that Vencil’s back problem is an occupational disease within the meaning of § 48-151(3).
Several courts, applying provisions of workers’ compensation acts containing language similar to that in § 48-151(3), have determined that back conditions resulting from repetitive and cumulative work-related traumas such as exist in Vencil’s case are occupational diseases. See, Patterson v. Connor, 19 Ohio App. 3d 304, 484 N.E.2d 240 (1984) (a nurse’s herniated disk was an occupational disease, because the disease was peculiar to her employment); Shelby Mut. Ins. Co. v. DILHR, 109 Wis. 2d 655, 327 N.W.2d 178 (1982) (claimant’s herniated disk and degenerative arthritis, resulting from a 24-year career of heavy lifting and shoveling, constituted an occupational disease); Matter of Keefer v. Norton Co., 68 A.D.2d 961, 414 N.Y.S.2d 764 (1979) (a claimant who suffered a herniated disk as the result of repeatedly lifting belts which weighed between 20 and 90 pounds contracted an occupational disease); Fruehauf Corp. v. Workmen’s Comp. App. Bd., 68 Cal. 2d 569, 440 P.2d 236, 68 Cal. Rptr. 164 (1968) (an employee whose work involved heavy lifting, twisting, and bending which resulted in three protruded lumbar disks, suffered an occupational disease); Matter of Ross v. Kollsman Instrument Corp., 24 A.D.2d 670, 261 N.Y.S.2d 186 (1965) (a claimant who worked the same job for 20 years, which required bending, lifting, and carrying various weights, suffered an occupational disease, not an accident). A multitude of other decisions recognizing compensability of an occupational disease resulting from repeated trauma are included in the extensive annotations in IB A. Larson, The Law of Workmen’s Compensation §§ 41.33(b) and 41.42 (1991).
In view of Vencil’s age, it is somewhat disingenuous to portray Vencil as one in an aging labor force, worn down by years of work and about to be listed among those who “have shuffled off this mortal coil.” More disappointing is the view *40that rather than assessing payment from those responsible for work-related injury and loss, the judiciary should pass the bucks of cost to taxpayers for payment from public funds. While that may be an adroit political maneuver and, to some, even the politically correct course of action, the judiciary should not be such a passionate paramour of politics. The fact remains that the majority’s constricted construction of the Nebraska Workers’ Compensation Act concerning compensability of disability from repeated trauma will eventually squeeze “occupational disease” out of the act. Moreover, after judicial disuse and demolition of the definition of “occupational disease” in the Nebraska Workers’ Compensation Act, saying that the Legislature now has the occasion to restructure the statutory definition of “occupational disease” is much like saying that the fire started by the O’Leary cow’s kicking over the lantern presented Chicago with a wonderful opportunity for urban redevelopment.
Obviously, in Vencil’s case, the issue is not compensability for protracted and gradual deterioration of the human body, occurring usually and naturally throughout a lifetime outside any occupation or employment. The basic question is whether Vencil’s employment conditions at Valmont caused disability from an occupational disease. Vencil’s plight, shared with a good many other workers, is an inability to point to an isolated or solitary traumatic event on a specific workday and, nonetheless, experiencing a gradual onset and eventually resulting disease generated by repeated trauma. Therefore, what this court again faces is the prevalent problem presented by a worker’s body or limbs subjected to work-related trauma over many months and perhaps years counted in decades. However, if this court, viewing the Nebraska Workers’ Compensation Act in a narrow range of vision, continues misconstruction of Crosby through adherence to the Maxson rule that compensability for cumulative effects of repetitive work-related trauma is determined solely by an “identifiable moment” within the definition of accident under § 48-151(2), and excludes repetitive work-related trauma as an occupational disease within § 48-151(3), then the accident test currently used *41by this court is a symptom of occupational diseases in the judiciary: retinitis pigmentosa statutorum and decisional dyslexia. Presently, the only physician to cure those illnesses is the Legislature.
Nevertheless, this cause should have been remanded to the Workers’ Compensation Court, since Vencil proved a prima facie case that he suffers an occupational disease caused by his employment at Valmont. Hence, the compensation court is clearly erroneous in its conclusion that Vencil failed to establish compensability for his claim.

=== CASE 9738961 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:06:07.497385+00 ===

Gillis, P.J.
(concurring in part and dissenting in part). While I agree with the remainder of the majority opinion, I would affirm the circuit court’s order granting defendants’ motion for a judgment notwithstanding the verdict with respect to Virginia Gore’s loss of consortium claim and reverse the trial court’s order denying defendants’ motion for a judgment notwithstanding the verdict with respect to the jury’s separate $60,000 verdict in favor of Mark Gore for emotional distress caused by the legal malpractice.
Dr. Lin removed Mark Gore’s testicle on April 14, 1983, suspecting cancer. Malignant cancer was confirmed, and Mark Gore was scheduled to undergo a second surgery on May 9, 1983. Mark Gore and Virginia Gore married on May 7, 1983. Mark Gore underwent the second surgery to remove his lymph nodes on May 9, 1983.
After defendants notified plaintiffs that they would not file a medical malpractice suit on behalf of Mark Gore, he filed suit against defendants, alleging that they had failed to file a timely malpractice suit against doctors who had treated him at Thorn Hospital. On November 5, 1985, plaintiffs filed an amended complaint, adding Virginia Gore as a plaintiff and claiming that she had suffered a loss of consortium as the result of the legal malpractice.
Defendants filed a motion for summary disposition of Virginia Gore’s loss of consortium claim, alleging that she had married Mark Gore after the removal of his testicle and, therefore, she had no loss of consortium claim.
*746In response, plaintiffs filed affidavits averring that, as a result of the legal malpractice, Mark Gore had suffered psychiatric damage that impaired his relationship with plaintiff Virginia Gore. Plaintiffs further averred that when they married, they did not know that plaintiff Mark Gore would have his lymph nodes removed two days later. The circuit court denied defendants’ motion for summary disposition.
At trial, however, Mark Gore testified that he knew that the lymph node surgery was scheduled two days after his wedding and, therefore, he could not completely enjoy his wedding day. Moreover, Mark Gore testified that, after he first met with Dr. Lin, he began to fear that the doctors had committed malpractice in 1981 by failing to diagnose a cancerous tumor. Nonetheless, Mark Gore testified that he did not consult with an attorney because he was too worried about himself. After the second surgery, Mark Gore thought that he should consult an attorney, because any money he recovered could be used to support his family in the event that he did not survive.
Likewise, at trial, Virginia Gore testified that when she married Mark Gore, she knew that he was scheduled to have his lymph nodes removed two days later. Virginia Gore also testified that plaintiffs discussed seeing an attorney soon after Mark Gore’s first visit with Dr. Lin. Virginia Gore further testified that plaintiffs went to see an attorney because they assumed that the doctors had committed malpractice when they failed to diagnose Mark Gore’s cancer. Virginia Gore repeated that plaintiffs’ discussion occurred shortly after a discussion with Dr. Lin.
On appeal, Virginia Gore claims that the trial court improperly granted the defendants’ motion for a judgment notwithstanding the verdict with *747regard to her claim. Virginia Gore contends that she was married to Mark Gore when the legal malpractice occurred and, therefore, is entitled to recover for loss of consortium with respect to the legal malpractice claim. In support of her contention that she is entitled to loss of consortium damages for the legal malpractice, Virginia Gore argues that the "suit within a suit” requirement, Basic Food Industries, Inc v Grant, 107 Mich App 685, 692-693; 310 NW2d 26 (1981), does not apply and that Mark Gore could recover for the emotional distress that resulted from the legal malpractice.
I would hold that the "suit within a suit” requirement applied to this case because defendants failed to file the medical malpractice suit within the statute of limitations. Id., p 693.
Even if I accepted Virginia Gore’s claim that the "suit within a suit” requirement did not apply, I would hold that Virginia Gore did not have a derivative claim for loss of consortium for the emotional damages Mark Gore suffered as the result of the legal malpractice. I note that Mark Gore claimed that he had suffered "great anxiety which is permanent” as a result of defendants’ legal malpractice. In Daley v LaCroix, 384 Mich 4, 12-13; 179 NW2d 390 (1970), our Supreme Court held:
[W]here a definite and objective physical injury is produced as a result of emotional distress proximately caused by defendant’s negligent conduct, the plaintiff in a properly pleaded and proved action may recover in damages for such physical consequences to himself notwithstanding the absence of any physical impact upon plaintiff at the time of the mental shock.
I do not think that Veselenak v Smith, 414 Mich *748567; 327 NW2d 261 (1982), changed this requirement. Instead, I believe that a complete reading of Veselenak and Ledbetter v Brown City Savings Bank, 141 Mich App 692, 703; 368 NW2d 257 (1985), demonstrates that they are consistent with Daley.
Here, Mark Gore did not sustain any bodily injury at the time of the legal malpractice; therefore, he could recover for emotional distress only where a definite and objective physical injury was produced as a result of the emotional distress. I note that plaintiffs’ failed to allege physical injury resulting from emotional distress. Daley, supra. In any event, plaintiffs testified that Mark Gore was upset by defendants’ failure to return their telephone calls and answer their letters and by their receipt of defendants’ June 25, 1985, letter. Plaintiffs’ expert, who met with plaintiffs on two occasions in restaurants, testified that Mark Gore was depressed and stated his opinion that the subsequent legal malpractice exacerbated Mark Gore’s depression. Plaintiffs’ expert could not distinguish between the emotional damages caused by the medical and legal malpractice and failed to testify how Mark Gore’s depression was exacerbated by the legal malpractice. Moreover, plaintiffs’ expert testified that Mark Gore’s depression primarily stemmed from his concern about his future (i.e., the reoccurrence of cancer because the alleged tumor went undiagnosed for a number of months). Plaintiffs testified that Mark Gore had trouble sleeping. Plaintiffs’ expert testified that this was one of the manifestations of depression. Still, Mark Gore testified that his inability to sleep occurred after the cancer was diagnosed. Given this testimony, I am unable to conclude that Mark Gore suffered a definite and objective physical injury as the result of emotional distress proximately caused *749by defendants’ legal malpractice. As a result, Virginia Gore’s derivative claim for loss of consortium must fail to the extent it is based on emotional distress suffered by Mark Gore as a result of the legal malpractice that occurred.
Virginia Gore also claims that she is entitled to bring a loss of consortium claim because she was married to Mark Gore when he discovered the existence of the underlying medical malpractice claim, which under the "suit within a suit” requirement would be part of plaintiffs’ damages for legal malpractice. I agree with the trial court that Virginia Gore could not marry a cause of action. Moss v Pacquing, 183 Mich App 574; 455 NW2d 339 (1990); Furby v Raymark Industries, Inc, 154 Mich App 339; 397 NW2d 303 (1986). See also Chiesa v Rowe, 486 F Supp 236 (WD Mich, 1980). Plaintiffs’ trial testimony confirmed that they believed that the physicians who treated Mark Gore at Thorne Hospital committed malpractice by failing to diagnose his testicular enlargement as cancer. Plaintiffs believed that malpractice occurred after Mark Gore’s first meeting with Dr. Lin in early April, before plaintiffs’ marriage. Moreover, Virginia Gore knew of the required surgery and its possible side effects before her marriage. Under these circumstances, I agree with the trial court that Virginia Gore did not have a cause of action for loss of consortium with regard to the underlying medical malpractice claim. I believe that the majority is distorting this record when it states: "While Virginia Gore was aware of Mark’s physical condition when they married, neither was necessarily on notice that his physical condition was attributable to the medical malpractice committed in 1981.” Plaintiffs need not have had a legal or a medical opinion that malpractice was committed before it could be said that they discov*750ered their cause of action. Szatkowski v Isser, 151 Mich App 264; 390 NW2d 668 (1986). Here, plaintiffs believed that the failure to diagnose the enlarged testicle was malpractice after their first meeting with Dr. Lin. I would hold that they discovered their cause of action at that time and, therefore, Virginia Gore was not entitled to loss of consortium for the underlying medical malpractice because she married Mark Gore having knowledge of that claim.
Virginia Gore further claims that she was also defendants’ client because she had attended with Mark Gore the meeting in defendants’ office. Consequently, Virginia Gore argues that the jury’s verdict represents appropriate damages for defendants’ breach of the standard of care with respect to her. Plaintiffs’ first amended complaint alleged that Virginia Gore suffered mental anguish as the result of defendants’ conduct. While there was some testimony by plaintiffs’ that Virginia Gore was upset, that condition appeared to be related to Mark Gore’s diagnosis of cancer. Once again, there was no definite and objective physical injury produced as the result of emotional distress proximately caused by defendants’ negligent conduct and, therefore, Virginia Gore could not recover. Daley, supra. Consequently, I would hold that the trial court properly granted defendants’ motion for a judgment notwithstanding the verdict with respect to the $30,000 judgment entered in favor of Virginia Gore.
I now turn to the issues raised in defendants’ cross appeal. Defendants claim that the trial court should have granted their motion for remittitur with respect to the jury’s separate award of $60,000 for Mark Gore’s emotional damages arising out of the legal malpractice claim because he failed to prove that a definite and objective physi*751cal injury was produced as a result of emotional distress proximately caused by defendants’ negligent conduct. For the reasons discussed above, I agree. Id.
Hence, I would affirm the jury’s verdict in favor of Mark Gore for $60,000 on the medical malpractice claim underlying the legal malpractice claim, as well as the trial court’s order granting defendants’ motion for a judgment notwithstanding the verdict with respect to the jury’s award of $30,000 to Virginia Gore; however, I would reverse the jury’s separate verdict for $60,000 for Mark Gore’s emotional damages resulting from legal malpractice.

=== CASE 9738962 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:06:07.747836+00 ===

BUCHANAN, Chief Judge.
CASE SUMMARY
Defendant Yvonne Bullock (Bullock) appeals from her conviction under the Offenses Against Property Act for shoplifting, challenging the trial court’s denial of her motion to dismiss. The motion was based on the alleged failure of the prosecutor to abide by an agreement whereby the defendant’s shoplifting charge would be dismissed in exchange for her testimony in the trial of an unrelated case.
We affirm.
PACTS
The facts most favorable to the State are:
Bullock testified before a grand jury in an arson-felony murder case against one Lonnie Fowler (Fowler). Following that testimony, she entered into an oral agreement with the prosecutor, whereby the shoplifting charge as well as another pending charge against her would, be dismissed if she testified at Fowler’s trial.1 She was subpoenaed in the Fowler case and went to *312court several times in order to testify; however, each time the Fowler case was continued, and she was never called to the stand. Eventually the State dismissed the Fowler case.
Subsequently, Bullock was tried for shoplifting. In her motion to dismiss, she contended the State should be bound by the agreement, inasmuch as the State had prevented her from completing her part of the bargain. The court, after conducting a hearing, denied the motion. The trial judge ordered that any evidence obtained as a result of the agreement should be suppressed. After a trial, Bullock was convicted.
ISSUE
The sole issue presented here is whether the trial court erred in denying the motion to dismiss, or more precisely, is the State bound to abide by the agreement?
PARTIES’ CONTENTIONS
Bullock’s argument is in two parts: first, integrity of the legal process requires dismissal; . second, the agreement was a contract which should be enforced.
The State responds that the trial court was not bound by the agreement under either theory.
DECISION
CONCLUSION — The court did not err in denying the motion, because none of defendant’s rights were violated and the agreement was not an enforceable contract.2
Bullock casts her lot with two cases, Santobello v. New York (1971), 404 U.S. 257, 92 S.Ct. 495, 30 L.Ed.2d 427, and Dube v. State (1971), 257 Ind. 398, 275 N.E.2d 7. Both involve broken agreements concerning plea bargains.3 In each case the defendant pleaded guilty in reliance upon a prosecutor’s promise concerning a recommended sentence; in each the State failed to live up to its side of the bargain; in each the Court held there was a violation of constitutional rights.
These cases are alien to Bullock’s situation. That the agreement here does not rise to the equivalent of a plea bargain is plain.4 A defendant entering a guilty plea forfeits certain rights, including the right to a jury trial, to confront witnesses, to present witnesses in his defense, to remain silent, and to be convicted by proof beyond a reasonable doubt. Santobello, 92 S.Ct. at 500 (Douglas, J., concurring). Thus, if the plea is unfairly obtained, it is not voluntary and so constitutes a violation of a defendant’s rights. See id. at 499.
Bullock forfeited none of these rights,5 and she does not argue that any rights were *313forfeited.6 She entered a plea of not guilty to the charge and received a fair hearing. This was the same due process accorded the defendant in Dube, supra. There our Supreme Court remanded the case to allow the defendant to withdraw his guilty plea. The Court did not order the result which would have obtained if the State had performed its part of the agreement. Nor did the United States Supreme Court fashion any such order in the Santobello case. There the Court remanded the case to the state court for a determination of the proper relief, leaving that question to the discretion of the state. See Gross v. State (1975), Ind.App., 338 N.E.2d 663, 665 n.4. Specific performance is not constitutionally mandated by every instance of a broken prosecuto-rial bargain.
Notwithstanding this fact, Bullock insists that the integrity of the legal system requires dismissal here. Such a question is not of constitutional dimension, although it may be covered by legislative enactment. Cf. United States v. Russell (1973), 411 U.S. 423, 433, 93 S.Ct. 1637, 1643, 36 L.Ed.2d 366, 374 (entrapment). The decision whether to prosecute is lodged in the executive branch of government. If no rights have been violated, and in the absence of a directive from the legislature or our Supreme Court, we cannot exercise a “chancellor’s foot” veto over the executive branch.
Moreover, Bullock’s contract claim that she forfeited something by appearing in court for the purpose of testifying is specious. She had no right to refuse the subpoena. See Ind. Code § 35-1-31-1. Nor had she any right to testify falsely if called to the stand, see United States v. Wong (1977), 431 U.S. 174, 97 S.Ct. 1823, 52 L.Ed.2d 231, and her previous grand jury testimony could have been used to impeach her. If she had a right not to testify as to self-incriminating matters, her remedy was to invoke that right when questioned. See Ind. Code § 35-6-3-1. At the hearing on the motion, the defendant admitted she was not prejudiced in any way by her courtroom appearances. She did not rely on the agreement to her detriment.
So even under accepted principles of contract law, this was not an enforceable bargain. Bullock did only what she was already legally bound to do. The State’s promise was nothing more than a gift, unaccompanied by elements of promissory es-toppel. It certainly was not the “deceptive contrivance” the defendant alleges, and the State cannot be held to a bargain unenforceable between private parties.
For these reasons, the trial court committed no error in denying the motion.
Affirmed.
ROBERTSON, J. (by designation), concurs.
SHIELDS, J., dissents with opinion.
. In her brief the defendant characterizes this as her promise to “cooperate.'
. Although we reject the notion that a case such as this is properly resolved by contract law, we address the argument only to expose its frailty.
. The Dube holding has never been extended beyond the context of a plea bargain. See, e. g., McMahan v. State (1978), Ind., 382 N.E.2d 154; Kelly v. State (1972), 259 Ind. 414, 287 N.E.2d 872.
. Nor did the agreement constitute any legally recognized “immunity.” This is true for two reasons. First, it is not within the purview of Ind. Code § 35-6-3-1, nor were the procedures outlined in that statute followed. Second, and more basically, the concept of immunity properly extends only so far as the right to be free from compelled self-incrimination under the fifth amendment of the United States Constitution and Article I, Section 14 of the Constitution of the State of Indiana. See generally 21 Am.Jur.2d, Criminal Law §§ 146-148. Thus, while Bullock could have been accorded immunity from prosecution in the Fowler case (where the State suggests she was a suspect) in exchange for her testimony, such immunity could not extend to bar prosecution in this unrelated proceeding. Indiana courts have construed immunity statutes narrowly. See e. g., Riner v. State (1972), 258 Ind. 428, 281 N.E.2d 815; Michaelree v. State (1929), 92 Ind.App. 147, 168 N.E.2d 27.
.During the hearing on the motion to dismiss, Bullock testified that she waived her right to a jury trial in reliance upon the promise that the charge would be dismissed. After denying the motion to dismiss, the court granted her request for jury trial; however, she later, withdrew that request and asked for trial by the court.
. We therefore decline to address the issue, raised sua sponte in the dissent, concerning effectiveness of counsel. Our Supreme Court has made clear the heavy burden which rests on an appellant raising such a claim. See e. g., Grimes v. State (1977), 266 Ind. 684, 366 N.E.2d 639; Conley v. State (1972), 259 Ind. 29, 284 N.E.2d 803.

=== CASE 9738963 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:06:07.751916+00 ===

SHIELDS, Judge,
dissenting.
I dissent.
In my opinion the State is bound to abide by its agreement with Bullock.
While the agreement between the State and Bullock was not a plea bargain in the sense it required Bullock to plead guilty to any pending criminal charges, it was nevertheless an agreement for which Bullock gave consideration. She waived her right under Indiana Rules of Procedure, Criminal Rule 4(c), to a trial within a year.1 Bullock’s trial was continued on several occasions “ . . . because we didn’t want to go to trial on her case until she had been a witness in that (Fowler) case.”
*314In addition, defense counsel’s effectiveness was seriously undercut by the State’s conduct. As recognized in Cooper v. United States, (1979) 4th Cir., 594 F.2d 12, pp. 18-19.
We begin by noting that two distinct sources of constitutional right are involved here; most obviously and directly, the right to fundamental fairness embraced within substantive due process guarantees; less directly perhaps, but nonetheless importantly, the Sixth Amendment right to effective assistance of counsel. The general relevance of the former is too plain to require discussion. That of the latter can be readily stated. Because prosecutors are required to conduct plea negotiations through defense counsel, the government’s positions and communications in plea discussions are necessarily mediated to the defendant through his counsel. * * * For this reason, not only the credit and integrity of the government but those of his counsel are involved in a defendant’s perception of the process. * * * To the extent that the government attempts through defendant’s counsel to change or retract positions earlier communicated, a defendant’s confidence in his counsel’s capability and professional responsibility, as well as in the government’s reliability, are necessarily jeopardized and the effectiveness of counsel’s assistance easily compromised. At the very least, these Sixth Amendment considerations add a heightened degree of obligation to the government’s fundamental duty to negotiate with scrupulous fairness in seeking guilty pleas. (Our emphasis.)
While Cooper, supra, dealt with the government’s attempted withdrawal of an offered plea bargain, the rationale behind the enforceability of a plea bargain is appropriate to the enforceability of any bargain offered a defendant by the State in exchange for any consideration from or detriment to the defendant. The rationale is our need to protect the credibility and integrity of the criminal justice system in all its component parts. Therefore, as in Cooper, supra, I find a right to enforcement of an agreement may indeed arise despite the fact the agreement does not encompass a guilty plea.
There is no dispute as to the content of the agreement insofar as it is described in the majority opinion. The only reasonable interpretation is Bullock agreed to fully cooperate with the State in its prosecution of Fowler. Undisputedly, she did so. Thus, she fully performed while at the same time the State was exposed to no risk. That Bullock was unable to testify at Fowler’s trial was the “fault” of the State, not Bullock. For reasons not evident in this record, the State apparently felt .Bullock’s testimony was so essential to the Fowler prosecution they were unwilling to rely on Bullock doing “what she was already legally bound to do,” as it is described by the majority opinion. Rather, the State, albeit rashly or unwise, sought to assure her cooperation by making a deal. By so doing, the State sealed its fate and now, in my opinion, must fulfill its agreement. When an agreement, specific, unambiguous, and not unreasonable on its face, is made by a defendant and the State, the agreement is enforceable unless extenuating circumstances affecting the propriety of the agreement that were unknown or not reasonably discovered by the State supervene or become known or unless the defendant breaches the agreement.
Therefore, obviously, but perhaps regretfully, I hold the opinion there is no effective remedy but to require specific performance of the agreement. I would reverse and remand with instructions to the trial court to order Bullock’s discharge.
. In addition, Bullock apparently agreed to waive her right not to incriminate herself inasmuch as she was a suspect, with Fowler, in the arson-felony murder case. The record is unclear whether she had in fact waived this right by testifying before the grand jury on the Fowler matter under the agreement with the State.

=== CASE 2218269 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:44.558488+00 ===

473 N.W.2d 184 (1991)
George HANRAHAN and Reynaldo R. Francia, on Behalf of Themselves and all Others Similarly Situated, Appellants,
v.
David KRUIDENIER; Barbara Mack; Ronald J. Peterson; Charles Edwards, Jr.; Richard Gilbert; Morley Cowles Ballantine; Luther L. Hill, Jr.; J. Robert Hudson; Kenneth MacDonald; Burke Marshall; John Crystal; and James L. Heskett, Appellees,
Elizabeth Ballantine, et al., Intervenors.
No. 90-205.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
July 17, 1991.
*185 Robert B. Scism and Virginia C. Scism of Scalise, Scism, Sandre, Uhl, McConville, Miller & Holliday, Des Moines, and David H. Weinstein of Kohn, Savett, Klein & Graf, P.C., Philadelphia, Pa., for appellants.
Bennett A. Webster of Gamble, Riepe, Webster, Davis & Green, and Robert G. Allbee of Ahlers, Cooney, Dorweiler, Haynie, Smith & Allbee, Des Moines, for appellees.
Considered by HARRIS, P.J., and SCHULTZ, CARTER, NEUMAN, and ANDREASEN, JJ.
HARRIS, Justice.
This is a shareholder derivative action, in the guise of a class action, to challenge a number of actions taken by defendant corporate leadership in winding up a corporation. The trial court dismissed the claims. Defendants cross-appeal from the denial of the imposition of sanctions. We affirm on both appeals.
Defendants,[1] led by David Kruidenier, held management positions with the Des Moines Register and Tribune Company, a longtime Iowa newspaper publisher. In 1985 the company changed its name to R & T Liquidation, Inc., after its assets had *186 been sold. Plaintiffs, led by George Hanrahan,[2] are shareholders who complain about the way defendants sold and liquidated the company.
The rights of stockholders are well defined and, as to individual complaints, are unaffected by the effectiveness of other actions taken by corporation directors. Shareholders lose no standing to challenge individual actions of corporate directors merely because, on the whole, the directors' performance inured to the stockholders' considerable advantage. Nevertheless the directors point with considerable pride to the remarkable growth in stock value during the period under challenge. Market value of the stock had been about thirty-two dollars per share. At trial $291.50 per share had been distributed on liquidation, with a small amount remaining.
Plaintiffs of course ascribe this phenomenal growth to the stock's inherent value and fortuitous circumstances and not to adroit business conduct on the defendants' part. We mention this remarkable profit initially, not in response to any of plaintiffs' challenges but only to indicate that the defendants were not shown to be ineffective in concluding the affairs of the corporation. Additional facts can be recited more appropriately as they relate to individual challenges.
Because it is basic to all challenges, we should first state the business judgment rule, the standard by which the actions of directors are measured. The business judgment rule, universally applied as a part of corporate law, has long been codified in Iowa. It now appears in Iowa Code section 490.830 (1991).[3]
The purpose of the rule is to severely limit secondguessing of business decisions which have been made by those whom the corporation has chosen to make them. See Cramer v. General Tel. & Elec. Corp., 582 F.2d 259, 274 (3d Cir.), cert. denied, 439 U.S. 1129, 99 S.Ct. 1048, 59 L.Ed.2d 90 (1978). Iowa Code section 490.830 sets precise metes and bounds for judicial interference. Good faith is required (§ 490.830(1)(a)). In weighing the appropriateness of challenged business decisions the test is both objective (§ 490.830(1)(b)) and subjective (§ 490.830(1)(c)). When directors act in good faith in making a business decision, when the decision is reasonably prudent, and when the directors believe it to be in the corporate interest, there can be no liability.
The business judgment rule applies to all plaintiffs' challenges which do not allege self-dealing on the part of defendants. Where directors are involved with self-dealing the burden rests upon them to establish that the transaction was fair to the corporation. Cookies Food Prods. v. Lakes Warehouse, 430 N.W.2d 447, 453 (Iowa 1988).
I. In the months preceding the sale of the newspaper, defendants "donated" approximately $750,000 to the state historical museum and $50,000 to Iowa Public Television, an action which plaintiffs vigorously challenge as unauthorized. As a basic proposition investors in corporations organized for profit should not be called upon to share in the corporate management's personal philanthropic causes, no matter *187 how worthy. The law nevertheless recognizes that charitable contributions can be good business, and precision is not required in connecting up the contributions with a specific business purpose. Annotation, Power of a Business Corporation to Donate to a Charitable or Similar Institution, 39 A.L.R.2d 1192 (1955); see also Vol. 5 Iowa Practice, Hayes, Business Organizations § 242, at 279 (1985).
The $800,000 in contributions were furnished as consideration to settle tax litigation. We view the settlement to be particularly propitious to all involved, including the corporation. The corporation had brought suit against the State of Iowa seeking a refund of taxes paid on newsprint and ink. The United States Supreme Court held a similar Minnesota tax statute unconstitutional. Minneapolis Star & Tribune Co. v. Minnesota Comm'r of Revenue, 460 U.S. 575, 103 S.Ct. 1365, 75 L.Ed.2d 295 (1983). Refunds of taxes previously paid could scarcely be considered automatic however, because, following the Minneapolis Star and Tribune decision, the Iowa General Assembly passed a statute prohibiting retroactive refunds.
The trial court in the tax suit ruled the Iowa statutes unconstitutional and the statute prohibiting refunds invalid. It was far from a complete victory for the newspaper however. The trial court also held that a valuable tax exemption granted by the statute to newspapers was also invalid.
At this point, at the trial judge's suggestion, the parties explored settlement. Because the issues involved were complex and would likely carry the case to the United States Supreme Court, it was apparent that further litigation would involve substantial expense to the corporation with the ultimate outcome far from certain. On July 1, earlier on the same day the board and shareholders later voted to dissolve the company, the directors agreed to a settlement. The state would refund newsprint sales taxes in exchange for which the newspaper would make the challenged charitable "donations." Plaintiffs criticize the fact that various terms of the settlement agreement were not in writing. The trial court found that an oral agreement was entered, however, and the evidence overwhelmingly supports the finding. Both sides complied with the agreement however, and it proved advantageous to the company. After making charitable gifts totaling $800,000 the company retained a net gain of $900,000.
The challenge rests on two contentions, a claimed lack of statutory authority and a claimed lack of legal obligation under the settlement. We reject both contentions.
Although plaintiffs argue otherwise, Iowa Code sections 496A.83 and 496A.84 (1989)[4] did not deprive the directors of authority to proceed with the donations. The statutes' provisions for business to cease and directors to proceed with "winding up" did not undermine the directors' authority to complete the settlement. The monetary donations were authorized before the dissolution vote.
The challenge, it is to be remembered, is to the actions of these defendants. We express no opinion on whether it was appropriate for state officials to negotiate or enter the settlement under the facts here.
The use of the term "donation" with regard to the $800,000 in payments is a misnomer. Ample consideration supported the payments. The settlement agreement was not a pure philanthropic gesture. The corporation did receive a return of $900,000, saved litigation expenses, and gained the assurance the corporation would not risk an unsuccessful appeal to the United States Supreme Court. The trial court was correct in rejecting plaintiffs' first challenge.
II. A donation of the company's artwork on December 24, 1984, presents a closer question. Valued at approximately $250,000, the artwork was given to the Des Moines Art Center and similar local institutions. Because the issue involves a duty of *188 care only, the plaintiffs again have the burden of establishing defendants' breach. Cookies Food Prods., 430 N.W.2d at 453.
The trial court found a rational business purpose for the gifts in the form of an income tax deduction which, the court stated, "appears to be more beneficial to the shareholders than selling art along with the other assets of the corporation where no additional consideration would ordinarily be given for them by the purchaser." The trial court thought a second factor supported the decision: keeping the art of the state's largest newspaper within the state. We find the gift well within the ambit of the business judgment rule and agree with the trial court's rejection of plaintiffs' challenge to the gift of the artwork.
III. Defendants implemented what they called a management retention program, which diverted $1,391,531 to officers and other employees while the company was being dissolved. Defendants thought this much in bonuses was necessary to maintain the quality of the paper while offers were being tendered by potential buyers. They cite various reasons to justify the plan: keeping the valuable editorial and corporate staffs during the sale period; maintaining profits; and preserving the value of the assets for the shareholders. General statutory authority existed to establish incentive plans for officers and employees under Iowa Code section 496A.4(15) (1989).
Several jurisdictions have upheld management retention programs, often called "golden parachutes." International Ins. Co. v. Johns, 874 F.2d 1447, 1460 (11th Cir.1989); Buckhorn, Inc. v. Ropak Corp., 656 F.Supp. 209, 232 (S.D.Ohio 1987); Royal Crown Co. v. McMahon, 183 Ga.App. 543, 544-45, 359 S.E.2d 379, 381 (1987); Worth v. Huntington Bancshares, Inc., 43 Ohio St.3d 192, 195-98, 540 N.E.2d 249, 254-55 (1989); Koenings v. Joseph Schlitz Brewing Co., 126 Wis.2d 349, 360, 377 N.W.2d 593, 599 (1985); see also 18B Am.Jur.2d Corporations § 1923, at 776-78 (1985). When the programs are shallow or half-hearted, so as to constitute a pretext or sham, the directors' acts are not shielded by the business judgment rule. Auerbach v. Bennett, 47 N.Y.2d 619, 634-35, 393 N.E.2d 994, 1002-03, 419 N.Y.S.2d 920, 929 (1979); see also Kann v. Keystone Resources, Inc., 575 F.Supp. 1084, 1090 (W.D.Penn.1983) (to prove corporate officer breached fiduciary duty by voting on his own compensation, it must be established that that act amounted to corporate waste or fraud). There was no evidence of waste or fraud here.
The parties dispute who should bear the burden on this issue. The claim is premised solely on, neither a breach of care nor a breach of fiduciary duty, but rather a hybrid of the two. The bonus payments were approved by a disinterested compensation committee. At the same time, when high salaries are paid to corporate executives, an indicia of self-dealing appears to exist. In Buckhorn, Inc., 656 F.Supp. at 232, the court held the burden rested with the directors to show the measures were reasonable. But see International Ins. Co., 874 F.2d at 1460 (business judgment rule applies on issue whether a compensation plan violated a duty of loyalty).
The trial court, relying on Cookies Food Products, 430 N.W.2d at 453, determined that Kruidenier and the four interested defendant directors[5] had the burden to prove the reasonableness of the program. We think this placement of the burden was correct.
We emphatically agree with the trial court that the program was fair and reasonable. To be sure, substantial bonuses were paid. But the stakes were also very high; the company assets were eventually sold for about $340,000,000. The *189 existence of sale negotiations was common knowledge among personnel, as it was indeed to all employees of the corporation. The loss of key personnel would in all likelihood have been a bargaining "chip" for potential buyers.
The challenged program was, under all the circumstances, entirely appropriate, and prudent. It was crucial to the interests of all shareholders that the operation of the newspaper be continued with full efficiency during the negotiation of the sale.
IV. Plaintiffs sought to prevent the trustees from indemnifying: (1) their own defense; (2) the defense of other officers and directors; and (3) the defense of shareholders who chose to intervene as defendants. The trial court ruled with the trustees as to the first and second of these groups, but sustained plaintiffs' challenge with respect to the intervening shareholders. Plaintiffs assign error in allowing the financing of any defense. Defendants cross-appeal to challenge the disallowance with respect to the intervening shareholders.
In asserting the trustees should not be indemnified for their defense, the plaintiffs allege there was no authority, either by statute or in the trust indenture, which allowed indemnification. Plaintiffs bolster their argument by citing principles of trust law. Plaintiffs first point to Iowa Code section 496A.4A(5) (1989) which provided that no indemnification shall be made by the corporation unless authorized by the board of directors, or by special legal counsel, or the shareholders. Because none of these authorizations were obtained, the plaintiffs assert there was no power to indemnify.
The trial court was not deterred by defendants' failure to authorize the payments in accordance with Iowa Code section 496A.4A(5). The corporation had been dissolved. In rejecting plaintiffs' objections, the trial court thought Iowa Code section 496A.4A(4)[6] was some authority for defendants' action.
The court rested its rejection mainly, however, on the basis of fairness. We agree with the trial court that in equity the expenses should be paid from the trust. In the first place payments were expressly authorized in the trust agreement. Plaintiffs complain the payments nevertheless constituted self-dealing, prohibited by a provision in Iowa's probate code. See Iowa Code §§ 633.155 and 633.160 (1991). See Coster v. Crookham, 468 N.W.2d 802, 810 (Iowa 1991) (fiduciary responsibility exists notwithstanding the fact that no appointment was made by a court). We however agree with the trial court that the self-dealing provision should not apply where the actions were authorized by the trust agreement and where the trustees were not acting in bad faith.
It would be patently unfair to require the trustees to finance their own defense when in essence they were performing the same duties as officers and directors of the former corporation. The fact that the lawsuit was filed after dissolution of the company should not keep the trustees, acting in a directory capacity, from indemnification for defending their actions.
Plaintiffs also claim that a trust law principle precludes the trustees from expending trust funds to defend other corporate officers. Trustees can however incur expenses to carry out the purpose of the trust. Restatement (Second) of Trusts § 186 comment d; § 188 comments a, b. Because the responsibility of the trustees was to wind up the affairs of the corporation, it was logical for the trust to finance the defenses which took place prior to dissolution. Any other result would be inequitable.
Plaintiffs did prevail with regard to some defense expenses. A judgment was entered against the trustees for payment of fees and expenses incurred on behalf of intervening shareholders. It reflected the actual cost of intervention and the expense incurred in response to plaintiffs' motion to dismiss the petitions of intervention. This is an issue upon which defendants cross-appeal.
*190 Defendants are unable to point out why the corporation should pay litigation expenses for the intervenors. There is no showing that intervention did, or was likely to, affect the outcome of the litigation.
Defendants' argument is premised mainly on principles of equity. The trust agreement declared it was to "be governed and construed in all respects as a trust." In light of the trust provision all shareholders are beneficiaries entitled to equal treatment. It would not be equal treatment if all shareholders were compelled to pay litigation expenses for those who, for reasons of their own, chose to intervene. We agree with the trial court's rejection of indemnification for defense expenses relating to the intervenors.
V. We find no abuse of discretion in the trial court's refusal to impose sanctions. See Fields v. Iowa Dist. Court, 468 N.W.2d 38, 39 (Iowa 1991). Although we have not discussed them, we have considered and now reject all other assignments and contentions. Costs on appeal are taxed eighty-five percent to plaintiffs and fifteen percent to defendants.
AFFIRMED ON BOTH APPEALS.
NOTES
[1]  Defendants include the Des Moines Register & Tribune Co., various directors and officers, R & T Liquidation, Inc. (the company's name following its adoption of a liquidation plan), and trustees of a trust formed to conclude the corporate affairs. For simplicity, except where necessary, all will be referred to as defendants.
[2]  Hanrahan is now deceased. Reynaldo R. Francia has been substituted as named plaintiff.
[3]  The same definition formerly appeared in Iowa Code § 496A.34 (1989). As it appears in the 1991 Code the statute states:
General standards for directors.
1. A director shall discharge that director's duties as director, including the director's duties as a member of a committee in conformity with all of the following:
a. In good faith.
b. With the care an ordinarily prudent person in a like position would exercise under similar circumstances.
c. In a manner the director reasonably believes to be in the best interests of the corporation.
. . . .
4. A director is not liable for any action taken as a director, or any failure to take any action, if the director performed the duties of the director's office in compliance with this section, or if, and to the extent that, liability for any such action or failure to act has been limited by the articles of incorporation pursuant to [Iowa Code] section 490.832.
[4]  Since repealed. For the present statutory scheme controlling corporation dissolution see Iowa Code § 490.1401 (1991) et seq.
[5]  The program was administered jointly by these interested directors (who were personally affected by the program) and by "outside" directors (who were not). The trial court placed no burden of proof on the outside directors on the ground they retained the protection of the business judgment rule. Because we hold the interested directors easily carried the burden, we need not and do not explore the question of possible varying burdens. We do observe that it lends credence to the actions of the interested directors that their actions were under scrutiny by disinterested ones.
[6]  For a new somewhat similar provision see Iowa Code § 490.851 (1991) et seq.

=== CASE 9738964 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:06:11.531179+00 ===

Per Curiam.
In a case of first impression, petitioners appeal as of right from a judgment entered by the Kalamazoo County Probate Court which denied their petition for James Bruce Jennings and Sharan Rae Selleck to adopt their adult daughter, Molly Marie Adams, born November 3, 1962. The probate court ruled that although Jennings and Selleck are the natural parents of Molly Adams, they could not petition to adopt her pursuant to MCL 710.24(1); MSA 27.3178(555.24)(1) because they were both married to other parties, rather than to each other. We affirm.
Molly Marie Adams is the natural daughter of petitioners Jennings and Selleck, who were married to each other at the time of Molly’s birth. Later, they were divorced and Selleck married Phillip D. Adams, who adopted Molly. This apparently occurred in 1987, after Molly had reached the age of majority. Selleck’s marriage to Phillip Adams eventually ended in divorce, and she later married her present husband, petitioner William Logan. In the meantime, Jennings married his present wife, petitioner W. Rose Ann Makowski.
The present action was commenced because Molly, her natural parents, and their respective spouses all desire that Molly again become the legal daughter of both of her natural parents. MCL 710.24(1); MSA 27.3178(555.24)(1) provides:
*542If a person desires to adopt a child or an adult and to bestow upon the adoptee his family name, or to adopt a child or an adult without a change of name, with the intent to make the adoptee his heir, that person, together with his wife or her husband, if married, shall ñle a petition with the probate court of the county in which the petitioner resides or where the adoptee is found. [Emphasis added.]
Petitioners argue that the probate court should have granted their petition to adopt because all interested parties, that is, Molly and her natural parents and both of their spouses, had joined in the petition and consented to the proposed adoption. Petitioners conclude that this is technical compliance with the terms of §24 and that the probate court’s refusal to grant their petition was an abuse of discretion. The probate court, however, construed §24 to require that when a married person petitions to adopt a child or an adult, the married person’s spouse must also petition to adopt the adoptee. Therefore, the court concluded that it had no authority to allow two married persons who are not married to each other, such as petitioners Jennings and Selleck, to adopt the same person, regardless of the fact that she is their natural daughter. We agree.
The jurisdiction, powers, and duties of the probate court are prescribed by and may not exceed that which is conferred by statute. In re Kasuba Estate, 65 Mich App 25; 236 NW2d 751 (1975). Proceedings in probate court must strictly comply with the terms of the authorizing statute. In re Milner’s Estate, 324 Mich 269; 36 NW2d 914 (1949). The entire subject of adoption is governed solely by statute. In re Leach, 373 Mich 148; 128 NW2d 475 (1964). Jurisdiction over adoption proceedings is conferred upon the probate court in *543chapter X of the Probate Code, known as the Adoption Code, MCL 710.21 et seq.; MSA 27.3178(555.21) et seq.
Although adoption has been practiced since ancient times, a right of adoption was not recognized by the common law. In re Smith Estate, 343 Mich 291; 72 NW2d 287 (1955). See also anno: Adoption of adult, 21 ALR3d 1012, §2, p 1016; 2 CJS, Adoption of Persons, 414. As with any statute in derogation of the common law, the provisions of the Adoption Code must be strictly construed. See Lincoln v Gupta, 142 Mich App 615; 370 NW2d 312 (1985). Moreover, the provisions of the Adoption Code must be construed together as a whole. In re Draime, 356 Mich 368, 371; 97 NW2d 115 (1959).
After reviewing the provisions of the Adoption Code, we conclude that the probate court correctly construed the requirement of § 24 that both spouses to a marriage join in the petition to adopt as precluding petitioners Jennings and Selleck, who are married, but not to each other, from adopting their natural daughter Molly Adams.
As with all other aspects of adoption, the question of who may adopt is controlled by statute. It has generally been held that the spouse of an adopting party, other than a spouse who is the natural parent of the adoptee, is a necessary party to an adoption proceeding. Anno: Required parties in adoption proceedings, 48 ALR4th 860, §§ 2-3, pp 864-869. To that end, courts in other jurisdictions have concluded that the law does not recognize adoption by one spouse alone. When an adoption statute requires joinder of the petitioner’s spouse, it is a joint petition, and, upon adoption, the adoptee becomes in law the child of both spouses and their relatives as if there had been a blood relationship. Id.
*544In the absence of a statutory prohibition, an unmarried person may adopt another person. However, it has been held inconsistent with the general scope and purpose of adoption statutes to allow two unmarried persons to make a joint adoption. 2 CJS §§ 14-15, pp 434-435. In Adoption of Meaux, 417 So 2d 522 (La App, 1982), the Louisiana Court of Appeals held that under a Louisiana adoption statute which allowed a single person or a married couple to adopt a child, the natural parents of a minor child, who were apparently living together but not married to each other, could not jointly adopt their natural child because they were neither "a single person” nor a married couple.
We have found only one Michigan case involving the issue whether the statutory requirement that a married person be joined by the married person’s spouse in adoption proceedings precludes a married person alone from adopting a child or an adult. Unfortunately, in that case, neither the Supreme Court nor this Court addressed the issue, choosing instead to resolve the case on another basis. See In re Adoption of Knox, 381 Mich 582; 165 NW2d 1 (1969), aff'g Knox v Reid, 8 Mich App 199; 154 NW2d 3 (1967).
Nevertheless, we believe that the policy considerations which have motivated courts of other jurisdictions to hold that married persons must jointly adopt with their spouses is applicable to the Adoption Code. The Michigan adoption scheme expresses a policy of severing, at law, the prior, natural family relationship and creating a new and complete substitute relationship after adoption. Bikos v Nobliski, 88 Mich App 157; 276 NW2d 541 (1979). This policy is expressed in MCL 710.60; MSA 27.3178(555.60), which provides in pertinent part:
*545(1) After the entry of the order of adoption, the adoptee shall, in case of a change of name, be known and called by the new name. The person or persons adopting the adoptee shall thereafter stand in the place of a parent or parents to the adoptee in law in all respects as though the adopted person had been born to the adopting parents and shall thereafter be liable for all the duties and entitled to all the rights of parents.
(2) After entry of the order of adoption there shall not be any distinction between the rights and duties of natural progeny and adopted persons, and the adopted person shall become an heir at law of the adopting parent or parents, and an heir at law of the lineal and collateral kindred of the adopting parent or parents. After entry of the order of adoption, an adopted child shall no longer be an heir at law of a parent whose rights have been terminated under this chapter or chapter XIIA or the lineal or collateral kindred of that parent, nor shall an adopted adult be an heir at law of a person who was his or her parent at the time the order of adoption was entered or the lineal or collateral kindred of that person, except that a right, title, or interest vesting before entry of the final order of adoption shall not be divested by that order. [Emphasis added.]
Section 60, the effect of adoption statute, focuses not only on inheritance and succession but on the rights and status of the adopting parent or parents. The effect of § 60 is to make an adoptee as much as possible a natural child of the adopting parents and, significantly, to make the adopting parents as much as possible the natural parents of the adoptee. Bikos, supra. Obviously, this desired effect is of much greater concern when the adoptee is a minor child. Nevertheless, although issues of inheritance and succession are presumably the primary concern in the adoption of an adult, adult adoptees are not excluded from the scope of § 60. *546Moreover, § 60(2), which relates to the subject of inheritance and succession, clearly contemplates that the adoptee’s adopting parent or parents replace "a person who was his or her parent at the time the order of adoption was entered.”
This clearly expressed intent to sever existing familial relationships is further supported by the fact that the 1974 revision of the Probate Code, embodied in 1974 PA 296, eliminated a provision in the original effect of adoption statute, MCL 710.9; MSA 27.3178(549), which allowed an adoptee to inherit from the adoptee’s natural parents as well as from the adopting parents. We conclude that the language of the present statute clearly shows that the Legislature intended that an adoptee, whether an adult or minor child, sever the adoptee’s prior legal family relationships upon adoption. Similarly, the fact that the joinder provision of § 24(1). applies to the adoption of both a child and an adult shows the Legislature’s intent that, if a married person desires to adopt another person, the married person’s spouse must also adopt that person.
We are troubled by the fact that this holding seems rather harsh and unyielding under the highly unusual facts of the present case. In truth, we see nothing unreasonable in petitioners’ wish that Jennings again become his natural daughter’s legal father. Moreover, under the Adoption Code, only the consent of the adoptee is required when the adoptee is an adult. MCL 710.43(3); MSA 27.3178(555.43)(3). We can think of no logical reason why an adult like Molly Adams should not be able to consent to be adopted by anyone she wishes.
However, we are also cognizant of the fact that there is nothing to prevent Jennings from developing a relationship with his daughter that involves *547all of the emotional bonds inherent in a family, regardless of the legal formalities. Moreover, he may pursue other legal options to provide for her inheritance interest, if that is his concern. It is also reasonable to bear in mind that these parties’ present predicament is of their own making. Clearly, the Legislature could not have foreseen the occurrence of the societal changes which have drastically altered our notions of what constitutes a "normal” family. To hold that the Adoption Code provides a remedy for petitioners’ problem is to impute an intent to the Legislature that it is highly unlikely to have held. See People v Gilbert, 414 Mich 191, 203-204; 324 NW2d 834 (1982). We believe that the policy of providing a stable family relationship for an adoptee, which motivated the Legislature’s choice to limit the group of persons eligible to adopt to single persons and married persons jointly with their spouses, remains valid even today. Any enlargement of that group must come from the Legislature and not this Court.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9738880 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:50.046149+00 ===

Caporale, J.,
concurring.
It seems to me that my dissenting colleagues’ criticisms of the majority opinion inflate the judicial role. The plaintiff herein seeks workers’ compensation benefits because he is gradually wearing out. However, the Nebraska Workers’ Compensation Act compensates only those personal injuries which result from “accident or occupational disease, arising out of and in the course of. . . employment.” Neb. Rev. Stat. § 48-101 (Reissue 1988). The gradual wearing process falls neither within this jurisdiction’s definition of accident or occupational disease, see Maxson v. Michael Todd & Co., 238 Neb. 209, 469 N.W.2d 542 (1991), nor, I submit, within any reasonable definition of those terms. Although some do so at a slower rate than others, we need no evidential record to tell us that all humans gradually wear out until the process produces death.
Admittedly, some occupations contribute to the wearing process more than do others. Thus, there may be a basis for compensating gradual work-caused wear under some system or *42another. I suggest that the federal Social Security Act does precisely that. See 42 U.S.C. § 423 (1988). Nonetheless, there may be some who would argue that our compensation act should supplement any other existing system and be extended to cover gradual work-caused wear.
I submit, however, that such is a policy decision to be made by our Legislature after full study, debate, and understanding of the economics involved; it is not a burden to be forced upon the employers of this state by judicial fiat. See, Neb. Const, art. II, § 1 (divides powers of government into the legislative, executive, and judicial branches and, as a general matter, prohibits one branch from encroaching on duties and prerogatives of other branches); State ex rel. Spire v. Conway, 238 Neb. 766, 472 N.W.2d 403 (1991). See, also, Nebraska P.P. Dist. v. City of York, 212 Neb. 747, 326 N.W.2d 22 (1982) (function of Legislature to declare law by enactment of statutes); Bowers v. Maire, 179 Neb. 239, 137 N.W.2d 796 (1965) (court will not indulge in judicial legislation); State v. Tatreau, 176 Neb. 381, 126 N.W.2d 157 (1964) (duty of court to administer law as it exists).
Boslaugh, White, and Fahrnbruch, JJ., join in this concurrence.

=== CASE 9738881 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:50.900222+00 ===

PIVARNIK, Justice.
The Indiana Supreme Court has exclusive jurisdiction of these causes pursuant to Ind. R.Ap.P. 4(A)(8) since these are appealable cases in which a state statute, Ind.Code 35 — 45-4-1 (Burns Supp.1978) has been held to be unconstitutional by trial courts.
In the Clark case plaintiff filed a complaint for declaratory judgment against the State of Indiana which was amended on November 28, 1977. The Lake County Prosecutor’s office filed a Motion for Judgment on the pleadings and the Attorney General’s office filed a Motion to Dismiss, both of which were denied. After a short evidentiary hearing on February 24, 1978, the State’s Motion to Dismiss and Motion for Judgment on the Pleadings were renewed. On May 9, 1978, the court entered judgment finding Indiana Code § 35-45-4-1 (Bums 1978) to be unconstitutional and restraining and enjoining the defendants from enforcing it. This appeal followed.
In Baysinger, et al., each of the appellees was charged with indecent exposure pursuant to Ind.Code § 35-45-4-1 (Burns 1978), by informations filed in Allen Superior Court. A Motion to dismiss was filed on February 16, 1978, alleging vagueness and/or overbreadth. This motion was granted on May 17, 1978, and the cause dismissed. A motion to correct errors was filed and denied. On October 13, 1978, the State’s motion for consolidation of appeal was granted by order of the Indiana Supreme Court. Pursuant to Ind.R.Ap.P. 5(B) eleven cases were consolidated under Cause No. 1078 S 202 for appeal.
In Kitty Kat Lounge, Inc,, et al., the owners and operators of taverns and bars were ordered to cease offering nude dancing as entertainment. Appellees ceased to have nude dancing and filed a complaint for temporary and permanent injunction and restraining order against the State seeking to have Ind.Code § 35-45 — 4-1 declared unconstitutional, alleging substantial loss of income. Their motion for a permanent injunction was granted upon a finding by the trial court that the nudity provision of Ind. Code § 35 — 45-5-1 was overbroad and thus unconstitutional. This appeal followed.
For convenience and to avoid unnecessary cost and delay, all of these appeals are consolidated here for opinion pursuant to Ind.R.Ap.P. 5(B). All involve the same con*582duct, nude dancing or appearances in bars. All involve the action of trial courts declaring Ind.Code § 35-45-4-1 to be unconstitutional. The statute in issue, Ind.Code § 35-45-4-1 (Burns 1978) reads as follows:
35-45-4-1. Public indecency. — (a) A person who knowingly or intentionally, in a public place:
(1) Engages in sexual intercourse;
(2) Engages in deviate sexual conduct;
(3) Appears in a state of nudity; or
(4) Fondles the genitals of himself or another person; commits public indecency, a class A misdemeanor.
(b) “Nudity” means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. [IC 35-45-4-1, as added by Acts 1976, P.L. 148, § 5, p. 718; 1977, P.L. 340, § 76, p. 1533.]
In considering the issue of the constitutionality of a statute.
“We recognize that the Legislature is vested with a wide latitude of discretion in determining public policy. Therefore, every statute stands before us clothed with the presumption of constitutionality and such presumption continues until clearly overcome by a showing to the contrary. In the deliberative process, the burden is upon the challenger to overcome such presumption, and all doubts are resolved against his charge.”
Sidle v. Majors, (1976) 264 Ind. 206, 341 N.E.2d 763, 766.
I.
The State alleges error in the lower courts finding that the statute was vague and claims error in that the lower courts failed in their duty to give the statute a reasonable interpretation. Appellees contend that because the term “public place” was undefined in the statute, the statute is unconstitutionally vague. The question involved in such an inquiry is whether a challenged law is so vague that “men of common intelligence must necessarily guess at its meaning and differ as to its application.” Connally v. General Constr. Co., 269 U.S. 385, 391, 46 S.Ct. 126, 127, 70 L.Ed. 322 (1926). As the State has pointed out, the conduct involved here, i. e., nude dancing and appearances in taverns and bars, is clearly conduct in a “public place.”
In Indiana, the definition of public indecency and public place has been considered and was early limited by the Court itself. In McJunkins and Others v. State, (1858) 10 Ind. 140, 145, involving a determination that certain improprieties of language were not intended to be included as a punishable offense under a charge of public indecency, the Court noted that:
“It would therefore appear that the term public indecency has no fixed legal meaning — is vague and indefinite, and cannot in itself imply a definite offense. And hence, the Courts, by a kind of judicial legislation, in England and the United States, have usually limited the operation of the term to public displays of the naked person, the publication, sale, or exhibition of obscene books and prints, or the exhibition of a monster — acts which have a direct bearing on public morals, and affect the body of society.”
In Ardery v. State, (1877) 56 Ind. 328, the Supreme Court faced the issue of whether or not the offense of public indecency, not being defined by statute, was punishable.
“The enquiry, therefore, arises for this court to answer is the exposure, in a public place, to divers persons there assembled, by a person, of his or her private parts, a public indecency? Prima facie, we think it is, if there is in the world any such thing as public indecency.”
In commenting that there had existed such a thing as decency and such a thing as indecency since the time of Adam and Eve, the court affirmed the judgment even though “decency” forbade that the parts exposed be named in the statute.
During the intervening years, many standards have changed and statutes have been *583drawn more specifically and explicitly. Nevertheless, it appears that the basis for the offense of public indecency remain the same. The word public was further defined in Peachey v. Boswell, (1960) 240 Ind. 604, 167 N.E.2d 48, 56-57, in discussing the phrase, “In any place accessible to the public” with reference to a gambling statute. We stated as follows:
“Webster defines ‘public’ as ‘open to common and general use, participation, or enjoyment’ of the public. It has been held that the term ‘public place’ as used in statutes pertaining to gambling includes any place which for the time being is made public by the assemblage of people who go there with or without invitation and without restraint. Roberts v. State, 1908, 4 Ga.App. 207, 60 S.E. 1082, 1085.
“A place may be accessible to the public for gambling notwithstanding that every person who desires is not permitted access thereto. Lockhart v. State, 1853, 10 Tex. 275, 276.
“It has also been held that in a case involving a prohibition law that by ‘public’ is meant that the public is invited to come to the place and has access to it for the purpose within the scope of the business there maintained. Brooks v. State, 1916, 19 Ga.App. 3, 90 S.E. 989, 991.
“ ‘Accessible to the public’ as used in the Act here in question has not been defined by either of the courts of appeal of this State, nor have we been able to find definition by the courts in other jurisdictions.
“From a consideration of the terms ‘accessible’, ‘public’, and ' ‘public place’, as defined hereinabove, together with the purpose of the Act, we have concluded that the phrase ‘in any place accessible to the public’ as used in § 10 — 2330, supra, means any place where the public is invited and are free to go upon special or implied invitation — a place available to all or a certain segment of the public.”
We find no merit in the contention that the statute is vague because the word public is undefined.
II.
Appellants claim error in the trial court’s finding that the statute is defective because of overbreadth, that is, that even if the meaning of the statute is clear, and, even though a nude dancer would know that her public nudity is a prohibited activity, the statute is unconstitutional if it sweeps too broad and regulates activities which cannot constitutionally be regulated. Consideration of this issue involves several claims. One is that because the appellees make their claim as a First Amendment claim, they may raise the rights of others, although there is no question that their conduct properly falls within the statute. This assertion of overbreadth depends initially upon a determination that the rights asserted are properly First Amendment rights and that therefore, they are entitled to consideration under the overbreadth doctrine.
This argument must have as its base that the activity involved here, appearing nude in bars and taverns and nude dancing in bars, is entitled to First Amendment protection. Appellees additionally argue that a statute directed at public nudity which does not limit its prohibition to certain sexual activity combined with nudity, or one which prohibits all “public nudity” is unconstitutionally overbroad because some protected activity may be deterred. In other words, appellees argue that if there is any protected expression that could be included under a category of nudity in “public”, this possibility would require our finding the public indecency statute to be overbroad. They claim that all prohibitions must be struck down unless somehow narrowed or tied to other regulations. They argue that if a statute could be read so as to prohibit not only topless and/or bottomless dancing in a tavern but also a production of the Ballet Africains at a public auditorium, then the statute is unconstitutionally overbroad. Appellees also include in this argument concerns that “public place” may also apply to restrooms, shower rooms, saunas, and locker rooms.
*584In support of this argument appellees quote at length from cases arising in New York which went to the United States Supreme Court. In 1973, the town of North Hempstead, New York enacted an ordinance prohibiting topless entertainment. Three bar owners challenged the ordinance on its face.
A temporary restraining order was refused. One owner continued to offer topless entertainment and was served with criminal process. The other two owners refrained. A temporary injunction was issued. The Federal district court refused to abstain pending the state criminal proceedings and held that the ordinance was over-broad. Salem Inn, Inc. v. Frank, 364 F.Supp. 478 (E.D.N.Y.1973). The Second Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed at 501 F.2d 18 (1974). The United States Supreme Court granted certiorari and affirmed the temporary injunction as to the two owners but reversed as to the other, holding that abstention was required. Doran v. Salem Inn, Inc., 422 U.S. 922, 95 S.Ct. 2561, 45 L.Ed.2d 648 (1975). The court held that the district court did not abuse its discretion in finding that the ordinance was probably overbroad, thus justifying the injunction.
Appellees quote from the Doran opinion in support of their position as follows:
“ ‘The local ordinance here attacked not only prohibits topless dancing in bars but also prohibits any female from appearing in “any public place” with uncovered breasts. There is no limit to the interpretation of the term “any public place.” It could include the theater, town halll, .opera house, as well as a public market place, street or any place of assembly, indoors or outdoors. Thus, this ordinance would prohibit the performance of the “Ballet Africains” and a number of other works of unquestionable artistic and socially redeeming significance.’ 364 F.Supp., at 483.
We have previously held that even though a statute or ordinance may be constitutionally applied to the activities of a particular defendant, that defendant may challenge it on the basis of over-breadth if it is so drawn as to sweep within its ambit protected speech or expression of other persons not before the Court. As we said in Grayned v. City of Rockford, 408 U.S. 104, 114, 92 S.Ct. 2294, 2302, 33 L.Ed.2d 222 (1972):
‘Because overbroad laws, like vague ones, deter privileged activity, our cases firmly establish appellant's standing to raise an overbreadth challenge.’ ”
Doran v. Salem Inn, Inc., (1975) 422 U.S. 922, 933, 95 S.Ct. 2561, 2568-69, 45 L.Ed.2d 648, 660. Appellees argue that this case requires the striking down of any “across the board” regulation of nudity.
The State, emphasizing the part of this opinion which refrains from stating a view on the merits argues that all Doran, supra, holds is that this form of entertainment, i. e., nude dancing, might be entitled to First and Fourteenth Amendment protection under some circumstances and that Doran is merely an interlocutory appeal and did not resolve the question of the constitutionality of the statute. The appellants also allege error in the trial court finding the statute overbroad, arguing that the activity involved is conduct, not speech, and that, therefore, challenge based on alleged facial invalidity is not available to appellees.
California v. LaRue, (1972) 409 U.S. 109, 93 S.Ct. 390, 34 L.Ed.2d 342, reh. denied, 410 U.S. 948, 93 S.Ct. 1351, 35 L.Ed.2d 615, held that in view of the State’s broad authority. to control the sale of intoxicating liquors under the Twenty-first Amendment, regulations proscribing some acts which were not obscene and possibly within the limits of the First and Fourteenth Amendments’ protection of freedom of expression did not violate the Federal Constitution. The specific portion of LaRue upon which the court in Doran relied is as follows:
“The súbstance of the regulations struck down prohibits licensed bars or nightclubs from displaying, either in the form of movies or live entertainment, ‘performances’ that partake more of gross sexuality than of communication. *585While we agree that at least some of the performances to which these regulations address themselves are within the limits of the constitutional protection of freedom of expression, the critical fact is that California has not forbidden these performances across the board. It has merely proscribed such performances in establishments that it licenses to sell liquor by the drink.
Viewed in this light, we conceive the State’s authority in this area to be somewhat broader than did the District Court. This is not to say that all such conduct and performance are without the protection of the First and Fourteenth Amendments. But we would poorly serve both the interests for which the State may validly seek vindication and the interests protected by the First and Fourteenth Amendments were we to insist that the sort of bacchanalian revelries that the Department sought to prevent by these liquor regulations were the constitutional equivalent of a performance by a scantily clad ballet troupe in a theater.”
409 U.S. 109, 118, 93 S.Ct. 390, 397, 34 L.Ed.2d 342, 352.
However, in LaRue the court also distinguished between written expression and public acts as follows:
“But as the mode of expression moves from the printed page to the commission of public acts that may themselves violate valid penal statutes, the scope of permissible state regulations significantly increases. States may sometimes proscribe expression that is directed to the accomplishment of an end that the State has declared to be illegal when such expression consists, in part, of ‘conduct’ or ‘action’ ”
Id. at 117, 93 S.Ct. at 396, 34 L.Ed.2d at 351. We read LaRue to caution against attempting to censor dramatic performances in theaters or in movies, which may be protected expression. As noted in Crownover v. Musick, (1973) 9 Cal.3d 405, 107 Cal.Rptr. 681, 509 P.2d 497, cert. den. sub nom., Owen v. Musick, 415 U.S. 931, 94 S.Ct. 1443, 39 L.Ed.2d 489 (1974):
“A close reading of the LaRue opinion reveals that the only area of regulation involved in that case which the Supreme Court found ‘within the limits of the constitutional protection of freedom of expression’ was that of motion pictures and theatrical productions.”
See also Gabriel v. Town of Old Orchard Beach, 390 A.2d 1065 (Me.1979); People v. Karns, 81 Misc.2d 186, 365 N.Y.S.2d 725 (Cty.Ct.Rochester, Monroe Co. 1975); Kew v. Senter, 416 F.Supp. 1101 (N.D.Tex.1976).
We recognize the existence of cases cited by the appellees to indicate that some courts have held that the regulation of nude dancing through public indecency statutes or ordinances, when such laws are not tied to the regulation of alcoholic beverages, may be unconstitutional. See New York Topless Bar and Dancers Assoc. v. New York State Liquor Authority, 91 Misc.2d 780, 398 N.Y.S.2d 637, 637 n. 2 (N.Y.Sup.Ct. 1977); People v. Nixon, 88 Misc.2d 913, 390 N.Y.S.2d 518 (Sup.Ct. 1976); Lucifer’s Gate, Inc. v. Town of Van Buren, 88 Misc.2d 790, 373 N.Y.S.2d 304 (Sup.Ct. 1975). Other courts in other jurisdictions have held similar statutes to be overbroad, Jamaica Inn, Inc. v. Daley, 53 Ill.App.3d 257, 11 Ill.Dec. 38, 368 N.E.2d 589 (1977). Other courts have attempted to construe the term public place in public indecency laws to exclude places where persons willingly enter. See Yauch v. State, 109 Ariz. 576, 514 P.2d 709 (1973); State v. Brooks, 275 Or. 171, 550 P.2d 440 (1976).
It is obvious that this area is confused by the consideration of overlapping concepts of nudity, public indecency, and obscenity in differing contexts.
Appellees assert that even though the conduct involved here is nudity in public and clearly would fall within the prohibitions of the statute, the legislature is unable to prohibit such conduct unless the statute includes requirements of a showing that the nudity involved is obscene. Apparently this concept is traceable to cases primarily dealing with other areas and performances such as films, books, and theatrical performances. See Erznoznik v. City of *586Jacksonville, 422 U.S. 205, 95 S.Ct. 2268, 45 L.Ed.2d 125 (films); Southeastern Promotions, Ltd. v. Conrad, (1975) 420 U.S. 546, 95 S.Ct. 1239, 43 L.Ed.2d 448 (prior restraint of stage production of Hair).
Cases involving such issues have continued to maintain certain distinctions between such concepts and to acknowledge that indecent public conduct is not included in the express exceptions allowed on the basis of the First Amendment. In the “Carnal Knowledge” film case, Jenkins v. Georgia, (1974) 418 U.S. 153, 161, 94 S.Ct. 2750, 2755, 41 L.Ed.2d 642, 650, nudity and obscenity were discussed, and it was stated that nudity alone was not enough to make material legally obscene citing Miller v. California, (1973) 413 U.S. 15, 93 S.Ct. 2607, 37 L.Ed.2d 419. However, the Miller case itself noted that:
“Although we are not presented here with the problem of regulating lewd public conduct itself, the States have greater power to regulate nonverbal, physical conduct than to suppress depictions or descriptions of the same behavior.”
413 U.S. at 26, 93 S.Ct. at 2616, n. 8.
In Erznoznik v. City of Jacksonville, 422 U.S. 205, 95 S.Ct. 2268, 45 L.Ed.2d 125 (1975) a local ordinance was passed which prohibited the showing of films containing nudity by a drive-in theater when its screen was visible from a public street or place. The Supreme Court held the ordinance unconstitutional. However, the Court added in a footnote:
“Scenes of nudity in a movie, like pictures of nude persons in a book, must be considered as a part of the whole work. . In this respect such nudity is distinguishable from the kind of public nudity traditionally subject to indecent exposure laws. . . . (‘No one would suggest that the First Amendment permits nudity in public places’), (citations omitted) Id. at 211, 95 S.Ct. at 2273, n. 7.”
Thus it appears that certain public conduct which involves nudity may be regulated on a standard different from that provided for movies or books. Here we note the existence of Ind.Code § 35-30-10.1 — 1 et seq. (Burns 1975) which may more properly be applied to such materials and performances and includes obscenity criteria. However, it appears obvious that as the content of the written material, motion picture, pictorial representation or live performance diminishes and we approach simply appearing nude in public, determining whether or not nudity is obscene becomes extremely difficult because the context is so limited. Therefore, the application of obscenity considerations to books, films and certain types of live musical or theatrical performances or productions seems more appropriate. In those settings, nudity, which may or may not be obscene, may be judged as are all other components of such materials or performances, in the context on which it is presented. There is sufficient content to enable courts to determine whether or not such nudity is obscene and therefore prohibited or whether, taken in its context, it is not obscene and requires protection as expression. However, the legislature is not required to provide for proof of obscenity before public nudity may be prohibited.
In appellees final and main contention they claim that this statute 'must fall because it could, in some other fact situations be used to suppress protected expression. These situations, it is alleged, could involve nudity within the context of a play, ballet, movie, book or other material. Thus, the argument goes that because of the potential for restriction of material or performances involving the communication of ideas, or speech, it is constitutionally required to tolerate or to allow some nudity in some contexts as part of some larger form of expression. Appellees argue that we must therefore conclude that we may not prohibit public nudity. We do not find this persuasive.
Consideration of their claim that the public indecency statute is overbroad requires a review of that basic doctrine. In Broadrick v. Oklahoma, (1973) 413 U.S. 601, 93 S.Ct. 2908, 37 L.Ed.2d 830, the United States Supreme Court held that in general, constitutional rights are personal and the Court will consider only the allegations of *587unconstitutionality in a particular fact .situation which the plaintiff hat, brought to court. An exception to this general rule allows a challenge of alleged facial invalidity in the area of free speech. However, this exception is limited.
“. . But the plain import of our cases is, at the very least, that facial overbreadth adjudication is an exception to our traditional rules of practice and that its function, a limited one at the outset, attenuates as the otherwise unprotected behavior that it forbids the State to sanction moves from ‘pure speech’ toward conduct and that conduct — even if expressive — falls within the scope of otherwise valid criminal laws that reflect legitimate state interests in maintaining comprehensive controls over harmful, constitutionally unprotected conduct. Although such laws, if too broadly worded, may deter protective speech to some unknown extent, there comes a point where that effect — at best a prediction — cannot, with confidence, justify invalidating a statute on its face and so prohibiting a State from enforcing the statute against conduct that is admittedly within its power to proscribe, (citation omitted). To put the matter another way, particularly where conduct and not merely speech is involved, we believe that thé overbreadth of a statute must not only be real, but substantial as well, judged in relation to the statute’s plainly legitimate sweep.”
Id. at 615, 93 S.Ct. at 2917-18, 37 L.Ed.2d at 842.
Under our statutes and case law, public nudity itself, regardless of a showing of obscenity, and without requiring proof of obscenity, is conduct which traditionally has been held to be public indecency, which is within the power of the legislature to prohibit. There is no right to appear nude in public. Rather, it may be constitutionally required to tolerate or to allow some nudity as a part of some larger form of expression meriting protection, when the communication of ideas is involved. A critical part of the final issue to be decided relates to whether appearing nude or performing a nude dance as presented in these cases is simply conduct or is expression entitled to First Amendment protection. In the cases before us it is clear the activity involved is appearing nude or dancing in the nude in bars and is conduct. Appellees make .no claim that there is any pure speech involved in their appearances. They make no claim that the expression of any ideas is involved or inhibited because of the restriction on nudity in a public place. The injury claimed by the individual dancers and the owners and operators of the bars is that they lose money if unable to appear nude in public or to offer nude dancing in their establishments. They complain that they make less money appearing scantily clad than they make when they appear nude. This is a claim for some kind of right to appear nude in public and in this context, to appear nude in public for money. This activity is conduct, not speech, and as such, this claim does not rise to the level of a First Amendment claim. The governmental interest in prohibiting conduct that has long been recognized as public indecency is unrelated to the suppression of free speech. Our case law has restricted and defined the type of conduct which has been prosecuted under public indecency statutes. Our statutes provide for procedures and standards to be used in a determination of obscenity when required for different materials or performances. Under these facts the argument that Ind.Code § 35-45 — 4-1 (Burns 1978) is overbroad must fail. Certainly the presumption of constitutionality with which each statute is clothed is not clearly overcome. We reverse the judgments of the lower courts, order the injunctions issued to be lifted, and declare Ind.Code § 35-45-4-1 to be constitutional as a valid exercise of the police powers of the state.
GIVAN, C. J., and PRENTICE, J., concur.
HUNTER and DeBRULER, JJ., dissent with separate opinions.

=== CASE 9738882 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:50.905729+00 ===

DeBRULER, Justice,
dissenting.
In my opinion the judgments of the trial courts below should be affirmed. In State *588v. Baysinger and others, No. 1978 S 202, appellees were charged with appearing in the state of nudity by showing the female breasts and buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering of the nipples and buttocks at a night club, The Scorpion, in violation of Ind. Code § 35-45-4 — 1 (Burns 1978). Ap-pellees filed a motion to dismiss and discharge contending that the statute was unconstitutional and the trial court sustained the motion. The judgments in the other two cases arose in different postures, but are to the same effect, i. e., that Ind. Code § 35 — 45-4-1 is unconstitutional on its face for reasons of overbreadth insofar as it proscribes public nudity in public places. That part of the statute dealing with public nudity applicable here provides:
“(a) A person who knowingly or intentionally, in a public place:
♦ * * * * *
(3) Appears in a state of nudity; ******
commits public indecency, a class A misdemeanor.
(b) ‘Nudity’ means the showing of the human male or female . . buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple . .
In Grody v. State, (1972) 257 Ind. 651, 278 N.E.2d 280, this Court invalidated a state criminal statute because of unconstitutional overbreadth and there described the doctrine as follows:
“A penal statute is unconstitutionally overbroad if its sanctions are applicable to activities that are protected by the First Amendment. Coates v. Cincinnati (1971), 402 U.S. 611, 91 S.Ct. 1686, 29 L.Ed.2d 214 . . . . The invalidity of such a statute rests on the fact that it constitutes a substantial deterrent to the free exercise of important First Amendment rights.” 257 Ind. at 653, 278 N.E.2d at 281-282.
The issue presented here then is whether a person could be criminally liable under Ind. Code § 35 — 45—4-1, for engaging in conduct protected by the First Amendment. The crime defined by this statute occurs when a female person appears at any time, in any manner, in any public place, for any purpose, with naked breast. The statute is indifferent to verbal or other conduct in which the person may be engaged at the time or the presence and rights of others who may be in the same place at the same time. This statute would empower law enforcement officials to arrest and prosecute a nude woman dancer or actress in a professional stage production or a nude woman engaged in a public meeting the purpose of which is to educate about and encourage infant breast feeding or self-examination for breast cancer. It would permit the arrest and prosecution of models who may pose in the nude for art classes at our state universities. Activities of these sorts involving live performances, the dance, and educational activities are afforded the broadest First Amendment protection. Schacht v. United States, (1970) 398 U.S. 58, 90 S.Ct. 1555, 26 L.Ed.2d 44; California v. LaRue, (1972) 409 U.S. 109, 93 S.Ct. 390, 34 L.Ed.2d 342; Doran v. Salem Inn, Inc., (1975) 422 U.S. 922, 95 S.Ct. 2561, 45 L.Ed.2d 648. This statute is clearly unconstitutionally overbroad. Furthermore, the statute is so grossly overbroad that no court could construe it so as to render it free from this constitutional defect as to do so would require the court to exercise a legislative authority, a role we cannot assume. Grody v. State, supra.

=== CASE 9738883 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:50.910437+00 ===

HUNTER, Justice,
dissenting.
I must dissent from the majority opinion in this case. I would ascribe greater weight than does the majority to the following language from Justice Rehnquist’s opinion in Doran v. Salem Inn, Inc., (1975) 422 U.S. 922, 95 S.Ct. 2561, 45 L.Ed.2d 648.
“The District Court observed, we believe correctly:
“ ‘The local ordinance here attacked not only prohibits topless dancing in bars but also prohibits any female from appearing in “any public place” with uncovered breast's. There is no limit to *589the interpretation of the term “any public place.” It could include the theater, town hall, opera house, as well as a public market place, street or any place of assembly, indoors or outdoors. Thus, this ordinance would prohibit the performance of the “Ballet Africains” and a number of other works of unquestionable artistic and socially redeeming significance.’ [Salem Inn, Inc. v. Frank, (E.D.N.Y.1973) 364 F.Supp. 478, 483.]
“We have previously held that even though a statute or ordinance may be constitutionally applied to the activities of a particular defendant, that defendant may challenge it on the basis of over-breadth if it is so drawn as to sweep within its ambit protected speech or expression of other persons not before the Court. As we said in Grayned v. City of Rockford, 408 U.S. 104, 114, 92 S.Ct. 2294, 33 L.Ed.2d 222 (1972):
“ ‘Because overbroad laws, like vague ones, deter privileged activity, our cases firmly establish appellant’s standing to raise an overbreadth challenge.’ ”
422 U.S. at 933, 95 S.Ct. 2568-9, 45 L.Ed.2d at 660.
The majority emphasizes that the Court held that nude dancing “might be entitled to First and Fourteenth Amendment protection under some circumstances.” 422 U.S. at 932, 95 S.Ct. at 2568, 45 L.Ed.2d at 660. Yet, the only circumstance under which the United States Supreme Court has allowed a ban on nude dancing has been when a state has included the ban as part of its liquor license program. California v. LaRue, (1972) 409 U.S. 109, 93 S.Ct. 390, 34 L.Ed.2d 342. The purview of Indiana’s public indecency statute is not limited to establishments where alcoholic beverages are served. The statute is couched in terms of nudity “in a public place.” West’s Ann. Ind. Code § 35-45-4-1 (1978).
I believe the quoted language from Doran v. Salem Inn, Inc., supra, stands for the proposition that a public indecency statute which prohibits nudity in any public place is unconstitutionally overbroad. See Jamaica Inn, Inc. v. Daley, (1977) 53 Ill.App.3d 257, 11 Ill.Dec. 38, 368 N.E.2d 589.
I would affirm the judgments of the trial courts below.

=== CASE 2218039 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:39.766832+00 ===

77 Ill. App.3d 1026 (1979)
397 N.E.2d 225
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
STEVE SCHOEPKE et al., Defendants-Appellants.
No. 78-281.
Illinois Appellate Court  Second District.
Opinion filed November 15, 1979.
*1027 Mary Robinson, of State Appellate Defender's Office, of Elgin, for appellants.
J. Michael Fitzsimmons, State's Attorney, of Wheaton (Robert L. Thompson, Assistant State's Attorney, of counsel), for the People.
Judgment affirmed.
Mr. JUSTICE SEIDENFELD delivered the opinion of the court:
Steve Schoepke and Robert Reinhardt were convicted in a consolidated bench trial of possession of more than 500 grams of cannabis. Reinhardt was sentenced to a term of probation for 3 years with 120 days to be served in the county jail; Schoepke was sentenced to a 3-year probation term with 90 days to be served in the county jail. They jointly appeal, contending that the trial court erred in denying their motions to suppress evidence.
Defendants were arrested on September 14, 1977, as the result of an incident which occurred in a parking lot adjoining the Northwestern station in Glen Ellyn at approximately 10 p.m. Lawrence Ryan, a Glen Ellyn policeman with 10 years experience, testified that he had been directed to spend the 4 to 12 o'clock shift in an unmarked van observing a small park near the station parking lot. He said that the assignment was made because of numerous problems in the area, resulting in some 25 arrests made in the two-week period prior to the time in question. He observed defendants as they arrived in a Fiat. He saw two of the passengers in the car exit and go into the park with a dog. Next, Schoepke got out and opened the trunk of the car. Within a short time a Camaro appeared and the defendants walked over to it and began talking to its occupants. Schoepke on the driver's side and Reinhardt on the other side. The officer noted that Schoepke was carrying a white plastic bag, "like a small plastic garbage bag," which swelled at the bottom. The bag appeared to be 8 inches in width and probably 10 inches in height. He believed it came out of the trunk of the vehicle because he hadn't seen it in Schoepke's hand when he went to the rear of the car the first time. After two or three minutes of conversation Reinhardt left in the Camaro and Schoepke walked back to his vehicle, still carrying the white bag. His trunk lid was still open.
At that time Ryan called Detective Velon telling him that there was a "situation down here worth checking out," which he thought might be a narcotics transaction. He testified:
"Just from previous experience I know that drugs are carried in plastic bags and sold in plastic bags."
When Velon appeared Schoepke was in the area of the trunk of the car *1028 but Ryan could not observe what he was doing except that he noted that the trunk lid was up.
Robert Velon testified that he had been a detective for the Glen Ellyn police department for 9 1/2 years. He said he pulled up in his vehicle at about 10:05 p.m., and saw Schoepke standing at the rear of his car with the trunk open. He identified himself as a police officer and asked Schoepke for identification but Schoepke said he did not have any. The witness asked Schoepke his name and was told, "Mike," but that he did not recall the last name he used. He said he was told that the vehicle belonged to Steve Schoepke but that defendant said he did not know where Schoepke was.
The officer testified that at the time he arrived he noticed that Schoepke was placing a white bag into the trunk and looking into the open trunk he saw a white plastic bag. In addition, he noticed back packs, a gym bag and miscellaneous clothes. He asked Schoepke what was in the white plastic bag and the answer was that it was dog food, to which Velon expressed disbelief. The witness testified that defendant Schoepke then said "go ahead and look." When Velon picked up the bag, which did contain dog food, he saw green plant material under it in the trunk, whereupon he arrested Schoepke for possession of cannabis. After the arrest he removed a back pack and found a container of cannabis with approximately 10 pounds, and a cannabis pipe. Reinhardt was later arrested when he returned to the lot because his identification was found in the back pack that was on top of the cannabis.
Officer Velon also testified that he had been assigned to the park for the purpose of surveillance for a two-week period before the 14th of September and that he had made approximately 25 arrests, eight of them being for unlawful possession of narcotics, one of the arrests on the 12th of September. He stated that there had not been a particular report of a crime on the night in question at that location.
Following the hearing in which Schoepke denied that he had consented to a search, the court entered the order appealed from which denied defendants' motions to suppress the items seized.
The issue in this case is a limited one. Defendants are not contesting Detective Velon's actions in lifting the plastic bag and discovering the cannabis, except insofar as these actions are the fruits of the alleged illegal stop. Defendants argue that the initial stop and questioning were unlawful and that all subsequent seizures, including defendant Reinhardt's arrest, were also illegal.
The issue raised tests the application of section 107-14 of the Illinois Code of Criminal Procedure (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 38, par. 107-14), which is a codification of the constitutional rule regarding investigatory stops first enunciated in Terry v. Ohio (1968), 392 U.S. 1, 20 L.Ed.2d 889, *1029 88 S.Ct. 1868. In Terry, the court held that to justify an official intrusion upon the constitutionally protected interests of the private citizen the officer "must be able to point to specific and articulable facts which, taken together with rational inferences from those facts, reasonably warrant that intrusion." (392 U.S. 1, 21, 20 L.Ed.2d 889, 906, 88 S.Ct. 1868, 1880.) And the court further noted that in making that assessment "it is imperative that the facts be judged against an objective standard: would the facts available to the officer at the moment of the seizure or the search `warrant a man of reasonable caution in the belief' that the action taken was appropriate?" (392 U.S. 1, 21-22, 20 L.Ed.2d 889, 906, 88 S.Ct. 1868, 1880.) The standard requires less than probable cause but more than "inarticulate hunches." (392 U.S. 1, 22, 20 L.Ed.2d 889, 906, 88 S.Ct. 1868, 1880.) See also Brown v. Texas (1979), ___ U.S. ___, 61 L.Ed.2d 357, 363, 99 S.Ct. 2637, 2641; Dunaway v. New York (1979), ___ U.S. ___, ___, 60 L.Ed.2d 824, 835, 99 S.Ct. 2248, 2255.) "[A] seizure must be based on specific, objective facts indicating that society's legitimate interests require the seizure of the particular individual, or that the seizure must be carried out pursuant to a plan embodying explicit, neutral limitations on the conduct of individual officers." Brown v. Texas (1979), ___ U.S. ___, ___, 61 L.Ed.2d 357, 362, 99 S.Ct. 2637, 2640.
The State argues that five interrelated factors gave the police ample reason to suspect that criminal activity was taking place: that the park was a high crime area, that Schoepke was carrying an opaque white plastic bag which from the officer's long previous experience was related to the carrying and sale of narcotics, that Schoepke's conversation with persons in the other car while holding the bag aided the inference that the contents were contraband, that Schoepke's car was parked in a "leased" spot, and finally that since an automobile search was involved the lower standard of reasonableness should be applied.
We completely reject any argument based on an automobile search and reliance upon Chambers v. Maroney (1970), 399 U.S. 42, 26 L.Ed.2d 419, 90 S.Ct. 1975. Since defendants are contesting only the initial stop, cases based on automobile searches do not apply. Nor is there any substance to the State's assertion that Schoepke's car being illegally parked was another factor leading to reasonable suspicion of crime. In this record Officer Ryan did not mention in his testimony that the illegal parking was a basis for advising Detective Velon to check out the situation; and Detective Velon only mentioned the illegal parking when asked his reasons for having the car towed. These facts distinguish People v. Crawford (1978), 64 Ill. App.3d 861, relied upon by the State.
We therefore address the remaining factors in determining whether the trial court correctly ruled on the basis of a Terry stop and pursuant to the Illinois statute.
*1030 We conclude that the specific reasonable inferences which the police officers were entitled to draw from the facts in the light of their experience justified the intrusion to stop and to make the threshold inquiries of Schoepke which led to the discovery of the contraband. The incidence of crime in the area is a characteristic of the area which the officers could consider as a factor. (United States v. Brignoni-Ponce (1975), 422 U.S. 873, 884-85, 45 L.Ed.2d 607, 618, 95 S.Ct. 2574, 2582; People v. McGowan (1977), 69 Ill.2d 73, 79.) Here, the police consistent with their duty to investigate criminal activities in the area had the locale under particular surveillance over a period of several weeks. Further, they were trained, experienced police officers who it could be said were able "to perceive and articulate meaning in given conduct which would be wholly innocent to the untrained observer. * * *" (Brown v. Texas (1979), ___ U.S. ___, ___ n. 2, 61 L.Ed.2d 357, 362 n. 2, 99 S.Ct. 2637, 2641 n. 2.) Schoepke had taken a small, apparently filled, plastic bag from his trunk, which the officer was able to articulate from his experience was often the type of container associated with drug traffic. This is a factor here even though, in itself, it does not justify an investigatory stop, nor, of course, give rise to probable cause. (Compare People v. Gottenborg (1976), 41 Ill. App.3d 8, 10; People v. Damon (1975), 32 Ill. App.3d 937, 938.) These facts which the officers were able to articulate as bearing on their decision, taken together with the apparent rendezvous with another car which arrived and kept its motor running while the defendants approached it and talked to the occupants with Schoepke holding the bag, made for a totality of articulable facts which could reasonably lead to a stop and a limited inquiry. We conclude that the balance between the individual's right of privacy and freedom from random police harassment and the public's interest in effective prevention of crime has been properly struck in favor of the State's position.
The judgment is affirmed.
Affirmed.
WOODWARD and NASH, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2218040 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:39.794652+00 ===

77 Ill.2d 459 (1979)
397 N.E.2d 799
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Appellant,
v.
BOBBY SNYDER, Appellee.
No. 51508.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed November 21, 1979.
William J. Scott, Attorney General, of Springfield, *460 and Norbert Goetten, State's Attorney, of Carrollton (Donald B. Mackay and Melbourne Noel, Assistant Attorneys General, of Chicago, and Robert C. Perry, Robert J. Biderman, Marc D. Towler and Gary J. Anderson, of the State's Attorneys Appellate Service Commission, of Springfield, of counsel), for the People.
Richard J. Wilson, Deputy Defender, and Jeff Justice, Assistant Defender, of the Office of the State Appellate Defender, of Springfield, for appellee.
Appellate court affirmed in part and reversed in part; circuit court affirmed.
MR. CHIEF JUSTICE GOLDENHERSH delivered the opinion of the court:
In the circuit court of Greene County, defendant, Bobby Snyder, pleaded guilty to possession of less than 30 grams of a controlled substance (cocaine) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 56 1/2, par. 1402(b)). He was sentenced to the penitentiary for not less than 2 nor more than 6 years, to be served consecutively with a sentence of not less than 1 nor more than 3 years for an unrelated conviction for robbery and aggravated assault. Defendant's motion to withdraw his plea of guilty and vacate the judgment and sentence was denied. In a Rule 23 order (58 Ill.2d R. 23) the appellate court affirmed the judgment but held that under People v. Dawson (1975), 30 Ill. App.3d 147, the cause must be remanded with directions to modify the sentence to provide that it be served concurrently with the sentence previously imposed. We allowed the People's petition for leave to appeal.
When the sentences were imposed section 5-8-4 of the Unified Code of Corrections (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 38, par. 1005-8-4) provided in pertinent part:
"(b) The court shall not impose a consecutive sentence unless, having regard to the nature and circumstances of the offense and the history and character of the defendant, it is of the opinion that such a term is required to protect the public from further criminal conduct by *461 the defendant, the basis for which the court may set forth in the record.
*   *   *
(e) In determining the manner in which consecutive sentences of imprisonment, one or more of which is for a felony, will be served, the Department of Corrections shall treat the offender as though he had been committed for a single term with the following incidents:
(1) the maximum period of an indeterminate term of imprisonment shall consist of the aggregate of the imposed indeterminate terms plus the aggregate of the imposed determinate sentences for misdemeanors subject to paragraph (c) of this Section;
* * *
(3) the minimum period of imprisonment shall be one year or the aggregate of the minimum period of imprisonment imposed by the court, whichever is greater, subject to paragraph (c) of this Section; * * *." Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 38, pars. 1005-8-4(b), 1005-8-4(e)(3).
In People v. Dawson (1975), 30 Ill. App.3d 147, the defendant, following revocation of his probation, was sentenced to the penitentiary for not less than 3 nor more than 12 years to be served consecutively with two previously imposed concurrent terms of 1 to 5 years. The judgment was affirmed but the cause was remanded with directions to issue an amended mittimus making the sentence concurrent with the prior sentences. In so holding the appellate court said:
"By reason of the provision of sub-paragraph (e) of the same cited section, the minimum and maximum of consecutive sentences are aggregated. Thus, in this case, since the defendant had a sentence of 1 to 5 years and a consecutive sentence was imposed of 3 to 12 years, the defendant had a sentence of 4 to 17 years. It is clear that the consecutive sentence was not `required to protect the public from further *462 criminal conduct by the defendant' since the trial court imposed sentences lesser in nature than that available for the offense of burglary, the same being a Class 2 felony with a provision for a possible 20-year maximum term." 30 Ill. App.3d 147, 148.
The appellate court noted that at the time of defendant's conviction the offense was a Class 3 felony and the circuit court could have imposed a sentence of not less than 3 1/3 nor more than 10 years. It noted further that since the consecutive sentences, aggregated, resulted in a term of not less than 3 nor more than 9 years they could not have been "required to protect the public from further criminal conduct by the defendant * * *."
This record presents the narrow question whether section 5-8-4(b) of the Unified Code of Corrections proscribed the imposition of a consecutive sentence when in the aggregate the minimum and maximum sentences were less than those which could have been imposed by means of a concurrent sentence. The appellate courts have not been in agreement on this question. (See People v. Strickler (1977), 47 Ill. App.3d 419; People v. DeRuse (1977), 48 Ill. App.3d 52.) The People contend that Dawson was incorrectly decided and that section 5-8-4(b) confers upon the circuit court "overlapping jurisdiction" to impose either form of sentence to achieve a desired result. Defendant contends that section 5-8-4(b) limits consecutive sentencing to cases in which concurrent sentencing cannot achieve a desired term of imprisonment. He cites the administrative complexities created by consecutive sentences in the computing of "good time" credits which determine the length of time which a prisoner must serve in order to be eligible for parole. Citing People v. Nicks (1976), 62 Ill.2d 350, and People v. Morgan (1974), 59 Ill.2d 276, defendant argues that the remandment for the purpose of making the *463 sentences concurrent was proper.
The Constitution of 1970 provides:
"All penalties shall be determined both according to the seriousness of the offense and with the objective of restoring the offender to useful citizenship." (Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, sec. 11.)
Within the permissible scope of the pertinent statutory provisions a circuit court is vested with great discretion in determining the sentence or sentences most likely to achieve the constitutional objective. The presentence report contained in this record would support the conclusion that a substantial sentence was "required to protect the public from further criminal conduct by the defendant." There is credible authority for the theory that consecutive sentences have value in the case of an offender who poses an unusual risk to the safety of the public. (ABA Standards, Sentencing Alternatives and Procedures sec. 3.4, commentary c (1968).) These sentences were imposed prior to the amendment of section 5-8-4(b) (see Public Act 80-1099, effective February 1, 1978), and although the circuit court did not set forth the basis for imposing the sentences as is required by the present statute, the transcript leaves no doubt as to the court's opinion and its reason for so doing. On this record we are unable to say that the circuit court was in error. For the reasons stated, insofar as the judgment of the appellate court affirms the judgment of the circuit court, it is affirmed, and that portion of the judgment which remands the cause for modification of the sentence is reversed. The judgment of the circuit court is affirmed.
Appellate court affirmed in part and reversed in part; circuit court affirmed.

=== CASE 2218043 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:39.843839+00 ===

189 Mich. App. 557 (1991)
473 N.W.2d 711
PUTMAN
v.
WAYNE COUNTY COMMUNITY COLLEGE
Docket No. 117796.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided April 3, 1991.
Approved for publication May 22, 1991, at 9:20 A.M.
Gittleman, Paskel, Tashman & Blumberg, P.C. (by Clifford Paskel), for the plaintiff.
Cummings, McClorey, Davis & Acho, P.C. (by Marcia L. Howe and Michael E. Rosati), for the defendants.
Before: DANHOF, C.J., and CYNAR and BRENNAN, JJ.
*558 AFTER REMAND
PER CURIAM.
Plaintiff appeals as of right an order granting defendants' motion for summary disposition. Plaintiff, a member of a theater group, filed suit claiming that defendants negligently maintained an auditorium on the campus of the Wayne County Community College and that as a result of that negligent maintenance he fell from a catwalk in the building while assisting the theater group director, who was working above the stage. In granting summary disposition, the trial court failed to set forth the basis or reasoning for its disposition. We remanded the case to the trial court for articulation of the reasons for its decision. On remand, the trial court stated that it granted summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(7), on the ground that plaintiff's claim was barred by the doctrine of governmental immunity. The trial court rejected plaintiff's contention that his claim fell under the public building exception to governmental immunity. We affirm.
On appeal, plaintiff claims that the trial court erred in granting summary disposition for defendants on the ground that plaintiff's claim was barred by governmental immunity. Plaintiff maintains that his claim falls within the public building exception to the governmental immunity doctrine because the area in which he was injured was part of a public building maintained for public use and he was a member of the general public.
The public building exception to governmental immunity, MCL 691.1406; MSA 3.996(106), applies to public buildings that are open for use by members of the public. Taylor v Detroit, 182 Mich App 583, 588; 452 NW2d 826 (1989). In Taylor, cited by the trial court, the plaintiff filed a wrongful death suit when his ten-year-old son was electrocuted after entering an electrical substation owned and *559 maintained by the City of Detroit. A panel of this Court found that the public building exception to governmental immunity did not apply where only authorized personnel were allowed entry into the substation and where the structure was neither designed nor intended to be accessible or used by the general public. Id.
Here, like in Taylor, the area in which plaintiff was injured was not open for use by members of the general public. The catwalk, like the electrical substation in Taylor, was neither designed nor intended to be used by or accessible to the general public. Only authorized persons, i.e., members of the theater group, were allowed entry to the catwalk area. Therefore, we agree with the trial court that the public building exception to governmental immunity does not apply here and that plaintiff's claim is barred by governmental immunity.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9738884 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:54.574179+00 ===

Mr. JUSTICE ALLOY delivered the opinion of the court: In this cause, the city of Rock Island appeals from the judgment of the circuit court of Rock Island County which was entered, following a bench trial, as a result of which the trial judge entered an order setting aside a deed executed by plaintiffs which conveyed approximately 22 acres for a right-of-way to construct a road on what is described as 92d Avenue. In this action, which was filed as a mandamus action, the court also ordered defendant to institute condemnation proceedings to acquire the property involved, which, at that time, was occupied by a completed roadway constructed by the city of Rock Island, as part of 92d Avenue. The action which was instituted by plaintiffs is asserted to be a mandamus action. Plaintiffs predicate that action upon a written agreement entered into on November 14,1970, between the city of Rock Island and the plaintiffs which provided, in part: “It is agreed by the City of Rock Island, Illinois, that 92nd Avenue from Route 67 (Moffitts’ property) west and north of the Centennial Expressway will be constructed and completed within 5 years from this date or the deed conveying said right-of-way shall be returned.” As part of the agreement defendant agreed to stub one water and one sewer line under 92d Avenue prior to the construction of the improvement, to be used when water and sewer service became available to the area and was desired by plaintiffs. As part of the understanding between the parties, also, the city agreed that the farm premises of the plaintiffs would be rezoned to a commercial zoning classification. The right-of-way acquisition was approved by the city council and a payment of *30,000 was authorized and paid to the plaintiffs for which the right-of-way was conveyed to the defendant city of Rock Island. Appellant states that apparently an escrow arrangement had been worked out but that the right-of-way deed actually was recorded and that plaintiffs did not object to the recording of said right-of-way deed which vested the right-of-way title in the city of Rock Island. The evidence indicated that the fair market value of the property which was conveyed, at the time of the conveyance, was between *86,000 and *110,000. It was, however, anticipated that the extension of 92d Avenue to the Centennial Expressway would encourage plaintiffs to develop the remainder of their property for a commercial venture and would substantially enhance the value of the remainder of the property. It is shown by the record that the city (working with the county) was to obtain the right-of-way for the road, which was to be constructed and which would establish a connection between the Centennial Expressway and 92d Avenue. Apparently, all of the road was in fact constructed on the right-of-way to a point 1% miles from the connection to the Centennial Expressway. No taxes were paid on the property conveyed for the right-of-way after such conveyance to the city of Rock Island. Sometime after the construction of the roadway was undertaken by the city (with the county participating), the State of Illinois, acting through its representatives, advised the city and county that the planned connection was not consistent with the plans made by the State with regard to the Centennial Expressway and that the city and county could not proceed with the Bz-mile connection to the expressway; that the State would take over the obligation of constructing the remaining Bz-mile connection to the Centennial Expressway. The State took over and had entire control of construction of this portion of 92d Avenue and the connection to the Centennial Expressway. It is shown of record that the city at all times kept requesting that the State complete the construction of this roadway connection. It appears that priorities in construction of roads by the State postponed construction of the connecting road, even though the State indicated it would be so constructed when funds became available for the State to construct such connecting road and junction with the Centennial Expressway. Meanwhile, the city, as a result of its agreement to stub a water and sewer line, remained ready and willing to do so and to complete the connection at any point where plaintiffs might designate the connections were desired. No such designation was made by the plaintiffs. It was also shown that the cost of the water and sewer facilities to the city would be approximately *200,000 as of time of the hearing instead of *66,000 at the time of the agreement. As of the time of the hearing in this cause, and since that time, the State project has not yet been completely funded, and no specific time when such project would be completed has as yet been determined, although the State has indicated that the project would be completed. Prior to the filing of the instant action on March 23,1978, no request was made by the Moffitts for reconveyance of the property referred to involved in the right-of-way, even though the five-year period mentioned in the right-of-way agreement had expired on November 16, 1975, and the action is based on the failure of the city to complete the road connection. The sum of *30,000 which was received by the Moffitts was not tendered to the city or to any city official, prior to filing the action, as a return of purchase moneys. Although the *30,000 was “tendered,” by recital, in the original and the amended complaints, the defendant city of Rock Island filed a motion to dismiss on the ground of failure to make a demand and, also, of failure of plaintiffs to tender the money prior to instituting the suit. The trial court denied the motion to dismiss.  On appeal in this court, defendant city of Rock Island contends that the amended complaint should have been dismissed for failure to allege that a reconveyance of the right-of-way sought to be directed by the trial court was previously demanded and that the demand was refused, or that such demand would have been unavailing. Failure to allege a demand normally renders a complaint for mandamus defective. Eley v. Cahill (1970), 126 Ill. App. 2d 272, 261 N.E.2d 819. The plaintiffs point out that, obviously, the defendant was not in a position to complete the construction of 92d Avenue, in view of the fact that the State had the sole authority and power to do so, and a demand on the city to that effect would have been unavailing. The action which was filed by the plaintiffs not only sought to have the trial court direct that the city reconvey the right-of-way property upon the tendered return of the *30,000 received from the city, but, also, to require the city to institute condemnation proceedings to reacquire that property then already occupied by a completed roadway as part of 92d Avenue.  In the amended complaint there is no allegation that a demand for reconveyance was made. The testimony presented at the trial established that no demand in fact was made and that there was no tender of the purchase money to the city prior to the filing of the complaint. Technically, the defendant’s motion to dismiss should have been granted under such circumstances.  In connection with the issues involved in this case, the city of Rock Island also asserts that there was in fact a waiver of the provision of the contract relating to the five-year period by conduct of the plaintiffs. No demand was made at the time the five-year period expired by the plaintiffs and plaintiffs knew that the city could not complete the connection to the expressway, but had completed all but 11* miles of 92d Avenue and was also in the process of or ready to construct the facilities for water and sewer service under the terms of the contract. Such evidence of apparent waiver could arise from the failure to demand strict compliance with the contract provision when time for performance had expired. (See Schmahl v. Aurora National Bank (1941), 311 Ill. App. 228, 35 N.E.2d 689.) A provision of this type could be waived by a party benefiting from it, and such waiver could have been determined to have been made by reason of the activities of the plaintiffs in this case. It is true that they contend that they received no benefit, but they did have a rezoning to commercial classification of their adjoining premises and, also, had provision made for available water and sewer lines which could be stubbed at points desired by plaintiffs, as noted in the record. See also Jacobs v. Carroll (1977), 46 Ill. App. 3d 74, 360 N.E.2d 136; Bartels v. Denler (1975), 30 Ill. App. 3d 499, 333 N.E.2d 640. The reliance of plaintiffs on the cases of People ex rel. King v. Lorenz (1966), 34 Ill. 2d 445, 216 N.E.2d 123, and Robinette v. Department of Public Works & Buildings (1971), 2 Ill. App. 3d 438, 276 N.E.2d 804, is misplaced. These cases involve the enforcement of conditions contained in the deed of dedication or the recorded plat, neither of which is involved in the case at bar. Likewise, this factual situation in the instant case does not involve a reservation of an interest by the person conveying the subject property, as occurred in People ex rel. Department of Public Works & Buildings v. Mokres (1974), 28 Ill. App. 3d 422, 328 N.E.2d 357.  The plaintiffs contend that a demand would have been unavailing since the city could not possibly have proceeded with the program in view of the fact that the State had taken control of the program and was in the sole position to complete the connection for the lM-mile stretch to the expressway. Under such circumstances, in view of the fact that the State had assumed control of the project during the five-year period and prior to the expiration of five years from the date of the agreement, it appears that a supervening impossibility of performance, not permanent in nature, is involved in the case. Under such circumstances, equitable considerations would require that the city be relieved of its obligation on the basis of impossibility of performance, but be required, if there is a change in the impossibility of performance situation, to do what is required to cause completion of the construction and connection to the expressway. It is clear that the city has sought to do this and continues to do so. While the parties have not alluded specifically to the impossibility of performance by the city, this circumstance operates to relieve the city of an obligation to perform a function rendered impossible by the State. The “takeover" by the State was wholly unforeseeable and not in any manner the fault of the city. Courts now grant relief to parties involved in this situation by discharging promisor of his obligation rendered impossible to perform where a supervening impossibility of performance occurs. The city of Rock Island is thus relieved of its obligation to complete the connection within the five-year period. See Restatement of Contracts §§457, 462 (temporary impossibilities) (1932), and 17 Am. Jur. 2d Contracts §408, at 856-57 (1964). Where equitable considerations are involved, as in the instant case, such equities must in fact apply so far as the parties are concerned on the basis of the facts in the instant case disclosing a supervening impossibility of performance, not permanent in nature. Under the facts and circumstances in this case, it appears that the city is still attempting to cause completion of the roadway connecting to the Centennial Expressway. The city has also caused completion of the construction of the portion of the road covered by the right-of-way and is, and has been, as admitted by the plaintiff S. Wallace Moffitt in testifying, constantly attempting to have the State complete the project to connect to the expressway. The city has undertaken substantial obligations, also, to bring water and sewer connections to the property of plaintiffs. In view of all the facts and circumstances, we conclude that the trial court improperly directed a reconveyance of the right-of-way property and a direction to institute condemnation proceedings as to said property. On the basis of the record, the connection of 92d Avenue to the Centennial Expressway will be completed when the State obtains funding for such purposes. Where impossibility of performance intervenes, as here, the parties are discharged as to the specific obligations rendered impossible of performance (by the city obligor). For the reasons stated, therefore, the judgment of the Circuit Court of Rock Island County is reversed and the judgment entered therein purporting to set aside the right-of-way deed and ordering defendant to institute condemnation proceedings is vacated. Reversed and judgment vacated. STOUDER, P. J., and SCOTT, J., concur.

=== CASE 9738885 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:54.579121+00 ===

SUPPLEMENTAL OPINION ON DENIAL OF REHEARING Mr. JUSTICE ALLOY delivered the opinion of the court: The appellees in the above-entitled case, in a petition for rehearing, have suggested that the doctrine of impossibility of performance should not be applied in the instant case on the basis that there was an alternative performance which has not become impossible, i.e., reconveyance of the right-of-way premises to the plaintiffs and cite 17 Am. Jur. 2d Contracts §422 (1964), relating to impossibility of performing alternative promise. In that section, it is also stated: “It has been said that it is impossible to lay down any universal rule as to whether the impossibility of performing one of two promises in the disjunctive excuses nonperformance of the other, but that the principle to be applied in each case must depend on the intention of the parties, to be ascertained from the nature and circumstances of the transaction and the terms of the agreement.” The facts and circumstances in the instant case clearly show that this principle is not applicable under the facts in the instant case and the conduct of the parties as shown in the record. The promises on the part of the city of Rock Island in the instant case were not alternative promises, but were several, mutually supportive in nature, and involved rezoning of a tract of real estate owned by the plaintiffs Moffit, most of which was not involved in, but adjoins, the right-of-way premises conveyed. The city also agreed as part of the agreement, notably, to construct water and sewer connections to the property of plaintiffs, and to build a fence around the right-of-way premises, as well as to construct the road, to which we have referred in the course of the opinion. The city of Rock Island has substantially completed these expressed obligations insofar as it was able to do so, including the construction of the road to a point where the State of Illinois has assumed control of completion to connect to another roadway. The bringing of the sewer and water ready for connections to be made to the plaintiffs’ land at points to be designated by the plaintiffs has been completed. The rezoning for plaintiffs and the construction of the fence have also been completed. The only reason the roadway was not actually connected to the Centennial Expressway results from the fact that the State had taken over the construction of such connection. The State, apparently, has not completed it for the reason that specific money has not as yet been appropriated for such completion by the legislature. There are, and will be, as shown by the record, substantial benefits to the plaintiffs through the water and sewer connections which plaintiffs maintain the city is required to provide for plaintiffs as part of the understanding between the parties. The city does not dispute this obligation and recognizes it as a continuing obligation even though the cost of such connections has risen from an original *66,000 to a total of approximately *200,000. As a result, the city of Rock Island has done all in its power to complete fully the obligations which it has undertaken with the plaintiffs. Plaintiffs continue to insist, as asserted by plaintiff, S. Wallace Moffitt, in his testimony upon the right of plaintiffs to have the sewer and water connections when and where designated by plaintiffs, irrespective of whether or when the roadway connection to the Centennial Expressway is finished by the State. There is also nothing in the record showing that any of the parties indicated that there would be any difficulty in completing the construction of the roadway within the five-year period referred to, and the record shows that the city of Rock Island, did, in fact, pursue the construction to the fullest extent permissible. Nothing in the record indicates that the clause about “return of the deed” to plaintiffs, was intended to assume anything other than that the city of Rock Island should undertake to construct the road and perform other obligations including furnishing water and sewer connections to plaintiffs. None of the parties anticipated that the State would take over the connection of the road to the expressway after the city had substantially completed its obligations undertaken with the Moffitts. It would be entirely contrary to the understanding of the parties that, after completion of the road and making available water and sewer connections for the plaintiffs, the city would be required to deed the premises now occupied by 92nd Avenue and containing the road and other facilities. Equitable principles derived from the doctrine of impossibility of performance must, under the facts and actions of the parties in the instant case, relieve the city of an arbitrary action which would penalize the city, for the reason that the State had taken over the connection of the roadway, a circumstance wholly unanticipated by the parties to this action. It is apparent from the contentions made by the plaintiffs that they have no objective in this cause other than to force a new condemnation proceeding so that the plaintiffs may obtain a larger sum than the *30,000 paid, at the same time the city is now required to spend approximately *200,000 to provide the premises of plaintiffs with sewer and water connections. It is clear from the record that neither of the parties anticipated that the State would intervene in this cause. The provision in the agreement, referring to the five-year time period, obviously was designed to cause the city to expedite performance on its undertaking within that period. That the city has done specifically, and it has completed all of its obligations to the extent possible. The fact that it was unable to complete the connection to the Centennial Expressway resulted wholly and entirely from action by the State which rendered performance on the part of defendant city to make the connection, impossible, even though the city expended substantial sums on completion of the roadway across plaintiffs’ property, on the right-of-way granted and paid for, as well as completion of all other parts of the agreement. It is apparent from the record and the facts in the instant case that all the undertakings of the city were in conjunction with the construction of 92nd Avenue, the installation of sewer and water facilities, the construction of a fence around the right-of-way, and rezoning of plaintiffs’ property. There was no alternative provision which could or would discharge the city of Rock Island from the obligations which were part of the agreement as between the city of Rock Island and the plaintiffs. In applying equitable principles to the issue involved, it is clear that impossibility of performance has properly discharged the city of Rock Island of its obligation to complete the roadway connection within the five-year period, but does not discharge its obligation to make available sewer and water connections. The fencing and rezoning arrangements, also involved in the agreement as between the plaintiffs and the city, were completed. Plaintiffs in this case also raised on petition for rehearing, for the first time, on appeal, a contention that plaintiffs have been deprived of the constitutional rights to just compensation for the premises. Such issue was not raised previously and should not be considered on rehearing. Likewise, in view of the record in this case, that particular contention has no support in the record, since the understanding and agreement of the parties was made voluntarily and for consideration deemed adequate by the parties, and evidenced by an unconditional conveyance and other undertakings on the part of the city, as part of the consideration for the right-of-way land referred to in this case. STOUDER, P. J., and SCOTT, J., concur.

=== CASE 9738886 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:55.430982+00 ===

Riley, J.
In Toussaint v Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Michigan, 408 Mich 579; 292 NW2d 880 (1980), this Court joined the forefront of a nationwide experiment in which, under varying theories, courts extended job security to nonunionized employees. In the vast outpouring of ensuing cases, there are indeed situations in which employers have in reality agreed to limit managerial discretion. However, the theory remains troubling because of those instances in which application of contract law is a transparent invitation to the factfinder to decide not what the "contract” was, but what "fairness” requires.
That courts have not been successful in unravel*632ing the logic of the theory to produce principles that distinguish the first category of cases from the second, is not necessarily a reason to abandon the experiment. As Justice Griffin put it in In re Certified Question, Bankey v Storer Broadcasting Co, 432 Mich 438, 457; 443 NW2d 112 (1989), "[fjairness suggests that a discharge-for-cause policy announced with flourishes and fanfare at noonday should not- be revoked by a pennywhistle trill at midnight.” But unless the theory has some relation to the reality, calling something a contract that is in no sense a contract cannot advance respect for the law. Thus, we seek a resolution which is consistent with contract law relative to the employment setting while minimizing the possibility of abuse by either party to the employment relationship.
It is in this context that we address the question presented in this appeal: whether an employer’s oral statements and written policy statements created an employment contract terminable only for cause.
FACTS AND PROCEEDINGS
In August of 1976, plaintiff applied for a sales position at defendant’s North Kent Mall store in Grand Rapids. Plaintiff was interviewed by Mr. Vern Harryman who, according to plaintiff, told her that she would have a job at Montgomery Ward & Co., Incorporated, as long as she achieved her sales quota. With regard to his meeting with plaintiff, Mr. Harryman testified:
When we hired commission salespeople, that’s sort of a different type of employee than a time-card person. Their main objective, the number one thing was that they must attain their draw of a hundred and twenty-six dollars a week, and gener*633ally, as long as they generated sales and were honest, why, they had a job at Wards, and that’s the way we used to hire our people.
At the time of her hiring, plaintiff signed a sheet entitled "Rules of Personal Conduct.” The sheet stated that adherence to company policies would help an employee to achieve "growth, profit, security, [and a] successful career.” The rules further provided that anyone involved in the following activities would be immediately dismissed.1
Several years later, in January of 1982, defendant issued to all employees a handbook entitled "Welcome to Wards.” The handbook contained disciplinary guidelines which classified infractions according to severity, and allowed four types of discipline for transgression: "1) Written Warning(s); 2) Suspension without Pay; 3) Probation . . . ; and 4) Separation.” In the back of the handbook was a form designated the "New Employee Sign-Off Sheet.” The sheet provided in part:
I have read and fully understand the rules governing my employment with Montgomery Ward. I agree to employment with Montgomery Ward under the conditions explained. I understand these conditions can be changed by the Company, without notice, at any time. I also understand and *634agree that my employment is for no definite period and may, regardless of the time and manner of payment of my wages and salary, be terminated at any time, with or without cause, and without any previous notice.
Although a personnel employee informed plaintiff that the sheet was. applicable to her, plaintiff refused to sign the form. Plaintiff claimed that it applied only to new employees, and she did not "feel it’s right that you can fire somebody for no reason, at all.” Plaintiff noted on the back of the sign-off sheet, "Read and do not wish to sign. 5-20-82. [s] Mary Rowe.”
Defendant issued another employee handbook to its work force in August of 1982. The August, 1982 handbook also contained an "Employee Sign-off Sheet” providing for termination with or without cause. Plaintiff received but did not sign this sheet. All Montgomery Ward employees, including plaintiff, received another handbook in May of 1983. In the 1983 handbook, there was further language providing for employment at will. Virtually the same disciplinary guidelines were included in all the handbooks.
The Court of Appeals opinion aptly describes the facts surrounding plaintiff’s termination.
On March 8, 1984, plaintiff was scheduled to work from 1 p.m. to 9 p.m. At 2 p.m., she was observed leaving the store from an unauthorized exit by security personnel. She returned approximately four hours later. Plaintiff did not receive permission to leave the store from her supervisor, although she claimed that she attempted to contact him several times since the previous day but was unable. She did tell her co-workers that she had to leave on an emergency but did not say where she was going or how long she would be gone. Further, even though the salaries of commis*635sioned salespersons are not do. indent upon the hours worked, plaintiff failed t_. punch out when she left or punch in when she returned, as required by company policy. Neither did she make note of her four-hour absence on the time card which she turned in at the end of the work week.
Two days later, plaintiff was called into the office of the store manager to answer for the unauthorized absence. She allegedly gave no explanation for leaving the store and refused to provide a written statement on the matter. She said only that she could not remember where she was for those four hours. As a result of this incident, plaintiff was terminated from defendant’s employ.
On May 14, 1984, plaintiff filed a complaint against defendant in the Kent Circuit Court asserting claims for wrongful discharge, breach of contract, and several other causes of action which are not relevant for purposes of this appeal. A jury trial on the matter was held on February 18 and 19, 1986. At the conclusion of plaintiff’s proofs, defendant moved for a directed verdict on the ground that she was an at-will employee who was subject to dismissal at any time without cause. The court denied that motion, reasoning that an issue of fact existed for the jury to determine whether there was a just-cause employment contract or whether plaintiff’s employ was terminable at the will of defendant. The trial then continued and eventually concluded in a jury verdict of $86,500 plus interest in favor of plaintiff. A judgment to that effect was thereafter entered by the court.
On May 1, 1986, defendant filed motions for judgment notwithstanding the verdict (JNOV), a new trial, or remittitur. By court order dated June 19, 1986, each of those motions was denied.[2]
Defendant appealed the decision, and the Court *636of Appeals reversed,3 finding that plaintiff was an employee at will. Plaintiff appealed in this Court, and we ordered Rowe held in abeyance pending resolution of In re Certified Question, supra, and Bullock v Automobile Club of Michigan, 432 Mich 472; 444 NW2d 114 (1989). On May 2, 1990, this Court granted leave to appeal. 434 Mich 910 (1990).
i
The issue posed by this case is whether defendant employer’s oral statements and written policy statements directed at plaintiff may be interpreted to permit a promise implied in fact not to terminate except for cause. We find that plaintiff’s allegations are insufficient to support her contention of a promise implied in fact limiting the defendant’s right to terminate her employment. Thus, plaintiff cannot maintain an action for breach of contract as a result of her dismissal.
This Court has held that contracts for permanent employment are for an indefinite period of time and are presumptively construed to provide employment at will. Lynas v Maxwell Farms, 279 Mich 684, 687; 273 NW 315 (1937). When contract claims rest on proofs of oral representations, the presumption provides assurance that oral contracts for an indefinite term, which fall outside the statute of frauds, will be recognized only where circumstances suggest both parties intended to be bound. The presumption may be overcome by proof of an express contract for a definite term or a provision forbidding discharge in the absence of just cause, or it may be overcome by proofs which permit a promise implied in fact of employment *637security, i.e., for a particular period of time or to terminate only for just cause.
In Lynas, the Court declined to imply a durational term where the plaintiff accepted an offer of a "permanent lifetime position with the defendant.” The Court observed, however, that the presumption of employment at will can be overcome if a contract is accompanied by "distinguishing features or provisions,” or additional consideration supporting a term of permanent employment.
Again, in Toussaint v Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Michigan, supra, p 600, the Court stated that "[b]ecause the parties began with complete freer dom, the court will presume that they intended to obligate themselves to a relationship at will.” In general, parties to an employment contract "remain free to provide, or not to provide, for job security.” Valentine v General American Credit, Inc, 420 Mich 256, 258; 362 NW2d 628 (1984).
In Toussaint, we had the opportunity to expand on the rule in Lynas and explore the kinds of "distinguishing features or provisions,” or special circumstances which limit an employer’s right to discharge on an open-ended contract. This Court there found sufficient factual evidence to permit a jury to imply a limitation on the employer’s right to discharge and held that a provision of termination for just cause may become part of a contract for indefinite duration by express agreement, or "as a result of an employee’s legitimate expectations grounded in an employer’s policy statements.” 408 Mich 598. However, the Court was careful to limit the effect of its holding:
Employers are most assuredly free to enter into employment contracts terminable at will without assigning cause. We hold only that an employer’s express agreement to terminate only for cause, or statements of company policy and procedure to *638that effect, can give rise to rights enforceable in contract. [408 Mich 610. Emphasis added.][4]
Plaintiff asserts that oral statements made to her at a prehiring interview amounted to a contract to terminate only for just cause, while defendant asserts that the plaintiff was an employee at will. However, this is not a situation in which interpretation requires an express determination of credibility. McIntyre v Smith-Bridgman & Co, 301 Mich 629; 4 NW2d 36 (1942). Rather, this is a situation in which the parties attach different meanings to undisputed facts, and the Court is asked to conclude that the jury was entitled to determine from the conduct of the parties that a promise existed limiting the employer’s ability to discharge.
Again, we are asked here to decide whether an employer’s oral statements and written policy statements created an employment contract terminable only for cause. We do not decide that the words and conduct of parties cannot, as a matter of law, create an issue submissible to a jury regarding the existence of a contract implied in fact. Moreover, we do not suggest that a contract of employment is too indefinite to be enforced where the employee’s consideration is the work performed in response to a unilateral offer. Nor do we depart from the concept that the presumption of employment at will is a rule of construction rather than a substantive limitation. As Justice Ryan acknowledged in his dissent in Toussaint, supra, p 645, "[w]e have no doubt that circumstances could exist in which an employer’s written policies *639. . . might be incorporated by reference, expressly or impliedly, into an otherwise oral employment contract and thus become a declaration of the employment agreement.” It is just as true, however, that the party bearing the burden of overcoming the presumption of employment at will must convince the court either that it should supply an omitted term or that the circumstances are such that the jury should be permitted to so conclude.5
In determining whether a reasonable factfinder can find a promise of job security implied in fact, we look to all the facts and circumstances to evaluate the intent of the parties. As stated in Miller v Stevens, 224 Mich 626, 632; 195 NW 481 (1923):
A contract is implied where the intention as to it is not manifested by direct or explicit words *640between the parties, but is to be gathered by implication or proper deduction from the conduct of the parties, language used or things done by them, or other pertinent circumstances attending the transaction.
In deciding whether there was mutual assent to a just-cause provision, we use an objective test, "looking to the expressed words of the parties and their visible acts.” (Emphasis added.) Goldman v Century Ins Co, 354 Mich 528, 535; 93 NW2d 240 (1958); Stark v Kent Products, Inc, 62 Mich App 546; 233 NW2d 643 (1975).
The starting point in analyzing oral statements for contractual implications is to determine the meaning that reasonable persons might have attached to the language, given the circumstances presented. In our analysis, we agree with the federal district court in Carpenter v American Excelsior Co, 650 F Supp 933, 936, n 6 (ED Mich, 1987):
After all Lynas as well as reality compels recognition of the fact that neither party to the beginning of an employment relationship expects it to be unsatisfactory, and both hope it will have a significant duration. This hope and noncontractual wish is expressed in terms of language such as "as long as you do the job.”
Consequently, the court stated that any orally grounded contractual obligation for permanent employment "must be based on more than an expression of an optimistic hope of a long relationship.” Id. (Emphasis added.)
Along the same lines, Justice Griffin’s remarks in Bullock, supra at 517, are instructive:
Surely, a modicum of realism and common sense *641is needed. An assurance such as that alleged in the instant case simply cannot be separated from the realities of the working world. It should be recognized that "lifetime” employment contracts are extraordinary and, being so, "must be expressed in clear and unequivocal terms before a court will conclude that an employer intended to enter into such a weighty obligation.” [Griffin, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part. Citations omitted.]
To be sure, because of the difficulty in verifying oral promises, the statements must clearly permit a construction which supports the asserted meaning. The "overreaching principle of contract interpretation” is that the court looks to all the relevant circumstances surrounding the transaction, including all writings, oral statements, and other conduct by which the parties manifested their intent. Farnsworth, Contracts, § 7.10, p 492.
We thus look to the facts in Toussaint to guide us in evaluating the oral statements implicated in the case before us. Both of the plaintiffs, Mr. Toussaint and Mr. Ebling, "negotiated specifically regarding job security with the persons who interviewed and hired them.” 408 Mich 612. Prior to being hired, Toussaint had several interviews with the cotreasurer of the company, and the position he sought was assistant to the treasurer. Toussaint claimed he was promised he would not be terminated " 'as long as I did my job.’ ” Further, upon inquiring about job security, he was handed a manual which expressly confirmed that he could be released " 'for just cause only.’ ” Id. at 613.
Ebling also had several interviews prior to being hired. He was interviewed by the executive vice president and the general manager about a marketing director position. He expressed concerns specifically about job security to the vice president. *642In particular, he voiced concerns about a personality conflict with his supervisor. Subsequent to negotiations, the vice president agreed not to terminate Ebling as long as he was doing his job.
In the instant case, plaintiff was interviewed for the job by Vern Harryman, sales manager of the appliance department. Although defendant had been advertising to attract salespersons, plaintiff told Harryman " 'Well, I hadn’t seen the ad, I just kind of stumbled in there ....’” With regard to representations pertinent to job security, plaintiff testified that "[h]e said that he needed somebody to sell sewing machines and vacuum cleaners and that this job would involve selling, and as long as I sold, I would have a job at Montgomery Ward.” (Emphasis added.)6_
*643Contrasting the surrounding circumstances of this case with Toussaint and Ebling to determine if there was mutual assent on a provision for permanent employment, or if the statements were noncontractual expressions of "optimistic hope of a long relationship,” we find the oral statements insufficient to rise to the level of an agreement providing termination only for just cause. Although the "as long as” statement bears resemblance to remarks made in Toussaint, we find objective evidence lacking to permit a reasonable juror to find that a reasonable promisee would interpret Harryman’s statements and actions as a promise of termination only for cause implied in fact.
Unlike Toussaint, plaintiff did not engage in preemployment negotiations regarding security. She simply "stumbled” into the store one day and had one interview before being hired. Nor is there any testimony suggesting that plaintiff inquired about job security. Therefore, Harryman’s statements could not have been addressed to any inquiry regarding job security. In short, no objective evidence exists that their minds met on the subject of continued employment. In addition, we note that in Toussaint, the plaintiffs were applying for singular, executive job positions. That the positions were unique supports the finding that the terms were specifically negotiated. Here, plaintiff was one of many departmental salespersons. The fact that plaintiff applied for one of several identical positions militates against the likelihood that the contract terms were negotiable and suggests that company policy was more likely to govern.
Furthermore, in Toussaint, in response to in*644quiries about job security, Toussaint was given a manual specifically providing termination only for just cause, and containing extensive disciplinary classifications. The manual offered objective support for the oral representations made to the plaintiff. In the instant case, the objective support was lacking. Upon being hired, plaintiff signed a "Rules of Personal Conduct” sheet. The sheet did not contain elaborate disciplinary procedures and, more importantly, did not contain the "release for just cause only” language. Moreover, the signed sheet conflicts with plaintiff’s interpretation of the oral remarks that she would have a job as long as she achieved her sales quota, and undercuts any belief that a contract arose from the interview. The rules listed conduct such as theft, destruction of property, falsification of records, and moral impropriety which would result in immediate dismissal. Plaintiff’s agreement to abide by those rules suggests that any subjective belief she maintained that she could only be dismissed for failure to obtain her quota was not reasonable.
Lastly, we find that Harryman’s testimony was insufficient to support an agreement of termination only for just cause. As suggested by our holding in Lynas, supra, and supported by this Court’s treatment of the facts in Toussaint and Ebling, an employee who seeks to establish from conduct a promise implied in fact must meet a higher standard than an employee who relies on express language. Logic compels the conclusion that where parties expressly negotiate with offers and counteroffers, it is more reasonable to anticipate mutual assent. Conversely, there is less chance that the parties desired or intended the result prayed for where, as here, conduct and oral statements are claimed to create a promise of job security implied in fact. See DiBonaventura v *645Consolidated Rail Corp, 372 Pa Super 420; 539 A2d 865 (1988).
Thus, we conclude that the oral statements of job security must be clear and unequivocal to overcome the presumption of employment at will. As stated by Justice Ryan in his separate opinion in Toussaint, supra at 632-633:
The second exception to the general rule consists of those instances in which the employment agreement includes some "distinguishing feature[s] or provision^],” as the Court put it in Lynas, supra, so as to preclude a construction of employment at will. A classic example of this type modification of an indefinite hiring is the modern collective bargaining agreement in which there is often included a provision that an employee shall be discharged only for cause. Provisions of this nature clearly and forcefully indicate a mutual intention to limit the employer’s discretion in terminating the employment relationship.
Harryman’s words were couched in general terms, more akin to stating a policy as opposed to offering an express contract. His words were vague when discussing termination (e.g., "generally, as long as they generated sales and were honest . . . they had a job at Wards”; "about the only way that you could be terminated would be if you failed to make your draw . . . .”). (Emphasis added.) We find that these words do not clearly indicate an intent to form a contract for permanent employment. Rather, the context of Harry-man’s comments suggests that they were merely intended to emphasize the number one priority of plaintiff’s job — sales.
We also reject plaintiff’s contention that the "Rules of Personal Conduct” created a contract to terminate only for cause. In signing the sheet, *646plaintiff agreed that she would be dismissed if she engaged in the prohibited conduct. Nothing in the rules suggested that the enumerated conduct was the only basis for dismissal, and the rules were consistent with a termination-at-will policy. Thus, we find no evidence from which a reasonable promisee could find a promise of job security. Consequently, we find no evidence from which reasonable minds could find that there was mutual assent on a term of employment terminable only for cause.
ii
‘Having concluded that the employer’s oral statements and the "Rules of Personal Conduct” did not form contracts for permanent employment, we must next decide whether the disciplinary guidelines promulgated by defendant gave rise to an employment contract providing termination only for just cause where defendant concurrently issued sign-off sheets containing an employment-at-will policy. We find that plaintiff cannot maintain an action for breach of contract on the basis of the disciplinary guidelines because the last handbook which plaintiff received clearly set forth an employment-at-will policy.
In Toussaint, this Court held that an employer’s written policy statements announcing a policy of termination only for cause may create contract rights if the statements give rise to "legitimate expectations” of just-cause employment in the employee. In that case, the Court determined a jury question was presented regarding whether a policy manual created such expectations. The Court stated:
Since Blue Cross published and distributed a *647260-page manual establishing elaborate procedures promising "[t]o provide for the administration of fair, consistent and reasonable corrective discipline” and "to treat employees leaving Blue Cross in a fair and consistent manner and to release employees for just cause only,” its employees could justifiably rely on those expressions and conduct themselves accordingly. [408 Mich 617. Emphasis added.]
Referring to the just-cause provision, the Court stated:
There were, thus, on this separate basis alone, special circumstances sufficient to overcome the presumptive construction that the contract was terminable at will. [408 Mich 614.]
In In re Certified Question, supra, the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals certified the following question to this Court:
"Once a provision that an employee shall not be discharged except for cause becomes legally enforceable under Toussaint [supra], as a result of an employee’s legitimate expectations grounded in the employer’s written policy statements, may the employer thereafter unilaterally change those written policy statements by adopting a generally applicable policy and alter the employment relationship of existing employees to one at the will of the employer in the absence of an express notification to the employees from the outset that the employer reserves the right to make such a change?” [432 Mich 441.]
In responding to the certified question, this Court held that a company’s written policy statements, which created legitimate expectations in the employee of discharge for cause only, could be unilat*648erally modified by the employer. The Court stated that
[a]n employer may, without an express reservation of the right to do so, unilaterally change its written policy from one of discharge for cause to one of termination at will, provided that the employer gives affected employees reasonable notice of the policy change. [432 Mich 441.]
The Court also required that the notice be uniformly given to employees affected by the policy change.
Much of the same documentation as in the case before us was involved in Dell v Montgomery Ward & Co, Inc, 811 F2d 970, 972 (CA 6, 1987). In Dell, the plaintiff sued for breach of contract after he was terminated by the defendant. The plaintiff alleged a contract terminable only for cause arose out of the defendant’s Progressive Discipline Reference Guide (pdrg). The pdrg was designed to give supervisors a procedure to follow when punishing employees. However, within the pdrg, it was stated that "[t]his procedure does not form an employment contract.” (Emphasis deleted.) Also, the defendant’s Human Resources Policy Manual contained a provision that discharge could be with or without cause, and also that discipline procedures did not constitute employment contracts. Furthermore, the plaintiff signed a sheet in 1982 which stated that employment could be terminated with or without cause. Writing for the court, Judge Ryan determined that there was no contract making employment terminable only for cause:
It is difficult to imagine what more the defendant might have done to make it crystal clear to Dell, and all Montgomery Ward employees, that, unless some other arrangement were made di*649rectly with the President and Chief Executive Officer or Executive Vice President of Human Resources, Montgomery Ward employees are employees "at will” who may be discharged with or without cause.
. . . The unequivocal language in the "sign off sheet” in this case, which stated that the employees could be discharged "with or without cause and without any previous notice,” means what it says and is binding upon the parties. Similarly, the plain and simple statement in the pdrg, that the due process procedures established there did "not form an employment contract,” likewise means what it says. [811 F2d 974.]
In the instant case, plaintiff received handbooks containing disciplinary guidelines.7 She claims the guidelines at least create a question for the jury regarding the existence of a contract providing termination for cause.
However, similar to the "sign-off sheet” in Dell, in the instant case the 1983 handbook8 contained unequivocal language expressing defendant’s termination-at-will policy. Under a heading entitled "Employment Relationship,” a paragraph in. the 1983 handbook provided:
Because business requirements fluctuate often in our industry, your employment conditions and status are subject to change at any time. Therefore, although you may have been hired for a specific position, with specified hours, pay, duties, etc., all of these can be reduced, increased or, in fact, terminated without advance notice and for any reason. Consequently, you also have the right to terminate your employment in the same man*650ner, at any time, for any reason. This lack of a guarantee or an employment contract also applies to other benefits, privileges and working conditions of employment at Montgomery Ward.
Whatever the nature of plaintiff’s expectations with regard to termination prior to the issuance of the 1983 manual, the last handbook distributed to plaintiff, we find that the 1983 manual clearly and unambiguously notified plaintiff of the company’s termination-at-will policy. We are persuaded therefore that the 1983 manual would have succeeded in modifying any prior expectations of termination only for cause.9
Furthermore, we reject plaintiff’s argument that she did not have reasonable notice of the policy. In addition to the May, 1983, manual, the two earlier sign-off sheets distributed in 1982 asserted a termination-at-will policy.10 Plaintiff was asked several times by the personnel department to sign the January, 1982, sign-off sheet, but she refused. We also note that the August, 1982, sheet was addressed to "employees,” not "new employees.” Also, plaintiff was not discharged until March 8, 1984. The last handbook distributed to plaintiff was sent out at least nine months before her discharge. Therefore, as a matter of law, we find that the existence of three handbooks clearly providing for termination at will, the last of which was sent to plaintiff at least nine months prior to termination, constituted reasonable notice of defendant’s policy.
Moreover, we find the fact that plaintiff did not *651sign the employment at will disclaimers is not determinative. If plaintiff had a prior express contract to be discharged only for cause, her assent would be required to modify the agreement. However, there was no such prior agreement. Consequently, we agree with the Court of Appeals statement that:
Her disagreement with the provisions contained therein cannot negate their effect. She was aware of the provisions and, therefore, any contrary expectations she may have harbored cannot be deemed reasonable. [Unpublished opinion per curiam, decided November 9, 1988 (Docket No. 93817), pp 5-6.]
In light of our findings, we would hold that upon receiving the May, 1983, manual, plaintiff could no longer harbor any legitimate expectations of a discharge-for-cause policy. Defendant expressly and clearly reserved the right to discharge employees at will.
hi11
Justice Levin’s lengthy dissent clearly evidences an insistence that this Court broaden the reach of his majority opinion in Toussaint which we elect not to do.
Thus, we respond — briefly—noting:
—In his dissenting opinion, Justice Levin relies on § 32 of the Restatement of Contracts, stating:
Today, this Court, without reference to § 32 of the first Restatement of Contracts [presently § 33 of the Restatement of Contracts, 2d], and ignoring cases enforcing contracts with ”as long as” terms, *652promulgates its own restatement of the law in holding that Rowe may not maintain an action to enforce a promise to employ her for as long as she did "the work” — selling—because, among other reasons, the promise did not include a durational term or a sufficiently definite durational term. [Slip op, p 22.]
While we acknowledge the Restatement as persuasive authority on the subject of contracts, this Court is not, nor is any other court, bound to follow any of the rules set out in the Restatement. Moreover, even assuming, as Justice Levin urges, that our ruling is inconsistent with the Restatement, the writings of the American Law Institute do not control the rulings of this Court, nor is the contract law of this state necessarily written to be consistent with the Restatement.
—In section ii(f) of his opinion, Justice Levin remarks that "[c]ourts generally regard 'as long as’ contracts as considerably more than expressions of a 'hope and noncontractual wish,’ but, rather, as expressing a durational term.” Post, p 694.
However, 56 CJS, Master and Servant, § 31, p 414, states:
Permanent employment contracts. As a general rule employment contracts which in some form purport to provide for permanent employment, as where the agreement is for the employee to have a permanent position or permanent employment or employment for life, or the employee is hired to fill a "permanent vacancy,” or where the employment is to be for as long as the master is operating, as long as the employee desires the position, or as long as the employee satisfactorily performs his duties, are terminable at will by either party where they are not supported by any consideration other than the obligation of service to be performed on the one hand and wages or salary to be paid on the other. [Emphasis added.]
*653Furthermore, this Court has previously found an "as long as” statement insufficient to supply a durational term. In Lynas, supra, p 687, "plaintiff was offered a permanent position or one for life so long as his services were satisfactory to defendant.” The Court held that a durational term was lacking and that the relationship was for an indefinite term and terminable at will.
The Lynas Court analogized that case to Lord v Goldberg, 81 Cal 596, 597-598; 22 P 1126 (1889). In Lord, it was
agreed by and between plaintiff and defendants that in consideration of his entering into their employment as such solicitor, and using all his efforts to secure certain-named persons as customers, and to extend their business, "they would give him permanent employment so long as he should use his best efforts to extend their business, paying him at the rate of twenty dollars per week, and increase his salary as the business increased” .... [Emphasis added.]
The court determined that the agreement was for an indefinite term and terminable at the will of either party.
In illustrating its holding, the Lynas Court also cited Rape v Mobile & ORR Co, 136 Miss 38, 45; 100 So 585 (1924), where the plaintiff was promised to have permanent and steady employment " 'as long as he was able and willing to perform such services properly.’ ” The court found that there was no durational term and the agreement was terminable at will.
In another case cited as illustrative by the Lynas Court, Arentz v Morse Dry Dock & Repair Co, 249 NY 439, 441; 164 NE 342 (1928), the plaintiff alleged that he was orally promised a permanent position, or a lifetime employment contract. In *654finding an agreement for termination at will, the Court of Appeals of New York stated that "[a]n agreement to employ the plaintiff in such a position for life is so unusual that we would expect to find it contained in some writing.” The court later asked:
Are we justified in saying that under all these circumstances the plaintiff has proved a life employment, or what amounts to about the same thing, an employment which is to last as long as the corporation does business, and the plaintiff’s services are satisfactory? Such contracts at least should be specific and definite, with little or no room for misunderstanding, even if they are not required to be in writing. [Id., p 443.]
The history behind the Lynas case teaches us that "as long as” statements do not necessarily provide durational terms, and contracts providing for permanent employment should be specific and definite with regard to duration.
—Many of the cases cited by Justice Levin in section ii(f) of his opinion are distinguishable from this case. Of the ones that are not distinguished here, none are controlling with respect to this Court.
—The following cases cited in Justice Levin’s opinion are distinguishable from this case because they are not employment contract cases: City of Superior v Douglas Co Telephone Co, 141 Wis 363; 122 NW 1023 (1909); Caplis v Monroe, 228 Mich 586; 200 NW 123 (1924); Long Beach Drug Co v United Drug Co, 13 Cal 2d 158; 88 P2d 698 (1939); Fuchs v United Motor Stage Co, Inc, 135 Ohio St 509; 21 NE2d 669 (1939); Phelps v Shawprint, Inc, 328 Mass 352; 103 NE2d 687 (1952); Big Spring v Texas Bd of Control, 404 SW2d 810 (Tex, 1966); *655State v Orkin Exterminating Co, Inc, 528 So 2d 198 (La App, 1988).
—In the following cases, the contract provisions outlining durational terms are clearly and specifically set out in writing so that the parties’ intent is more easily discernible. Of course, in the instant case, we must attempt to ascertain the parties’ intent from vague oral statements: Fuchs; Long Beach Drug Co; Big Spring, supra; McMullan v Dickinson Co, 60 Minn 156; 62 NW 120 (1895); Kirkley v FH Roberts Co, 268 Mass 246; 167 NE 289 (1929).
In Diggs IV v Pepsi-Cola Metropolitan Bottling Co, Inc, 861 F2d 914 (CA 6, 1988), the court found an enforceable oral promise that as long as the plaintiff’s performance was satisfactory, he would have a job. However, in Diggs, the promise was made in response to the plaintiff’s direct inquiries about job security. In the instant case, plaintiff made no inquiries about job security. Whether the parties to a contract negotiate or specifically discuss a subject is relevant to a determination regarding mutual assent. Furthermore, the court in Diggs mischaracterizes the district court’s decision in Carpenter, supra. The court in Diggs states that "[u]nlike Carpenter, Diggs did not sign an 'employment-at-will’ clause.” 861 F2d 918. However, the plaintiff in Carpenter also did not sign the employment application containing the clause.12
In Ehrenworth v Stuhmer & Co, 229 NY 210; 128 NE 108 (1920), the plaintiff agreed to exclusively sell black bread made by the defendant, and the defendant agreed to furnish the plaintiff with all his black bread requirements. The agreement *656was to last as long as both parties remained in business. Since the plaintiff was an exclusive agent, selling only the defendant’s black bread, the circumstances were more conducive to finding a durational term. Also, the statement that as long as both parties are in business provides a definite standard, whereas "as long as she sold” is a vague, isolated statement on which to pin a term of duration.
In State v Orkin Exterminating Co, Inc, supra, p 199, pest control services were "for the lifetime of the treated structure so long as the customer paid a specified annual renewal fee.” The court focused on the phrase the "lifetime of the structure” in finding the term definite and ascertainable. However, in this state, lifetime employment contracts are indefinite and terminable at will.13
—In section vn of his opinion, Justice Levin incorrectly determines that plaintiff did not assert that the 1983 manual, or procedures found therein, provided a basis for a finding of just cause employment.
Virtually the same disciplinary guidelines are found in each of the manuals. Plaintiff’s brief sets out what it refers to as "four major evidentiary features” in the case: (1) the 1982 handbook, (2). the 1983 handbook, (3) the "sign-off ” sheet, and (4) the testimony of Mr. Harryman and 1976 Rules of Conduct.
Further, the plaintiff’s brief later states:
It is Plaintiff’s contention that the 1982 hand*657book is a reiteration of the "for cause” policy first established by Mr. Harryman’s statement and the 1976 personal rules of conduct. This means that there are three separate bases for Ms. Rowe’s objective expectancy that she would not be terminated except for cause, i.e., the oral statements, the 1976 Personal Rules of Conduct (Exhibit 2), and the 1982 handbook (Exhibit 10). [Emphasis added.]
Plaintiff also argued in the Court of Appeals that the disciplinary classifications found in the manuals supported an agreement for just-cause employment. The Court of Appeals stated:
Plaintiff asserts that the jury was properly allowed to decide what type of contract existed in the instant case because two factors raised an issue for the trier of fact. Those two factors were: (1) the promise allegedly made to plaintiff at her job interview that she would have a job as long as she met her sales quota, and (2) defendant’s disciplinary classification and procedure. As to the latter factor, plaintiff claimed that, because the classification encompassed misconduct that would constitute good cause for discharge, such created a reasonable expectation in the employees that they would not be discharged except for good cause. [Slip op, p 5.]
Along the same lines, Justice Levin argues that we incorrectly framed the issue. In so arguing, he states that "Rowe’s express contract claim for wrongful discharge does not depend at all on Montgomery Ward’s 'written policy statements’ or on terms left to inference,”14 thus flying in the face of the passages set out above that plaintiff did assert that the guidelines found within the manuals formed the basis for a just-cause contract.
*658CONCLUSION
In summary, we find the oral statements relied on by plaintiff insufficient to rise to the level of an agreement providing termination only for just cause. Moreover, the circumstances do not support a finding of mutual assent on a provision for permanent employment.
We also find that the "Rules of Personal Conduct” did not create a contract terminable only for cause.
Finally, plaintiff cannot maintain an action for breach of contract on the basis of the disciplinary guidelines because the last handbook which plaintiff received clearly set forth an employment-at-will policy. Thus, we would affirm the decision of the Court of Appeals.
Brickley and Griffin, JJ., concurred with Riley, J.
APPENDIX
Disciplinary Action Guidelines
Disciplinary guidelines have been established so that you know exactly what the company expects of you. These guidelines detail the actions that will cause disciplinary action to be taken by the company.
*659There are four types of discipline that may be used by supervisors to correct improper conduct/performance: 1) written warning(s); 2) suspension without pay; 3) probation; and 4) separation.
Violations are categorized as Class a, b, or c. The type of disciplinary action taken will depend on the violation committed. The violations are:
Class a
Counter Productive Behavior
An act or acts which result in theft, fraud, rape (or other sex offenses) arson, extortion, embezzlement, burglary, larceny, or violence using deadly weapons; willful violation of company conflict of interest policies; unauthorized disclosure of confidential company information; any other personal conduct which substantially limits your effectiveness as a Montgomery Ward employee by reason of its detrimental effect on the business or reputation of the company.
Insubordination
Refusal to follow direct instructions from a supervisor or manager.
Use or Possession of Deadly Weapons
Unauthorized use or possession of explosives, firearms or other weapons, on company premises or while performing company business.
Irresponsible Actions
Behavior which creates a substantial and unjustifiable risk or harm to another person; serious damage to company property; damage to the property or person of others while on company time or premises. Includes, but is not limited to: harassment of other employees or customers; reckless *660use of company equipment; physical assault, or attempted physical assault on any fellow employee, customer, vendor or visitor.
Trafficking or Use of Drugs/Alcohol
Sale, possession or use of controlled drugs or alcohol on company premises; drug or alcohol dependency that substantially interferes with your ability to perform assigned responsibilities. (If mitigating circumstances, such as bona fide legal disability are present, the employee may be reinstated with satisfactory evidence of recovery.)
Fraudulent/Deceptive Practices
Use of company property, credit, services or employment relationship in a manner other than prescribed by Company Policy, Federal, State or Local Laws. Includes, but is not limited to: willful manipulation or falsification of any company documents); misuse of employee/family discounts; misappropriation of company, vendor or customer property, services or credit; theft; fraud; price negotiation; or gross misuse of check cashing privileges. Refer to page 17 for discount information.
Class b
Hazardous Acts
Violation of applicable safety rules or actions which are in fact unsafe work practices. Includes, but is not limited to: failure to wear personal protective equipment, (safety goggles/glasses, safety toe shoes, safety belts and lanyards); report all occupational injuries or conform to applicable o.s.h.a. regulations.
Employee Harassment
Harassment based on race, sex, age, national origin, religion, physical or mental handicap affect*661ing any aspect of employment. Includes, but is not limited to: offensive or degrading remarks or comments, innuendoes, or implication which, to a reasonable person create a hostile, intimidating or offensive work environment.
Negligent Conduct
Failure to use reasonable care in the performance of work or work related duties, which results in injury, property damage or financial loss to the company or others, which limits or interferes with profit production. Includes, but is not limited to: horseplay; excessive customer complaints; working off the time clock; and gambling.
Unauthorized Solicitation
Distribution of literature or soliciting membership in unions, fraternal, religious, social or political organizations, while on company time; or to those who seek or have a business relationship with the company, except such activities that are officially and expressly authorized by the company.
Aiding and Abetting Gross Violations
Association with fellow employees in an unlicensed or unlawful way. Includes aiding or abetting any conduct classified as Class a violations.
Class c
Reporting to Work in Unfit Condition
Reporting to work when so physically, mentally, or emotionally impaired as to be unable to satisfactorily perform assigned responsibilities.
Excessive Absenteeism/Tardiness
Excessive absences from work, late reporting, long breaks, leaving early or other violations of company work schedules.
*662Unauthorized Smoking
Smoking in non-designated areas. Includes, but is not limited to: sales floor; auto service center stock; or warehouse areas.
Violation of Uniform or Dress Regulations
Failure to follow a standard of dress appropriate for the business situation involved. Includes, but is not limited to: safety toe shoes; product service technician, automotive or truck driver uniforms; or local regulations as established by management.
Lounging/Loafing
Behavior during scheduled work hours that demonstrates significant lack of attention to assigned duties or responsibilities. Includes, but is not limited to: sleeping; reading for personal pleasure; or extensive personal telephone calls.
Violation of Company Policy
Violation of applicable policies and procedures not otherwise specifically referred to in the disciplinary guidelines.
NOTE: The above guidelines are not all inclusive of violations for which you can be disciplined. [Emphasis added.]
. Theft
• D[e]struction or misappropriation of property
• Violation of accepted moral standards
• Manipulating, altering or falsifying Company records (including employment application)
• Dishonesty of any kind
Rowe v Montgomery Ward & Co, Inc, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, decided November 9, 1988 (Docket No. 93817), pp 2-3.
Judge Gribbs dissented from the per curiam decision signed by Judge Maher and Judge Simmons.
In Bullock v Automobile Club of Michigan, and In re Certified Question, supra, we distinguished between a promise implied in law arising from the employer’s creation of legitimate expectations and an oral contract which can be formed on the basis of an express promise of job security or a promise implied in fact.
Bullock counsels that the presumption of employment at will does not authorize dismissal of unrebutted allegations of "exceptional circumstances.” But, Bullock does not stand for the proposition that all such claims are submissible to a jury.
As 3 Corbin, Contracts, § 554, pp 223-225, observes, "If the words of agreement, whether oral or written, are definite and undisputed, and if there is no doubt as to the relevant surrounding circumstances, the interpretation of the words is ordinarily held to be a matter for the court.”
In the 1991 supplement to §554A, p 274, Professor Kaufman observes:
Corbin’s assertion that all questions of interpretation are essentially factual was not intended to destroy that rule. What Corbin meant was that even where a judge is to decide on a particular question of interpretation, he still is obliged to treat the question as one of fact. That is, he is still obliged to hold a factual hearing, he is obliged to take evidence, to allow cross-examination, to inquire into the surrounding circumstances, the situations and prior communications of the parties, and the like. [Emphasis in original.]
Where there are two fairly reasonable interpretations of the situation or where the proper interpretation of a contract requires a determination of credibility, summary disposition is inappropriate.
Harryman testified:
Q. At the interview, who was present other than you and Mary Rowe?
A. If I remember right, and that’s very difficult, I think the personnel manager introduced me, and we did most of the interview, I think, in her office. . . .
Harryman discussed with plaintiff the terms of her employment:
A. . . . Their main objective, the number one thing was that they must attain their draw of a hundred and twenty-six dollars a week, and generally, as long as they generated sales and were honest, why, they had a job at Wards, and that’s the way we used to hire our people.
Q. What did you tell Mary Rowe when you hired her?
A. That that was the prime purpose, to get sales and to attain that roughly $2,000 a week or more in sales.
In further discussing the conditions of employment, Harryman stated:
A. The conditions, again, number one was to attain those sales quotas and to be honest. . . . We had those sorts of things, but again, about the only way that you could be terminated would be if you failed to make your draw for two months in a row. . . .
Q. Did you tell her any other reasons for which she may be terminated?
*643A. Theft or, you know, obviously, murder, or something like that; theft of any company properties, or so on.
The disciplinary guidelines are essentially the same in all the manuals. The guidelines as printed in the May, 1983, handbook are set out in the attached appendix.
According to the record, this was the last in a series of handbooks distributed to plaintiff.
Because we find the 1983 manual clearly informed plaintiff of defendant’s termination-at-will policy, we do not reach the question whether the guidelines actually created expectations of termination only for cause.
All three handbooks were distributed to all employees, signifying defendant’s intention that the contents were to apply to all employees.
This section responds to the latest draft of a proposed dissent circulated, but as yet not filed, by Justice Levin.
After discussing the language in the employment application, the Carpenter court stated, "secondly and more importantly, as noted before, [the plaintiff] has not established any basis for a specific durational contract.” 650 F Supp 937.
The court noted:
Both lifetime contracts for employment and health club memberships are not enforced as definite contracts by legislative act. [Citation omitted.] There is no legal basis for Orkin’s assertion that lifetime contracts are indefinite and will not be specifically enforced in Louisiana. [528 So 2d 201.]
Post, p 679.

=== CASE 9738887 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:55.447601+00 ===

Boyle, J.
(concurring). I agree with the affirmance of the decision of the Court of Appeals and parts i, ii and m of Justice Riley’s opinion.1 Plaintiff’s proofs are insufficient to support the inference of a promise of termination only for just cause.
i
I read part i of the opinion to stand for the *663proposition that plaintiff’s proofs are insufficient to permit a reasonable juror to find that the employer made a commitment that a reasonable promisee would believe amounted to a promise of termination only for just cause.2
The employment-at-will rule reflected a policy judgment that informal promises of informal employment security should not be taken seriously by the law, unless the employee offers an indication that both parties meant for their deal to be enforced. [Perritt, Employee Dismissal Law & Practice (2d ed), § 4.2, p 176.]
Professor Epstein explains that rules of construction are adopted to reflect "the dominant practice in a given class of cases and because that practice is itself regarded as making good sense for the standard transactions it governs.” Epstein, In defense of the contract at will, 51 U Chi L R 947, 951 (1984). It has not been demonstrated that the dominant practice of employment-at-will arrangements in the oral promise employment context has shifted sufficiently to warrant determination that the practice no longer makes sense and to reject the rule of construction that presumes employment at will.
Drawing on the facts of Toussaint and Ebling,3 the lead opinion sets forth a list4 of some of the *664circumstances that are of assistance in determining the threshold issue of intent. Even where there is proof that an employer made an express statement of job security, for "as long as I sold,” or "forever/’ it does not follow that a promise to continue employment until cause existed for termination must be inferred. Lynas v Maxwell Farms, 279 Mich 684, 687; 273 NW 315 (1937) ("permanent position or one for life so long as his services were satisfactory to defendant”); Sullivan v Detroit, Y & AA R, 135 Mich 661, 676; 98 NW 756 (1904) (circumstances insufficient to support a contract contemplating that the plaintiff would be employed "as long as he was able to do the legal work of the defendant”). Stated otherwise, where the parties have not supplied a durational term, employment at will is the inferred term that the court supplies by construction. It will be overcome by circumstances establishing that the nonexistence of the presumption is more likely than not.5
The court’s description of the method of analysis in Darlington v General Electric, 350 Pa Super *665183, 200; 504 A2d 306 (1986), an employment case, is instructive:
When "sufficient additional consideration” is present, courts infer that the parties intended that the contract will not be terminable at-will. This inference may be nothing more than a legal fiction because it is possible that in a given case, the parties never truly contemplated how long the employment would last even though additional consideration is present. Even so, the at-will presumption would be overcome. On the other hand, if the parties specifically agreed that the employment would be at-will, even though additional consideration were present, we would expect a court to construe the contract according to the parties’ stated intention and hold it to be at-will. Thus, we start with the usual at-will presumption which, let us say, has not been overcome by evidence of a contract for a term or for a reasonable length of time. Then, if sufficient additional consideration is present, the law presumes this to be sufficient to rebut the at-will presumption. . . . However, the presumption created by the additional consideration rule could itself be rebutted by evidence that the parties specifically contracted for employment at-will. [Emphasis in the original.]
As Toussaint and Ebling illustrate, reliance or special consideration as a result of bargaining is an objective indication that the existence of job security is more probable than not. Otherwise stated, it is circumstantial evidence that the omitted durational term that the court would otherwise infer (employment at will) does not reflect the parties’ intent. Thus, while the oral contract prong of Toussaint and Ebling recognizes that validation devices6 provide circumstantial evidence rebutting *666the presumption of employment at will, neither case is to be construed as creating a rule of substantive law that words of commitment must be interpreted as words of promise which must be submitted to the factfinder.
As Professor Perritt states,
Part of the idea of offer and acceptance or meeting of the minds in contract theory is to require that a promise be supported by some sort of validation device before the law enforces it. A competing approach to promise enforcement has received little support in the cases: essentially to forget about validation devices and enforce employer promises of employment security merely upon proof the employer made them. [Perritt, supra, § 4.12, pp 197-198. Emphasis omitted.]
This is not to say that consideration in addition to rendering services is essential to enforceability in employment cases; it is to say that the more ambiguous the circumstances, the more appropriate it is to look for objective indications of assent.
Professor Farnsworth likewise observes, when determining whether circumstances constitute an offer,
[t]he fact that a proposal is very detailed suggests that it is an offer, while omission of many terms suggests that it is not. "The more terms the parties leave open, the less likely it is that they have intended to conclude a binding agreement.” [Farnsworth, Contracts, § 3.10, p 127, quoting the comment to UCC 2-204.]
*667Courts will infer a reasonable price or other term to avoid a problem with indefiniteness. However, when "the indefiniteness goes to the central question of the quantity of work to be done,[7] and there is no satisfactory external standard of reasonableness to answer it,” courts are much more reluctant to infer a durational term. Farnsworth, supra, § 3.28, p 197. Thus, when considering whether a statement constitutes an ofier, in the context of commercial contracts, courts construe a statement as nonpromissory if it would expose the maker to the risk of being bound to perform beyond his means to perform.
Even under the liberalized requirement of definiteness under the Uniform Commercial Code
which permits a contract to be found with many open terms emphasizes two fundamental requirements: (1) a manifest intention to make a contract, and (2) a reasonably certain basis for giving an appropriate remedy. ... If an employee has begun to perform with the acquiescence of the employer, there can be no question that the parties intended to make a contract. However, absent other manifestations of intention, how shall a court read a definite term into such a contract to provide an appropriate remedy . . . ? [I]t is not possible to decide upon a suitable term of employment where there is no objective manifestation of the parties’ intention to guide the court. [Darlington v General Electric, supra, p 197.]
In most employment arrangements, the durational term is central to the agreement because it is inseparable from the threshold question whether a commitment could reasonably be understood to be a promise.
I agree with Justice Riley’s conclusion that *668there is an insufficient basis to overcome the presumption and supply an omitted durational term. In this context, the standard of performance is not sufficient to guide the Court on the central question of the parties’ intent regarding the duration of the employment relationship.
ii
It is black letter law that enforceable obligations may arise from "explicit” promises, Perritt, supra, § 4.1, p 173, from promises implied in fact, or obligations implied in law (such as the policy or legitimate-expectations prong of Toussaint v Blue Cross & Blue Shield). An enforceable obligation under the contract prong of Toussaint can arise from an explicit promise or can be inferred from words or other conduct.8 "Sometimes a contract that results from words is described as 'express,’ while one that results from conduct is described as 'implied in fact,’ but the distinction as such has no legal consequences.” Farnsworth, supra, § 3.10, p 124.
When the communication between parties has more than one possible meaning and that formula*669tion is submitted to a court, the court employs its own criteria for interpretation. Likewise, when a contract is incomplete because it fails to provide for a contingency, courts both at common law and under the Restatement may supply constructive conditions or "gap fillers” to avoid failure for indefiniteness. See, generally, Goetz & Scott, The limits of expanded choice: An analysis of the interaction between express and implied contract terms, 73 Cal L R 261 (1985).
Thus, even in employment contracts where courts have been much more reluctant to cure indefiniteness in duration, if the amount of work to be done is definite, a term that it must be done within a reasonable time will be supplied and enforced, Browne & Co v Sharkey Co, 58 Or 480; 115 P 156 (1911), as would a reference to a measurable time period such as, " 'as long as’ John Engler is Governor, or Michael F. Cavanagh is Chief Justice,” Levin, J., post, p 700, which clearly refers to an external standard of durational measure.
Farnsworth describes the process by which a court analyzes a dispute over an omitted term by observing that in order to determine what the parties have not said, it is first necessary to determine what they have said. Farnsworth, Disputes over omission in contracts, 68 Colum L R 860, 874 (1968).
The first step in deciding whether the requirement of definiteness has been met is to interpret the language of the agreement. [Farnsworth, Contracts, § 3.28, p 195.]
Thus, the process of supplying omitted terms begins with an incipient dispute over expression, for finding an omitted term "is itself an exercise in *670interpretation of the contract to decide whether or not the parties have provided for the case.” Farnsworth, 68 Colum L R 873-874.
In this case, to determine what the parties have not said, we examine the language "as long as she sold,” which the dissent finds is a "definite term of employment.” (Post, p 688. Emphasis added.) The dissent eschews interpretation of the language in question, and characterizes the language as an absolute promise that would terminate only on the happening of a condition or event, i.e., failure to sell the quota.9
It is apparent, however, that the "as long as” language can be interpreted two ways: either in a temporal sense or in a qualitative sense,10 that is, that your employment will last "as long as” you sell or your employment will last "as long as” your sales are satisfactory. The term is less definite than "lifetime” or "permanent employment,” which has a temporal reference only, but in referring to a sales draw, it may be understood to mean as long as the employee is able to do the work properly and the employer continues in the business. Stated otherwise, the words "as long as,” like "permanent” and "lifetime,” may be taken either literally as an obligation in perpetuity or seen as an offer of steady employment.
Since, in this case, there is more than one *671possible meaning of the language "as long as” she sold, a meaning that signals a temporal limit and another that provides in generalized terms for the performance expectation of the employer, I cannot agree that the "plain meaning” of the language employed addresses when or how termination will occur, or binds the employer for any particular length of time.
Terms such as "permanent employment” have no immutable meaning. When used in different concrete situations by different individuals different meanings may fairly be attached to the term. If the employee has paid in money or in some other way for the promise of "permanent employment,” it is likely that both parties understood that employment was to endure as long as the employee is able to perform the work for which he is hired or at least until retirement age. The payment of a consideration is an evidentiary factor bearing on the proper interpretation of the parties’ intention. It follows that other evidentiary factors can perform the same function. In each case all of the circumstances are to be considered. It may be shown that the parties meant or did not mean something definite. [Calamari & Perillo, Contracts (3d ed), § 2-9, pp 60-61.]
If this problem is analyzed as a dispute over interpretation, i.e., the meaning of "as long as,” I read Justice Riley’s opinion as fully consistent with the rule of construction, acknowledged in Toussaint, that the Court’s task is "to construe 'permanent’ consistent with the circumstances surrounding the formation of the contract . . . .” Id., p 609.
If analyzed as a case of an omitted term, Farnsworth, supra, § 7.17, pp 531-532, the result is also fully consistent with courts that have regularly found that an agreement that is silent with re*672spect to termination is an omitted case, despite absolute promises on both sides. Then, by implication, they have almost invariably supplied a term allowing either party to terminate at will.11
When one party seeks to terminate an agreement that is silent with respect to termination, the other party may claim that silence is not omission and that, since the promises of the parties are absolute, the agreement admits of no termination. Despite the superficial appeal of this argument, courts have had little difficulty in resolving the threshold problem of interpretation so as to find an omitted case. Farnsworth, supra, § 7.17, pp 531-532. Farnsworth emphasizes that although this dispute arises frequently in the employment context, "[c]onscious of the traditionally intimate nature of the relationship between employer and employee, courts have regularly found that termination is an omitted case, despite absolute promises on both sides. Then by implication they have almost invariably supplied a term allowing either party to terminate at will.” Id., p 532.
Farnsworth explains that, just as modern courts conclude that promises in a bilateral contract are not absolute, but include constructive conditions of exchange, they conclude that the promise relied on here cannot be read to supply a durational term. In the seventeenth century, early common-law courts held that bilateral promises were absolute unless one of the parties explicitly qualified the promise. Thus, if one party failed to perform, the other party "could not escape liability merely because the other party had not performed what he had promised in return.” Farnsworth, 68 Colum LR 863. Later common-law courts concluded that *673despite an absolute promise, the performance of each parties’ promise "is made a condition of the duty to perform the other . . . Farnsworth, supra, § 8.9, p 579.
According to Farnsworth, modern courts do not follow a literal approach to contract construction but "take greater liberties in defining its [the contract’s] scope.” Farnsworth, 68 Colum LR 863. Rather than interpreting the promises as absolute, modern courts conclude that each promise defines the party’s performance, but does not necessarily address the conditions of performance. Thus, the courts conclude that they are dealing with an omitted term, the conditions of performance. The same reasoning applies when courts consider language such as the "as long as she sold” statement upon which the plaintiff predicates her claim.
Despite the fact that modern courts reject this literal approach and conclude that neither party intended the language to cover the duration or scope of the obligation, Farnsworth, supra, § 7.17, pp 531-532, the dissent would read the words as absolute, resulting in an obligation conceivably extending for the plaintiff’s life. The approach confirms the accuracy of the observation that the dissent "clearly evidences an insistence that this Court broaden the reach of . . . Toussaint,” Riley, J., ante, p 651, an observation that is further supported by comparing the analysis here with that of the Toussaint majority.
In Toussaint, the majority assumed the validity of precedent that a contract for "permanent” employment was for an indefinite term, Lynas v Maxwell Farms, supra, and found that an employee hired for an indefinite term may nonetheless have an enforceable obligation of "for cause” discharge. In this case, despite the recognition in Toussaint of the fact that our precedents require *674construing " 'permanent’ consistent with the circumstances surrounding the formation of the contract,” id., p 609, the dissent relies on the plain meaning of "as long as” to supply a durational term.12
Finally, I read Justice Riley’s opinion as consistent with the modern view of 1 Restatement Contracts, 2d, § 33 and the UCC 2-204(3), that indefiniteness regarding material terms does not prevent a contract from existing,13 and that context is referenced to determine the meaning of the agreement. 1 Restatement Contracts, 2d, § 33 appears in the chapter of the work which deals with offers. It expresses the view that a court should not find that there is no contract simply because "one or more of the terms of a proposed bargain are left open or uncertain,” § 33(3). That the illustration relied on by Justice Levin addresses the enforceability of the promise, not its duration, is supported both by comment (d) that "[w]hen the contract *675calls for successive performances but is indefinite in duration, it is commonly terminable by either party, with or without a requirement of reasonable notice,” and by the Reporter’s note to comment (d), citing Tanenbaum Textile Co, Inc v Sidran, 423 SW2d 635, 637 (Tex Civ App, 1968). In Tanenbaum, a manufacturer was obligated to pay a one percent commission on sales produced by the plaintiff, against the defendant’s claim that "the agreement ... is too indefinite to be enforceable in that: (1) its duration is not specified . . . .”
While holding that the law would imply that a reasonable time was the durational term intended by the parties and that the contract was not too indefinite to be enforced, the court specifically stated:
Where a contract is silent as to the time it is to run, or provides that it is to run for an indefinite term, it is not invalid for that reason but may be terminated by either party at any time. [Id., p 637. Emphasis added.]
In sum, I read part i of the opinion to be fully consistent with the black letter rule that where the parties have failed to set forth a material term, the court must interpret the language and conduct to determine the parties’ intent.
hi
The plaintiff relied on a promissory theory of liability and the implied-in-law policy prong of Toussaint. In the context of employment arrangements, a promissory theory of liability is analyzed in light of the presumption of employment at will, a procedural device that, like other presumptions, is simply a legal recognition of the normal expec*676tations of parties in most employment situations.14 Where it is asserted that the proofs are insufficient to create an issue of fact, the promissory implied-in-fact claim requires the court to focus on the words or actions of the defendant to determine whether there is sufficient evidence manifesting an intention to make a commitment of job security. Where the defendant’s commitment-making actions predominate, that is, where it is more likely than not that a reasonable promisee would believe that the employer was making a commitment that amounted to a promise, the presumption is overcome. Where the defendant’s commitment-making actions do not predominate and there exists no other basis to supply a term regarding the scope or duration of the obligation, the promissory theory is an inappropriate rationalization for an enforceable obligation. Pettit, Modern unilateral contracts, 63 Boston ULR 551 (1983).
Because I agree that on this record the "defendant’s commitment-making actions do not predominate,” id., p 577, I agree that the decision of the Court of Appeals should be affirmed.
This opinion responds to the latest draft of a proposed dissent circulated by Justice Levin.
I do not read Justice Riley’s opinion as rejecting the claim that if the parties’ intention appears, it is that intention that should be enforced. 2 Restatement Contracts, 2d, § 201, pp 83-86; Farnsworth, Contracts, §§ 7.15-7.16, pp 517-526; Darlington v General Electric, 350 Pa Super 183; 504 A2d 306 (1986).
Toussaint v Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Michigan, 408 Mich 579; 292 NW2d 880 (1980).
Among the circumstances identified as objective indications of intent are the clarity, specificity, and lack of ambiguity of oral statements; whether there were specific negotiations for job security; the nature of the position; and whether, if policy statements are relied on, they support or undercut a reasonable belief that a promise of job security was being extended.
Where the parties’ intention is not apparent and the facts and circumstances advanced by the plaintiff are sufficient to show it is more likely than not that a reasonable promisee would believe that the employer was making a commitment that amounted to a promise of job security, the court will conclude, as a threshold matter, that the presumption has been overcome. Where facts and circumstances are contradicted and reasonable minds can differ, the jury will determine the facts and circumstances that actually obtained, whether there was a commitment amounting to a promise, and whether the promise was breached. Where the facts and circumstances produced would not warrant a reasonable juror in finding a promise of job security, the question cannot be put to the jury, Leslie v Mendelson, 302 Mich 95, 104; 4 NW2d 481 (1942). To experienced practitioners of employment law, this formulation may appear at best, unnecessary — at worst, simplistic. It is here to balance the perhaps unduly cryptic language in Bullock v Automobile Club of Michigan, 432 Mich 472, 483; 444 NW2d 114 (1989), that the determination (of the effect of these manuals) "must await further discovery and perhaps trial.” (Emphasis added.)
Chief Justice Cavanagh incorrectly observes that the oral contract claim in Toussaint did not "rely on the policy manual,” post, p 721. "Toussaint’s case is, if anything, stronger because he was handed *666a manual of Blue Cross personnel policies which reinforced the oral assurance of job security,” Toussaint, p 597. "Toussaint’s testimony was sufficient to create a question of fact for the jury whether there was a mutual understanding that it was company policy not to discharge an employee 'as long as [he] did [his] job,’ and that this policy, expressed in documents (which said 'for just cause only’), assertedly handed to Toussaint when he was hired, would apply to him as to other Blue Cross employees.” Id., p 613.
In the area of sales of goods, for example, courts will infer almost every kind of term except the quantity term.
Contrary to Justice Levin’s assertion, the Rules of Personal Conduct (or other policy statements) may be relevant to an inquiry into Rowe’s claims under the contract prong of Toussaint The facts of Toussaint are illustrative. Toussaint inquired regarding job security, and a manual was handed to him in response. Id., pp 598, 617. The manual, which Toussaint asserted became part of his contract, included ah explicit provision limiting dismissal to just cause. Id., p 597, n 5. In contrast, Rowe received a copy of the Rules of Personal Conduct which enumerated grounds for immediate dismissal, but failed to limit discharge to those grounds and omitted any discussion regarding just cause. Unlike the manual relied on in Toussaint, the Rules of Personal Conduct fail to support Rowe’s contention that her agreement with her employer was anything other than the at-will term inferred where a durational term is omitted or ambiguous.
Like the manual in Toussaint, the Rules of Personal Conduct also may be analyzed under the policy prong of Toussaint to determine whether it gives rise to legitimate expectations, an obligation implied in law. See Riley, J., part n, ante, pp 646-651.
While Justice Levin characterizes the durational term of the offer as " 'as long as [she was] able to do the work,’ ” citing the Restatement, post, p 691, the proofs rest on the words, "as long as she sold.”
"As long as” does not establish the scope or duration of the agreement. See, e.g., Tanner Co v Sparta-Tomah Broadcasting Co, 716 F2d 1155, 1158-1159 (CA 7, 1983) (applying Wisconsin law); Starling v Valmac Industries, Inc, 589 F2d 382, 387 (CA 8, 1979); Fleming v Mack Trucks, Inc, 308 F Supp 917, 920 (ED Pa, 1981); cf. Davie v Lumberman’s Mining Co, 93 Mich 491, 492; 53 NW 625 (1892) ("as long as” they could make it pay, too uncertain to enforce an executory contract) with Caplis v Monroe, 228 Mich 586, 588; 200 NW 123 (1924) (" 'as long as I paid the rent that I could stay there until she sold the property”). (Emphasis added.)
This is not to say that relief may not be awarded under an indefinite agreement on the basis of the terms of the agreement, restitution, or reliance. Farnsworth, supra, § 3.30, pp 208-210.
Justice Levin implicitly acknowledges the lack of an explicit durational term when he discusses the parties’ contentions regarding the existence or nonexistence of a just-cause term. Post, p 681, n 8. According to the dissent, the statement upon which Rowe predicates her claim defines the "work to be done, the compensation to be paid, and a durational term of the contract, so that the trier of fact may find, upon acceptance of the offer, an express contract of employment was formed for as long as the employee is able to do the work.” Post, pp 687-688. Nowhere in this statement is there any reference to a just-cause dismissal term. Furthermore, if the logic of the dissent is adopted, this "not unusual promise of employment for as long as the employee is able to do the work,” post, p 686, would preclude an employer from terminating for any reason except a failure to meet the standard of performance. Even if Justice Levin limited the "as long as she sold” statement with the Rules of Personal Conduct, the employer would be entitled to terminate only for failure to sell or for one of the enumerated grounds for immediate dismissal. A termination on the basis of any other ground, including an economic downturn requiring layoffs, a business reorganization, excessive absenteeism, or chronic tardiness, would presumably be a breach of contract.
As observed in concurrence in Dumas v Auto Club Ins Ass’n, 437 Mich 521; 473 NW2d 652 (1991), the Court would not be precluded from resorting to "gap fillers” analogous to those contemplated under the ucc to supply an omitted term or to resolve an ambiguity.
The presumption does not prevent proof of actual intent and should not be employed to permit unjustified evasions of promissory liability.

=== CASE 9738888 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:55.473551+00 ===

Levin, J.
(dissenting).
i
The lead and concurring opinions misstate the issue, and proceed on the basis of a mistaken assumption._
*677A
The mistaken assumption concerns a fundamental point of law. It is assumed that statements made to Mary Rowe, corroborated by the person who hired her, advising that "as long as I sold, I would have a job at Montgomery Ward,” did not provide a durational term for the contract of employment that most assuredly was entered into when Rowe went to work for Montgomery Ward.1
Section 32 of the first Restatement of Contracts stated that "a method is provided for determining the length of the engagement” — and, thus, a durational term — where a promises b to employ him, *678and b promises to serve a "as long as b is able to do the work.”2 (Emphasis added.)
Clearly, Professor Samuel Williston, the reporter, and Professor Arthur L. Corbin, the special advisor, and other luminaries3 involved in the preparation of the Restatement of Contracts, were of the opinion that a promise to serve as long as one is able to do the work provides a method for determining the length of the engagement and, hence, a durational term.
B
The misstatement of the issue appears in the following sentence of the lead opinion:
The issue posed by this case is whether defendant employer’s oral statements and written policy statements directed at plaintiff may be interpreted to permit a promise implied in fact not to terminate except for cause.[4] [Emphasis added.]
A claim for wrongful discharge predicated on "oral statements directed at plaintiff” — e.g., "as long as I sold, I would have a job at Montgomery Ward” — seeks recovery on the basis of an express promise, not a promise implied in fact. A claim that is based on an employer’s "written policy *679statements” would, indeed, depend on an implied promise.
The signers of the lead opinion err in combining two inquiries:
—Did the "oral statements directed at” Rowe give rise to an express contract; and
—Did Montgomery Ward’s "written policy statements” "imply in fact” a promise not to terminate except for cause?
In thus misstating the issue, the majority asks the wrong question, and perforce reaches the wrong answer.
Rowe’s express contract claim for wrongful discharge does not depend at all on Montgomery Ward’s "written policy statements”5 or on terms left to inference. Rowe claimed, she testified, the person who hired her corroborated, and the jury found, that Montgomery Ward offered — subject to Rules of Personal Conduct that enumerated grounds for discharge6 — to employ her to sell appli*680anees at a stated compensation for as long as she was able to do the work, i.e., selling.7 Those terms *681were all express, none were implied.
Since the promise made to Rowe stated a durational term and required no performance of Rowe other than that she sell, then, absent a term inferred for the beneñt of the employer that she could be discharged for a cause not stated in the Rules of Personal Conduct, Rowe could be discharged only for nonperformance, i.e., failure to sell, or a cause stated in the Rules of Personal Conduct.8
When Montgomery Ward discharged Rowe it did not claim that she had ceased to be able to do the work, i.e., to sell. On the contrary, Rowe’s sales record was exemplary.9 The stated10 reason for discharging Rowe was that on one occasion she left *682the store without permission and failed to note on her time card that she had been absent. The question whether Rowe was properly discharged for cause in failing to punch out on her time card was submitted to the jury,11 and by its verdict12 the jury found that Rowe’s failure to punch out was not cause for discharge.13
*683C
Contracts with "as long as” durational terms are express contracts. The majority concludes that to maintain an action on an express "as long as” promise of employment, a promisee must establish an implied promise by the promisor not to discharge at will. The conclusion that a promisor may renege at will unless he impliedly promised not to renege at will is without support in the cases,14 and should be viewed by promisors generally — even those who may, in the short run, believe that today’s decision is to their advantage— as excessive.
D
The majority compounds the errors in misstating the issue (subpart A, p 677), and in proceeding to decision on the mistaken assumption that the promise made to Rowe did not state a durational term (subpart b, p 678), by donning the mantle of trier of fact.
On the basis of its subjective intuition that *684Montgomery Ward did not "in reality” agree to limit "managerial discretion” to discharge at will,15 the majority finds that there was not "mutual assent,” and that the "minds” of the parties did not meet.16
Under the traditional objective approach, the correct focus is not on what the promisor, Montgomery Ward, actually intended, but on what a reasonable person in the position of the promisee, Rowe, would conclude the offer meant.17
E
The lead opinion begins with a comment about Toussaint v Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Michigan, 408 Mich 579; 292 NW2d 880 (1980), stating that there this Court "extended job security to non-unionized employees.”18
Toussaint did not, however, extend job security to nonunion employees. It simply ruled that promises of job security that had been extended — not by the courts, but rather by employers — were enforceable in a court of law. In Valentine v General American Credit, Inc, 420 Mich 256, 258; 362 NW2d 628 (1984), a unanimous Court said:
Toussaint makes employment contracts which provide that an employee will not be dismissed except for cause enforceable in the same manner as other contracts. It did not recognize employment as a fundamental right or create a new "special” right. [Emphasis added.]
Toussaint, thus, did not create entitlement to job *685security for nonunionized employees. It simply ruled that if an employer promises job security, a court of law will enforce that promise. Today, the court retreats from enforcement of a promise found on an adequate record to have been made to an employee.
Montgomery Ward, apparently responding to Toussaint, has required all persons newly hired since 1982 to "sign off” any claim of job security by acknowledging in writing that no promise of job security was made. Rowe was hired, however, before new employees were required to so sign, and refused to sign when asked to do so.19_
*686F
The majority also mischaracterizes the promise made to Rowe as one for "permanent” or "lifetime” employment.
A contract of employment is ordinarily deemed to be terminable at will if the parties do not agree on the duration of the employment, or agree on "permanent” or "lifetime” employment.
The signers of the lead opinion erroneously equate an "as long as” durational term with a "permanent employment” term.20 "As long as one can sell” is not "permanent” or "for life.”
Such a promise is not an "extraordinary”21 promise of "permanent” or "lifetime” employment but, rather, a not unusual promise of employment for as long as the employee is able to do the work.
Rowe did not allege that she was promised permanent22 employment. She claimed, rather, that she was promised employment for "as long as she sold” at the required rate. By its terms, such a *687promise is not for "permanent” or "lifetime” employment but, rather, for employment for a durational term coextensive with the time that the employee is able to do the work.
G
The "issue” dealt with in part n of the lead opinion was not briefed or argued by Rowe, the appellant, in this Court, and may not now properly be addressed by this Court.
Rowe has not advocated the position dealt with by the majority adversely to other employee litigants who are not now before the Court, but whose cases are pending in this Court on applications filed by employers for leave to appeal from decisions of the Court of Appeals.
H
A correct statement of the question presented is: Does the evidence tending to show that Rowe was hired by Montgomery Ward on the understanding that, subject to Rules of Personal Conduct enumerating grounds for discharge, she would have a job "as long as [she] sold,” sufficiently support the finding that her contract of employment was not terminable at the will of Montgomery Ward?
I would hold, contrary to the majority, that
—An offer by an employer to employ a person for stated compensation "as long as” the person "is able to do the work” — here to "sell” a sufficient amount of appliances to earn commissions at least equal to the weekly draw — defines clearly, specifically, and unambiguously the work to be done, the compensation to be paid, and a durational term of the contract, so that the trier of fact may find, upon acceptance of the offer, an express contract *688of employment was formed for as long as the employee is able to do the work.
—Since the contract provides a method for determining the length of the engagement, namely, the length of time the employee is able to do the work, the duration of the contract is determinable. The duration is therefore sufficiently definite, although it is uncertain how long the employee will be able to do the work and, thus, when the contract will terminate.
—The promise made by such an employer to the employee — to provide the employee with work at a stated compensation for as long as the employee is able to do the work — is express and not implied.23
—The "presumption” of employment at will is overcome by such an express promise for a determinable and, hence, a sufficiently definite term of employment.
—An offeror’s intention will be held to be what a reasonable person in the position of the other party would conclude the offer meant.
The correct inquiry in this case, therefore, is what a reasonable person in Rowe’s position would conclude the offer of a job for "as long as she sold” the requisite amount of appliances, subject to Rules of Personal Conduct that enumerated grounds for discharge, meant with regard to whether her employment was terminable at the will of Montgomery Ward or only for cause.
The focus therefore should be on what Rowe could reasonably have concluded the offer meant with regard to termination of employment, and not on whether Montgomery Ward actually in*689tended or meant to promise a contract providing termination only for cause.24
It is undisputed that Vernon Harry man, when he hired Rowe, made the promissory statements or "manifestations” that they both related at the trial, when they testified that she was told that as long as she sold she would have a job at Montgomery Ward, and that Rowe signed Rules of Personal Conduct enumerating grounds for discharge.25
Reasonable jurors could properly conclude on that basis that Montgomery Ward intended to provide employment not terminable at its will but only for cause, because that is what a reasonable woman in Rowe’s position might reasonably conclude Montgomery Ward meant by its promissory statements or manifestations.
—The answer to the question whether the words used by the parties are sufficient to support a finding that a contract of employment was entered into does not depend on whether the words are set forth in a writing or are expressed orally. There is no rule of law requiring "objective support,” in the form of a manual, other writing or other corroborative evidence, for an oral term of a contract of employment.
—A durational term of an employment contract is not negated, as a matter of law, by evidence that the employee did not, when hired, inquire about, or "negotiate” for, job security, or by evidence that the employee was seeking a sales position rather than a "singular, executive job position[ ].”26_•
*690II
Rowe and Montgomery Ward indisputably entered into an express oral contract of employment when Montgomery Ward offered to employ Rowe for a stated compensation for as long as she was able to do the work, selling appliances in an amount that would earn commissions at least equal to her weekly draw, and Rowe accepted the offer and began work.
A
The question whether an "as long as” term is sufficiently certain to be enforceable has been considered by courts in a number of contexts. The author of one treatise on the law of contracts has summed up the pertinent case law as follows:
Where the contract by its terms provides that it is to terminate upon the happening of a stated event, or that performance is to continue until the happening of a stated event, it is not too indefinite for enforcement, even though it is impossible to tell when the event will happen. For example, if by the contract performance is to continue so long as the parties are engaged in a certain business, the contract is sufficiently definite as to duration to be enforceable. Similarly, where the agreement is to make weekly payments so long as the promisor conducts a certain business, or where a vessel is chartered to the government for one month and as much longer as it may be required by the war department. Also, where plaintiff's employment was to continue so long as workers trained by plaintiff were retained by the employer, the employment agreement was held sufficiently deñnite as to duration to constitute a contract, and was *691not terminable at the will of the employer. [Simpson, Contracts (2d ed), § 48, p 75.27 Emphasis added.]
Section 32 of the first Restatement of Contracts spoke of the need for certainty in expression, and specifically included promises of employment.28 The Restatement illustrated the § 32 "black letter” statement of the rule concerning "certainty” with the following example:29
A promises b to employ him for a stated compensation and b promises A to serve therefor as long as b is able to do the work, or as long as a specified business is carried on. These promises create contracts, as a method is provided for determining the length of the engagement. [1 Restatement Contracts, § 32, comment c, illustration 3, pp 41-42. Emphasis added.]__
*692That example is repeated in the Restatement of Contracts, Second.30
B
Employment contracts are generally oral. The illustrative contract set forth in §32 of the Restatement of Contracts is an employment contract. Nothing there suggests that such a contract must be in writing, or that the contract formed by the promissory exchange between a and b was in writing.
Nor could a distinction properly be drawn between "as long as I am able to do the work” and "as long as I am able to sell.” Rowe’s work was selling — that is all she was hired to do. "As long as I sell” has the same meaning in her contract of employment as "as long as I am able to do the work.”
c
Samuel Williston, the reporter for, and Arthur Corbin, the special advisor to the Restatement of Contracts, are the authors of the leading multivolume treatises of the law of contracts31 — standard works in courts, universities, and law offices throughout the country.
D
The lead opinion relies on obiter dictum in a footnote that characterizes " ’as long as you do the *693job’ ” as expressing a "hope and non-contractual wish,”32 The opinion containing that characterization in obiter dictum was written and signed by one judge, and cites no authority.33
E
The author of the lead opinion in this case also wrote the lead opinion in the companion case of Dumas v Auto Club Ins Ass'n 437 Mich 521; 473 NW2d 652 (1991). There the Court considers the enforceability of a promise to pay a seven percent renewal commission to sales representatives for "as long as they were employed by the Auto Club,” or "forever,” or "always,” or "words to that effect.” (Emphasis added.) The signers of the lead opinion do not, as here, say that such a promise is unenforceable because it constitutes nothing more than an expression of a "hope and noncontractual *694wish.” They adopt, rather, three other modes of analysis.
Proceeding on the apparent premise that such a promise, if made, would be enforceable, the signers of the lead opinion in Dumas conclude that
—the one hundred thirty-nine sales representatives comprising Group a could not recover because the "as long as” promise there alleged was not "expressly” made, not because an "as long as” promise in an oral employment contract is not enforceable;
—the twenty sales representatives comprising Group b could not recover because the promise was not capable of performance within one year and was not in writing;
—the twenty sales representatives comprising Group c could not recover because the promise was not made when they were hired, but after they began work, and the circumstances did not demonstrate mutual assent.
F
Courts generally regard "as long as” contracts as considerably more than expressions of a "hope and noncontractual wish,” but, rather, as expressing a durational term.
This Court, in Caplis v Monroe, 228 Mich 586, 588; 200 NW 123 (1924), held that an oral leasehold was for a term not exceeding one year, and, hence, not violative of the statute of frauds, on the basis of the tenant’s testimony that the landlord told him that " 'as long as I paid the rent that I could stay there until she sold the property. . . .’” This Court said:
The contract constituted a concise lease in plain *695terms of contingent but determinative duration. That is certain in law which can be made certain. The specified contingency might occur within the year and there was no understanding that it would not. [Id., p 594. Emphasis added.]
The United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit,34 the Supreme Court of Mississippi,35 a Colorado appeals court36 and a New York trial court37 have held that oral employment contracts for "as long as” the employee maintained his performance at a certain level,38 a business was operated at the named place,39 the plaintiff was a stockholder of the corporation,40 or the defendant employer "continued to employ workers trained, *696developed and gathered by plaintiff,”41 provided sufficiently definite durational terms.
The highest courts of Minnesota and Massachusetts dealt with nonfinite durational terms in written employment contracts. The Minnesota court held that the durational term was "sufficiently defined” where defendant agreed to employ the plaintiff during the time "the business of said corporation should be continued, not exceeding the term of the existence of said corporation . . . .”42 The Massachusetts court held that the durational term was not too indefinite where the employer agreed to employ the plaintiff "as long as” he faithfully and diligently performed the duties at the compensation fixed.43
The highest court of New York held that an oral agreement providing that the plaintiff was the exclusive distributor of pumpernickel bread "as long as” both the plaintiff and the defendant remained in business was not "interminable” because it would last at most only as long as the plaintiff and the defendant were both in business.44 The Supreme Court of California similarly held that an agreement providing the plaintiff with an exclusive selling agency "so long as” the plaintiff " 'shall perform the terms of [the] agreement’ ” was "sufficiently certain. ”45
In a case that may be seen as the mirror image of an exclusive distribution agreement, New York’s intermediate appellate court held that a sufficient durational term was provided, where the *697plaintiff and the defendant orally agreed that the plaintiff would receive a weekly check from the defendant "as long as” the plaintiff, a newspaper salesman or distributor, abstained from distributing another newspaper. The court found that the "duration of the contract was not unmeasured, as it would continue until plaintiff did an act, viz., resumed the sale of the Telegram.”46
The United States Supreme Court held that an oral agreement by a railroad to " 'put down the iron rails and maintain the switch for the plaintiff’s benefit for shipping purposes as long as he needed it’ ” was not within the local statute of frauds applicable to "an 'agreement . . . not to be performed within . . . one year . . . .’ ”47
The Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts found that a promise by the individual defendants to pay the plaintiff "$100 a month, so long as [the individual defendants] should be connected with the defendant corporation, if [the plaintiff] should succeed in having the [individual defendants] sell their shares to them,” "carried its own measure of time . . . even though it is impossible to predict precisely when the contingency will occur that will bring the contract to an end.”48
"As long as” durational terms have also been found to be sufficiently certain in requirements contracts.49 An agreement to furnish water to a *698hospital "as long as the State of Texas shall in good faith operate and maintain a hospital at the site” was found by the Supreme Court of Texas to provide a "certain and definite” term.50 The Supreme Court of Wisconsin found that an agreement to install telephones in plaintiff’s public buildings and to maintain them for "as long as” defendant should maintain and operate a telephone system in the city fixed "a time for its termination . . . .”51 Similarly worded requirements contracts were also found to provide adequate durational terms by the Supreme Court of Ohio52 *699and a Louisiana appellate court.53
G
The signers of the lead opinion cite no authority for the view that Rowe’s claim of an oral "as long as” contract of employment is lacking in "objective support,”54 can give rise only to a "subjective belief,”55 or is not "clear and unequivocal”56 either because Rowe did not inquire about or negotiate for job security,57 or because Rowe "stumbled” into Montgomery Ward,58 or because she was seeking a relatively low level position as a salesperson instead of "singular, executive job positions.”59 Those factors might properly be argued to a jury, or a judge sitting as trier of fact, but do not, as a matter of law, negate formation of a durational contract term on the basis of the words spoken when Rowe was hired.
The signers of the lead opinion state that "because of the difficulty in verifying oral promises, the statements must clearly permit a construction which supports the asserted meaning.”60
It is again relevant that the parties indisputably entered into a "contractual relationship.” The only dispute concerns the enforceability of a single term of that relationship, the "as long as” dura*700tional term. Montgomery Ward did not seek to refute Rowe’s and Harryman’s testimony that the "as long as” term was agreed to.
Nor do the signers of the lead opinion cite authority for their view that words used to express oral contract terms must, more so than the words used in a written contract, "clearly permit a construction which supports the asserted meaning.” The contract was oral in Caplis,61 and in a number of the cases decided in other jurisdictions where the courts found that an "as long as” term provided a sufficiently definite durational term.62
In all events, this Court, in Caplis, held that an oral lease for " 'as long as I paid the rent’ ” and " 'until [the landlord] sold the property’ ” constituted a concise agreement "in plain terms of contingent but determinative duration. That is certain in law which can be made certain.”63
To be sure, the formality of a writing may provide some additional assurance. In a case such as this, however, where there is no dispute concerning what was said, and where the words clearly would be sufficient to add an "as long as” durational term to the contract were it in writing, it cannot properly be said that the "as long as” term is not sufficient because it is oral.
Manifestly, if a collective bargaining agreement provided that the members of a labor union would be employed "as long as” John Engler is Governor, or Michael F. Cavanagh is Chief Justice, the durational term would be reasonably certain and the agreement enforceable.64 Such a durational *701term would not be less certain or less enforceable if it were expressed orally.
H
The emphasis in the concurring opinion on the absence of a durational term suggests recognition that where there is a durationál term the employee ordinarily cannot be discharged during the duration of the contract except for cause.65 To hold otherwise would vitiate an employment contract for "as long as the employee is able to do the work.”
The concurring opinion asserts that "it does not follow that a promise to continue employment until cause existed for termination must be inferred” from an "express statement of job security,” such as "for 'as long as I sold.’,,66 Toussaint contradicts this assertion.
Both of the contracts of employment considered in Toussaint were for "as long as” the employee did the job. Toussaint held that the trier of fact may find on the basis of an "as long as I do the job” promise of employment that the employment will continue until there is cause for termination.67
*702Rowe’s contract of employment was an "as long as I do the job” contract. Under Toussaint, the jury could properly be permitted to find that her contract was not terminable except for cause.
The author of the concurring opinion appears to acknowledge that "for 'as long as I sold’ ” is an "express statement of job security.”68 Nevertheless, it is asserted that "employment at will is the inferred term that the court supplies by construction” because "the parties have not supplied a durational term.”69 It is again relevant that "as long as I sold” supplies a durational term.
The "express statement of job security, for 'as long as I sold’ ” gave rise to an express, not an implied, contract of employment. Putting aside whether "as long as” constitutes a durational term, there is no suggestion in the cases discussed in part ii-f70 that a promisor would be permitted to terminate promissory obligations under an exclusive distribution, requirements, employment, or other "as long as” contract except for failure of performance by the promisee.
There is no suggestion in the cases there discussed that a term might properly be inferred permitting such a promisor to renege "at will,” or that the promisee must, as a predicate of recovery, establish an implied promise not to renege "at *703will.” On the contrary, if a renege-at-will term were implied, or a promise not to renege at will were a predicate of recovery, the plaintiffs in all the cases discussed in part ii-f would have lost instead of prevailing.
"Contract law” becomes another oxymoron if a promisee must establish as a predicate to recovery that the promisor promised not to renege at will.
in
The author of the concurring opinion finds persuasive the analysis of the lead opinion on "the threshold issue of intent.”71 (Emphasis added.)
A
The concurring opinion cites Professor Perritt’s statement that an "informal promise” of employment security should not be "taken seriously by the law” unless the employee demonstrates that "both parties meant for their deal to be enforced.”72 The concurring opinion suggests that the lead opinion has adopted this position in stating that oral promises will be recognized where "cir*704cumstances suggest both parties intended to be bound.”73 (Emphasis added.)
The doctrinal thesis adopted by the majority appears to be that an employee seeking to enforce a contract of employment — in contrast with any other person who asserts that he entered into a contract with another person — has the burden of showing, with evidence other than the usual promissory "manifestations,” that the employer actually intended to be bound.
The general rule, however, as stated by Professors Calamari and Perillo, is that "a party’s intention will be held to be what a reasonable man in the position of the other party would conclude his manifestation to mean.”74
Professor Farnsworth similarly wrote that the prevailing view is that the standard is objective and not subjective. The "promisee” is not required to show that the "promisor” made the promissory statement "with the intention of assenting to an agreement. It is enough that the other party had reason to believe that the first party had that intention.”75 Farnsworth, Contracts, § 3.6, p 114. (Emphasis added.)_
*705Professor Farnsworth continued:
[T]he objective theory tends to hold the parties to linguistic usage that is accepted as normal, a matter of fact that arguably falls within the province of a jury.[76]
The signers of the lead opinion quote with approval from this Court’s opinion in Goldman v Century Ins Co, 354 Mich 528, 535; 93 NW2d 240 (1958).77 There, this Court adopted the objective standard for determining what constitutes a "meeting of the minds,” and rejected the subjective approach.78 Speaking through Justice Talbot Smith, the Court said:
*706We agree, also, that evidence of the unexpressed thoughts and understanding of the Goldmans was inadmissible to establish their intent. The Gold-mans assert that such denial "shatters the whole concept of a 'meeting of the minds.’ ” They read the figure of speech too literally. To say, as we do, that a contract requires a "meeting of the minds” is only a figurative way of saying there must be mutual assent. This we judge by an objective standard, looking to the expressed words of the parties and their visible acts. [Emphasis added.]
The signers of the lead and concurring opinions appear to have adopted the subjective view, requiring evidence that "both parties intended to be bound,”79 of "actual mental assent”80 by the employer, to constitute a "meeting of the minds.”81
*707The lead and concurring opinions, in requiring "objective” indications or "validations,”82 have in truth rejected, for oral contracts of employment, the general doctrine that "a party’s intention will be held to be what a reasonable man in the position of the other party would conclude his manifestation to mean.”
The majority, in effect, announces a new rule of law requiring corroboration or something akin, that an employer, acting through a subordinate such as Harryman,83 actually intended to provide job security.
B
The use of the quotations from Professor Perritt’s treatise on Employee Dismissal Law and Practice in the concurring opinion is misleading.84
*708When Professor Perritt states that there is little support in the cases for "forget[ting] about validation devices and [for] enforc[ing] employer promises of employment security merely upon proof that the employer made them,” he is referring to Professor Fried’s thesis that promises should be enforced on the basis of fairness without, regard to whether there is consideration.85
If one reads on, it appears that "[t]he most common validation device is consideration: something given in return for a promise. This may be a return promise or it may be conduct. It may be any benefit or detriment that is given in exchange for a promise.” Perritt, Employee Dismissal Láw & Practice (2d ed), § 4.12, p 198. Read in context, it is manifest that Professor Perritt’s statement does not support the notion that there must be an actual meeting of the minds.
Professor Perritt’s true views become clear on reading the following:
The doctrine of additional consideration sometimes has led to the erroneous notion that a promise of employment tenure must be supported by its own consideration, separate from consideration for other promises in the employment agreement.[86]
*709Like the observations of Professor Perritt, Professor Epstein’s remarks, in a law review article quoted in the concurring opinion, are directed at a question not here presented.
Professor Epstein’s strictures are addressed to those who would impose by operation of law— statute or judicial decision — independently of the agreement of the parties, a just-cause term generally in employment relationships, with the result that, whether bargained for or not, employees would generally have tenure.87 This Court rejected such an approach in Valentine.
Professor Epstein’s views are clarified in reading the following passage, which the majority should *710consider in assessing the issues presented in Dumas.
*709The rule of construction is normally chosen because it reflects the dominant practice in a given class of cases and because that practice is itself regarded as making good sense for the standard transactions it governs. It is of course freely waivable by a joint expression of contrary intention. When the law introduces a just-cause requirement, it flies in the face of ordinary understandings and thus rests upon an assumption that just-cause arrangements are in the broad run of cases either more frequent or desirable than the contract at will, though neither is the case. Where this rule of construction is used, therefore, contracting-out will have to take place in the very large number of cases where the parties desire to conform to the norm by entering into a contract at will. Furthermore, it may be difficult to waive the for-cause requirement in fact, even if waiver is formally allowable as a matter of law, because of high standards for “informed” waiver that cannot be met after the fact. By degrees, the original presumption against the contract at will could so gain in strength that a requirement that is waivable in theory could easily become conclusive in fact. [Epstein, In defense of the contract at will, 51 U Chi L R 947, 951-952 (1984). Emphasis added.]
*710The same problems can exist with modern employment contracts. Suppose that a worker has put in the effort to obtain for the firm a large contract on which he is to be paid a commission. If the firm dismisses him under an at-will contract before the sale is consummated and the commission is formally due, most courts will (rightly) imply a term of good faith that gives the employee the commission for the work done, unless the agreement explicitly provides otherwise. Thus in Coleman v Graybar Electric Co, Inc [195 F2d 374 (CA 5, 1952)], the plaintiff’s claim for compensation rested in part upon commissions that were paid annually based upon the sales record in the previous period. The court construed the contract to preclude the at-will norm: "We conclude that in this case the contract did not authorize the forfeiture of additional compensation provided in the plan of compensation if the services of the employee were terminated arbitrarily and without just cause.” [Epstein, In defense of the contract at will, 51 U Chi L R 947, 980 (1984).]
IV
Although the majority calls for "objective” evidence corroborating Montgomery Ward’s actual intention to provide job security, it trivializes that search by focusing on inconsequential distinctions, urged by counsel for Montgomery Ward, said to distinguish the instant case from Toussaint but which, in another case, may be of little or no importance, because the record will show that the employee did not "stumble in,” and did inquire about job security.
*711A
The signers of the lead opinion state that Rowe "did not engage in preemployment negotiations regarding security. She simply 'stumbled’ into the store one day and had one interview before being hired. Nor is there any testimony suggesting that plaintiff inquired about job security.”88
The analysis of the lead opinion suggests that if, instead of "stumbling” into the store one day, Rowe had answered a help-wanted advertisement Montgomery Ward was thén running, or if she had "inquired” about job security, a different result might be justified.
The record, indeed, does not indicate how the subject of job security arose during the preemployment interview. But somehow or other the subject came up. When Harryman was asked whether he had informed Rowe of the "reasons for which she may be terminated,” Harryman testified, "[t]heft or, you know, obviously, murder, or something like that; theft of any company properties, or so on.” Also, Rowe signed the Rules of Personal Conduct, which enumerated grounds for discharge.
Since the record provides at least an issue properly submissible to the jury regarding whether Rowe and Harryman discussed job security, it should not be of any importance whether Rowe "inquired” about job security before Harryman brought it up and described the current policy as he understood it.89
B
Yet, even if Rowe had "inquired” about job *712security, that would not satisfy the majority. With still another analysis, the signers of the lead opinion observe that in Toussaint, supra, the plaintiff was applying for a "singular, executive job position[ ],” while Rowe "was one of many departmental salespersons.” The lead opinion observes that Rowe’s application was for one of "several identical positions” and reasons that this circumstance "militates against the likelihood that the contract terms were negotiable and suggests that company policy was more likely to govern.”90
The record does not, however, indicate that there was a "company policy” contrary to Rowe’s and Harryman’s testimony. The Montgomery Ward manager who discharged Rowe testified that she would have had to rely, at the time she was hired, on what Harryman told her and what the Rules of Personal Conduct provided.
The lead opinion does not state or describe the "company policy” adverted to in the opinion. Thus, in addition to assessing, as trier of fact, the "likelihood that the contract terms were negotiable,” and finding that "company policy was more likely to govern,” the lead opinion appears to hypothesize or posit, without record support, an unstated and undescribed "company policy” that was neither consistent with Harryman’s statements to Rowe nor reflected in the Rules of Personal Conduct.
c
The lead opinion states that "[ujnlike Toussaint, plaintiff did not engage in preemployment negotiations regarding security.”91
Toussaint dealt with the consolidated appeals in *713Charles Toussaint’s action against Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Michigan, and Walter Ebling’s action against Masco Corporation. Both Toussaint and Ebling were employed in middle-management positions.
Ebling dealt directly with the executive vice president of Masco, and did indeed specifically "negotiate” for job security. The Toussaint opinion does not, however, indicate that Toussaint negotiated for job security any more than did Rowe.92 An officer at bcbsm advised Toussaint of the current policy.
Ebling is distinguishable in this regard from Rowe, but Toussaint is not. Toussaint may have been a higher level employee than Rowe, but nothing in the Toussaint record suggests that the terms of Toussaint’s employment with bcbsm were any more negotiable than the terms of Rowe’s employment.
The effort to distinguish Toussaint on the basis of negotiations for job security does not bear analysis insofar as the case of Charles Toussaint is concerned.
v
The concurring opinion adverts to "the circumstances identified as objective indications of intent”93 said to be set forth in the lead opinion. I fail to see how any of these criteria provide "objective indications” of an employer’s actual intent to relinquish "managerial discretion” to discharge an employee at will. Be that as it may, the "circum*714stances identified as objective 'indications of intent” tend — objectively or subjectively viewed — to support Rowe.94
VI
The author of the concurring opinion postulates still another rule of construction:
[W]hen considering whether a statement constitutes an offer, in the context of commercial contracts, courts construe a statement as nonpromis*715sory if it would expose the maker to the risk of being bound to perform beyond his means to perform.[95] [Emphasis added.]
This suggests that providing job security for commissioned salespersons for as long as they sell might have been beyond the means of Montgomery Ward. There is nothing in the record to support such a finding, and under the circumstance that commissioned salespersons are paid only when they sell, it is unlikely that this rule of construction has any application on this record.
In this connection, especially noteworthy are the decisions of the Supreme Courts of Texas and California, and of the Louisiana Court of Appeal,96 because in each of those cases the contracts — to provide water, pest control, or an exclusive selling agency — proved to be onerous during their long terms. The courts did not, however, relieve the contracting party of the "as long as” promise. Again, however, there is nothing to suggest that employing Rowe, on a straight commission basis, as long as she sold might be economically disadvantageous to Montgomery Ward.
VII
The "issue” dealt with in part n of the lead opinion was not briefed or argued by Rowe, and hence cannot properly be decided at this time.
This issue is addressed in two cases pending in this Court on applications by employers for leave to appeal, Henry v Montgomery Ward, Docket No. 90134, and Schippers v SPX Corp, Docket No. 90702.
*716A
The first paragraph of part ii of the lead opinion reads:
Having concluded that the employer’s oral statements and the "Rules of Personal Conduct” did not form contracts for permanent employment, we must next decide whether the disciplinary guidelines promulgated by defendant gave rise to an employment contract providing termination only for just cause where defendant concurrently issued sign-off sheets containing an employment-at-will policy. We ñnd that plaintiff cannot maintain an action for breach of contract on the basis of the disciplinary guidelines because the last handbook which plaintiff received clearly set forth an employment-at-will policy.[97] [Emphasis added.]
The "last handbook” was issued in 1983.
While Rowe argued that the Rules of Personal Conduct, which she signed in August, 1976, when she was hired, were part of her express contract of employment and gave rise to reasonable expectations of termination only for cause, she did not assert that the procedure set forth in the 1983 manual or handbook — the sign-off sheet which she did not sign — gave rise to an implied promise of termination only for cause. Rowe did not assert that she could, in the words of the lead opinion, "maintain an action for breach of contract on the basis of the disciplinary guidelines” set forth in the 1983 handbook.
B
Rowe’s brief did not claim rights under the 1983 *717manual or handbook,98 but rather that it was not binding on her.99 During oral argument, Rowe *718stated her position that as a result of both the oral assurances creating the express-contract leg under Toussaint, and as a result of Rules of Personal Conduct, in light of this Court’s ruling in Toussaint and subsequent cases, a question was raised sufficient for presentation of the jury. The reference to the Rules of Personal Conduct, of course,. adverts to the Rules of Personal Conduct signed in 1976, and not the 1982 or 1983 manuals or handbooks.
It appears from the Court of Appeals opinions on this issue, in Langeland v Bronson Methodist Hosp, 178 Mich App 612; 444 NW2d 146 (1989), Dalton v Herbruck Egg Sales Corp, 164 Mich App 543; 417 NW2d 496 (1987), Henry, supra, and Schippers, supra, that the issue is not free from doubt.100
c
In Keasey v Engles, 259 Mich 178, 181; 242 NW 878 (1932), this Court said:_
*719Plaintiff relies upon an expression in Carmichael v Carmichael, 72 Mich 76 [40 NW 173 (1888)], to the effect that beneficiaries under contract to make a will were proper parties plaintiff, "as parties having vested interest in this real estate under the contract of their father and mother.” The question of vesting was not raised in the case, and the expression cannot be given the force of authority thereon. [Emphasis added.][101]
Stated otherwise, where the parties have not supplied a durational term, employment at will is the inferred term that the court supplies by construction. [Boyle, J., ante, p 664. Emphasis added.]
Otherwise stated, it [reliance or special consideration] is circumstantial evidence that the omitted durational term that the court would otherwise infer (employment at will) does not reflect the parties’ intent. [Id., p 665. Emphasis added.]
[C]ourts are much more reluctant to infer a durational term. [Id., p 667. Emphasis added.]
In most employment arrangements, the durational term is central to the agreement because it is inseparable from the threshold question whether a commitment could reasonably be understood to be a promise. [Id. Emphasis added.]
I agree with Justice Riley’s conclusion that there is an insufficient basis to overcome the presumption and supply an omitted durational term. In this context, the standard of performance is not sufficient to guide the Court on the central question of the parties’ intent regarding the duration of the employment relationship. [Id., pp 667-668. Emphasis added.]
It is just as true, however, that the party bearing the burden of overcoming the presumption of employment at will must convince the court either that it should supply an omitted term or that the circumstances are such that the jury should be permitted to so conclude. [Riley, J., ante, p 639. Emphasis added.]
Restatement Contracts, § 32, comment c, illustration 3, pp 41-42. Now, Restatement Contracts, 2d, § 33, comment d, illustration 5, p 94.
Learned Hand, Benjamin N. Cardozo, John W. Davis, Owen J. Roberts, Elihu Root, and others, were members of the Council of the Institute whose concurrence was required before a Restatement could be promulgated.
Riley, J., ante, p 636. The signers of the opinion conclude that "plaintiff’s allegations are insufficient to support her contention of a promise implied in fact limiting the defendant’s right to terminate her employment,” id. (emphasis added), and that "objective evidence [is] lacking to permit a reasonable juror to find that a reasonable promisee would interpret Harryman’s statements and actions as a promise of termination only for cause implied in fact.” Id., p 643.
Since Rowe was hired in 1976, before Montgomery Ward issued its 1982 and 1983 employee manuals or handbooks, the written policy statements there set forth have no bearing on the terms of her contract.
Rowe’s assertion that the Rules of Personal Conduct gave rise to legitimate expectations that she would not be discharged at will, suggests that she was seeking recovery on an implied promise not to terminate her employment except for cause. But the majority’s conclusion that no such promise can be inferred does not reach or decide the question whether the promise of employment at a stated compensation as long as she sold gave rise to an express employment contract when she accepted the offer. If, as the jury found, that promise and acceptance formed a contract, the resulting contract was express, not implied.
When Rowe was hired, she was given and signed a copy of the Rules of Personal Conduct. The full text of the Rules of Personal Conduct follow:
Rules of Personal Conduct
Everyone at Wards is working for the same Company goals. *680Your adherence to Company policies and high personal standards will help Wards and you achieve: Growth, Profit, Security, Successful career.
However, the following activities are extremely harmful to the success of our store, and anyone involved in them will be immediately dismissed:
• Theft
• Destruction or misappropriation of property
• Violation of accepted moral standards
• Manipulating, altering or falsifying Company records (including employment application)
• Dishonesty of any kind
You should be familiar with Wards rules and regulations and all of the procedures governing you and your job.
We are confident you will always conduct yourself according to the rules of good conduct.
I have read and agree to the above statements. My trainer has explained the Company policies and rules governing the store and my job. I understand what is expected of me as an employee.
/s/ Mary Rowe_ Aug. 9,1976
(Employee’s name) (Date)
(Trainer’s name) (Date)
This sheet becomes a permanent part of the employee’s file.
Rowe was hired in 1976 to sell sewing machines at a store in Grand Rapids. Later she was transferred to major appliances. Rowe received a straight nine percent commission for the sale of sewing machines and six percent for the sale of major appliances.
When Rowe was hired, she was interviewed by Vernon Harryman, the manager of the appliance department. Rowe testified that Harry-man explained the requirements of the job and said, "as long as I sold, I would have a job at Montgomery Ward.” Harryman testified that he informed Rowe that if she did riot make the amount of her draw against commission for two consecutive months, she would be reviewed and that such failure would be grounds for dismissal.
Harryman testified that commissioned salespersons were different *681from hourly employees: "[GJenerally, as long as they generated sales and were honest, why, they had a job at Wards, and that’s the way we used to hire our people.” He said that Rowe would have to sell approximately $2,000 of sewing machines a week to make her draw, and that was the number one thing, condition of employment, and that, if she failed to generate such sales for two months, her employment would be subject to termination.
The Rules of Personal Conduct, insofar as they enumerated grounds for discharge, were part of the express contract asserted by Rowe.
In deciding whether Rowe was properly discharged for cause, the jury was not, however, limited to an inquiry whether she had violated the particularized grounds of discharge set forth in the Rules of Personal Conduct. Rowe acknowledged that an employee may ordinarily be discharged for cause without regard to whether such a term is expressed at the time of hiring. But, if such a term is not expressed, it is the employer who will later seek to establish by implication a term that he may discharge for cause although the employee otherwise has duly performed the work.
Insofar as Montgomery Ward sought to justify Rowe’s discharge on the basis of a cause not stated in the Rules of Personal Conduct, it was Montgomery Ward who sought to establish by implication a term —i.e., that Rowe could be discharged for any "cause,” not only cause stated in the Rules of Personal Conduct — rather than Rowe who was seeking, as the signers of the lead opinion erroneously declare, to infer a promise that her employment could not be terminated except for cause.
Rowe frequently set sales records and won prizes for her sales efforts.
But see n 19.
The signers of the lead opinion misstate Rowe’s position when they suggest that she asserted she could "only be dismissed for failure to obtain her quota . . . .” Riley, J., ante, p 644. She acknowledged that she could be dismissed for cause. See ns 8 and 65.
Rowe commenced this action against Montgomery Ward in May, 1984, claiming breach of contract and wrongful discharge. The jury returned a verdict of $86,500 for Rowe. The majority does not find that, contrary to the jury’s verdict, there was cause for dismissal.
It does not appear that Rowe had any disciplinary record, even in the form of a warning or a reprimand during her nearly eight years with Montgomery Ward.
Rowe was scheduled to work between 1:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. on a Saturday in March, 1984. At about 2:00 p.m., a Montgomery Ward "loss prevention officer” observed Rowe leave through an unauthorized exit. Upon checking her time card, he observed that she had not punched out. Rowe returned about 6:00 p.m. Rowe made no notation on her time card of her extended absence from the store.
Rowe testified that another salesperson, Marie Morris, asked Rowe to switch shifts with her so that Morris could visit a terminally ill friend in the hospital. Rowe agreed, but added that she might have to attend to a personal matter on Saturday afternoon and had even considered taking all day Saturday off. Rowe also testified that the commissioned employees switched their shifts back and forth from time to time. Rowe had attempted on the previous evening to reach her supervisor to tell him of the switch, but he did not work on Friday and did not come in on Saturday. Morris confirmed Rowe’s testimony about trading shifts in general, and specifically with respect to the trade that occurred that Saturday.
Rowe testified that she was familiar with the staffing needs of the department, and that she did not leave the store without assuring herself that there was an adequate number of persons staffing the major appliance department. Another employee confirmed her testimony.
Harryman testified that while all employees were required to punch in and out, these policies frequently changed. He indicated that they really had little application to commission salespersons. He said, "The number one thing was to work, attain those draw figures. It was sales. Sales covered a multitude of sins. That was our favorite slogan at Wards.” He said that Rowe was the best commission salesperson he had ever worked with.
When Rowe returned to work, a security guard was waiting for her *683and escorted her to the office of the store manager. Rowe was told that she had violated a company policy. She responded that she honestly did not know which policy they were talking about. When Rowe was told that she had left the store without punching her time card and had cost the company money, she responded that she worked on commission and had more sales than anyone that day. Rowe added that she was sorry that she did not punch out while gone, and would do so in the future.
Rowe said that she was asked to sign "another paper” and that she should "read it over and write down what happened and sign it.” Rowe refused. The manager was then called in and said that he had no choice but to dismiss Rowe. When she responded that he would be losing the best salesperson he had, he responded, "Yes, I know,” and then said something to the effect that he had no choice.
Rowe testified that she had left on that Saturday afternoon to assist her elderly and ailing father with housekeeping chores in preparing her parents’ home for the return of her mother, who had been away for a number of months.
See part ii-f, n 34 ff, and accompanying text.
Riley, J., ante, p 631.
Id., pp 640, 643, 644.
Calamari & Perillo, Contracts (3d ed), § 2-2, p 27. See part m, n 74 ff.
Riley, J., ante, p 631.
In 1982 or 1983, a number of years after Rowe was hired, she was asked to sign a writing stating that her employment was at will, and refused to do so. The majority does not posit its disposition of this appeal on the basis that, although she did not expressly agree thereto, she was bound by the statements in the employee manuals distributed after she was hired.
Sometime after August 1982, Montgomery Ward issued an "Employee Guide” that included an introductory letter from the company president and ceo, as well as other introductory materials suggesting that the manual was directed to new employees. A slightly different version of the manual, also directed to new employees, was issued in May, 1983.
Each version of the manual had a final "tear-out” or "cut-out” page which was labeled "Employee Sign-off Sheet,” which the employee was asked to sign and return to the immediate supervisor or personnel representative for inclusion within the personnel file of the employee. The sign-off sheet stated that employment at Montgomery Ward was at will.
Rowe testified that she refused to sign this sign-off sheet when it was presented to her. The back of the document contains the inscription: "Read & do not wish to sign. 5-20-82 [/s/] Mary Rowe.” Rowe testified that she said she would not sign the form, and she "didn’t really think it was right to come along in 1983 and ask me to sign a new employee handbook.”
According to Rowe, the following conversation occurred between her and a person in the personnel department:
A. I took it back to the office and I handed the book to them and I said, "I’m sorry, but I cannot, in truth, sign this,” and I handed her the book.
Q. [Mr. Spruit]: And this was Ms. Foster?
A. Yes.
Q. And what did she say?
*686A. She said, "You have to sign it.” I said, "I beg your pardon. This is a free country and I really don’t feel, — if you feel in your heart that it’s not right to sign, I’m not going to sign it,” and she said, "If you don’t sign it, you don’t have a job.” So this went on, I think, for almost a week, back and forth, "Sign the book,” "No, I don’t feel I can sign it. I’m not a new employee. It just isn’t right.” So finally, she said, "All right. If you don’t sign the book, will you at least acknowledge that you got it?” and I said, "Yes, I will do that,” and so on a sheet of paper, I wrote "refused to sign” and initialed it or signed it, that part of it.
Consequently, the court stated that any orally grounded contractual obligation for permanent employment "must be based on more than an expression of an optimistic hope of a long relationship.” [Riley, J., ante, p 640. Emphasis added.]
Bullock v Automobile Club of Michigan, 432 Mich 472, 517; 444 NW2d 114 (1989) (Griffin, J.), quoted by Riley, J., ante, pp 640-641.
The signers of the lead opinion appear to state that the correct inquiry is whether "there was mutual assent on a provision for permanent employment.” Riley, J., ante, p 643 (emphasis added), see n 81, for the full text.
It is the employer, rather, who might seek to rely on a term "implied in fact,” namely, that the employer may, although he did not expressly reserve the right to do so, terminate the employment— at least for cause, the employer would prefer at will — even though he expressly promised the employee employment for as long as the employee is able to do the work.
The correct inquiry is, thus, not whether the "circumstances suggest both parties intended to be bound” (Riley, J., ante, p 636), or whether the employer has "in reality agreed to limit managerial discretion” (id, p 631) to discharge at will. (Emphasis added.)
Harryman, the manager of the appliance department, hired Rowe and corroborated her testimony. See n 7.
Id., p 643.
The author of this treatise also recognized:
In the case of employment contracts without fixed duration it seems to be universally held that only an employment at will is created. [Id., p 74.]
Requirement of Certainty in the Terms of an Offer.
An offer must be so definite in its terms, or require such definite terms in the acceptance, that the promises and performances to be rendered by each party are reasonably certain.
Comment:
a. Inasmuch as the law of contracts deals only with duties defined by the expressions of the parties, the rule stated in the Section is one of necessity as well as of law. The law cannot subject a person to a contractual duty or give another a contractual right unless the character thereof is fixed by the agreement of the parties. A statement by a that he will pay b what a chooses is no promise. A promise by a to give b employment is not wholly illusory, but if neither the character of the employment nor the compensation therefor is stated, the promise is so indefinite that the law cannot enforce it, even if consideration is given for it. [1 Restatement Contracts, § 32, p 40. Emphasis added.]
See n 28 for the § 32 black letter statement of the rule.
A offers to employ b for a stated compensation as long as b is able to do specified work, or as long as a specified business is carried on, and b accepts the terms offered. The length of the engagement is sufficiently definite for the formation of a contract. [1 Restatement Contracts, 2d, § 33, comment d, illustration 5, p 94]
Williston on Contracts and Corbin on Contracts.
Carpenter v American Excelsior Co, 650 F Supp 933, 936, n 6 (ED Mich, 1987).
A panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit commented on Carpenter as follows:
Here the district judge, as trier of fact, was faced with a specific promise coupled with a performance standard. Unlike Carpenter, Diggs did not sign an "employment-at-will” clause. [Diggs IV v Pepsi-Cola Metropolitan Bottling Co, Inc, 861 F2d 914, 918 (CA 6, 1988).]
Rowe did not, when hired, agree in writing or orally that her employment was at will. When she was later asked to sign such a writing, she refused. This case also presents "a specific promise coupled with a performance standard.” The evidence showed that Rowe was hired with the understanding that she would have a job at Montgomery Ward as long as she generated sufficient sales to cover her weekly draw.
The judge, in a subsequent opinion denying summary judgment, may have recharacterized Carpenter when he said that in Carpenter the employee had signed an application for employment acknowledging that the employee served at the will or pleasure of the company, and that in such a case a finding of a just-cause contract, sought to be predicated on policies and procedures enumerated in employee handbooks and elsewhere, was precluded. Ross v State Farm Ins Co, 676 F Supp 781 (ED Mich, 1987).
A panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit held that an oral promise to retain an employee as district sales manager " 'as long as his performance was maintained at a certain level’ ” was enforceable. (Emphasis added.) Diggs IV, n 32 supra, p 916.
The Supreme Court of Mississippi held that the term of duration of an oral employment contract for "so long as the business was operated at the named place” is not "so indefinite” as to render the contract invalid "as a method is provided therein for determining the length of the engagement.” Thorne v True-Hixon Lumber Co, 167 Miss 266, 273; 148 So 388 (1933), relying on 1 Restatement Contracts, § 32, comment c, illustration 3, pp 41-42.
The Colorado Court of Appeals ruled that where the plaintiff had entered into a written contract of employment to manage a camera supply business that he had sold, taking back ten percent of the capital stock of the purchaser, he could, consistent with the parol evidence rule and the one-year statute of frauds, maintain an action for breach of an oral durational term of the written employment contract. The oral term was "allegedly for as long as” (emphasis added) the plaintiff was a stockholder of the corporation which bought the business. Buechner v Rouse, 538 P2d 117, 118 (Colo App, 1975).
A New York trial court held that an oral employment contract whereby the defendant agreed to employ the plaintiff as manager "so long a time as” the defendant " 'continued to employ workers, trained, developed and gathered by plaintiff,’ ” "fixed an objective limit to the life of the contract — the date when the employment of the skilled workers should cease” to he in the employ of the defendant. Deucht v Storper, 44 NYS2d 350, 351 (NYC, 1943). (Emphasis added.)
See n 34.
See n 35.
See n 36.
See n 37.
McMullan v Dickinson Co, 60 Minn 156,157; 62 NW 120 (1895).
Kirkley v F H Roberts Co, 268 Mass 246, 251; 167 NE 289 (1929). (Emphasis added.)
Ehrenworth v Stuhmer & Co, 229 NY 210, 220; 128 NE 108 (1920).
Long Beach Drug Co v United Drug Co, 13 Cal 2d 158, 165-166; 88 P2d 698 (1939). (Emphasis added.)
Rague v New York Evening Journal Publishing Co, 164 AD 126, 126-127; 149 NYS 668 (1914). (Emphasis added.)
Warner v Texas & Pacific R Co, 164 US 418, 434-435; 17 S Ct 147; 41 L Ed 495 (1896). (Emphasis added.)
Phelps v Shawprint, Inc, 328 Mass 352, 353-355; 103 NE2d 687 (1952). (Emphasis added.) The report is silent whether the agreement was oral or written.
Courts have held to be enforceable oral agreements for the sale of existing scrap and such as would accumulate during the course of building a dam, no definite time or quantity of material being indicated (Mason-Walsh-Atkinson-Kier Co v Stubblefield, 99 F2d 735 [CA 9, 1938]), and for the cutting, sawing, and hauling of lumber from a *698specific tract of land for a specific consideration, where the contract ■ was silent with regard to duration. W P Brown & Sons Lumber Co v Rattray, 238 Ala 406; 192 So 851 (1939).
Big Spring v Texas Bd of Control, 404 SW2d 810, 815 (Tex, 1966).
City of Superior v Douglas Co Telephone Co, 141 Wis 363, 371; 122 NW 1023 (1909).
The court quoted with approval the following statement:
"The duration of a contract may be made dependent upon the expiration of a period of time, or upon the completion of a given undertaking, or the happening of some event, all of which in turn may be certain or uncertain as to the date when the undertaking may be completed, or the event may happen. This uncertainty, however, does not render the contract terminable at will.” [Robson v Mississippi River Logging Co, 43 F 364, 370 (ND Iowa, 1890).]
In another case, the defendant agreed, under a written contract, to "furnish plaintiff steam 'while in the building occupied and used by them as a steam laundry ....’” The Wisconsin Supreme Court held that the term "while” clearly expressed duration, and thus the terms of the contract "indicate[d] that the time of the contract [was] dependent upon the event of use and occupancy of the building by plaintiff as a laundry.” Accordingly, the contract was not void for indefiniteness with regard to time. American Steam Laundry Co v Riverside Printing Co, 171 Wis 644, 647; 177 NW 852 (1920).
The Ohio Supreme Court ruled that a written requirements contract calling for performance "so long as” the plaintiff should own fifteen shares of stock of the defendant company, or "so long as” the plaintiff should continue in the business of selling gasoline, oil, and grease, provided "an ascertainable fact or event by which the duration of the term of [the] contract can be determined . . . .” Fuchs v *699United Motor Stage Co, Inc, 135 Ohio St 509, 512; 21 NE2d 669 (1939). (Emphasis added.)
The Louisiana Court of Appeal found that a contract to provide "pest control and repair services with guarantees for the lifetime of the treated structure so long as the customer paid a specified annual renewal fee” was for a "definite and ascertainable period.’’ State v Orkin Exterminating Co, Inc, 528 So 2d 198, 199, 201 (La App, 1988). (Emphasis added.)
Riley, J., ante, p 644.
Id.
Id., p 645.
Id., p 643.
Id., p 642.
Id., p 643.
Id., p 641.
Discussed in part ii-f, text preceding n 34.
See ns 34-37, 44 and the accompanying text.
Caplis, supra, pp 588, 590, 594.
See Don King Productions, Inc v Douglas, 742 F Supp 741, 763 (SD NY, 1990). The contract provided that it should run for three years plus " 'the entire period [Douglas is] world champion and a *701period of two years following the date on which [Douglas] thereafter cease[s] . 1 . to be so recognized as world champion.’ ”
The court held that the contract was of the type that provides for termination or cancellation upon the occurrence of a specified event, and that it was enforceable.
Rowe does not claim that she could not be discharged for cause. She recognizes that, having signed the Rules of Personal Conduct, she could be discharged on a ground there stated. She also conceded that all the reasonable grounds for discharge under a contract providing termination only for cause need not be particularized.
An exception for cause would ordinarily be implied in fact for the benefit of the employer. There may, however, be a case where it would not be appropriate to infer an exception permitting the employer to discharge for cause other than that the employee is no longer able to do the work.
Boyle, J., ante, p 664.
This Court there said:
*702Both Toussaint and Ebling inquired regarding job security when they were hired. Toussaint testified that he was told he would be with the company "as long as I did my job.” Ebling testified that he was told that if he was "doing the job” he would not be discharged. Toussaint’s testimony, like Ebling’s, made submissible to the jury whether there was an agreement for a contract of employment terminable only for cause. [Toussaint, supra, p 597. Emphasis added.]
Boyle, J., ante, p 664. (Emphasis in original.)
Id.
See n 34 ff, and the accompanying text.
Drawing on the facts of Toussaint and Ebling, the lead opinion sets forth a list of some of the circumstances that are of assistance in determining the threshold issue of intent.
4 Among the circumstances identified as objective indications of intent are the clarity, specificity, and lack of ambiguity of oral statements; whether there were specific negotiations for job security; the nature of the position; and whether, if policy statements are relied on, they support or undercut a reasonable belief that a promise of job security was being extended.
[Boyle, J., ante, pp 663-664.]
Perritt, Employee Dismissal Law & Practice (2d ed), § 4.2, p 176. Professor Perritt’s statement is discussed in part iii-b.
See Boyle, J., ante, pp 665-666; Riley, J., ante, p 636.
Calamari & Perillo, Contracts (3d ed), § 2-2, p 27.
Judge Jerome Frank . . . put it, "The objectivists transferred from the field of torts that stubborn anti-subjectivist 'the reasonable man.’ ” According to the objectivists, a party’s mental assent was not necessary to make a contract. If his actions, judged by a standard of reasonableness, manifested an intention to agree, the real but unexpressed state of his mind was irrelevant. As an analyst from the field of torts might view it, that party had by his fault induced the other to believe that there was a contract.
By the end of the nineteenth century, the objective theory had become ascendant and courts generally accept it today. True, a party may still avoid liability by showing that he did not even intend to engage in the actions by which he appeared to manifest his assent, for example, if he was falsely told that a writing had no legal effect or was compelled to sign by such force that he was a “mere mechanical instrument.” But as long as he intended to engage in those actions, there is no further *705requirement that he must have done so with the intention of assenting to an agreement. It is enough that the other party had reason to believe that the ñrst party had that intention. [Farnsworth, supra, pp 113-114. Emphasis added.]
Id., p 116. (Emphasis added.)
Bernie and Leon Goldman conducted a coal business in Detroit. A fire damaged the coalyard bins, fences, and gates, and the roofs of out buildings in the coalyard, but there was no damage to the one-story or two-story buildings described in the fire insurance policies. The Goldman brothers insisted that they intended to insure everything flammable on the premises.
Professors Calamari and Perillo summarized the debate concerning what constitutes a "meeting of the minds,” and particularly concerning the differing approaches of the subjectivists and the objectivists:
In the previous section it is stated that mutual assent is a prerequisite to the formation of the contract. However, over the years a debate has raged as to whether the assent of the parties should be actual mental assent so that there is a ’’meeting of the minds” or whether assent should be determined solely from objective manifestations of intent — namely what a party says and does rather than what he subjectively intends or believes or assumes. Thus under the objective theory the mental assent and intent of the parties is irrelevant. However, even under the objective theory the acts manifesting assent must be done either intentionally or negligently. For at least a century the objective theory of contracts has been dominant.
Another portion of the credo of the objectivists is that objec*706tive manifestations of intent of the party should be viewed from the vantage point of a reasonable man in the position of the other party. The phrase "in the position of the other party” means that the other party is charged not only with the knowledge of a reasonable man but also with what he knows or should know because of his superior knowledge. . . . [Id., § 2-2, p 26. Emphasis added.]
Riley, J., ante, p 636. (Emphasis added.)
See Calamari & Perillo, n 78.
In deciding whether there was mutual assent to a just-cause provision, we use an objective test, "looking to the expressed words of the parties and their visible acts.” [Riley, J., ante, p 640. Emphasis added.]
In short, no objective evidence exists that their minds met on the subject of continued employment. [Id., p 643. Emphasis added.]
Upon viewing the
surrounding circumstances of this case ... to determine if there was mutual assent on a provision for permanent employment, or if the statements were noncontractual expressions of "optimistic hope of a long relationship,” we find the oral statements insufficient to rise to the level of an agreement providing termination only for just cause. [Id., p 643. Emphasis added.]
*707[Tjhere is less chance that the parties desired or intended the result prayed for where, as here, conduct and oral statements are claimed to create a promise of job security implied in fact. [Id., p 644. Emphasis added.]
Consequently, we find no evidence from which reasonable minds could find that there was mutual assent on a term of employment terminable only for cause. [Id., p 646. Emphasis added.]
"[W]e find objective evidence lacking.” Id., p 643. "[N]o objective evidence exists.” Id. "[Objective support for the oral representations.” Id., p 644. "[Objective support was lacking.” Id.
But, as acknowledged in Darlington v General Electric, 350 Pa Super 183, 200; 504 A2d 306 (1986), quoted with approval in the concurring opinion, the " 'sufficient additional consideration’ ” validation device "may be nothing more than a legal fiction . . . .”
Montgomery Ward did not assert or seek to establish, at trial or on appeal, that Harryman did not have authority to promise Rowe employment as long as she was able to sell, or to enter into a contract of employment with her on that basis.
The statement first quoted, Boyle, J., ante, p 663, that the " 'employment-at-will rule reflected a policy judgment’ ” is footnoted with a reference to §§ 4.12-4.17 of the same work. Section 4.12 contains the second statement quoted in the concurring opinion, id., p 666.
See n 7 of Professor Perritt’s work, pp 197-198, which is the sole citation in support of the second statement quoted in Justice Boyle’s opinion, p 666. "C. Fried, Contract as Promise 39 (1981) (enforcement of promises on the basis of fairness).”
Perritt, id., § 4.16, pp 207-208.
Professor Perritt continues:
A majority view of contract doctrine is to the contrary:
" 'A single and undivided consideration may be bargained for and given as the agreed equivalent of one promise or of two promises or of many promises.’ Thus there is no analytical reason why an employee’s promise to render services, or his actual rendition of services over time, may not support an employer’s promise both to pay a particular wage (for example) and to refrain from arbitrary dismissal.”
*709Thus, it is important to recognize that the issue regarding consideration in an employment contract is whether the entire package of promises made by one party is supported by consideration. Each discrete promise need not be supported by separate consideration. [Id. Emphasis added.]
This becomes clear if one reads in context the words quoted from Professor Epstein’s article:
Riley, J., ante, p 643.
The only record evidence concerning "company policy” was Harryman’s testimony, tending to support Rowe’s assertion that she was promised that she would have a job as long as she sold, "that’s the way we used to hire our people.”
Riley, J., ante, p 643.
Id.
I acknowledge that the opinion in Toussaint, supra, p 612, states that Ebling and Toussaint "negotiated specifically regarding job security with the persons who interviewed and hired them.” It would have been more precise to have said Ebling "negotiated” and Toussaint "inquired” about job security.
Boyle, J., ante, p 663, n 4.
Clarity, specificity, and lack of ambiguity of oral statements. The statement "as long as I sold, I would have a job at Montgomery Ward” is terse, but surely clear, specific, and unambiguous. As in Caplis, supra, p 594 (part ii-f, preceding, n 34), the oral terms were "plain terms of contingent but determinative duration. That is certain in law which can be made certain.” (Emphasis added.)
Harryman testified that he described what constituted "selling.” He said that sales persons were generally expected to generate roughly $2,000 a week or more in sales. Clearly, the question what constituted "selling” was not left at large. The contract was clear, specific, and unambiguous insofar as what constituted "selling.”
Nor was there ambiguity or an absence of clarity or specificity regarding the grounds for termination. In addition to Harryman’s spelling out the work performance expected of Rowe — selling sufficient merchandise to make her weekly draw — the Rules of Personal Conduct provided that she would be immediately dismissed for "[t]heft, [destruction or misappropriation of property, [violation of accepted moral standards, [mjanipulating, altering or falsifying Company records (including employment application), or [dishonesty of any kind.”
The terms of the contract of employment were, thus, clear and specific, and there was no ambiguity.
Whether there were specifíc negotiations for job security. While the record does not indicate whether it was Rowe or Harryman who brought up the question of job security, the question of job security was discussed and the subject of a writing, the Rules of Personal Conduct signed by Rowe.
Whether, if policy statements are relied on, they support or undercut a reasonable belief that a promise of job security was being extended. The Rules of Personal Conduct signed by Rowe spoke of "[gjrowth, [pjrofit, [s]ecurity,” and "Successful career” (emphasis added) and stated that theft and other dishonesty could result in immediate dismissal. The Rules of Personal Conduct tended to reinforce the oral promise of job security.
Boyle, J., ante, p 667.
See ns 50, 45, and 53.
Riley, J., ante, p 646.
While Rowe’s brief did not claim rights under the 1983 manual or handbook, she did assert that the 1982 handbook provided a separate basis for her "objective expectancy that she would not be terminated except for cause”:
It is Plaintiff’s contention that the 1982 handbook is a reiteration of the "for cause” policy first established by Mr. Harryman’s statement and the 1976 personal rules of conduct. This means that there are three separate bases for Ms. Rowe’s objective expectancy that she would not be terminated except for cause, i.e., the oral statements, the 1976 Personal Rules of Conduct (Exhibit 2), and the 1982 handbook (Exhibit 10).
The mere assertion that the 1982 handbook provided one of three separate bases for Rowe’s "objective expectancy” without any supporting argument or advocacy whatsoever did not raise the issue dealt with in part ii, and does not provide an appropriate basis for a pronouncement by this Court on an issue pending in a separate application for leave to appeal in this Court where there is adversary briefing.
The court rules require that a brief contain a "statement of questions involved . . . .” MCR 7.212(C); MCR 7.306(A). Neither Rowe’s application for leave to appeal nor her brief on appeal in this Court stated as a question presented for review (MCR 7.302[A][l][b]) or involved whether the jury’s verdict in her favor could be sustained solely on the basis of the 1982 handbook.
It is well established that this Court will not ordinarily review questions not separately stated in the statement of the questions presented for review or where leave to appeal has been granted in the statement of questions involved. See 7A Callaghan’s Michigan Pleading & Practice (2d ed), § 57.24, p 305.
Plaintiff readily admits that Defendant published new handbooks in 1983. She denies that it was intended that she be bound by the new employment terms specifically addressed to "new employees.” The jury was shown the 1983 handbook and defendant argued that the "at will” language contained therein was to apply to all employees, including Plaintiff. The Court of Appeals in Langeland v Bronson Methodist Hosp, 178 Mich App 612; 444 NW2d 146 [1989], lv den 433 Mich [915] (1989), addressed the issue of conflicting language in a policy manual. In Langeland, supra, the manual contained both "at-will” and "just cause” language. The Court, citing Dalton v Herbruck Egg Sales Corp, 164 Mich App 543; 417 NW2d 496 (1987) stated that a jury question exists when the stated termination policies of an employer contain expressions of both "at-will” and "just cause” employment.
While Rowe did refer to Court of Appeals decisions, Langeland and *718Dalton, that address the issue dealt with in part n of the lead opinion, it is clear from the foregoing that Rowe was not seeking to predicate a right of recovery on the basis of the 1983 manual or handbook, but rather stated an alternative reason for finding that the 1983 manual or handbook did not apply to her.
Rowe’s brief also asserted that, assuming the "at-will” language in the 1983 handbook applied to her, which she denied, Montgomery Ward did not provide her with reasonable notice of its "attempted unilateral change to an 'at-will’ policy.” This argument was prompted by this Court’s decision in In re Certified Question, Bankey v Storer Broadcasting Co, 432 Mich 438; 443 NW2d 112 (1989), decided after the decision by the Court of Appeals in the instant case.
Rowe observed that in Certiñed Question, this Court said that " 'reasonable notice of the change must be uniformly given to the affected employees.’” It is apparent that Rowe was concerned that this Court might extend the concept set forth in Certiñed Question, permitting unilateral change of a policy manual, to a unilateral change of an express contract.
See Preston v Claridge Hotel & Casino, 231 NJ Super 81; 555 A2d 12 (1989), where, on the facts, the court found a disclaimer in a revised employee handbook to be ineffective. See also McDonald v Mobil Coal Producing, Inc, 789 P2d 866 (Wyo, 1990).
In Hett v Duffy, 346 Mich 456, 461-462; 78 NW2d 284 (1956), this Court said:
It is true that the plaintiff has not raised the question here and has not cross-appealed. Under the circumstances, anything this Court might now say on the question of law as to presumption of due care would not be controlling of decision. On the contrary, our conclusion here that plaintiff’s decedent was guilty of contributory negligence as a matter of law controls the outcome, and any discussion of the issue of presumption of due care would merely be obiter dicta.
"Statements and comments in an opinion concerning some rule of law or legal proposition not necessarily involved nor essential to determination of the case in hand, are, however illuminating, but obiter dicta and lack the force of an adjudication.” People v Case (syllabus), 220 Mich 379 [190 NW 289 (1922)].
See, also, Robinson v Gordon Oil Co, 266 Mich 65, 71 [253 NW 218 (1934)]. [Emphasis added.]

=== CASE 9738889 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:55.484424+00 ===

Cavanagh, C.J.
(dissenting). I am in substantial .agreement with the analysis of my Brother Levin’s dissenting opinion, with the exception of parts ii(e) and vn, ante, pp 693-694, 715-719. Justice Levin persuasively demonstrates why the majority’s analysis is simply erroneous with regard to the law, and constitutes a virtual overruling of Toussaint v Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Michigan, 408 Mich 579; 292 NW2d 880 (1980). I add only the following observations:
First, my Brother Levin, in part iv(c), ante, pp 712-713, demonstrates why the majority’s reliance on the fact that Rowe did not specifically "negotiate” for job security, see ante, pp 641-642, fails *720adequately to distinguish this case from Toussaint. I would go further, however, and point out that the majority fails to convincingly explain why "negotiation” or the lack of it is even relevant. The relevant issue regarding the terms of Rowe’s oral employment contract — including the durational or job security term, if any — is what terms were in fact agreed to, not how or whether they were "negotiated.” The majority’s reasoning suggests that a company is legally incapable of offering an oral just-cause employment contract to a prospective employee on a standardized, "take-it- or-leave-it” basis. Yet offering such contractual job security as a matter of standard routine, even without "negotiation” or prompting or inquiry from the applicant, would seem to be an attractive "selling point” for any company seeking employees, and would seem likely to aid the company in finding and keeping good employees. The majority’s reasoning, carried to its logical limit, would permit companies to reap the benefits of offering such contractual job security, without holding them to their promises. This is neither fair nor countenanced by any accepted contract principles.
Second, my Brother Levin demonstrates that the majority confuses the issue whether Rowe’s claim is supported by express contractual statements with the separate issue whether her claim is supported by the employer’s written policy statements, see ante, pp 678-682 (part i[b]), and that, to the extent "objective support” for the express oral contract in this case is relevant, such factors support Rowe, see ante, pp 713-714 (part v). I agree and would point out that the majority’s newly invented requirement of "objective support” for such an express oral contract from policy manuals or statements, see ante, p 644, plainly alters and misapplies this Court’s holding and reasoning in *721Toussaint and its companion case, Ebling. While it is true, as the majority notes, that "Toussaint was given a manual specifically providing termination only for just cause,” ante, p 644, we did not rely on the policy manual in Toussaint to support the existence of Toussaint’s oral just-cause contract. The policy manual was relevant only to Toussaint’s separate claim that his dismissal without cause was barred by "legitimate expectations” created by the manual. See 408 Mich 598-599 (holding that "[i]n Toussaint, as in Ebling, there was sufficient evidence of an express agreement to justify submission to the jury,” and separately holding that "[a] jury could also find for Toussaint based on legitimate expectations grounded in his employer’s written policy statements”) (emphasis added). The majority ignores the fact that in Ebling there was no policy manual providing any "objective support,” but only oral statements establishing an oral just-cause contract. See id. at 625-626 (opinion of Ryan, J., joined by Coleman, C.J., and Fitzgerald, J.). Yet this Court, while dividing four to three in Toussaint’s favor, held unanimously that Ebling had produced sufficient evidence of an oral just-cause contract "to justify submission to the jury.” Id. at 598 (opinion of the Court), and at 633-636 (opinion of Ryan, J., joined by Coleman, C.J., and Fitzgerald, J.).
Finally, I would note that the majority in this case, despite its disclaimers, effectively takes upon itself the role of jury and factfinder. See, generally, ante, pp 640-646. The majority makes quite clear that, were it sitting as the jury in this case, it would not be convinced that a just-cause contract of employment was entered into. It is well established, however, by a fifty-year-old line of controlling precedents (unbroken until now) that whether two parties have, by express oral statements, en*722tered into a contract providing for just-cause employment is, ultimately, a question of fact for the jury. See McIntyre v Smith-Bridgman & Co, 301 Mich 629, 637; 4 NW2d 36 (1942); Toussaint, 408 Mich 613 (opinion of the Court), and at 635 (opinion of Ryan, J., joined by Coleman, C.J., and Fitzgerald, J.); Bullock v Automobile Club of Michigan, 432 Mich 472, 484-485; 444 NW2d 114 (1989). It is equally well established that the jury’s determination of factual issues should not be disturbed unless, considering the record in the light most favorable to the verdict, there is no competent or sufficient evidence from which reasonable minds could reach the jury’s conclusion. See Kupkowski v Avis Ford, Inc, 395 Mich 155, 167-168; 235 NW2d 324 (1975); Dodd v Secretary of State, 390 Mich 606, 612; 213 NW2d 109 (1973).
The majority has not demonstrated how the oral just-cause employment contract in this case— which clearly enjoys sufficient factual support to justify the jury’s verdict — is barred or precluded by any supervening principles of contract law, properly analyzed. This case, for all relevant and dispositive purposes, is legally and factually indistinguishable from Toussaint. I therefore dissent from the majority’s overturning of the jury’s verdict.
Mallett, J., took no part in the decision of this case.

=== CASE 9738890 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:58.341474+00 ===

SULLIVAN, J.
This case involves the construction of an insurance contract and the coverage afforded under the uninsured motorist (UM) clause contained in a policy issued to a youth home.1 There are no material facts in question. The issues present a question of law which we review de novo. Martin v. Milwaukee Mut. Ins. Co., 146 Wis. 2d 759, 766, 433 N.W.2d 1, 3 (1988).
The undisputed facts involve a car accident. On the day of the collision, the appellants, Cameron J. Car-rington and Dorthea Evans (collectively, the children), both minors, resided at Sunburst Youth Homes, Inc. *151(Sunburst) under orders extending dispositional orders of the juvenile court. These orders determined that Car-rington and Evans were children in need of protection and services (CHIPS), and placed their custody with the department of social services of their respective counties of residence.2 They were on an outing with a Sunburst employee, Wesley Jarrell, and another adult, Lori Jarrell. Both children sustained injuries when, as passengers in a Sunburst-owned 1986 Dodge Omni, they were struck by an uninsured vehicle which allegedly crossed the center line of the highway. St. Paul Fire & Marine Insurance Company (St. Paul) had issued a commercial fleet policy to Sunburst, including coverage for the occupied vehicle.
Evans appeals from a summary judgment granted to St. Paul which declared, inter alia, that its UM provision afforded occupancy coverage only, and which also dismissed her complaint.3 Carrington appeals the same judgment.
The trial court determined that Evans and Car-rington were not named insureds, but occupancy insureds. Applying the single-limit provision,4 the court limited all injured parties' recovery to a total of $100,000. The consequence of finding the children to be occupancy insureds and applying the single-limit provision is that it precludes stacking the UM coverage of the *152other vehicles owned by Sunburst and insured by St. Paul.
*151Single limit. If a single limit is shown, it is the most we'll pay for all damages resulting from bodily injury caused by any one accident. This limit applies no matter how many covered autos or protected persons are involved or how many claims are made.
*152This case presents two issues. First, does a UM provision of a commercial fleet policy issued to a corporate insured include two minors who had been placed by juvenile courts at a corporate insured facility under CHIPS dispositional orders as named insureds.5 Second, if the children were named insureds, does the single limit UM policy coverage of $100,000 preclude the stacking of the coverages of multiple insured vehicles, regardless of the number of insured vehicles and the number of protected persons or the number of claims filed, and whether the single-limit language of the policy violates sec. 631.43(1), Stats.
I.
The resolution of whether the children may stack the UM coverage of the noninvolved vehicles is dependent upon first, their status under the insurance policy. The children can either be "occupancy insureds,"6 i.e., individuals having insurance coverage merely because they were occupants of the insured vehicle struck by an uninsured motorist, or they can be "named insureds." As occupancy insureds, they cannot stack the UM coverage of the noninvolved vehicles. If they are also named insureds, they may stack the insurance coverage.7
*153In answering the question of whether the children were named insureds under Sunburst's fleet policy, St. Paul argues that because the policy was issued to Sunburst, its unambiguous language defining protected persons could not apply to the children. The policy, in part, provides:
Who Is Protected Under This Agreement
Protected persons are people and organizations protected under this agreement. Each is protected separately. However, the limits of coverage shown in the Coverage Summary are shared by all protected persons.
Here's a list of "protected persons" and certain limitations on their liability protection.
•You.
•A member of your family.
A member of your family is a person who is related to you by blood, marriage or adoption and lives in your home. A ward or foster child who lives with you is also considered to be a member of your family.
•Anyone else in a covered auto. Anyone else while in a covered auto or a temporary substitute auto is protected.
The children are occupancy insureds at the very least because they were passengers in the insured vehicle. However, St. Paul contends that because Sunburst is an inanimate and bloodless corporate entity, it could not have a family of which any children could be members, nor does it have a home where children, as wards or foster children, could live. Because no "family" exists, *154St. Paul argues that the children's recovery is limited to their status as occupants and not amenable to stacking. In Martin, 146 Wis. 2d at 766, 433 N.W.2d at 3, the supreme court determined that passengers, occupancy insureds who were not named insureds, were not covered by insurance on a noninvolved vehicle. St. Paul contends that the policy's failure to name any insured other than the Sunburst corporate entity eliminates the children as named insureds. See, e.g., American Fire and Casualty Co. v. Sinz, 487 So. 2d 340, 340-41 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1986).
The children contend that they are named insureds, and hence, covered by approximately eighteen nonin-volved vehicles named in St. Paul's fleet policy.8 They reason that the term "protected person" includes "You," which the policy defines as:
The words you, your and yours mean the insured named here:
Sunburst Inc. of Wisconsin
Sunburst Youth Homes, Inc.
Sunburst Care Facilities, Ltd.
Sunburst Foundation, Inc.
Neillsville, WI 54456
Which is a:
x corporation — individual
— partnership — joint venture
— other — condominium
*155Their reasoning posits that Sunburst is named as a protected person, or insured, and that protected persons include "[a] ward or foster child who lives with you" as a member of "your family." Because -the juvenile court placed the children with Sunburst, a group home, they assert that they qualify under St. Paul's policy as named insured wards or foster children. If the children are named insureds, they may stack UM coverage provided to all noninvolved vehicles. As persons operating a home which receives children under court order, Sunburst's owners could reasonably expect that such children would benefit from coverage as named insureds. We agree.
A.G. v. Travelers Insurance Co., 112 Wis. 2d 18, 24, 331 N.W.2d 643, 646 (Ct. App. 1983), determined that a one-year, juvenile court placement of a child in a family foster home9 upon a delinquency finding qualified the child as a "resident" of the household for insurance purposes. In A.G., we limited the scope of our holding in the following language:
We hasten to add that we expressly are not deciding whether foster homes owned by the state or a county agency fall within the ambit of this case; nor are we deciding whether group homes are of the same genre.
Id. at 25, 331 N.W.2d at 647.
There are certain practical considerations to warrant a consistency in determining that a foster child, placed by a county agency or court in a facility other than a family foster home, is a "member of the family" for insurance purposes of that facility. After a court finds that a child is in need of protection or services, it is faced with the consideration of numerous placement alternatives. Among other things, the court may consider placing the child in the home of a relative, an unlicensed *156foster home, a licensed foster home, a group home, or a residential treatment center. See secs. 48.345, 48.34(3), Stats.
In determining the type of placement that would be in the best interest of the child, an unnecessary burden would be placed upon the courts and child welfare agencies if there was an inconsistency whereby a child, as a matter of law, would be held to be a member of the family for insurance purposes while a resident of a foster home, but not at a group home; or at a group home or a foster home, but not at a residential care facility.
We now determine that the rationale of A.G. should be extended to include as named, insureds, for UM stacking purposes, CHIPS children placed by court order into a corporate home to which the UM policy is issued. Evans and Carrington, as court-placed children in a group home,10 are therefore named insureds under a fleet liability policy issued to Sunburst, the corporate home.
II.
Since we have determined that Evans and Car-rington are named insureds, the second issue is whether St. Paul's $100,000 single-limit policy provision11 precludes stacking and whether the single-limit language of the policy violates sec. 631.43(1), Stats. The statute provides in part:
Other insurance provisions. (1) General. When 2 or more policies promise to indemnify an insured against the same loss, no "other insurance" provi*157sions of the policy may reduce the aggregate protection of the insured below the lesser of the actual insured loss suffered by the insured or the total indemnification promised by the policies if there were no "other insurance" provisions.
St. Paul argues that even if the children are named insureds, their recovery is limited to the unambiguous single-limit language of the policy. The children argue that sec. 631.43(1) bars exclusion of other insurance to reduce the aggregate pool of money available for coverage.
In Hulsey v. American Family Mut. Ins. Co., 142 Wis. 2d 639, 419 N.W.2d 288 (Ct. App. 1987), Jill Hul-sey, who was a resident in her father's home, was injured while riding as a passenger on a friend's motorcycle. The friend had no liability insurance. The court of appeals permitted the daughter to recover UM benefits under her father's policy in addition to recovering under her own UM policy provision. Id. at 648-49, 419 N.W.2d at 292. The court determined that sec. 631.43(1), Stats., mandates indemnity insurance for named insureds injured by uninsured drivers and moreover, prohibits reduction of aggregate protection.
St. Paul contends that the express terms of the fleet policy limit recovery for all vehicles to $100,000 and consequently precludes stacking. St. Paul also seeks the umbrage of sec. 632.32(4), Stats., which mandates minimum insurance in "every policy" which insures "any motor vehicle." It argues that this statute does not mandate UM coverage for each listed vehicle contained within one policy document. In short, because the policy language limits total coverage to $100,000, recovery is limited to that amount, regardless of how many vehicles are listed. St. Paul asserts that the effect of this lan*158guage, as well as Sunburst's corporate status, limits coverage to a total of $100,000 caused by the accident.
In relying on Hulsey, the children assert that St. Paul's listing of the individual vehicles and the assessment of separate premiums for each, although contained in one policy document, is in effect a policy for each vehicle. See Burns v. Milwaukee Mut. Ins. Co., 121 Wis. 2d 574, 578, 360 N.W.2d 61, 63-64 (Ct. App. 1984). Because sec. 632.32(4)(a), Stats.,12 mandates UM coverage in each policy, they may recover under each. "When the insured pays two premiums, he or she obtains two protections regardless of whether the coverage is provided in one policy or two policies." Mills v. Wisconsin Mut. Ins. Co., 145 Wis. 2d 472, 483, 427 N.W.2d 397, 402 (Ct. App. 1988).
We agree that a fleet policy which lists the individual vehicles and assesses a separate premium for each, regardless of whether this information is contained in one or several policies, is in effect a separate policy for each vehicle. See Burns, 121 Wis. 2d at 578, 360 N.W.2d at 63-64. This fleet policy, which limits recovery for each accident to $100,000, violates sec. 631.43(1), Stats. As set forth in Hulsey:
*159In Wisconsin, however, there is an exception to this rule regarding indemnity insurance in the form of uninsured motor vehicle coverage. The legislature has promulgated sec. 632.32(4)(a), Stats., which mandates uninsured motor vehicle coverage in every automobile policy. Of equal importance, the legislature has enacted sec. 631.43, Stats., prohibiting insurers from circumscribing the aggregation of uninsured motorist benefits. Welch [v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co.], 122 Wis. 2d at 177, 361 N.W.2d at 683 [1985].
Thus, in Wisconsin, exclusionary clauses that may otherwise be valid in limiting the aggregation of benefits in multiple policies, or within the same policy, are not valid when attempting to limit uninsured motorist coverage. Nicholson v. Home Ins. Co., 137 Wis. 2d 581, 594, 405 N.W.2d 327, 332 (1987). It is a prohibited practice in Wisconsin for an insurer to deny, by policy limitation, the personal and portable nature of the indemnity insurance known as uninsured motorist protection. See Welch, [122 Wis. 2d] at 179, 361 N.W.2d at 684. The personal and portable nature of uninsured motorist protection is allowed by law to exist. This means that an insured may "carry" this particular part of the insurance policy and place it on top of other insurance policies providing similar coverage, even though prohibiting clauses exist regarding the rest of a policy. Cf. id. at 180-81, 361 N.W.2d at 684-85.
Hulsey, 142 Wis. 2d at 644-46, 419 N.W.2d at 290-91 (citations and emphasis in original, footnotes omitted). Following the reasoning set forth in Hulsey, the single limit provision as set forth in this case does not prevent the stacking of UM coverage of the noninvolved vehicles.
In conclusion, the children, Evans and Carrington, are the equivalent of "wards or foster children" and meet the definition of protected persons under St. Paul's pol*160icy. Hence, they are named insureds and entitled to coverage of the listed but noninvolved vehicles. Further, the single limit provision contained in the policy violates sec. 631.43(1), Stats. This provision of the policy cannot limit the coverage for each accident to a total of $100,000 for the entire fleet.
By the Court. — Judgment reversed.
This court's request for certification was denied by the supreme court on April 9, 1991.
See sec. 48.13(10), Stats.
St. Paul paid $100,000 into court. This was distributed to the two minor residents and Lori Jarrell, who was also injured in the collision. Upon stipulation, the trial court ordered distribution of the fund.
The single-limit provision states:
Evans' dispositional order placed her at Child & Adolescent Treatment Center and provided that, when released, she be placed at an appropriate treatment center. At the time the first extension petition was filed, Evans resided at Sunburst. Car-rington's extension of the dispositional order extended his placement at Sunburst.
Lori Jarrell was an occupancy insured. She did not reside at nor was she employed by Sunburst.
Sunburst argues that even if the children are named *153insureds, the single-limit provision in the policy precludes stacking the coverage.
The policy lists each covered vehicle and separately declares the premium rate for each. Coverage for two of the vehicles was omitted in August of 1985; however, coverage reappeared on the policy issued in January of 1986.
See sec. 48.34(3) (c), Stats.
The description of Sunburst as a group home is not assailed by St. Paul, which in its brief refers to Sunburst as a "youth home."
See policy language, supra note 3.
Section 632.32(4)(a), Stats., provides in part:
(4) Required Uninsured Motorist and Medical Payments Coverages. Every policy of insurance subject to this section that insures with respect to any motor vehicle registered or principally garaged in this state against loss resulting from liability imposed by law for bodily injury or death suffered by any person arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of a motor vehicle shall contain therein or supplemental thereto provisions approved by the commissioner:
(a) Uninsured motorist. . ..

=== CASE 9738891 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:58.346836+00 ===

Fine, J.
(dissenting). This case involves two children whose legal custody was transferred to their respective counties of Milwaukee and Wood pursuant to secs. 48.34(4)(b) and 48.435(1), Stats. At the time of the accident that underlies this lawsuit, the children were residing at a facility operated by Sunburst Youth Homes, Inc., in Neillsville, Wisconsin. Sunburst was insured under a commercial fleet liability policy issued by St. Paul Fire and Marine Insurance Company. On appeal, appellant contends that he is entitled to multiply the policy's single-limit uninsured-motorist coverage by the total number of motor vehicles insured under the policy. At the time of the accident on April 27, 1986, the policy covered eighteen vehicles: seven cars, five vans, two station wagons, one truck, one bus, and two snowmobiles. According to the dispositional order entered with respect to the child whose legal custody was transferred to Milwaukee County, Sunburst Youth Home in Neillsville, Wisconsin, where both children were residing at the time of the accident, was a "residential treatment center." Residential treatment centers, foster homes, and group homes are different types of facilities. See secs. 48.02(6) & (7), 48.34 (3)(c) & (d), 48.62, and 48.625, Stats.
Since, as the majority points out, the children may stack uninsured-motorist coverages only if they are named-insureds under the St. Paul policy, see Martin v. Milwaukee Mut. Ins. Co., 146 Wis. 2d 759, 762, 433 *161N.W.2d 1, 2 (1988), the initial issue is whether the children are named-insureds. Under the clear language of the policy, I believe that only the child whose custody was transferred to Milwaukee County was a named-insured. The second issue is whether "stacking" is permitted here at all; namely, whether the policy's single-limit uninsured-motorist coverage is abrogated by section 631.43(1), Stats. For the reasons discussed below, I conclude that it is not.
I.
The St. Paul policy's uninsured-motorist coverage protects "[a] ward or foster child who lives with you.” The policy defines the words "you, your and yours" as they appear in the policy to include Sunburst and Milwaukee County, which is an additional insured under an endorsement to the policy. Wood County is not an additional insured under the policy. Accordingly, the policy protects those who live "with" Sunburst as either "wards" of Sunburst or Milwaukee County or as foster children. At the time of the accident that underlies this lawsuit, Milwaukee County had legal custody of one of the children. See secs. 48.345(1) and 48.34(4)(b), Stats. As we have seen, this child and the child whose legal custody was transferred to Wood County were placed at Sunburst.
"Legal custody" under the Children's Code is "a legal status created by the order of a court, which confers the right and duty to protect, train and discipline the child, and to provide food, shelter, legal services, education and ordinary medical and dental care, subject to the rights, duties and responsibilities of the guardian of the child and subject to any existing parental rights and responsibilities and the provisions of any court order." *162Section 48.02(12), Stats. Since neither of the children involved in this case had guardians, and since their parents were determined to be unable to fulfill properly their parental responsibilities, transfer of the children's legal custody to their counties of residence effectively made the children wards of those counties.1 See Town of Lafayette v. City of Chippewa Falls, 70 Wis. 2d 610, 619-620, 235 N.W.2d 435, 440-441 (1975) (patient-residents committed to a state hospital for the mentally infirm were wards of the state even though none were under formal guardianship). The child whose legal custody was transferred to Milwaukee County was thus a ward of Milwaukee County living at Sunburst and, accordingly, a named-insured under the policy.
As we have seen, Wood County was not an insured under the policy. Thus, the child whose legal custody was transferred to Wood County was a ward of that county and not a named-insured under the policy by virtue of that status. He also was not a named-insured because he resided at Sunburst.
Residential treatment centers licensed as child welfare agencies under section 48.60, Stats., provide "care and maintenance" to children whom they receive "with or without transfer of [the children's] legal custody." *163Section 48.60(1), Stats.; see also sec. 48.61, Stats. Under chapter 880, Stats., a "ward" is a person "for whom a guardian has been appointed," sec. 880.01(10), Stats., and a "guardian" is someone "appointed by a court to have care, custody and control of the person of a minor or an incompetent," sec. 880.01(3), Stats. Similarly, under chapter 48, Stats., a "guardian" is a "person appointed by the court” who thereby "has the duty and authority to make important decisions in matters having a permanent effect on the life and development of the child and the duty to be concerned about the child's general welfare, ” sec. 48.023, Stats., including the "rights and responsibilities of legal custody except when legal custody has been vested in another person," sec. 48.023(4), Stats. Accordingly, a residential treatment center licensed as a child welfare agency under section 48.60 may, under certain circumstances, have a guardian/ward-like relationship with the children entrusted to their care. Here, however, the legal custody of both children was transferred to their respective counties of residence. As a result, both counties were vested with the legal "right and duty" to provide the children with needed care. See sec. 48.02(12), Stats. This, in my view, gave the counties the ultimate authority with respect to the care Sunburst provided to each child. I am thus unable to conclude from the appellate record that Sunburst acted in a guardian-like capacity with respect to either child. Similarly, I cannot conclude from this record that either child was Sunburst's "foster child." A.G. v. Travelers Insurance Co., 112 Wis. 2d 18, 331 N.W.2d 643 (Ct. App. 1983), upon which the majority relies, does not support a contrary conclusion.
A "residential treatment center," such as Sunburst, is not a "foster home." See secs. 48.02(6) and 48.34(3)(c), (d), Stats. A foster home licensed pursuant *164to the Children's Code "provides care and maintenance for no more than 4 children unless all children are siblings." Section 48.02(6).2 See also sec. 48.62(1), Stats. The issue in A.G. was "whether a foster child placed in a foster home is a 'resident' of that household for insurance purposes." Id., 112 Wis. 2d at 20, 331 N.W.2d at 644. A.G. was injured as the result of the alleged negligence of the foster parent's child. Id., 112 Wis. 2d at 24, 331 N.W.2d at 646. He sued the foster parent's homeowner's insurance company, among others. Ibid. The insurance company argued that A.G. was a "resident" of the foster family's household and therefore within policy-coverage exclusion for such residents. Ibid. The court of appeals held "that, as a matter of law, in a court dispositional order of one year under sec. 48.34, Stats., to a family operated foster home of the type envisioned in sec. 48.62, Stats., the foster child shall be considered a resident of the household for insurance purposes." Ibid. It based its rationale on the special, close, family-type relationship between A.G. and his foster family. Id., 112 Wis. 2d at 21-24, 331 N.W.2d at 645-646.3 The court emphasized, however, it was "expressly . . . not deciding *165whether foster homes owned by the state or a county agency fall within the ambit of this case; nor . . . deciding whether group homes are of the same genre." Id., 112 Wis. 2d at 25, 331 N.W.2d at 647. There is nothing in the appellate record here that permits us to conclude as a matter of law, on an appeal from summary judgment, that the relationship between either child and Sunburst was akin to the relationship between a foster child and a foster parent.
Insurance policies are contracts. Absent statutory mandate, no insurance company may be compelled to provide coverage beyond the scope of its policy. See Martin, 146 Wis. 2d at 776, 433 N.W.2d at 7. The majority's extension of named-insured coverage to the child whose legal custody was transferred to Wood County because it would place "an unnecessary burden" on those vested with responsibility under the Children's Code to formulate and enter appropriate dispositional orders for those children determined to be in need of protection and services, both usurps the legislative function and impermissibly rewrites the St. Paul policy.
II.
Although I agree with the majority that the child whose legal custody was transferred to Milwaukee County is a named-insured under the St. Paul policy, albeit for different reasons, I disagree with the majority's conclusion that section 631.43(1), Stats., overrides the policy's $100,000 single limit in connection with that child's claim. The policy's language in this regard is unambiguous:
If a single limit is shown, it is the most we'll pay for all damages resulting from bodily injury caused by any one accident. This limit applies no matter how *166many covered autos or protected persons are involved or how many claims are made.
This contractual provision is not nullified by section 631.43(1), which, as relevant here, provides:
When 2 or more policies promise to indemnify an insured against the same loss, no "other insurance" provisions of the policy may reduce the aggregate protection of the insured below the lesser of the actual insured loss suffered by the insured or the total indemnification promised by the policies if there were no "other insurance" provisions.
(Emphasis added.) The "single limit" clause in the St. Paul policy is not an "other insurance" provision; rather, as specifically permitted by section 631.43(1), "the total indemnification promised by the" St. Paul policy was $100,000 since, on the record before us, there is no evidence that Sunburst paid more than one premium for the uninsured-motorist coverage. There was thus but one coverage. A recent case decided by our court, Krause v. Massachusetts Bay Ins. Co., 161 Wis. 2d 711, 468 N.W.2d 755 (Ct. App. 1991), illustrates this point.
Krause involved an attempt to stack underinsured-motorist coverage. Two automobiles were insured in a single policy issued by Massachusetts Bay Insurance Company. Id:, 161 Wis. 2d at 714, 468 N.W.2d at 756. Separate premiums were charged for separate underin-sured-motorist coverages for each car. Ibid. The policy had a "limit of liability" clause similar to the "single limit" clause here:
The limit of liability shown ... for this coverage is our maximum limit of liability for all damages resulting from any one accident. This is the most we will pay regardless of the number of:
*1671. Covered persons;
2. Claims made;
3. Vehicles or premiums shown in the Declarations; or
4. Vehicles involved in the accident.
Id., 161 Wis. 2d at 714-715, 468 N.W.2d at 756 (emphasis omitted). We held that Massachusetts Bay's "limit of liability" clause was an "other insurance" provision and thus violated section 631.43(1), Stats. Id., 161 Wis. 2d at 717, 468 N.W.2d at 757-758; 161 Wis. 2d at 714, 468 N.W.2d at 756:
The circuit court reasoned that Mass Bay's insurance contract should be construed as two policies because the insured plaintiffs were charged two separate premiums for coverage of their vehicles, and any attempt by Mass Bay to avoid aggregate coverage through its "Limit of Liability" clause runs afoul of Wisconsin's stacking statute, sec. 631.43(1), Stats. We agree and affirm.
Here, however, the appellate record indicates that only one uninsured-motorist premium was paid.4 Since the "single limit" clause in the St. Paul insurance contract with Sunburst does not violate section 631.43(1), the clause should be enforced. Cf. Mills v. Wisconsin Mut. Ins. Co., 145 Wis. 2d 472, 482-489, 427 N.W.2d 397, 401-404 (Ct. App. 1988) (neither section 631.43(1) nor public policy permits the stacking of liability or medical services coverages under two insurance policies even *168though separate premiums were collected in face of a contractual limitation on the insurance company's liability). I would affirm the judgment.5
On October 18,1985, the Director of the Milwaukee County Department of Social Services was appointed as a sixty-day temporary guardian for the child whose legal custody was transferred to Milwaukee County. This was five months after the child's legal custody was transferred to Milwaukee County on May 16, 1985. The child was represented at the juvenile court proceedings by an attorney. See 48.23(l)(b), Stats. The child whose legal custody was transferred to Wood County was under the age of twelve and was represented at the juvenile court proceedings by a guardian ad litem. See sec. 48.23(l)(b)2, Stats. A guardian ad litem is not a guardian. See secs. 48.02(8), 48.023, and 48.235(3), Stats.
A group home provides "for the care and maintenance of 5 to 8 children.” Section 48.02(7), Stats.
The court cast its specific conclusions based on A.G.'s relationship with his foster family into a general rule of law for three reasons. First, it was consistent with an earlier case decided by the supreme court. A.G., 112 Wis. 2d at 24-25, 331 N.W.2d at 646-647. Second, it "comport[ed] with the intended purpose of the 'resident of a household' exclusion." Id., 112 Wis. 2d at 26, 331 N.W.2d at 647. Third, the court determined that it was "in the best interests of both the insurance industry and the insured to have some finality on the question of whether a foster child in a family operated foster home is a resident of the household." Ibid.
Although additional premiums were, of course, charged for each additional insured vehicle, there is nothing in the appellate record to indicate that additional uninsured-motorist premiums were collected. If that were the case, the "single limit" clause might very well violate section 631.43(1), Stats.
Significantly, all of the cases upon which the majority relies, directly or indirectly, involved situations where separate premiums were paid for each coverage sought to be stacked. Thus, Tahtinen v. MSI Insurance Co., 122 Wis. 2d 158, 361 N.W.2d 673 (1985), held that section 631.43(1) "voids reducing clauses which prohibit stacking of multiple policy coverages issued by the same insurer to the same insured," id., 122 Wis. 2d at 160, 361 N.W.2d at 675 (emphasis added), and Welch v. State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co., 122 Wis. 2d 172, 361 N.W.2d 680 (1985), held that a "drive other car" exclusion violated section 631.43(1) because it was an attempt to "prohibit the stacking of multiple policy coverages of uninsured-motorist protection," id., 122 Wis. 2d at 173, 361 N.W.2d at 681 (emphasis added). See also Nicholson v. Home Ins. Cos., 137 Wis. 2d 581, 590-594, 405 N.W.2d 327, 330-332 (1987) (A clause that reduced the amount of liability coverage afforded a passenger in an insured's automobile by the amount paid to that passenger under the policy's uninsured-motorist provision violated section 632.32(4)(a), Stats.); Hulsey v. American Family Mut. Ins. Co., 142 Wis. 2d 639, 641, 648-649, 419 N.W.2d 288, 289, 292 (Ct. App. 1987) (An insured may stack the uninsured-motorist coverage of her father's policy and the uninsured-motorist coverage of her own policy.); Burns v. Milwaukee Mut. Ins. Co., 121 Wis. 2d 574, 576-579, 360 N.W.2d 61, 63-64 (Ct. App. 1984) (An "other insurance" provision applicable to uninsured-motorist coverage violated section 631.43(1) even though the insurance for the two automobiles was issued in a single document where the insured "paid separate premiums for uninsured motorist [coverage] on each auto."). As noted in the main body of this opinion, Mills, which involved the attempt to stack liability and medical-services coverages and not uninsured-motorist coverage, specifically reaffirmed the right-to-contract *169concept in the insurance context. Id., 145 Wis. 2d at 485-486, 427 N.W.2d at 402-403.

=== CASE 9738892 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:59.589659+00 ===

CHIPMAN, Judge.
Following a jury trial in the Lake Superi- or Court appellant Lester Bergner was convicted of sodomizing1 his four-year old daughter. His appeal challenges the trial court’s rulings on the admissibility of photographs depicting the act of fellatio and the applicability of the marital privilege to the testimony of his ex-wife. Appellant also argues the evidence was insufficient to support the verdict. We have extensively reviewed and researched these issues and affirm appellant’s conviction.
FACTS
The principal evidence in this case consisted of State’s Exhibits 1 and 2 which are photographs depicting the act of fellatio by a female child on an adult male. The photographs show the child lying between the man’s legs with her face, head, and upper body clearly visible. Only the lower body of the male — from the chest to the knee— can be seen, however. The man is partially clothed in a bathrobe.
In May, 1977 appellant’s ex-wife, X, went to appellant’s home to look for these photographs after having been told of their existence by appellant’s son, W. Although appellant was not home at the time, X apparently searched the darkroom located in the home and discovered the photographs in a box on a shelf. The photographs were later turned over to Detective Mitchell of the Highland Police Department.
At trial X identified her four-year old daughter, Y, and appellant as the persons depicted in the photographs. Her identification of appellant was based upon her recognition of appellant’s lower body, a hernia scar on his abdomen, and his bathrobe. She *1014also was able to recognize a portion of the living room of the home they shared during their marriage. She established October 1976 as the approximate date the photographs were taken; Y’s teenage brother had attempted to cut her hair shortly before and a distinctly unprofessional haircut resulted.
Detective Mitchell verified having received the photographs from X. He subsequently arrested appellant, and during booking procedures requested appellant lower his trousers far enough to reveal the hernia scar. Mitchell stated the scar he observed was “consistent with” the one depicted in the photographs.
Barry Mones was qualified as an expert photograph examiner for the F.B.I. His analysis of the photographs revealed they were “authentic and . . not composites or altered.” He also testified the photographs and their respective negatives were taken on Polaroid black and white film.
The only witness called by the defense was Carol Bergner, appellant’s current wife. She noted a number of physical discrepancies between appellant and the male in the photographs and stated, in her opinion, the photographs were not of her husband.
At the close of the testimony the State moved to have appellant examined by a doctor, presumably to secure impartial identification evidence. The trial court denied this motion but suggested an even more novel procedure: the court ordered appellant to lower his pants and display his lower abdomen and thighs to the jury. Neither prosecution nor defense objected to this procedure which the trial judge characterized as “a rather unusual thing for the court to do.” The jury convicted appellant of the crime of sodomy and this appeal followed.
ISSUES
I.Were two photographs erroneously admitted on improper foundation evidence where no witness testified the photographs were true and accurate representations of what they purported to depict?
II. Did the trial court err in permitting appellant’s ex-wife to testify in violation of the marital privilege?
III. Was the evidence sufficient to support the verdict?
I. PHOTOGRAPHIC EVIDENCE
Whether the two photographs depicting the sexual act were properly admitted into evidence presents a novel question and a case of first impression for Indiana courts. Appellant argues the photographs were inadmissible because the State failed to establish the proper foundation for their admission as required by existing Indiana law. This assertion is patently correct, but the State contends the photographs were admissible under the so-called “silent witness theory” of photographic evidence and urges us to adopt this theory.
A. CURRENT INDIANA LAW
Indiana courts traditionally have stressed three requirements for the admission of photographic evidence. First, an adequate foundation must be laid. Our courts have consistently held this requires the testimony of a witness who can state the photograph is “a true and accurate representation of the things it is intended to depict.” Wilson v. State, (1978) Ind., 374 N.E.2d 45; Boone v. State, (1978) Ind., 371 N.E.2d 708; Green v. State, (1976) 265 Ind. 16, 349 N.E.2d 147; Murry v. State, (1979) Ind.App., 385 N.E.2d 469. See McCurdy v. State, (1975) 263 Ind. 66, 324 N.E.2d 489 (photos properly excluded for failure to satisfy this requirement); Johnson v. State, (1972) 258 Ind. 648, 283 N.E.2d 532 (same).
Relevancy is the second requirement for the admission of photographic evidence in Indiana. Like all evidence, a photograph must meet the usual relevancy standard, i. e., it must tend to prove or disprove a material fact. Smith v. Crouse-Hinds Company, (1978) Ind.App., 373 N.E.2d 923. In applying this standard to photographic evidence, our courts ask whether a witness would be permitted to testify as to the subject matter portrayed in the photograph. Simpson v. State, (1978) Ind., 381 N.E.2d 1229; Crane v. State, (1978) Ind., 380 *1015N.E.2d 89. If so, the photograph is deemed relevant.
Finally, some Indiana cases require the photographs aid jurors’ understanding of other evidence. See Whitfield v. State, (1977) 266 Ind. 629, 366 N.E.2d 173; Patterson v. State, (1975) 263 Ind. 55, 324 N.E.2d 482; McPherson v. State, (1978) Ind.App., 383 N.E.2d 403. Whether this is truly a requirement for the admission of photographs in Indiana is not totally clear. Some cases seem to elevate it to the level of a requirement, McPherson, supra, while others merely recite it as a part of the relevancy test, Whitfield, supra.
B. THE SILENT WITNESS THEORY
Although all three requirements for the admission of photographic evidence are important, in this case we are singularly concerned with the foundation requirement. Indiana’s approach to the admission of photographs, as guided by the current foundation requirement, falls within what has been characterized as the “pictorial testimony theory” of photographic evidence. Ill J. Wigmore, Evidence § 790 (Chadbourn rev. 1970). This theory categorizes photographs with maps, models and diagrams, and thus treats photographs purely as demonstrative evidence. As such, a photograph is not evidence in itself, but is used merely as a nonverbal method of expressing a witness’ testimony and is admissible only when a witness can testify it is a true and accurate representation of a scene personally viewed by that witness. McCormick, Evidence § 214 (1972); 2 C. Scott, Photographic Evidence § 1001 (1969).
The “silent witness theory” for the admission of photographic evidence permits the use of photographs at trial as substantive evidence, as opposed to merely demonstrative evidence. Thus, under the silent witness theory there is no need for a witness to testify a photograph accurately represents what he or she observed; the photograph “speaks for itself.” Ill J. Wigmore, Evidence § 790 (Chadbourn rev. 1970). The theory may be best explained by examining some of the contexts in which it is commonly applied.
One of the most frequent, and often unintentional, utilizations of the silent witness theory occurs when X-rays are admitted into evidence. Obviously, no witness can testify he or she saw what an X-ray depicts, thus rendering the pictorial testimony theory logically inapplicable.2 3 C. Scott, Photographic Evidence § 1262 (1969). Nevertheless, every jurisdiction admits X-ray photographs as substantive evidence upon a sufficient showing of authentication. This usually entails the establishment of the reliability and trustworthiness of the X-ray machine, the operator or technician, the procedure used in exposing and processing the X-ray plate, and record keeping techniques so as to establish the identity and condition of the patient. See, e. g., Slow Development Company v. Coulter, (1960) 88 Ariz. 122, 353 P.2d 890; Sinz v. Owens, (1949) 33 Cal.2d 749, 205 P.2d 3; Field, Uses and Limitations of X-ray Pictures as Evidence, 2 Forum 219 (1967).
A context in which the silent witness theory has been expressly employed involves cases in which Regiscope photographs are introduced into evidence. A Regiscope is simply an automatic camera which takes a simultaneous picture of a check being offered for cashing and of the person presenting it. Regiscope photographs are often admitted as substantive evidence in forgery prosecutions despite the inability of the clerk who cashed the check to remember the particular transaction or individual. Typically, the courts require a showing of authenticity which includes an identification of the defendant as the individual depicted and a showing of the proper functioning of the camera and processing of *1016the photograph. United States v. Gray, (1976 8th Cir.) 531 F.2d 933; Barker v. People, (1965) 158 Colo. 381, 407 P.2d 34; Sisk v. State, (1964) 236 Md. 589, 204 A.2d 684 (expressly adopting silent witness theory for first time); State v. Tatum, (1961) 58 Wash.2d 73, 360 P.2d 754.
The silent witness theory has also been adopted in cases involving bank robbery photographs. These are photographs taken during the course of a robbery by automatic or hidden cameras and are admitted as substantive evidence upon a sufficient showing of the reliability of the procedures used in taking and developing the photographs. E. g., United States v. Taylor, (1976 5th Cir.), 530 F.2d 639 (photographs taken after defendant locked all bank personnel in safe held admissible as substantive evidence). See Murry v. State, (1979) Ind.App., 385 N.E.2d 469, in which Judge Shields stated a photograph taken during a robbery could have been properly admitted had there been testimony indicating when the film was installed, when the pictures were taken, or whether the camera was activated at any other times.
We have presented the above cases and their foundation requirements because we think it important to note how these various courts have stressed the need for authentication or verification of the photographs. We think it equally important to note the courts have recognized that the verification requirement should be understood in a relative sense. See generally Annot. 9 A.L.R.2d 899 (1950). In other words, these courts have not blindly followed the formal, traditional requirement of admitting photographs solely as demonstrative evidence. Instead, these jurisdictions have analyzed the theory behind the traditional requirements, and have recognized the probative potential of photographic evidence. As a result, these courts view photographic evidence in a modern, realistic light and admit photographs where their authenticity can be sufficiently established in view of the context in which the photographs are sought to be admitted. We think this creative analysis and refusal to follow traditional standards merely because such standards exist is laudable as the highest form of a progressive judiciary.
Our consideration of the authorities and the arguments in both the State’s and the appellant’s excellent briefs leads us to an inescapable conclusion. We hereby accept the State’s invitation and adopt the silent witness theory for the admission of photographic evidence as the law in Indiana.
In so doing, we cannot help but note the good company in which we find ourselves. The following jurisdictions, when presented with the issue we now decide, have also adopted the silent witness theory: United States v. Gray, (1976 8th Cir.) 531 F.2d 933; United States v. Taylor, (1976 5th Cir.) 530 F.2d 639; Watkins v. Reinhart, (1942) 243 Ala. 243, 9 So.2d 113; State v. Kasold, (1974) 110 Ariz. 558, 521 P.2d 990; People v. Bowley, (1963) 59 Cal.2d.855, 31 Cal.Rptr. 471, 382 P.2d 591; People v. Doggett, (1948) 83 Cal.App.2d 405, 188 P.2d 792; Oja v. State, (1974) Fla.App., 292 So.2d 71; Franklin v. State, (1882) 69 Ga. 36; Cook v. Clark, (1971) Iowa, 186 N.W.2d 645; State v. Young, (1973) Me., 303 A.2d 113; Sisk v. State, (1964) 236 Md. 589, 204 A.2d 684; Hartley v. A.I. Rodd Lumber Co., (1937) 282 Mich. 652, 276 N.W.2d 712; People v. Withers, (1961) Mo., 347 S.W.2d 146; King v. State, (1922) 108 Neb. 428, 187 N.W. 934; People v. Byrnes, (1974) 33 N.Y.2d 343, 352 N.Y.S.2d 913, 308 N.E.2d 435; State v. Hunt, (1979) 297 N.C. 447, 255 S.E.2d 182; 3 State v. Brown, (1970) 4 Or.App. 219, 475 P.2d 973; State v. Goyet, (1957) 120 Vt. 12, 132 A.2d 623; Ferguson v. Commonwealth, (1972) 212 Va. 745, 187 S.E.2d 189, cert. denied 409 U.S. 861, 93 S.Ct. 150, 34 L.Ed.2d 108. But see Casson v. Nash, (1977) 54 Ill.App.3d 783, 12 Ill.Dec. 760, 370 N.E.2d 564, 573 n. 3; Foster v. Bilbruck, (1959) 20 Ill.App.2d 173, 155 N.E.2d 366, 372.
*1017We recognize our adoption of the silent witness theory permits the admission of photographs as substantive or demonstrative evidence. We stress we are not changing existing Indiana law; we are adding a second basis for the admissibility of photographic evidence. Thus, our holding in no way affects the use of photographs as demonstrative evidence; the traditional requirements for admissibility as laid down in numerous Indiana cases remain wholly effective.
Likewise, the relevancy requirement must be met when photographs are admitted as substantive evidence. The requirement that a photograph aid the jury in understanding other evidence remains effective, if at all, only when photographs are used for demonstrative purposes. By its nature, this requirement relates only to demonstrative evidence and has no logical applicability when photographs are used substantively.
The foundation requirements for the admission of photographs as substantive evidence under the silent witness theory are obviously vastly different from the foundation required for demonstrative evidence. However, we feel it would be wrong to lay down extensive, absolute foundation requirements. Every photograph, the context in which it was taken, and its use at trial will be different in some respect. We therefore hold only that a strong showing of the photograph’s competency and authenticity must be established. Whether a sufficiently strong foundation has been laid is left to the sound discretion of the trial court, reviewable only for abuse. However, we stress our use of the adjective “strong.” Photographs tend to have great probative weight and should not be admitted unless the trial court is convinced of their competency and authenticity to a relative certainty-
Despite our reluctance to formulate absolute standards for the admissibility of photographs as substantive evidence, we feel compelled to require proof the photograph has not been altered in any significant respect. This is necessary to avoid the dangers of misrepresentation or manufactured evidence which are possible through composite or retouched photographs. Additionally, we suggest a few non-mandatory guidelines for the admission of photographs under the silent witness theory. The date the photograph was taken should be established in certain cases, especially where the statute of limitations or the identity and alibi of the defendant are in question. In cases involving photographs taken by automatic cameras, such as Regiscopes or those found in banks, there should be evidence as to how and when the camera was loaded, how frequently the camera was activated, when the photographs were taken, and the processing and chain of custody of the film after its removal from the camera. See Murry v. State, (1979) Ind.App., 385 N.E.2d 469.
In adopting the silent witness theory we are cognizant of two problems which arise when photographs are used as substantive evidence. The first involves the potential for distortive and misrepresentative images present in any photograph. The second concerns the inability to “cross-examine” a photograph being used as a silent witness.
Photography is not an exact science. The image a camera produces on film can be affected by a variety of things that may lead to distortion and misrepresentation. The quality of the camera and lens, type of film, available light, focal length of the lens, use of lens filters, or even the perspective from which the photograph is taken can play a part in producing a truly representative photograph. See 1 C. Scott Photographic Evidence, §§ 151 — 587 (1969). However, assuming any misleading qualities of a photograph are not so egregious as to result in an inadequate foundation, complaints concerning a photograph’s distortion go only to the weight to which a photograph is entitled, not admissibility. Ill Wigmore, Evidence § 792 (Chadbourn rev. 1970); Comment, Photographic Evidence— Is There a Recognized Basis for Admissibility? 8 Hast.L.J. 310, 311 (1957). In addition, we note the testimony of an eyewitness is subject to many failings.. Essentially, a *1018witness’ testimony is based upon what he thinks he remembers he saw. Although the human eye is capable of perceiving many things and the human brain has an unmatched capacity for the retention of information, neither is infallible. A witness’ perception of an event may be distorted by his other senses, optical illusions, hallucinations, or other simple perception errors. He is also likely to have forgotten some of what he saw or may have difficulty communicating his recollection in words. See 1 C. Scott, Photographic Evidence §§ 41-54 (1969). On the other hand, a photograph sees in more detail, remembers more accurately and transmits its message more clearly than any human witness. Id. Thus, although a witness’ testimony and a photograph suffer from some of the same maladies, the photograph is far superior in many respects.
The second problem posed by our adoption of the silent witness theory concerns the inability to “cross-examine” the photograph.4 We first note that before a photograph can be admitted under the silent witness theory a proper foundation must be laid. The opposing party, therefore, is able to extensively cross-examine the witness whose testimony establishes the foundation. Once a foundation is properly established, the photograph gains a certain degree of authenticity and reliability, and we perceive no compelling need for further cross-examination. The situation is analogous to the exceptions to the hearsay rule where the declarant is unavailable. Once “circumstantial guarantees of trustworthiness” are demonstrated an out-of-court assertion is admissible notwithstanding the inability of the opponent of the evidence to cross-examine the declarant. Fed.R.Evid. 804. In light of the ability to cross-examine those witnesses whose testimony establishes the required foundation, and the authenticity and reliability which attaches to a photograph once a sufficient foundation has been laid, we are unwilling to say the inability to “cross-examine” a photograph is a sufficient basis for the exclusion of photographs as substantive evidence.
C. APPLICATION
Having adopted the silent witness theory, we must now determine whether the photographs involved in this case were properly admitted. There were three main grounds used by the State to establish the foundation. They clearly demonstrate a sufficient degree of authenticity for the admission of the photographs.
First, there was expert testimony to show the photographs had not been altered in any way. Barry Mones, the photographic examiner for the F.B.I., stated his examination and testing of the photographs revealed they were not retouched nor composites.
Second, the approximate date the photographs were taken was shown to be October, 1976. Appellant’s ex-wife, X, testified to this based on her daughter’s haircut in the picture. The haircut was memorable because it had been given, ineptly, by X’s son. This evidence was corroborated by Barry Mones’ testimony regarding the date of manufacture of the film. He stated Exhibit 1 was manufactured in August, 1966 or 1976, and Exhibit 2 was produced in January, 1964 or 1974. He also stated Polaroid film has a relatively short life, thus leaving an inference that the later dates are more likely the actual dates of manufacture.
Finally, there was strong testimony regarding the identification of the two persons in the photographs. X unequivocally identified her daughter, Y, and portions of the living room of the home she shared with appellant during their marriage. She also identified appellant on the basis of a robe she had purchased for him, and her knowledge of the general shape of his lower body and hernia scar. X’s recognition of the scar was reinforced by the testimony of Detective Mitchell who stated appellant’s scar was “consistent with” the one in the photograph.
*1019Our decision to hold the photographs admissible is buttressed by similar decisions from other jurisdictions. In People v. Doggett, (1948) 83 Cal.App.2d 405, 188 P.2d 792, a married couple was charged with sodomy on the basis of a photograph depicting the act. Although there were no eyewitnesses to the sexual activity, a landlord and police officer testified the photograph accurately portrayed the defendant’s living room, and an expert witness stated the photograph was not a composite. In affirming the conviction the court held that as long as the photograph could be “verified or authenticated,” the manner in which the requisite showing was made was unimportant. To the same effect, see People v. Bowley, (1963) 59 Cal.2d 855, 31 Cal.Rptr. 471, 382 P.2d 591.
Similarly, the New York Court of Appeals held admissible photographs depicting sodomy and intercourse between the defendant and his eleven year old daughter. People v. Byrnes, (1974) 33 N.Y.2d 343, 352 N.Y.S.2d 913, 308 N.E.2d 435. The court based its decision on the identification testimony of the child’s mother and an expert opinion that the photographs had not been altered or doctored. “[A] fair conclusion is that the foundation testimony, even excluding that of the complainant, sufficiently authenticated the photographs by showing that they accurately depict what they purport to show, and that in themselves, the photographs were probative evidence of the crimes charged.” Id. 352 N.Y.S.2d at 917, 308 N.E.2d at 438. Accord, State v. Kasold, (1974) 110 Ariz. 558, 521 P.2d 990.
Our evaluation of these authorities, analysis of the silent witness theory, and consideration of the facts of this case lead us to but one conclusion. The trial court did not abuse its discretion and thus committed no error in admitting the photographs as substantive evidence.
II. MARITAL PRIVILEGE
Appellant’s second argument concerns the applicability of the marital privilege to the testimony of his ex-wife, X. It is his contention that X’s identification of his hernia scar and lower body was based on knowledge gained by virtue of the marital relationship, and therefore, constituted privileged information which should not have been admitted.
Ind.Code 34-1-14-5 states husbands and wives are “incompetent”5 witnesses “as to communications made to each other.” “Communications” are not limited to audible communications but include any knowledge gained by virtue of an act by one spouse which would not have been done in the presence of the other spouse but for the marital relationship. Smith v. State, (1926) 198 Ind. 156, 152 N.E. 803. The privilege is based on strong public policy grounds which “favors the promotion and preservation of marital confidences, even at the expense, in certain instances, of depriving honest causes of upright testimony.” Shepherd v. State, (1971) 257 Ind. 229, 277 N.E.2d 165, 167. The policy clearly restricts the privilege to communications made in the course of a legally recognized marriage. Lane v. State, (1977) 266 Ind. 485, 364 N.E.2d 756; Damrell v. State, (1976) Ind.App., 352 N.E.2d 855. However, as long as a communication is made within the course of a marriage, divorce does not subsequently remove the privilege. Shepherd v. State, supra; Perry v. Randall, (1882) 83 Ind. 143.
Based upon this law, appellant argues his ex-wife’s knowledge of his lower body and hernia scar “was gained by virtue of the very essence of the conjugal relationship between the spouses, i. e., the intimacy occasioned by acts of sexual intercourse during the marriage.”6 However, even if *1020we assume appellant is correct and hold the marital privilege applicable to X’s testimony, any error must be deemed harmless on the basis of other equally persuasive evidence. Chatman v. State, (1975) 263 Ind. 531, 334 N.E.2d 673; Hunter v. State, (1977) Ind.App., 360 N.E.2d 588, cert. denied, 434 U.S. 906, 98 S.Ct. 306, 54 L.Ed.2d 193.
The first basis for our determination involves the testimony of Detective James Mitchell.7 He was the arresting officer and during booking procedures asked appellant to display his hernia scar. From this observation, Detective Mitchell testified appellant’s hernia scar was “consistent with” the scar portrayed in the photographs.
Secondly, any error in X’s testimony was rendered harmless by virtue of appellant’s display of his abdomen and thighs to the jury. This evidential exhibition, clearly viewed by all members of the jury and compared by them to the photographic exhibits, surely dispelled any doubts they might have had regarding the identification testimony. Seldom has a finder of fact had such a unique opportunity to view first hand such crucial, if not ultimate, evidence.
In light of the compelling nature of this evidentiary presentation, in addition to the testimony of Detective Mitchell, we hold any error in the admission of X’s testimony harmless.
III. SUFFICIENCY OF THE EVIDENCE
Appellant’s final assertion of error attacks the sufficiency of the evidence. More specifically, it is argued the identification testimony was insufficient to establish appellant was the male portrayed in the photographs. We disagree and, contrary to appellant’s argument, think the evidence indicates more than appellant’s opportunity to commit the crime.
The commission of the crime of sodomy cannot seriously be disputed. In graphic detail, State’s Exhibits 1 and 2 photographically depict the prohibited sexual activity. The identity of the male in the photographs is not nearly as clear, however. Unlike all other cases our research has revealed, the facial features of the male are not visible. This deficiency has been more than overcome, however, by strong identification evidence, both circumstantial and direct.
The location of the sexual act was established to be the living room of appellant’s house. Appellant was the only adult male who lived in or was given access to the home during the time the pictures were taken. The photographs were found in appellant’s darkroom. Also, appellant was a professional photographer who possessed the equipment and expertise necessary to produce the photographs. This evidence, though circumstantial, tends to show appellant may have been the male depicted in the photographs.
This tendency is elevated to a near certainty once the personal identification evidence is considered. Both X and Detective Mitchell identified appellant’s hernia scar as the one shown in the photographs. X also testified that she recognized the lower body of the male as her former husband’s. Last, and certainly not least, the jury viewed appellant’s thighs and lower abdomen, including the hernia scar. We think this evidence was more than sufficient to sustain the verdict.
Affirmed.
MILLER, P. J., concurs.
YOUNG, J., dissents -with opinion.
. Ind.Code 35-1-89-1 (since repealed). Appellant was also charged with the crime of Assault and Battery with Intent to Gratify, Ind.Code 35-1-54 — 4 (since repealed). This second Count was dropped pursuant to Appellant’s Motion for Directed Verdict.
. Some jurisdictions freely admit X-rays upon a proper showing of verification without recognizing the silent witness theory. Generally these jurisdictions treat X-rays as scientific, as opposed to photographic, evidence. Indiana is a prime example. See Howard v. State, (1976) 264 Ind. 275, 342 N.E.2d 604. Although Wig-more treats the admission of X-ray evidence much the same as Indiana, he admits the silent witness theory may be a “more satisfactory rationale.” Ill Wigmore, Evidence § 795 n. 1 (Chadbourn rev. 1970).
. This recent North Carolina opinion is especially significant. North Carolina was one of the jurisdictions most reluctant to adopt the silent witness theory. See The Camera Goes to Court, 24 N.C.L.Rev. 233 (1946).
. This issue, raised by appellant, appears to present a unique question. Our research has uncovered no other case which has dealt with the “cross-examination” of a photograph.
. The use of the word “incompetent” is technically incorrect. Our case law makes clear that the statute creates a privilege as to confidential communications, not an absolute incompetency. Shepherd v. State, (1971) 257 Ind. 229, 277 N.E.2d 165; Merry v. State, (1975) Ind.App., 335 N.E.2d 249.
. The State points up that appellant and X had sex prior to their marriage, thus, it is argued, negating the claim that X’s knowledge of appellant’s lower body was gained solely during the marriage. However, this argument does not affect her testimony concerning the hernia scar because appellant’s hernia operation occurred during their marriage.
. Although appellant objected to the introduction of this testimony at trial, the issue was not raised in the motion to correct errors or brief. Any error is therefore waived. Ind. Rules of Procedure, Appellate Rule 8.3.

=== CASE 9738893 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:59.595887+00 ===

YOUNG, Judge,
dissenting.
I dissent.
It is not proper to permit the photographs to be admitted into evidence under current Indiana law regarding the foundation for admissibility of photographs. The majority *1021correctly states the traditional rule for the admission of photographic evidence. They also state that this case is singularly concerned with the foundation requirement and suggest that the “independent silent witness” theory be adopted as an alternative to the current “pictorial testimony” theory. I would treat it as an exception and require more exacting standards of trustworthiness.
Initially, there are significant distinctions in the examples of where the “independent silent witness theory” is said by the majority to be applied and its application in this case. In the cases supportive of the “silent witness theory” extreme care is taken to assure the veracity of the offered exhibit particularly with regard to the mechanical process by which the same is recorded. The foundation requirements regarding the camera angle, lighting, exposure, type of film, lens used, and other data should be readily determinable by expert testimony. The danger of accepting the “silent witness theory” without these safeguards is the possibility of misleading evidence. Posed photographs could result which would not fairly and accurately depict an act or occurrence.
The first example cited by the majority of unintentional utilization of the silent witness theory occurs when x-rays are admitted into evidence. As the majority allows in footnote 2, in Indiana x-rays are treated as scientific evidence, as contrasted to photographic evidence. Howard v. State, (1976) 264 Ind. 275, 342 N.E.2d 604; III J. Wigmore, Evidence § 795 (Chadbourn rev. 1970). Consistent with this rationale, Wig-more states that an instrument which furnishes an abnormal aid to the senses may be employed as a “source of testimonial knowledge.” The x-ray as a source of testimonial knowledge is similar to other data on which a physician would base a diagnosis. Preliminary testimony is required to show the trustworthiness of the process and correctness of the particular instrument. Wig-more states that the concern here is the source of a witness’ knowledge and not his mode of communication.1 The x-ray is like other scientific data on which a physician relies in making a diagnosis. The foundation for such data is specialized and differs from traditional photographic evidence. I do not believe that an x-ray is evidence which could “speak for itself” and it has not been admitted on that rationale. The use of a photograph in this case is different from how an x-ray is used.
There are no Regiscope cases from Indiana cited by the majority nor do I locate any. It appears to me that those jurisdictions allowing the introduction of these types of photographs without the traditional foundation find the basis for trustworthiness in the procedure underlying the transaction. In State v. Tatum, (1961) 58 Wash.2d 73, 360 P.2d 754, and Sisk v. State, (1964) 236 Md. 589, 204 A.2d 684, the courts held as part of the foundation that the photograph accurately portray the subjects illustrated. In each case there was lengthy testimony regarding the underlying process. For example, the following description is taken from Sisk, 204 A.2d at 686-87.
William Shraver, Chief Investigator for Montgomery Ward, was then called. He stated that he received the check from the Chief Cashier after it was returned unpaid; that he went to the cashier’s cage where there is located a Regiscope camera and removed the film therefrom and sent it, by mail, to the “Regiscope Company” in Fairfax, Va., with a description of the check and the Bates number thereon, and a request for a picture. The witness further testified that he had taken a course of instruction on the operational procedure of the Regiscope Company, which included a complete explanation of the camera and its functions and the company’s procedures for developing and storing the film, etc., so that he was “thoroughly familiar with their operation.” The Bates numbering machine is *1022one so designed that each time the machine is stamped the number printed by it is changed one digit. The number is printed in the center of the top of the check and in the instant case is 136278. As requested by the witness, the “pictures” were returned to him by mail. The picture, which was later introduced into evidence, was “a complete photograph of a transaction of cashing the check. The bottom part of the photograph is a picture of the person cashing the check and the top part * * * is the check and the identification used to cash the check.” The Regiscope pictures are taken with a camera which contains two lenses; one points straight forward in the direction of the person cashing the check; the other points down in the direction where the check and the identification are laid on the base of the camera. The camera is operated by a single lever, which, when pushed, takes two pictures, simultaneously, on the same negative. The picture, State’s Exhibit 2, contains a picture of the check involved herein, which had been previously identified. The camera has a fixed focus; so the farther away a person is from the front of the camera, the smaller a person appears upon the picture. From his experience, it was witness’ opinion that appellant was against the counter just outside the cage window when the picture was taken. On September 28, 1962, the witness had a conversation with the appellant. After looking at the picture, State’s Exhibit 2, appellant stated that the person pictured thereon was he; that he had cashed a check “at Montgomery Ward that day,” but not the check on the picture; and that he did not care to tell “what the other check was.”
Upon cross examination, the witness stated that he was not present when the Regiscope picture involved was taken, or the negatives developed. His opinion at this time was different from that expressed at the first trial. He did not now believe that it would be possible for one cashier to photograph six different people with the same check (as he had testified at the first trial), nor did he believe it possible to photograph the same person with six different checks; because each person is required to produce a separate identification, and that identification is returned to each individual after each photograph is taken, and, should a different check than the one .actually presented be placed on the platform to be photographed along with the person who has presented the check, it would not match up with the identification used. In the witness’ opinion, for a Regiscope photograph to show a person other than the one intended to be photographed, the one so intended “would have to step completely away from the window and someone else step up to the window.”
Marian Stevens, who had been head cashier at the store for some 5 years, said she and her assistants cashed about 25 to 30 checks a day and they had operated the Regiscope machine on many occasions. She could not say whether it was she, or one of the assistants, who took the picture. The camera “sets right up front,” on the front counter, inside “her cage.” The camera can only be operated by one person at a time; it is movable, and is turned to one side when not being utilized; when being used, “we slide it in front of the window” and take a picture. The camera is only operated at one window, which is a small one “up top of a counter” (upon which a special light had been installed) so that the person whose picture is being taken is “right in front of you.” The witness stated the picture was “taken at Montgomery Ward. The Bargain Room is in the background, and that would be a picture of the person, the check, and their identification.”
Joseph E. Slattery, an employee of Filmdex Corporation known as Regiscope, explained in detail (and demonstrated to the court below) how the camera works, and he also explained how his company processes and stores the films. Much of his testimony corroborated and confirmed that of the witnesses Shraver and Stevens; consequently, only' the portions of *1023his testimony that added to theirs will be set forth. Regiscope received the roll of films and the request for a picture (by specific number, name of company, name of bank and so forth). The witness did not develop the negatives himself, but he examined the roll of developed film in the film reader and found the negative of the “particular transaction.” An enlargement of it was made and sfent to Montgomery Ward as requested. The enlargement was a true representation of the negative. The witness also examined the transactions on the roll of film immediately preceding and following the subject one, and found them to be full and complete transactions; the first was a picture of a woman who cashed a Treasurer of the United States check; the latter a man who also cashed a Treasury check.
The film used in taking the Regiscope pictures is perforated on one side only, so the film “cannot be put in reverse” as this would tear the perforations. Hence, on the finished picture, the check is always above the person’s picture. The camera used at Montgomery Ward’s store has a fixed focus, with a depth of field of approximately three feet.
In a Regiscope case, the process assures trustworthiness and authentication for the photograph, unlike the situation in this case.
The trustworthiness for photographs in bank robbery cases also relies on the process of recording. In United States v. Taylor, (1976 5th Cir.) 530 F.2d 639, the showing of reliability involved the following description of the process.
In the case before us it was, of course, impossible for any of the tellers to testify that the film accurately depicted the events as witnessed by them, since the camera was activated only after the bank personnel were locked in the vault. The only testimony offered as foundation for the introduction of the photographs was by government witnesses who were not present during the actual robbery. These witnesses, however, testified as to the manner in which the film was installed in the camera, how the camera was activated, the fact that the film was removed immediately after the robbery, the chain of its possession, and the fact that it was properly developed and contact prints made from it. Under the circumstances of this case, we find that such testimony furnished sufficient authentication for the admission of the contact prints into evidence. Admission of this type of photographic evidence is a matter largely within the discretion of the court, and it is clear that the district court did not abuse its discretion here.
530 F.2d at 641-42 (citations omitted). It appears that if the proper foundation were laid as in Taylor, Indiana would allow such photographs to be admitted into evidence. See Murry v. State, (1979) Ind.App., 385 N.E.2d 469, 472. Here again, there is no showing in this case of a reliable trustworthy process by which the photographs were made and presented.
I agree that the verification requirement should be understood in a relative sense. Annot., 9 A.L.R.2d 899 (1950). “The proof which one should offer in verifying a photograph varies with the nature of the evidence which the photograph is offered to supply and the degree of possibility of error in the photograph.” Id. at 900. The annotation reasons that different degrees of accuracy are required when the photograph is of a handwriting as compared to a photograph of a person for purposes of identification. The purpose for which a photograph is used determines the relative verification. When a photograph is used as substantive evidence, the need for certainty and accuracy is greater because there is no witness able to explain any distortions, inaccuracy or changes.
The more general use of photographs in court has been hindered by the feeling rather widely held, that so-called trick photography can distort the real facts. The truth is cameras do lie. . . The elimination of the dangers of false or “trick” photographs lies not in rigid rules excluding photographs generally but in the careful qualification of such photographs on their preliminary examination.
*1024Gardner, The Camera Goes to Court, 24 N.C.L.Rev. 233, 235 (1946). This article, supporting the admissibility of photographs as substantive evidence, states that perhaps the .reason for the illustrative only rule is that few judges and lawyers are familiar enough to examine adequately and quickly the competency of a photograph. It then lists possible sources of distortion (recognized by the majority). Id. at 236-238. The “tendency to accept as true what is mirrored in photographs has wide and more important implications. It renders doubly important that the photographer have available for each picture such details as the position of the camera, the distance from the object, the angle and type of lens, the time of day, the date, and similar data . .” Id. at 238. An analysis of the rule allowing use of photographs as substantive evidence requires that its competency be shown prior to admission. As has been discussed above, the “tendency to accept as true what is mirrored in a photograph” requires very strict rules for admitting a photo as substantive evidence. In this case the photograph is to be used as the only substantive evidence of a crime without even the degree of authentication required in a Regiscope or bank robbery case.
It may also be noted that except in sex offenses there is independent competent evidence of the crime. In the Regiscope cases there is evidence that a bad check has been passed when it is returned paid to the store. This is also true in a bank robbery case.
I would limit the use of the “silent witness theory” to cases where it is shown there is no possibility that the traditional foundation could be proved. It should be treated as an exception to the general rule, not as an alternative. The foundation required of other “exceptions” to the traditional rule has not been laid in this case and for that reason I would hold the photographs were improperly admitted.
. Wigmore allows, as the majority points out, that the silent witness theory “may be” a more satisfactory rationale. Wigmore § 795, n. 1.

=== CASE 2218066 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:40.356723+00 ===

8 Mass. App. Ct. 854 (1979)
397 N.E.2d 1157
HARRY A. LAWRENCE
vs.
KAMCO, INC.
Appeals Court of Massachusetts, Norfolk.
November 20, 1979.
December 28, 1979.
Present: BROWN, GREANEY, & DREBEN, JJ.
William K. Mone for the defendant.
Martin S. Cosgrove for the plaintiff.
GREANEY, J.
The two issues raised in this appeal stem from a judgment entered on a jury verdict for the plaintiff. They are whether Kamco, Inc. (Kamco), was negligent in the manner in which it temporarily repaired a broken window in its cocktail lounge and, if so, whether such negligence was the proximate cause of the plaintiff's injuries, which occurred when he was pushed during an argument between two other patrons of the lounge and fell against the broken window, severely lacerating his right wrist. At the close of the evidence Kamco moved for a directed verdict, Mass.R.Civ.P. *855 50(a), 365 Mass. 814 (1974), which was denied by the trial judge. The jury returned a verdict in the amount of $75,000. Kamco subsequently moved for a judgment notwithstanding the verdict, Mass.R.Civ.P. 50(b), 365 Mass. 814 (1974), or in the alternative, for a new trial, Mass.R. Civ.P. 59(a), 365 Mass. 827 (1974), which were also denied by the trial judge. Kamco appeals from the judgment and from the denial of all three motions. There was no error.
We summarize the relevant evidence in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, under the often stated standard applicable to motions for directed verdicts, and to motions for judgment notwithstanding the verdict which question the sufficiency of the plaintiff's case. 9 Wright and Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure § 2524, at 541-542 (1971). Graci v. Massachusetts Gas & Elec. Light Supply Co., 7 Mass. App. Ct. 221, 222 (1979). Such motions must be denied if "anywhere in the entire evidence [there is] any set of circumstances that will support a reasonable inference in favor of the plaintiff." Becker's Inc. v. Breyare, 361 Mass. 117, 121 (1972), quoting Mazzaferro v. Dupuis, 321 Mass. 718, 719 (1947). Monterosso v. Gaudette, ante 93, 95 (1979).
Kamco owned Kimberly's Restaurant and Lounge (the lounge) in Quincy. On December 24, 1973, Kamco's owner and principal officer arrived at its location at approximately 9:30 A.M. and discovered that a window had been broken after closing time the night before, leaving a jagged hole approximately one foot in diameter. The window was two and a half feet wide and three and a half feet long; it was located approximately two to three feet from the end of a bar in the lounge which had stools for patrons. There was also a stand-up bar in the vicinity of the window, which was in an area where patrons of the bar would normally walk. After attempting to have the window replaced,[1] the proprietor observed his cleaning *856 man stapling a piece of cardboard to the frame of the window on the outside of the building. That evening, around seven o'clock, the plaintiff, a journeyman plumber, went to the lounge to have a drink. The area was dimly lit, and, although he walked in the direction of the window towards the bar stools, he did not notice the window and its jagged glass. The plaintiff sat on the next to last stool at the bar with the window to his right. Three individuals seated to his left began an altercation. The plaintiff stood up to avoid being drawn into the dispute, but by that time a fight had erupted and the plaintiff was jostled or shoved backwards by one or more of the individuals. He put his right arm out to break his anticipated fall and found his hand inside the broken window, which he saw at that instant. His right wrist came in contact with the jagged glass and was severely lacerated, damaging the radial nerve (which brings feeling to the top of the hand and the thumb). His hand did not come in contact with the cardboard on the outside of the window. The night bartender testified that the incident happened very quickly, some ten or fifteen feet away from him. There had never been a fight inside the lounge before, although there had been fights outside the lounge.
1. There was sufficient evidence to send to the jury the issue of the defendant's negligence in temporarily repairing a broken window, in an area where patrons could reasonably be expected to congregate, by stapling cardboard to the outside of the window while doing nothing to remedy a dangerous condition caused by the broken window inside the lounge. "A landowner must act as a reasonable man in maintaining his property in a reasonably safe condition in view of all the circumstances, including the likelihood of injury to others, the seriousness of the injury, and the burden of avoiding the risk." Mounsey v. Ellard, 363 Mass. 693, 708 (1973), quoting Smith v. Arbaugh's Restaurant, Inc., 469 F.2d 97, 100 (D.C. Cir.1972). Whether the landowner has fulfilled this responsibility is ordinarily a question of fact. Luz v. *857 Stop & Shop, Inc., 348 Mass. 198, 203-204 (1964). On the evidence in this case, it was a question for the jury to determine whether the defendant had maintained the premises in a reasonably safe condition under all the circumstances. Monterosso v. Gaudette, supra at 102.
2. The defendant argues that, in any event, its failure to repair the broken window in the lounge was not the proximate cause of the plaintiff's injury. It points to the evidence that there had never been a fight inside the lounge and that the bartender inferentially had no time to stop the fracas, as support for its position that the window constituted a mere passive condition upon which the intervention of third parties for whom it was not responsible then acted. The distinction between a cause and a condition is "now almost entirely discredited" and if it has "any validity at all, it must refer to the type of case where the forces set in operation by the defendant have come to rest in a position of apparent safety, and some new force intervenes." Prosser, Torts § 42, at 248 (4th ed. 1971). The evidence before us does not present such a case, because, if the broken window was in a dangerous condition, it remained so until its repair on December 26, 1973. On the evidence the jury could have found that the defendant's negligent acts had permitted a situation, dangerous to persons like the plaintiff, to continue without adequate warning. West v. Molders Foundry Co., 342 Mass. 8, 12 (1961). In such circumstances the more accurate test of proximate cause has been stated by the Supreme Judicial Court in this fashion: whether "the probable consequence of [the defendant's] acts was that harm of the same general character as that which came to the plaintiff would come to persons who stood in the same general relation to the defendant as the plaintiff" and "it is not necessary to make out liability on a defendant's part that the particular series of events which ended in the [plaintiff's] injury ... were the probable consequences of the defendant's acts." Id. at 12-13, quoting Ogden v. Aspinwall, 220 Mass. 100, *858 103 (1915). Accord, Luz v. Stop & Shop, Inc., supra at 204. Even if the defendant could not have foreseen the precise manner in which the injury occurred, "[w]here the negligent conduct of the actor creates or increases the risk of a particular harm and is a substantial factor in causing that harm, the fact that the harm is brought about through the intervention of another force does not relieve the actor of liability, except where the harm is intentionally caused by a third person and is not within the scope of the risk created by the actor's conduct." Restatement (Second) of Torts § 442B (1965). The circumstances referred to in the exception portion of the Restatement's rule just quoted apply in a situation where the intentionally tortious or criminal acts of the third parties involved are directed at causing harm to the plaintiff. Restatement (Second) of Torts § 442B, supra, Illustrations 7-10. There is no evidence in this case, and it has not been argued to us, that the plaintiff was the target of the scuffle or that the plaintiff was intentionally pushed or shoved by the participants in the fight so as to bring the circumstances within the Restatement's exception. The jury could have found that the possibility of someone's falling against the jagged edges of the broken glass was the type of general harm which the defendant should have foreseen. Under the Restatement's analysis of proximate cause, the particular manner in which the injury occurs (the plaintiff's being pushed by two arguing patrons) becomes immaterial because the general danger of a patron's being jostled or bumped, or of his slipping, tripping or stumbling into the window should have been foreseen by the defendant.[2]
Finally, we think the evidence was also sufficient to present a question of proximate cause as to whether an injury which occurred during an argument inside an establishment *859 serving liquor on Christmas Eve was the result of activity foreseeable by the defendant where there had been previous altercations outside the lounge. Martin v. Reis, 344 Mass. 32, 36 (1962), and cases cited. Randolph v. Five Guys from Boston, Inc., 354 Mass. 730, 734 (1968). Restatement (Second) of Torts § 442A (1965). In such an event, the jury could have found that repair of the window would have avoided a reasonably predictable injury.[3]
The orders denying the defendant's motions for a directed verdict, for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, and for a new trial are affirmed. The judgment is affirmed.
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  There was evidence that the company which was called to replace the glass did not do so until December 26, 1973.
[2]  Dean Prosser discusses cases within this causation framework under the pragmatic characterization of "foreseeable results of unforeseeable causes." Prosser, Torts § 44, at 286-289 (4th ed. 1971).
[3]  The judge's instructions to the jury on the issue of proximate cause have not been reproduced in the appendix and we assume throughout that the jury received appropriate instructions on the subject.

=== CASE 9738894 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:02.078633+00 ===

Mr. JUSTICE TRAPP delivered the opinion of the court: Plaintiffs appeal from an order of the trial court which dismissed plaintiffs’ amended complaint with prejudice under a written memorandum of findings that there was a failure to state a cause of action in terms of duty and proximate cause. The order of dismissal was entered December 27,1978. The notice of appeal and proof of service of that notice each bear the circuit clerk’s stamped filing date of January 29, 1979. The 30th day for purposes of filing the timely notice of appeal is January 26, 1979.  Upon its own motion this court issued a rule to show cause why the appeal should not be dismissed for failure to file a timely notice of appeal. Plaintiffs’ response to the motion states that the notice of appeal was deposited in the United States mail, addressed to the clerk of the circuit court, on January 26, 1979. We take judicial notice that January 26,1979, was a Friday. Counsel addressed the issue at oral argument and this court dismissed from the bench. Supreme Court Rule 303(a) (58 Ill. 2d R. 303(a)), states that: “Except as provided in paragraph (b) below, the notice of appeal must be filed with the clerk of the circuit court within 30 days after the entry of the final judgment appealed from, or, if a timely post-trial motion directed against the judgment is filed, whether in a jury or a nonjury case, within 30 days after the entry of the order disposing of the motion.” (Emphasis supplied.) The rule is mandatory in its language and terms and it is consistently held that the timely filing of the notice of appeal is “mandatory and jurisdictional.” Portock v. Freeman (1977), 53 Ill. App. 3d 1027, 369 N.E.2d 201; Norris v. Board of Fire & Police Commissioners (1975), 30 Ill. App. 3d 224, 332 N.E.2d 553. Plaintiffs cite In re Rauch (1977), 45 Ill. App. 3d 784, 359 N.E.2d 894, as suggesting that the reviewing court has the “power” to consider this appeal even though the filing of the notice did not meet the terms of the rule. In Rauch, parental rights were terminated. Counsel appointed by the court asked that the time for appeal by the parents be extended to 50 days, and the State’s Attorney suggested that such provision be incorporated into the order. The State’s Attorney thereafter moved to dismiss the appeal for want of a timely notice. The appellate court stated that the trial court had exceeded its authority in extending the time to file a notice of appeal, but denied the motion to dismiss upon “the broad concept that a party whose own conduct contributes or causes another to commit an irregularity in judicial procedure, cannot later twist that irregularity to his own advantage.” (45 Ill. App. 3d 784, 787, 359 N.E.2d 894, 896.) Such considerations are not present here.  Plaintiffs also cite the provisions of Supreme Court Rule 303(e) (58 Ill. 2d R. 303(e)): “On motion supported by a showing of reasonable excuse for failure to file a notice of appeal, on time, accompanied by the proposed notice of appeal, filed in the reviewing court within 30 days of the expiration of the time for filing a notice of appeal, the reviewing court may grant leave to appeal and order the clerk to transmit the notice of appeal to the trial court for filing.” Such rule requires a showing of reasonable cause and the granting of leave to file a late notice of appeal becomes a matter of judicial discretion upon consideration of the reasons for delay. A notice of appeal, which is not timely filed, cannot be treated as such a motion under that rule.  Supreme Court Rule 11 provides that in the trial court there may be service by mail of papers other than the process and the complaint, and Rule 12(c) provides the effective date for papers which are so mailed. Supreme Court Rule 373 (58 Ill. 2d R. 373) provides that papers to be filed in the reviewing court by a specified date may be filed by deposit in a United States Post Office with a postmark as evidence of compliance. No rule providing for the use of mail undertakes to modify the mandatory language of Supreme Court Rule 303(a). For such reason the appeal is dismissed. Dismissed. REARDON, P. J., concurs.

=== CASE 9738984 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:06:49.964172+00 ===

Boyle, J.
i
This is an interlocutory appeal by the defendant from the trial court’s denial of its motion for summary judgment pursuant to GCR 1963, 117.2(3),1 alleging that there is no genuine issue of material fact and that aaa is therefore entitled to judgment as a matter of law.2 The motion was filed before defendant’s answer and before any meaningful discovery.
A motion for summary judgment filed before interrogatories and depositions are taken tests whether a cause of action has been stated, but a motion, filed after depositions and interrogatories, generally tests whether the opposing party’s appropriate data raises a genuine issue as to any material fact. The function of a court in disposing of a motion for summary judgment is not to decide issues of fact, but to ascertain whether or not there is an issue of fact to be tried, resolving all *475doubts as to the existence of a genuine issue of fact against a moving party. The fact allegations in the affidavits of the party opposing the motion must be considered to be true. Inferences must be viewed in the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion. [7 Callaghan’s Michigan Pleading & Practice (2d ed), § 43.12, p 30.]
The timing of the defendant’s motion, coupled with the failure of the defendant to specifically identify the issue as to which it believes there is no genuine issue of material fact,3 places this case in an awkward posture for appellate review. Also, the trial court’s analysis and that of the Court of Appeals focused on the employment-manual exception to employment at will and the question as to whether and under what circumstances an employer may alter policy manuals. However, turning first to the pleadings,4 I find the following, common allegations:
3. That when Plaintiff entered the employ of Defendant he entered the employ of Defendant based upon [sic] the following promises:
a) That he would have a lifetime job as long as he did not steal;
b) that he would work as a commission salesman for Defendant and enjoy the benefits of a seven (7%) percent commission for sales which had been in effect for many years;
c) that if he worked hard and built up his "book of business,” he would be able to earn large sums of money;
d) that if he worked hard and built up his "book of business,” he could enjoy his later working years with Defendant by realizing commissions *476from the "book of business,” which "book of business” is the accumulated memberships and policies which a commission salesman builds up over the years.
4. That for many years, Defendant worked very hard and built up his "book of business” in reliance upon the promises of Defendant and in order to enable him to enjoy the benefits of a large salary due to his individual efforts in developing his business.
In addition to these common allegations, count i of the first amended complaint asserts a breach of contract upon the basis of the following actions of aaa:
a) Eliminating commissions as a basis of compensation for sales persons;
b) establishing a "unit compensation” program whereby the commission salesmen would only get a certain amount of money per membership or policy rather than a percentage commission as had been promised to the commission salesmen when they entered the employ of Defendant;
c) establishing non-competitive rates for its product;
d) coercing Plaintiff and other similarly situated out of their employment thereby breaching the express and implied contract between Plaintiff and Defendant.
Finally, paragraph 7 of the first. amended complaint alleges that these actions violated plaintiffs reasonable expectations based upon defendant’s "policy statements,” while paragraph 8 alleges a breach of oral promises:
That as a consequence of the breach of the express oral promises of Defendant, Plaintiff has lost a job which was guaranteed to be a lifetime *477job in which he was told he would be able to earn large commissions.[5]
In support of its motion, aaa submitted two affidavits. The affidavit of Gerald Trocchio asserts facts relevant only to the issue of nlra preemption. On the other hand, the affidavit of Frederick A. Cruise, Vice President for Corporate Operations, states a number of facts relevant to the state law issues of this appeal. This affidavit essentially admits that plaintiff was discharged for failure to meet minimum production quotas imposed by aaa after reaching impasse in its negotiations with plaintiff’s union. Of greatest significance, however, are paragraphs 6 and 7 of the affidavit of Mr. Cruise:
6. The Company has continuously reviewed and revised its employment policies. For example, examination of the Company’s Sales Rules Manual reveals that the entire manual was revised on July 1, 1972, and that particular sections were again revised on November 1, 1973 and July 1, 1975. Def. Exh. A. Similarly, memorandum issued by the Company in 1971 and 1978 pertaining to minimum production requirements reveals that in 1971 sales personnel were required to sell a minimum of thirty memberships per month and in 1978 sales personnel were required to sell a minimum of twenty memberships. Def. Exh. b. Likewise, examination of the Company’s "Employee Complaint Review Policy” reveals that it was revised in November, 1979, and again in April, 1981. Def. Exh. c.
7. Defendant’s Exhibits A, b, and c to Defen*478dant’s Memorandum of Law in Support of Defendant’s Motion to Dismiss are true and correct copies of documents maintained by Defendant in the ordinary course of its business.
After reviewing the pleadings and affidavits, the trial court denied defendant’s motion for summary judgment. Bullock submitted his own affidavit in the Court of Appeals, stating in part:
7. The Company never reserved the right to unilaterally change Company rules regarding grounds for demotion and/or discharge. I was clearly told by the Company at the time I was hired and many times thereafter that nobody gets fired unless they steal.
8. The Sales Rules Manual distributed to commission sales representatives, to the extent they [sic] contained any language regarding termination of employees, were [sic] not followed. During the fifteen (15) years I was with the Company, no sales representative was ever terminated for unsatisfactory performance, although some employees were admittedly not producing. The Company had both a direct promise and custom and practice that no one would get fired unless they stole.
The defendant’s motion to strike this affidavit was denied by the Court of Appeals on February 2, 1985. The defendant has not renewed its motion in this Court.
The Court of Appeals affirmed the trial court’s denial of the defendant’s motion for summary judgment.6
ii
We agree with part n of Justice Levin’s opinion, *479concluding that plaintiffs claim is not preempted by the National Labor Relations Act, 29 USC 151 et seq. Proper resolution of the state law issues raised by the defendant requires further analysis.
m
Without identifying the nature or elements of Bullock’s claim, aaa argues in support of its general assertion that no genuine issue of material fact precluded the trial court from granting its summary judgment motion. What at first blush might be oversight is undoubtedly due to a desire to preserve a position when an answer is filed, both as to the formation of the contract pled by Bullock and the existence of such a contract at the time of Bullock’s discharge. The defendant’s efforts to preserve these questions are sound strategy, but the pleadings and affidavits currently before us present undisputed oral promises made to Bullock at the time he entered defendant’s employ. These must be deemed true.7
The defendant argues that a right to amend employment policies is fully consistent with the presumption of employment at will. We agree. This observation, however, is most pertinent to the plaintiff having pled in part that defendant’s actions violated his reasonable expectations based on "policy statements” of the defendant, the origin and precise nature of which have not yet been identified. Bullock has also pled that the defendant’s actions breached an express oral promise.
*480While the policy manual legitimate expectations analysis of Toussaint v Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Michigan, 408 Mich 579; 292 NW2d 880 (1980), may have in practice obscured that portion of the opinion dealing with a contract arising from an express agreement, oral or written, it is clear that the Toussaint majority held both that a provision of an employment contract providing that an employee shall not be discharged except for cause is legally enforceable and that the contract may be established in alternative ways. According to Toussaint, formation may be "either by express agreement, oral or written, or as a result of an employee’s legitimate expectations grounded in an employer’s policy statements.” Id., p 598 (emphasis added).
The majority in Toussaint carefully pointed out that the enforceability of personnel policies did not turn on whether negotiations had taken place, the parties’ minds had not met on the subject, the employee knew nothing of the particulars, or that the employer could change the policies unilaterally. Policy manuals in this situation were enforceable not as express promises, in quasi contract, or because of promissory estoppel, but because the Court under its common-law authority recognized the enforceability of "a situation 'instinct with an obligation,’ ” id., p 613, an obligation distinct from and independent of contract analysis.
In Toussaint and Ebling, the Court held that there was sufficient evidence of an express agreement to justify submission to a jury. Toussaint, supra, p 598. While the Court in Toussaint also held that there was sufficient evidence of Toussaint’s legitimate expectations grounded in the policy manual to submit to the jury, id., p 599, apart from the employment manual upon which Toussaint’s legitimate expectations were based, *481four members of the Court found that testimony as to the promises of Allen R. Schaedel, the defendant’s treasurer, created a jury-submissible issue as to whether there was a discharge-for-cause contract.
In Ebling, the corporate vice president, Richard Manoogian, promised that, if anything detrimental came up between Ebling and his immediate supervisor regarding Ebling’s performance, Manoogian would personally review Ebling’s performance and give him a chance to "correct things.” The plaintiff testified that Manoogian further promised Ebling that, if he was doing the job, he would not be discharged. Id., p 626 (separate opinion of Ryan, J.). All members of the Court, Chief Justice Coleman, and Justices Kavanaugh, Williams, Moody, Levin, Ryan, and Fitzgerald, agreed that this testimony created a jury-submissible issue as to whether plaintiff’s employment was not terminable at will but only for cause. Id., pp 633-644.
To paraphrase the language in Toussaint, p 611, and illustrate the distinction between the alternative theories of "enforceability” there recognized, suppose that a policy manual providing for employment at will was extant at the time an employee was hired. Could it be said that such a manual, as a matter of law, precluded the enforceability of a later written contract providing "in so many words” that the employee could not be discharged except for cause? We think not. Likewise, it cannot be said that where an express agreement is alleged preceding an employment manual, the alleged promise is, as a matter of law, unenforceable.8
*482In In re Certified Question, Bankey v Storer Broadcasting, 432 Mich 438; 443 NW2d 112 (1989), we have today said that the obligation recognized by the policy manual leg of Toussaint does not preclude employers from amending employment manuals. In re Certified Question does not, however, do more than establish that discharge-for-cause policy provisions may be modified on the basis of "reasonable notice of the change . . . uniformly given to affected employees,” issues which the defendant’s affidavit understandably does not address. It does not establish that amendments to employment manuals must be construed to be modifications of a distinct, express, or implied-in-fact contract. As the pleadings and affidavits stand, Bullock alleges an oral contract for hire in which the employer limited his right to terminate, not employment at will.
It is true, as the defendant contends, that indefinite hirings have been considered to be terminable at will. 9 Williston, Contracts, § 1017, p 131. However, as recognized by both the Toussaint majority and dissent, this rule, properly conceived, has never been more than one of construction.9 Toussaint, supra, pp 597, 650. Bullock has alleged an oral contract of employment containing a discharge-for-cause provision and the defendant’s affidavits do not rebut that allegation. This allegation sets forth a claim under the holding in Toussaint that the express promise of the employer apart from the employment manual may create a jurysubmissible issue. ,_
*483The extent of plaintiffs reliance on policy manuals and the effect of the manuals submitted by the defendant cannot be resolved on this record. These matters may be raised on remand in light of In re Certified Question. However, as to plaintiffs allegation of an oral promise, plaintiffs pleadings, which must be deemed true, allege a breach of discharge-for-cause employment under Toussaint. The employment manuals submitted by the defendant, to the extent that they do not constitute unilateral modification of the policy basis of plaintiffs claim, must be seen on this record as an offer to modify the discharge-for-cause provision of Bullock’s alleged express contract and do not entitle the defendant to summary disposition.
The determination of the effect of these manuals on Bullock’s allegations must await further discovery and perhaps trial. We do not, at this point, know basic facts such as who made the alleged promises to Bullock and under what circumstances the promises were made. Nor do we know whether the policy manuals referenced in the Cruise affidavit constituted an offer of modification, and, if so, whether there is a genuine issue of fact as to whether Bullock accepted the offer.10 Finally, we *484do not know at this point whether the alleged promise of "a lifetime job as long as he did not steal” was either intended by the defendant or understood by Bullock in the literal sense which disturbs the dissent.11
In sum, to the extent that plaintiff relies on policy manuals as the basis for his claim, In re Certified Question provides the guidelines for resolution on remand as to whether unilateral change in the policy manuals would be effective. However, defendant’s assertion of a change in policy manuals does not, on this record, establish that there is no genuine issue of material fact as to whether the plaintiff had an enforceable contract containing a *485limitation on discharge. The defendant is not entitled to judgment as a matter of law.
IV
CONCLUSION
Bullock has pled an action for a breach of an oral contract of employment alleged to have arisen at the commencement of his employment. The defendant’s affidavits in regard to its policy manuals do not entitle the defendant to judgment under GCR 1963,117.2(3).
We affirm the decisions of the trial court and the Court of Appeals denying the defendant’s motion for summary judgment and remand the case to the trial court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion and In re Certified Question.12 We do not retain jurisdiction.
Brickley, Cavanagh, and Archer, JJ., concurred with Boyle, J.
Levin, J. William J. Bullock claims that the Automobile Club of Michigan breached an oral contract of employment when it discharged him for failing to achieve production standards set forth in a revision of its sales rules manual. Aaa asserts that it had the right to revise minimum production standards, although the right to do so was not expressly reserved in the manual, and that, in all events, Bullock’s claim is preempted by the National Labor Relations Act.
The instant case was argued together with In re Certified Question, Bankey v Storer Broadcasting, *486432 Mich 438; 443 NW2d 112 (1989), also decided today. In In re Certified Question, this Court holds that an employer may, without an express reservation of the right to do so, unilaterally change a discharge-for-cause written policy statement to a terminable-at-will policy.
In In re Certified Question, there was no dispute concerning the terms of the employment contract. The stated question posited that the terms of the employee manual had become terms of the employment contract. The dispute was whether the employer could unilaterally change a policy stated in the employee’s manual that had become a term of the employment contract. Here, the central question is what were the terms of the employment contract, specifically, whether the provisions of the sales rules manual concerning minimum production standards were terms of the employment contract, as claimed by aaa, or whether, as claimed by Bullock, the provisions of the sales rules manual were inconsistent with an orally agreed upon employment contract and not terms of the contract.
A majority of the Court agrees with the circuit judge and the Court of Appeals1 that the question what were the terms of the employment contract should not have been decided on the motion for summary disposition. The question should be decided by the trier of fact following a trial at which employer and employee witnesses testify.
We all agree with the circuit judge and the Court of Appeals that Bullock’s claim is not preempted by the National Labor Relations Act. The National Labor Relations Act does not address the state law claims set forth in Bullock’s complaint. Bullock’s claims do not concern conduct *487Congress intended to leave unregulated by state law. Although a union was certified, no collection bargaining agreement was entered into between aaa and the union. The state law claims of the members of the union were not instantly extinguished when the union was certified, before negotiations for a collective bargaining agreement began and without regard to whether a collective bargaining agreement was entered into.
i
Aaa. terminated Bullock’s employment as a commission sales representative after employing him in that capacity for nearly fourteen years. Bullock remained at aaa working as a salaried sales employee, a member advisor. Bullock commenced this action alleging that the termination of his employment as a commission sales representative and changes in his compensation breached his oral contract of employment. Bullock based his claim of an oral employment contract on statements assertedly made to him when he was employed as a sales representative with aaa in May, 1968. According to Bullock, he was told that (1) he would have a lifetime job with aaa as long as he did not steal; (2) he could work as a commission sales representative for aaa and continue to receive a seven percent commission for insurance sales; and (3) if he worked hard and built up his "book of business,” he would enjoy his later working years by realizing substantial commissions from that "book of business.”
In 1978, aaa changed its method of compensation for commission sales representatives, substituting a "unit compensation plan” for the straight seven percent commission system. In September, 1981, aaa adopted production standards and a *488disciplinary procedure to be followed when sales representatives failed to meet the new standards. In February, 1982, Bullock was terminated as a commission sales representative after failing to meet aaa production standards.2
Bullock contends that the production standards were not imposed to increase productivity, but were part of a scheme to "eliminate senior and older commission sales representatives from the staff” because the standards did not take "into consideration the fact that the senior commission salesmen had to spend disproportionate amounts of their time in servicing existing accounts, rather than seeking out new business.” Bullock asserts that aaa decided to eliminate senior commission salesmen and replace them with "younger, lower paid salaried personnel.” In addition to pleading a claim for breach of contract, Bullock also claimed that aaa is liable for unjust enrichment,3 conversion,4 age discrimination,5 and negligent evaluation.6
*489Aaa did not answer Bullock’s complaint. Aaa moved for accelerated judgment, claiming that Bullock’s cause of action was preempted by federal labor law and, therefore, a state court lacked jurisdiction to hear the matter.7 Aaa alternatively *490moved for summary judgment, claiming that Bullock had failed to state a claim on which relief could be granted and that aaa was entitled to judgment because (1) Toussaint v Blue Cross & Blue Shield, 408 Mich 579; 292 NW2d 880 (1980), is not applicable to unionized employees, (2) Toussaint provided that employers may make unilateral policy changes, and (3) under the common-law requirements of Toussaint, aaa did not breach any of Bullock’s contract rights. The basis of decision proposed in the dissenting opinion was not stated in aaa’s motion or supporting brief.
The circuit judge found that Bullock’s claims were not preempted by federal law and denied aaa’s motion for accelerated judgment. He also rejected the arguments made in support of aaa’s motion for summary judgment. The Court of Appeals affirmed.8
Aaa raises the following questions in this Court:
1. May an employer revise its personnel practices, including required standards of job performance, notwithstanding that some employees might not have been aware that the policies previously in effect were subject to revision?_
*4912. Do the undisputed facts demonstrate, as a matter of law, that Bullock knew or should have known that aaa’s personnel policies were subject to revision?
3. May employees—on whose behalf a union has negotiated wages, hours and working conditions— invoke preunion, individual contract rights to supersede the lawful results of the negotiations?
A majority of the Court affirms the Court of Appeals and the circuit court denials of aaa’s motion for accelerated and summary judgment.
ii
We first address the question whether the circuit court lacked jurisdiction of the subject matter because Bullock’s state law claims were preempted by the nlra.
a
When Bullock was hired in 1968, aaa’s sales employees were not represented by a union. On February 7, 1978, the Michigan AAA Sales Association was certified as the exclusive bargaining representative for aaa’s commission sales representatives. Although aaa and the union met numerous times to negotiate a collective bargaining agreement, they failed to reach an agreement because the union would not accede to aaa’s demand that the agreement contain minimum production standards. Aaa’s final offer included a proposal for minimum production standards. On August 5, 1981, the union rejected this final offer at a general meeting of its membership, thus creating an impasse in the bargaining. After further attempts to negotiate a collective bargaining agreement failed, the union was decertified in October, 1982.
*492Aaa implemented the proposed production standards on September 1, 1981. Accompanying the production standards was a disciplinary procedure providing that a sales representative who did not meet a production standard during any month would receive an oral warning. If the representative failed to meet the standards for four successive months, he would receive a written warning, probation, and would ultimately be subject to demotion or termination.
Aaa contends that Bullock’s termination was lawful because he was discharged for failing to meet aaa’s production standards after aaa followed the steps outlined in its disciplinary procedure. Aaa and the amicus curiae, Michigan State Chamber of Commerce, argue that Bullock’s claim is preempted for two reasons: (1) aaa’s right to impose production standards is within the exclusive jurisdiction of the National Labor Relations Board, and (2) Bullock’s state law claims disrupt the collective bargaining process by attempting to deprive aaa of an economic weapon of self-help, namely, the right to implement a final offer after an impasse.
Bullock responds that state courts retain jurisdiction of state law claims where the parties have not entered into a collective bargaining agreement and where the litigation does not concern federal interests, but rather discrete state interests.
B
The United States Supreme Court has developed two doctrines for determining whether a state claim is preempted by the nlra.9 One doctrine, set *493forth in San Diego Building Trades Council v Garmon, 359 US 236, 245; 79 S Ct 773; 3 L Ed 2d 775 (1959), established that state regulations and causes of action are preempted when they concern an activity that is actually or arguably protected or prohibited by the nlra. The state claim may survive, however, if the conduct at issue "is of only peripheral concern to the federal law or touches interests so deeply rooted in local feeling and responsibility . . . .”10 The court balances the state’s interest in regulating or promoting a remedy for the conduct against the intrusion in the nlrb’s jurisdiction and the risk that the state’s determination will be inconsistent with provisions of the NLRA.
The second preemption doctrine originated in Machinists v Wisconsin Employment Relations Comm, 427 US 132; 96 S Ct 2548; 49 L Ed 2d 396 (1976), and was "designed, at least initially, to govern pre-emption questions that arose concerning activity that was neither arguably protected from employer interference by §§7 and 8(a)(1) of the nlra, nor arguably prohibited as an unfair labor practice by § 8(b) of that Act.”11 Machinists preemption prohibits state regulation and state law claims involving conduct that Congress intended to remain unregulated, namely, the use of *494economic weapons of self-help by labor and management.12
Aaa and the amicus curiae, mscc, argue that Bullock’s action is preempted under both the Garmon and Machinists branches of nlra preemption doctrine.
c
We first examine Bullock’s state law claims in light of the Garmon doctrine of preemption. Garmon provides:
When an activity is arguably subject to § 7 or § 8 of the Act, the States as well as the federal courts must defer to the exclusive competence of the National Labor Relations Board if the danger of state interference with national policy is to be averted.[13]
Section 8(a)(5) states that it is an unfair labor practice for an employer "to refuse to bargain collectively with the representatives of his employees . . . .”14 Section 8(d) defines the duty "to bargain collectively” as the duty to "meet . . . and confer in good faith with respect to wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment . . . .”15 Although an employer’s unilateral change in the conditions of employment then under negotiation is a violation of § 8(a)(5), an employer is generally permitted to make such changes following an impasse in negotiations.16
Aaa and mscc assert that implementation of *495production standards after an impasse is at least arguably protected by § 8. Bullock contends, however, that state law claims are not within the scope of §7 or §8. According to Bullock, the instant action does not require that this Court consider aaa’s imposition of new standards of production;17 rather, the action concerns oral statements made to Bullock that allegedly gave rise to a contract of employment.
The United States Supreme Court declared in Sears, Roebuck & Co v Carpenters, 436 US 180, 197; 98 S Ct 1745; 56 L Ed 2d 209 (1978), that preemption analysis should focus on whether the state court controversy is identical with or different from that which could have been presented to the nlrb:
The critical inquiry, therefore, is not whether the State is enforcing a law relating specifically to labor relations or one of general application but whether the controversy presented to the state court is identical to ... or different from . . . that which could have been, but was not, presented to the Labor Board. For it is only in the former situation that a state court’s exercise of jurisdiction necessarily involves a risk of interference with the unfair labor practice jurisdiction of the Board which the arguably prohibited branch of the Garmon doctrine was designed to avoid. [Emphasis added.]
In Belknap, Inc v Hale, 463 US 491; 103 S Ct 3172; 77 L Ed 2d 798 (1983), the United States Supreme Court ruled that employees hired to replace striking workers could pursue causes of action for misrepresentation and breach of contract *496in state court.18 The Court found preemption to be inappropriate because, among other reasons, an action before the nlrb could not address or in any way remedy the wrongs suffered by the plaintiffs.
Following the Belknap and Sears analyses, we conclude that the substance of Bullock’s state law claims significantly differ from any claims he could have presented to the nlrb. The state law claims require a determination of what were the terms of Bullock’s employment contract and whether certain actions by aaa19 breached that contract. The nlrb, on the other hand, is concerned with the process of bargaining. The board would decide whether an impasse in bargaining had occurred before aaa’s implementation of the production standards contained in its last offer at the bargaining table. The nlrb would not look at any particular provision of an employment contract in evaluating the question whether an impasse had occurred.20
Bullock’s state law claims could not have been presented to the nlrb because the nlrb would not and could not determine Bullock’s state law claims. The nlrb would not have provided a rem*497edy for his state law claims and, therefore, would not have provided a remedy for his discharge from aaa. Bullock’s state law claims and any claim he could bring before the nlrb are not identical but rather separate and discrete. Allowing Bullock to proceed on his state law claims poses no risk of interference with the jurisdiction of the nlrb.
d
Aaa and mscc also contend that Bullock’s claims are preempted under the Machinists rationale because maintenance of a state law action would thwart the effective implementation of the nlra. They argue that an employer’s right to impose its final offer when the parties fail to reach a collective bargaining agreement is one of the employer’s most powerful economic self-help weapons. They contend that Bullock’s action threatens to interfere with the collective bargaining process in a way Congress did not intend.
Machinists preemption becomes relevant where the action lies outside the reach of Garmon. It "protects against state interference with policies implicated by the structure of the [nlra] itself, by pre-empting state law and state causes of action concerning conduct that Congress intended to be unregulated.” Metropolitan Life Ins Co v Massachusetts, 471 US 724, 749; 105 S Ct 2380; 85 L Ed 2d 728 (1985). Under the Machinists doctrine,
Whether self-help economic activities are employed by employer or union, the crucial inquiry regarding pre-emption is the same: whether "the exercise of plenary state authority to curtail or entirely prohibit self-help would frustrate effective implementation of the Act’s processes. ”[21]
*498Bullock’s action is essentially an ordinary contract action, routinely heard in state court. The United States Supreme Court observed in Belknap:
The interests of the Board and the nlra, on the one hand, and the interest of the State in providing a remedy to its citizens for breach of contract, on the other, are "discrete” concerns .... We see no basis for holding that permitting the contract cause of action will conflict with the rights of either the strikers or the employer or would frustrate any policy of the federal labor laws. [Id., p 512.]
E
The Msec maintains that once a union is certified, the terms and conditions of employment are covered exclusively by federal labor law, not state law. Because Bullock was discharged for failure to meet the production standards, the mscc reasons that the circumstances surrounding the implementation of those standards is central to Bullock’s state law claims and necessitates a finding of preemption. We disagree.
The selection of a union representative did not instantly extinguish Bullock’s state law claims or contract rights. Employees would hesitate to cast their lot with a union if they were deemed to have forgiven their common-law contract and other claims when a collective bargaining agent was certified without regard to whether a collective bargaining agreement is entered into. The United States Supreme Court, in J I Case Co v NLRB, 321 US 332, 336-337; 64 S Ct 576; 88 L Ed 762 (1944), said:
Care has been taken in the opinions of the Court to reserve a field for the individual contract, even *499in industries covered by the National Labor Relations Act, not merely as an act or evidence of hiring, but also in the sense of a completely individually bargained contract setting out terms of employment, because there are circumstances in which it may legally be used, in fact, in which there is no alternative. Without limiting the possibilities, instances such as the following will occur: Men may continue work after a collective agreement expires and, despite negotiation in good faith, the negotiation may be deadlocked or delayed; in the interim express or implied individual agreements may be held to govern. [Emphasis added.]
When a collective bargaining agreement expires and the parties are unable to agree on the terms of a new agreement, an employer may implement its final oifer after impasse. In the instant case, however, no collective bargaining agreement was ever agreed upon and the union was decertified, albeit after Bullock was discharged.22 Where no agreement is reached, enforcement pursuant to state law of preexisting state law contract rights and other state law claims does not "frustrate any policy of the federal labor laws.” Belknap, supra, p 512.
In sum, we conclude that state court jurisdiction of Bullock’s state law claims is not preempted under the Garmon branch or the Machinists branch of federal preemption doctrine. The circuit court has jurisdiction of the subject matter.
iii
Aaa claims that it is entitled to summary judg*500ment because Bullock failed to state a claim on which relief can be granted and there is no genuine issue of material fact.
A
A motion for summary judgment for failure to state a claim "seeks to test the genuineness of a claim by challenging the legal adequacy of the pleadings.”23 The standard in evaluating such a motion "is whether plaintiff’s claim, on the pleadings, is so clearly unenforceable as a matter of law that no factual development can possibly justify a right to recovery.”24 In assessing the motion, the trial court "does not act as a factfinder, nor does the court attempt to probe the parties’ ability to prove their allegations.”25 The court thus "accepts as true all well-pleaded facts.”26
Toussaint held enforceable contractual rights grounded in an employee’s legitimate expectations generated by an employer’s statements of policy.27 *501Before a court can address the question of an employee’s legitimate expectations arising from such statements of policy, the trier of fact must determine which employer statements, oral and written, were a part of the contract of employment. Because this involves a factual inquiry in the instant case, the circuit judge properly denied summary judgment.
We are bound to accept all well-pleaded facts as true when reviewing the ruling on aaa’s motion for summary judgment. The oral employment con-, tract, as described by Bullock, supports a claim for breach of contract. Bullock alleged that his oral contract of employment provided that aaa would terminate him only if he were caught stealing and that he would be compensated on a seven percent commission plan based on his "book of business.” Bullock’s pleadings presented questions of fact whether aaa breached the alleged contractual provisions. Bullock has sufficiently stated a claim on which relief could be granted.
Nor did the oral statements made to Bullock at the time of hiring necessarily lack the definiteness required to form a binding contract as a matter of law. Oral statements may be as binding as written statements.
Aaa filed an affidavit in support of its motion for summary judgment, asserting that it had continuously reviewed and revised its employment policies. The affidavit stated that the sales rules manual was revised in July, 1972, November, 1973, and July, 1975, and that memoranda issued by aaa in 1971 and 1978 required 1971 sales personnel to sell a minimum of thirty memberships per month, and 1978 sales personnel to sell a minimum of twenty memberships.
Bullock relies on an oral contract of employment allegedly entered into when he was hired in May, *5021968, two or three years before the earliest memoranda adverted to in aaa’s affidavit. He asserts that aaa cannot avoid its contractual obligations resulting from the claimed oral employment contract by later promulgating inconsistent general policies that apply to all employees. He notes that the record is sparse because virtually no discovery has been conducted, and that aaa has not filed an answer and thus has not denied the oral promises asserted by Bullock. He states that the general provisions of the sales rules manual pertaining to production standards and continued employment contradict the express oral agreements regarding compensation and job security that were negotiated terms of the oral employment agreement and that the arguments advanced by aaa and amicus curiae obscure the real issue: "Did the Auto Club agree to employ Bullock as a commission salesperson at a rate of seven percent commission on all new sales and renewals and to restrict its right to discharge Bullock for reasons other than dishonesty or theft?”
Preliminary and central questions are whether the terms alleged by Bullock in his complaint were the terms of the contract of employment, and whether and to what extent provisions of the sales rules manual, consistent or inconsistent with the terms alleged, were part of the contract of employment. It is a separate question whether provisions of the sales rules manual that were in fact part of the contract could, consistent with legitimate expectations generated by aaa’s policy statements set forth in the sales rules manual, be revised in the manner aaa claims it had the right to revise them.
B
Aaa asserts that, under Toussaint, it was enti*503tied to make unilateral changes in policy, including the change in the compensation structure and the implementation of production standards. It therefore follows, according to aaa, that these changes could he made and enforced regardless of rights and duties previously established.
Aaa further reasons that just as employers have a common-law right to terminate an employee at will who is hired for an indefinite term, they may similarly rescind at will a personnel policy implemented for an unspecified period where the employer has not demonstrated an intention of maintaining such a policy permanently. Aaa suggests that while an employee can reasonably expect that an employer will apply its current policies uniformly, an employee cannot, given the routine changes that businesses must periodically make, expect that policies will continue to be in force indefinitely.
While Toussaint did state that the employer could make unilateral policy changes,28 that statement should be read in light of Toussaint’s primary holding that an employee may enforce legitimate expectations that have been generated by an employer’s statements of policy.29
*504It is not possible to answer aaa’s question— whether it could unilaterally revise its policies set forth in the sales rules manual, including required standards of job performance—in the abstract. That question can only be answered after the trier of fact has defined the terms of Bullock’s contract of employment, including the extent, if at all, the provisions of the sales rules manual are terms of the contract and, if they are, the court30 has determined what legitimate expectations would be generated in a reasonable employee as a result of those contractual terms.
There will be situations where the employer’s unilateral changes in policy are consistent with its employees’ legitimate expectations without regard to whether the employer has given explicit notice that its policies are subject to change or has established a pattern of revising its policies periodically. Notice is not the critical issue, although it may be a relevant factor.
The proper focus is the legitimate expectations of the reasonable employee. Certain policies may not involve subject matter of sufficient significance to engender legitimate expectations worthy of enforcement. Similarly, changes, even when made with respect to critical terms of employment, may be so minor that there is little or negligible interference with employee legitimate expectations.
In determining what a reasonable employee in Bullock’s position might legitimately expect, the court might consider, among other things, such factors as the nature of the change, whether changes in that regard have previously been made and implemented, length of employment and job status before and after the policy change.31 Be*505cause Bullock claims that the production standards and adoption of the "unit compensation” plan had a more severe effect on senior commission sales representatives with commitments to large "books of business,” the extent of the commitment involved in servicing Bullock’s "book of business” should also be examined.
In joining in the affirmance of the Court of Appeals conclusion that summary judgment was properly denied, I do not wish to be understood as stating that an employer may only make unilateral changes where the employees have been given specific notice that the employer has reserved the right to do so. An employer retains the right to unilaterally modify its policies where the change will not defeat the legitimate expectations of its employees.
IV
Aaa maintains that unilateral contract principles bind Bullock to aaa’s revisions regardless of the original terms of the employment contract. Under this analysis, when an employer unilaterally changes its policies, an employee’s continued performance constitutes consideration for, and acceptance of, the new terms of employment. An employee is then bound by the new terms and can no longer rely on the employer’s prior policies.
In In re Certified Question, this Court considered unilateral contract analysis in a case concerning an employer’s unilateral change from a discharge-for-cause policy to a termination-at-will policy, and *506said that it found "unilateral contract theory . . . inadequate as a basis for [its] answer. . . .”32
Even if the revision in the manual in In re Certified Question from discharge for cause to termination at will was an offer by Storer Broadcasting Company of a change in the employment contract, there was no reason to suppose that the plaintiff, Kenneth Bankey, accepted such an offer. See Thompson v Kings Entertainment, 653 F Supp 871 (ED Va, 1987), where the court said that the employer failed to show that the employee had accepted the revision in policy from dismissal for cause to termination at will. In Pine River State Bank v Mettille, 333 NW2d 622 (Minn, 1983), and Duldulao v St Mary of Nazareth Hosp Ctr, 115 Ill 2d 482; 505 NE2d 314 (1987), the employers distributed manuals that conferred greater rights on the employees. In such a case, it is ordinarily reasonable to find that the employee accepted the beneficial terms.
v
Aaa is concerned that the Court of Appeals decision in Bullock provides an employee access to a jury if he merely claims that he interpreted his employer’s oral statements or practices as establishing policies inducing his reliance. Amicus curiae also expresses concern that submitting such issues to a jury will inevitably strip employers of the right to change their policies. Both aaa and amicus curiae maintain that juries are inherently biased toward employees and thus are incapable of rendering a just verdict in this context. They fear that employment discharge cases ask juries of laymen to second-guess the complicated decision-*507making processes of corporate and small business employers.
The preliminary and central question of what the terms of the employment contract in fact are is clearly a question for the trier of fact, a jury where one has been requested. Contract interpretation may present a question of law.33 Once the trier of fact has determined what are the terms of the employment contract, the separate question of what legitimate employee expectations were generated by employer policy statements found to be a part of the contract is a question of law34 for the Court.35
VI
The dissenting opinion would dismiss the complaint for failure to state a claim on a ground not *508urged in the trial court.36 While aaa’s motion for summary judgment asserted that Bullock had failed to state a claim on which relief can be granted, the bases of that assertion were grounds other than those adopted in the dissenting opinion.
The dissenting opinion, recognizing that oral assurances were held in Toussaint to be sufficient to require submitting the question whether there was a contract to a jury,37 states that "not all oral assurances merit jury consideration,”38 It is suggested that the expressions relied on by Bullock were not " 'clear and unequivocal.’ ”39 It is said that Bullock could not have reasonably relied on the oral assurances he alleged as a means of creating a contract of employment which was not *509terminable at will unless there were distinguishing features or provisions or special consideration.40
Putting aside that there is a suggestion in one of the briefs that Bullock may have left the employ of another employer to accept employment with aaa, which, if true, might constitute a distinguishing feature or provision or special consideration, there is no rule of law requiring that a contract that need not be in writing be more specific or clear and less equivocal when it is oral than when it is in writing. Also putting aside that the disposition proposed in the dissenting opinion has not been explored at the trial level, aaa has not answered or denied the allegations that such a contract was entered into, there is no rule making unenforceable as a matter of law the contract alleged by Bullock.
While the dissenters may find it incredible that an employer would undertake to employ a person on the terms alleged by Bullock, issues of credibility are to be resolved by the trier of fact. In this connection, it is significant that a number of other former aaa employees have made similar allegations.41
The law implies terms of written and oral contracts. Bullock was not discharged because he was “inefficient, absent, tardy, slovenly, reckless, nonproductive” or “violent.”42 If aaa had sought to discharge him for one of those undesirable traits or for criminal activity other than thievery, the *510question would then arise whether it might do so by reason of breach of an implied term of the contract of employment. A contract is not defective because the parties have not provided for contingencies that another person or a lawyer might have sought to address.
VII
In conclusion, the determinations of the circuit court and Court of Appeals that Bullock’s state law claims are not preempted by federal labor law are affirmed. Also affirmed is the denial of aaa’s motion for summary judgment. Bullock has sufficiently stated a claim on which relief can be granted. Aaa has failed to demonstrate that it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Critical questions of fact remain undeveloped and should be developed at trial.
The cause is remanded to the circuit court.
Now MCR 2.116(0(10).
While AAA’s trial court motion was brought on alternate ground of GCR 1963, 117.2(1), failure to state a claim upon which relief may be granted and GCR 1963, 117.2(3), it does not now claim that Bullock’s amended complaint is technically deficient, i.e., that it fails on its face to state a claim for a breach of contract. The defendant’s brief does touch upon an issue of indefiniteness which might he characterized as an attack upon the sufficiency of the complaint, but this issue was raised in neither the trial court nor in the Court of Appeals. My resolution of this matter is therefore limited to the GCR 1963,117.2(3) question.
MCR 2.116(G)(4) now requires a specific identification of the allegedly undisputed issue.
As MCR 2.116(G)(5) now makes clear, the pleadings may be considered in a motion for summary disposition on the ground of no genuine issue of material fact.
We are in this instance addressing a question of wrongful discharge. Plaintiff alleges that he was coerced out of his employment. Plaintiffs affidavit further alleges that he was "forced to resign.” Thus, for the purposes of resolving this appeal, we accept as true that the plaintiff was discharged (as the affidavit of Mr. Cruise also sets forth).
Bullock v Automobile Club of Michigan, 146 Mich App 711; 381 NW2d 793 (1985).
Resolution of this matter is further complicated by the parties understandable melding of contract theory and the theory of legitimate expectations. Admittedly, the prior opinions of this Court have done little to clarify the relationship between these two theories. Cf. Valentine v General American Credit, Inc, 420 Mich 256, 259; 362 NW2d 628 (1984) with Renny v Port Huron Hosp, 427 Mich 415; 398 NW2d 327 (1986).
I note, but decline to address, the defendant’s argument that an oral contract of employment in this context violates the Michigan Statute of Frauds. MCL 566.132; MSA 26.922. The defendant failed to raise this issue in the trial court and the matter is therefore not *482properly before this Court. Whether the Legislature should reconsider and reformulate the statute of frauds is also a matter not properly before the Court.
In this regard, both Toussaint and Lynas v Maxwell Farms, 279 Mich 684, 687; 273 NW 315 (1937), depart from the rule under which employment at will is treated as a substantive limitation on the enforcement of contracts (post, pp 517-518, Griffin, J.).
It also should be noted there are factors in the complaint which may bring it within the distinguishing features holding of Ebling v Masco Corp, separate opinion by Ryan, J., pp 633-634. It appears that Bullock was initially employed as a commission salesman whose income was derived in part from commissions paid for renewals on his book of business and that Bullock was induced to work particularly hard during the earlier years of his employment so that he might later enjoy the fruit of his efforts derived from renewal commissions. Bullock’s contract was similar to that of Ebling in which continued employment was necessary to give the employee the full benefit of a stock option plan. We, of course, express no opinion on this question.
Facts similar to these have fueled the growing body of case law extending the duty of good faith to discharges under employment-at-will contracts. See, e.g., Fortune v Nat’l Cash Register Co, 373 Mass 96; 364 NE2d 1251 (1977); Maddaloni v Western Mass Bus Lines, Inc, 386 Mass 877; 438 NE2d 351 (1982); Cook v Alexander & Alexander, *48440 Conn Supp 246; 488 A2d 1295 (1985); K mart Corp v Ponsock, 732 P2d 1365 (Nev, 1987); Foley v Interactive Data Corp, 47 Cal 3d 654; 254 Cal Rptr 211; 765 P2d 373 (1988).
As one commentator has observed:
Although not all courts have recognized exceptions or limitations to the employment at will doctrine, courts in thirty-two states have adopted public policy exceptions, eleven states have applied the covenant of good faith and fair dealing, and twenty-nine states have used employee handbooks to find contractual limitations on terminations. A total of thirty-nine states now employ one or more theories to qualify the employment at will doctrine. [Summers, Labor law as the century turns: A changing of the guard, 67 Neb L R 7, 13-14 (1988).]
It is perhaps the isolation in which this promise has been reviewed in the partial concurrence and partial dissent of Justice Griffin which caused such a stir. As Professor Corbin has explained, however:
There is no doubt that indefiniteness of terms of an agreement is a factor that will be given some weight, even though standing alone it would not be decisive. It may be the factor that is chiefly stressed in a judicial opinion, in a case that involved elements of unfairness or fraud or disloyalty. Where no such elements exist, and the employee has so greatly changed his position that a more limited remedy is inadequate, the court is more ready to fill gaps by liberal interpretation and by inferences from the performances already rendered. [1 Cor-bin, Contracts, § 96, p 422.]
We recognize the limited nature of this response to an invitation to address far broader questions regarding modification of the oral promise recognized in Toussaint. If we are to exercise that authority responsibly, we must proceed carefully on a record developed by adversaries where much more than what is now before us is known.
Bullock v Auto Club of Michigan, 146 Mich App 711; 381 NW2d 793 (1985).
In the termination letter, aaa offered Bullock a salaried position as a "member advisor.”
Bullock claims that in taking back his "book of business” when he was terminated as a sales representative, aaa was unjustly enriched.
Bullock claims he had a property right in his "book of business” and that property right was taken from him as a result of wrongful acts of AAA.
Bullock claims that he was promised a lifetime job as long as he did not steal and commissions of seven percent of the "book of business” that he might build up, and "that if he worked hard and built up his 'book of business,’ he could enjoy his later working years with [aaa] by realizing commissions from the 'book of business,’ which 'book of business’ is the accumulated memberships and policies which a commission salesman builds up over the years.”
In Follmer, Rudzewicz & Co v Kosco, 420 Mich 394; 362 NW2d 676 (1984), this Court recognized that an employer has a property interest in insurance renewals that it may protect by contract. See also Lichnovsky v Ziebart Int’l, 414 Mich 228; 324 NW2d 732 (1982). Bullock claims a property interest in the renewals arising as a result of contract.
Bullock alleges that the production standards were designed to displace senior and older commission salespersons.
Bullock alleges that aaa breached a duty to perform accurate, reasonable and fair performance evaluations.
Aaa’s motion for accelerated judgment, or in the alternative summary judgment, sought judgment in its favor pursuant to GCR 1963, 116 and 117, on the grounds that “first, the Court lacks jurisdiction of the subject matter; second, Plaintiff has failed to state a claim upon which relief can be granted; and, third, there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that Defendants are entitled to judgment as a matter of law . . . .”
The memorandum of law in support of the motion contained the following headings:
A. The Complaint Must Be Dismissed In Accordance With Principles Of Federal Preemption.
1. Plaintiff’s Toussaint Claim Is Preempted Because It Seeks To Disrupt The Balance Of Economic Power Under Federal Law.
a. States Are Precluded From Interfering With The Policy Of Free Collective Bargaining Established By Federal Law.
b. The Employer’s Federal Right To Make A Good Faith Unilateral Change Cannot Be Infringed By A State Cause Of Action.
c. A Law Of General Applicability Is Nonetheless Preempted If Its Application Would Frustrate The Federal Scheme.
2. Plaintiff’s Toussaint Claim Is Also Preempted Because It Seeks To Regulate Conduct Exclusively Within The Unfair Labor Practice Jurisdiction Of The NLRB.
B. The Complaint Must Be Dismissed Because The Supreme Court Of Michigan Never Intended Toussaint To Apply In A Union Context.
C. The Complaint Must Be Dismissed Because Toussaint Expressly Protects An Employer’s Right To Make A Unilateral Change.
D. The Complaint Must Be Dismissed Because The Company Never Breached Plaintiff’s Alleged Rights Under Toussaint.
Affidavits of two aaa employees were attached. One, who served on aaa’s bargaining team in the negotiations with the Michigan AAA Sales Association, described the negotiating process, the impasse, and the implementation of production standards contained in aaa’s final offer. The other, referred to the implementation of the final offer, stated that seventy-five of the company’s 570 sales personnel, including Bullock, failed to meet the new minimum production standards, *490were terminated, and were offered alternative employment as salaried employee advisors which they all accepted. This affidavit further states that Bullock received all commissions that were due him and describes revisions in its employment policies referred to in the text following n 27. A copy of the sales rules manual as revised July 1, 1972, was also attached.
Plaintiff’s complaint alleged breach of contract. An amended complaint was filed after aaa’s motion for accelerated and summary judgment was filed that added counts for unjust enrichment, conversion, age discrimination, and negligent evaluation. The allegations describing the alleged contract in the amended complaint are, however, identical with those in the original complaint. Aaa did not file an amended motion or change its arguments after the filing of the amended complaint. The circuit judge delivered his opinion immediately after the amended complaint was filed, but the order denying the motion was not entered for almost two months.
Bullock v Automobile Club of Michigan, 146 Mich App 711; 381 NW2d 793 (1985).
Golden State Transit Corp v Los Angeles, 475 US 608, 613; 106 S Ct 1395; 89 L Ed 2d 616 (1986); Metropolitan Life Ins Co v Massachusetts, 471 US 724; 105 S Ct 2380; 85 L Ed 2d 728 (1985).
*493Another line of federal preemption, preemption under § 301(a) of the Labor Management Relations Act of 1947, 61 Stat 156; 29 USC 185(a), is not pertinent because the interpretation of a collective bargaining agreement is not involved. Lingle v Norge Div of Magic Chef, Inc, 486 US 399, —; 108 S Ct 1877, 1880-1881; 100 L Ed 2d 410 (1988). Teamsters v Lucas Flour Co, 369 US 95; 82 S Ct 571; 7 L Ed 2d 593 (1962). Aaa’s reliance on Nat’l Metalcrafters, Div of Keystone v McNeil, 784 F2d 817 (CA 7, 1986), and Serrano v Jones & Laughlin Steel Co, 790 F2d 1279 (CA 6, 1986), is misplaced as both cases involve § 301 preemption.
Belknap, Inc v Hale, 463 US 491, 498; 103 S Ct 3172; 77 L Ed 2d 798 (1983); San Diego Building Trades Council v Garmon, 359 US 236, 243-244; 79 S Ct 773; 3 L Ed 2d 775 (1959).
Metropolitan Life Ins Co v Massachusetts, n 9 supra, p 749.
Id.
Garmon, supra, p 245.
29 USC 158(a)(5).
29 USC 158(d).
See NLRB v Katz, 369 US 736, 743; 82 S Ct 1107; 8 L Ed 2d 230 (1962).
Bullock’s amended complaint eliminates an allegation in his original complaint that the imposition of production standards (quotas) by aaa constituted a breach of contract.
In recent years, Garmon has been applied flexibly, "especially where the State has a substantial interest in regulation of the conduct at issue and the State’s interest is one that does not threaten undue interference with the federal regulatory scheme.” Farmer v Carpenters, 430 US 290, 302; 97 S Ct 1056; 51 L Ed 2d 338 (1977). The United States Supreme Court has expanded the exception to Garmon preemption to provide state courts with jurisdiction in actions involving "interests so deeply rooted in local feeling and responsibility that, in the absence of compelling congressional direction, we could not infer that Congress had deprived the States of the power to act.” Garmon, supra, p 244.
See n 17.
Aaa relies on UA 198 Health & Welfare, Education & Pension Funds v Rester Refrigeration Service, 790 F2d 423, 426 (CA 5, 1986), where the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit held that primary jurisdiction of the matter belonged to the nlrb because the "key issue on the merits is whether the parties have reached an impasse.’’ (Emphasis added.)
Machinists, supra, pp 147-148.
We also reject aaa’s assertion that employees who have been unionized cannot bring a Toussaint-basei cause of action. See Lingle, n 9 supra. As the circuit judge correctly noted, Toussaint made no exception for unionized employees.
Abel v Eli Lilly & Co, 418 Mich 311, 323; 343 NW2d 164 (1984), cert den 469 US 833 (1984).
Id., p 323.
Id., p 324.
Id.
Contrary to the argument of amicus curiae, the scope of Toussaint is not limited to discharge-for-cause contracts. While Toussaint focused on the question whether the specific discharge-for-cause statement contained in the employer’s policy manual and oral statements to that effect gave rise to a binding contract, the Court’s holding was phrased in broad terms; the Court said that "employer statements of policy, such as the Blue Cross Supervisory Manual and Guidelines, can give rise to contractual rights in employees . . . .” Id., pp 614-615. The Court also said that "[Recognition that contractual obligations can be implicit in employer policies and practices is not confined to cases where compensation is in issue,” id., p 617, thereby indicating that express policies other than those pertaining to job security can, in a proper context, become binding.
Any policy statement, then, may give rise to a contractual obligation under Toussaint. A policy statement in a manual or in a casual conversation with a superior does not, however, automatically rise to the level of a contract. Only those statements that create legitimate expectations in a reasonable employee are actionable. See n 31.
Toussaint, supra, pp 613-615.
An employer who establishes no personnel policies instills no reasonable expectations of performance. Employers can make known to their employees that personnel policies are subject to unilateral changes by the employer. Employees would then have no legitimate expectation that any particular policy will continue to remain in force. Employees could, however, legitimately expect that policies in force at any given time will be uniformly applied to all. If there is in effect a policy to dismiss for cause only, the employer may not depart from that policy at whim simply because he was under no obligation to institute the policy in the first place. Having announced the policy, presumably with a view to obtaining the benefit of improved employee attitudes and behavior and improved quality of the work force, the employer may not treat its promise as illusory. [Toussaint, supra, p 619.]
See n 34.
Neither Valentine v General American Credit, Inc, 420 Mich 256; *505362 NW2d 628 (1984), nor any other decision of this Court supports the statement in the dissenting opinion that the rationale of Toussaint "has been confined by this Court to claims of wrongful discharge.” Post, p 521. See n 27.
In re Certified Question, p 453.
See Farnsworth, Contracts, § 7.14, pp 515-517.
In the following areas of law, judges consider facts to resolve questions of law: public figure status in libel actions, Rosenblatt v Baer, 383 US 75; 86 S Ct 669; 15 L Ed 2d 597 (1966); former jeopardy, Mitchell v Forsyth, 472 US 511, 528; 105 S Ct 2806; 86 L Ed 2d 411 (1985); immunity for members of Congress, id., probable cause in an action for malicious prosecution, Koski v Vohs, 426 Mich 424; 395 NW2d 226 (1986); promissory estoppel, C & K Engineering Contractors v Amber Steel Co, Inc, 23 Cal 3d 1, 7-8; 151 Cal Rptr 323; 587 P2d 1136 (1978).
It may be the court’s duty to determine what conduct is "reasonable” in a given context. The Fourth Amendment protects against unreasonable searches and seizures. Although there is a large factual quotient in the resolution of what constitutes an "unreasonable” search and seizure, this voluminous body of law—LaFave, Search & Seizure (2d ed), which now comprises four volumes—has been developed by judges sitting without a jury who have, in the application of tests enunciated by the United States Supreme Court and other courts, elucidated at great length on what is "reasonable” and "unreasonable.”
Depending on the nature of the factual dispute requiring jury resolution, the court might either instruct the jury regarding the legitimate expectations that would arise if it finds for the employee on the disputed factual issues or, if that does not appear feasible or desirable, await before ruling thereon the jury’s response in the form of a special verdict that includes questions concerning damages.
See n 7.
Post, p 514; Toussaint, p 597.
Post, p 515.
Post, p 517.
The dissenting opinion states:
Furthermore, the rule of construction set forth in Lynas, which is preserved by Toussaint,3 provides that a lifetime employment contract, even if agreed to, is generally construed as an indefinite hiring, terminable at the will of either party, in the absence of distinguishing features or special consideration in addition to the services to be rendered.
Toussaint states, however:
[A] provision of an employment contract providing that an employee shall not be discharged except for cause is legally enforceable although the contract is not for a deñnite term— the term is "indefinite . . . .” [Id., p 598. Emphasis added.]
No authority is cited by Blue Cross, Masco or our colleague for the proposition that where an employer has agreed that an employee hired for an indeñnite term shall not be discharged except for cause the employer may, nevertheless, terminate the employment without cause. [Id., p 609. Emphasis added.]
Toussaint, supra, at 596-597, 632. [Post, pp 517-518.]
Post, p 517.
See Dumas v Auto Club Ins Ass’n, 168 Mich App 619; 425 NW2d 480 (1988) (180 plaintiffs); Farrell v Auto Club of Michigan, 155 Mich App 378; 399 NW2d 531 (1986).
Post, p 516. While Bullock was discharged for failing to meet AAA’s production standards, that does not necessarily mean he was "nonproductive.” It is Bullock’s claim that he had been productive in creating a "book of business” and had a contractual right to continue to work on his "book of business.”