=== CASE 2219212 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:05.441962+00 ===

588 N.E.2d 1104 (1992)
147 Ill. 2d 1
167 Ill. Dec. 974
Noma WEST, Appellee,
v.
Perry M. KIRKHAM et al. (The City of Urbana, Appellant).
No. 71018.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
January 30, 1992.
Rehearing Denied March 30, 1992.
*1105 Michael R. Cornyn and Howard W. Small, Thomas, Mamer & Haughey, Champaign, for appellant.
Kelly R. Welsh, Corp. Counsel, Chicago (Lawrence Rosenthal and Brian Trubitt, of counsel), for amicus curiae City of Chicago.
James T. Newman, Cooney and Conway, and Josette Belvedere, Chicago, for amicus curiae Illinois Trial Lawyers Assoc.
Andrew J. Kleczek, Peoria (Diane E. Greanias, of counsel), for appellee.
Justice BILANDIC delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiff, Noma West, brought the present action against defendants, the City of Urbana (the City), Perry M. Kirkham, Wheels, Inc., and Pfizer, Inc., to recover damages for injuries she sustained in an automobile accident. The City filed a motion for summary judgment, contending that the Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act (Tort Immunity Act) barred plaintiff's claim against it. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1987, ch. 85, par. 1-101 et seq.) The trial court granted the City's motion. Plaintiff appealed and the appellate court reversed, holding that summary judgment in the City's favor was improper. (201 Ill.App.3d 1051, 148 Ill. Dec. 234, 560 N.E.2d 632.) We granted the City's petition for leave to appeal (134 Ill.2d R. 315). Only the liability of the City is at issue on this appeal.
Count IV of plaintiff's amended complaint is directed at the City. Count IV alleges that plaintiff was injured in an automobile collision with defendant Kirkham on June 9, 1988, at the intersection of Bradley Avenue and Lincoln Avenue (the intersection) in the City of Urbana. Plaintiff, traveling south on Lincoln Avenue, was in the process of making a left turn onto eastbound Bradley Avenue when her automobile collided with Kirkham's vehicle in the intersection. Kirkham had been traveling north on Lincoln Avenue and was proceeding straight through the intersection when the collision occurred.
Plaintiff's complaint charges that the City proximately caused the collision by committing the following acts of alleged negligence: (a) failing to provide a left turn arrow for southbound traffic on Lincoln Avenue; (b) failing to provide warning of a "dip" in the street on Lincoln Avenue just south of the intersection which allegedly rendered northbound traffic momentarily obscured to southbound traffic; (c) failing to provide safe and proper traffic control devices (by failing to provide the aforementioned left turn arrow); (d) failing to provide warning of the obscured vision of oncoming traffic (caused by the alleged *1106 "dip"); and (e) failing to provide an adequate speed control sign for northbound traffic as it entered the "dip." The argument that the City's liability could be premised on plaintiff's allegations concerning the "dip" in the street and the obscured vision caused by that "dip" (allegations (b), (d) and (e), supra) was rejected by the appellate court and plaintiff has not appealed from that holding. (201 Ill.App.3d at 1054, 148 Ill. Dec. 234, 560 N.E.2d 632.) Therefore, we will concern ourselves only with whether the City's alleged negligence in failing to provide a left turn arrow for southbound traffic on Lincoln Avenue was sufficient to preclude summary judgment.
The record reveals that Lincoln Avenue is a north-south street with two lanes in each direction. Bradley Avenue is an east-west street with one lane in each direction. Bradley Avenue is a main thoroughfare in Urbana up to its intersection with Lincoln Avenue. East of Lincoln Avenue, Bradley Avenue is an unpaved street, constructed of "rock and chip." The intersection of the two streets is controlled by "stop and go" traffic lights in all four directions. There are no left turn lanes for any direction on either street. There is a left turn arrow provided for northbound traffic on Lincoln Avenue. No other direction has a left turn arrow. The speed limit on Lincoln Avenue is 35 miles per hour, and the speed limit on Bradley Avenue is 30 miles per hour. There is no dispute that the traffic signals provided at the intersection were working properly and were clearly visible at the time of the collision. Both plaintiff and Kirkham had a steady green light when they entered the intersection.
After hearing argument on the City's motion, the trial court granted summary judgment for the City, finding that the City's alleged negligence was immunized by the Tort Immunity Act. The appellate court reversed, holding that the City's alleged negligence in failing to provide a left turn arrow was not immunized. The sole issue before us is whether the City may be liable for its failure to provide a left turn arrow for southbound traffic on Lincoln Avenue. We now reverse the appellate court and affirm the order of the trial court granting summary judgment in favor of the City.
The tort liability of municipalities is governed by the Tort Immunity Act. (Goebig v. City of Chicago (1989), 188 Ill. App. 3d 614, 616, 136 Ill. Dec. 339, 544 N.E.2d 1114; Ross v. City of Chicago (1988), 168 Ill.App.3d 83, 87, 118 Ill. Dec. 760, 522 N.E.2d 215.) The Act confers immunity upon local governments and their employees for liability arising out of the "operation of government." (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1987, ch. 85, par. 1-101.1.) Most pertinent to this appeal is section 3-104 of the Act. Section 3-104 provides as follows:
"Neither a local public entity nor a public employee is liable under this Act for an injury caused by the failure to initially provide regulatory traffic control devices, stop signs, yield right-of-way signs, speed restriction signs, distinctive roadway markings or any other traffic regulating or warning sign, device or marking, signs, overhead lights, traffic separating or restraining devices or barriers." (Emphasis added.) Ill.Rev. Stat.1987, ch. 85, par. 3-104.
The City contends that plaintiff's claim against it fits squarely within the immunity granted by section 3-104. We agree. Plaintiff's complaint charges the City with failing to provide a left turn arrow for traffic on southbound Lincoln Avenue. No claim is made that the existing devices were not working properly or were defective in any way; rather, it is only the failure to provide a particular traffic device that is alleged. Section 3-104, by its express terms, confers immunity upon a municipality where an injury is caused by the failure to initially provide a "traffic control device." A left turn arrow certainly qualifies as a "traffic control device." Where the language of a statutory provision is clear, a court must give it effect. (In re Marriage of Logston (1984), 103 Ill. 2d 266, 277, 82 Ill. Dec. 633, 469 N.E.2d 167.) Thus, by the express mandate of section 3-104, the City cannot be liable for the failure to install a left turn arrow for southbound traffic on Lincoln Avenue, *1107 even if such failure was negligent and was a cause of plaintiff's injury. Summary judgment in the City's favor was therefore proper pursuant to section 3-104 of the Tort Immunity Act.
Plaintiff argues that the language of section 3-104 granting immunity for the failure to "initially" provide a device means only that no liability will attach if the municipality was without notice that the lack of the device created a dangerous condition. Plaintiff thus asserts that section 3-104 bestows immunity only for the "initial" injury and that, once a municipality is aware that the failure to provide a particular device has caused an injury, the immunity no longer attaches for future injuries. We disagree.
Plaintiff attempts to find a substantial limitation on the immunity of section 3-104 where none exists. The language of the provision is unconditional; no reference is made in section 3-104 to notice or lack of notice on the part of the governmental entity. In this regard, it is instructive to compare the language of section 3-104 to that of two other provisions in the Tort Immunity Act. Section 3-102(a) of the Act, which imposes a duty on municipalities to maintain public property in a safe condition, specifically states that the municipality will be immune from liability unless it had actual or constructive notice of the unsafe condition. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1987, ch. 85, par. 3-102(a).) Section 3-103(a) grants immunity for injury caused by a municipality's adoption of a plan or design for a public improvement where that plan or design is approved by the proper authority. That section goes on to specifically exclude from the scope of that immunity, those situations in which it appears from the use of the plan or design that an unsafe condition has been created. (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1987, ch. 85, par. 3-103(a).) Thus, in those sections, the legislature, in clear and deliberate language, expressed its intent to limit those sections' immunity to situations where the municipality was without notice that it had created an unsafe condition. To the contrary, section 3-104 contains no language which expresses an intent to limit that section's immunity to situations in which the municipality was without notice that the lack of a particular device was unsafe. Furthermore, section 3-104 contains no language which indicates an intent to impose a duty on municipalities to provide a particular traffic control device where the municipality has notice that the failure to so provide has proved to be unsafe. Rather, section 3-104 clearly and unequivocally states that the municipality is immune from all liability arising out of the failure to provide a particular traffic control device.
Bolstering our interpretation of the scope of section 3-104 is the legislative history of that section. The legislative history of a statutory provision provides valuable insight into the legislature's intent. (See In re Marriage of Logston, 103 Ill.2d at 279, 82 Ill. Dec. 633, 469 N.E.2d 167.) Section 3-104 was amended in 1986 to read as it does at present. The pre-1986 version of section 3-104 provided as follows:
"(a) Neither a local public entity nor a public employee is liable under this Act for an injury caused by the failure to initially provide regulatory traffic control devices, stop signs, yield right-of-way signs, speed restriction signs, distinctive roadway markings or any other traffic regulating signs.
(b) Neither a local public entity nor a public employee is liable under this Act for an injury caused by the failure to provide traffic warning signals, signs, markings or other devices unless such a signal, sign, marking or device was necessary to warn of a condition which endangered the safe movement of traffic, and which would not be reasonably apparent to or anticipated by a person in the exercise of due care." Ill.Rev.Stat. 1985, ch. 85, par. 3-104.
Thus, under subsection (b) of the predecessor version of section 3-104, it was possible to hold a municipality liable for the failure to provide a traffic warning sign or device if such was "necessary to warn of a condition which endangered the safe movement of traffic." When the legislature amended section 3-104 in 1986, it deleted subsection (b) in its entirety. Moreover, *1108 in addition to deleting subsection (b), the amendment added "warning sign, device or marking" and "overhead lights, traffic separating or restraining devices or barriers" to the list of traffic devices a municipality was immunized for failing to provide. The legislature thus clearly intended to enlarge the scope of section 3-104's immunity and to immunize absolutely the failure to initially provide a traffic control device, even where such failure might "endanger the safe movement of traffic."
The applicability of section 3-104 to a similar claim of municipal negligence was recently addressed by our appellate court in Newsome v. Thompson (1990), 202 Ill. App. 3d 1074, 148 Ill. Dec. 377, 560 N.E.2d 974. In that case, the plaintiff was injured when his motorcycle was struck by an automobile driven by the defendant driver. The plaintiff sued the defendant driver, the City of Chicago, and a contractor hired by the City to perform reconstruction work on the street on which the collision occurred. The City of Chicago had closed the three northbound lanes of the street and had converted the three southbound lanes into one lane each for northbound and southbound traffic. The complaint charged the City with negligence in that it allegedly: (1) failed to erect barricades between northbound and southbound traffic; (2) failed to erect any protective devices at the point of the collision; and (3) failed to warn of traffic entering the northbound lanes from the southbound lanes. (Newsome, 202 Ill. App.3d at 1076, 148 Ill. Dec. 377, 560 N.E.2d 974.) The City moved to dismiss the plaintiff's claim for failure to state a cause of action and the trial court granted the City's motion. Newsome, 202 Ill.App.3d at 1075, 148 Ill. Dec. 377, 560 N.E.2d 974.
The appellate court in Newsome held that the dismissal of the plaintiff's claim against the City of Chicago was proper. The court determined that the specific acts of negligence alleged in the plaintiff's complaint were immunized by section 3-104 of the Tort Immunity Act. The court found that section 3-104 expressly barred a claim against the City for its failure to provide median barriers, warning signs or other protective devices. (Newsome, 202 Ill. App.3d at 1078, 148 Ill. Dec. 377, 560 N.E.2d 974.) We agree with the Newsome court's interpretation of the scope and effect of section 3-104. In accordance with that interpretation, we find that the acts of negligence with which the City of Urbana is herein charged are immunized by section 3-104.
Plaintiff further argues that the immunity of section 3-104 does not apply in this case because the City had already installed a left turn arrow for northbound traffic on Lincoln Avenue and her claim was therefore not premised on an "initial" failure to provide. Plaintiff apparently contends that the City, having undertaken to "provide" left turn devices for the intersection, had the duty to provide them symmetrically. The appellate court agreed with plaintiff, finding that the City's "partial regulation" of the intersection precluded the City from enjoying immunity under section 3-104. (201 Ill.App.3d at 1053-54, 148 Ill. Dec. 234, 560 N.E.2d 632.) The appellate court went on to hold that liability could be imposed on the City for the failure to provide a left turn arrow for southbound traffic on Lincoln Avenue solely because it had provided such an arrow for northbound traffic on Lincoln Avenue. 201 Ill.App.3d at 1054, 148 Ill. Dec. 234, 560 N.E.2d 632.
We find that the exception to section 3-104 urged by plaintiff and accepted by the appellate court is unwarranted and would effectively swallow the section's immunity entirely. The creative plaintiff, seeking to premise an action on the failure to provide a particular traffic device, could always circumvent section 3-104 by finding and pointing out some other traffic device that was provided. We do not believe that the legislature intended such a narrow construction of section 3-104, particularly considering the changes wrought by the 1986 amendment.
Parenthetically, we note that the appellate court relied almost exclusively on Smith v. County of White (1989), 191 Ill. App. 3d 569, 138 Ill. Dec. 789, 548 N.E.2d 19, in finding that section 3-104 did not apply in this case. In Smith, the appellate court *1109 held that the defendant county was not immunized by section 3-104 for its failure to post a sign warning motorists of a dangerous curve in a highway. (Smith, 191 Ill.App.3d at 577, 138 Ill. Dec. 789, 548 N.E.2d 19.) However, the collision in Smith occurred prior to the 1986 amendment of section 3-104 and the court based its holding on subsection (b) of the predecessor version of the statute. Thus, the holding of the Smith court, to the extent it relied on the deleted section 3-104(b), is no longer viable. The Smith court also noted, however, that an additional reason for upholding the plaintiff's claim was that section 3-104(a) (of the predecessor version) did not apply because the county had installed a sign warning of the curve on the approach to the curve opposite to that used by the plaintiff. The court determined that the plaintiff's claim was therefore not premised on an "initial" failure to provide. (Smith, 191 Ill.App.3d at 577, 138 Ill. Dec. 789, 548 N.E.2d 19.) As noted, we disagree with the conclusion that section 3-104 may be circumvented by such reasoning. Thus, to the extent that the holding in Smith conflicts with this opinion, it is overruled.
Our interpretation of section 3-104, better serves the policy behind the Tort Immunity Act than does that urged by plaintiff or that accepted by the appellate court in this case and in Smith. Section 1-101.1 of the Act states the expressed purpose of the Act. According to that section, the Act is intended to "protect local public entities and public employees from liability arising from the operation of government." (Ill. Rev.Stat.1987, ch. 85, par. 1-101.1(a).) The "operation of government" necessarily encompasses the policy decisions made by a municipality; that is, those decisions which require the municipality to balance competing interests and to make a judgment call as to what solution will best serve each of those interests. The decision whether to install a traffic signal requires the municipal traffic planner to balance a host of competing interests, among them, safety, convenience and cost. In the instant case, the City could have determined that the competing interests were best served by installing a left turn arrow for northbound traffic on Lincoln Avenue, but not for southbound traffic on Lincoln Avenue. The fact that Bradley Avenue is unpaved on the east side of Lincoln Avenue may have resulted in the conclusion that left turns onto eastbound Bradley Avenue would be too infrequent to justify the expenditure of tax dollars for a left turn arrow. Regardless, this is not the sort of decision that should be second-guessed by the courts. Were such second-guessing permitted, the traffic planner would be more concerned with avoiding possible litigation than with using his best judgment to properly balance the competing interests. Thus, instead of seeking the best balance of safety, convenience and cost, the traffic planner would concern himself only with whether it could later be argued that the regulation provided could have possibly been safer. Excessive regulation, with no corresponding gain in safety, convenience or cost efficiency, would be the natural result. The legislature recognized this by enacting section 3-104 and expressly immunizing the failure to provide a traffic control device or sign.
Plaintiff finally urges this court to find that the City had a duty to provide a left turn arrow for southbound traffic on Lincoln Avenue pursuant to sections 3-103(a) or 3-102(a) of the Tort Immunity Act (Ill. Rev.Stat.1987, ch. 85, pars. 3-103(a), 3-102(a)). Contrary to plaintiff's assertions, neither of these sections supports plaintiff's argument. Section 3-103(a) provides:
"A local public entity is not liable under this Article for an injury caused by the adoption of a plan or design of a construction of, or an improvement to public property where the plan or design has been approved in advance of the construction or improvement by the legislative body of such entity or by some other body or employee exercising discretionary authority to give such approval or where such plan or design is prepared in conformity with standards previously so approved. The local public entity is liable, however, if after the execution of *1110 such plan or design it appears from its use that it has created a condition that it [sic] is not reasonably safe. Ill.Rev. Stat.1987, ch. 85, par. 3-103(a).
Plaintiff argues that the City executed a traffic "plan or design" for the intersection, which "plan or design" created an unsafe condition by failing to provide a left turn arrow for southbound traffic on Lincoln Avenue. We note that plaintiff made no allegation in her complaint that the City had implemented a traffic "plan or design" for the intersection. Defects in a party's pleadings cannot be cured by argument. (Knox College v. Celotex Corp. (1981), 88 Ill. 2d 407, 427, 58 Ill. Dec. 725, 430 N.E.2d 976.) Regardless, we do not believe that a "plan or design" within the meaning of section 3-103(a) was implemented by the City in this case.
In Curtis v. County of Cook (1983), 98 Ill. 2d 158, 74 Ill. Dec. 614, 456 N.E.2d 116, this court determined that the location of a speed limit sign did not constitute a plan or design within section 3-103(a). Likewise, we find that the City of Urbana's decision to install traffic controls at the intersection did not constitute the implementation of a "plan or design" such that liability under section 3-103(a) could be invoked. Plaintiff's interpretation of "plan or design" would render the immunity of section 3-104 meaningless. The provision of any sign or device could be argued to be the implementation of a "plan or design" which renders the City liable for the failure to include some other sign or device. We thus find that the City could not be held liable to plaintiff under section 3-103(a).
Neither is section 3-102(a) of any aid to plaintiff. That section provides:
"Except as otherwise provided in this Article, a local public entity has the duty to exercise ordinary care to maintain its property in a reasonably safe condition for the use in the exercise of ordinary care of people whom the entity intended and permitted to use the property in a manner in which and at such times as it was reasonably foreseeable that it would be used, and shall not be liable for injury unless it is proven that it has actual or constructive notice of the existence of such a condition that is not reasonably safe in reasonably adequate time prior to an injury to have taken measures to remedy or protect against such condition." Ill.Rev.Stat.1987, ch. 85, par. 3-102(a).
Plaintiff argues that the City had a duty to install a left turn arrow for southbound traffic on Lincoln Avenue as part of its duty to maintain its property under this section. Plaintiff's argument ignores the opening phrase of the section, which states, "[e]xcept as otherwise provided in this Article." It is "otherwise provided" in section 3-104, which is located in article III with section 3-102(a), that a municipality does not have a duty to provide traffic control devices. Thus, the obligation to provide traffic control devices is expressly excluded from the purview of the general duty to maintain found in section 3-102(a). This limitation on the scope of the duty in section 3-102(a) is in keeping with the scope of that duty as it existed at common law. The Tort Immunity Act creates no new duties but merely codifies those existing at common law. (Swett v. Village of Algonquin (1988), 169 Ill.App.3d 78, 92, 119 Ill. Dec. 838, 523 N.E.2d 594; Ross v. City of Chicago (1988), 168 Ill. App. 3d 83, 87, 118 Ill. Dec. 760, 522 N.E.2d 215.) At common law, a municipality had a duty to maintain its property in a safe condition, but this duty did not extend to creating or erecting public improvements. (Havens v. Harris Township (1988), 175 Ill.App.3d 768, 770, 125 Ill. Dec. 256, 530 N.E.2d 284; Swett, 169 Ill.App.3d at 92, 119 Ill. Dec. 838, 523 N.E.2d 594.) Once a public improvement was actually constructed, the municipality had a duty to maintain it in a reasonably safe condition; however, no liability could be imposed for the failure to undertake the improvement in the first place. (Swett, 169 Ill.App.3d at 92, 119 Ill. Dec. 838, 523 N.E.2d 594.) As noted, there is no allegation in this case that the City failed to maintain the existing traffic controls in proper working order. Section 3-102(a) thus does not provide a basis for the City's liability to plaintiff.
*1111 Accordingly, for the aforesaid reasons, we reverse the judgment of the appellate court and affirm the trial court's granting of summary judgment in favor of the City of Urbana.
Appellate court reversed; circuit court affirmed.

=== CASE 9739277 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:37.356724+00 ===

TERNUS, Justice.
In this workers’ compensation case involving an injured agricultural employee, the compensability of the claimant’s work-related injury depends on whether the employer’s insurance policy specifically covers the claimant, as required for application of the workers’ compensation act to farm employees. See Iowa Code § 85.1(3)(6)(3), (6) (1997). Although the employer’s workers’ compensation policy does not by its terms cover the claimant, the deputy workers’ compensation commissioner reformed the policy to provide such coverage. On intra-agency appeal, the chief deputy commissioner held that the agency had no jurisdiction to reform a workers’ compensation policy and this decision was affirmed on judicial review.
We think the agency did have jurisdiction to reform the policy because, under the unique circumstances of this case, a determination of insurance coverage was an essential prerequisite to a determination of the compensability of the claimant’s injury. Therefore, we reverse and remand for further proceedings.
I. Background Facts and Proceedings.
The appellant, Mark Zomer, was employed by appellee West River Farms, Inc. as a farm laborer. West River Farms is a family farm corporation owned by Gertrude Blom, Zomer’s mother-in-law. While employed by West River Farms, Zomer sustained a work-related injury on November 8, 1995. He subsequently filed a claim with the Iowa workers’ compensation commissioner, seeking statutory benefits under the Iowa workers’ compensation act, Iowa Code chapter 85.
West River Farms’ insurance carrier, appellee IMT Insurance Company, contested liability, claiming Zomer was an exempt agricultural employee under the act. IMT relied on " Iowa Code section 85.1(3)(6)(3), which provides that chapter 85 does not apply to “persons engaged in agriculture,” including spouses of the children of officers of a family farm corporation. Iowa Code § 85.1(3)(6)(3). Zomer claimed this exemption did not apply to *132him, citing Iowa Code section 85.1(6), which permits a family farm corporation to assume liability under chapter 85 “by the purchase of valid workers’ compensation insurance specifically including the employee or classification of employees.” Id. § 85.1(6). IMT asserted West River Farms had not exercised this option because the policy issued by TMT to the farm corporation did not include an endorsement extending coverage to family members. In response, Zomer claimed the endorsement had been omitted from the policy through the mutual, mistake of Blom and IMT’s agent. He asked the commissioner (1) to reform the policy to provide coverage for family members, (2) to hold, that the reformed policy removed Zomer from the section 85.1(8) exemption under the act, and. (3) to award benefits under the act for his work-related injury.
The matter proceeded to hearing and a deputy workers’ compensation commissioner granted Zomer the requested relief. On IMT’s appeal, the chief deputy workers’ compensation commissioner issued a final agency decision holding that the agency had no “equitable jurisdiction” and therefore was required to determine the compensability of Zomer’s injury on the basis of the policy as actually issued by IMT. Based on the policy as written, the chief deputy concluded West River Farms had not insured family members, and consequently, Zomer was an exempt agricultural employee to whom the benefits of chapter 85 did not apply.
This decision was affirmed on judicial review by the district court and on appeal by the court of appeals. We granted Zomer’s application for further review.
II. Issue on Appeal and Scope of Review.
The sole question on appeal is whether the workers’ compensation commissioner has jurisdiction to reform a workers’ compensation policy where the existence of insurance coverage is determinative of a claimant’s qualification for benefits under chapter 85. We review the agency’s decision on this legal question for correction of errors of law. See Iowa Code § 17A.19(8)(e) (stating court may reverse agency ruling affected by an error of law).
III. Discussion.
In determining whether the commissioner has the power to reform a workers’ compensation insurance policy under the circumstances presented by this case, we start with the general proposition that as an administrative agency, the commissioner “has no inherent power and has only such authority as is conferred by statute or is necessarily inferred • from the power expressly granted.”1 Schmidt v. Iowa State Bd. of Dental Exam’rs, 423 N.W.2d 19, 21 (Iowa 1988); accord Sioux City Cmty. Sch. Dist. v. Iowa State Bd. of Pub. Instruction, 402 N.W.2d 739, 741 (Iowa 1987). What then is the power “expressly granted” to the commissioner? Our legislature has given the commissioner authority to resolve claims for workers’ compensation benefits:
The industrial commissioner may order any number or combination of alleged workers’ compensation insurance *133carriers and alleged employers, which are parties to a contested case ..., to pay all or part of the benefits due to an employee ... if ... the commissioner determines after an evidentiary hearing, that one or more of the carriers or employers is liable to the employee ... for benefits under this chapter ....
Iowa Code § 85.21. The scope of this authority is comprehensive: “In an original proceeding, all matters relevant to a dispute are subject to inquiry.” Id. § 86.14 (emphasis added). The determinative question, then, is whether the reformation issue presented by this case is a matter relevant to the employer’s liability for benefits under the act.
In answering this question, we keep in mind that the workers’ compensation law “must be construed according to the language the legislature has chosen.” Ehteshamfar v. UTA Engineered Sys. Div., 555 N.W.2d 450, 453 (Iowa 1996). Moreover, we interpret the act broadly and liberally in favor of the worker. Danker v. Wilimek, 577 N.W.2d 634, 636 (Iowa 1998). Finally, we strive to be true to the legislature’s purpose in providing this statutory remedy. See Travelers Ins. Co. v. Sneddon, 249 Iowa 393, 403, 86 N.W.2d 870, 877 (1957). That purpose has been stated as follows:
The fundamental reason for the enactment of this legislation is to avoid litigation, lessen the expense incident thereto, minimize appeals, and afford an efficient and speedy tribunal to determine and award compensation under the terms of this act.
“It was the purpose of the legislature to create a tribunal to do rough justice— speedy, summary, informal, untechnical. With this scheme of the legislature we must not interfere; for, if we trench in the slightest degree upon the prerogatives of the commission, one encroachment will breed another, until finally simplicity will give way to complexity, and informality to technicality.”
Flint v. City of Eldon, 191 Iowa 845, 847, 183 N.W. 344, 345 (1921) (citation omitted).
Interpreting the statutory powers conferred by the legislature on the workers’ compensation commissioner in light of these principles, we conclude the commissioner has the power to decide any issue necessary to a determination of whether a claimant is entitled to workers’ compensation benefits. Here, in order to determine whether the employee is entitled to such benefits, it is necessary for' the commissioner to decide whether Zomer is covered by the farm corporation’s workers’ compensation insurance policy. Resolution of this coverage issue depends on whether the policy should be reformed, based on the parties’ mutual mistake, to include the claimant as an insured. Thus, only by deciding the reformation issue can the commissioner determine whether the claimant is entitled to workers’ compensation benefits.
The insurance carrier contends, however, that only courts may grant the equitable remedy of reformation. As a result, according to the insurer, an employee in Zomer’s position must first commence an action in district court to reform the policy and then, if successful, proceed to recover workers’ compensation benefits in a contested case proceeding before the commissioner.
Such an interpretation of the commissioner’s authority is, we think, contrary to the express language of the applicable statute as well as its underlying purpose. The legislature has given the commissioner the power to resolve “all matters relevant” to a compensation claim, not just the legal issues relevant to a claim. Iowa Code § 86.14 (emphasis added). In addition, the bifurcated litigation process suggested by *134the insurer is a far cry from the efficient and speedy remedy envisioned by the general assembly when it adopted the workers’ compensation act. As this court recently observed, the “beneficent purposes” of the workers’ compensation law “should not be defeated by ‘reading something into it which is not there.’ ” Area Educ. Agency 7 v. Bauch, 646 N.W.2d 398, 400 (Iowa 2002) (citation omitted). We refuse to read into the statute a limitation on the commissioner’s authority to decide claims for compensation, particularly when to do so would defeat one of the primary purposes of the statute — the provision of a prompt and adequate remedy.
Our conclusion that the workers’ compensation commissioner has authority to reform the policy under the circumstances of this case finds support in our Sneddon decision. In that case, we held the commissioner had jurisdiction to decide whether the workers’ compensation policy at issue was in effect at the time of the employee’s injury. See Sneddon, 249 Iowa at 404, 86 N.W.2d at 877. In our opinion, we cited several cases from other jurisdictions “which support[ed] our holding,” and represented the majority view, including cases holding the commissioner had the power to reform a policy based on mutual mistake, to reform a policy for fraud in the procurement, and to correct a scrivener’s mistake in writing the policy, as well as a case stating generally that the commission has the power to apply rules of equity as well as rules of law to determine whether an award of workers’ compensation benefits should be made.2 See id. at 398-402, 86 N.W.2d at 874-75. The fundamental premise of our opinion was that the commissioner has jurisdiction to decide issues integral to the determination of a claimant’s entitlement to workers’ compensation benefits.
We disagree with the insurer and employer’s contention that the present case is more analogous to Bair v. Blue Ribbon, Inc., 256 Iowa 660, 129 N.W.2d 85 (1964), where we held the commissioner did not have jurisdiction to determine the liability of an insurer for policy' benefits payable under an endorsement to a workers’ compensation policy. In Bair, the claim asserted was not a claim for workers’ compensation benefits, but for payment under another coverage of the employer’s insurance policy that provided “benefits to a person not deemed an employee under the [a]ct,” such payment being measured by what the claimant would have recovered under the workers’ compensation law had he been covered by the act. See Bair, 256 Iowa at 661-62, 129 N.W.2d at 85-86 (emphasis added). Clearly, this issue had nothing to do with the determination of liability for statutory workers’ compensation benefits, and therefore was properly held to be outside the jurisdiction of the workers’ compensation commissioner. We think the present case is more analogous to the coverage question raised in Sneddon because the coverage issue in that case, like the reformation issue raised here, was essential to a determination of the employee’s entitlement to benefits under the act.
As a final matter, we address the agency’s conclusion that it has no “equitable jurisdiction” and so cannot reform the policy. Although it is true as a general proposition that the commissioner has no equita*135ble jurisdiction in the same sense that a court has equitable jurisdiction, we do not think this truism resolves the question before us. The mere fact that reformation is equitable in nature should not hinder the commissioner’s ability to determine the compensability of an injury. See Employers’ Liab. Assurance Corp. v. Matlock, 151 Kan. 293, 98 P.2d 456, 462 (1940) (rejecting argument that commissioner could not consider equitable claim for reformation based on fraud and mutual mistake, stating such a restriction on commissioner’s authority would undermine lawmakers’ intent to provide a speedy administrative remedy for workers’ claims); Harris v. Pine Cleaners, Inc., 296 S.W.2d 27, 29 (Mo.1956) (holding industrial commission had authority to rule upon equitable issue, “ ‘otherwise endless complications and delays would be introduced into the administration of the Act’ ” (citation omitted)). In fact, the legislature has expressly granted the commissioner authority to equitably' apportion benefits among dependents. See Iowa Code § 85.43. Clearly, then, the legislature harbored no intent that the commissioner was incapable of applying rules of equity. Similarly, we find no impediment to the commissioner’s application of equitable principles of reformation when appropriate and necessary to determine a worker’s entitlement to statutory benefits.
IV. Summary and Disposition.
In summary, the test with respect to the commissioner’s jurisdiction is whether the disputed matter is necessary to a determination of liability under the workers’ compensation statute. If so, the commissioner has the power to decide the issue. The issue presented in the appeal before us clearly meets this test and, therefore, the commissioner had the authority to resolve that issue. We vacate the court of appeals’ contrary ruling, reverse the district court’s judgment, and remand this case to the commissioner for further proceedings consistent with our decision.
DECISION OF COURT OF APPEALS VACATED; DISTRICT COURT JUDGMENT REVERSED AND CASE REMANDED.
All justices concur except NEUMAN, J., who dissents. LARSON, J., joins the dissent.
. Although the 1998 amendments to Iowa's administrative procedure act do not apply to this case as the petition for arbitration was filed prior to the effective date of the amendments, see 1998 Iowa Acts ch. 1202, § 46, these amendments confirm the principle that an agency has no inherent authority. See id. § 25 (codified at Iowa Code § 17A.23 (2001)). See generally Arthur E. B onfield, Amendments to Iowa Administrative Procedure Act, Report on Selected Provisions to Iowa State Bar Association and Iowa State Government 73 (1998) (stating amendment to section 17A.23 “clearly and firmly restates current law”).
. While there is some diversity of opinion among courts considering the scope of jurisdiction granted to an agency responsible for administering a workers’ compensation act, the majority rule appears to remain, as we noted in Sneddon, that the agency can consider any issue necessary to a determination of a claimant’s right to statutory benefits, including reformation of the policy. See 9 Larson’s Workers' Compensation Law § 150.04[1], at 150-21 (2002); 82 Am.Jur.2d Workers' Compensation § 487, at 426 (2003).

=== CASE 9739278 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:37.360959+00 ===

NEUMAN, Justice
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent. I think it will come as a great surprise to the workers’ compensation commissioner that the agency has not only the power to determine the legal effect of a contract — as this court recognized in Sneddon — but to take the next step of reforming contracts based on equitable principles.
Were we writing on a clean slate, the majority’s persuasive opinion might strike me as a great idea. Why not adjudicate all the issues, legal and equitable, in one forum? Courts can do it, why not administrative agencies? The reason, of course, is that our constitution vests the legislature — not this court — with the task of determining the scope of an executive agency’s powers. The majority pays lip service to this principle but then, by its own lights, decides contract reformation is surely an equitable power the legislature meant to confer on the compensation commissioner. It points to a case from Kansas to bolster its view, Employers’ Liability Assurance Corp. v. Matlock, 151 Kan. 293, 98 P.2d 456, 462 (1940). That opinion, however, has been criticized precisely for having failed to consider the constitutional question implicit in assigning equitable powers to an administrative agency based on statutory interpretation. See Provenzano v. Long, 64 Nev. 412, 183 P.2d 639, 644 (1947) (citing Michigan Mut. Liab. Co. v. Baker, 295 Mich. 237, 294 N.W. 168, 170 (1940)). Al*136though we drew on Matlock for our holding in Sneddon, we described the Kansas decision as “more far reaching than ours is here.” Sneddon, 249 Iowa at 398, 86 N.W.2d at 874. Indeed it was, until today.
The Provenzano case explained its rationale for rejecting the Kansas “rule” this way:
No citation of authority is necessary to show that courts of equity have authority in proper cases to modify, reform, or cancel written instruments. On the other hand, the powers of the commission are derived exclusively from the statutes. No statute is cited by appellants, and we have been unable to find any which even pretends to confer authority on the commission to modify, reform, or cancel written instruments properly before it for consideration. Any attempt by the Legislature to confer such purely judicial powers upon the commission would no doubt meet with insurmountable constitutional objections. While the Workmen’s Compensation Act must at all times be liberally construed to the end that its beneficent purposes may be fully carried out, we find no sanction in the law for the contention herein made that the commission may exercise such purely judicial powers.
Provenzano, 183 P.2d at 645 (citations and quoted authority omitted). More recently, the Oklahoma appellate court reached the same conclusion, holding its compensation commissioner “does not possess the power of reformation and cannot exercise that power by the use of interpretation and construction.” D. Daniels Masonry v. Daniels, 999 P.2d 1124, 1126 (Okla.Civ.Ct.App.2000).
The majority rightly notes that other courts have taken a different course. But when the question has arisen in other contexts in Iowa, this court has ruled the compensation commissioner cannot grant equitable relief. See, e.g., Ford v. Barcus, 261 Iowa 616, 622, 155 N.W.2d 507, 511 (1968); Doyle v. Dugan, 229 Iowa 724, 731-32, 295 N.W. 128, 131-32 (1940).
The majority justifies today’s decision as a way of simplifying the resolution of insurance contract disputes “when appropriate and necessary to determine a worker’s entitlement to statutory benefits.” This is a noble goal but I fear it will ultimately complicate, rather than simplify, the process. Here the commissioner, construing the employer’s insurance policy, determined as a matter of law that the policy did not cover Zomer. So, the commissioner concluded, the agency was without jurisdiction to adjudicate Zomer’s claim for benefits. Today’s holding means that the agency will now reconsider the record, examining the facts for proof of mutual mistake, and .then reform the contract (or not) based on equity. When the inevitable petition for judicial review is filed, and then appealed, will this court then review the disputed facts de novo, rather than at law? Assuming the former, this court will be free to substitute its judgment for the judgment of the agency, a situation that arguably will lead — in the long run — to more appeals and resultant delay, not less.
In short, I am convinced the majority has read too much into our Sneddon decision and, more importantly, has given equitable authority to an agency that is the legislator’s prerogative to confer, not ours. The opinion also injects uncertainty into a system that needs more, not less, predictability. I cannot join it.
LARSON, J., joins this dissent.

=== CASE 2219215 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:05.514484+00 ===

588 N.E.2d 550 (1992)
Charles A. BRATTON and Rosemary B. Bratton; Alvin W. Weaver and Joanne Holycross Weaver, Appellant-Defendants,
v.
David K. YERGA and Kathleen M. Yerga; John Miller and Shirley J. Miller, Appellee-Plaintiffs.
No. 64A03-9108-CV-235.[1]
Court of Appeals of Indiana, First District.
March 19, 1992.
James L. Sullivan, Valparaiso, for appellant-defendants.
Michael C. Harris, Harris, Welsh & Lukmann, Chesterton, for John and Shirley J. Miller.
David M. Welter, Valparaiso, for David and Kathy Yerga.
BAKER, Judge.
Defendant-appellants Charles A. and Rosemary B. Bratton and Alvin W. and Joanne H. Weaver appeal an adverse ruling in a declaratory judgment suit initiated by *551 plaintiff-appellees David K. and Kathleen M. Yerga and John and Shirley J. Miller. The Yergas and the Millers brought the action to determine the rights and responsibilities associated with an easement serving as a driveway.
We choose to adopt the appellees' statement of the issues:[2]
I. Whether the trial court's decision regarding the easement is clearly erroneous.
II. Whether the appellees are entitled to an award of attorney's fees under Ind. Appellate Rule 15(G).
We affirm the decision of the trial court, but award no fees.
FACTS
The facts underlying this appeal are not in dispute. Shirley Miller inherited a 40 acre parcel of land from her parents. The southern edge of this property is bordered by Porter County Road 650 North. In October 1972, Miller sold ten acres of her property to Thomas and Audrey Witzman. This ten acre parcel was situated in the northeastern portion of the 40 acres. The Witzmans split their ten acres into two roughly five acre parcels and sold one to the Nelsons and one to the Irelands. Neither five acre parcel had access to County Road 650 North, however, so in 1973 the Millers, the Nelsons, and the Irelands executed and recorded a grant of easement, the pertinent parts of which read as follows:
... [T]he grantors, John A. and Shirley J. Miller .. . grant and convey to Jeffrey J. Ireland and Gunta Ireland ... and Timothy E. Nelson and Janel Nelson, a right of way and easement appurtenant, for use as a roadway and driveway for unlimited passage over, upon, through and across [a twenty foot wide strip of land running in a certain direction].
It is understood ... that ... this easement is... for the use of the grantees for the purposes of allowing the grantees to obtain ingress to and egress from [the described property].
It is further understood between the grantors and grantees that the grantors have the right to use and cross over this easement for the purpose of reaching other portions of their property and that the grantees are not allowed to erect fences or other obstructions which will interfere with this right of the grantors.
It is further understood and agreed by and between the grantors and the grantees that the grantors or the grantors' successors in interest may once at any time in the future relocate the aforementioned easement for ingress to and egress from [the described piece of property], so long as the grantors or the grantors' successors in interest provide a roadway as good as or better than the roadway existing at the time on the easement herein conveyed.
It is further understood and agreed that this easement, or any location of said easement, as provided hereunder, may at any time in the discretion of the grantors or their successors in interest and by their act alone, be in full or in part dedicated as a public right of way by *552 constructing in said right of way a road sufficient to meet the requirements for dedication then existing... .
Record at 196-97.
In 1980, the Brattons purchased the Irelands' property. In 1985, the Weavers purchased the Nelsons' property. In 1988, the Yergas purchased an eleven acre tract of land from the Millers; this property lies largely between the Brattons' and Weavers' property to the northeast and County Road 650 North to the south. The greatest part of the easement runs directly through and alongside the Yergas' property. At this point it may be helpful to refer to the rough diagram we have prepared:
*553
*554 At some moment in time the Weavers and the Brattons informed the Yergas that the Yergas were not to use any portion of the easement, and that if the Yergas wanted access to County Road 650 North, they could build a separate driveway running parallel to the easement.
The Yergas and the Millers filed a declaratory action seeking to have the rights associated with the easement clarified. The trial court ruled that the Brattons and the Weavers did not have exclusive use of and rights to the easement as against the Yergas and Millers. Record at 65. This appeal followed.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
I. Standard of Review
Neither party asked the trial court to enter specific findings of fact and conclusions of law under Ind. Trial Rule 52(A). Had either done so, we would have employed a standard of review in which we affirm the judgment if the evidence adduced at trial supports the findings and if the findings support the judgment. Vanderburgh County Bd. of Comm'rs v. Rittenhouse (1991), Ind. App., 575 N.E.2d 663, 665, trans. denied. Here, the trial court initiated the development of findings of fact and conclusions of law by requesting the parties submit proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law. The T.R. 52(A) standard of review is therefore inapplicable. Instead, the general judgment controls as to the issues upon which the trial court has not found, and the specific findings control only as to the issues they do cover. Id. at 666. While the specific findings will not be set aside unless they are clearly erroneous, we will nonetheless affirm the general judgment upon any legal theory supported by evidence introduced at trial. Id.
II. Easement
The thrust of the Brattons' and the Weavers' argument appears to be that the court erred by concluding they did not have exclusive rights to the use of the easement. They argue that the paragraph in the grant stating the grantors have the right to cross over and use the easement is inapplicable to the Yergas, because, unlike the other paragraphs, there is no mention of the right extending to the Millers' successors in interest. They note the grant of easement contains no general paragraph passing the Millers' rights to all successors in interest and assigns; therefore, they conclude, the grant was exclusive.
The Brattons and Weavers have presented us with a question of contract interpretation. When considering contracts, we endeavor to give words their plain and usual meaning, "unless, from the entire contract and subject matter thereof, it is clear that some other meaning is intended ..." Tomahawk Village Apartments v. Farren (1991), Ind. App., 571 N.E.2d 1286, 1291. Particular words and phrases of a contract cannot be read alone; the parties' intention must be gleaned from the contract considered as a whole. Id.
"Generally, exclusivity should be clearly evidenced in the grant of the easement." Brown v. Heidersbach (1977), 172 Ind. App. 434, 442, 360 N.E.2d 614, 620. "In the absence of an agreement to the contrary, the owner of the servient estate may use his property in any manner and for any purpose consistent with the enjoyment of the easement by the owner of the easement." Bd. of Comm'rs of Vanderburgh County v. Joeckel (1980), Ind. App., 407 N.E.2d 274, 277. Here, we agree with the trial court that the easement is not exclusive. True, the paragraph reserving the right to cross over and use the easement contains no mention of the right passing to successors in interest, unlike the subsequent two paragraphs. We cannot infer from this absence, however, an intent to limit cross over and use to the Millers alone, given the rule in Brown that exclusivity should be "clearly evidenced." We hardly think the absence of any reference to successors in interest or assigns is "clear evidence" of an intent to exclude them. For this reason, we affirm the judgment.
Over objection, the trial court considered extrinsic evidence surrounding the *555 formation of the grant of easement. Parol or extrinsic evidence is inadmissible to explain a written instrument unless there is a showing of fraud, mistake, illegality, duress, undue influence, or ambiguity. Turnpaugh v. Wolf (1985), Ind. App., 482 N.E.2d 506. Unlike the trial court, we find the terms of the instrument regarding exclusivity unambiguous. We note, however, that if we had found the language of the easement ambiguous, we would have been compelled to uphold the trial court's determination that the intent of the parties was not to limit the reservations contained in the easement. Although the evidence presented at trial on this issue was in conflict, Shirley Miller testified the easement was created for the benefit of the owners of the dominant tract, and the reservations were added for her benefit and for a farmer who was farming an adjacent piece of property. "[W]e needed language in the easement to enable people to use it," she testified. Record at 103. On cross-examination, Miller was asked, "You have also told us that you thought you would have the right to use it and anybody you sold real estate to use it[?]" Miller replied, "Yes." Record at 108. There was, therefore, evidence in the record to support the trial court's finding that the intent of the parties was to allow the reservations of rights to pass to others. We decline the Brattons' and the Weavers' request that we reweigh the evidence and reassess the credibility of the witnesses.
The Yergas and the Millers ask us to assess attorney's fees against the Brattons and Weavers, claiming they have been unnecessarily subjected to substantial expense, time, energy, and inconvenience in defending the appeal. They argue there was "not a scintilla of rationality" to the Brattons' and the Weavers' position. Although we are tempted, especially given our remarks in Note 1, supra, we are constrained to admit we find no evidence of bad faith, frivolity, or vexatiousness in the Brattons' and the Weavers' prosecution of their appeal. Cf. Lesher v. Baltimore Football Club (1987), Ind., 512 N.E.2d 156.
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed, and no attorney's fees are awarded.
RATLIFF, C.J. and STATON, J. concur.
NOTES
[1]  This case was transferred by direction of the Chief Judge on 2-20-92.
[2]  Our choices were limited, for we were unable to discern readily the Brattons' and Weavers' statement of issues. Section one of appellants' brief, subtitled "Statement of the Issues," states "The issues raised in Appellant's Motion to Correct Error are... ." Brief of the Appellant at [1]. Six issues are set forth, with the final issue having five subparts. But nowhere in the brief is there a correspondence between the issues announced and the argument presented. No attempt has been made to distinguish the arguments associated with one issue from arguments associated with another. There is no summary of the argument section to guide us, as required by Ind. Appellate Rule 8.3(A)(6). Although numerous references are made to the trial court's ruling or holding, appellants have failed to include a verbatim statement of the judgment, as required by Ind. App. Rule 8.3(A)(4). Rather than spend fruitless hours attempting to locate and address the argument concerning each of the issues associated with appellants' "Motion to Correct Errors," we will instead attempt to distill and respond to appellants' gallimaufry within the parameters established by appellees' statement of the issues, notwithstanding the fact that substantial failure to comply with the rules of appellate procedure subjects the non-complying party to dismissal. Sartain v. Blunck (1983), Ind. App., 453 N.E.2d 324. As a final note, we would advise appellants it is unnecessary to include in their brief a table of contents for the record of proceedings, and that a certificate of service is designed to prove notice to opposing counsel, not to prove eight copies of the brief were sent to our clerk's office.

=== CASE 9739279 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:38.682369+00 ===

OPINION
BLATZ, Chief Justice.
In this pretrial appeal, appellant Jerrett Lee Anderson challenges the court of appeals’ decision reversing the district court’s dismissal of the charge of unintentional second-degree felony murder for lack of probable cause. Anderson argues that, when the second-degree felony-murder statute is read in conjunction with our prior holdings, the court of appeals’ decision must be reversed. We agree and hold that the predicate offenses of felon in possession of a firearm1 and possession of a stolen firearm cannot support the charge of unintentional second-degree felony murder.
The facts giving rise to this appeal are not in dispute. On February 26, 2002, Jerrett Lee Anderson arrived at Blake Rogers’ residence in Minneapolis and, at about 10:45 p.m., joined Rogers and a friend of Rogers in Rogers’ bedroom. While there, Anderson showed them a 12-gauge shotgun, which was missing its rifle stock, and stated that the shotgun had been stolen. Rogers’ friend handled the shotgun, and all three noticed that the shotgun was loaded. As the shotgun was returned to Anderson, Rogers was kneeling in front of his stereo system, inserting compact discs. Anderson then pointed the shotgun at Rogers, and it discharged, killing Rogers. Anderson and Rogers’ friend fled the residence.
Anderson was charged with second-degree unintentional felony murder, in violation of Minn.Stat. § 609.19,' subd. 2(1) (2002), and third-degree murder (“depraved mind” killing), in violation of Minn. Stat. § 609.195(a) (2002). The district court dismissed the second-degree felony-murder charge, ruling that felon in possession of a firearm and possession of a stolen firearm are not proper predicate offenses for second-degree felony murder.
The state appealed under Minn. R.Crim. P. 28.04, subd. 1, which permits appeals from pretrial orders of the trial court. In a 2-1 decision, the court of appeals concluded that possession of a loaded, stock-less shotgun pointed at the victim was inherently dangerous. State v. Anderson, 654 N.W.2d 367, 372 (Minn.App.2002). Accordingly, the court of appeals held that the district court erred in dismissing the second-degree felony-murder charge. Id. The dissenting judge argued that there is *698nothing inherently dangerous about the two predicate unlawful firearm possession offenses. Id. at 373. Viewing the majority holding as an unwarranted extension of the felony-murder doctrine to “status” offenses,2 the dissenting judge explained that she “would [have affirmed] the trial court’s pretrial order dismissing the unintentional murder in the second-degree (felony-murder) charge on the grounds that the ‘status’ offenses of unlawful possession of a firearm and possession of a stolen firearm cannot serve as predicate offenses to felony-murder.” Id. at 372, 375. It is from this court of appeals’ decision that Anderson appeals.
The single issue presented by this case is whether the offenses of felon in possession of a firearm and possession of a stolen firearm are proper predicate offenses for a charge of unintentional second-degree felony murder. This issue is a question of law, subject to de novo review. Frost-Benco Elec. Ass’n v. Minnesota Pub. Utils. Comm’n, 358 N.W.2d 639, 642 (Minn.1984). Whether a statute has been properly construed is also a question of law, reviewed de novo. State v. Stevenson, 656 N.W.2d 235, 238 (Minn.2003).
We begin with the statutory provisions at issue. The felon-in-possession statute provides that a person who has been adjudicated delinquent of a crime of violence shall not be entitled to possess a firearm for 10 years following restoration of civil rights or expiration of his or her sentence, and a violator is subject to a penalty of up to 15 years imprisonment or a $30,000 penalty, or both.3 Minn.Stat. § 624.713, subds. 1(b), 2 (2002). Similarly, the receiving stolen property statute provides that the offense of possession of a stolen firearm is subject to up to 20 years confinement or a fine of $100,000, or both. Minn. Stat. §§ 609.53, subd. 1 (2002); 609.52, subd. 3(1) (2002). The second-degree felony-murder statute, under which Anderson was charged, provides that a person who “causes the death of a human being, without intent to effect the death of any person, while committing or attempting to commit a felony offense other than criminal sexual conduct in the first or second degree with force or violence or a drive-by shooting” may be sentenced to imprisonment for not more • than forty years. Minn.Stat. § 609.19, subd. 2(1). This statutory provision does not define what constitutes “a felony offense.”
To understand the felony-murder statute, it is helpful to review the historical backdrop surrounding its enactment as well as our case law. To begin, Minnesota’s second-degree felony-murder statute codifies the common law felony-murder rule: “ ‘if one intends to do another felony, and undesignedly kills a man, this is also murder.’ ” Rudolph J. Gerber, The Felony Murder Rule: Conundrum Without Principle, 31 Ariz. St. L.J. 763, 765 (Í999) (quoting Sir William Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England 947 (George Chase ed., 4th ed. 1938)). Viewed in historical context, the common law felony-murder rule, though stated broadly, was limited in scope and consequence because there were few felonies4 at common *699law — all were mala in se5 and most were life-endangering — and because all were punishable by death. James J. Tomkovicz, The Endurance of the Felony-Murder Rule: A Study of the Forces that 'Shape Our Criminal Law, 51- Wash. & Lee L.Rev. 1429, 1445-46 (1994). As a result, application of the felony-murder rule at common law was consistent with the requirement of mens rea because the malice required for murder could be imputed from the wrongful mental attitude for the predicate felony, and “it made little difference whether the felon was hanged for the felony or for the murder.” 2 Wayne R. LaFave & Austin W. Scott, Jr., Substantive Criminal Law § 7.5, at 207 n. 4 (1986); State v. Branson, 487 N.W.2d 880, 881 (Minn.1992).
More recently, because the number of felonies has increased and many comparatively minor offenses are classified as felonies, malice is imputed from crimes that are much less severe than murder. Branson, 487 N.W.2d at 882. For this reason, many courts have judicially limited the application of the doctrine so that not every felony offense serves as a predicate felony for a felony-murder charge. Id.; see also 2 LaFave & Scott, Jr., supra, § 7.5, at 206-11.
In Minnesota, prior to 1981, predicate felonies for felony murder were those felonies “committed upon or affecting the person whose death was caused.” 40 Minn. Stat. Ann. § 609.195 at 333, 1963 advisory committee cmt. (West 2003). This language limited the application of the felony-murder statute so that “a purely property crime would not fall within the clause [as a proper predicate felony].” Id. In State v. Nunn, we stated that the justification for this limitation was to “isolate for special treatment those felonies that involve some special danger to human life.” 297 N.W.2d 752, 753 (Minn.1980). Accordingly, district courts were to determine whether an offense involved a special danger to human life by examining the offense in the abstract together with the facts of the particular casé, including the circumstances in which the felony was committed. Id. at 754.
In 1981, the legislature amended Minnesota’s felony-murder statute, increasing the severity of the offense from third-degree murder to second-degree murder and deleting the limiting language, “a felony upon or affecting the person whose death was caused.” Act of May 19, 1981, ch. 227, §§ 10 and 11, 1981 Minn. Laws 1006, 1010 (amending ' Minn.Stat. §§ 609.19, 609.195 (1980) and codified at MinmStat. § 609.19, subd. 2 (1982)). In State v. Back, decided after the 1981 amendment was adopted, we held that even a property offense can be used as an underlying felony when a special danger to human life is present. 341 N.W.2d 273, 276-77 (Minn.1983). In essence, in interpreting the 1981 statutory amendment, we concluded that the possible universe of predicate offenses was expanded to include property offenses but that the previous limitation — that “a special danger to human life” be present — was not abandoned.
*700In recent years, Minnesota courts have continued to consider both the elements of the predicate felony in the abstract and the totality of the circumstances in determining whether the predicate felony involves a special danger to human life. See State v. Cole, 542 N.W.2d 43, 53 (Minn.1996) (“When determining if the underlying felony involves a special danger to life, we not only consider the elements of the underlying felony in the abstract, but also the facts of the particular case and the circumstances under which the felony was committed”). In Cole, we. concluded- a special danger to human life existed where the defendant, armed with a loaded gun, entered a department store to exchange stolen goods for cash. Id. at 46, 53. To avoid arrest for the felony theft charge, the defendant shot and killed a police officer. Id. at 47. We determined that both the property crime of theft and the second-degree assault were proper predicate offenses because “the circumstances of this case clearly demonstrate that special danger existed.” Id. at 53. Furthermore, we noted that the assault itself was a proper predicate felony to a felony-murder conviction because assault is not a property crime but a crime against the person. Id.
In the instant case, the state argues that Anderson’s felon-in-possession and possession of a stolen firearm offenses support a charge of felony murder. In support of its position, the. state first contends that under the plain meaning of the second-degree felony-murder statute, any felony, except those expressly excluded by the statute, can serve as a predicate felony.
The plain language of the second-degree felony-murder statute punishes perpetrators of all unintentional deaths caused during the commission of “a felony,” with the exception of crimes that are predicates for first-degree niurder:
Whoever does * * * the following is guilty of unintentional murder in the second degree and may be sentenced to imprisonment for not more than 40 years:
(1) causes the death of a human being, without intent to effect the death of any person, while committing or attempting to commit a felony offense other than criminal sexual conduct in the first or second degree with force or violence or a drive-by shooting ⅜ * *.
Minn.Stat. § 609.19, subd. 2(1). Admittedly, under its plain language, except for the three specified exceptions, the statute appears to apply to all other felonies. In re Welfare of M.D.S., 345 N.W.2d 723, 729 (Minn.1984).
However, this interpretation ignores the history of our court’s judicial limitation of the felony-murder rule as set forth in precedent. We have recognized that when the legislature does not amend our construction of a statute, the court’s construction stands. Western Union Telegraph Co. v. Spaeth, 232 Minn. 128, 131-32, 44 N.W.2d 440, 441-42 (Minn.1950) (“The ‘judicial construction of a statute, so long as it is unreversed, is as much a part thereof as if it had been written into it originally’ ” and quoting 6 Dunnell, Dig. & Supp. § 8936b); see also Minn.Stat. § 645.17 (2002) (providing that “when a court of last resort has construed the language of a law, the legislature in subsequent laws on the same subject matter intends the same construction to be placed upon such language”). Therefore, our post-1981 case law, read in conjunction with the statutory language, is dispositive.
In 1980 — before the' 1981 amendment — we adopted the “special danger to human life” standard which, in Minnesota, requires consideration of the elements of the underlying felony in the abstract and the circumstances under which the felony *701was committed.6 Nunn, 297 N.W.2d at 753-54. Post-amendment, in 1983 and 1996 respectively, we decided Back, 341 N.W.2d 273, and Cole, 542 N.W.2d 43. See also M.D.S., 345 N.W.2d at 729-30 (citing, in 1984, Nunn’s special danger to human life standard). In Back, we cited-Nunn’s special danger to human life standard and recognized that if a property offense involved special danger to human life, it could support a felony-murder conviction. Back, 341 N.W.2d at 277. Our court advanced Nunn again in Cole by rejecting Cole’s argument that the district court had mistakenly relied upon Back. Cole, 542 N.W.2d at 52. In concluding that felony theft and second-degree assault were proper predicate felonies for second-degree felony murder, we noted that the special danger standard requires consideration not only of “the elements of the underlying felony in the abstract, but also the facts of the particular case and the circumstances under which the felony was committed.” Id. at 53. In summary, our posN1981 cases consistently have recognized Nunn’s special danger to human life two-part standard to limit the application of the felony-murder rule in Minnesota, and the legislature has not legislated otherwise.7
Applying the statute as previously interpreted by us to this record, we conclude that the predicate offenses of felon in possession of a firearm and possession of a stolen firearm are not inherently dangerous. While the use of a firearm can pose significant danger to human life, simple possession — standing alone — does not. In other words, there is nothing about a felon’s possession of a firearm, or of a stolen firearm — in the abstract — that in and of itself involves a special danger to human life. As the district court below explained:
While a felon in possession of a firearm or stolen firearm creates a dangerous situation, there -is a material distinction between the level of imminency and probability of the special danger to human life in that situation than in a situation involving the traditional felony predicates. The predicate felony in this case does not require an act of violence in carrying out the crime. Nor can it be persuasively argued that death would be the natural and probable consequence of the Defendant’s conduct in carrying out the predicate offense. .
Because felon in- possession of a firearm and possession of a stolen firearm are not dangerous in the abstract, these predicate felonies fail the special danger to human life standard. Accordingly, we hold that the predicate offenses of felon in possession of a firearm and possession of a stolen firearm cannot support the charge of unintentional second-degree felony murder.8
*702Reversed.
. Minnesota Statutes section 624.713, which defines this offense, is entitled "Certain Persons Not to Have Pistols or Semiautomatic Military-Style Assault Weapons.” For ease of reference we will adopt the parties’ description of this offense for the purposes of this opinion.
. The dissenting judge explained that “each of these offenses is malum prohibitum — a crime because it is prohibited by statute — rather than malum in se — an inherently immoral act.” Anderson, 654 N.W.2d at 373.
. In 1998, Anderson was adjudicated delinquent for the crime of riot in the second degree, a "crime of violence” pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 624.712, subd. 5 (2002). It is a felony for one who is adjudicated delinquent of a crime of violence to possess a firearm. Minn.Stat. § 624.713, subds. 1(b), 2.
.The felonies that traditionally supported a felony-murder conviction were: "homicide, mayhem, rape, arson, robbery, burglary, lar*699ceny, prison breach, and rescue of a felon.” State v. Aarsvold, 376 N.W.2d 518, 521 (Minn.App.1985).
. Malum in se means "a wrong in itself[.] * * ⅜ An act is said to be malum in se when it is inherently and essentially evil, that is, immoral in its nature and injurious in its consequences, without any regard to the fact of its being noticed or punished by the law of the state.” Black’s Law Dictionary 959 (6th ed. 1990). In comparison, malum prohibitum means “a thing which is wrong because [it is] prohibited; an act which is not inherently immoral, but becomes so because its commission is expressly forbidden by positive law.” Id. at 960.
.We reject the state’s argument that the standard to determine whether an underlying felony can support a charge of second-degree felony murder is a one-part inquiry — whether the offense involves a special danger to human life as committed. Minnesota's special danger to human life standard is not merely a totality of the circumstances standard but rather a two-part inquiry into the inherent danger of the offense and the danger of the offense as committed. Looking only at the circumstances of a particular case — i.e. the facts — would eviscerate the special danger to human life standard because the predicate offense would always be found to have been committed in a particularly dangerous manner if a death occurs.
. Contrary to the implications set forth in the dissent, we are not writing on a clean slate. We cannot, and should not, ignore our precedent interpreting Minnesota’s felony-murder statute in order to render an opinion reaching a different result. While in the future the legislature may choose to amend the statute to clarify or to change the statute’s reach, the fact remains that, to date, despite our existing precedent interpreting the statute, it has not.
. Because we reverse on these grounds, we do not reach Anderson’s argument that the *702court of appeals should be reversed because the required causal relationship between the predicate offense and the resulting death is lacking.

=== CASE 9739280 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:38.686846+00 ===

GILBERT, Justice
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent from the majority opinion and would affirm the court of appeals. The majority adopts the reasoning of the dissenting judge in the court of appeals panel, which would have affirmed a district court’s dismissal of this charge. The district court dismissed this charge in part because, in its reasoning, “[t]he felony offense of felon in possession is more akin to the criminalization of the status of a person, namely, one who is a felon and who possesses a firearm or stolen firearm. Such felony offense is malum prohibitum as opposed to malum in se.” The majority wisely avoids adopting the status offense rationale of the district court but still appears to be intrigued by the district court’s reasoning. Rather than reverting to an exercise in Latin, we should deal with the realities of this situation, including the clear intent of the legislature.
The majority acknowledges that the appellant was a felon in possession of a firearm, in fact a stolen firearm. This firearm happened to be a loaded, shortened 12-gauge shotgun. See Minn.Stat. § 609.67, subd. 1(c) (2002). Furthermore, this appellant had already been adjudicated a delinquent of riot in the second degree, which is a crime of violence under Minn. Stat. § 624.712, subd. 5 (2002). It also appears to be undisputed that the appellant pointed the shotgun at the victim, it discharged, and Rogers was shot in the head.
The majority candidly admits that “under its plain language, except for the three specified exceptions, the statute appears to apply to all other felonies.” Accordingly, the majority concedes that the felon in possession statute and felon in possession of stolen goods are predicate acts under Minn.Stat. § 609.19, subd. 2(1) (2002). The majority then holds, “we conclude that the predicate offenses of felon in possession of a firearm and possession of a stolen firearm are not inherently dangerous.” I disagree. This case involves exactly the inherently dangerous situation the legislature envisioned.
The appellant had already been adjudicated delinquent of a crime of violence. The majority summarily concludes that “there is nothing about a felon’s possession of a firearm, or of a stolen firearm — in the abstract — that in and of itself involves a special danger to human life.” First of all, we should not decide this case in the abstract. Second, we must recognize that a felon in possession of a firearm is not one of those “many comparatively minor offenses [that] are classified as felonies” noted by the majority. The legislature has determined that felons and firearms are not a good mix. Likewise, the crime of riot in the second degree is a serious crime of violence, which had been recently committed by appellant. Now, the appellant has not only been adjudicated delinquent, but also acts to possess a stolen gun, which is loaded and had been shortened. Shortly upon entering the house of the victim, this gun, which the appellant was feloniously possessing, was pointed at the victim and used to shoot him in the head. Possession of a loaded gun in these circumstances is indeed the type of felony that is inherently dangerous and represents a special danger to human life. As the majority states, “we noted that the special danger standard requires consideration not only of ‘the elements of the underlying felony in the abstract, but also the facts of the particular case and the circumstances under which *703the felony was committed.’ ” (quoting State v. Cole, 542 N.W.2d 43, 53 (Minn.1996)). While I agree with the majority that we must be careful in the application of the felony murder doctrine so that not every felony offense serves as a predicate felony for a felony-murder charge, the legislature wisely included the felonies in issue here within the felony-murder statute.
The majority casts away the clear legislative directive of this enhanced crime by summarily concluding that the offenses of felon in possession of a firearm and possession of a stolen firearm are not felonies sufficiently dangerous to support a felony-murder conviction. The majority opinion effectively amends the statute and discounts the legislative process’s recognition of the obvious inherent danger of convicted felons possessing firearms. This is precisely the especially dangerous situation that the legislature may have anticipated in expanding the felony-murder statute to include all but a few designated felonies under this statute. The dangerous combination of a felon and an illegally possessed gun made it possible for the most serious of felonies to be committed; that of wrongfully taking an individual’s life.

=== CASE 9739281 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:38.954879+00 ===

JUSTICE HOWERTON delivered the opinion of the court: Plaintiff was riding in a car driven by her father, who was divorced from her mother, who had custody. She and her father were on their way to a circus, but when it began to rain, they decided to drive to her father’s home, instead. On the way, her father drove from Illinois Route 15 onto Illinois Route 157. Keeley and Sons, Inc., was repairing the intersection under a contract with the State. As plaintiff’s father drove onto Route 157, another driver, Phillip Darwin, ran a stop sign and crashed into plaintiff’s father’s car. Plaintiff was seriously injured. Plaintiff, by her mother and next friend, Nancy Cates Schmittling, sued Phillip Darwin’s estate, Keeley and Sons, Inc., and her father, Timothy Cates, for her injuries. Her father filed a motion for summary judgment claiming that his daughter’s suit against him was barred by the doctrine of parental immunity. The circuit court granted him summary judgment. Plaintiff appealed, and only plaintiff and her father are parties to this appeal. We reverse and remand. Plaintiff asks this court to abolish the doctrine of parental immunity to permit her to sue her father for negligence. Defendant argues that parental immunity was adopted by the Illinois Supreme Court and, therefore, only the Illinois Supreme Court has the power to abolish it. See Nudd v. Matsoukas (1956), 7 Ill. 2d 608, 131 N.E.2d 525; Stallman v. Youngquist (1988), 125 Ill. 2d 267, 531 N.E.2d 355; Ackley v. Ackley (1988), 165 Ill. App. 3d 231, 518 N.E.2d 1056. Parental immunity is a creature of the common law and was judicially created by the Mississippi Supreme Court in 1891. (See Hewellette v. George (1891), 68 Miss. 703, 9 So. 885.) Four years later, in 1895, the Illinois Appellate Court, citing no authority, said that “[i]t is doubtless the law, that a child can not maintain an action for damages on account of maltreatment against a parent.” (Foley v. Foley (1895), 61 Ill. App. 577, 580.) Sixty-one years later, the Illinois Supreme Court addressed the issue for the first time. Nudd v. Matsoukas (1956), 7 Ill. 2d 608, 131 N.E.2d 525. In Nudd, a child sued his father for willful and wanton misconduct. His father argued that parental immunity barred the action and that the supreme court was bound by stare decisis to rule accordingly. The court disagreed, stating: “We consider the question before us a novel one in Illinois. The Appellate Court decisions cited to us do not determine the question of parental immunity in case of wilful and wanton misconduct. Any justification for the rule of parental immunity can be found only in a reluctance to create litigation and strife between members of the family unit. While this policy might be such justification to prevent suits for mere negligence within the scope of the parental relationship we do not conceive that public policy should prevent a minor from obtaining redress for wilful and wanton misconduct on the part of a parent.” (Emphasis added.) (Nudd, 7 Ill. 2d at 618-19,131 N.E.2d at 531.) The supreme court’s holding is clear: a child may sue his parents for willful and wanton misconduct; it did not hold that a parent is immune from suits brought in negligence. We are not free to impute an adoption of parental immunity to Nudd, for appellate courts must read cases only in light of the issues brought before the court for determination (Nix v. Smith (1965), 32 Ill. 2d 465, 207 N.E.2d 460), and the only issue in Nudd was whether “public policy should prevent a minor from obtaining redress for wilful and wanton misconduct on the part of a parent.” (Nudd, 7 Ill. 2d at 619, 131 N.E.2d at 531.) Nudd’s holding, furthermore, should not be read to imply tacit approval of parental immunity for negligence for two cogent reasons: (1) the question of immunity from suits for negligence was not presented and, therefore, not argued to the court, and the competing policies presented by that question might or could differ from the policies involved in consideration of the question of immunity from suits brought for willful and wanton misconduct, rendering it unfair to impute tacit approval of a doctrine not argued; and (2) the very language used by the court is precatory: “[w]hile this policy might be such justification to prevent suits for mere negligence,” words chosen to alert the reader that the issue has purposely been left open. (Emphasis added.) 7 Ill. 2d at 619. Since Nudd, the supreme court’s treatment of parental immunity has been confined to six cases: (1) Mroczynski v. McGrath (1966), 34 Ill. 2d 451, 216 N.E.2d 137; (2) Kobylanski v. Chicago Board of Education (1976), 63 Ill. 2d 165, 347 N.E.2d 705; (3) Tanari v. School Directors of District No. 502 (1977), 69 Ill. 2d 630, 373 N.E.2d 5; (4) Gerrity v. Beatty (1978), 71 Ill. 2d 47, 373 N.E.2d 1323; (5) Thomas v. Chicago Board of Education (1979), 77 Ill. 2d 165, 395 N.E.2d 538; and (6) Stallman v. Youngquist (1988), 125 Ill. 2d 267, 531 N.E.2d 355. We examine these cases to determine if parental immunity was ever adopted by the Illinois Supreme Court. In Mroczynski, a son sued his father for, among other things, abandoning him and his mother. The father, having been served summons in Minnesota, where he resided, moved to quash service and dismiss the case. His motions were granted. Plaintiff appealed directly to the supreme court, where the case turned on whether Illinois’ long-arm statute conferred jurisdiction over the defendant. It held it did not. In doing so, the court examined whether abandonment of mother and child gave rise to a cause of action. In that analysis, the court reiterated the holding in Nudd, i.e., that “public policy in a case of wilful misconduct did not prevent redress of a minor from his parent.” (Mroczynski, 34 Ill. 2d at 455.) The court went no further. This reiteration, however, is not law, for it is not a holding; it is dictum or obiter dictum. In Kobylanski, the court reviewed two cases consolidated for the purpose of deciding whether teachers were immune from suit pursuant to the School Code (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, ch. 122, pars. 24—24, 34—84a). The court held that sections 24 — 24 and 34 — 84a of the Code conferred upon teachers immunity from suits in negligence arising out of matters relating to the discipline in, and conduct of, the schools and the school children. The court stated: “None of the parties *** disputes the fact that a parent is not liable for injuries to his child absent wilful and wanton misconduct.” (Kobylanski, 63 Ill. 2d at 170, 347 N.E.2d at 709.) Since the parties did not raise the issue whether a parent was immune from suits in negligence brought by his children, the court did not address it. Concerned, however, that the Kobylanski majority seemed to accept that a parent is not liable for injuries to his child absent willful and wanton misconduct, Justice Goldenhersh, with two justices joining, stated in dissent that the “court has never decided [the] question [of parental immunity].” Kobylanski, 63 Ill. 2d at 179, 347 N.E.2d at 712 (Goldenhersh, J., dissenting). In Tanari, the court reversed the lower court and held that a school district is not immune from suit by a spectator injured by students at a football game. In discussing Kobylanski, the supreme court stated: “Since the forgoing statute [section 24—24 of the School Code] specifically confers upon educators the status of parent or guardian to the students, and since a parent is not liable for injuries to his child absent wilful and wanton misconduct (Nudd v. Matsoukas (1956), 7 Ill. 2d 608[, 131 N.E.2d 525]), it therefore follows that the same standard applies as between educator and student.” (Tanari, 69 Ill. 2d at 636, 373 N.E.2d at 7.) Here too, Justice Goldenhersh was compelled to comment on what he termed was “the repetitive misreading of Nudd v. Matsoukas.” (69 Ill. 2d at 640.) He stated in his concurrence: “The majority, and apparently the parties, appear to accept as settled law ‘that a parent is not liable for injuries to his child absent willful and wanton misconduct. [Citations.]’ [Citation.] On the contrary, this court has never decided that question.” Tanari, 69 Ill. 2d at 640, 373 N.E.2d at 9 (Goldenhersh, J., concurring). That “repetitive misreading of Nudd v. Matsoukas” occurred twice more: once in Gerrity and once in Thomas. In Gerrity, the court stated that “it has been recognized as a general rule in this State that children may not maintain actions against their parents for mere negligence but may do so only in cases of wilful and wanton misconduct.” (Gerrity, 71 Ill. 2d at 49, 373 N.E.2d at 1324.) In Thomas, the court stated that “children may not maintain actions for negligence against their parents.” (Thomas, 77 Ill. 2d at 171, 395 N.E.2d at 541.) Both cases, while not holding themselves that a parent is immune from suit absent willful and wanton misconduct, impute to Nudd an adoption of the doctrine. But, the fact is, the supreme court has never adopted parental immunity. The only other supreme court case mentioning parental immunity was Stallman v. Youngquist (1988), 125 Ill. 2d 267, 531 N.E.2d 355, a case that held that a fetus bom alive has no cause of action against its mother for the unintentional infliction of prenatal injuries. There, the court stated that “it [was] unnecessary *** to reach the issue concerning the status of the parental immunity doctrine” (Stallman, 125 Ill. 2d at 269, 531 N.E.2d at 355), and so did not address it. The court did state, however: “Insofar as Stallman I [Stallman v. Youngquist (1984), 129 Ill. App. 3d 859, 473 N.E.2d 400] and Stallman II [Stall-man v. Youngquist (1987), 152 Ill. App. 3d 683, 504 N.E.2d 920] purport to effect a change in the status of the parental immunity doctrine as it existed before the appeal to the Stallman I court, the judgments are vacated.” (Stallman, 125 Ill. 2d at 271, 531 N.E.2d at 356.) Since the supreme court specifically said “we do not decide the issue,” we fail to see how anyone could contend that Stallman adopted the doctrine of parental immunity. Furthermore, nothing could have been implied by the court when it said: “Insofar as Stall-man I and Stallman II purport to *** change *** the status of *** parental immunity *** as it existed before [the first appeal], the judgments are vacated.” (125 Ill. 2d at 271.) Nothing can be inferred from this statement simply because Stallman held only that a fetus has no cause of action against its mother; had the court not added this language, some lawyers might have expanded the holding, a mischief sought to be avoided by the supreme court.  A cardinal principle of our common law system is that a holding can have no broader application than the facts of the case that gave it birth. (Nix v. Smith (1965), 32 Ill. 2d 465, 207 N.E.2d 460). We, as an appellate court, forsake our duty if we refuse to follow that principle. We are not condemning or refusing to follow what the supreme court has ruled; we merely point out the truth. The supreme court has never ruled upon this issue. To say otherwise is unwise, for it would be most incongruous, and indeed dangerous to our fundamental system of separation of powers, for the Illinois Supreme Court to insist on strict construction of statutes (see DeClerck v. Simpson (1991), 143 Ill. 2d 489, 577 N.E.2d 767; City of Elmhurst v. Buettgen (1946), 394 Ill. 248, 68 N.E.2d 278), but permit a less rigorous treatment of its own cases and the common law rules fashioned therein. Since the Illinois Supreme Court never adopted parental immunity, but the Illinois Appellate Court has, we are free to either retain it, retool it, or abolish it. In a larger sense, however, it is not simply a matter of this court being free to abolish or modify the doctrine (Schenk v. Schenk (1968), 100 Ill. App. 2d 199, 241 N.E.2d 12; contra Ackley v. Ackley (1988), 165 Ill. App. 3d 231, 518 N.E.2d 1056); rather, it is because the issue has been put to us that we must decide it, at least until the supreme court speaks.  Since its inception, courts favoring parental immunity have feared that a suit brought by an unemancipated child might disrupt family harmony, encourage collusion, fraud, and perjury between family members, or impair parental authority or discipline. See Foley v. Foley (1895), 61 Ill. App. 577. We consider first family harmony. We believe the argument that parental immunity is necessary to preserve family harmony is inharmonious with contemporary standards; indeed, it may have never carried much weight. (See, e.g., Roller v. Roller (1905), 37 Wash. 242, 79 P. 788 (where an unemancipated daughter was prevented from suing her father who had raped her), overruled by Borst v. Borst (1952), 41 Wash. 2d 642, 251 P.2d 149; Hewellette v. George (1891), 68 Miss. 703, 9 So. 885 (where the court held that a minor child could not sue her mother for maliciously confining her to an insane asylum); McKelvey v. McKelvey (1903), Ill. Tenn. 388, 77 S.W. 664, overruled by Davis v. Davis (Tenn. 1983), 657 S.W.2d 753 (where the court barred a child from suing a father and stepmother for cruel and inhuman treatment).) Rape. Imprisonment. Cruel and inhuman treatment. Who would believe that in 1992 courts would refuse to hear these cases? Courts, furthermore, ignore family harmony in other intrafamily suits. For example, an emancipated child can sue a parent for injuries negligently inflicted (see Logan v. Reaves (1962), 209 Tenn. 631, 354 S.W.2d 789; Glover v. Glover (1958), 44 Tenn. App. 712, 319 S.W.2d 238; contra Wilkosz v. Wilkosz (1984), 124 Ill. App. 3d 904, 464 N.E.2d 1232); and children, regardless of emancipation, can sue a parent for breach of contract or on property matters. (See Streenz v. Streenz (1970), 106 Ariz. 86, 471 P.2d 282.) We believe a child’s body is worthy of as much protection from the law as her property or contractual rights. Can a suit for breach of contract somehow disrupt a family less than a personal injury suit? We fail to see how, for our instincts tell us that it would be more disruptive for a child to sue a parent over the family fortune or a family heirloom or hearth and home than to sue over injuries from a car wreck. Another principle upon which the doctrine of parental immunity rests is the prevention of collusion, fraud, and penury between family members. The possibility of these very serious and practical problems, however, exists in all litigation, including other intrafamily litigation not barred by the doctrine. (See, e.g., Brown v. Brown (1978), 62 HI. App. 3d 328, 379 N.E.2d 634 (a case between brother and sister); see also Streenz v. Streenz (1970), 106 Ariz. 86, 471 P.2d 282; Logan v. Reaves (1962), 209 Tenn. 631, 354 S.W.2d 789.) In these other cases, courts traditionally have relied on the trial lawyers’ talents at direct and cross-examination and on the jury’s ability to sift through the facts and determine the truth. Do these talents dissipate, disappear, when the suit is for bodily injury? Do defense lawyers, competent in all other matters, become inept when handling a personal injury case? We think not. Another pillar supporting parental immunity is the fear that suit will undermine parental authority and discipline. These same concerns exist in cases of contract and property, yet they create no immunities. How is it, by what device, do they create immunities in negligence? Are we afraid that a child will sue a parent for negligence in disobedience to that parent’s command? Surely not. The fact is suits are most commonly brought where there is insurance coverage, and if no coverage exists, no suit will likely be brought, because there is no way to equitably satisfy the judgment. Are we afraid that a parent will injure a child so there can be recovery against insurance funds? Would any parent ever do that? If so, only the most minuscule number, but the law ordinarily is not framed to prevent the unexpected. Threads of what is expected, what is reasonably forseeable, what is likely or unlikely, weave their way through the fabric of the law, and the recognition of this is, to some extent, the source of Holmes’ famous maxim: “The life of the law has not been logic: it has been experience.” The law should not be fashioned in such a way that courthouse doors are closed to those who need redress in order to satisfy some remote fear of collusive claims, claims that we know in our collective experience as human beings pose negligible risk. Courts have increasingly abandoned parental immunity either completely or partially. (See Annot., Liability of Parent for Injury to Unemancvpated Child Caused by Parent’s Negligence—Modern Cases, 6 A.L.R4th 1066 (1981).) In Illinois a child may sue a parent for willful and wanton misconduct (Nudd v. Matsoukas (1956), 7 Ill. 2d 608, 131 N.E.2d 525) or when the injury complained of occurred outside the realm of the family relationship or family purpose (Schenk v. Schenk (1968), 100 Ill. App. 2d 199, 241 N.E.2d 12). A child may sue a deceased parent (Johnson v. Myers (1972), 2 Ill. App. 3d 844, 277 N.E.2d 778) or a grandparent (Gulledge v. Gulledge (1977), 51 Ill. App. 3d 972, 367 N.E.2d 429), and a defendant may seek contribution from a child-plaintiff’s parent (Larson v. Buschkamp (1982), 105 Ill. App. 3d 965, 435 N.E.2d 221). Nine States have completely abolished parental immunity. (See Gibson v. Gibson (1971), 3 Cal. 3d 914, 479 P.2d 648, 92 Cal. Rptr. 288; Anderson v. Stream (Minn. 1980), 295 N.W.2d 595; Guess v. Gulf Insurance Co. (1981), 96 N.M. 27, 627 P.2d 869; Gelbman v. Gelbman (1969), 23 N.Y.2d 434, 245 N.E.2d 192, 297 N.Y.S.2d 529; Nuelle v. Wells (N.D. 1967), 154 N.W.2d 364; Kirchner v. Crystal (1984), 15 Ohio St. 3d 326, 474 N.E.2d 275; Winn v. Gilroy (1984), 296 Or. 718, 681 P.2d 776; Falco v. Pados (1971), 444 Pa. 372, 282 A.2d 351; Elam v. Elam (1980), 275 S.C. 132, 268 S.E.2d 109.) Nineteen States and the District of Columbia have partially abrogated the doctrine where the minor’s injury resulted from a parent’s negligent operation of an automobile. (See Hebel v. Hebel (Alaska 1967), 435 P.2d 8; Streenz v. Streenz (1970), 106 Ariz. 86, 471 P.2d 282; Conn. Gen. Stat. Ann. §52—572(c) (1985); Williams v. Williams (Del. 1976) 369 A.2d 669; Rousey v. Rousey (D.C. App. 1985), 499 A.2d 1199; Ard v. Ard (Fla. 1982), 414 So. 2d 1066; Farmers Insurance Group v. Reed (1985), 109 Idaho 849, 712 P.2d 550; Turner v. Turner (Iowa 1981), 304 N.W.2d 786; Nocktonick v. Nocktonick (1980), 227 Kan. 758, 611 P.2d 135; Black v. Solmitz (Me. 1979), 409 A.2d 634; Sorensen v. Sorensen (1975), 369 Mass. 350, 339 N.E.2d 907; Transamerica Insurance Co. v. Royle (1983), 202 Mont. 173, 656 P.2d 820; Briere v. Briere (1966), 107 N.H. 432, 224 A.2d 588; N.C. Gen. Stat., §1-539.21 (1983); Unah v. Martin (Okla. 1984), 676 P.2d 1366; Silva v. Silva (R.I. 1982), 446 A.2d 1013; Smith v. Kauffman (1971), 212 Va. 181, 183 S.E.2d 190; Lee v. Comer (1976), 159 W.Va. 585, 224 S.E.2d 721; Merrick v. Sutterlin (1980), 93 Wash. 2d 411, 610 P.2d 891; Allstate Insurance Co. v. Wyoming Insurance Department (Wyo. 1983), 672 P.2d 810.) Four States have abolished the doctrine except in cases where a parent is exercising authority and discretion as a parent. (See Rigdon v. Rigdon (Ky. 1970), 465 S.W.2d 921; Foldi v. Jeffries (1983), 93 N.J. 533, 461 A.2d 1145; Plumley v. Klein (1972), 388 Mich. 1, 199 N.W.2d 169; Goller v. White (1963), 20 Wis. 2d 402, 122 N.W.2d 193). Five States never adopted parental immunity in the first place. Petersen v. City & County of Honolulu (1969), 51 Haw. 484, 462 P.2d 1007; Rupert v. Stienne (1974), 90 Nev. 397, 528 P.2d 1013; Kloppenburg v. Kloppenburg (1938), 66 S.D. 174, 280 N.W. 209; Wood v. Wood (1977), 135 Vt. 119, 370 A.2d 191; Elkington v. Foust (Utah 1980), 618 P.2d 37. Having examined the doctrine of parental immunity’s history, its rationale and its treatment by our supreme court and the courts in other jurisdictions, we believe it should be abolished. The question remains, however, whether parental immunity should be abolished completely or partially. We have examined the facts of this case and have imagined hypothetical cases, ranging from these facts to one where a parent negligently allows the handle of a pot of hot water to extend outward from a stove so that a toddler can reach it and be scalded. We, likewise, have been mindful of the tension that exists between our own language above, on the one hand, wherein we reiterate that cardinal principle of the common law that holdings should be confined to the facts of the case presented, and, on the other hand, society’s need to be able to extrapolate broader contours so as to be able to predict results in future cases and lives be governed accordingly. We further are acutely aware that it is the supreme court, not us, who is the ultimate policy arm of the judicial branch and who bears the responsibility of unifying the law throughout this State. Since we cannot predict with certainty all sets of facts that are possible within the field of parental immunity, we cannot predict the impact of a rule of universal applicability. We remember here that the genius of the common law has been its ability to proceed on a case-by-case basis, so that new theories may emerge slowly and be molded by the myriad facts of countless cases until the end result fits contemporary needs. In consideration of these factors, and mindful also that in Illinois automobile insurance is mandatory, we hold that a parent is not immune from suit brought by a child alleging personal injury proximately caused by that parent’s negligent operation of an automobile. The circuit court is reversed and this cause is remanded. Reversed and remanded. HARRISON, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739282 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:38.95942+00 ===

JUSTICE CHAPMAN, dissenting: I do not necessarily disagree with the majority’s result, and in fact, I agree with many of their criticisms of the parental-immunity doctrine and a good deal of their analysis of the bases (or lack thereof) of it. I dissent, however, because I think that the supreme court has made its position on parental tort immunity known to date and that we are required to follow it. Although the Illinois Supreme Court has not decided a case in which the question of parent-child tort immunity for negligent torts was directly at issue, the court’s adoption of the rule is implicit in the holdings of several of the cases to which the majority refers. I find it of particular significance that in two of those decisions Justice Goldenhersh, deviating from the majority, protested the court’s repeated assumption that a parent is not liable for injuries to his child absent willful and wanton misconduct. He pointed out that the court has never decided the question of parental tort immunity in a negligence context. (See Kobylanski v. Chicago Board of Education (1976), 63 Ill. 2d 165, 179, 347 N.E.2d at 705, 712 (Goldenhersh, J. dissenting); Tanari v. School Directors of District No. 502 (1977), 69 Ill. 2d 630, 640, 373 N.E.2d 5, 9 (Goldenhersh, J., concurring).) In light of Justice Goldenhersh’s statements and the language of Nudd, I cannot agree that the supreme court majority was unaware that it was imputing to Nudd an adoption of the rule in this State that children may not maintain actions against their parents for mere negligence. Nudd v. Matsoukas (1956), 7 Ill. 2d 608, 131 N.E.2d 525; Mroczynski v. McGrath (1966), 34 Ill. 2d 451, 216 N.E.2d 137; Kobylanski v. Chicago Board of Education (1976), 63 Ill. 2d 165, 347 N.E.2d 705; Tanari v. School Directors of District No. 502 (1977), 69 Ill. 2d 630, 373 N.E.2d 5; Gerrity v. Beatty (1978), 71 Ill. 2d 47, 373 N.E.2d 1323; Thomas v. Chicago Board of Education (1979), 77 Ill. 2d 165, 395 N.E.2d 538; Stallman v. Youngquist (1988), 125 Ill. 2d 267, 531 N.E.2d 355. In reviewing the state of the parental-tort-immunity doctrine, one finds that the districts in Illinois have continually precluded children from maintaining negligence actions against their parents because of the parental-tort-immunity doctrine adopted by the supreme court. However, each of the districts has recognized exceptions to the rule. (See Eisele v. Tenuta (1st Dist. 1980), 83 Ill. App. 3d 799, 404 N.E.2d 349; Edgington v. Edgington (3d Dist. 1990), 193 Ill. App. 3d 104, 549 N.E.2d 942.) In one instance the court permitted minors to maintain a cause of action against their deceased mother’s estate for negligence because the policy of maintaining the family relationship underlying the tort-immunity doctrine could not apply where the parent was deceased. (Johnson v. Myers (2d Dist. 1966), 2 Ill. App. 3d 844, 277 N.E.2d 778.) Another exception allows a negligence claim if the minor’s injuries arose “outside of the family relationship.” Illinois National Bank & Trust Co. v. Turner (2d Dist. 1980), 83 Ill. App. 3d 234, 238, 403 N.E.2d 1256; Cummings v. Jackson (4th Dist. 1978), 57 Ill. App. 3d 68, 372 N.E.2d 1127; see also Hogan v. Hogan (5th Dist. 1982), 106 Ill. App. 3d 104, 435 N.E.2d 770. As the majority point out, other States have relaxed or completely abolished the parental-tort-immunity doctrine. Various commentators have noted the trend toward abolishing the parental-tort-immunity doctrine. (See Rooney & Rooney, Parental Tort Immunity: Spare the Liability, Spoil the Parent, 25 New Eng. L. Rev. 1161 (1991); McLeod, Jilani v. Jilani: The Erosion of the Parental Tort Immunity Doctrine in Texas, 28 Hous. L. Rev. 717 (1991); Wingerter, Parent-Child Tort Immunity, 50 La. L. Rev. 1131 (1990); Fularczyk, Parent-Child Immunity After Carey v. Meijer, Inc., 35 Wayne L. Rev. 153 (1988); Atchison, Ard v. Ard: Limiting the Parent-Child Immunity Doctrine, 44 U. Pitt. L. Rev. 977 (1983); Grimm, Tort — Parental Immunity — Merrick v. Sutterlin, 93 Wash. 2d 411, 610 P.2d 891 (1980), 56 Wash. L. Rev. 319 (1981).) Because of the exceptions that have been carved by the districts within Illinois, the apparent trend toward partial abrogation or complete abolishment of the doctrine, and the analysis set forth in the majority opinion, the supreme court may want to reexamine the parental-tort-immunity doctrine. My disagreement with the majority is based on what they say the supreme court says on the issue which obviously differs from my interpretation of the supreme court rulings. I would affirm the decision of the trial court.

=== CASE 9739283 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:40.87569+00 ===

BUCHANAN, Judge.
CASE SUMMARY
Appellant-defendant Roy Robinson (Robinson) appeals his conviction for disorderly conduct, a class B misdemeanor,1 claiming that the evidence was insufficient to support his conviction.
We affirm.
FACTS
The facts most favorable to the judgment reveal that at approximately 7:40 p.m. on June 12, 1990, Indianapolis Police Officer Ronald Mills (Mills) was dispatched to a Preston Safeway parking lot in Indianapolis because of citizen complaints that an individual was selling merchandise from his car which was parked in the lot. Mills approached the group of people who had gathered in the lot. He noticed Robinson, who was seated in the car, and asked what he was doing. Robinson immediately became belligerent, accused Mills of harassing him, and told him to "get the fuck away." Record at 24. Mills told Robinson to get out of the car and Robinson again told Mills to "get the fuck away." Robinson continued to shout, screaming that the investigation was "bullshit," and that Mills was a "lying mother-fucker." 2 Record at 24. Mills then told Robinson three or four more times to be quiet, but when he refused, Mills arrested him.
Robinson was charged with criminal trespass and disorderly conduct. After a bench trial, Robinson was acquitted of criminal trespass and convicted of disorderly conduct.
ISSUE 3
Whether the speech for which Robinson was convicted is protected by the first amendment of the United States Constitution?
DECISION
PARTIES' CONTENTIONS-Robinson contends that his speech directed at Mills enjoyed first amendment protection.
The State responds that the conviction for disorderly conduct is supported by sufficient evidence because the words Robinson screamed at Mills were obscenities and "fighting words" which are not constitutionally protected.
*535CONCLUSION-Robinson's conviction for disorderly conduct was supported by sufficient evidence.
The statute under which Robinson was charged provides as follows:
"A person who recklessly, knowingly, or intentionally:
(2) makes unreasonable noise and continues to do so after being asked to stop ... commits disorderly conduct, a Class B misdemeanor."
IC 85-45-1-8.
When this court reviews disorderly conduct convictions based on speech, we must look at the charged events in light of the constitutional protections afforded speech. Brown v. State (1991), Ind.App., 576 N.E.2d 605 Brittain v. State (1990), Ind.App., 565 N.E.2d 757; 4 Gilles v. State (1988), Ind.App., 531 N.E.2d 220, cert. denied, 493 U.S. 939, 110 S.Ct. 337, 107 L.Ed.2d 325. In Brittain, this court determined that spoken words generally fall within the First Amendment's guarantee of freedom of speech; however, several categories of speech fall outside of this constitutional protection:
"'These include the lewd and obscene, the profane, the libelous, and the insulting or 'fighting' words-those which by their very utterance inflict injury or tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace. It has been well observed that such utterances are no essential part of any exposition of ideas, and are of such slight social value as a step to truth that any benefit that may be derived from them is clearly outweighed by the social interest in order and morality. 'Resort to epithets or personal abuse is not in any proper sense communication of information or opinion safeguarded by the Constitution, and its punishment as a criminal act would raise no question under that instrument.''"
Brittain at 760-61, quoting Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire (1942), 315 U.S. 568, 571, 62 S.Ct. 766, 768-69, 86 L.Ed. 1031 (citations and footnotes omitted), (emphasis supplied); see also Mesarosh v. State (1984), Ind. App., 459 N.E.2d 426. Additionally, " 'personal epithets and verbal abuse (which may or may not contain vulgarities or obscenities) do not enjoy constitutional protection, and ... engaging in such activity may under certain cireumstances constitute disorderly conduct'" Brittain, supra. at 761 quoting Stults v. State (1975), 166 Ind.App. 461, 469, 336 N.E.2d 669, 674.
The record before us reflects that on two occasions Robinson screamed at Mills "to get the fuck away." Record at 24. Robinson also told Mills that the investigation was "bullshit" and he shouted at him calling Mills a "lying mother-fucker." Record at 24.
The use of such repugnant verbiage used under these conditions may not technically constitute "obscene" language because these words were not "in some significant way, erotic," Cohen v. California (1971), 403 U.S. 15, 20, 91 S.Ct. 1780, 1785, 29 L.Ed.2d 284, or dealt "with sex in a manner appealing to prurient interest." Roth v. U.S. (1957), 354 U.S. 476, 487, 77 S.Ct. 1304, 1310, 1 L.Ed.2d 1498. See also Cavazos v. State (1983), Ind.App., 455 N.E.2d 618. Rather, we consider Robinson's words to constitute "fighting words" undeserving of constitutional protection. See Brittain, supra, (conviction for disorderly conduct affirmed when defendant called police officers "fuckers" and a "son-ofa bitch"); Mesorosk, supra, Stults, supra ("mother-fucker" is a fighting word). They skirt the depths of degradation despite the fact they may be tolerated or in common usage by a certain element of our society. Unfortunately, there is an element of our society that regularly engages in criminal conduct, hardly an excuse for others to do likewise. This does not justify tolerance of such depravity by a police officer or any other citizen.
"It is a sad commentary of our modern society that law enforcement officers must be subjected to insults such as those used in the present case." Mesarosk, supra at *536430; quoting Evans v. State (1982), Ind.App., 434 N.E.2d 940, 943. The defendant here cannot claim immunity by wrapping himself in the cloak of Freedom of Speech. See Brittain, supra; Mesarosh, supra. These "fighting words," by their very utterance "tend[ed] to incite an immediate breach of the peace." Brittain, supra. at 760, quoting Chaplinsky, supra, 315 U.S. at 571, 62 S.Ct. at 769.
Judgment affirmed.
HOFFMAN, J., concurs.
SHIELDS, J., dissents with opinion.
. Ind.Code 35-45-1-3 (1988).
. "Honour thy father and thy mother...." Exodus 20:12.
. Robinson states the issue as whether the evidence is sufficient to support his conviction. However, Robinson's argument-beyond his request that we consider evidence other than that which supports the conviction, which we will not do, see Holder v. State (1991), Ind., 571 N.E.2d 1250, 1253-is based entirely on his position that the activity for which he was convicted is protected by the Constitution, a question of law. Therefore, we rephrase the issue.
. Transfer was not sought in Brittain, Mesarosh v. State (1984), Ind.App., 459 N.E.2d 426, or Cavazos v. State (1983), Ind.App., 455 N.E.2d 618. Consequently, there is no Indiana Supreme Court authority on this subject.

=== CASE 9739284 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:40.879721+00 ===

SHIELDS, Judge,
dissenting.
I dissent.
It is not necessary that the speech in question fall within the category of constitutionally unprotected speech to constitute "unreasonable noise" under the disorderly conduct statute.1 The disorderly conduct statute imposes reasonable limitations on the time, place, or manner of expression of speech activity if its application is not based on the content of the speech. However, in this case, Robinson's conviction for disorderly conduct was based on the content of his speech, ie., "shouting obscenities at police". Record at 5. Thus, if Robinson's speech is protected by the Constitution, his conviction must be reversed for lack of sufficient evidence to support the conviction.
Robinson's language does not constitute "obscene" language. Unprotected "obscene" language must be erotic or deal with sex in a manner appealing to prurient interest. See Cavazos v. State (1983), Ind.App., 455 N.E.2d 618, 620.
Robinson's words also are not "fighting words." "Fighting words" are words which by their very utterance inflict injury or tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace. City of Houston v. Hill (1987), 482 U.S. 451, 461-62, 107 S.Ct. 2502, 2509-10, 96 L.Ed.2d 398; Cavazos, 455 N.E.2d at 619. I acknowledge the words "motherfucker" and "fuckers" have been held to constitute "fighting words." See Brittain v. State (1990), Ind.App., 565 N.E.2d 757; Mesarosh v. State (1984), Ind.App., 459 N.E.2d 426, Stults v. State (1975), 166 Ind.App. 461, 336 N.E.2d 669; see also State v. Weber (1986), 6 Conn.App. 407, 505 A.2d 1266, certification denied, 199 Conn. 810, 508 A.2d 771; L.J.M. v. State (1989), Fla.Dist.Ct.App., 541 So.2d 1321, review denied, Fla., 549 So.2d 1014; City of Saint Paul v. Morris (1960), 258 Minn. 467, 104 N.W.2d 902, cert. denied, (1961), 365 U.S. 815, 81 S.Ct. 696, 5 L.Ed.2d 693; State v. Groves (1985), 219 Neb. 382, 363 N.W.2d 507. Indeed, at some earlier point in time, the terms undoubtedly had a meaning which would fall within the seope of "fight ing words." However, in present common usage, "a mean, despicable, or vicious person," and "anything considered to be despicable, frustrating," Random House Webster's College Dictionary 884 (1991), the words do not fall within that category. So defined, the terms are no more injurious than the term "asshole," defined as "a stupid mean, or contemptible person," id. at 82, and which was found not to constitute a "fighting word" in a similar factual setting. See Covazos, 455 N.E.2d 618 (calling police officer an "asshole" while arguing over the arrest of another does not constitute "fighting words"); see also Buffkins v. City of Omaha (1990), 8th Cir., 922 F.2d 465, cert. denied, (1991), - U.S. -, 112 S.Ct. 273, 116 L.Ed.2d 225 (calling police officer "asshole" at end of narcotics investigation does not constitute "fighting words").
Also, Mills did not claim he viewed Robinson's language as part of an effort to provoke violence. In context, Robinson's language can be viewed only as an expression of his frustration with the detainment and investigation. Robinson wanted Mills to leave him alone.
Certainly I do not condone Robinson's language. It is offensive under any circumstance but especially so when spoken *537to a police officer performing his duty. However, speech directed to police officers cannot be held to a higher standard than speech directed to a member of the public at large:
[Thhe First Amendment protects a significant amount of verbal criticism and challenge directed at police officers. "Speech is often provocative and challenging ... [But it] is nevertheless protected against censorship or punishment, unless shown likely to produce a clear and present danger of a serious substantive evil that rises far above public inconvenience, annoyance, or unrest."
Hill, 482 U.S. at 461, 107 S.Ct. at 2509 (citations omitted). Furthermore, the constitutional protection of free speech does not vanish merely because speech is offensive. Texas v. Johnson (1989), 491 U.S. 397, 414, 109 S.Ct. 2533, 2544-45, 105 L.Ed.2d 342.
Because Robinson's speech is protected by the Constitution, the evidence is insufficient to sustain his conviction.
. IC 35-45-1-3 provides in relevant part: A person who recklessly, knowingly, or intentionally:
(2) makes unreasonable noise and continues to do so after being asked to stop ... commits disorderly conduct....

=== CASE 2219225 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:05.816735+00 ===

588 N.E.2d 1119 (1992)
147 Ill.2d 40
167 Ill.Dec. 989
Alvin D. WELCH et al., Appellees,
v.
David N. JOHNSON et al. (David N. Johnson, Appellant).
No. 72123.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
February 19, 1992.
*1120 Richard F. Friedman, Ernesto D. Borges, Jr., Chicago, for appellant.
Nathaniel R. Howse, Jr., P. Scott Neville, Jr., Chicago, for appellees.
Justice FREEMAN delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant David N. Johnson appeals from a judgment of the appellate court reversing the circuit court of Cook County's summary judgment in favor of defendant, voiding the results of the April 2, 1991, election for the office of mayor of the City of Harvey, Illinois, and ordering a special election for that office. (214 Ill. App.3d 478, 158 Ill.Dec. 255, 574 N.E.2d 49.) We reverse.
INTRODUCTION
As there is no dispute as to the underlying facts and procedural history of this case, as set out in the appellate court's opinion, we will refer to the history and facts only as necessary to give a frame of reference for our decision.
The ultimate issue presented in this case is whether removal from the ballot of a candidate for elective office is a permissible sanction for the candidate's filing, in relation to his candidacy, of a statement of economic interests which is not true, correct and complete due to inadvertence on the candidate's part. We conclude that such removal from the ballot is not a permissible sanction. Before setting forth our reasoning on that issue, however, we must address three preliminary issues raised by the parties.
OUR JURISDICTION OVER APPEAL
First, plaintiffs contend that we do not have jurisdiction over defendant's appeal. Specifically, plaintiffs assert that defendant's petition for leave to appeal from the final judgment of the appellate court, which defendant filed on June 18, 1991, was not filed within 35 days of the date of entry of the appellate court's judgment, which plaintiffs contend was April 19, 1991. On April 19, 1991, the appellate court entered an order granting plaintiffs relief and stating that a written opinion or order expressing reasons for the instant order would be filed in due course. Defendant asserts that his petition for leave to appeal was timely filed within 35 days of the appellate court's final judgment, which he contends was the May 14, 1991, written opinion of the court setting forth its reasons for the April 19, 1991, order.[1]
We previously denied, on July 12, 1991, the same motion by plaintiffs based essentially on the same arguments and case law contained in their brief on appeal. In view *1121 of that denial and our construction of our rules, we conclude that we have jurisdiction over defendant's appeal.
Supreme Court Rule 315(b) prescribes the time limits for petitioning for leave to appeal to this court and, in so doing, refers to petitions for rehearing in the appellate court and the time limit therefor. The rule does so in terms of the date of entry of the "judgment" of the appellate court. (134 Ill.2d R. 315(b).) Supreme Court Rule 367(a) actually provides for the filing of petitions for rehearing in the appellate court and prescribes the time limit. It does so in terms of the date of entry of the "opinion" of the appellate court. (134 Ill.2d R. 367.) Finally, Supreme Court Rule 23, relating to appeals to the appellate court, mandates that "a case shall be disposed of by opinion" where: (1) a majority of the panel deciding the case determines that any one of four criterion set forth therein are met; or (2) a concurring or dissenting opinion is proposed to be filed, unless the panel unanimously decides that an opinion will not be filed. 134 Ill.2d R. 23.
Construing the above rules together and in light of the fact that the order issued by the appellate court in this case on March 19, 1991, indicated both that an opinion would be filed "in due course" and that one of the three justices on the panel dissented from the order, it is clear to us that the final judgment of the appellate court was not entered until its opinion was filed on May 14, 1991. As such, we have jurisdiction over defendant's appeal.
CIRCUIT COURT'S JURISDICTION OVER PLAINTIFFS' COMPLAINT
Next, defendant argues that the circuit court did not have jurisdiction over plaintiff's complaint because they failed to exhaust their administrative remedies. Specifically, defendant argues that objections to nomination papers, which defendant contends include statements of economic interests filed in relation to candidacies for elective office under section 10-5 of the Election Code (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 46, par. 10-5), must be brought before and decided by the election authority with whom the nomination papers are on file, in this case the municipal officers electoral board of the City of Harvey, before relief from the courts may be sought (Ill.Rev. Stat.1989, ch. 46, pars. 10-8, 10-9, 10-10, 10-10.1).
Plaintiffs assert that the circuit courts, not local election authorities or officials, have original jurisdiction over challenges to the truthfulness, correctness and completeness of statements of economic interests, filed in relation to candidacies for elective office, for the reason that such statements are not part of the nomination papers required to be filed under the Election Code. We agree.
As plaintiffs note, it is the Illinois Governmental Ethics Act (Ethics Act) (Ill.Rev. Stat.1989, ch. 127, par. 601-101 et seq.), not the Election Code, which actually requires candidates for elective office to file statements of economic interests (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1989, ch. 127, par. 604A-101). Secondly, where a candidate's nomination papers and statement of economic interests are not required to be filed with the same officer, as in this case,[2] section 10-5 of the Election Code merely requires the filing, with the officer with whom the nomination papers are filed, of a receipt for the statement of economic interests from the officer with whom the statement of economic interests is filed, within the time by which the nomination papers must be filed. (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1989, ch. 46, par. 10-5.) Thirdly, and most importantly, the Election Code grants the election authority or local election official with whom certificates of nomination and nomination papers or petitions "are on file" the power and authority to hear objections thereto. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 46, par. 10-8.) Because statements of economic interests are not on file with such election authorities or officials, we conclude that they *1122 do not have jurisdiction over challenges to those statements. As such, we will not reverse the appellate court's judgment based on lack of jurisdiction over this cause.
MOOTNESS
Next, defendant asserts that this case is moot because the City of Harvey mayoral election has already been held and has resulted in his retaining the office. As plaintiffs note, however, defendant is merely serving in the office of mayor of the City of Harvey until his successor is elected and has qualified. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 24, par. 3-4-4.) In this regard, we note that "qualified," as that term is used in the Municipal Code, means the taking of the oath of office and the giving of a bond, where required. (See City of Pekin v. Industrial Comm'n (1930), 341 Ill. 312, 173 N.E. 339.) It is not disputed in this case that defendant has not taken the oath of office upon his reelection. As such, his successor, whether himself or someone else, has not been elected and qualified. This case is not moot.
WAIVER
Next, plaintiffs assert that, in appealing to this court, defendant cannot rely on the record evidence to the effect that his failure to disclose his employment with Community College District 510 in his statement of economic interests was the result of inadvertence. Plaintiffs reason that defendant cannot rely on that evidence because he has not asserted to this court any error in the appellate court's ruling that the trial court improperly admitted that evidence into the record, by way of an offer of proof, and has thus waived any such error. (134 Ill.2d R. 341(e)(7).) The appellate court reasoned that the trial court erred in entertaining the offer of proof evidence because, at the time it did so, all that was before it was plaintiffs' motion for judgment on the pleadings, which raised no factual questions but only a question of law: The legal sufficiency of the complaint and answer.
It is well established that the rule of waiver is a limitation on parties and not on reviewing courts and that this court, in reviewing the judgments of lower courts, may, in furtherance of its responsibility to reach a just result, override considerations of waiver and consider a point which is either not raised or, if raised, not argued by the appellant. (See In re Marriage of Sutton (1990), 136 Ill.2d 441, 145 Ill.Dec. 890, 557 N.E.2d 869.) In the instant case, we find that our responsibility to provide a just result outweighs defendant's waiver of any error in the appellate court's ruling on the propriety of the offer of proof.
Having determined that we may examine the correctness of the appellate court's ruling with respect to the offer of proof made by defendant in the trial court, we conclude that the appellate court erred in considering the issue.
At the hearing on plaintiff's complaint, the following colloquy occurred between the court, defendant's counsel, Richard Friedman, and plaintiffs' counsel, Nathaniel Howse, after the trial court indicated from the bench that plaintiffs' oral motion for judgment on the pleadings was granted:
"MR. FRIEDMAN: Your Honor, may we make an offer of proof as to the matters that we alleged in our answer concerning the intent with which the mistake was made and the public knowledge that * * * Mayor Johnson's employment was in the community?
THE COURT: Mr. Howse, do you have any objection?
MR. HOWSE: An offer of proof that if he would have been called what he would have testified to, I have no objection to.
THE COURT: All right.
MR. FRIEDMAN: May we put that on through Mayor Johnson, your Honor?
THE COURT: Yes, you may put him on.
MR. HOWSE: This is in relation as to what he would testify if he was called?
MR. FRIEDMAN: I would like to put this offer of proof through Mayor Johnson.
*1123 MR. HOWSE: Your Honor, for the record, I technically have to object if he's going to do that. I thought it was a stipulation.[3]
I don't want to prejudice myself by participating in this matter. I didn't mind the offer of proof, but I do object to the testimony when the judgment has already been entered.
MR. FRIEDMAN: It's simply an offer of proof.
MR. HOWSE: I have no objection to an offer of proof."
From the foregoing colloquy generally, and from plaintiffs' counsel's ultimate representation of no objection to the proposed offer specifically, we conclude that plaintiffs waived any error with respect thereto. It is well established that in order to preserve for appellate review an issue relating to the admission of evidence, a party must object at the time of such admission. In the absence of such an objection, a reviewing court should not consider the issue. As such, the appellate court erred in considering the offer of proof issue and in concluding that the trial court's error in allowing the offer also supported a reversal of its judgment for defendant. In view of our conclusion, we find that the record evidence of defendant's inadvertence in completing the statement of economic interests filed in relation to his candidacy for the April 2, 1991, City of Harvey mayoral election is properly before this court.
THE MERITS
Having resolved the preliminary issues, we can now determine the dispositive issue in this cause. The first step in that determination is to set forth the relevant provisions of the Election Code and the Ethics Act.
Section 10-5 of the Election Code provides that the certificate of nomination or nomination papers required thereunder, inter alia, "must include a statement of candidacy" which shall, inter alia, state that the candidate "has filed (or will file before the close of the petition filing period) a statement of economic interests as required by the Illinois Governmental Ethics Act" and which shall be subscribed and sworn to by such candidate. Section 10-5 further provides that nomination papers filed thereunder are not valid if a candidate fails to file a statement of economic interests as required by the Ethics Act in relation to his candidacy with the appropriate officer by the end of the period for the filing of nomination papers (with an exception not relevant here). Section 10-5 lastly provides that if a candidate's nomination papers and statement of economic interests are not required to be filed with the same officer, the candidate must file, with the officer with whom the nomination papers are filed, a receipt, from the officer with whom the statement of economic interests is filed, showing the date upon which the statement was filed. Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 46, par. 10-5.
Section 4A-104 of the Ethics Act provides that statements of economic interests required to be filed with a county clerk under the Act, with whom defendant was required to file his statement (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1989, ch. 127, pars. 604A-101, 604A-106), shall be verified, dated and signed by the person making the statement and requires the maker to list the name of any unit of government which employed him during the preceding calendar year other than the unit of government in relation to which the statement was filed. With respect to the verification of the statement, the maker is required to declare that he has examined it and, to the best of his knowledge and belief, it is a true, correct and complete statement of his economic interests. The verification clause further states that the maker understands that the penalty for willfully filing a false or incomplete statement shall be a fine or imprisonment or both. Ill.Rev. Stat.1989, ch. 127, par. 604A-104.
Finally, section 4A-107 of the Ethics Act provides, as alluded to in the verification clause of a statement of economic interest, *1124 that any person required to file a statement of economic interests who willfully files a false or incomplete statement shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. That section further provides that failure to file a statement within the time prescribed shall result in ineligibility for, or forfeiture of, office or position of employment. Ill. Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 127, par. 604A-107; see also Ill. Const. 1970, art. XIII, § 2.
A reading of the plain language of these statutes convinces us that removal from the ballot is not a permissible sanction for the filing of a statement of economic interests which is not true, correct and complete when filed with the appropriate officer merely due to inadvertence on the part of the person filing the statement.
In making the willful filing of a false or incomplete statement of economic interest a Class A misdemeanor and in providing for the ineligibility for or forfeiture of office for the failure to file a statement of economic interest within the time prescribed, but failing to impose any sanction at all for the filing of an inadvertently false and incomplete statement, the Ethics Act strongly intimates that the legislature intended no sanction for the filing of such a statement. It is a fundamental principle of statutory construction that the express mention of one thing in a statute excludes all other things not mentioned. Nelson v. Union Wire Rope Corp. (1964), 31 Ill.2d 69, 99, 199 N.E.2d 769.
The facts that a candidate for office must verify that his statement of economic interest is true, correct and complete and must subscribe and swear to a statement of candidacy, which must include a statement that he has filed a statement of economic interests as required under the Ethics Act, buttress, rather than contradict, this conclusion. The requirement of subscribing and swearing to the statement of candidacy implicates the perjury provision of the Election Code, section 29-10 (Ill.Rev. Stat.1989, ch. 46, par. 29-10; see also Serwinski v. Board of Election Commissioners (1987), 156 Ill.App.3d 257, 260, 108 Ill. Dec. 813, 509 N.E.2d 509). Section 29-10 makes a false statement, material to the issue or point in question, which the maker does not believe to be true, in any affidavit, certificate or sworn oral declaration required by any provision of the Code, a Class 3 felony. In establishing scienter as an element for false statements subject thereto, section 29-10 strongly intimates that merely innocently or inadvertently false statements shall not be cause for the imposition of any sanction thereunder.
The verification provision of section 4A-104 of the Ethics Act serves essentially the same purpose of the subscription and oath provision of section 10-5 of the Code, except for the fact that a knowing and intentional violation thereof constitutes a Class A misdemeanor under section 4A-107 of the Ethics Act.
Plaintiffs read the language in section 10-5 of the Code that "nomination papers filed [hereunder] are not valid if the candidate named therein fails to file a statement of economic interests as required by the Illinois Governmental Ethics Act" (emphasis added), when read with sections 4A-104 and 4A-107 of the Ethics Act, as categorically requiring a candidate to file a statement of economic interests which is true, correct and complete. That is, plaintiffs imply, inadvertence is no excuse and as long as a statement of economic interests is not true, correct and complete when filed, nomination papers will be invalid, regardless of the reason therefor.
In light of section 4A-107 of the Ethics Act, we cannot concur in plaintiffs' construction of section 10-5. Even if the "as required" language of section 10-5 is a reference to the substantive requirements which statements of economic interests filed under the Ethics Act must meet, rather than merely a reference to the fact that the Ethics Act, not the Election Code, actually requires the filing of such statements, the fact remains that section 4A-107, and by implication the verification requirement of section 4A-104, merely require the filing of such statements containing no willful or intentional falsehood, whether by inclusion or omission. As such, we do not construe section 10-5 of the Code, even in light of sections 4A-104 and 4A-107 of the Ethics *1125 Act, as categorically requiring the filing of true, correct and complete economic interests statements.
Buttressing our construction of section 10-5 is the provision therein that nomination papers are invalid if a candidate fails to file a statement of economic interests "by the end of the period for the filing of nomination papers unless he has filed [such a statement] in relation to the same governmental unit during the same calendar year as the year in which the nomination papers were filed."
That this provision refers to a complete failure to file a statement of economic interests and not merely the filing of an inadvertently untrue, incorrect or incomplete statement is made clear by sections 4A-105 and 4A-107 of the Ethics Act. Section 4A-105(a) provides that "[a] candidate for elective office shall file his statement not later than the end of the period during which he can take the action necessary * * * to attempt to qualify for nomination, election or retention to such office if he has not filed a statement in relation to the same unit of government within a year preceding such action." (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 127, par. 604A-105.) Section 4A-107, in turn, provides that "[f]ailure to file a statement within the time prescribed shall result in ineligibility for, or forfeiture of, office." (See also Ill. Const. 1970, art. XIII, § 2.) Reading section 10-5 of the Code in light of sections 4A-105 and 4A-107 of the Ethics Act, it is clear that the failure to file referred to means a complete failure to file any economic statement within the time prescribed for doing so rather than the filing of an economic statement which is untrue, incorrect or incomplete due to inadvertence or innocent mistake.
In view of our construction of the relevant provisions of the Code and the Ethics Act, we find unavailing to plaintiffs the case law upon which they rely for their construction of those provisions as categorically requiring the filing of true, correct and complete statements of economic interests.
In Havens v. Miller (1981), 102 Ill.App.3d 558, 57 Ill.Dec. 929, 429 N.E.2d 1292, candidates for election to a school board filed their statements of economic interests with the board's secretary rather than the county clerk, as mandated by section 4A-106 of the Ethics Act. The statements were not forwarded to the county clerk until two days after the filing deadline. The appellate court ordered the candidates removed from the ballot. The court based its decision on section 2 of article XIII of the Illinois Constitution of 1970, which it found mandatory, and section 4A-106 of the Ethics Act. The former, like section 4A-107 of the Ethics Act, provides that "[f]ailure to file a statement [of economic interests] within the time prescribed shall result in ineligibility for, or forfeiture of, office." (Ill. Const. 1970, art. XIII, § 2.) The latter informs the public that statements filed by candidates such as those in Havens shall be available for inspection at the office of the county clerk. Although not relied upon by the court therein, Havens is clearly, unlike this case, a case of a complete failure to file a statement of economic interests "with the appropriate officer" as that term is used in section 10-5 of the Election Code. It is, thus, of no avail to plaintiffs.
Also of little assistance to plaintiffs is Troutman v. Keys (1987), 156 Ill.App.3d 247, 108 Ill.Dec. 757, 509 N.E.2d 453, which cites Havens for the proposition that the Ethics Act "devolves upon a candidate not only the duty to file a disclosure statement, but one which is true, correct and complete." (Troutman, 156 Ill.App.3d at 252, 108 Ill.Dec. 757, 509 N.E.2d 453.) Whatever support the foregoing language lends plaintiffs here is seriously undermined by the immediately following acknowledgement by the Troutman court of the provisions of section 4A-107 of the Ethics Act and section 29-10 of the Election Code. As we have noted, those statutory provisions sanction only knowingly or willfully false statements in connection with economic statements, specifically, and elections, generally.
In Jones v. Municipal Officers Electoral Board (1983), 112 Ill.App.3d 926, 68 Ill.Dec. 522, 446 N.E.2d 256, a candidate for an aldermanic election filed a statement of *1126 economic interests which failed to designate the office for which the statement was filed beyond the words "3rd Ward." The appellate court found the candidate's statement in violation of the Election Code. In doing so, the court noted that section 4A-104 of the Ethics Act, in directory terms, requires candidates to reveal the office to which they seek election. Reading that provision together with section 10-5 of the Code, the court found that the latter, in mandatory terms, required a candidate to file a statement of economic interests "in relation to his candidacy," or, in other words, a statement including the designation of the office sought by the candidate. The court concluded that removal from the ballot was the only possible remedy for the taint upon the nomination process caused by the candidate's direct violation of the Election Code.
We find Jones of no avail to the plaintiffs for the simple reason that we disagree with them as to what exactly the Election Code, when construed in light of the Ethics Act, mandates of a candidate in relation to the filing of an inadvertently untrue, incorrect and incomplete economic interests statement. Because of that difference, the Jones court's conclusion that removal from the ballot is the only possible remedy for the taint upon the nomination process caused by the candidate's violation of the Election Code is inapplicable here.
In view of our conclusion that removal from the ballot is not a proper sanction for the filing of inadvertently untrue, inaccurate or incomplete statements of economic interests in connection with candidacies for elective office, we need not address the remaining arguments of the parties.
In the last analysis, we are not unmindful that the provisions of the Election Code are designed to protect the integrity of the electoral process. (Welch, 214 Ill.App.3d at 483, 158 Ill.Dec. 255, 574 N.E.2d 49; Havens, 102 Ill.App.3d at 571, 57 Ill.Dec. 929, 429 N.E.2d 1292.) Ultimately, however, we believe that access to a place on the ballot is a substantial right not lightly to be denied. (See Williams v. Butler (1976), 35 Ill.App.3d 532, 536, 341 N.E.2d 394.) In this regard, we find that plaintiffs have raised a meritorious issue. However, the remedy they seek is drastic, and absent a clearer statement by the legislature that it intended that remedy as a sanction for an inadvertent, as well as willful, omission from a candidate's statement of economic interests, we decline to construe the Election Code in the manner advocated by plaintiffs. Finally, our decision is limited to the circumstances of this case and is not to be taken as an expression of opinion on the sanctions clearly provided by the legislature for the filing of willfully false or incomplete statements of economic interests or for the complete failure to file such statements.
For all of the reasons stated herein, the judgment of the appellate court is reversed and judgment of the circuit court is affirmed.
Appellate court reversed; circuit court affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  Plaintiffs do not contest that defendant had 35 days to file a petition for leave to appeal rather than the 21 days otherwise allowed under Supreme Court Rule 315(b) (134 Ill.2d R. 315(b)) because he filed, within 21 days of May 14, 1991, an affidavit of intent to file a petition for leave to appeal to this court. While we find illogical plaintiffs' choosing to contest the timeliness of defendant's petition for leave to appeal rather than that of the affidavit of intent to do so which preceded the petition, we do not believe it is dispositive.
[2]  And as in all but a few cases where both are filed with county clerks. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 46, par. 10-6; ch. 127, par. 604A-104.)
[3]  Plaintiffs' counsel's reference was to a stipulation filed during the hearing as to certain facts not including defendant's alleged inadvertence in completing his statement of economic interests.

=== CASE 2219229 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:05.957202+00 ===

32 Mass. App. Ct. 332 (1992)
588 N.E.2d 1375
A. DOUGLAS HADDAD
vs.
KEITH A. TAYLOR.
No. 90-P-887.
Appeals Court of Massachusetts, Worcester.
November 20, 1991.
March 30, 1992.
Present: DREBEN, SMITH, & IRELAND, JJ.
John W. Spillane for the plaintiff.
Robert T. Gill (Christopher G. Betke with him) for the defendant.
DREBEN, J.
This is an appeal from a dismissal of an action for lack of personal jurisdiction, Mass.R.Civ.P. 12(b)(2), 365 Mass. 755 (1974), against a New York attorney. The defendant was the holder of a power of attorney from Manuelle Van Den Bogaerde, executed in England, reciting that it was "intended to constitute a General Power of Attorney pursuant to Article 5, Title 15 of the New York General Obligations Law." At all material times Bogaerde resided in Great Britain or Portugal.
Since the question of personal jurisdiction is "sensitive to the facts of each case," Good Hope Indus., Inc. v. Ryder *333 Scott Co., 378 Mass. 1, 2 (1979), we turn to the facts alleged in the complaint and the matters set forth in the defendant's two affidavits. We also examine the power of attorney. That instrument authorized the defendant "to act in my name, place and stead in any way which I myself could do, if I were personally present, with respect to the following matters [as defined in the New York statute, supra] to the extent that I am permitted by law to act through an agent:
(A) real estate transaction;
(B) chattel and goods transactions;
(C) [crossed out];
(D) banking transactions;
(E) [crossed out];
(F) insurance transactions;
in connection with sale of real property situated at Barnes Road, in Oak Bluffs, Dukes County, Commonwealth of Massachusetts ..., including without limitation, negotiation of terms and provisions of sale transaction, execution of Contracts, Deeds, Assignments and other Agreements, and effecting of Contracts, Deeds, Assignments and other Agreements, and effecting a closing and distribution of proceeds; in addition to the foregoing, the same shall apply to the disposition and sale of any and all personal property located at said premises." The power of attorney also included a clause indemnifying any third person against any claims by reason of having relied on the instrument.
The complaint alleged that the plaintiff "had cemented" the terms of a real estate transaction to purchase Bogaerde's real estate, that he had deposited $2,000 as well as an additional $18,000 with the defendant, and that the defendant had deceptively frustrated that transaction in violation of G.L.c. 93A. The plaintiff also alleged that, in reliance on the agreement, he had caused a survey of the land to be made, had a title abstract prepared, and had obtained clearance from the issuer of title insurance for title insurance.
The defendant acknowledged that he had negotiated by telephone from New York with the plaintiff, that he had forwarded to him in Massachusetts a purchase and sale agreement, *334 and that the plaintiff's lawyer had sent to the defendant (from Massachusetts) another draft of the agreement. He claimed that the negotiations had terminated without an agreement and that he had returned to the plaintiff's lawyer the plaintiff's checks. If an oral agreement had been reached with a real estate agent, he insisted the agent was without authority. All negotiations were by telephone or mail and the defendant never traveled to Massachusetts while they were pending.[1]
Whether the exercise of personal jurisdiction over a nonresident defendant is permissible presents generally "a two-fold inquiry: (1) is the assertion of jurisdiction authorized by statute, and (2) if authorized, is the exercise of jurisdiction under State law consistent with basic due process requirements mandated by the United States Constitution?" Good Hope Indus., Inc. v. Ryder Scott Co., 378 Mass. at 5-6. Heins v. Wilhelm Loh Wetzlar Optical Mach. GmbH & Co. KG, 26 Mass. App. Ct. 14, 16 (1988). The two questions may converge since G.L.c. 223A "functions as `an assertion of jurisdiction over the person to the limits allowed by the Constitution of the United States.'" Good Hope Indus., Inc. v. Ryder Scott Co., supra at 6, quoting from "Automatic" Sprinkler Corp. of America v. Seneca Foods Corp., 361 Mass. 441, 443 (1972).
We first undertake the statutory inquiry. General Laws c. 223A, § 3(a) and (e) (1988 ed.), the subsections relied on by the plaintiff, provide:
"A court may exercise personal jurisdiction over a person, who acts directly or by an agent, as to a cause of action in law or equity arising from the person's
(a) transacting any business in this commonwealth;
...
*335 (e) having an interest in, using or possessing real property in this commonwealth...."
The term "transacting business" is broadly construed, see Bond Leather Co. v. Q.T. Shoe Mfg. Co., 764 F.2d 928, 931 (1st Cir.1985), and "applies to any purposeful acts by an individual, whether personal, private, or commercial." Ross v. Ross, 371 Mass. 439, 441 (1976). The Supreme Judicial Court has suggested that even in two cases where the contacts with the Commonwealth were held to be constitutionally insufficient ("Automatic" Sprinkler Corp. of America v. Seneca Foods Corp., 361 Mass. 441 [1972], and Droukas v. Divers Training Academy, Inc., 375 Mass. 149 [1978]), "the defendants might be viewed literally as having `transacted business'" within the Commonwealth. Good Hope Indus., Inc., 378 Mass. at 8 n. 13.
In the case at bar, the defendant negotiated with the plaintiff for the sale of land located in Massachusetts. He spoke on the telephone with the plaintiff (who was in the Commonwealth) as well as with his Massachusetts attorney, and wrote to that attorney in Massachusetts. The cause of action arose out of those negotiations and negotiations with a Massachusetts real estate broker hired by the defendant.[2] That the defendant acted only as agent, Kleinerman v. Morse, 26 Mass. App. Ct. 819, 824-825 (1989); Berkeley PG Corp. v. Southbank Inv. Group, 291 S.C. 315, 318, 320 (1987), and that he claims no binding contract was consummated is not dispositive. See Berkeley PG Corp. v. Southbank Inv. Group, 291 S.C. at 317, 319. Nor is it determinative that the defendant was not physically present in Massachusetts. Widespread use of the telephone and the mail has commonly replaced physical presence in negotiations. Good Hope Indus., Inc., 378 Mass at 11.
*336 What is significant "is that the defendant's contacts with the forum were deliberate and not fortuitous, such that `the possible need to invoke the benefits and protections of the forum's laws was reasonably foreseeable, if not foreseen, rather than a surprise.'" Ibid., quoting from Product Promotions, Inc. v. Cousteau, 495 F.2d 483, 496 (5th Cir.1974). This is particularly so where, as here, the negotiations had substantial connection with Massachusetts, namely a contract for the sale of real estate in Massachusetts. See Columbia Briargate Co. v. First Natl. Bank, 713 F.2d 1052, 1058 (4th Cir.1983), cert. denied sub nom. Pearson v. Columbia Briargate Co., 465 U.S. 1007 (1984); Berkeley PG Corp. v. Southbank Inv. Group, 291 S.C. at 319.
The subject matter of the transaction is also of importance in determining the second branch of our inquiry, that is, whether the exercise of personal jurisdiction meets due process considerations. See Wolfman v. Modern Life Ins. Co., 352 Mass. 356 (1967) (contract of insurance); Quasha v. Shale Dev. Corp., 667 F.2d 483, 486-487 (5th Cir.1982) (real property). We conclude that "the exercise of personal jurisdiction over the defendant would be neither so unfair nor so unreasonable as to result in a denial of due process." Good Hope Indus., Inc., 378 Mass. at 12. See generally Heins v. Wilhelm Loh Wetzlar Optical Mach. GmbH & Co. KG, 26 Mass. App. Ct. at 22-27. Massachusetts has a legitimate interest in providing a forum for this action. The land is located here, the defendant conducted negotiations in Massachusetts by telephone and mail, and the broker hired by the defendant, through whom the plaintiff learned of the availability of the land and with whom he may have negotiated, was also located here.[3]
*337 Accordingly, the judgment of dismissal on the basis of Mass.R.Civ.P. 12(b)(2), is reversed.[4]
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  The defendant claimed the instrument which he termed a "limited Power of Attorney ... excluded any aspect of litigation concerning the property." New York Gen. Oblig. Law § 5-1502A(10) (McKinney 1989), however, provides that a statutory short form power of attorney with respect to real estate transactions (such as the present instrument) "must be construed" to include certain broad powers, one of which is the power "to prosecute, to defend, to submit to arbitration, to settle ... any claim...."
[2]  New York Gen. Oblig. Law § 5-1502A(11) (McKinney 1989) provides that the short power of attorney "must be construed to mean that the principal authorizes the agent: To hire ... any attorney ... or other assistant or assistants when the agent shall think such action to be desirable for the proper execution by him of any of the powers described in this section...."
[3]  There is also pending in Massachusetts an action against Bogaerde arising out of the same negotiations.
[4]  The parties have not argued, and we do not reach, the question whether the action could be dismissed under Mass.R.Civ.P. 12(b)(6). We also do not consider the applicability, if any, of G.L.c. 223A, § 3(e).

=== CASE 2219231 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:06.039719+00 ===

412 Mass. 259 (1992)
588 N.E.2d 630
ANDREW SHABSHELOWITZ
vs.
FALL RIVER GAS COMPANY.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Bristol.
December 4, 1991.
March 16, 1992.
Present: LIACOS, C.J., WILKINS, ABRAMS, NOLAN, & GREANEY, JJ.
Edwin J. Carr (Robert P. Snell with him) for the defendant.
Frederic L. Ellis for the plaintiff.
ABRAMS, J.
The question before us is whether a stockholder motivated solely by personal investment concerns may compel a company to produce a stockholder list for him to inspect and copy. The Appeals Court held that the plaintiff had no right to inspect the stockholder list because he was motivated solely by a desire "to obtain information that might result in acquiring additional company stock for his investment portfolio." Shabshelowitz v. Fall River Gas Co., 30 Mass. App. Ct. 769, 773 (1991). We allowed the plaintiff's application for further appellate review. We agree with *260 the Appeals Court's analysis. We comment briefly on the procedure used to report the case. We remand the matter to the Superior Court to enter judgment for the defendant.
1. Facts. The plaintiff commenced an action in Superior Court alleging that the company wrongfully had denied him access to its stockholder list. The complaint sought both injunctive relief and damages. The parties filed a statement of agreed facts. The agreed facts are as follows. The plaintiff has been a stockholder of the defendant since 1980. The defendant, a Massachusetts gas company within the meaning of G.L.c. 164, has only one class of stock, of which there are 296, 757 shares issued and outstanding. The stock is registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
In September, 1984, the plaintiff made a formal written request that he be permitted to inspect and copy a list of all stockholders of the defendant company. According to the statement of agreed facts, "[t]he purpose of Plaintiff's request ... was to learn the identity of Company stockholders in order to determine whether there were stockholders willing to sell their Company shares to him. [The plaintiff was happy with current management of the Company and ... wished to change [neither] management nor its policies." The plaintiff has stated under oath that if he is permitted the inspection he seeks, he will use the Company stockholder list solely to make inquiries of Company stockholders to see if they are willing to sell their shares of Company stock to him. Shabshelowitz v. Fall River Gas Co., supra at 770-771.
2. The report. The parties filed cross motions for summary judgment, and a joint motion to report "this case to the Appeals Court, pursuant to [Mass. R. Civ. P. 64, 365 Mass. 831 (1974)], for determination of the [reported] question."[1]*261 The judge did not rule on the cross motions for summary judgment; the judge did allow the parties' motion to report the case. The judge, however, reported a question of law to the Appeals Court.[2] He did not report the case.[3]
Rule 64 provides that a trial judge, in certain circumstances, may report a case to the Appeals Court. The provisions of rule 64 relevant to this case (found in the third sentence of the rule) require that the report be requested by both parties and that the parties agree in writing to all material facts. Mass. R. Civ. P. 64. The judge need not render any decision on the case before reporting it.[4]
Rule 64 does not provide for the report of a question of law without entry of a finding or order. Ordinarily, we would decline to decide a case that was improperly reported. Because the parties requested a report of the case and agreed in writing to all the material facts and because the Appeals Court addressed the issue at length, however, we exercise our discretion to treat this matter as if the case, rather than a question, were reported. Cf. Adoption of Thomas, 408 Mass. *262 446, 449 (1990) ("We believe the public interest would be best served by our answering the questions posed, ... and therefore we do so" [citation omitted]). Cf. also Scandura v. Trombly Motor Coach Serv., Inc., 370 Mass. 612, 615 (1976). Because we treat the case as if it had been reported properly under rule 64, we do not answer the question reported to the Appeals Court but rather consider the appropriate resolution of the case. See McStowe v. Bornstein, 377 Mass. 804, 805 n. 2 (1979). Scandura v. Trombly Motor Coach Serv., Inc., supra.
3. The merits. The plaintiff contends that G.L.c. 156B, § 32 (1990 ed.), confers on him the right to inspect and copy the stockholder list for his stated purpose of acquiring stock for his portfolio.[5] We disagree. The statute does not compel such a conclusion. The question is whether the trading of stock solely for investment purposes is "relative to the affairs of the corporation." G.L.c. 156B, § 32.
The language of the statute is the best indication of legislative intent. The words of a statute are "construed by the ordinary and approved usage of the language, considered in connection with the cause of its enactment, the mischief or imperfection to be remedied and the main object to be accomplished, to the end that the purpose of its framers may be effectuated." Commonwealth v. Fall River Motor Sales, Inc., 409 Mass. 302, 316 (1991), quoting Commonwealth v. *263 Galvin, 388 Mass. 326, 328 (1983). Board of Educ. v. Assessor of Worcester, 368 Mass. 511, 513 (1975).
The parties agree that the crucial language in G.L.c. 156B, § 32, was enacted by the Legislature (in St. 1923, c. 172) in response to our holding in Shea v. Parker, 234 Mass. 592, 595 (1920). Shabshelowitz contends that, in enacting St. 1923, c. 172, the Legislature only intended to prevent stockholders from using inspection rights in furtherance of fraudulent investment schemes. Shabshelowitz further maintains that the statute merely reimposes the common law requirements for inspection of stockholder lists.
Shabshelowitz's arguments are unpersuasive. The Appeals Court, Shabshelowitz asserts, erred because legislative history of the statute demonstrates that it was only intended to eliminate the use of stockholder lists in fraudulent investment schemes. In support of this argument, the plaintiff cites a petition that accompanied the statute as originally proposed. The petition "represent[ed] that public necessity and convenience require the passage of legislation prohibiting or restricting the securing of lists of stockholders of Massachusetts corporations for purposes not connected with the affairs of the corporation or for the purpose of ascertaining the small shareholders in order to get them to sell their sound investments and invest in speculative or worthless foreign oil and mining shares ..." (emphasis added). 1923 House Doc. No. 620. The petition cited by Shabshelowitz has little, if any, value as legislative history. The petition purports to reflect not the intent of the Legislature as a whole but, rather, the views of one legislator.
Assuming that the petition were to be considered as legislative history, however, it would not support Shabshelowitz's argument. Instead, the petition demonstrates that its author sought to deny inspection rights not only to those who urge the public to "invest in speculative or worthless foreign oil and mining shares" but also to those motivated by "purposes not connected with the affairs of the corporation." The use of the disjunctive "or" indicates that the "purposes not connected with the affairs of the corporation" contemplated by *264 the Legislature comprised more than just fraudulent investment schemes. See Bello v. South Shore Hosp., 384 Mass. 770, 782 (1981) ("The word `or' is given a disjunctive meaning unless the context and the main purpose of all the words demand otherwise," quoting Eastern Mass. St. Ry. v. Massachusetts Bay Transp. Auth., 350 Mass. 340, 343 [1966]).
Shabshelowitz's reading of the statutory language as a response to Shea v. Parker, supra, is similarly dubious. Prior to our holding in Shea, stockholders enjoyed an absolute statutory right to inspect corporate stockholder lists. See Shabshelowitz v. Fall River Gas Co., supra at 772. In Shea v. Parker, supra at 594, we held that this absolute right applied to a stockbroker who intended to use the stockholder list "to ascertain [when inquiries were made by prospective purchasers] if any of the shares were for sale, and [to] `broaden[] the market for the stock.'" It was in response to this holding, according to Shabshelowitz, that the Legislature enacted the requirement that inspection requests be "relative to the affairs of the corporation."
There is, however, no significant difference between the stockbroker's purpose in Shea v. Parker, supra, and Shabshelowitz's purpose here. Indeed, Shabshelowitz himself argues that one of the primary effects of his effort to inspect the shareholder list will be a "broadening of the market for the corporation's stock." Viewed from the point of view of the corporation, whose "affairs" are the subject of legislative concern, there is no difference between a stockbroker's efforts to find willing sellers for third-party buyers and Shabshelowitz's endeavors to find stockholders willing to sell to him.[6] For this reason, the Appeals Court's distinction between purely personal purposes for seeking inspection and those which are "relative to the affairs of the corporation" is sound. See Shabshelowitz v. Fall River Gas Co., supra at 773.
*265 Shabshelowitz unsuccessfully urges us to interpret St. 1923, c. 172, as a Legislative return to the common law principle with respect to inspection of stockholder lists. Even assuming that this position were correct, however, Shabshelowitz misstates the substance of the common law. According to Shabshelowitz, the common law required that a stockholder demonstrate "good faith" and "a proper purpose" before the stockholder was allowed to inspect the corporate books. Shabshelowitz then attempts to establish that his purpose for inspecting the stockholder lists was "proper."
Shabshelowitz, however, cites no authority for the proposition that the "proper purpose" requirement ever was the governing standard in Massachusetts. In fact, as the Appeals Court explained, at common law, stockholders had the right to inspect stockholder lists if they were "acting in good faith and for the purposes of advancing the corporation's interest and protecting their rights as owners." Shabshelowitz v. Fall River Gas Co., supra at 771, citing Varney v. Baker, 194 Mass. 239, 240 (1907). A return to the common law of Massachusetts, therefore, would require that Shabshelowitz be motivated by the "purposes of advancing the corporation's interest." Id. His own stipulation confirms that he was not.
Shabshelowitz maintains that the Appeals Court's approach is inconsistent with the results reached by every other court that has considered this question. The short answer to this contention is that the statutes interpreted by those courts "appear to emphasize the personal interest of the stockholder and do not contain our statutory language referring to the `interest of the applicant, as a stockholder, relative to the affairs of the corporation.'" Shabshelowitz v. Fall River Gas Co., supra at 773 & 773, citing Delaware Code Ann. tit. 8, § 220(b) (1983) ("A proper purpose shall mean a purpose reasonably related to such person's interest as a stockholder ..."). Cf., e.g., Florida Stat. § 607.1602(8) (1991 ed.) ("`proper purpose' means a purpose reasonably related to such person's interest as a shareholder"). Model Business Corporation Act § 16.02(c) (Supp. 1986) (purpose of inspection must be "relevant to the ... shareholder's interest as a *266 shareholder). Cf. also Morris v. United Piece Dye Works, 59 A.2d 660, 661 (N.J. 1948) (stockholder's purpose for inspection must be "germane to the applicant's right as a shareholder").
Shabshelowitz also contends that our cases since Shea v. Parker, supra, support his position. The Appeals Court, however, properly disposed of this argument. In both of the cases cited by Shabshelowitz, the stockholders seeking inspection of stockholder lists sought to control corporate policy or governance. See Shabshelowitz v. Fall River Gas Co., supra at 774, citing Hanrahan v. Puget Sound Power & Light Co., 332 Mass. 586 (1955) (stockholders sought merger of corporation with another); Donaldson v. Boston Herald-Traveler Corp., 347 Mass. 274 (1964) (proxy contest).
Finally, Shabshelowitz advances strong policy arguments in support of his position. He notes that stockholders are the true owners of a corporation and that the right to communicate with other stockholders is fundamental to corporate democracy. See generally Guthrie v. Harkness, 199 U.S. 148, 155 (1905). Shabshelowitz also postulates that it is always in stockholders' best interest to create as wide a market as possible for shares. The Legislature, however, and not a court, is the appropriate forum for consideration of those policy arguments.
Accordingly, we remand this case to the Superior Court for entry of judgment for the defendant.
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  Rule 64 provides that a trial judge, "upon request of the parties, in any case where the parties agree in writing as to all the material facts, may report the case to the [A]ppeals [C]ourt for determination without making any decision thereon" (emphasis added). In this case, the parties jointly requested that the judge report the case to the Appeals Court. The parties also agreed to a statement of facts that resolved all material factual disputes.
[2]  The judge reported the following question: "Does plaintiff have a right to inspect and copy the Fall River Gas Company stockholders list for the purpose of identifying current stockholders whom he can contact in order to determine whether they are willing to sell their shares of Company stock to him for his own investment portfolio?" The Appeals Court answered this question "[n]o."
[3]  In his order for report, the judge noted that the resolution of pending cross-motions for summary judgment "depend[s] upon resolution of the [reported] question...." Thus, the judge recognized that a negative answer to the reported question would determine the outcome of the case.
[4]  Rule 64 also allows a judge to report an interlocutory finding or order if the judge believes that the finding or order "so affects the merits of the controversy that the matter ought to be determined by the [A]ppeals [C]ourt before any further proceedings in the trial court." Mass. R. Civ. P. 64, 365 Mass. 831 (1974). "[T]he basic issue to be reported [under this provision of rule 64] is the correctness of [the judge's] finding or order. Reported questions need not be answered in this circumstance except to the extent that it is necessary to do so in resolving the basic issue." McStowe v. Bornstein, 377 Mass. 804, 805 n. 2 (1979), citing, inter alia, Scandura v. Trombly Motor Coach Serv., Inc., 370 Mass. 612, 615-616 (1976). Because the trial judge here made no finding or order, he could not invoke these provisions of rule 64.
[5]  General Laws c. 156B, § 32, as inserted by St. 1964, c. 723, § 1, provides, in pertinent part:
"If any officer or agent of a corporation having charge of ... [the corporation's stock and transfer records] refuses or neglects to exhibit them in legible form or to produce for examination a list of stockholders with the record address and amount of stock owned by each, he or the corporation shall be liable to any stockholder for all actual damages sustained by reason of such refusal or neglect, but in an action for damages or a proceeding in equity under this section for neglect or refusal to exhibit for inspection the stock and transfer records, it shall be a defen[s]e that the actual purpose and reason for the inspection sought are to secure a list of stockholders or other information for the purpose of selling said list or information or copies thereof or of using the same for a purpose other than in the interest of the applicant, as a stockholder, relative to the affairs of the corporation"(emphasis added).
[6]  We emphasize here that Shabshelowitz stipulated that he "was happy with [then] current management of the [c]ompany and neither wished to change management nor its policies."

=== CASE 9739287 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:44.19145+00 ===

JUSTICE FREEMAN, also dissenting: While it is true that a statutory amendment creates a presumption that the legislature intended to change the law as it previously existed, I believe that in the present case such presumption is not controlling, having been overcome by more persuasive considerations. Bruni v. Department of Registration & Education (1974), 59 Ill. 2d 6,12. By enacting section 143a — 2, the legislature intended that all classes of automobile owners become aware that there existed underinsured motorist coverage. This consumer awareness, and hence protection, was achieved by requiring that insurers make a meaningful offer of such coverage. It makes little sense that the legislature would eliminate such an encompassing requirement by an amendment which merely mandates the policy inclusion of a minimal level of underinsured motorist coverage for one particular class of insured automobile owners. Furthermore, I am not convinced, as is the majority, that the plain meaning of the 1989 version of the statute necessarily supports the view that no meaningful offer was required under the 1983 version. I therefore agree with and respectfully join the dissent of Justice Bilandic.

=== CASE 2219234 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:06.1487+00 ===

588 N.E.2d 545 (1992)
Rodney J. WARTHEN, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 60A01-9108-CR-256.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, First District.
March 18, 1992.
*546 Richard W. Lorenz, Hickam and Hickam, Spencer, for appellant-defendant.
Linley E. Pearson, Atty. Gen. of Indiana and Preston W. Black, Deputy Atty. Gen., Office of Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellee-plaintiff.
BAKER, Judge.
Defendant-appellant Rodney J. Warthen appeals his conviction for operating a vehicle while intoxicated, a Class A misdemeanor.[1] He raises two issues for our review, which we restate as:
I. Whether the trial court erred when it gave Final Jury Instruction No. 8 regarding the rebuttable presumption that the result of Warthen's subsequent blood alcohol test related back to the time he operated the vehicle.
II. Whether Final Jury Instruction No. 8 impermissibly failed to advise the jury that the presumption was both permissive and rebuttable.
We reverse and remand for a new trial.
FACTS
Warthen was involved in a single vehicle accident sometime during the early morning hours of July 1, 1990. The van he was driving left the roadway on U.S. 231 approximately one mile north of Carp, Indiana, and landed in a ditch 50 to 75 feet away. The Owen County Sheriff's Department received a call from someone in the area who reported that he kept hearing a horn honk on and off. At 4:48 a.m., Deputy Michael Herrington was dispatched to investigate and arrived at the scene shortly thereafter. A man flagged him down and directed him to the van which was down an embankment. When Deputy Herrington approached the van, he noticed the van's motor and windshield wipers were running and its rear wheel was turning. Warthen, who was alone, was trapped in the driver's side and was yelling for help. The deputy noted that Warthen had a strong odor of alcoholic beverages about him.
Deputy Herrington radioed for assistance and emergency personnel successfully freed Warthen from the van. They transported him to Bloomington Hospital where a sample of his blood was drawn at 7:14 a.m. The sample revealed a blood alcohol content (BAC) of .116%. On September 12, 1990, Warthen was charged by information with operating a motor vehicle while intoxicated. A jury found him guilty of the charge on January 28, 1991, and the court imposed a one year suspended sentence and suspended Warthen's Indiana driver's license for 90 days.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
I
(A) Erroneous Instruction
Warthen contends the trial court erred when it gave Final Jury Instruction No. 8. He argues it was an incorrect statement of the law and it was unsupported by the evidence. The giving of a jury instruction lies within the discretion of the trial court. Crabtree v. State (1990), Ind. App., 547 N.E.2d 286, 292, trans. denied. This court will review the decision only for an abuse of discretion. Id. The test of whether a tendered instruction is proper is whether there is evidence to support giving the instruction, whether the substance of the tendered instruction is covered by other instructions, and whether the instruction is *547 a proper statement of the law. Bieghler v. State (1985), Ind., 481 N.E.2d 78, 96, cert. denied, (1986), 475 U.S. 1031, 106 S.Ct. 1241, 89 L.Ed.2d 349.
Final Jury Instruction No. 8 provided, in relevant part:
A law enforcement officer who has probable cause to believe that a person has commited [sic] an offense of (operating a vehicle while intoxicated) shall offer the person the opportunity to submit to a chemical test... . A law enforcement officer may offer a person more than one chemical test... . However, all tests must be administered within three (3) hours after the officer had probable cause to believe the person committed an offense (of operating a vehicle while intoxicated)... .
Under Indiana law, if the evidence in this case establishes that:
(1) A chemical test was performed on a test sample taken from the defendant within the period of time allowed for testing under the Indiana statutes regarding the offense of operating while intoxicated... and
(2) The defendant had at least ten hundredths percent (.10%) by weight of alcohol in his blood at the time the test sample was taken;
Then you as the trier of fact shall presume that the defendant had at least ten hundredths (.10%) by weight of alcohol in his blood at the time he operated the vehicle. However, this presumption is rebuttable, and accordingly, after considering all of the evidence, you may find that this initial presumption is rebutted by other evidence.
Record at 60-61 (emphasis added). At issue here is the highlighted language which mandates the presumption applies when the BAC test is conducted within three hours after the officer develops probable cause. This instruction follows the statutory language set out in IND. CODE 9-30-6-15 and IND. CODE 9-30-6-2.[2] Our supreme court has stated that it is generally proper to give instructions in the exact language of the statute when the statutory language is not unconstitutionally vague or misleading. Bieghler, supra at 95. We find it was error for the trial court to give the above instruction in this case, however, because the instruction was an incomplete statement of the law under the facts here.
When operation of the vehicle and formation of probable cause occur in close proximity to one another, and when the BAC test is conducted within three hours after both events, the case law has clearly held the three-hour time period is satisfied. See, e.g., Hall v. State (1990), Ind. App., 560 N.E.2d 561 (police stopped erratic driver at 1:30 a.m., and after noting strong smell of alcohol conducted BAC test at 1:55 a.m.); Chilcutt v. State (1989), Ind. App., 544 N.E.2d 856, trans. denied (officer dispatched to scene of accident found driver lying next to overturned vehicle and BAC test was administered "within the specified period of time"); Livingston v. State (1989), Ind. App., 537 N.E.2d 75 (BAC test conducted 29 minutes after officer stopped defendant for speeding and driving erratically). When an officer does not develop probable cause in close proximity to when the driver operated the vehicle, however, and when the BAC test is conducted within three hours after the officer developed probable cause but not within three hours *548 after the driver operated the vehicle, the question arises whether the three-hour time period is satisfied.
This court recently addressed this issue in a case of first impression in Mordacq v. State (1992), Ind. App., 585 N.E.2d 22. In that case, Police Officer Rozzi noticed a car parked on 7th Street in Logansport, Indiana, with its engine running. When the officer passed the car again an hour later, the engine was still running and the car had not moved. It was then 3:30 a.m., and the officer decided to investigate. He found Mordacq asleep in the driver's seat. When she awoke, he smelled alcohol on her breath. Mordacq told Officer Rozzi that she had driven to 7th Street at least two hours earlier, but she wasn't sure of the time. Officer Rozzi transported her to the county jail, and at 3:55 a.m. the BAC test registered .10%. Mordacq was convicted in a bench trial under IND. CODE 9-11-2-1 [now IND. CODE 9-30-5-1] of operating a vehicle with at least .10% blood alcohol content.
In her appeal, Mordacq argued the evidence was insufficient to sustain the presumption that the result of the BAC test related back to the time of the offense. This court agreed. Although IND. CODE 9-30-6-2(c) states that "[a] test administered under this chapter must be administered within three (3) hours after the law enforcement officer had probable cause to believe the person committed an offense," Judge Barteau explained that the three-hour limit "begins not from the moment an officer ideates probable cause, but rather from the moment at which the vehicle was operated in violation of I.C. 9-30-5." Id. at 26. Otherwise, "in a case where the officer did not observe the defendant operating the vehicle, the statutes could be read to impose no limit on the relation back of the test, provided the test was performed within three hours of the time an officer investigated the defendant." Id. As this court expressed in Mordacq, this would lead to absurd and illogical results.
In this case, the jury was instructed that Warthen's BAC test presumptively related back to the time he operated his van, provided the test was conducted within three hours after the officer had probable cause to believe he operated the vehicle while intoxicated. The evidence was in dispute, however, as to when Warthen operated the van.
Deputy Herrington testified that he did not know when Warthen's accident occurred, but when he arrived at the scene he noted that the van's motor and windshield wipers were running and the tire was spinning. The State argues this was evidence Deputy Herrington reached Warthen's van and developed probable cause not long after the accident occurred. Deputy Herrington also testified, however, that Warthen's legs were jammed in the dash so badly he could not get his hand on the key to turn off the motor. Even the emergency medical technicians (EMTs) could not reach the key nor could they cut the battery connections. In regard to the spinning wheel, Deputy Herrington recalled that someone "had to crawl underneath and disconnect something to get that tire to stop." Record at 204. It was Warthen's testimony that the accident occurred around midnight and he was trapped in his vehicle until Deputy Herrington arrived, which was shortly after 4:48 a.m. The BAC test was not conducted until 7:14 a.m.
In light of this evidence, the jury could have found that Warthen's operation and the officer's development of probable cause did not occur in close proximity to one another. Accordingly, the jury should have been instructed that the presumption under IND. CODE 9-30-6-15 related back to the time of operation only if the jury found the BAC test was conducted within three hours after Warthen operated the vehicle. See id.
(B) Harmless Error Review
Our review is not complete, however. Even if it was error to give Final Jury Instruction No. 8, Warthen must still show he was prejudiced. See Hurt v. State (1990), Ind. App., 553 N.E.2d 1243, 1249. Reversal is not mandated if the evidence clearly sustains the conviction and the jury could not have found otherwise. Id.
*549 Although there is no direct evidence Warthen was impaired when he operated the motor vehicle, proof of operating while intoxicated may be made by circumstantial evidence. Smith v. State (1989), Ind., 547 N.E.2d 845, 846. The circumstantial evidence in this case, however, does not clearly sustain the conviction. There were no witnesses who saw Warthen's accident or who observed his driving before the accident. Warthen testified that he was very tired and fell asleep behind the wheel. Deputy Herrington testified that there were no skid marks on the highway or any indications of braking, and there was no evidence that Warthen had tried to avoid obstacles. Warthen also testified that after having the accident at around midnight or a little later, he was trapped and in great pain when he began drinking from a bottle of whiskey that was under the driver's seat.
Just because Warthen says it is so does not make it so, and we express no opinion as to his credibility. Nevertheless, because the evidence does not clearly sustain the conviction that Warthen was intoxicated when he operated his van, we cannot say the instruction error was harmless. See Hurt, supra. This error warrants a new trial. See Street v. State (1991), Ind., 567 N.E.2d 102, 105.
II
Permissive And Rebuttable Presumption
Warthen also argues that Final Jury Instruction No. 8 impermissibly failed to advise the jury the presumption the BAC test related back to the time he operated the vehicle was both permissive and rebuttable. We address this issue because of the possibility it will arise again in Warthen's second trial.
This court has rejected jury instructions that followed the language of IND. CODE 9-30-6-15 but failed to advise the jury it was free to accept or reject the presumption that the defendant's subsequent BAC test results related back to the time of vehicle operation. See, e.g., Sturgeon v. State (1991), Ind. App., 575 N.E.2d 679, 681 (instruction was erroneous because it was both conclusive and mandatory); Hall, supra at 563 (jury not instructed it could reject presumed fact even if defendant did not come forward with rebuttal evidence).
In this case, Final Jury Instruction No. 8 concluded with the phrase, "However, this presumption is rebuttable, and accordingly, after considering all of the evidence, you may find that this initial presumption is rebutted by other evidence." Record at 61. This phrase sufficiently informed the jury the presumption was rebuttable, but it did not inform the jury it was free to accept or reject the presumption even if the defendant did not come forward with rebuttal evidence. See Hall, supra. The instruction was accordingly erroneous.
Our decision today does not affect earlier decisions of this court in which we recognized that post-accident consumption of alcohol is an affirmative defense, and it is permissible to place the burden on the defendant to establish the defense. See, e.g., Chilcutt, supra at 858. This court has held that the defendant should have the burden of establishing post-accident alcohol consumption because he is in the best position of knowing how much alcohol he consumed after operating the vehicle. Id.
The judgment of the trial court is reversed and the cause is remanded for a new trial.
RATLIFF, C.J., and RUCKER, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  IND. CODE 9-11-2-2 [now 9-30-5-2]
[2]  IND. CODE 9-30-6-15 provides, in relevant part:
(b) If, in a prosecution for an offense under IC 9-30-5, evidence establishes that:
(1) a chemical test was performed on a test sample taken from the person charged with the offense within the period of time allowed for testing under section 2 of this chapter; and
(2) the person charged with the offense had at least ten-hundredths percent (0.10%) by weight of alcohol in the person's blood at the time the test sample was taken; the trier of fact shall presume that the person charged with the offense had at least ten-hundredths percent (0.10%) by weight of alcohol in the person's blood at the time the person operated the vehicle. However, this presumption is rebuttable.
Referenced above as "section 2," IND. CODE 9-30-6-2 provides, in relevant part: (c) A test administered under this chapter must be administered within three (3) hours after the law enforcement officer had probable cause to believe the person committed an offense under IC 9-30-5.

=== CASE 9739288 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:44.733001+00 ===

Liacos, C.J.
Once again, we review a trial in which alternate jurors were present in the jury room during deliberations. In Commonwealth v. Smith, 403 Mass. 489 (1988), and again in Commonwealth v. Jones, 405 Mass. 661 (1989), we held that it is reversible error to allow alternate jurors to sit in the jury room with deliberating jurors. We reaffirm the Smith rule in the present case.
The record before us presents these facts. The defendant, Paul Sheehy, was indicted for murder on August 7, 1986, see G. L. c. 265, § 1 (1990 ed.), and was tried in the Superior Court from September 8 to September 24, 1987. When the jury retired to the-jury room for deliberations, three alternate jurors accompanied them. The alternate jurors sat in chairs against a wall, while members of the jury sat around a table. They did not participate in any of the jurors’ discussions but were close enough to hear the speakers; they were also present during the jurors’ vote on the verdict. On September 24, 1987, the jury returned a verdict of guilty on the charge of murder in the first degree, and the defendant was sentenced to life in prison. See G. L. c. 265, §§ 1, 2.
After our decision in Smith, the defendant filed a motion for a new trial, which a Superior Court judge granted.1 The Commonwealth has appealed from this decision, arguing that we should abandon or revise the Smith rule. We decline to do so. We affirm the grant of a new trial.
*2371. G. L. c. 234A, §§ 68, 74 (1990 ed.). We focus on the one argument raised by the Commonwealth that was not before us in Smith and Jones, that is, the contention that the Smith rule conflicts with G. L. c. 234A, § 74,2 and must yield to the statute.3 According to G. L. c. 234A, § 68, alternate jurors must be kept separate from the jury unless the parties have agreed otherwise.4 Pursuant to § 74, a violation of the chap*238ter’s provisions (e.g., § 68) is not reversible error unless there has been an appropriate objection and a showing of prejudice.5 In Smith, by contrast, we explicitly held that the presence of alternate jurors in the jury room during deliberations is reversible error without regard to whether a defendant has objected or shown prejudice. See Smith, supra at 495, 496-497. Thus, the conflict between § 74 and the Smith rule concerns the proper response to violations of the requirement that alternate jurors be separated from the jury.
The requirement that alternates not sit with deliberating jurors ensures a constitutionally guaranteed fair jury trial. Article 12 of the Declaration of Rights of the Massachusetts Constitution guarantees the right to trial by jury in criminal cases. Opinion of the Justices, 375 Mass. 795, 818 (1978). “Proper respect for the right to jury trial. . . dictates judicial vigilance to ensure, in so far as reasonably possible, that jury deliberations are conducted privately and without extraneous *239influence.” Smith, supra at 493. Minor invasions of the jury’s privacy, while regrettable, do not impinge upon the right. See, e.g., Commonwealth v. Saunders, 20 Mass. App. Ct. 917 (1985) (no new trial when person entered jury room, stated that it was raining, retrieved umbrella, and left). The presence of alternate jurors in the jury room, however, is not a minor invasion of the jury’s privacy. The alternate jurors, whose own views may be influenced by their lack of responsibility for the verdict, may influence the jurors. Even if the alternates do not speak, their presence alone might inhibit some jurors from speaking freely.6 See Smith, supra at 494-495, citing State v. Cuzick, 85 Wash. 2d 146, 149 (1975); and People v. Valles, 24 Cal. 3d 121, 131 (1979) (Mosk, J., dissenting). In order to protect the constitutional right to trial by jury, we have.held that the presence of alternate jurors in the jury room during deliberations is an intolerable invasion of the jury’s privacy that requires reversal.7 See Smith, supra at 497; Jones, supra at 662.
If we were to accept the Commonwealth’s argument that G. L. c. 234A, § 74, should be applied to the requirement that alternate jurors be kept separate from jurors, we would be required to overlook two fatal flaws in such a principle. First, in cases where a defendant has made no objection or been unable to prove prejudice, G. L. c. 234A, § 74, instructs *240a court to overlook the presence of alternates in the jury room. This instruction permits an invasion of the jury’s privacy that is incompatible with the constitutional right to trial by jury. “[Wjhatever impairs, the essentials of the right to jury trial must be struck down.” Commonwealth v. Foster, 411 Mass. 762, 765 (1992), citing Commonwealth v. Bellino, 320 Mass. 635, 639, cert. denied, 330 U.S. 832 (1947). To hold that G. L. c. 234A, § 74, be applied to the requirement that alternates be kept separate from the jury would violate art. 12.
Second, the application of § 74 to the rule requiring separation of jurors and alternate jurors would intrude on the judicial domain in violation of art. 30 of the Massachusetts Declaration of Rights.8 It is the judiciary’s role to be the final arbiter of the essence of the rights guaranteed by our State Constitution. See, e.g., Opinions of the Justices, 387 Mass. 1201, 1206 (1982) (provision in school prayer bill stating that bill does not establish religion invades judicial province); Sears v. Treasurer & Receiver Gen., 327 Mass. 310, 321 (1951) (“The question whether or not the requirements of the Constitution have been observed and a valid law has been enacted is a justiciable question to be determined in the last analysis by the judicial department of the government whenever the question arises in a proper proceeding in court”). If, as the Commonwealth claims, there is a legislative intent to excuse through § 74 the violation of the rule requiring separation of alternate jurors and jurors, then it would be clear that the Legislature attempted to define the bounds of the constitutional right to trial by jury. Article 30 prohibits the Legislature from performing this judicial function. It is the exclusive function of the judiciary to determine *241in what circumstances, if any, the right to trial by jury can countenance the presence of alternate jurors in the jury room during deliberations. We made this determination in the Smith case. Under art. 30, the Legislature may not supplant our decision.
2. Arguments addressed in Smith and Jones. We review briefly the Commonwealth’s remaining arguments, all of which we considered in Smith and Jones. The Commonwealth argues that the Smith rule is inconsistent with our holding in Commonwealth v. Fidler, 377 Mass. 192, 201 (1979), which allows the Commonwealth an opportunity to prove that an extraneous influence on the jury is not prejudicial. There is no conflict. In the particular case of alternate jurors, the Commonwealth can never prove lack of prejudice under the Fidler test, because “the probable effect of the extraneous facts on a hypothetical average jury,” Fidler, supra at 201, is always an intolerable interference with the jury’s decision-making process. See discussion, supra. The Commonwealth does contend that the defendant was not prejudiced by the presence of alternate jurors in the jury room. Its attempt to support this assertion only convinces us further that it is impossible to determine conclusively that their presence, body language, or facial expressions had no effect on the jury without inquiring into the subjective mental processes of the jurors, a query we cannot permit. See Fidler, supra at 198. See also Smith, supra at 499 (Abrams, J., concurring). The Commonwealth next asks us to look to the law of other jurisdictions on this issue, but we have done this in Smith and formulated our rule in light of our study. The Commonwealth also argues that we only should apply the Smith rule prospectively. We have considered this issue twice before and stand by our determination that the rule applies to cases pending on direct appeal or for which the time for direct review had not expired on the date Smith was issued. See Smith, supra at 497 n.1; Jones, supra at 662.
*2423. Conclusion. The allowance of the motion for a new trial is affirmed.
So ordered.
We held in Smith that the rule adopted therein would apply “in cases that are pending on direct appeal or as to which the time for direct appeal has not expired on the date of this decision.” Commonwealth v. Smith, 403 Mass. 489, 497 n.l (1988). On the date of the Smith decision, the defendant’s appeal had been entered in this court, but the appeal had not been heard. He filed his motion for a new trial with this court. A single justice of this court remanded the motion to the Superior Court, where a judge held hearings (the trial judge having retired) and granted the motion.
The Commonwealth did not raise the issue in its brief in opposition to the motion for a new trial, nor did it raise the issue during the motion hearings. We need not consider an argument which urges reversal of a trial court’s ruling when that argument is raised for the first time on appeal. See, e.g., Commonwealth v. Pares-Ramirez, 400 Mass. 604, 609 (1987), and cases cited. Nevertheless, as the issue has been fully briefed and argued, we choose to confront the argument in order to underscore the basis of the Smith rule.
Section 68 did not apply to the trials reviewed in Smith and Jones. Chapter 234A was inserted by St. 1982, c. 298, § 1, but it became applicable county by county and section by section over time, pursuant to orders of this court. See G. L. c. 234A, § 1. The Smith trial took place in August, 1985, in Norfolk County; c. 234A, § 68, became effective in that county on January 1, 1986. The Jones trial occurred in November, 1983, in Suffolk County; c. 234A, § 68, became effective in Suffolk County on January 1, 1984. The law applicable in Smith and Jones did require that alternate jurors be kept separate from the jury during deliberations, but it did not allow for a waiver of the rule nor did it contain provisions as broad as those provided in G. L. c. 234A, § 74. See discussion, infra; Mass. R. Grim. P. 20 (d) (2), 378 Mass. 889 (1979).
Chapter 234A was applicable to Middlesex County during the defendant’s trial in 1987. See G. L. c. 234A, § 1 (establishing Middlesex County as a participating county as of the effective date of the chapter).
Section 68 reads in pertinent part:
“In every twelve-person jury case, the court shall impanel at least two additional jurors. . . . Alternate jurors shall not be identified until immediately prior to jury deliberations in accordance with the following. If, at the time of the submission of the case by the court to the jury for its deliberations upon a verdict, more than the number of jurors required for deliberation are available, the court shall direct the clerk to place the names of all of the available jurors except the foreperson into a box or drum and to select at random the names of the appropriate number of jurors necessary to reduce the jury to the proper number of members required for deliberation in the particular case. The jurors so selected shall not be discharged, but shall be known as alternate jurors. The alternate jurors shall be kept separate from the jury in some convenient location, subject to the same rules and procedures as govern the jury during its deliber*238ations, until the jury has agreed upon a verdict or has been otherwise discharged” (emphasis added).
Rule 20 (d) (2) was in effect at the time of Smith and Jones, as well as the time of the trial of this case. It provides:
“If at the time of the final submission of the case to the jury more than twelve members of the jury who have heard the whole case are alive and not incapacitated or disqualified, the judge shall direct the clerk to place the names of all the remaining jurors except the foreman in a box and draw the names of a sufficient number to reduce the jury to twelve members. Those jurors whose names are drawn shall not be discharged, but shall be known as alternate jurors and shall be kept separate and apart from the other jurors in some convenient place, subject to the same rules and regulations as the other jurors, until the jury has agreed upon a verdict or has been otherwise discharged” (emphasis added).
Section 74 reads in pertinent part:
“[A]ny irregularity in qualifying, selecting, summoning, confirming, postponing, excusing, cancelling, instructing, impanelling, challenging, discharging, or managing jurors; ... or any defect in any procedure performed under this chapter shall not be sufficient to cause a mistrial or to set aside a verdict unless objection to such irregularity or defect has been made as soon as possible after its discovery or after it should have been discovered and unless the objecting party has been specially injured or prejudiced thereby.”
The only way to disprove our assumptions would be to inquire into the jurors’ subjective mental processes. See Smith, supra at 499 (Abrams, J., concurring). Such an inquiry is forbidden. Id. See Commonwealth v. Fidler, 377 Mass. 192, 198 (1979); Woodward v. Leavitt, 107 Mass. 453, 460 (1871).
We reiterate what we stated in Smith, supra at 494: “The critical fact to be recognized in this case is that ‘alternate jurors,’ as long as they remain alternates, really are not jurors. When they attend jury deliberations they do so as mere strangers.”
As in Smith, we do not confront the issue whether a defendant personally may agree to the presence of alternate jurors in the jury room during deliberations. See Smith; supra at 495. We note that in Smith the defendant’s trial counsel and the prosecutor agreed to the procedure pertaining to the alternate jurors sitting with the deliberating jurors. No such agreement was made in this case, although the defendant’s trial counsel raised no objection.
Article 30 of the Massachusetts Declaration of Rights reads as follows: “In the government of this Commonwealth, the legislative department shall never exercise the executive and judicial powers, or either of them: the executive shall never exercise the legislative and judicial powers, or either of them: the judicial shall never exercise the legislative and executive powers, or either of them: to the end it may be a government of laws and not of men.”

=== CASE 2219236 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:06.206896+00 ===

588 N.E.2d 1268 (1992)
In the matter of Brian W. Smith.
No. 28S00-8806-DI-532.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
March 25, 1992.
Laurie Baiden Bumb, Evansville, for respondent.
David F. Hughes, Staff Atty., Indianapolis, for Indiana Supreme Court Disciplinary Comm'n.
SUPPLEMENTAL OPINION
PER CURIAM.
On October 2, 1991, 579 N.E.2d 450, this Court handed down its opinion in this disciplinary case finding misconduct and imposing a public reprimand. The case is now before us on a petition by the Indiana Supreme Court Disciplinary Commission for clarification of the imposed sanction.
In imposing a public reprimand for Respondent's single act of neglecting to timely file a Motion to Correct Error, this Court took judicial notice of the fact that the Respondent had engaged in misconduct on two prior occasions and had been sanctioned accordingly. In re Smith (1976), 266 Ind. 6, 351 N.E.2d 1 (public reprimand), In re Smith (1986), 487 N.E.2d 138 (thirty day suspension). In light of his prior acts of misconduct, Respondent's single act of neglect exhibited in the present case warranted a public reprimand.
We further conclude that prior misconduct is a factor to be brought to the attention of this Court and the Hearing Officers and considered in the assessment of disciplinary sanctions.
The Commission's Petition for Clarification is hereby granted, and the per curiam opinion of October 2, 1991, issued in this case is supplemented as herein set out.
DeBRULER, J., dissents.

=== CASE 2219238 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:06.28862+00 ===

412 Mass. 215 (1992)
588 N.E.2d 634
RUTH V. KOLODZIEJ
vs.
WARREN SMITH & another.[1]
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Hampden.
October 9, 1991.
March 16, 1992.
Present: LIACOS, C.J., WILKINS, LYNCH, O'CONNOR, & GREANEY, JJ.
Raymond R. Randall (Deborah D.A. Jeffrey with him) for the plaintiff.
Douglas R. Dagarin for the defendants.
Steven J. Schwartz, for Civil Liberties Union of Massachusetts, amicus curiae, submitted a brief.
Robert G. Caprera, for Institute in Basic Life Principles, amicus curiae, submitted a brief.
O'CONNOR, J.
At all relevant times, the defendant Warren Smith was the president and sole shareholder of the corporate defendant Electro-Term, Inc. The plaintiff asserts in her complaint that the defendants interfered with her rights of religious freedom guaranteed by the Federal and State Constitutions, entitling her to damages and other relief under G.L.c. 12, § 11I (1990 ed.). She seeks similar relief on the ground that the defendants made her retention of employment conditional on her forgoing the practice of her "creed or religion as required by that creed or religion" in violation of G.L.c. 151B, § 4 (1A) (1990 ed.). Finally, the plaintiff's complaint alleges that she is entitled to damages because Electro-Term, Inc., terminated her at-will employment in violation of public policy, that is, Electro-Term, Inc., fired or demoted her because she refused to attend a religion seminar. Other claims set forth in the complaint are not in issue in this appeal.
The case was tried to a jury. At the close of the plaintiff's evidence, the defendants moved for directed verdicts. Recognizing "the wisdom, normally, of submitting cases to juries for their decision rather than directing verdicts at the close of the plaintiff's evidence or of all the evidence, as recommended *217 by Soares v. Lakeville Baseball Camp, Inc., 369 Mass. 974 (1976) and its several progeny," the judge nevertheless "was of the strong belief that the plaintiff clearly had failed to make out a case which warranted submission to the jury," and therefore he allowed the motion for directed verdicts in its entirety. The plaintiff appealed to the Appeals Court and we transferred the case here on our own motion. We affirm the judgment entered in the Superior Court.
In reviewing a directed verdict, we summarize the evidence in the light most favorable to the party having the burden of proof, who ordinarily, as here, is the plaintiff. Narine v. Powers, 400 Mass. 343, 344-345 (1987). The jury would have been warranted in finding the following facts. Electro-Term, Inc., manufactures and sells electrical connectors. Begun in 1976 by the defendant Smith, the company considers itself a "Christian company." It espouses Christian principles and offers a weekly Bible reading session to employees at which attendance is voluntary. In 1988, when the plaintiff's legal action was commenced, Electro-Term, Inc., employed approximately forty-one people. The plaintiff, a Roman Catholic, was initially hired as a temporary employee by the company in August, 1987. In October, 1987, she was hired permanently and promoted to the position of controller, a management position. At all times she was an employee at will.
Smith considered it very beneficial for the company's employees annually to attend a week-long seminar put on by the Institute in Basic Life Principles entitled "Institute in Basic Youth Conflicts." Attendance was mandatory for management level employees. The seminar offered instruction in several areas including the resolution of conflicts in interpersonal relationships, dealing with anger, and responding to authority. The seminar was nondenominational, but it used references to Scriptural texts to reinforce and illustrate its teachings. On the first night, the 1988 seminar, which was held in Symphony Hall in Springfield, focused on the family and its relationship to "the church." A workbook was distributed that referred to Biblical passages. The workbook was *218 prefaced with an extensive list of passages, separated by topic headings, which those in attendance were encouraged to read at home. A representative sampling of topic headings is as follows: "Wisdom and Understanding," "Discerning Levels of Conflict," "Responding to Enemies," "Basic Steps of Maturity," "Acceptance of God's Design," "Abnormal Social Developments," "Discerning God's Guidance," "Basic Structures of Authority  Family, Government, Church," "Reverence," "Gratefulness," "Forgiveness," "Basic Steps to Walk in God's Spirit," "Consequences of Sensual Material," and "Consequences of Alcohol."
On the second night of the 1988 seminar, a videotape presentation centered on a woman's proper place in the family. The plaintiff testified, "This whole thing was done by video cassette, a screen up on the auditorium stage. There was no person giving the seminar. You watched the video on a screen, and there was this great big triangle and there was a man up at the top and the wife underneath him and the family underneath that, and I kind of looked at that situation where the woman was  I was told the woman was under the man's influence in the family, that she should follow everything that he says, that she should not concern herself with financial matters in the family, that was his area, that she made the home a pleasant place to be; that she made the home, that he financed the home, in essence." Scriptural passages were offered in support of this concept and the workbook contained a diagram showing a man in a superior position to the woman in the family. The plaintiff further testified: "They were telling me that I was a second class citizen  my husband's first class, I'm second class  and yet they are using the Bible to tell me that this is true, which I didn't believe was true, they are telling me that I shouldn't know anything about financial matters, and here I am supposedly the controller of Electro-Term and the president is supposed to be digesting what I tell him. It just  the whole thing bothered me terribly."
On Wednesday, the plaintiff told Smith that she would not attend the rest of the seminar. On the following day, she explained *219 to Smith that it was personally offensive, "religious," and not work-related. He told her that, if she did not attend the seminar, she could no longer be part of management. He offered her a position as bookkeeper. The plaintiff refused either to attend the seminar or to accept what she considered to be a demotion to the nonmanagement position of bookkeeper. The plaintiff left the company's employ. For our purposes it makes no difference whether we consider the plaintiff as having been demoted or discharged for her refusal to attend the seminar. In either event, she was penalized.
The Massachusetts Civil Rights Act, G.L.c. 12, § 11H (1990 ed.), authorizes the Attorney General to bring a civil action in the Superior Court "[w]henever any person or persons, whether or not acting under color of law, interfere by threats, intimidation or coercion, or attempt to interfere by threats, intimidation or coercion, with the exercise or enjoyment by any other person or persons of rights secured by the constitution or laws of the United States, or of rights secured by the constitution or laws of the commonwealth...." Section 11I grants a private cause of action to any individual whose exercise or enjoyment of such rights has been interfered with, or attempted to be interfered with, as described in § 11H. Batchelder v. Allied Stores Corp., 393 Mass. 819, 821 (1985). The plaintiff contends that the defendants interfered with her rights of religious freedom under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and under art. 2 of the Declaration of Rights of the Massachusetts Constitution.
The First Amendment states, "Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof...." Article 2 provides in relevant part, "[N]o subject shall be hurt, molested, or restrained, in his person, liberty, or estate, for worshipping GOD in the manner and season most agreeable to the dictates of his own conscience, or for his religious profession or sentiments; provided he doth not disturb the public peace, or obstruct others in their religious worship." General Laws c. 12, §§ 11H and 11I, provide remedies for interference with civil rights either *220 by the State or by private individuals. O'Connell v. Chasdi, 400 Mass. 686, 692 (1987). Bell v. Mazza, 394 Mass. 176, 181-182 (1985). Batchelder v. Allied Stores Corp., supra at 821, 822-823. The question we must answer is whether the evidence set forth above is sufficient to warrant a finding that either defendant or both defendants interfered with the plaintiff's Federal or State constitutional right to believe and profess the religious doctrine of her choice. This right includes the right to assemble, or abstain from assembling, with others to engage in religious activity, Employment Div., Dep't of Human Resources of Or. v. Smith, 494 U.S. 872, 877-878 (1990), and it includes the right to refrain from professing a particular religious belief. Torcaso v. Watkins, 367 U.S. 488, 495 (1961). "Only beliefs rooted in religion are protected...." Frazee v. Illinois Dep't of Employment Sec., 489 U.S. 829, 833 (1989), quoting Thomas v. Review Bd. of Ind. Employment Sec. Div., 450 U.S. 707, 713 (1981). "Purely secular views do not suffice." Frazee, supra. However, in order for a belief to be a protected religious belief, it is not necessary that it be shared by an organized sect or church. Id.
The plaintiff argues that the principle taught at the seminar, that Scripture says that husbands have authority superior to that of their wives within the family context, is a belief rooted in religion, as is her contrary belief. Frequently, as here, making a proper distinction between religious and secular beliefs is difficult. Nevertheless, we accept the plaintiff's contention that these two contrary beliefs are religious beliefs. It follows that the plaintiff would have had a right to abstain from attendance at the seminar if, as a result of the advocacy of that belief, the seminar constituted a religious activity. We hold, however, that it did not.
We have no doubt that an employer's requirement of an employee's attendance at devotional services at which prayer is offered would constitute unlawful compulsion to participate in religious activity. This would be true regardless of whether the employee was told she could ignore what was going on. Young v. Southwestern Sav. & Loan Ass'n, 509 *221 F.2d 140 (5th Cir.1975), and EEOC v. Townley Eng'g & Mfg. Co., 859 F.2d 610 (9th Cir.1988), cited by the plaintiff, stand for that proposition. However, the seminar at issue here was in no sense a devotional service despite the fact that it promoted Scriptural passages as support for the lessons it sought to promote. No case has come to our attention in which a court has held on facts comparable to the facts here that an employer has interfered with an employee's religious freedom, and we are not willing to go that far. Surely, there is no evidence in this case that would warrant a finding that the defendants have forced the plaintiff to alter her religious convictions or her profession of belief, or to give the appearance of supporting a particular tenet of religion. We conclude that the evidence was insufficient as a matter of law to warrant recovery under G.L.c. 12, § 11I, and that the judge correctly directed verdicts for the defendants on those claims.
Next, the plaintiff argues that compulsory attendance at the seminar violated G.L.c. 151B, § 4 (1A), which makes it an "unlawful discriminatory practice for an employer to impose upon any individual as a condition of obtaining or retaining employment any terms or conditions, compliance with which would require such individual to violate, or forego the practice of, his creed or religion as required by that creed or religion.... The employee shall have the burden of proof as to the required practice of his creed or religion." In Lewis v. Area II Homecare for Senior Citizens, Inc., 397 Mass. 761, 771 (1986), we observed that this "statute does not deal with the full panoply of religious beliefs, practices, preferences, and ideals," but focuses instead on required religious practices. The plaintiff produced no evidence that the defendants' condition for her continuing as controller, attendance at the seminar, required her to miss any religious service or to compromise her faith. There was no evidence that Roman Catholic dogma forbade her attendance at the seminar. The judge correctly allowed the motion for directed verdicts on the G.L.c. 151B, § 4 (1A), claim.
We turn to the plaintiff's claim that she was discharged or demoted in violation of public policy. As an employee at will *222 the plaintiff's employment was subject to termination or modification at any time for any reason or no reason at all. Smith-Pfeffer v. Superintendent of the Walter E. Fernald State Sch., 404 Mass. 145, 150 (1989). We have allowed exceptions to this general at-will employment rule in cases where employees have been discharged for doing what the law requires, see Hobson v. McLean Hosp. Corp., 402 Mass. 413, 416 (1988), for performing important public deeds such as cooperating with law enforcement officials, see Flesner v. Technical Communications Corp., 410 Mass. 805, 811 (1991), and for refusing to commit unlawful acts, see DeRose v. Putnam Management Co., 398 Mass. 205, 209-210 (1986). Of course, it is a public policy of this State to allow free exercise of religion. The plaintiff's claim fails, however, because there was no evidence that attending the seminar inhibited her in the exercise of her religion, or that Electro-Term, Inc., fired her because of her religion. A verdict for Electro-Term, Inc., was properly directed.
It appears that before commencing this action the plaintiff had filed a complaint with the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination (MCAD) and MCAD then filed that complaint with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission as required for a plaintiff to bring a Title VII (Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000e et seq. [1988]) action. See Lewis v. Area II Homecare for Senior Citizens, Inc., supra at 770 n. 11, citing 2 A. Larson, Employment Discrimination § 48.31 (1985). Beyond the averment in her Superior Court complaint that she had filed a complaint with MCAD, the plaintiff's complaint did not set forth a specific count asserting a violation of Title VII. Apparently, this was because counsel believed that Title VII actions were required to be brought in a Federal court. See Bradshaw v. General Motors Corp., 805 F.2d 110, 112 (3d Cir.1986); Jones v. Intermountain Power Project, 794 F.2d 546, 553 (10th Cir.1986); Valenzuela v. Kraft, Inc., 739 F.2d 434, 436 (9th Cir.1984). Subsequent to the bringing of this action, approximately one month before the trial, the United States Supreme Court held that State courts have jurisdiction *223 to adjudicate Title VII claims. Yellow Freight Sys., Inc. v. Donnelly, 494 U.S. 820, 825 (1990). We think that the plaintiff should have an opportunity to file a motion in the Superior Court to amend her complaint to assert a Title VII claim.
We affirm the judgments entered below except that we remand this case solely to give the plaintiff an opportunity within thirty days of the issuance of the rescript of this court to move to amend her complaint as discussed above.
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  Electro-Term, Inc.

=== CASE 9739290 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:45.981748+00 ===

ROBERTSON, Judge.
James I. Hampton appeals from a jury trial conviction of murder for which he received a fifty (50) year sentence. On appeal, he claims that the evidence is insufficient to support his conviction, that the trial court erroneously refused his instruction on reckless homicide as a lesser included offense, that the trial court improperly allowed expert testimony on blood splatter analysis because it is not generally recognized as reliable, and that his sentence is manifestly unreasonable. We affirm.
The evidence reveals that Hampton, his wife, and his son all lived with Hampton's father, who had a history of abuse of prescription drugs and alcohol. One night, Hampton arrived home late to find his father intoxicated. Hampton argued with his father because his father had urinated on the bathroom floor. The two exchanged blows, and Hampton retired to his bedroom. Later, Hampton returned to the living room and beat his father to death with a post from the banister.
I.
The evidence is sufficient.
The State charged that Hampton knowingly killed his father. Hampton claimed his father attacked him and he defended himself with the post. The police found the post hidden under a shed in the yard and found Hampton had washed his clothes after the killing. The State introduced evidence that the father was sedated with alcohol and prescription drugs at the time of the beating and that the father had a disabled leg.
Hampton's argument on this issue is nothing more than a lengthy invitation to reweigh the evidence and to rejudge the credibility of the witnesses. He emphasizes his evidence that the father was sober enough to be abusive and could walk well enough to attack him. He claims his father hit him and threatened to cut him with a knife. He also contends the evidence also fits his version of the events. Given the evidence, the jury could rightly conclude either that Hampton did not act without fault, as he was mutually aggressive, or that Hampton had no reasonable fear or apprehension of death or great bodily harm, as the father was sedated and disabled. We will not reweigh the evidence.
IL
The trial court properly refused the reckless homicide instruction.
Hampton claims the trial court should have given his instruction on reckless homicide as a lesser included offense of murder. However, without any evidence of reckless acts, there is no basis for giving an instruction on reckless homicide. Macon v. State (1988), Ind., 529 N.E.2d 343. Here, by Hampton's own admission, he deliberately hit his father with a post three times. He did not claim the death was accidental due to a reckless act on his part but claimed the deliberate beating occurred because he feared for his life and was defending himself. The trial court committed no error.
IIL.
The trial court properly allowed testimony about bloodstain analysis.
Hampton claims bloodstain analysis is not a field of expertise which is generally recognized as reliable. He therefore contends the trial court should not have allowed expert testimony on the subject. The State's expert testified about where the father was located in the room, how high his head was above the floor, and the minimum number of blows struck.
The determination of whether a witness is qualified to testify as an expert is within the sound discretion of the trial court, whose ruling will not be disturbed *558absent an abuse of discretion. Wissman v. State (1989), Ind., 540 N.E.2d 1209. In order to qualify as an expert, the subject matter must be related to some scientific field beyond the knowledge of the average lay person, and the witness must have sufficient skill, knowledge or experience in the field to make it appear that the witness' opinion will aid the trier of fact. No precise quantum of knowledge is required if the witness shows a sufficient acquaintance with the subject. Id. Expert testimony is inappropriate and may be excluded when it concerns matters within the common knowledge and experience of ordinary persons and which the jury may determine as well as the expert; however, even if the evidence is not beyond the knowledge and expertise of the average juror, the expert may nevertheless testify concerning his special knowledge of the subject. Id.
Two Indiana decisions have addressed whether a person had sufficient expertise to testify about blood spatter as an expert. See King v. State (1988), Ind., 531 N.E.2d 1154; Fox v. State (1987), Ind., 506 N.E.2d 1090. Although possibly inherent in them, these decisions did not, however, address whether blood spatter is a subject related to some scientific field either beyond the knowledge of the average lay person or which would assist the trier of fact in understanding the evidence or deciding a factual issue.
The record reveals that Sergeant Malone had been a Field Technician for eighteen years and was the supervisor of five other technicians. In 1981, he was sent to a school for blood flight interpretations given by a noted expert in the area of blood flight. Malone also assisted another prominent expert on blood flight analysis give a blood flight seminar in the State of Indiana, where they trained other officers in blood flight analysis. Since he became a technician, Malone saw and diagramed over one hundred homicide scenes. He testified that blood is different from other liquids in that it consists of cells and has strong molecular bonds. As a result, when blood hits an object, it will show a definite directionality. If the blood hits at a 90 degree angle, it will show a circular spot; but if it hits at an angle different from 90 degrees, it will "tail" in the direction the blood is moving.
Blood spatter analysis may be reduced to common, fundamental sciences, such as mathematics, chemistry, and physics. Because of its physical properties, blood which has been put in motion reacts in a certain, predictable manner when it hits a surface. Portions of the opinion testimony were beyond the common knowledge and experience of the average lay person, but portions of it were also inherently understandable. We conclude the evidence has been sufficiently shown to be reliable. They are a part of everyday experience and could have aided the jury in its search for truth. Likewise, a satisfactory foundation for the admission of the evidence was made. Accordingly, the trial court abused no discretion when it allowed Malone to give his opinions on the subject of blood spatter.
IV.
The sentence is not manifestly unreasonable.
A person who commits murder shall be imprisoned for a fixed term of forty years, with not more than twenty (20) years added for aggravating circumstances or not more than ten (10) years subtracted for mitigating circumstances. Ind.Code 35-50-2-3(a). The trial court specifically found the aggravating factors outweighed the mitigating factors and gave Hampton an enhanced, fifty (50) year sentence.
A sentence authorized by stat ute will not be revised except where it is manifestly unreasonable in light of the nature of the offense and the character of the offender. A sentence is not manifestly unreasonable unless no reasonable person could find it appropriate to the particular offense and offender for which it was imposed. Ind. Appellate Rule 17(B).
The trial court found the following to be aggravating circumstances:
*559(1) Defendant violated the conditions of his probation from Wabash County when he committed this crime.
(2) Defendant has a history of criminal activity represented by a theft conviction in the Wabash Circuit Court on August 1, 1989.
(3) Imposition of a reduced sentence would depreciate the seriousness of this crime because the manner in which Defendant murdered the vietim is especially heinous. The Defendant's version that he struck the victim only three times is inconsistent with the physical evidence of this crime: the victim was beaten beyond recognition about the head and face with a heavy, blunt instrument. The grotesque condition of the victim could have come only from multiple, repetitious blows, well beyond what would have been necessary for the Defendant to have repelled the victim's attack from which Defendant contends he was protecting himself. It is this Court's opinion that the condition of the victim could not have resulted from only three blows which the Defendant insists he struck.
(4) There was evidence that the victim was physically infirmed (sic) and had difficulty walking which, if true, belies Defendant's self defense theory.
(5) Defendant contends that he was fearful of his father, the victim, because of a prior history of lifelong beatings and abuse inflicted upon him by his father; if Defendant was so fearful of his father then one must ask why he continued to reside with him.
The court found the following mitigating cireumstances:
(1) Defendant is a young person, only 19 years of age.
(2) A long term of imprisonment will result in undue hardship to Defendant's two children.
(3) There was evidence of a past history of abuse and beatings inflicted upon the Defendant by the victim and the possibility that the victim may have provoked the Defendant's attack. There was also evidence that the Defendant is suffering from a previous head injury and that he may have been attempting to protect himself from a blow to the head which could have resulted in further serious injury or death.
In his argument on this issue, Hampton gives his own weight to the aggravating and mitigating factors. He attacks the relative weights of the trial court's cireum-stances and concludes a manifestly reasonable sentence would be thirty (80) years.
The trial court's factors are supported by the evidence, though not Hampton's version of it. Hampton does not attack the first two aggravating factors. Numerous photographs, medical evidence, and other testimony support the rest. Hampton identifies no potential mitigating factor which the trial court did not consider.
Reasonable persons could find a fifty (50) year sentence appropriate for Hampton and the murder. The sentence is not manifestly unreasonable.
Judgment affirmed.
BAKER, J., concurs.
SULLIVAN, J., concurs in part and concurs in result in part with separate opinion.

=== CASE 9739291 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:45.986361+00 ===

SULLIVAN, Judge,
concurring in part and concurring in result in part.
I fully concur with respect to Issues I, II and IV. As to Issue III, I concur in result and agree that it was appropriate to admit into evidence the testimony of Sergeant Malone concerning blood spatter analysis. I disagree, however, with the majority's statement of the test by which admissibility of expert testimony is determined.
The majority quotes from Wissman v. State (1989) Ind., 540 N.E.2d 1209, 1213 as follows:
"Expert testimony is inappropriate and may be excluded when it concerns matters within the common knowledge and experience of ordinary persons and which the jury may determine as well as the expert. Grimes v. State (1983), Ind., 450 N.E.2d 512. However, even if evidence is not beyond the knowledge and expertise of the average juror, the expert may *560nevertheless testify concerning his special knowledge of the subject. Summers v. State (1986), Ind.App. 495 N.E.2d 799."
It is clear, however, that the last sentence quoted is dictum because in Wissman the opinion held that the testimony in question "[ellearly ... was beyond the common knowledge and experience of the average lay person." 540 N.E.2d at 1213.
In any event, the dictum quoted appears to misinterpret the holding of Summers v. State (1986) 1st Dist.Ind.App., 495 N.E.2d 799. The Summers case created a test for admissibility of expert testimony different from the previously existing traditional test. The Summers standard is not a part of the test as enunciated in Grimes v. State (1983) Ind., 450 N.E.2d 512, which requires that the testimony must concern matters outside the common knowledge and experience of ordinary persons.
That the Summers test was intended to be different from and to replace the former test is made clear from Cox v. American Aggregates Corp. (1991) ist Dist.Ind.App., 580 N.E.2d 679 at 686, written by Chief Judge Ratliff, who authored Summers:
"It has been said previously, that to be admissible the subject matter of an expert's testimony must be beyond the understanding of laymen. [Citations omitted.] However, in Summers, we rejected this traditional test and said that the proper and modern test is whether the expert has some special knowledge which would assist the trier of fact in understanding the evidence or deciding a factual issue."
In any event, as noted by the majority here, the questioned testimony meets the traditional test as well as the new Summers test. It is therefore not essential that we resort to the Summers test for admissibility. For this reason and in this light, I concur in the affirmance of the judgment.

=== CASE 2219250 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:06.993223+00 ===

666 N.W.2d 729 (2003)
STATE of Minnesota, Appellant,
v.
Geoffrey HICKMAN, Respondent.
No. A03-94.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
August 5, 2003.
*730 Mike Hatch, Attorney General, St. Paul, MN; and Amy Klobuchar, Hennepin County Attorney, Patrick C. Diamond, Senior Assistant County Attorney, Minneapolis, MN, for appellant.
Paul C. Engh, Minneapolis, MN; and Robert G. Malone, St. Paul, MN, for respondent.
Considered and decided by SCHUMACHER, Presiding Judge, RANDALL, Judge, and KALITOWSKI, Judge.
OPINION
ROBERT H. SCHUMACHER, Judge.
This appeal is from a sentence imposed for five counts of tax evasion under Minn.Stat. § 289.63, subd. 1(a) (1998). The state argues that the district court abused its discretion in granting respondent Geoffrey Hickman a downward dispositional departure. We affirm.
FACTS
Hickman was charged in March 2002 with five counts of felony tax evasion for failing to file Minnesota state tax returns for the 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, and 2000 tax years. The complaint alleged that Hickman was a Northwest Airlines pilot, had flown out of the Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport since 1989, had built a home in Mendota Heights on which he claimed a homestead exemption, and had claimed a Florida residence during those tax years. The complaint alleged that Hickman listed Florida as his residence on his payroll withholding forms at Northwest, although there was no evidence that he lived in Florida or maintained more than minimal contacts with that state. His ex-wife and children lived in Florida.
On November 13, 2001, investigators for the Minnesota Department of Revenue obtained and executed a search warrant at Hickman's Mendota Heights residence. The officers, with Hickman's cooperation, seized a number of records regarding his residency status and his personal income for the relevant tax years. Hickman's W-2 forms disclosed that he earned $78,681 in 1996, $110,962 in 1997, $173,699 in 1998, $203,394 in 1999, and $185,578 in 2000. Hickman did not file a Minnesota tax return for any of those years. His total state tax liability was about $49,000.
The complaint alleged that although Hickman maintained a post office box in Carabelle, Florida, that box bore no relationship to any real property, and police in that small community knew nothing of Hickman. Hickman had applied for, and received, a Florida driver's license, and had registered to vote in Florida but had been removed from Florida voting rolls after never having voted there. The complaint alleged that Hickman's Mendota Heights home was well furnished and contained a plethora of personal records, personal property, and personal mail addressed to that residence. The complaint alleged that Hickman admitted to investigators that he resided there since 1995 and that he had not filed a Minnesota tax return since 1994, when he won $100,000 in the state lottery.
Hickman waived his right to a trial by jury, and the case was tried to the court. The district court issued an order finding that Hickman "knew of his obligation to file Minnesota individual income tax returns for all relevant years and willfully *731 failed to file the required returns." The court found Hickman guilty and ordered a presentence investigation.
The presentence investigation detailed Hickman's explanation for his conduct, including Hickman's statement that he had claimed Florida as his state of residence since the 1960's when he was in the Air Force. Hickman also claimed that he did not read the homestead exemption application form and that he believed he could validly claim Florida residency because he owned a home there, his children were in school there, and he planned eventually to live there. The presentence investigation noted that Hickman also stated that he tried to change his residency status in Northwest's payroll computer system in October 2001, the month before the search warrant was executed, but was unable to correct it until December. The presentence investigation noted that Hickman had paid the taxes due for 1996-2000, plus penalties and interest, and that Hickman was a low risk to reoffend. Noting there were both aggravating and mitigating factors, the presentence investigation stated that "incarceration is appropriate for such offense behavior."
The district court, stating it was departing from the guidelines, stayed imposition on all five counts. The court imposed two-year probationary periods on each count, with two being consecutive to the first probationary period, making a total of six years of probation. In support of its dispositional departure, the court cited Hickman's amenability to probation, his acceptance of responsibility for his acts, his "lifetime pattern of law-abiding behavior," and the fact that he had accrued all his criminal history points at one sentencing. The court then justified the consecutive service of three of the probationary periods, which it construed as a departure, on the grounds that Hickman's tax evasion constituted a major economic offense.
ISSUES
1. Did the district court abuse its discretion in staying Hickman's sentence?
2. Did the district court impose a non-felony sentence, and, if so, was it reversible error to do so?
ANALYSIS
1. The decision to depart from the sentencing guidelines rests within the district court's discretion and will not be reversed absent a clear abuse of discretion. State v. Givens, 544 N.W.2d 774, 776 (Minn.1996).
The state argues that the district court imposed a downward dispositional departure in staying imposition of Hickman's sentence, and that this departure was not supported by substantial and compelling mitigating circumstances. In particular, the state argues that Hickman is not amenable to probation, in part because he did not take responsibility for "willfully" failing to file a Minnesota tax return, which is an element of the felony offense of which he was convicted.
The district court may depart from the presumptive sentence if it specifies "substantial and compelling" circumstances to support the departure. State v. Law, 620 N.W.2d 562, 564 (Minn.App.2000), review denied (Minn. Dec. 20, 2000). This court will generally not interfere with a district court's decision to depart downward. State v. Gebeck, 635 N.W.2d 385, 389 (Minn.App.2001). The court may do so, however, if it has a "strong feeling" that the departure is inappropriate. Law, 620 N.W.2d at 565 (quoting State v. Malinski, 353 N.W.2d 207, 209 (Minn.App.1984), review denied (Minn. Oct. 16, 1984)). A defendant's amenability to probation may *732 by itself support a downward dispositional departure. Gebeck, 635 N.W.2d at 389.
The state argues that Hickman is not amenable to probation because he continues to minimize his criminal conduct. The state also argues that the downward departure reflects an improper reliance on prohibited employment factors.
The state's first argument confuses, to a certain degree, amenability to probation and amenability to treatment. See State v. Donnay, 600 N.W.2d 471, 474 (Minn.App.1999) (noting defendants without treatment needs are not disqualified from probation), review denied (Minn. Nov. 17, 1999). The presentence investigation did not recommend any treatment program for Hickman, nor did the district court make treatment a condition of probation. Admitting guilt, and taking responsibility for one's criminal conduct, is a critical factor in an offender's amenability to treatment. See generally State ex rel. Morrow v. LaFleur, 590 N.W.2d 787, 792-93 (Minn.1999) (holding inmate was properly terminated from treatment program and disciplined because he refused to admit sexual offense). But amenability to probation depends on an offender's ability to comply with the conditions of probation and benefit from the opportunity for rehabilitation that probation affords. See State v. Holland, 421 N.W.2d 382, 389 (Minn.App.1988) (reversing execution of presumptively stayed sentence where record showed defendant was willing and able to comply with requirements of probation officer despite disruptive behavior in court). Hickman has already paid the state for the unpaid taxes, meeting his duty to make restitution, which is a frequent condition of probation. The presentence investigation noted there is a low risk that Hickman would reoffend.
An offender's remorse is a relevant factor in assessing his amenability to a probation that does not include treatment. See Donnay, 600 N.W.2d at 474 (concluding defendant's remorse was a factor making him particularly amenable to probation that did not include treatment). The supreme court has identified a non-exclusive list of factors as relevant to amenability to probation, those being "the defendant's age, his prior record, his remorse, his cooperation, his attitude while in court, and the support of friends and/or family." State v. Trog, 323 N.W.2d 28, 31 (Minn.1982). Although Hickman's minimization of his offense indicates he was less than fully remorseful, remorse is only one of the Trog factors. And Hickman accepted responsibility for his conduct by making prompt repayment.
Hickman's age (59), his lack of any criminal record, his cooperation, especially with the Minnesota Department of Revenue agents who searched his home, and his positive attitude in court, all support the district court's conclusion that Hickman is particularly amenable to probation. The district court also properly cited as a mitigating factor the fact that Hickman accrued all his criminal history points in one sentencing. See Minn. Sent. Guidelines II.D.2.a. (4)(b).
The state's second argument challenges the district court's consideration of Hickman's employment status as an airline pilot in staying his sentence. The guidelines prohibit the court from considering occupation, employment history, and other "[e]mployment factors" as reasons for departure. Minn. Sent. Guidelines II.D.1.c. But the Trog factors support the district court's conclusion that Hickman is particularly amenable to probation. And the court did not cite Hickman's employment status as a factor in its decision.
The state also argues that prison sentences are necessary to deter serious tax *733 evaders like Hickman. But the district court imposed a 150-day jail term as a condition of probation. This lengthy period of incarceration, although not the equivalent of a prison sentence, is a significant deterrent to a white-collar criminal. The state's argument that the district court's sentence leaves the state no significant criminal sanction as a deterrent against tax evasion is without merit.
We conclude that the district court did not abuse its discretion in finding sufficient mitigating factors to warrant a downward dispositional departure. Therefore, we need not address whether the district court could have imposed the same stayed sentence without departing by finding Hickman's five offenses were part of a single behavioral incident and therefore Hernandez sentencing could not be used. See generally State v. Hernandez, 311 N.W.2d 478, 479-81 (Minn.1981) (holding that defendant's criminal history score may be increased for other convictions sentenced on same day that are not part of same behavioral incident).
2. The state argues that the district court improperly attempted to impose a non-felony sentence based on Hickman's employment status, although the state contends that attempt was unsuccessful.
A felony conviction is "deemed to be" a gross misdemeanor if the "sentence imposed" is within the limits for a gross misdemeanor sentence. Minn.Stat. § 609.13, subd. 1(1) (2000). It may also be "deemed to be" a misdemeanor if the imposition of sentence is stayed and the defendant successfully completes probation. Id., subd. 1(2). At sentencing, the district court expressed the opinion, in response to a question from the prosecutor, that the convictions were "deemed to be a gross misdemeanor," because there was a two-year probationary period for each. There are five sentencing orders in the file, none of which indicate the level of conviction.
We conclude it is unnecessary to address the state's argument because the level of Hickman's convictions appears to have no present effect on the criminal prosecution. A party is not entitled to appellate review of an advisory opinion of the district court. State v. Johnson, 291 Minn. 407, 192 N.W.2d 87, 92 (1971); see State v. Roesch, 355 N.W.2d 754, 755 (Minn.App.1984) (holding that language in trial court memorandum issued following remand expressing intent to rule differently if supreme court reversed court of appeals could not be reviewed on appeal because it had no legal effect), review denied (Minn. Dec. 20, 1984). The district court stayed imposition of sentence, postponing the determination of the length of any executed term of incarceration until the day, should it arrive, that the stay is revoked.
The state makes no attempt to show that the district court's opinion that the sentence is a gross misdemeanor sentence has any present effect on the criminal prosecution. Accordingly, we do not address it.
DECISION
The district court did not abuse its discretion in imposing a downward dispositional departure based on Hickman's particular amenability to probation.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 2219472 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:14.73541+00 ===

133 Ill. App. 2d 1 (1971)
266 N.E.2d 787
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
CHARLES TIDWELL, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 53997.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District.
January 8, 1971.
Gerald W. Getty, Public Defender, of Chicago, (Mary Cahill and James J. Doherty, Assistant Public Defenders, of counsel,) for appellant.
Edward V. Hanrahan, State's Attorney, of Chicago, (Robert Novelle, and Themis Karnezis, Assistant State's Attorneys, of counsel,) for the People.
Judgment affirmed.
*2 Mr. JUSTICE ENGLISH delivered the opinion of the court:
OFFENSES CHARGED
Unlawful possession and sale of narcotics. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, ch. 38, par. 22-3.
JUDGMENT
After a bench trial, defendant, who was a guard at the county jail, was found guilty and given concurrent sentences of 10 to 11 years (sale) and 2 to 3 years (possession).
CONTENTION RAISED ON APPEAL
The trial court erred in receiving into evidence a five-dollar bill taken from defendant's locker at the jail.
EVIDENCE
Because of the conclusion we reach in this opinion, we find it necessary to set forth the testimony in detail.
Walter Scott, for the State:
He was an inmate of the Cook County jail awaiting trial on a burglary charge. During the second week of December, 1967, he told Patrick Tuite, Chief of the Criminal Division of the State's Attorney's Office, that he thought he could buy marijuana from defendant who was a jail guard.
On December 20, 1967, he was introduced to Leotis Clark. On December 21, 1967, he met Clark in the visitor's cage at the jail, and then Clark talked to defendant. After that, Scott asked defendant if he would pick up some money his cousin had brought. Defendant agreed to get it for him and leave it folded up in the visitor's pass. In the visitor's cage, Clark gave defendant $25 wrapped in his visitor's pass, and defendant then passed the money through the bars to Scott. The money was in small denominations, including a five-dollar bill. About fifteen minutes later, Scott gave defendant five dollars for making the transfer of money and $18 for defendant's promise to get him some marijuana, with the understanding that defendant would be given another $2 upon delivery.
The following day, he talked to defendant who explained that, due to a shakedown at the jail that day, he did not have the marijuana, but would bring it the next day. Shortly after this conversation, he talked with John Clarke [a Probation Officer who was investigating the jail and who had been notified of the proposed purchase of narcotics], and gave him a note explaining that the exchange was to take place the next day. The next day he saw defendant who told him that he would have to wait until later to get the marijuana. Scott notified Clarke of the additional delay.
On the morning of December 24, defendant told Scott that the marijuana was available and he would be back with it. Scott then held up *3 two folded single dollar bills so that Clarke, who was within sight, would know that the exchange was about to take place. Defendant returned shortly and told him to come to the safety cage. Defendant knelt down and handed him a tier board under which were two tin-foil packets. He gave defendant the two folded one-dollar bills which defendant placed in his pocket. About one minute later, after defendant left, Clarke came over and Scott told him that the packets had been passed. He gave Clarke one of them and placed the other packet in a cigarette package because of the presence of another guard.
Five minutes later, Lieutenant Gilbert removed Scott from the tier and he gave the cigarette package with the tin-foil packet to Gilbert. He was then taken to the bull pen where he gave Tuite a sheet of paper on which he had written the serial numbers of the bills.
As a result of his participation in the purchase, his pending burglary charge was nolle prossed.
Leotis Clark, for the State:
In December of 1967, Tuite asked him to help the State's Attorney's Office in this matter. On December 20, 1967, he was introduced to Walter Scott. The next day he was given four five-dollar bills and five one-dollar bills, a total of $25, the serial numbers of which had been recorded on a paper which he signed. That afternoon he went to the jail to see Scott, telling the guards that he was his cousin. Scott told him to call defendant. Defendant and Scott walked around in back and were talking, after which defendant came back and Clark gave defendant the $25 wrapped in a visitor's pass. Scott and defendant left for a moment, and then Scott returned, showing him that he had the money.
The State's Attorney's Office gave him some money for clothes.
John J. Clarke, for the State:
He is a Probation Officer and was on a special assignment investigating conditions at the county jail during December of 1967. He first met Scott in Tuite's office around December 21, 1967, and talked with him several times at the jail in the next few days.
On the morning of the 24th, he saw defendant arriving for work. He and defendant were searched before going into the jail. Inside the jail, he went to the area of Scott's tier, where he saw Scott hold up two one-dollar bills folded to the size of a quarter. He then walked over to an inmate, Alderman Schababy, stood with his back toward Scott, and told Schababy to tell him when he saw a guard approach Scott's tier. He was at that time about 40 feet from the safety cage.
When Schababy notified him, he turned and saw defendant kneel in front of the safety cage where Scott was, and push a slate board under the bars. As this occurred, he glimpsed a shiny silver substance in defendant's *4 hand. Defendant then stood up, put his left hand into his left pants' pocket, and walked away. Clarke then walked over to Scott who gave him a tin-foil packet in which he observed a crushed green plant that he believed to be marijuana. He summoned Officers Carlyle and Wallenda and arrested defendant. They immediately searched defendant and in his jacket pocket found seven tin-foil packets, each containing a crushed green plant which also appeared to be marijuana. Two one-dollar bills folded to about the size of a quarter were taken from defendant's left pant's pocket.
Tuite and Officers Montejano and Moriarity arrived with an infra-red lamp. The two one-dollar bills recovered from defendant, along with a five-dollar bill later taken from his wallet in his locker, showed a stamp which read "State's Attorney's Office" when placed under the infra-red lamp. The administrative officials of the jail have complete control of the locker room facilities, which are subject to search at any time, even though the guard has his own key.
Jack Wallenda, for the State:
He is a Chicago detective on duty with the State's Attorney's Office. During December, 1967, he was assigned to an investigation of the Cook County jail. He was present when the $25 was given to Leotis Clark. He dusted the bills, four five-dollar bills and five singles, with fluorescent powder, stamped them with "State's Attorney's Office," and compared the serial numbers on the bills with a list.
On the morning of December 24, 1967, he and Officer Carlyle searched defendant's clothing after his arrest. They recovered two one-dollar bills which were crumpled up to small size in defendant's left pants' pocket. He examined the bills under the infra-red lamp and found they bore the State's Attorney's stamp. He also saw the residue of the fluorescent powder on defendant's hands and left pants' pocket when examined under the lamp.
He asked defendant for his identification and was informed that it was in defendant's basement locker. The witness, defendant, Tuite, Captain Mathis (Captain of Jail Guards), and Carlyle went downstairs where, at the direction of Captain Mathis, defendant opened his locker and gave him his wallet. The wallet contained some bills, including a five-dollar bill that bore the State's Attorney's stamp, visible under the lamp, and matched a serial number on the pre-recorded list.
The witness was then given the tin-foil packets which he inventoried, placed in a sealed envelope signed by Detective Carlyle, and turned over to the Chicago Police Crime Laboratory.
Patrick Tuite, for the State:
He is the Chief of the Criminal Division of the State's Attorney's Office. *5 During the second week in December, 1967, he received a letter from Scott saying that he could help in the Grand Jury investigation of narcotics traffic in the jail. He called Scott to his office and was told by Scott that he could purchase narcotics from defendant. Tuite arranged to have Leotis Clark, who had been working on the investigation, give Scott $25 in marked money to make the purchase. For his help, Clark was given $20 to $25 to buy some clothes.
After the witness' conversation with Scott, he notified Probation Officer John Clarke and arranged to have Clarke at the jail to keep the planned transaction under surveillance.
On December 24, 1967, Tuite went to the jail with three officers. He found Detectives Wallenda and Carlyle with defendant. They examined defendant and two one-dollar bills under an infra-red lamp and he saw a glow on the bills and on defendant's pants' pocket. They took defendant to the basement where defendant, upon request, opened his locker and gave them his wallet which contained a five-dollar bill on the list of pre-recorded funds. Later he received a package of cigarettes containing a tin-foil packet which he turned over to Officer Wallenda.
He took defendant to his office immediately thereafter and informed him of his rights to remain silent and to have an attorney present. He informed defendant that any statement made by him could later be used against him, and that he would be provided free counsel if necessary. Defendant said he understood all of this but wanted to talk to him anyway, and did not want an attorney. As to where he got the five-dollar bill in question, he said he must have gotten it from a gas station as change. He claimed to have gotten the tin-foil packets, which he knew to contain "dope," from a man "out south" whom he had never seen before; that he was not going to deliver them in the jail, but to somebody outside after work. Defendant said he had not made a sale that day.
Scott's burglary charge was nolle prossed in return for his cooperation. Scott was later jailed for a parole violation and subsequent burglary charge.
Fred Finkbeiner, for the State:
He is the assistant chief correctional officer at the Cook County jail and is familiar with the customs and procedures of the jail administration. Employees of the jail are assigned free lockers to which the administration has a duplicate key. The lockers are subject to periodic shakedowns, and if the administration receives information that an employee might be a security risk, his locker is inspected.
Stipulation, for the State:
It was stipulated that if Shirley Krause were called to testify, she would testify that she is a chemist in the Chicago Police Crime Laboratory, *6 qualified by education and experience; that the substance in the tin-foil packets delivered to her in a sealed envelope by Detective Wallenda was examined by her and found to be marijuana.
Charles Tidwell, defendant, in his own behalf:
He worked as a guard for the county jail for nine months, including the time in question. He saw John Clarke as he arrived for work December 24. They walked into the jail together and were both searched. After going down to the basement to put his wallet in his locker, he went upstairs into the jail and was searched again before entering the tier section. He then went to Scott's tier, let Scott into the safety cage, and passed the tier board under the bars so that Scott, who was tier boss, could check on the number of inmates on the tier. He stooped down and pushed the tier board under the bars because it was too wide to fit through the bars. "When I stooped down, the chance appeared that Walter Scott could have put the money in my pocket. I was standing right next to him at that time." Defendant did not sell or dispense any narcotics to Scott.
After passing the tier board to Scott, he removed his jacket and hung it on the control door. Then a guard, Major Taylor, came up and Taylor also talked with Scott, remaining in the area for five or ten minutes. Defendant next walked to another tier. As he was walking, he discovered for the first time that money was in his pocket. After checking several other tiers, he walked back to where he had hung his jacket, noticed that it was on the floor, and put it on.
He had proceeded to another tier when Officer Wallenda and his partner walked in and took him to an office where he was searched. He did not see anything taken from his jacket. They took the two one-dollar bills from his right-hand pants' pocket. He was then taken to his locker and told to open it, which he did, and it was searched. A five-dollar bill was taken out of his wallet, but he did not know where it came from. The money and his hands and clothes were examined under an infra-red lamp. He was taken to Tuite's office. He did not remember having any conversation with Tuite concerning the five-dollar bill, and denied having said anything to him concerning tin-foil packets of marijuana.
He testified that he did not have any marijuana or sell the same to anyone on December 24, 1967, or at any other time, nor did he give any money to Scott or receive any from Leotis Clark.
OPINION
Defendant's sole contention on appeal is that the five-dollar bill found in his wallet in the locker was erroneously admitted into evidence. Defendant argues that since no search warrant had been issued, the search *7 would have to have been incident to the arrest, or consented to by him, to render the fruit of the search admissible.
We believe that the locker search was not incident to defendant's arrest, but we find that it was, nevertheless, lawful and proper. Defendant argues that his was not a genuine, but a coerced, consent to the search under the circumstances shown by the evidence, citing Bumper v. North Carolina, 391 U.S. 543, and People v. Haskell, 41 Ill. 2d 25. This argument would be telling, indeed, if his consent had been critical, or if the search had been of defendant's home rather than of the locker assigned to him at the jail. The basic right of access to the locker, however, was shown to have been that of the jail administration, not defendant's. The Captain of the Jail Guards directed that the search be made, and he would have been derelict in his duty had he not done so. This was the consent relied upon by the State in both the trial court and here, and the position was well taken, in our opinion. The facts were quite similar in People v. Overton, 20 N.Y.2d 360, 24 N.Y.2d 522, which involved the search of a student's locker with the consent of the school's principal.
 1 Even if we were to agree with defendant that the locker search was unlawful and the money seized therefore inadmissible, reversal of his conviction would not be required in the light of the harmless error doctrine expressed in Chapman v. California, 386 U.S. 18, 22, and Harrington v. California, 395 U.S. 250, 254. See also People v. Landgham, 122 Ill. App. 2d 9, 24. We have set forth the evidence in detail because we think it demonstrates beyond a reasonable doubt that the error in admitting the five-dollar bill (if it was an error) did not contribute to the result. We declare our belief that it was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. (See Chapman, supra, page 24, and People v. Smith, 38 Ill. 2d 13, 17.) The trial judge, who was the fact-finder in this case, made a similar statement for the record at the time of rendering his decision.
 2 Apart from the five-dollar bill, the evidence was overwhelming as to defendant's guilt on the sale charge. The possession charge was also supported independently by the testimony concerning packets of marijuana found on defendant's person after his arrest, and defendant has raised no question as to the lawfulness of that search.
The judgment of the Circuit Court is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
DRUCKER and LEIGHTON, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9739370 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:13:08.239271+00 ===

ROLAND B. DAY, C.J.
This is a review of an unpublished court of appeals decision reversing an order of the circuit court for Milwaukee County, the Honorable John A. Franke, suppressing a handgun and cocaine base found on petitioner Michael T. Morgan (Morgan). Morgan was charged with carrying a concealed weapon, contrary to Wis. Stat. § 941.23 (1991-92), and possession of cocaine while armed, contrary to Wis. Stat. §§ 161.14(7)(a), 161.41(3m), 161.48, 939.63 (1991-92). Morgan challenged the legality of the pat-down search that produced the evidence leading to the charges. At a hearing on May 28, 1993, the circuit court granted the defendant's motion to suppress the evidence. The court of appeals, in an unpublished opinion, reversed the circuit court. We hold that the pat-down search did not violate Morgan's right under the federal and state constitutions to be free from unreasonable searches. Accordingly, we affirm the court of appeals.
The following facts are taken from the preliminary hearing and suppression hearing in this matter, and are undisputed. City of Milwaukee Police Officers Peter Mulock (Mulock) and Brent Tidquist (Tidquist) *204were on patrol at four a.m. on March 1, 1993. Officers Mulock and Tidquist were driving in a squad car near Capitol Drive in Milwaukee, an area which Officer Mulock described as a "fairly high-crime-rate area." Officer Mulock also noted that "there was not a whole lot of traffic" on the street at that time. Officers Mulock and Tidquist observed a vehicle containing three males driving out of an alley. The car then made several turns in the space of a few city blocks, and entered another alley. Having observed that the car's license plates were expired, the officers engaged the emergency lights on their squad car and stopped the vehicle. Officer Mulock then approached the car and asked Morgan (the car's driver) for his operator's license. Morgan rapidly checked his pockets and wallet, and searched some of his pockets several times; however, he was unable to locate the license. According to Officer Mulock, Morgan "appeared nervous" while searching for his license. Officer Mulock testified at the suppression hearing:
Q: Now, Officer Mulock, not that this has ever happened, when I'm pulled over, I act a little nervous too. Is this anything — anymore [sic] unusual than the usual person stopped by the police?
A: I think so. Yes, it was.
Q: What was different about it?
A: Just the look on his face. He just appeared nervous and the way he was checking his pockets.
He was doing it extremely fast.
Morgan did in fact possess a license, which was discovered in a later search of his wallet incident to arrest.
Officer Mulock then asked Morgan to step out of the vehicle, and performed a pat-down search on Morgan. In the course of the pat-down search, Officer *205Mulock discovered a loaded .22-caliber pistol in Morgan's coat pocket. Officer Mulock placed Morgan under arrest and conducted a custodial search of Morgan's person which discovered certain pills (later determined to be diazepam, an antianxiety drug) and a pipe showing traces of cocaine base residue. According to Officer Mulock's testimony, in the event that he had not found the gun on Morgan, the officer would have placed Morgan in the back of his squad car while he or Officer Tidquist conducted various informational inquiries through the squad car's radio, such as an operator's license check and a criminal record check.
Morgan challenged the legality of the pat-down search. Following a suppression hearing, the circuit court granted Morgan's motion to suppress. The circuit court ruled that the pat-down search was impermissible under State v. Swanson, 164 Wis. 2d 437, 475 N.W.2d 148 (1991):
Officer Mulock had every intention to put [Morgan] into some sort of custody and run a check. He was going to put him in the back of the vehicle using his vehicle as something of a tentative booking room, run a check, and then either keep him in custody or release him. I think it's reasonable for a police officer to do that....
The only way I think this frisk flies is by the custodial search by the officer. And while it seems to be reasonable, it seems to me that the way Swanson is written, it appears to be very deliberate, very careful, very intentional, that what this officer did, at least at the time of the pat down had not yet ripend [sic] into an arrest, that I have to look at this not in the context of what might not have happened in the next few minutes, not even a five or ten minute period, but that the moment, under Swanson at *206that moment, I don't believe there was an arrest and, therefore, I don't believe that — Well, at least arguably reasonable, the search can fly....
If Officer Mulock had said "What I'm going to do is put you in the back of my car. I'm going to run a check on your license and before I do that, I'm going to search you. You are going to be taken into custody and I'm searching you pursuant to that custody," then I believe that this flies. Swanson, at least in dicta, addressed this problem and says the officer's unarticulated plan is irrelevant in determining the question of custody.
The circuit court held that, in the absence of a "clear and specific record," it could not rely on the officer's testimony that the stop occurred in a high-crime neighborhood in determining the legality of the search. In addressing the other factors the officer raised as justifying the search, the circuit court stated:
While the time of night and the nervousness of the subject and the number of occupants are all factors that are pertinent in deciding whether there's a sufficient basis to conduct the pat down, they're not enough by themselves. And together here there's really nothing more than a routine traffic stop. People who were stopped with expired plates and can't find their licenses are often nervous .. . and I don't find that there was any nervousness that was not easily attributable to the fact [Morgan] could not find a license. The fact that he actually did have his license on him is not important in assessing what the officer did but it's important in assessing the credibility of what happened here and I'm satisfied based on the officer's own testimony in that fact that what he was observing was a person nervously trying to come up with their driver's license and thinking it's there and not being able to find it.
*207The court of appeals reversed, holding that the pat-down search was permissible because the totality of the circumstances justified a protective search for weapons. The court of appeals held that the circuit court had erroneously relied on Swanson in granting the defendant's motion to suppress; the court of appeals stated that Swanson held a search invalid because it had exceeded its permissible scope, and not because the officer had failed to inform the suspect of his intention to place the suspect in his squad car. The court of appeals then held that the search of Morgan was supported by articulable facts in the record, including
the "fairly-high-crime-rate area"; Morgan's driving in two alleys at approximately 4:00 a.m.; Morgan's nervous and unsuccessful efforts to produce a driver's license upon request; and Morgan's apparent violation of the traffic law by driving without a license. We also note that Officer Mulock and his partner were outnumbered by the three occupants of the car.
The court of appeals concluded: "While none of these factors in isolation necessarily would justify a frisk for weapons, and although the trial court noted the lack of a 'clear and specific record' regarding whether the area was one of high crime, in combination they provide ample justification."
The Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution and Article I, § 11 of the Wisconsin Constitution guarantee citizens the right to be free from "unreasonable searches."1 This court, in constru*208ing Article I, § 11 of the Wisconsin Constitution, consistently follows the United States Supreme Court's interpretation of the Fourth Amendment. State v. Betterly, 191 Wis. 2d 407, 417, 529 N.W.2d 216 (1995). Upon review of an order granting suppression, this court will uphold the trial court's findings of fact unless they are against the "great weight and clear preponderance of the evidence." State v. Kiper, 193 Wis. 2d 69, 79, 532 N.W.2d 698 (1995) (quoting State v. Richardson, 156 Wis. 2d 128, 137, 456 N.W.2d 830 (1990)). However, deciding whether a search is unreasonable is a question of law that this court reviews without deference to the lower courts. Betterly, 191 Wis. 2d at 416-17.
A pat down, or "frisk," is a search. State v. Guy, 172 Wis. 2d 86, 93, 492 N.W.2d 311, 314 (1992), cert. denied, 113 S. Ct. 3020 (1993) (citing Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 16-17 (1968)). The Fourth Amendment prohibits only unreasonable searches; in determining whether a search is reasonable, this court balances the need for the search against the invasion of the suspect's privacy entailed in the search. Id. at 93. Pat-down *209searches are justified when an officer has a reasonable suspicion that a suspect may be armed. Id. at 94. The officer's reasonable suspicion must be based on "specific and articulable facts which, taken together with rational inferences from those facts, reasonably warrant that intrusion." Richardson, 156 Wis. 2d at 139 (quoting Terry, 392 U.S. at 21). The test is objective:
[T]he issue is whether a reasonably prudent man in the circumstances would be warranted in the belief that his safety or that of others was in danger. . . . And in determining whether the officer acted reasonably in such circumstances, due weight must be given... to the specific reasonable inferences which he is entitled to draw from the facts in light of his experience.
Guy, 172 Wis. 2d at 94 (quoting Terry, 392 U.S. at 27). Finally, the determination of reasonableness is made in light of the totality of the circumstances known to the searching officer. Richardson, 156 Wis. 2d at 139-40.
Morgan argues that the pat-down search conducted by Officer Mulock was not supported by articulable facts giving rise to a reasonable belief that Morgan was armed. We hold that an officer making a Terry stop need not reasonably believe that an individual is armed; rather, the test is whether the officer "has a reasonable suspicion that a suspect may be armed." Guy, 172 Wis. 2d at 94 (citing Terry, 392 U.S. at 30); see also Terry, 392 U.S. at 27 ("The officer need not be absolutely certain that the individual is armed . . . ."). In this case, then, we look to the totality of the circumstances known to Officer Mulock in determining whether an officer in his position would reasonably *210suspect that Morgan might be armed. See Richardson, 156 Wis. 2d at 144 (test for frisk is reasonable suspicion under totality of circumstances).
Morgan claims that the court of appeals disregarded the circuit court's findings of fact in using the high-crime nature of the area as a factor justifying the search. However, the record reveals that the circuit court did not make a factual finding that the area was not a high-crime area. The circuit court stated in making its ruling:
I think it's absolutely reasonable for police officers to consider where they are. It's just not the same in Riverhills [sic] as it is in other parts of town. But if the state wants the Court to rely on a high-crime area theory in justifying a Terry pat down, there has to be a clear and specific record made.
I've discussed this issue at length and reviewed the applicable cases and reviewed the problems that we will face if we simply say whenever police are in a high-crime area, they have the right to frisk. Maybe that's reasonable in this day and age but if it's going to be done, it's going to have to be done with some clear and specific rules which we don't have right now. We have Terry. Terry doesn't allow it....
The circuit court did not make a finding that the area was not high-crime; instead, it ruled that its reading of Terry did not allow the consideration of the high-crime nature of an area as a factor justifying a search. The court of appeals in this case was not disregarding the circuit court's findings of fact in considering the high-crime area in its analysis. The court of appeals, like this court, was making its de novo determination of the reasonableness of the search, a question of law *211reviewed without deference to the lower courts. Betterly, 191 Wis. 2d at 416-17.
Like the court of appeals, we find that an officer's perception of an area as "high-crime" can be a factor justifying a search. Professor LaFave notes that "the area in which the suspect is found is itself a highly relevant consideration" in justifying a search, and that the cases "most frequently stress that the observed circumstances occurred in a high-crime area." 3 Wayne R. LaFave, Search and Seizure § 9.3(c), at 456 (2d ed. 1987). In United States v. Michelletti, 13 F.3d 838, 844 (5th Cir. 1994) (en banc), cert. denied, 115 S. Ct. 102 (1994), the court noted: "[The searching officer] expressed concern that he was patrolling a high crime area of town .... The location in which suspicious behavior occurs, like the time of day, is among the facts that generate reasonable inferences as to the necessary police response to the behavior." See also United States v. Sharpe, 470 U.S. 675, 682 n.3 (1985) (noting that presence of vehicles in an area "known to be frequented by drug traffickers" was a factor justifying investigative stop); United States v. Rickus, 737 F.2d 360, 365 (3d Cir. 1984) ("The reputation of an area for criminal activity is an articulable fact upon which a police officer may legitimately rely.").
State supreme courts have also noted the high-crime nature of an area in determining the legality of a search. In People v. Souza, 885 P.2d 982 (Cal. 1994), the California Supreme Court relied on an officer's description of an area as high-crime as a factor in upholding a search. Citing Sharpe, 470 U.S. at 682-83 n.3, the court stated "[a]n area's reputation for criminal activity is an appropriate consideration in assessing whether an investigative detention is reasonable under *212the Fourth Amendment." Souza, 885 P.2d at 992. Recent decisions in several states endorse the use of an area's reputation as a factor. See State v. Dean, 645 A.2d 634, 636 (Me. 1994); Commonwealth v. Fraser, 573 N.E.2d 979, 982 (Mass. 1991); State v. Valentine, 636 A.2d 505, 513 (N.J. 1994). Both the State in this case and Professor LaFave note other jurisdictions conforming to the rule. See LaFave, supra, § 9.3(c), at 456-57 n.194 (citing, inter alia, People v. Cobbin, 692 P.2d 1069 (Colo. 1984); State v. Freeman, 414 N.E.2d 1044 (Ohio 1980); Commonwealth v. Ellis, 335 A.2d 512 (Pa. Super. Ct. 1975); State v. Halstead, 414 A.2d 1138 (R.I. 1980); State v. Choat, 363 S.E.2d 493 (W. Va. 1987)).
Morgan argues that the fact that Morgan was in a supposedly high-crime area should not be sufficient to justify the search, or all residents of high-crime areas would be denied the protections of the Fourth Amendment. We recognize, as did the court in People v. Bower, 597 P.2d 115, 119 (Cal. 1979), that many persons "are forced to live in areas that have 'high crime' rates or they come to these areas to shop, work, play, transact business, or visit relatives or friends. The spectrum of legitimate human behavior occurs every day in so-called high crime areas." Furthermore, Professor LaFave warns that "simply being about in a high-crime area should not of itself ever be viewed as a sufficient basis to make an investigative stop." LaFave, supra, § 9.3(c), at 457-58. However, that is not the case here, because it is clear from the record that Officer Mulock, in making a determination that Morgan might have been armed, did not rely solely on the fact that he observed Morgan in what the officer termed a "fairly high-crime-rate area." Officer Mulock had seen Morgan's car leaving and entering two alleys in rapid succession. Officer Mulock also knew that Morgan was *213driving a car with expired license plates, and observed Morgan nervously fail to locate his operator's license. Morgan was driving at four a.m. in a lightly-trafficked area. The combination of these facts, not the mere fact that Morgan was in a "fairly high-crime-rate area," led to the search.
In State v. Williamson, 58 Wis. 2d 514, 206 N.W.2d 613 (1973), this court found an officer's pat-down valid on substantially similar facts. As in the instant case, the officer in Williamson stopped the suspect's car after observing an irregular pattern of driving, and the driver of the car could not produce a driver's license. The stop occurred at 11 p.m. The court held:
Given . . . the circumstances here present, including the time of day and the fact that the defendant was driving without a driver's license on his person, and without any identification, the police officer was justified in his precautionary pat-down to determine if the defendant was armed and dangerous.
Id. at 520. The search in Williamson was permissible even without the presence of a factor present in the instant case: the high-crime area.
The court of appeals in the present matter also noted the time at which the stop occurred as a relevant factor. In State v. Flynn, 92 Wis. 2d 427, 435, 285 N.W.2d 710 (1979), cert. denied, 449 U.S. 846 (1980), this court noted suspect activity occurring "in the early morning hours" as a factor justifying a stop and frisk. Other jurisdictions have considered the time of day to be a factor in forming an officer's articulable suspicion, see United States v. Holifield, 956 F.2d 665, 667 (7th Cir. 1992) (noting time of night — 9 p.m. — as a factor justifying officer's pat-down search). The United States *214Supreme Court, in Michigan v. Long, 463 U.S. 1032, 1050-51 (1983), noted that "[t]he hour was late" in upholding a Terry search for weapons. Finally, Professor LaFave includes the time of day as one of "several other factors, none of which would individually justify a stopping for investigation, which nonetheless are properly considered together with other suspicious circumstances in determining whether there are grounds for such a brief seizure." LaFave, supra, § 9.3(c), at 454. We hold that the time of night — four a.m. — may be considered in determining the legality of the pat-down search of Morgan.
Morgan argues that the court of appeals disregarded a finding of fact by the circuit court in relying on Morgan's perceived nervousness as a factor justifying the search. However, the record shows that the circuit court specifically found that Morgan was nervous; the court, in making its ruling on the defendant's motion, stated that Morgan "nervously and repeatedly went through his wallet and his pockets" while searching for his license. Nonetheless, the circuit court considered Morgan's nervousness not unusual in light of the fact that a person in his situation might expect to be nervous: "People who were stopped with expired plates and can't find their licenses are often nervous ... I don't find that there was any nervousness that was not easily attributable to the fact he could not find a license." The circuit court, then, made a finding that Morgan was nervous, but discounted the nervousness as a factor justifying the search because it might be explained by Morgan's not being able to find his license. We note that another explanation for Morgan's nervousness might have been the fact that he was carrying a loaded .22-caliber pistol and drug paraphernalia while speaking to an officer of the law. We also note that Officer *215Mulock testified that Morgan appeared more nervous than the "usual person stopped by the police." We conclude that the court of appeals, and this court, can use Morgan's nervousness as a factor in its de novo determination of the legality of Officer Mulock's pat-down search.
In the present matter, we agree with the court of appeals that the totality of the circumstances known to Officer Mulock justified a pat-down search of Morgan for weapons. Officer Mulock observed the defendant driving in and out of alleyways at four a.m., in an area which the officer considered a high-crime area, and in a car with an expired license. Officer Mulock observed that the defendant "appeared nervous" while failing to produce his operator's license. According to Officer Mulock's later testimony at the suppression hearing, Morgan was more nervous than the typical person stopped by the police. A reasonably prudent officer in the position of Officer Mulock could have concluded that Morgan might be armed. Terry, 392 U.S. at 30 (frisk is justified "where a police officer observes unusual conduct which leads him reasonably to conclude in light of his experience that.. . the persons with whom he is dealing may be armed and presently dangerous"). We find that these facts, taken in combination, were sufficient to cause a reasonable officer to have a reasonable suspicion that Morgan might be armed, and justified the limited pat-down search for weapons which Officer Mulock conducted.
On this review, the State urges us to formulate a "bright-line" rule making all searches justified when a police officer intends to place a suspect in a squad car. We decline. This case is simply resolved on settled Fourth Amendment law.
*216By the Court. — The decision of the court of appeals is affirmed.
The Fourth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States provides:
*208The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.
Article I, § 11 of the Wisconsin Constitution provides:
Searches and seizures. SECTION 11 The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects against unreasonable searches and seizures shall not be violated; and no warrant shall issue but upon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing-the place to be searched and the persons or things to be seized.

=== CASE 9739371 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:13:08.262413+00 ===

JANINE P. GESKE, J.
(concurring). I fully concur in not only the mandate, but also in the legal analysis presented in the majority opinion. I am writing this concurrence solely to address the dissent.
As noted in the dissent, the "controlling principles of law applicable to this case are firmly established." (Dissent at 218.) These include the principle that the determination of whether an officer had the requisite reasonable suspicion to conduct a pat-down must be based on the totality of the circumstances. This court has often reiterated that "all of the circumstances . . . are to be considered in determining what was reasonable police procedure in the particular situation." State v. Williamson, 58 Wis. 2d 514, 520, 206 N.W.2d 613 (1973) (quoting State v. Chambers, 55 Wis. 2d 289, 297, 198 N.W.2d 377 (1972)).
A court must employ common sense in its analysis of whether an officer, at the time of the encounter, faced a situation which in its entirety justified a pat-down. Individual factors cannot simply be pulled out and discarded one by one. As the Supreme Court noted, even "Terry itself involved a 'series of acts, each of them perhaps innocent' if viewed separately, 'but which taken together warranted further investigation.'" United States v. Sokolow, 490 U.S. 1, 9-10 (1989) (quoting Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 22 (1968)). The facts and inferences relied upon need not all be given equal weight but the totality of the circumstances confronting the officer must at least be considered.
I agree with the dissent's assertion that hindsight cannot constitutionally be employed to justify a pat-*217down. (Dissent at 223.) However, neither can hindsight be used to selectively discount facts and circumstances as they were perceived by the officer at the time of the encounter. The totality of circumstances must be examined not from the viewpoint of one sitting on a judicial bench under the cold white lights of a safe courtroom, but rather from the viewpoint of a police officer standing in what he believes to be a "fairly-high-crime" area at 4:00 a.m. next to a car with three men in it, having to make that split-second decision of whether, under the circumstances, to pat-down Morgan for the officer's own safety. Did the officer have a reasonable suspicion Morgan might be armed under the circumstances? At 4:00 a.m. on March 2, Officer Mullock had observed the car exit an alley, make several turns and then enter another alley at a time when there was not much traffic on the road. He had observed a vehicle with expired plates which contained three men. Upon stopping the car, he saw Morgan nervously fail to locate a driver's license despite repeatedly checking his pockets and wallet.
The key, as with any Fourth Amendment question, is reasonableness. Terry, 392 U.S. at 19. I agree with the majority in our de novo review that, under the circumstances presented to Officer Mullock at the time of the pat-down, his suspicion that Morgan may be armed was reasonable.
I am authorized to state that Chief Justice Roland B. Day and Justices Donald W. Steinmetz, William A. Bablitch, Jon P. Wilcox and Ann Walsh Bradley join this concurring opinion.

=== CASE 2219262 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:07.722223+00 ===

856 N.E.2d 1202 (2006)
In the Matter of Stanley E. ROBISON, Jr.
No. 22S00-0610-DI-361.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
November 20, 2006.
ORDER APPROVING STATEMENT OF CIRCUMSTANCES AND CONDITIONAL AGREEMENT FOR DISCIPLINE
Pursuant to Ind. Admission and Discipline Rule 23, Section 11, the Indiana Supreme Court Disciplinary Commission and the respondent have submitted for approval a Statement of Circumstances and Conditional Agreement for Discipline stipulating agreed facts and proposed discipline as summarized below:
Facts: Respondent represented the husband in a dissolution of marriage action. *1203 The husband and wife had separated in early February 2005, with the wife remaining in the marital residence. On February 14, 2005, respondent filed a dissolution petition along with a motion for a restraining order. The motion was unverified and alleged the residence belong to husband and that wife had a history of destroying property, drinking and verbal abuse. The motion sought wife's removal from the residence. Wife, who was unrepresented by counsel, was not notified of the filing. Further, the motion failed to include a certification of the efforts made to notify the wife, or why notice should not be given. The judge signed the Order and the Sheriff removed the wife from the residence without giving her an opportunity to take her possessions.
Violations: Respondent's conduct violated Ind. Professional Conduct Rule 3.5(b), which prohibits ex parte communication with a judge.
Discipline: Public reprimand.
The Court, having considered the submission of the parties, now APPROVES and ORDERS the agreed discipline. Costs of this proceeding are assessed against the respondent. The Court further finds that with the acceptance of this agreement the hearing officer appointed in this case is discharged.
The Clerk of this Court is directed to forward a copy of this Order to the hearing officer and in accordance with the provisions of Admis.Disc.R. 23, Section 3(d).
All Justices concur.

=== CASE 9739294 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:54.284081+00 ===

OPINION
NAJAM, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
James and Berma Johnson ("the John-sons" or "Defendants") appeal from the trial court's issuance of an injunction following a bench trial. The injunction prohibited the Johnsons from building a detached two-car garage on their property in the Meadowbrook Subdivision No. 1 ("Meadowbrook"). The trial court also awarded attorney's fees to James L. Dawson, Earl E. Nelson, Jane Graham, and Brenda Kauffman (collectively, "Dawson" or "Plaintiffs"). The Johnsons raise three issues for our review:
1. Whether the trial court erred in its interpretation of a restrictive covenant.
*7712. Whether Dawson's acquiescence in prior restrictive covenant violations by other Meadowbrook landowners bars an action against the Johnsons.
3. Whether the trial court properly awarded attorney's fees.
We affirm.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
In its order, the trial court found the following undisputed facts:
1. Plaintiffs are residents and lot owners in [Meadowbrook] located in Tippecanoe County, Indiana.
2. [The] Johnson{s] are residents of [Meadowbrook] and own residential real estate located at 1283 Meadowbrook Drive, Lafayette.
3. Covenants, Restrictions and Conditions were promulgated and adopted for [Meadowbrook] in May of 1956 and were recorded in the Tippecanoe County Recorder's Office.
4. The Restrictive Covenants stipulated into evidence are valid and enforceable restrictions on the use of each lot in [Meadowbrook] including the Johnsonsg' lot.
5. Plaintiffs ... are each entitled to enforce the terms and conditions of the Restrictive Covenant applicable to [Mea-dowbrook].
6. Defendants' lot currently contains a detached single-family dwelling, which includes an attached private garage for two (2) cars.
7. Defendants seek to build an additional detached private garage for two (2) additional cars.
8. Restrictive Covenant No. 2 provides:
No structure shall be erected, altered, placed or permitted to remain on any residential building lot other than one detached single-family dwelling not to exceed two stories in height and a private garage for not more than three cars; carports shall be considered as garages.
"ok os
12. At the May 3, 2005[,] meeting [of the Board of Directors of Meadow-brook], the Board members approved the plans for the [Johnsons' additional] garage.
ook
16. Based upon ... documents submitted by Defendants ... a building permit was issued by Tippecanoe County on May 23, 2005.
17. The Board of Directors of [Mea-dowbrook] met again on May 23, 2005[,] and voted to disapprove construction of the Johnsons' garage.
18. The Johnsons proceeded after May 28, 2005[,] with excavating and pouring concrete for the footings pursuant to the building permit.
19. On June 8, 2005[,] the Johnsons received a letter from Plaintiffs' attorney demanding that the Johnsons cease construction, citing Restrictive Covenant Number 2 of [Meadowbrook].
Hood ok
25. There are numerous detached garages, sheds, and carports in [Meadow-brook].
Appellants' Exhibit A at 1-4. The trial court went on to make the following legal conclusions:
3. The plaintiffs did not waive [their] right[s] or acquiesce in the defendants|'] [sic 1] action.
*772#o tok
5. The Covenants that govern [Mea-dowbrook], as amended, do not give the Board of Directors and Officers the authority to issue binding approval of nonconforming structures within the Subdivision.
ock
7. Paragraph 2 of the Restrictive Covenants is ambiguous. It unambiguously states that only one single family, detached dwelling, no more than two stories in height, may be constructed on any lot. It is ambiguous as to how many garages or carports, for how many cars, are permitted. The Court finds that the intention of the parties was to restrict the number of cars for which garages were built, and not to restrict the number of garages built for them. The Court finds that a garage is permitted for no more than three cars, but there may be one garage for two cars and another garage for one car or one garage for three cars, or three garages for three cars. The use of the word "a" to modify garage rather than the word "one" leads the Court to this conclusion. 8. The Court therefore concludes that the building of a second garage does not violate the Restrictive Covenants, but the plan to have garage space for four cars does violate the Restrictive Covenants.
ock ock
12. The Court finds that $175.00 per hour is a reasonable attorney's fee. The Court finds that plaintiffs are entitled to their attorney fees and costs. The Court awards $5,600.00 in attorney fees and court costs of $111.00.
13. Defendants are enjoined from completing their project in a manner which would result in garage space for more than three cars on their lot. Defendants are ordered to pay plaintiffs' attorney fees and costs in the sum of $5,711.00.
Id. at 5-7 (emphasis added). This appeal ensued.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
Issue One: The Restrictive Covenant
A restrictive covenant is an agreement between a grantor and a grantee in which the latter agrees to refrain from using his property in a particular manner. Mayer v. BMR Properties, LLC, 830 N.E.2d 971, 979 (Ind.Ct.App.2005). One purpose of restrictive covenants is to maintain or enhance the value of land "by controlling the nature and use of lands subject to a covenant's provisions." Grandview Lot Owners Ass'n v. Harmon, 754 N.E.2d 554, 557 (Ind.Ct.App.2001) (quoting Campbell v. Spade, 617 N.E.2d 580, 583 (Ind.Ct.App.1993)). Because covenants are a form of express contract, we apply the same rules of construction. Renfro v. McGuyer, 799 N.E.2d 544, 547 (Ind.Ct.App.2003), trans. denied. Construction of the terms of a written contract .is a pure question of law for the court and we conduct a de novo review of the trial court's conclusions in that regard. Grandview, 754 N.E.2d at 557.
Indiana law permits restrictive covenants but finds them disfavored and justified only to the extent they are unambiguous and enforcement is not adverse to public policy. Holliday v. Crooked Creek Villages Homeowners Assoc., Inc., 759 N.E.2d 1088, 1092 (Ind.Ct.App.2001). *773When courts are called upon to interpret restrictive covenants, they are to be strictly construed, and all doubts should be resolved in favor of the free use of property and against restrictions. Renfro, 799 N.E.2d at 547. The covenanting parties' intent must be determined from the specific language used and from the situation of the parties when the covenant was made. Mayer, 830 N.E.2d at 979. Specific words and phrases cannot be read ex-elusive of other contractual provisions. Id. In addition, the parties' intentions must be determined from the contract read in its entirety. Id. We attempt to construe contractual provisions so as to harmonize the agreement, id., and so as not to render any terms ineffective or meaningless, City of Lawrenceburg v. Milestone Contractors, L.P., 809 N.E.2d 879, 883 (Ind.Ct.App.2004), trans. denied.
Here, restrictive covenant number two ("the Restrictive Covenant"), provides: "No structure shall be erected, altered, placed or permitted to remain on any residential building lot other than one detached single-family dwelling not to exceed two stories in height and a private garage for not more than three cars; carports shall be considered as garages." Appellant's Exhibit A at 2. The Johnsons maintain that the Restrictive Covenant's limitation of " 'not more than three cars' can reasonably be read to apply solely to any detached garage, or to the total amount of garage space on the property." Appellant's Brief at 7. Thus, the Johnsons argue, the Restrictive Covenant must be interpreted in a manner that favors the free use of the property, which, for the John-sons, means allowing the construction of a detached two-car garage to accompany their attached two-car garage. Dawson, on the other hand, asserts that the Restrictive Covenant is unambiguous regarding the maximum garage space permitted, namely, space for three cars. We agree with Dawson and the trial court's analysis that "the intention of the parties was to restrict the number of cars for which garages were built." Appellant's Exhibit A at 6.
The Restrictive Covenant must be interpreted as a whole. We agree with the trial court that the phrase "a private garage" is, in isolation, ambiguous as to the number of attached-detached garage combinations available to a Meadowbrook landowner, especially in light of the drafters' explicit use of the word "one" to modify "detached single-family dwelling" in the immediately preceding clause. Appellant's Exhibit A at 2. What is unambiguous, however, is the restrictive phrase "for not more than three cars." Id. "If the language is clear and unambiguous, we give that language its 'plain, usual, and ordinary meaning."" King v. Ebrens, 804 N.E.2d 821, 828 (Ind.Ct.App.2004). Here, not more than three means not more than three. It does not mean four, five, or six, which could result if the three-car limitation applied separately to an attached garage and a detached garage on the same lot. Further, when there is an ambiguity, "the paramount rule for interpretation is to give effect to the actual intent of the parties ... as collected from the whole instrument...." Renfro, 799 N.E.2d at 547. Again, specific words and phrases cannot be read exclusive of other contractual provisions; rather, the parties' intentions must be determined by reading the contract in its entirety and attempting to construe contractual provisions so as to harmonize the agreement. Mayer, 830 N.E.2d at 979. Thus, in interpreting the Restrictive Covenant as a whole, we first attempt to understand the ambiguous language in conjunction with the unambigu*774ous language.2
Considering the ambiguous and unambiguous language together, the most reasonable interpretation is that Meadow brook landowners are limited to garage space of not more than three cars per lot. To interpret the Restrictive Covenant otherwise, such that the three-car limitation would apply to each garage rather than the total garage space, would eviscerate the Restrictive Covenant by allowing a landowner to erect multiple three-car garages. However, we construe contractual provisions so as not to render any terms ineffective or meaningless. City of Lawrenceburg, 809 N.E.2d at 883. Thus, the following are examples of garage combinations available to Meadowbrook landowners: an attached one, two, or three-car garage; a detached one, two, or three-car garage; an attached one-car garage along with a detached one or two-car garage; or an attached two-car garage along with a detached one-car garage. In each of those examples, the restricting factor is the unambiguous three-car limit. Hence, the Johnsons are not permitted to build a detached two-car garage to accompany their existing attached two-car garage, as that would bring their total garage space to four cars, in violation of the Restrictive Covenant.
Issue Two: Acquiescence
The Johnsons next argue that their building of an additional detached two-car garage is "in line with the traditional usage of the parties"3 as other landowners within Meadowbrook properties have garage space for more than three cars. Appellant's Brief at 7. The Johnsons argue, in effect, that Dawson has acquiesced in prior restrictive covenant violations of other Meadowbrook landowners and is therefore barred from challenging the Johnsons' building of the additional detached two-car garage. We cannot agree.
Paragraph number twenty-seven of the Meadowbrook restrictive covenants reads:
The failure for any period of time to compel compliance with any restrictions, condition or covenant shall in no event be deemed as a waiver of the right to do so thereafter, and shall in no way be construed as a permission to deviate from said restrictions, conditions and covenants.
Appellants' App. at 22. Hence, under paragraph number twenty-seven, Dawson may enforce the Restrictive Covenant against the Johnsons despite prior violations by other Meadowbrook landowners. Nonwaiver clauses generally are enforced in Indiana. See, e.g., HK New Plan Marwood Sunshine Cheyenne, LLC v. Onofrey Food Servs., Inc., 846 N.E.2d 318, 325 (Ind.Ct.App.2006).
Nonetheless, the Johnsons argue that such clauses "have not been enforced [in Indiana law] in the context of a multi-party restrictive covenant. This difference is material." Appellant's Brief at 7. We agree that the enforcement of such non-waiver clauses in the multiparty context is a question of first impression in Indiana courts. That said, we are not persuaded that multiparty nonwaiver clauses are materially different from two-party nonwaiver *775clauses, or that such clauses are per se unenforceable.
The Johnsons are concerned that the enforcement of the nonwaiver clause in the multiparty context "is less likely to have a beneficial effect, and far more likely to have an insidious one.... [A] multi-party non-waiver clause [here] raises the specter of selective enforcement." Id. at 8. In support, the Johnsons cite to Hrisomalos v. Smith, 600 N.E.2d 1363 (Ind.Ct.App.1992). In Hrisomalos, we generally discussed and applied the doctrine of acquiescence. However, no mention was made in Hrisomalos of a nonwaiver clause. Thus, Hrisomalos is inapposite. Further, the Johnsons' argument is unpersuasive on the simple ground that the Johnsons agreed to the Restrictive Covenant. Hence, even if violations and selective enforcement are occurring, the Johnsons are bound by the clause.
Although there is no Indiana case law on this issue, we are persuaded by the reasoning of the Arizona Court of Appeals's recent opinion in Burke v. Voicestream Wireless Corp. II, 207 Ariz. 393, 87 P.3d 81 (App.2004). In Burke,4 the court stated:
Even though [the defendant property owners] presented evidence that the [objecting plaintiff] homeowners in [the] Desert Estates [residential subdivision] have acquiesced in prior violations of [the restrictive covenants], we have not been presented any persuasive reason why the non-waiver provision of the Restrictions should not be enforced in this instance. Unambiguous provisions in restrictive covenants will generally be enforced according to their terms. These Restrictions were drafted to allow enforcement of restrictive covenants by individual homeowners. The non-waiver provision, by its plain language, is intended to prevent a waiver based on prior inaction in enforcing the Restrictions. To hold otherwise would render the non-waiver provision meaningless and violate the expressed intention of the contract among the property owners.
Id. at 86 (citations omitted). Further, enforcement of the nonwaiver clause in the multiparty context allows prospective purchasers of property to rely on recorded restrictions and covenants. See Simms v. Lakewood Village Property Owners Ass'n, 895 S.W.2d 779, 786-87 (Tex.App.1995). Again, restrictive covenants are permissible under Indiana law so long as they are unambiguous and their enforcement is not adverse to public policy. Holliday, 759 N.E.2d at 1092. Paragraph number twenty-seven of the Meadowbrook restrictive covenants is an unambiguous nonwaiver clause, and its enforcement is not adverse to public policy. As such, the Johnsons are barred from raising the defense of acquiescence.
Issue Three: Attorney's Fees
Finally, the Johnsons argue that "it was unjust" for the trial court to award attorney's fees to Dawson given the John-sons' exercise of good faith attempts to comply with the restrictive covenants by seeking the approval of Meadowbrook's Board of Directors. Appellant's Brief at 11. However, "ilt is well settled that one is entitled to attorney fees when provided for by statute or contract." Parrish v. Terre Haute Sav. Bank, 488 N.E.2d 1, 3 (Ind.Ct.App.1982) (citing Trotcky v. Van *776Sickle, 227 Ind. 441, 85 N.E.2d 638 (1949)) (emphasis removed). Paragraph number twenty-six of the restrictive covenants states that "the owner, owners, or persons in possession against whom action is taken shall pay court costs and reasonable attorney's fees in the event judgment is rendered against him." Appellant's App. at 22. The Johnsons do not challenge the reasonableness of the trial court's award, nor do they argue that the clause is ambiguous or that it violates public policy. See Walton v. Claybridge Homeowners Ass'n, Inc., 825 N.E.2d 818, 825-26 (Ind.Ct.App.2005). Because the Johnsons agreed to be responsible for attorney's fees in the event they were found to have violated the restrictive covenants, we cannot say that the award was improper.
Conclusion
Based on the foregoing, we hold that: (1) the Restrictive Covenant limits the cumulative total garage space to three cars; (2) the nonwaiver clause is valid and enforceable; (8) the Johnsons are barred by the nonwaiver clause from asserting the defense of acquiescence; and (4) the award of attorney's fees to Dawson was not improper.
Affirmed.
SHARPNACK, J., concurs.
ROBB, J., dissents with separate opinion.
. Neither party argues whether Dawson acquiesced in prior violations by the Johnsons, *772nor do the facts reveal any such prior violations. Rather, the briefs make it clear that the trial court intended to state that Dawson did not acquiesce in prior violations by other Meadowbrook landowners.
. The paragraphs surrounding the Restrictive Covenant discuss setback requirements and building procedures. Hence, these paragraphs do not aid in the interpretation of the Restrictive Covenant.
. The Johnsons cite as their factual support for this argument the trial court's finding number 25. Thus, we do not accept Dawson's argument that there is no factual basis in the trial court's findings supportive of the Johnsons' position.
. In Burke, the nonwaiver provision provided that "failure to enforce any of the restrictions, rights, reservations, limitations and covenants contained herein shall not in any event be construed or held to be a waiver thereof or consent to any further or succeeding breach or violation thereof." Burke, 87 P.3d at 86.

=== CASE 9739295 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:54.288551+00 ===

ROBB, Judge,
dissenting with separate opinion.
I respectfully dissent from the majority opinion with regard to the restrictive covenant because a less restrictive interpretation should be applied in light of ambiguity within the covenant. Indiana law disfavors restrictive covenants, and any doubt must be resolved in favor of the free use of property and against restrictions. Grandview Lot Owners Ass'n, Inc. v. Harmon, 754 N.E.2d 554, 557 (Ind.Ct.App.2001), trams. denied. The intent of the parties to a restrictive covenant, which is a form of express contract, must be derived from the specific language used, as well as the circumstances of the parties, at the time the covenant was created. Mayer v. BMR Properties, LLC, 830 N.E.2d 971, 979 (Ind.Ct.App.2005). The restrictive covenant must be considered in its entirety, rather than reading specific words and phrases to the exclusion of other provisions. Id.
Presently, the majority isolates the phrase "for not more than three cars" in determining that the intent of the drafters was to limit the number of cars for which garages were built, which the majority extrapolates as resulting in a total of only three spaces available on an entire residential lot. However, closer analysis of the restrictive covenant's inherent ambiguity requires that it be interpreted against the drafters, therefore favoring less restriction of property use.
The restrictive covenant at issue deals with permissible structures on residential lots in Meadowbrook. As the majority notes, the ambiguity in the restrictive covenant stems from language indicating the types and description of structures permitted on each residential lot. Although the limiting phrase "for not more than three cars" is unambiguous, its relation to ambiguous language in the restrictive covenant results in two possible interpretations: the more restrictive, which limits the number of spaces for vehicles on the entire lot to three, and the less restrictive, which limits the number of spaces in a garage structure to three. The majority improperly applies the more restrictive interpretation in light of the ambiguity, rather than construing the covenant against the drafters and in favor of the free use of property.
*777The language of the restrictive covenant disallows any structure on a residential lot "other than one detached single-family dwelling not to exceed two stories in height and a private garage for not more than three (8) cars." Appellants' Appendix at 19. The language does not specify "one dwelling with a garage," or "one dwelling and garage," which would arguably prevent the Johnsons from building a second, detached, garage. Instead, the language, positively stated, permits only two structures on a residential lot: one dwelling and a garage. Here, the John-sons's lot contains one structure, a dwelling. They wish to build a separate garage structure as contemplated by the covenant. Thus, the distinction between types of structures is important where, as here, the landowner's dwelling also incorporates space for vehicles, resulting in ambiguity as to the three-car limitation. The ambiguity must be resolved in favor of the landowner.
Focusing on the two permissible structures does not discount the size limitation contained in the restrictive covenant. Just as the dwelling structure described in the provision is limited in size to two stories, the garage structure is limited in size by the number of cars it may contain. As phrased, the unambiguous clause "for not more than three cars" directly modifies "a private garage," the permissible second structure. It may well be that the drafters of the restrictive covenant meant to restrict total space for cars on an entire residential lot, but the language of the covenant does not state that the total space on each lot shall not exceed that required for three cars. The limitation is reserved for garage structures. Here, the Johnsons's proposed garage will have space for two cars, which is less than the limitation imposed upon garage structures under the covenant's language.
The less restrictive interpretation does not render language of the restrictive covenant ineffective or meaningless. Rather, it emphasizes the permissibility of having two structures on a residential lot, and functions to limit the size of one of these structures, a private garage, to space for no more than three cars. Indeed, three means three as applied to garage structures. Extending this limitation to the entire residential lot, rather than just to a garage structure, is contrary to the presumption against the drafters where there is ambiguity in the language of the covenant. Moreover, the majority's fear that the less restrictive interpretation will result in the potential erection of multiple three-car garages is overstated. In fact, the restrictive covenant does not permit building more than a singular dwelling structure and a singular garage structure on each lot. Thus, because the Johnsons wish to build a garage structure with space for two cars on a lot that currently contains only a dwelling, they are in compliance with the limitation imposed by the restrictive covenant.
Apart from the language of the restrictive covenant at issue, the intent of the parties as evinced by the circumstances at the time the covenant was drafted supports construing it against the drafters. This is evident in paragraphs following the restrictive covenant, to which they relate. The restrictive covenant at issue is the second paragraph in a long list of restrictive covenants, and is the first of three restrictive covenants directly dealing with structures on residential lots in Meadow-brook. It establishes the two structures allowable on these lots, and is followed by paragraphs pertinent to structures on each residential lot by delineating setback requirements and the procedure for erection or placement of structures on lots. Far from being irrelevant to the interpretation of the restrictive covenant at issue, this surrounding context supports the restric*778tive covenant's larger purpose as being to limit the type, number, and specifications of structures upon a residential lot. For this purpose, as a permissible structure, only a-garage is explicitly limited to hold no more than three cars. Projecting this limitation onto dwelling structures or the entirety of a residential lot does not resolve the doubts created by the covenant's language against restriction and in favor of the owner's free use of the property. __
As for the majority's discussion of aequi-escence, I do not disagree that Dawson may now seek to enforce the restrictive covenant, although there has been a marked lack of enforcement in the past. Nevertheless, even this lack of previous enforcement weighs in favor of the John-sons's free use of property and against the drafters of the ambiguous covenant. The issue is not whether Dawson seeks to correct a previously applied interpretation of the restrictive covenant, and therefore pursues enforcement of the more restrictive interpretation rather than an incorrect, less restrictive interpretation. The interpretation of the restrictive covenant has always been ambiguous. In the absence of discussion as to the proper interpretation of the restrictive covenant, and where other three-car garages have been erected in Meadowbrook, a reasonable person would assume that the less restrictive interpretation, limiting only garage structures to space for no more than three cars, is controlling.
Moreover, there is no evidence from past enforcement that suggests the more restrictive interpretation propounded by Dawson, and adopted by the trial court and the majority of this court, was the intent of the drafters. Had prior enforcement indicated that the intent of the drafters was to impose the greater restriction, the current problem arising from the covenant's ambiguity may have been lessened or eliminated. In other words, prior actions may shed light on the meaning of a provision. As this is not presently the case, and because the ambiguity remains, it must be resolved against the drafters and in favor of the Johnsons.
The end result is that the ambiguity in the restrictive covenant requires an interpretation against the drafters, and favoring the Johnsons's free use of their property. A narrow construction of the restriction applied to the present cireum-stances permits the Johnsons to build a separate garage structure limited to space for three cars or less. Although the trial court was correct that the covenant restricts the number of cars for which a garage structure may be built, it incorrectly applied that limitation to the entirety of the residential lot, including the landowner's dwelling, rather than only to the proposed garage structure. This wrongly imposes the greater restriction where ambiguity in the restrictive covenant dictates lesser restriction. Given the presumption against the drafters, as well as the fact that prior conduct seemingly permitted the Johnsons's actions, the less restrictive interpretation should govern the present outcome.

=== CASE 9739296 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:55.488108+00 ===

DAVID T. PROSSER, J.
¶ 1. This is a review of a published decision of the court of appeals, State v. Davison, 2002 WI App 109, 255 Wis. 2d 715, 647 N.W.2d 390, which reversed the judgment of the Kenosha County Circuit Court, following Jimmie Davison's (Davison) negotiated guilty plea to one count of aggravated battery, one count of special circumstances battery (battery by prisoner), and one count of threats to injure, all as a repeater. The court of appeals concluded that the aggravated battery and battery by prisoner punishments were multiplicitous, in violation of Davison's double jeopardy rights under the United States and Wisconsin Constitutions. Id., ¶ 20.
¶ 2. Two issues are presented for review. First, does a criminal defendant who pleads guilty to several crimes in a negotiated plea agreement waive the right to raise a multiplicity claim against one of the resulting convictions? Second, did the circuit court err in entering a judgment of conviction for one count of aggravated battery and one count of battery by prisoner on the facts of this case? More specifically, did the legislature intend in Wis. Stat. § 939.66(2m) (1999-2000)1 to prohibit conviction for both aggravated battery under Wis. Stat. § 940.19(6) and battery by prisoner under Wis. Stat. § 940.20(1) in the prosecution of a single act?
¶ 3. We hold that the legislature did not clearly intend in § 939.66(2m) to bar convictions for both aggravated battery under § 939.19(6) and battery by prisoner under § 940.20(1) in a single prosecution aris*151ing out of a single act. When the broad language of § 939.66(2m) is viewed in its full context, considering its legislative history as well as the different harms addressed by different battery statutes, we conclude that § 939.66(2m) was intended to address specific problems pertaining to § 940.19 and not intended to prohibit cumulative punishments from convictions under the two battery statutes.
¶ 4. Davison's convictions for both aggravated battery and battery by prisoner were in conformity with legislative intent and thus did not violate his due process right against multiplicitous punishments. Because we conclude that Davison's multiplicity objection fails on the merits, we decline to decide whether, by pleading guilty, he waived his right to raise this claim.
I. FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
¶ 5. The facts in this case are taken from the criminal complaint. In 1997, Jimmie Davison was an inmate at the Kenosha Correctional Center, serving a 12-year sentence for first-degree sexual assault. During the day, he was assigned to a work release program at a farm in Franksville. On November 11, 1997, Davison arranged for his wife to meet him for lunch at his work site. When Mrs. Davison arrived at the grounds about noon, Davison got into her car and instructed her to drive to a remote area of the farm and park inside an isolated shed-type building. Once there, he pushed his food aside and began making sexual advances, which Mrs. Davison rejected.
¶ 6. Davison became very angry when his wife drew away. He grabbed her around the neck with both hands, pulling her face close to his. For the next 45 minutes or so, Davison intermittently choked her, at*152tempted to kiss or grope her, pulled up her dress, and screamed at her when she resisted him. Mrs. Davison told him that he was "really hurting" her and later told police that she felt sure that Davison was going to kill her. When she broke free and fled from the car, Davison caught her and forced her back into the shed and car. He continued to choke her. She said she had a hard time breathing and was afraid Davison would break her neck or jaw because his grip was so tight. Later, witnesses saw evidence of black and blue marks on Mrs. Davison's arm and of bruises, scratches, and bleeding around her neck.
¶ 7. At approximately 1:00 p.m., Mrs. Davison was able to persuade her husband that he would be in trouble if he got back late from lunch, and he drove the car back to the work area. Before exiting the car, however, Davison suddenly, violently punched the left side of Mrs. Davison's head. She had a black eye for approximately two weeks. A physician later noted bruises and tenderness around her eye, as well as handprints around both of Mrs. Davison's ears and under her jaw.
¶ 8. Mrs. Davison told police that one reason she visited her husband was that he had agreed to a divorce as soon as he got out of prison but had promised to fight her "all the way" if she filed while he was still incarcerated. When she visited him on a second occasion, February 8, 1998, with their two children, Davison threatened to kill her if she filed for divorce. He bluntly declared that he had "set a plan in motion" to have her killed within three days if she tried to break up their family.
¶ 9. On June 26, 1998, the Kenosha County District Attorney's Office filed a criminal complaint reciting these facts and charging Davison with one count *153each of kidnapping,2 false imprisonment,3 and aggravated battery under Wis. Stat. § 940.19(6),4 all as a repeater under Wis. Stat. § 939.62(l)(b). These charges related to the November 11, 1997, incidents. In addition, the complaint contained one count of threats to injure under Wis. Stat. § 943.30(1), as a repeater, based on the separate February 8, 1998, incident. After Davi-son waived his preliminary hearing, the prosecutor added a count of special circumstances battery (battery by prisoner) under Wis. Stat. § 940.20(1),5 as a repeater, to the information. This additional count was based on the events of November 11.
¶ 10. In response to the added count, Davison filed a motion claiming that the two battery charges were multiplicitous under Wis. Stat. § 939.66(2m)6 and violated the constitutional prohibition against double *154jeopardy. After a hearing, Kenosha County Circuit Judge David M. Bastianelli denied Davison's motion, finding that the charges, were not multiplicitous or in violation of double jeopardy.
¶ 11. Thereafter, Davison entered a negotiated plea, agreeing to plead guilty to aggravated battery as a repeater, battery by prisoner as a repeater, and threatening to injure as a repeater. For its part, the State agreed to dismiss, but read-in, the charges for kidnapping as a repeater and false imprisonment as a repeater. The plea bargain did not incorporate any provision forbidding Davison from making a multiplicity or double jeopardy claim on appeal.
¶ 12. After accepting the guilty plea, the circuit court sentenced Davison to six years in prison for aggravated battery, five years to be served consecutively for battery by prisoner, and another five years to be served consecutively for the threats to injure. Davison appealed. During the briefing stage of his appeal, he complained that his appointed counsel failed to adequately consult with him and respond to his inquiries. The court of appeals granted Davison's counsel's motion to withdraw, directed the public defender to appoint new counsel, and then granted additional time for filing a postconviction motion and appeal.
¶ 13. In early 2001 Davison's new counsel filed a postconviction motion reasserting the multiplicity and double jeopardy claim, as well as other claims not relevant to this appeal. The circuit court again denied the multiplicity and double jeopardy claim, finding that, *155while the claim might have merit, the issue had been waived by Davison's guilty plea. Davison again appealed.
¶ 14. In reversing the circuit court, the court of appeals rejected the State's contention that Davison had waived his multiplicity claim by pleading guilty to the charges. Davison, 255 Wis. 2d 715, ¶ 13. The court characterized Davison's claim as being one of double jeopardy and observed that double jeopardy claims are not governed by the guilty plea waiver rule. Id., ¶ 12. The court also concluded that, while aggravated battery and battery by prisoner are offenses that are different in law, § 939.66(2m) applies to all battery statutes, including those outside of § 940.19. Id., ¶¶ 18, 20. Therefore, the court said, Davison could not be convicted of both § 940.19(6) and § 940.20(1), and the court remanded the case to determine the appropriate remedy under State v. Robinson, 2002 WI 9, 249 Wis. 2d 553, 638 N.W.2d 564. Id., ¶ 25. The State petitioned for review, which we granted.
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
¶ 15. This case presents several questions of law. Whether an individual's constitutional right to be free from double jeopardy has been violated is a question of law that this court reviews de novo. State v. Anderson, 219 Wis. 2d 739, 746, 580 N.W.2d 329 (1998). Whether a multiplicity violation exists in a given case, which requires a determination of legislative intent, is a question of law subject to independent appellate review. See State v. Multaler, 2002 WI 35, ¶ 52, 252 Wis. 2d 54, 643 N.W.2d 437.
*156III. CONSTITUTIONAL ANALYSIS
A. Double Jeopardy
¶ 16. The State seeks clarification of the analysis to be employed in multiplicity claims, including a discussion of multiplicity's relationship to double jeopardy. Twenty years ago, in an opinion by then-justice Abra-hamson, this court observed that:
Although the federal constitutional guarantee against double jeopardy has "its roots in antiquity," it is "one of the least understood ... provisions of the Bill of Rights" and the holdings of the United States Supreme Court can "hardly be characterized as models of consistency and clarity." Whalen v. United States, 445 U.S. 684, 699-700 (1980) (Rehnquist, J., dissenting). See also Westen and Drubel, Toward a General Theory of Double Jeopardy, 1978 The Supreme Court Review 81, 82.
State v. Bohacheff, 114 Wis. 2d 402, 406-07, 338 N.W.2d 466 (1983). In the ensuing years, this court has wrestled repeatedly with the proper principles to apply to claims of multiplicity and double jeopardy.7
¶ 17. The Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution reads in part: "nor shall any person be subject for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb." Article I, § 8(1) of the Wisconsin Constitution provides in part that "no person for the same offense may be twice put in jeopardy of punishment ... ."
*157¶ 18. Our tradition is to view these provisions as identical in scope and purpose. Day v. State, 76 Wis. 2d 588, 591, 251 N.W.2d 811 (1977). Consequently, this court accepts decisions of the United States Supreme Court as controlling interpretations of the double jeopardy provisions of both constitutions. State v. Lechner, 217 Wis. 2d 392, 401 n.5, 576 N.W.2d 912 (1998) (citing Day, 76 Wis. 2d at 591, and State v. Calhoun, 67 Wis. 2d 204, 220, 226 N.W.2d 504 (1975)); see also State v. Tappa, 127 Wis. 2d 155, 161, 378 N.W.2d 883 (1985) (citing cases).
¶ 19. The United States Supreme Court has stated that the Double Jeopardy Clause provides three separate protections. "It protects against a second prosecution for the same offense after acquittal. It protects against a second prosecution for the same offense after conviction. And it protects against multiple punishments for the same offense."8 North Carolina v. Pearce, 395 U.S. 711, 717 (1969) (emphasis added). This summary has been quoted or paraphrased many times by this court.9 It does not apply to cases in which a person was never put in "jeopardy" or in which the person is properly subject to retrial.
*158¶ 20. Under this analytical framework, the first two protections involve "a second prosecution." The third protection involves a single prosecution. All three protections implicate "the same offense."
¶ 21. Over the years, courts have struggled with the concept of "the same offense." The seminal case in this regard is Blockburger v. United States, 284 U.S. 299 (1932). Blockburger was charged with five offenses for unlawfully selling drugs. A jury found him guilty of three. The three charges were variations on two sales of a particular drug to the same purchaser. The Court had no difficulty concluding that sales made on consecutive days did not constitute "a single offense" or a "single continuing offense." Blockburger, 284 U.S. at 301-03.10 In this facet of the case, the Court pointed to separate acts to distinguish the offenses. Two offenses were committed.
¶ 22. More significant for our purposes, the Court addressed a second claim made by the defendant, "that the sale charged in [one] count as having been made not from the original stamped package, and the same sale [charged in a second count] as having been made not in pursuance of a written order of the purchaser, constitute but one offense for which only a single penalty lawfully may be imposed." Id. at 301 (emphasis added). The court addressed this second claim as follows:
Each of the offenses created requires proof of a *159different element. The applicable rule is that where the same act or transaction constitutes a violation of two distinct statutory provisions, the test to be applied to determine whether there are two offenses or only one, is whether each provision requires proof of a fact which the other does not. Gavieres v. United States, 220 U.S. 338, 342 [1911], and authorities cited. In that case this court quoted from and adopted the language of the Supreme Court of Massachusetts in Morey v. Commonwealth, 108 Mass. 433 [1871]: "A single act may be an offense against two statutes; and if each statute requires proof of an additional fact which the other does not, an acquittal or conviction under either statute does not exempt the defendant from prosecution and punishment under the other." ... Applying the test, we must conclude that here, although both sections were violated by the one sale, two offenses were committed.
Id. at 304. For this second facet of the case, there was only one act, but it violated two statutes, each of which required proof of a different element.
¶ 23. There is no reference in Blockburger to the Double Jeopardy Clause of the Fifth Amendment. There is no direct reference to "double jeopardy" in any context, or to "cumulative punishment." The Court observed that "each offense is subject to the penalty prescribed; and if that be too harsh, the remedy must be afforded by act of Congress, not by judicial legislation under the guise of construction." Blockburger, 284 U.S. at 305. However, the opinion cites Gavieres v. United States, 220 U.S. 338 (1911), which involved a 1902 Act of Congress that read: "No person, for the same offense, shall be twice put in jeopardy of punishment." Id. at 341 (citing section 5 of the Act of Congress of July 1, 1902, 32 Stat., c 1369, 691). In addition, the Court affirmed a decision of the Court of Appeals, Blockburger v. United States, 50 F.2d 795 (7th Cir. 1931), in which the dissent*160ing judge wrote: "I do not think the penalty section of the statute contemplates such double punishment for the same transaction." Id. at 799 (Alschuler, J., dissenting). Thus, the Court could not have been oblivious to the implications of its decision for future cases.
¶ 24. The "elements only test" articulated in Blockburger has frequently been used to aid courts in determining whether a charge is "the same offense" for purposes of any of the protections embodied in the Double Jeopardy Clause.11 United States v. Dixon, 509 U.S. 688, 696 (1993). Because the Blockburger test sometimes produces unsatisfactory results, however, it is "now seen as simply a rule of construction creating a rebuttable prescription of sameness." Akhil Reed Amar, Double Jeopardy Law Made Simple, 106 Yale L. Rev. 1807, 1819 (1997) (citing Garrett v. United States, 471 U.S. 773, 778-79 (1985); Ohio v. Johnson, 467 U.S. 493, 499 n.8 (1984); Missouri v. Hunter, 459 U.S. 359, 366-67 (1983)); see also Albernaz v. United States, 450 U.S. 333, 337 (1981); Whalen v. United States, 445 U.S. 684, 691 (1980); Iannelli v. United States, 420 U.S. 770, 785 n.17 (1975).
¶ 25. The impact of a judicial determination that a charge is the same offense under the Blockburger test appears to depend to some extent upon whether the charge comes in a "second prosecution" or in a single, first prosecution. See Brown v. Ohio, 432 U.S. 161, 165 (1977); Bohacheff, 114 Wis. 2d at 407 n.5; Peter Westen *161& Richard Drubel, Toward a General Theory of Double Jeopardy, in 1978 The Supreme Court Review 121 n.188 (Philip B. Kurland & Gerhard Casper eds., 1979).
It is important to distinguish here between the constitutional standards for multiple punishment and the distinct standards for a multiple prosecution. Although the Blockburger Rule operates as nothing more than a rebuttable presumption for purposes of multiple punishment, it may have a stricter and more rigid application in the context of multiple prosecution.
Westen & Drubel, supra, at 121-22 n.188. The Court appears less tolerant of prosecuting the same offense in a second prosecution.
¶ 26. If the same offense is involved in a single prosecution, we look to whether the same offense is part of: (1) a "second sentence" challenge, (2) a unit-of-prosecution challenge, or (3) a cumulative punishments challenge, as we have in the present case. See Whalen, 445 U.S. at 702-705 (Rehnquist, J., dissenting) (describing the three "strands" of "multiple punishment" precedent) (citing cases).
¶ 27. Before discussing "punishment," it should be noted that the Supreme Court has said that the Double Jeopardy Clause does not prohibit the State "from prosecuting [a defendant] for [ ] multiple offenses in a single prosecution," even in situations where it could not impose cumulative punishments for the same offense. Johnson, 467 U.S. at 500 (emphasis added). The Johnson case distinguishes prosecution on overlapping charges for the same offense from punishment on those charges for the same offense and explains that prosecution does not equal punishment.
*162¶ 28. Looking then solely to cumulative punishments imposed in a single prosecution for the same offense, "the Double Jeopardy Clause does no more than prevent the sentencing court from prescribing greater punishment than the legislature intended." Missouri v. Hunter, 459 U.S. 359, 366 (1983). "Even if the crimes are the same under Blockburger, if it is evident that a state legislature intended to authorize cumulative punishments, a court's inquiry is at an end." Johnson, 467 U.S. at 499 n.8; see also Garrett v. United States, 471 U.S. 773, 779 (1985).
¶ 29. As noted above, the United States Supreme Court summarized the double jeopardy protections as including "multiple punishments for the same offense." Pearce, 395 U.S. at 717. For this proposition, the Court cited only cases involving a second sentence imposed by the court. Id.12 Hence, uncertainty has developed whether the prohibition against "multiple punishments for the same offense" can be reconciled with the Court's conclusion that a legislative body may approve cumulative punishments for the same offense, even when the offense is identical in law and fact.13
*163¶ 30. To address this uncertainty, the Court's rule prohibiting "multiple punishments for the same offense" should be modified in cases involving simultaneous convictions under more than one statute. We read the Supreme Court as saying that when a defendant is convicted under more than one statute for a single act or transaction and the charges constitute "the same offense" because they are identical in law and fact, the Double Jeopardy Clause prohibits cumulative punishments from these convictions unless the relevant legislative body intended to authorize cumulative punishments. The "question whether punishments imposed by a court after a defendant's conviction upon criminal charges are unconstitutionally multiple cannot be resolved without determining what punishments the Legislative Branch has authorized." Whalen, 445 U.S. at 688.
¶ 31. The Double Jeopardy Clause does not itself restrict a legislature's power to make law. "Because the substantive power to prescribe crimes and determine punishments is vested with the legislature, United States v. Wiltberger, 5 Wheat. 76, 93 (1820), the question under the Double Jeopardy Clause whether punish*164ments are 'multiple' is essentially one of legislative intent." Johnson, 467 U.S. at 499 (citing Hunter, 459 U.S. at 366-68).
¶ 32. In sum, we conclude that the imposition of cumulative punishments from different statutes in a single prosecution for "the same offense" violates double jeopardy when the cumulative punishments are not intended by the legislature. See Whalen, 445 U.S. at 689; see also Rutledge v. United States, 517 U.S. 292, 297 (1996).
¶ 33. The "same offense" in this specific situation should be an offense identical in law and fact. The imposition of cumulative punishments not authorized by the legislature is a due process violation, not a double jeopardy violation, when the punishments do not spring from the same offense. "The same offense" is the sine qua non of double jeopardy. State v. Trawitzki, 2001 WI 77, ¶ 22, 244 Wis. 2d 523, 628 N.W.2d 801; State v. Grayson, 172 Wis. 2d 156, 159 n.3, 493 N.W.2d 23 (1992).
B. Multiplicity
¶ 34. The present case involves a claim of "multiplicity." In State v. Rabe, 96 Wis. 2d 48, 61, 291 N.W.2d 809 (1980), we stated:
Multiplicity arises where the defendant is charged in more than one count for a single offense. United States v. Free, 574 F.2d 1221 (5th Cir. 1978); State v. Dreske, 88 Wis. 2d 60, 74, 276 N.W.2d 324 (Ct. App. 1979). As we noted in State v. George, 69 Wis. 2d 92, 230 N.W.2d 253 (1975), multiplicitous charges are impermissible, because they violate the double jeopardy provisions of the state and federal constitutions.
*165Id. at 815. The Rabe statements have been repeated numerous times by this court. See Anderson, 219 Wis. 2d at 746; Grayson, 172 Wis. 2d at 159; Tappa, 127 Wis. 2d at 161. In recent cases, the court has attempted to divide "multiplicity" into categories. State v. Derango, 2000 WI 89, ¶ 27, 236 Wis. 2d 721, 613 N.W.2d 833; Lechner, 217 Wis. 2d 392, 402 n.6.14
¶ 35. Some of our commentary on multiplicity must be re-evaluated in light of the last quarter-century of United States Supreme Court decisions. We know that the Blockburger court long ago explained that a single act may be an offense against two statutes. Blockburger, 284 U.S. at 304. We have learned since Blockburger that "the same offense" may give rise to more than one conviction and punishment, if cumulative punishments for the same offense are intended by the legislature. Rutledge, 517 U.S. at 303. This is the teaching of Hunter, Johnson, and Garrett. This court has heretofore acknowledged as much. In Bohacheff, the court stated:
In recent cases the United States Supreme Court has held that as long as the legislative intent is clear the federal Constitution does not bar the legislature from imposing multiple punishments even if the crimes described by the two statutory provisions under which two punishments are imposed are the same offense.
*166Bohacheff, 114 Wis. 2d at 409 n.7 (emphasis added) (citing Missouri v. Hunter, 459 U.S. 359 (1983), and State v. Gordon, 111 Wis. 2d 133, 137, 330 N.W.2d 564 (1983)).15 In short, legislative intent to authorize cumulative punishments overrides a total identity of law and fact a la Blockburger.
¶ 36. This understanding is significant because this court has said that if offenses "are identical in law and fact, the charges are multiplicitous in violation of the double jeopardy clauses of the federal and state constitutions." Anderson, 219 Wis. 2d at 747; see also Trawitzki, 244 Wis. 2d 523, ¶ 21; Derango, 236 Wis. 2d at ¶ 30. Although this statement is usually true, it is not always true, because the legislature may have intended to authorize cumulative punishments for the same offense.
¶ 37. In situations where the legislature intends to authorize cumulative punishments for the same offense, we may no longer say that the charges are "multiplicitous" or that they violate double jeopardy. Use of the term "multiplicitous" should be limited to situations in which the legislature has not authorized multiple charges and cumulative punishments.
¶ 38. In addition, in discussing multiplicity, a reference to "charges" must be employed carefully, because it is permissible to charge more than one count, even if *167the state may not punish a defendant on more than one count. Johnson, 467 U.S. at 500. In Bohacheff, for instance, the state charged the defendant with being under the influence of an intoxicant while operating a vehicle, in violation of Wis. Stat. § 940.25(1)(a) (1981-82), and having a blood alcohol concentration of .10 or more while operating a vehicle in violation of Wis. Stat. § 940.25(1)(b) (1981-82). Bohacheff, 114 Wis. 2d at 404. The defendant filed a motion to dismiss the complaint on the ground that charging him under both sections violated protections against double jeopardy. The circuit court granted the motion. Id. at 405. This court reversed, concluding that the complaint did not violate double jeopardy because the statutes subjected the defendant to only one conviction and one punishment. Id. This court's ruling was and is consistent with the subsequent Supreme Court decision in Johnson.
¶ 39. Bohacheff did not describe itself as a multiplicity case, although it would have been a multiplicity case if unauthorized cumulative punishments had been imposed. By contrast, Rabe, 96 Wis. 2d 48, did describe itself as a multiplicity case, based upon the charges alone, but it was not. Rabe involved four charges of homicide by intoxicated use of a motor vehicle under the same statute, as four persons were killed in an accident caused by the defendant's intoxication. Id. at 52. The defendant filed a motion to consolidate the four counts into one count on grounds that the defendant's single act of negligently driving his vehicle while intoxicated could not be charged as multiple offenses. The circuit court granted the motion. Id. at 52-53.
¶ 40. In vacating the circuit court's dismissal of three counts, this court adopted the "multiplicity" rhetoric employed by the defendant. We cited United States v. Free, 574 F.2d 1221, 1224 (5th Cir. 1978), for *168the proposition that multiplicity arises where the defendant is charged in more than one count for a single offense. Rabe, 96 Wis. 2d at 61. In Free, the defendant claimed that his indictment was "multiplicitous" because one count charged him with second-degree murder and a second count charged him with unlawfully conveying a weapon designed to kill an inmate from place to place in a federal correctional institution. Free, 574 F.2d at 1224. The court used the Blockburger test to dismiss the defendant's claim as meritless, making no reference to double jeopardy in its decision. Id. For its definition of "multiplicity," the Free court cited Gerber-ding v. United States, 471 F.2d 55, 58 (8th Cir. 1973), another case completely silent on double jeopardy. Free, 574 F.2d at 1224.
¶ 41. Both Free and Gerberding involved different charges, not multiple counts of the same charge. This made them similar to this case, but different from Rabe. As a general proposition, different elements of law distinguish one offense from another when different statutes are charged. Different facts distinguish one count from another when the counts are charged under the same statute.16
¶ 42. There is an established methodology for reviewing multiplicity claims. Trawitzki, 244 Wis. 2d 523, ¶ 21; Anderson, 219 Wis. 2d at 746; Lechner, 217 Wis. 2d at 402-03.
*169¶ 43. First, the court determines whether the charged offenses are identical in law and fact using the Blockburger test. Trawitzki, 244 Wis. 2d 523, ¶ 21; Derango 236 Wis. 2d 721, ¶ 29. If it is determined, using this test, that the offenses are identical in law and fact, the presumption is that the legislative body did not intend to punish the same offense under two different statutes. Whalen, 445 U.S. at 692. "Accordingly, where two statutory provisions proscribe the 'same offense,1 they are construed not to authorize cumulative punishments in the absence of a clear indication of contrary legislative intent." Id. (emphasis added).
¶ 44. Conversely, if under the Blockburger test the charged offenses are different in law or fact, a presumption arises that the legislature did intend to permit cumulative punishments. See Derango, 236 Wis. 2d 721, ¶ 30; Lechner, 217 Wis. 2d at 407; Sauceda, 168 Wis. 2d at 496; State v. Kuntz, 160 Wis. 2d 722, 755, 467 N.W.2d 531 (1991). "This presumption can only be rebutted by clear legislative intent to the contrary." Derango, 236 Wis. 2d 721, ¶ 30; Lechner, 217 Wis. 2d at 407; Kuntz, 160 Wis. 2d at 755 (citing Missouri v. Hunter, 469 U.S. at 367; Albernaz, 450 U.S. at 340).
¶ 45. Second, even if the charged offenses are not identical in law and fact, the court must still determine whether the legislature intended multiple offenses to be brought as a single count. See Anderson, 219 Wis. 2d at 746. At this juncture, however, it is the defendant's burden to show a clear legislative intent that cumulative punishments are not authorized.
*170¶ 46. Applying these principles to this case, there is no dispute that the offense of aggravated battery is not identical in law to the offense of battery by prisoner. Consequently, we are not dealing with a potential double jeopardy violation involving "the same offense." The cumulative punishments against the defendant are not "multiplicitous" either, unless the legislature did not intend to authorize multiple convictions and cumulative punishments for the two battery offenses on these facts. If the legislature did not intend to authorize multiple convictions and cumulative punishments, Davison has a legitimate due process claim. To evaluate this claim, we must concentrate our focus on legislative intent.
IV LEGISLATIVE INTENT
¶ 47. Davison challenges one of his two "battery" convictions on multiplicity grounds, arguing that Wis. Stat. § 939.66(2m) represents a clear expression of legislative intent not to authorize cumulative punishments in his situation. Wisconsin Stat. § 939.66 reads in part as follows:
Conviction of included crime permitted. Upon prosecution for a crime, the actor may be convicted of either the crime charged or an included crime, but not both. An included crime may be any of the following:
(2m) A crime which is'a less serious or equally serious type of battery than the one charged.
¶ 48. Davison notes that aggravated battery and battery by prisoner are both Class D felonies. Thus, if measured by the penalty structure, each crime is an *171"equally serious type of battery."17 As a result, he argues, Wis. Stat. § 939.66(2m) bars conviction of "[a] crime which is [an] . . . equally serious type of battery than the one charged."
¶ 49. Davison does not dispute that the two offenses are not identical in law. Thus, there is a presumption that the legislature intended to permit punishments for both offenses. The critical issue to be decided, then, is whether Wis. Stat. § 939.66(2m) represents a clear legislative intent to prohibit cumulative punishments on the facts before us, rebutting the presumption to the contrary.
¶ 50. As we seek legislative intent in a multiplicity claim, the court does not stop at the language of the subsection. Instead, we analyze four factors to determine legislative intent: (1) all applicable statutory language; (2) the legislative history and context of the statute; (3) the nature of the proscribed conduct; and (4) the appropriateness of multiple punishment for the conduct. See Grayson, 172 Wis. 2d at 160 (citing Tappa, 127 Wis. 2d at 165).18
*172A. Statutory Language
¶ 51. Wisconsin Stat. § 939.66 is the second of two sections that appear under the heading "Rights of the Prosecution" in Subchapter V of Chapter 939. The first section, Wis. Stat. § 939.65, is entitled "Prosecution under more than one section permitted." It provides that "if an act forms the basis for a crime punishable under more than one statutory provision, prosecution may proceed under any or all such provisions." Wis. Stat. § 939.65(1). This section gives a green light to multiple charges, which may result in multiple convictions, under different statutory provisions.19
*173¶ 52. Wisconsin Stat. § 939.66 then speaks of an "included crime":
Upon prosecution for a crime, the actor may be convicted of either the crime charged or an included crime, but not both. An included crime may be any of the following:
(1) a crime which does not require proof of any fact in addition to those which must be proved for the crime charged.
Subsection (1) is a codification of the Blockburger test.
¶ 53. In this case, the two battery offenses share only two elements: (1) the defendant caused bodily harm to the victim, and (2) the defendant intended to cause bodily harm to the victim. Compare Wis JI— Criminal 1226, with Wis JI — Criminal 1228.20 To prove battery by prisoner, the State must prove four elements that are not included in aggravated battery, namely (1) *174the defendant was a prisoner; (2) the victim was a visitor to the defendant's institution; (3) the defendant caused bodily harm without the consent of the victim; and (4) the defendant knew the victim was a visitor to the institution and knew that the victim did not consent to the causing of bodily harm. See Wis JI— Criminal 1228. To prove aggravated battery under § 940.19(6), the State must prove two elements that are not included in battery by prisoner, namely (1) the defendant's conduct created a substantial risk of great bodily harm; and (2) the defendant knew his conduct created a substantial risk of great bodily harm. See Wis JI — Criminal 1226. The marked difference in the elements of the two offenses clearly supports a presumption that the legislature's intent was to permit cumulative punishments.
¶ 54. On the other hand, § 939.66 also provides in subsection (2m) that an included crime includes "a crime which is a less serious or equally serious type of battery than the one charged."
¶ 55. Battery by prisoner is a crime. Wis. Stat. § 940.20(1).
¶ 56. Battery by prisoner is arguably a "type of battery" if "battery" refers to statutory offenses as opposed to physical acts.21
¶ 57. Battery by prisoner is an "equally serious type of battery" because both statutory offenses are Class D felonies. Lechner, 217 Wis. 2d at 410.
*175¶ 58. Based on the plain language of the subsection, one would normally conclude that the legislature intended that the defendant not be convicted of both crimes.
¶ 59. Supporting this conclusion is the fact that the legislature showed elsewhere in Wis. Stat. § 939.66 that it could write more narrowly than subsection (2m) when it wanted to. For instance, subsection (2r) reads: "A crime which is a less serious type of violation under s. 943.23 than the one charged." (Emphasis added). Unlike (2m), this subsection confines the analysis of an included crime to a specific statute. See also subsection (6c) ("A crime that is a less serious type of violation under s. 940.285 than the one charged."); subsection (6e) ("A crime that is a less serious type of violation under s. 940.295 than the one charged."); subsection (7) ("The crime specified in s. 940.11(2) when the crime charged is specified in s. 940.11(1).").
¶ 60. The text also shows that the legislature has repeatedly evinced a concern about overlapping charges of battery. In Wis. Stat. § 939.66, the legislature addressed battery in subsection (5) ("The crime of attempted battery when the crime charged is sexual assault, sexual assault of a child, robbery, mayhem or aggravated battery or an attempt to commit any of them.") and in subsection (6) ("A crime specified in s. 940.285(2)(b)4. or 5. ['maltreatment' of vulnerable adults] when the crime charged is specified in s. 940.19(2) to (6) [subsections of the battery statute pertaining to substantial bodily harm and great bodily harm]."), 940.225(1), (2) or (3) or 940.30.
¶ 61. Finally, the court provided a supportive interpretation of the statute in a parallel subsection. Wisconsin Stat. § 939.66(2) addresses multiple convictions for homicide and prohibits conviction of "a crime *176which is a less serious type of criminal homicide than the one charged." In Lechner,. 217 Wis. 2d 392, the defendant pled no contest to both second-degree reckless homicide and homicide by intoxicated use of a vehicle when both charges involved the death of a single person. The defendant argued that he could not be convicted twice for killing the same person. In rejecting his claim, the court stated:
[T]he legislature, by enacting Wis. Stat. § 939.66(2), has specifically addressed the issue of multiple homicide convictions for a criminal act causing a single death. Where a single act of a defendant forms the basis for a crime punishable under more than one statutory provision, Wis. Stat. § 939.66(2) provides that a defendant may not be convicted for two criminal homicides if one is "a less serious type of criminal homicide." The defendant in this case argues that this section "unequivocally" evinces the legislature's intent to allow only one homicide conviction for causing the death of one person. A closer reading of the plain language in Wis. Stat. § 939.66(2), however, establishes just the opposite.
The plain language of Wis. Stat. § 939.66(2) does not prohibit multiple homicide convictions for killing one person. It bars multiple convictions only when one of the homicide convictions is for a "less serious type" of homicide. Noticeably absent from the prohibitions of Wis. Stat. § 939.66(2) is a bar against multiple homicide convictions when the homicides are "equally serious."
Id. at 407-08 (emphasis added).
¶ 62. We went on to explain that, since the legislature enacted § 939.66(2) as a prohibition against multiple homicide convictions but "limited its application to situations where one homicide conviction is for a less serious type of homicide, we can infer a legislative *177intent not to prohibit multiple convictions when the defendant is convicted for equally serious types of homicide." Id. at 408.
The inference that the legislature did not intend to prohibit multiple convictions for "equally serious" homicides is supported by the fact that the statutory provision immediately following Wis. Stat. § 939.66(2) prohibits multiple convictions when one crime is a "less serious or equally serious type of battery." Wis. Stat. § 939.66(2m) (emphasis added). ... [T]he legislature apparently intended to bar multiple convictions for a single act of battery, regardless of the seriousness of the offenses.
Id. at 408-09.
¶ 63. This rationale is helpful to Davison. Turning Lechner on its head, "we can infer a legislative intent" to prohibit multiple convictions when the defendant is convicted for equally serious types of battery.
¶ 64. In short, Davison is not forced to rely solely on the words in subsection (2m). The words are buttressed by textual analysis and prior case law.
¶ 65. There is, however, another side to the dispute. A literal reading of subsection (2m) of § 939.66 is inconsistent with the general intent of § 939.65, which permits multiple charges under different statutes for a single act and may result in multiple convictions. It is also inconsistent with the test set out in subsection (1) unless (2m) is narrowly construed.
¶ 66. In addition, the introductory sentence and several subsections of § 939.66 may be read to apply only to a single charged offense and to a lesser-included offense that is not charged but is later submitted to the jury. Section 939.66 reads:
Upon prosecution for a crime, the actor may be *178convicted of either the crime charged or an included crime, but not both. An included crime may be any of the following:
(1) A crime which does not require proof of any fact in addition to those which must be proved for the crime charged.
(2m) A crime which is a less serious or equally serious type of battery than the one charged.
Wis. Stat. § 939.66 (emphasis added).
¶ 67. This plausible reading of the statute could make the statute inapplicable to the present case because, in the present case, both battery statutes were charged. As will be seen, the legislative history lends support to this interpretation of the statute.
¶ 68. Alternatively, if subsection (2m) is interpreted to apply to both charged and uncharged crimes, it limits a single act of battery against a single victim to only one "battery" conviction, regardless of the circumstances. The reason for this result is that all "battery" charges will either be "less serious or equally serious" to one of the charged offenses. There will never be a "more serious" battery charge that could simultaneously be prosecuted. To illustrate, if a police officer visited a correctional institution to interview a prisoner and the prisoner attacked the police officer causing great bodily harm, the prisoner could be charged with only one battery offense under any statute, if we adopt the defendant's interpretation of (2m). There is reason to ponder whether the legislature intended such a result.
¶ 69. The plain language interpretation of subsection (2m) is also inconsistent with the plain language of subsection (6). Subsection (6) explicitly exempts simple *179battery, § 940.19(1), from the prohibition of a simultaneous prosecution and conviction of maltreatment under §§ 940.285(2)(b)4. If subsection (2m) is interpreted to preclude conviction of equally serious "types of battery," the exemption in subsection (6) is rendered meaningless.
¶ 70. As noted in ¶ 56 above, the phrase "type of battery" is subject to different interpretations, depending on whether "battery" refers to a statutory offense or a physical act. If one interprets "type of battery" to refer to the "act" as affected by the actor's state of mind and the seriousness of the resulting injury, then those elements are discussed only in § 941.19.
¶ 71. Finally, the State makes two textual arguments. First, the State notes that subsection (2m) speaks simply of the "unadorned appellation 'battery.'" It adds that only in § 940.19 is the word "battery" applied without referring to the persons who commit the battery or the persons against whom the battery is committed.22 Therefore, the State contends, reasonable *180doubt exists whether the word "battery" in § 939.66(2m) was intended to apply to the special circumstances batteries created outside of § 940.19.
¶ 72. Second, the State questions whether it is reasonable to apply § 939.66(2m) to the specific battery provisions relating to named actors or victims and to other similar battery provisions in Chapter 940, given the fact that the purpose of these specialized statutes is to enhance the penalties for committing a general battery under § 940.19. The questionable interaction of statutes, the State argues, creates ambiguity as to the legislature's intended scope of § 939.66(2m).
¶ 73. Under § 940.19, the severity of the different offenses is measured by the actor's intent and the seriousness of the injury suffered by the victim. These factors are wholly absent from the special circumstances batteries in §§ 940.20, 940.201, 940.203, 940.205, and 940.207 — offenses based on the special status of the actor or the victim of the battery.
¶ 74. To sum up, we think subsection (2m) is ambiguous. Read literally in one way, it is very helpful to the defendant. Read literally in another way, it is inapplicable to the defendant. Read as the defendant wishes it read, it contradicts the principle of §§ 939.65 and 939.66(1) and produces some curious results. Subsection (2m) is not clear enough to resolve the issue of legislative intent. *181B. Legislative History and Context
¶ 75. We turn now to the legislative history and context of Wis. Stat. § 939.66(2m). Both parties and the court of appeals agree that subsection (2m) was created in response to this court's decision in State v. Richards, 123 Wis. 2d 1, 365 N.W.2d 7 (1985). We think it is useful, however, to examine the full history of Wis. Stat. § 939.66.
¶ 76. Wisconsin Stat. § 939.66 was created in two steps in the early 1950s as part of the revision of the state criminal code. Chapter 623, Laws of 1953; ch. 696, Laws of 1955. The new text was accompanied by extensive comments. The comment for the section at issue provides in part:
This section permits conviction of a crime included within the crime charged and states what crimes are included crimes. The reason behind the rule of this section is the state's difficulty in determining before a trial exactly what crime or degree of the crime it will be able upon the trial to prove beyond a reasonable doubt. There is no disadvantage to the defendant in such a rule, for he is apprised of the charges against him by reason of the fact that the crime charged is broader than the included crime.
An example of an included crime under subsection (1) is the crime of burglary when the crime charged is aggravated burglary. An example of an included crime under subsection (2) is homicide by reckless conduct when the crime charged is first-degree murder. An example of an included crime under subsection (3) is injury by reckless conduct when the crime charged is battery.
1953 A.B. 100, at 53 (emphasis added).
*182¶ 77. The clear implication of the comment is that a defendant may be charged with one crime but ultimately convicted of an "included crime" — a lesser included crime that is not charged — when the State is unable to prove the more serious crime. In these circumstances, the defendant has no complaint "by reason of the fact that the crime charged is broader than the included crime." Id.
¶ 78. In 1985 this court decided State v. Richards, 123 Wis. 2d 1, 365 N.W.2d 7 (1985). The question presented in Richards was whether simple battery and intermediate battery, as proscribed by the version of Wis. Stat. § 940.19 applicable at that time,23 were lesser-included offenses of aggravated battery. Id. at 2. The court applied the elements-only test articulated in § 939.66(1) and concluded that simple battery and intermediate battery were not included offenses of aggravated battery, because the two "lesser" crimes had different elements, requiring proof of nonconsent, *183whereas aggravated battery did not. Id. at 4, 6. As a result, we affirmed the circuit court's decision refusing to submit either simple battery or intermediate battery to the jury as lesser-included offenses of aggravated battery. Id. at 4.
¶ 79. While the Richards court felt bound by the statutory elements laid out in § 940.19, it nevertheless agreed with the defendant that common sense dictated that the two lower degrees of battery be lesser-included offenses of aggravated battery. Id. at 12. Therefore, the court explained how the legislature could rectify the situation:
Simply because the legislature could, and arguably should, have delineated the statutory elements differently does not permit this court to rewrite the elements of the crime by judicial fiat. It is up to the legislature, if it concludes that the lower battery offenses should be lesser included offenses, to do so within the statutory framework of sec. 939.66 and sec. 940.19, Stats. The legislature could remedy the situation by adding a subsection to sec. 939.66, analogous to sec. 939.66(2), to ■ provide that an included crime may be a crime which is a less serious type of battery than the one charged. - Alternately, the legislature could remove victim non-qonsent as an element of simple and intermediate battery and make consent a defense to sec. 940.19(1) and (lm) but not (2).
Id. at 12-13 (footnote omitted). The alternatives presented, by the Court offered the legislature two options tOveliminate the peculiarity of simple and intermediate battery not being lesser-included offenses of aggravated battery. The court made no mention of the effect these proposals might have on cumulative punishments for batteries prosecuted under both § 940.19 and one of the special circumstances battery offenses defined elsewhere in Chapter 940.
*184¶ 80. Two months after our decision in Richards, the Assembly introduced 1985 Assembly Bill 359, which ultimately became 1985 Wisconsin Act 144 and created § 939.66(2m). See Legislative Reference Bureau Drafting File for 1985 Wis. Act 144. The original bill was drafted to follow the Richards option of removing victim nonconsent as an element of simple and intermediate battery and making consent a defense to §§ 940.19(1) and (lm) but not to aggravated battery under § 940.19(2). Id. This revision would have affected only § 940.19.
¶ 81. The Legislative Reference Bureau's original analysis of 1985 Assembly Bill 359 explains that the bill's focus was on the degrees of general battery contained in § 940.19, not the special circumstances batteries located in Chapter 940. According to the Legislative Reference Bureau:
Under present law, Wisconsin prohibits battery (intentionally causing bodily harm) under a number of different statutes. The potential penalties vary depending on the circumstances surrounding the act, the actor, the victim and the harm suffered by the victim. This bill affects the first 2 levels of battery. Under present law, the first level of battery (ordinary battery) involves intentionally causing bodily harm to a victim without the victim's consent. The 2nd level of battery involves causing great bodily harm by an act done with intent to cause bodily harm without the consent of the victim. The bill removes the element of "no consent" from both of these crimes.
Legislative Reference Bureau Drafting File for 1985 Wis. Act 144, Analysis by the Legislative Reference *185Bureau of 1985 A.B. 359 (emphasis added).24 While alluding to the existence of special circumstances batteries, the bill analysis specifically stated that the bill would only affect "the first two levels of battery," meaning simple and intermediate battery in § 940.19.
¶ 82. In the end, the legislature approved the other option proposed by the Richards court. It created subsection (2m) and declared a "less serious type of battery than the one charged" to be an included offense. Although this option did not unambiguously limit the scope of change to § 940.19, there is nothing in the legislative history of § 939.66(2m) to indicate that this second option was intended to achieve different policy objectives from the first option. Rather, it appears that the two options were anticipated to have the same narrow substantive effect. This court has previously recognized that the purpose of § 939.66(2m) was to rectify the § 940.19 problem highlighted in Richards. See State v. Vassos, 218 Wis. 2d 330, 338 n.8, 579 N.W.2d *18635 (1998). We find no public record in the amendment revealing an intent to apply § 939.66(2m) beyond § 940.19.25
¶ 83. In 1994 the legislature added the phrase "or equally serious" to subsection (2m). 1993 Wis. Act 441, § 2. The history of this addition also is instructive.
¶ 84. 1993 Assembly Bill 879, relating to battery and providing penalties, was introduced originally to make several changes to § 940.19. The bill passed the Assembly with no change to § 939.66(2m). According to a February 16, 1994, memorandum from Assistant Attorney General Sally Wellman to Andy Cohn, Executive Assistant to Attorney General James Doyle, a survey of state prosecutors did not like the Assembly bill.26 Wellman wrote:
Some questioned whether a "middle" form of battery is really needed. They also made some valid suggestions regarding my draft, questioning which batteries will now be lesser included offenses, whether my proposed "middle" form will encompass too much of what is arguably only battery, whether some parts of the definition are too vague (i.e. multiple bruising) and raising the issue of which if any degrees of battery should have a "without consent" element. Given the difficulty of the issue and the number of subissues it raises, my preference would be [ ] to take some more time with this. If we can get it pulled out of this session so that we can get input from a wider range of people on a second draft, we will end up with a better product. If that is not *187possible, and we still need to amend AB 879 now, I suggest the following revisions:
¶ 85. Wellman then (1) proposed a new definition of "substantial bodily harm," (2) rewrote § 940.19, and (3) proposed an amendment to § 939.66(2m) to read: "A crime which is a less serious or equally serious type of battery than the one charged." Id. at 2 (emphasis added). With only grammatical modifications to the definition, all these changes were adopted by the legislature.
¶ 86. In truth, then, all critical language in the 1994 legislation was drafted by the Wisconsin Department of Justice, with no indication that the language Was intended to interact with any statute beyond § 940.19. Rather, the new language in (2m) appears to reflect the changes proposed for § 940.19.
•%¶ 87. Under the Department's 1994 proposal, § 940.19 was projected to contain one Class C felony, three Class D felonies, one Class E felony, and one Class A misdemeanor. Without the Wellman amendment, § 939.66(2m) would not have prohibited simultaneous convictions of three Class D felonies under subsections (3), (4), and (6) of proposed § 940.19.
¶ 88. We acknowledge that the legislature could have had a different view. The original bill analysis, before the amendment, begins with the statement that:
Under current law, battery is punishable by a range of crime classifications that vary from Class A misdemeanor to Class C felony depending on the type of harm the victim suffers, the type of harm the offender *188intends to inflict and special circumstances such as when the victim is a peace officer.27
Bill Analysis to 1993 Assembly Bill 879.
¶ 89. This identical statement appears in two Legislative Council Staff memoranda written respectively to the chairs of the Assembly and Senate legislative committees that considered Assembly Bill 879. See Staff Memorandum to Representative Wayne W. Wood from Shaun Haas, Senior Staff Attorney, Wisconsin Legislative Council, February 2,1994, at 1; Staff Memorandum to Senator Joanne Huelsman, from Don Salm, Senior Staff Attorney, Legislative Council, March 14, 1994, at 1. The two memoranda were accompanied by the texts of both §§ 940.19 and 940.20.
¶ 90. Nonetheless, we believe the stronger inference to be drawn from the legislative history is that the legislature intended to apply subsection (2m) only to § 940.19 and did not intend to prevent cumulative punishments for a special circumstances battery.
C. Nature of the Proscribed Conduct
¶ 91. The third factor, the nature of the proscribed conduct, requires an examination of the policy considerations embedded in the various battery statutes.
¶ 92. Wisconsin Stat. § 940.19 lays out gradations of victim injury and offender intent and assigns punishment in accord with the severity of these factors.
*189This pattern is perfectly illustrated by the escalating definitions of "bodily harm," "substantial bodily harm," and "great bodily harm":
(1) "Bodily harm" means physical pain or injury, illness, or any impairment of physical condition. Wis. Stat. § 939.22(4).
(2) "Substantial bodily harm" means bodily injury that causes a laceration that requires stitches; any fractúre of a bone; a burn; a temporary loss of consciousness, sight or hearing; a concussion; or a loss or fracture of a tooth. Wis. Stat. § 939.22(38).
(3) "Great bodily harm" means bodily injury which creates a substantial risk of death, or which causes permanent disfigurement, or which causes a permanent or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ or other serious bodily injury. Wis. Stat.. § 939.22(14).
¶ 93. By contrast, the special circumstances batteries in Chapter 940 enhance the penalty that may be imposed for bodily harm because of the status of the offender or the status/vulnerability of the victim. Plainly, the legislature wanted more severe punishment for intentional bodily harm to a law enforcement officer, a fire fighter, a judge, or a juror, than to the ordinary participant in a bar fight.
¶ 94. This objective will be achieved when the offender intends and causes only "bodily harm" and is charged under a special circumstances battery. However, Davison's interpretation of the statute would permit an offender to be charged with only one battery, regardless of the aggravating circumstances. See ¶ 68 above for discussion. This would mean, for instance, that an offender who causes substantial bodily harm to a woman by an act done with intent to cause bodily *190harm, will suffer no incremental punishment by virtue of the fact that the offender is under court injunction and the woman is the person who sought the injunction. Both §§ 940.19(2) and 940.20(2) are Class E felonies. Likewise, an offender who causes substantial bodily harm by fracturing a person's bone by an act done with intent to cause only pain will suffer no incremental punishment, even though the person battered is a public officer and the offender battered the public officer in order to influence the action of the officer. See Wis. Stat. §§ 940.19(2), 940.20(4). An offender who succeeds in intentionally breaking a police officer's nose but stops short of inflicting "great bodily harm" will suffer no incremental punishment as a result of the officer's status. See Wis. Stat. §§ 940.19(3), 940.20(2). These results show that Davison's interpretation would undermine the objective of special circumstances batteries in a number of situations.
¶ 95. A battery is an act causing a degree of bodily injury, whether the act is prosecuted under § 940.19 or § 940.20(1). But the legislature did not wish to treat all pains, all lacerations and broken bones, and all permanent disfigurements equally. It is not merely the underlying act that distinguishes the offenses involved. The circumstances in which the offender commits the act are also important. State v. Selmon, 175 Wis. 2d 155, 166, 498 N.W.2d 876 (Ct. App. 1993). The statutes are designed to protect different interests. See Tappa, 127 Wis. 2d at 170.
¶ 96. The defendant might argue that many acts of battery will be more severely punished if prosecuted successfully as special circumstances batteries and that subsection (2m) therefore serves to prevent a second charge and punishment under a subsection of § 940.19. In fact, however, misdemeanor battery is normally a *191lesser-included offense under §§ 940.20, 940.201, 940.203, 940.205, and 940.207. Cf. State v. Fitzgerald, 2000 WI App 55, ¶ 8, 233 Wis. 2d 584, 608 N.W.2d 391. Hence, defendants would not be eligible for multiple convictions in these circumstances because of § 939.66(1), assuming subsection (1) is interpreted to apply to both charged and uncharged offenses. The problem of a true lesser-included offense under the special circumstances batteries was addressed by § 939.66(1) before the enactment of subsection (2m).28
¶ 97. As a result, we believe that the nature of the proscribed conduct supports the position that the legislature did not intend to preclude prosecution and punishment under both §§ 940.19(6) and 940.20(1).
D. Appropriateness of Multiple Punishments
¶ 98. Often in our multiplicity analyses, consideration of the appropriateness of multiple punishments is informed by our conclusions regarding the nature of the proscribed conduct. See, e.g., Tappa, 127 Wis. 2d at 168-170 (overlapping the discussion of the third and fourth factors); Anderson, 219 Wis. 2d at 755-56 (same). This is true in the present case. There is no need to repeat extensively the analysis from the previous category.
¶ 99. Because different interests are protected by imposing punishment under both § 940.19 and § 940.20(1), see Anderson, 219 Wis. 2d at 756, the legislature could have thought it appropriate to convict and punish a defendant for both offenses arising out of a prisoner's single act of battery.
*192¶ 100. There is simply no symmetry between the battery by prisoner statute and the well-understood gradation scheme found in § 940.19. If the legislature sensed that the general battery statute adequately punished and deterred the conduct of battery in all circumstances, we doubt that it would have created additional offenses beyond the conduct proscribed under § 940.19.
¶ 101. Wisconsin Stat. § 940.20(1) was passed to provide more severe sanctions for prisoners who commit batteries than for non-prisoners who commit the same batteries. See C.D.M v. State, 125 Wis. 2d 170, 175, 370 N.W.2d 287 (Ct. App. 1985). The harm caused by aggravated battery and the harm caused by battery by a prisoner "are significantly different to justify charging them as separate offenses," Tappa, 127 Wis. 2d at 169, even though the act generating these disparate harms is the same. In enacting § 940.20(1) on top of § 940.19, the legislature intended to punish two different, albeit overlapping evils. See C.D.M., 125 Wis. 2d at 175 ("The enhanced penalty of [Wis.,Stat. § 940.20(1)] is intended to deter batteries in circumstances where the usual penalty may be ineffective.").
¶ 102. Davison contends that the purpose of imposing additional punishment when a battery is committed by a designated actor (e.g., a prisoner) or against a designated victim (e.g., a firefighter) is not undermined by barring multiple punishments. He notes that, under § 940.20(1), any battery by a prisoner is a Class D felony, regardless of the degree of bodily injury caused or the level of intent to cause harm. By contrast, under §§ 940.19(1) and (2), a battery that causes bodily harm is only a Class A misdemeanor, while a battery causing substantial bodily harm is only a Class E felony. Therefore, Davison argues, the statute would still provide for *193additional punishment and deterrence, since any battery done by a prisoner would be a Class D felony.29
¶ 103. Under Davison's view of § 939.66(2m), however, a prisoner who commits aggravated battery will be exposed to no greater punishment than a non-prisoner who commits this same offense. Hence, the objectives of deterrence and extra protection would be undermined. The legislature may of course enact Davison's interpretation, but we are not convinced that it did,
¶ 104. Wisconsin courts have previously valued the deterrence created by separate punishments for different offenses when the legislature was not clear whether multiple punishments were permitted. In Grayson, for example, we reasoned that multiple punishment for each 120-day period of continual failure to pay child support was essential for deterring long-term failure to provide support in accordance with the felony non-support statutes. Grayson, 172 Wis. 2d at 166. In State v. Hamilton, 146 Wis. 2d 426, 432 N.W.2d 108 (Ct. App. 1988), the court of appeals allowed multiple punishment under Wis. Stat. § 943.37(3) for each item a defendant possesses with altered or removed serial numbers, in order to make the criminal risk concomi*194tant with the potential criminal profit. Id. at 441. If additional punishment for battery by prisoner is not allowed in cases of aggravated battery, then the greater evil of aggravated battery by prisoner is not punished proportionally to that greater evil. See Grayson, 172 Wis. 2d at 167 ("The longer the period of nonpayment, the greater the harm that is inflicted.").
¶ 105. Inability to prosecute and punish under both statues permits an offender, at least in some circumstances, to inflict a greater degree of harm without fear of additional punishment. This odd result is similar to one recognized by this court in Anderson. In explaining why multiple punishments under the bail jumping statute were appropriate when a defendant violated different and distinct terms of his bail, we explained:
Without imposing multiple punishments for violating the different terms of bail, a defendant may even be encouraged to violate multiple terms, knowing that the punishment will be no different whether he or she violates one or all terms of bail. It is difficult to believe that the legislature intended this result.
Anderson, 219 Wis. 2d at 756.
¶ 106. In summary, considering the appropriateness of multiple punishments for committing both aggravated battery and battery by prisoner, we do not perceive the policy basis upon which the legislature would have intended to preclude multiple convictions for these offenses in a single prosecution.
V CONCLUSION
¶ 107. Applying our four-factor examination of legislative intent to this multiplicity challenge, we conclude that Davison has failed to meet his burden of *195persuasion. Aggravated battery and battery by prisoner are clearly not "the same offense" as a matter of law. Davison has failed to rebut the presumption in this specific situation that the legislature intended to authorize multiple prosecutions and punishments for these two offenses.
¶ 108. If we were focusing solely on the text of subsection (2m), we would find this to be a much closer case, for we would not be seeking legislative intent outside the text of the statute. We are informed, however, by our decision in Grayson, where we said: "If an express legislative intent or the absence of ambiguity were the benchmark against which the issue of the allowable unit of prosecution had to be decided, consideration of the matter would be limited to the first two factors. The last two factors would not then be relevant." Grayson, 172 Wis. 2d at 161.
¶ 109. In applying the more expansive rules of statutory interpretation we have traditionally employed in multiplicity cases, we are convinced not only that Davison has not met his burden, but also that the legislature very likely intended to authorize multiple punishments on these facts. The disturbing inconsistency within § 939.66 if Davison's literal interpretation of subsection (2m) were adopted, the compelling legislative history of subsection (2m), the legislative motive for the proscribed conduct under the ordinary and special circumstances battery statutes, and the appropriateness of punishing more than one offense lead us to conclude that the legislature has not clearly intended to prohibit multiple punishments on these facts.
¶ 110. We have analyzed this case as a single act of battery, because that is the way the case reached us. We are disinclined to abandon the four-part analysis for statutory construction in a multiplicity case on the *196record presented here. After all, the facts set out in ¶¶ 5-7 reveal that Davison committed multiple criminal acts of battery over a 45-minute period. Davison caused bodily harm to his wife at different times at different places, resulting in multiple injuries.
¶ 111. Because Davison's multiplicity objection fails on the merits, we need not and do not decide whether, by pleading guilty, he waived his right to raise this claim.
By the Court. — The decision of the court of appeals is reversed.
All subsequent references to the Wisconsin Statutes are to the 1999-2000 volumes unless otherwise indicated.
Contrary to Wis. Stat. § 940.31.
Contrary to Wis. Stat. § 940.30.
Wisconsin Stat. § 940.19(6) provides in the relevant portion: 'Whoever intentionally causes bodily harm to another by conduct that creates a substantial risk of great bodily harm is guilty of a Class D felony."
Wisconsin Stat. § 940.20(1) provided, at the times relevant to this case: "Battery by prisoners. Any prisoner confined to a state prison or other state, county or municipal detention facility who intentionally causes bodily harm to an officer, employee, visitor or another inmate of such prison or institution, without his or her consent, is guilty of a Class D felony." Wis. Stat. § 940.20(1).
Wisconsin Stat. § 939.66(2m) provides:
Conviction of included crime permitted. Upon prosecution for a crime, the actor may be convicted of either the crime charged or an included crime, but not both. An included crime may be any of the following:
*154(2m) A crime which is a less serious or equally serious type of battery than the one charged.
To support this statement, the Supreme Court cited Ex parte Lange, 18 Wall. 163 (1873); United States v. Benz, 282 U.S. 304, 307 (1931); United States v. Sacco, 367 F.2d 368 (2d Cir. 1966); United States v. Adams, 362 F.2d 210 (6th Cir. 1966); and Kennedy v. United States, 330 F.2d 26 (9th Cir. 1964). Each of these five cases involves a second sentence or an amended sentence imposed after a first sentence was vacated or corrected.
See, e.g., State v. Trawitzki, 2001 WI 77, ¶ 20, 244 Wis. 2d 523, 628 N.W.2d 801; State v. Derango, 2000 WI 89, ¶ 26, 236 *158Wis. 2d 721, 613 N.W.2d 833; State v. Sauceda, 168 Wis. 2d 486, 492, 485 N.W.2d 1 (1992); State v. Rabe, 96 Wis. 2d 48, 64, 291 N.W.2d 809 (1980).
The Court stated: "[T]he first sale had been consummated, and the payment for the additional drug, however closely following, was the initiation of a separate and distinct sale completed by its delivery." Blockburger v. United States, 284 U.S. 299, 301 (1932).
In Rutledge v. United States, 517 U.S. 292, 297 (1996), the Court stated: "For over half a century we have determined whether a defendant has been punished twice for the 'same offense' by applying the rule set forth in Blockburger v. United States, 284 U.S. 299, 304 (1932)." The Blockburger test is used also to determine "sameness" for situations involving successive prosecutions. Brown v. Ohio, 432 U.S. 161, 168 (1977).
See also Whalen v. United States, 445 U.S. 684, 703 (1980) (Rehnquist, J., dissenting) ("As is borne out by subsequent cases, the Double Jeopardy Clause as interpreted in Ex parte Lange prevents a sentencing court from increasing a defendant's sentence for any particular statutory offense, even though the second sentence is within the limits set by the legislature.").
Justice Antonin Scalia has written that the Double Jeopardy Clause prohibits multiple prosecutions, "not multiple punishments." Dep't of Revenue of Mont. v. Kurth Ranch, 511 U.S. 767, 798 (1994) (Scalia, J., dissenting). He cited materials leading to the approval of the Fifth Amendment by Congress in *1631789, United States ex rel. Marcus v. Hess, 317 U.S. 537, 555-56 (1943) (Frankfurter, J., concurring), and In re Bradley, 318 U.S. 50, 53 (1943) (Stone, C.J., dissenting), to show that Ex parte Lange, 18 Wall. 163 (1873), the source of the protection against "multiple punishments for the same offense," should have been decided solely on due process grounds, thereby avoiding many decades of misinterpretation. Id. at 798-800.
A growing sense that the Court has been on the wrong track may explain its explicit recognition that legislative intent overrides multiple punishments for the same offense.
In State v. Derango, 2000 WI 89, 236 Wis. 2d 721, 613 N.W.2d 833, the court stated: "Multiplicity challenges ... usually arise in two different situations: 1) when a single course of conduct is charged in multiple counts of the same statutory offense (the 'continuous offense' cases), and 2) when a single criminal act encompasses the elements of more than one distinct statutory crime." 236 Wis. 2d 721, ¶ 27.
See also State v. Tappa, 127 Wis. 2d 155, 173 n.3, 378 N.W.2d 883 (1985) (Abrahamson, J., dissenting) ("[T]he United States Supreme Court held that the dispositive issue in determining whether a court may impose multiple punishments on a defendant in a single trial for violating two statutory provisions (regardless of whether they constitute the same offense) is whether the legislature authorized multiple punishments.").
The Rabe and Anderson cases may be compared with State v. George, 69 Wis. 2d 92, 230 N.W.2d 253 (1975), to illustrate contrasting treatment of multiple counts under the same statute.
Reference to the penalty structure is the correct way of determining whether a type of crime is "less or equally serious." State v. Lechner, 217 Wis. 2d 392, 410, 576 N.W.2d 912 (1998) (citing State v. Davis, 144 Wis. 2d 852, 857, 425 N.W.2d 411 (1988)).
This four-factor test first became part of this court's jurisprudence in Manson v. State, 101 Wis. 2d 413, 422, 304 N.W.2d 729 (1981). In Manson, we were confronted with a unanimous verdict challenge. Id. at 419. Before considering the defendant's contention that he was deprived of a unanimous verdict, this court determined whether the armed robbery statute, Wis. Stat. § 943.32(1), defined one offense with alternative means of being committed or two independent offenses. *172Id. In discerning the legislature's intent on this matter, the court adopted a four-factor test previously employed in United States v. UCO Oil Co., 546 F.2d 833 (9th Cir. 1976), and concluded that there was only one legislatively intended offense in § 943.32. Manson, 101 Wis. 2d at 422, 428.
The test was first applied to a double jeopardy challenge in State v. Bohacheff, 114 Wis. 2d 402, 410, 338 N.W.2d 466 (1983), and was directly incorporated into our multiplicity jurisprudence in Tappa, 127 Wis. 2d at 165.
The State may file multiple charges leading to multiple convictions. The comment to Wis. Stat. § 939.65 explains the purpose of the section as follows:
This section makes clear that there may be prosecution under more than one section for the same conduct. For example, a person may be prosecuted under a general section even though there is a specific section which covers the conduct, or he may be prosecuted under both; a person may be prosecuted for an attempt rather than the completed crime; a person may be prosecuted for a misdemeanor even though some other section may make his conduct a felony.
This section states a rule of pleading, and does not purport to state the limitations on multiple sentences for the same act or the limitations on multiple convictions and subsequent prosecutions for the same act which may be included in the constitutional *173double jeopardy rule. For some of the limitations which have been incorporated in the code, see sections 339.66, 339.71 and 339.72.
1953 A.B. 100, at 52.
The statutory elements of Wis. Stat. § 940.19(6) are: (1) the defendant caused bodily harm to the victim; (2) the defendant intended to cause bodily harm to the victim; (3) the defendant's conduct created a substantial risk of great bodily harm; and (4) the defendant knew that his or her conduct created a substantial risk of great bodily harm. Wis JI— Criminal 1226. In contrast, the statutory elements of Wis. Stat. § 940.20(1) are: (1) the defendant was a prisoner; (2) the defendant intentionally caused bodily harm; (3) the victim was a visitor to the institution; (4) the defendant caused bodily harm without consent of the victim; and (5) the defendant knew the victim was a visitor of the institution and knew that the victim did not consent to the causing of bodily harm. Wis JI — Criminal 1228.
If "type of battery" does not refer to statutory offenses, then all the "types of battery" would be covered by Wis. Stat. § 941.19.
The other Wisconsin statutes that impose punishments for battery committed in special circumstances are Wis. Stat. §§ 940.195 (Battery to an unborn child; substantial battery to an unborn child; aggravated battery to an unborn child), 940.20(lm) (Battery by persons subject to certain injunctions), 940.20(2) (Battery to law enforcement officers and firefighters), 940.20(2m) (Battery to probation, extended supervision and parole agents and aftercare agents), 940.20(3) (Battery to jurors), 940.20(4) (Battery to public officers), 940.20(5) (Battery to technical college district or school district officers and employees), 940.20(6) (Battery to public transit vehicle operator, driver or passenger), and 940.20(7) (Battery to emergency medical care providers). In addition, other particularized battery offenses include Wis. Stat. §§ 940.201 (Battery or threat to witnesses), 940.203 (Battery or threat to judge), 940.205 (Battery or threat to department of revenue employee), and 940.207 *180(Battery or threat to department of commerce or department of workforce development employee). Finally, we note that the penalty for burglary is enhanced from a Class C to a Class B felony when a burglar commits a battery while in the burglarized enclosure. See Wis. Stat. § 943.10(2)(d).
The version of Wis. Stat. §940.19 applicable to the Richards case provided:
940.19 Battery; aggravated battery. (1) Whoever causes bodily harm to another by an act done with intent to cause bodily harm to that person or another without the consent of the person so harmed is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
(lm) Whoever causes great bodily harm to another by an act done with intent to cause bodily harm to that person or another without the consent of the person so harmed is guilty of a Class E felony.
(2) Whoever causes great bodily harm to another by an act done with intent to cause great bodily harm to that person or another with or without the consent of the person so harmed is guilty of a Class C felony.
State v. Richards, 123 Wis. 2d 1, 2 n.2, 365 N.W.2d 7 (1985) (quoting Wis. Stat. § 940.19 (1979-80)).
The drafting record for 1985 Wis. Act 144 reveals that considerable attention was given to how to incorporate a defense of consent into the simple and intermediate battery statutes. As originally drafted, the bill created a defense of consent specifically to persons who were willing participants in athletic events and when the harm suffered was a reasonably foreseeable hazard of the practice or competition. See Legislative Reference Bureau Drafting File for 1985 Wis. Act 144. While there is nothing in the drafting record that explains what animated the legislature to forgo this route, it is reasonable to infer that concerns existed regarding either the interpretative confusion that might develop from this athletic-event exception or fear that the consent provision would be under-inclusive.
We observe that the Comment sections to the model Wisconsin Jury Instructions for battery offenses, Wis JI — • Criminal 1220 through 1244, make no mention of the effect of § 939.66(2m) except in those instructions pertaining to the battery offenses established in § 940.19.
The Wellman memorandum is part of the Legislative Council file on 1993 A.B. 879.
Note the use of the word "type" in the Legislative Reference Bureau analysis and compare the phrase "type of battery" as it existed in Wis. Stat. § 939.66(2m) before and after the 1994 amendment.
If misdemeanor battery did not require proof of any additional element than the special circumstances battery, it would presumptively create a double jeopardy violation.
The court of appeals noted this argument and concluded: "Consequently, since the enhancer is the status of the actor in § 940.20 and not the degree of the crime, there is not an ambiguity problem between the statutes with regard to the word 'battery.'" State v. Davison, 2002 WI App 109, ¶ 18, 255 Wis: 2d 715, 647 N.W.2d 390. We are unsure exactly what the court of appeals meant by this statement, but we imagine it is congruent with Davison's argument. However, it is precisely because the enhancer is a status-based consideration that shows how § 940.20(1) embodies an entirely different interest than the general battery statute.
Missouri v. Hunter, 459 U.S. 359, 368 (1983) (quoting Albernaz v. United States, 450 U.S. 333, 344 (1981)).
The majority opinion is very lengthy and addresses numerous issues. My failure to comment on all aspects of the opinion should not be interpreted as my agreeing with them.
For example, the majority opinion discusses multiplicity and double jeopardy at length, but I am not sure what conclusion it reaches about their relationship and what difference it makes in this case. The "constitutional law" applicable in this case is as follows: When multiple punishments in a single prosecution are not for the same offense (in law and fact), a presumption arises that the legislature intended to permit multiple punishments. The presumption can be rebutted by clear legislative intent to the contrary. State v. Derango, 2000 WI 89, ¶ 30, 236 Wis. 2d 721, 613 N.W.2d 833.
As another example, in ¶ 65 the majority opinion states that a literal reading of Wis. Stat. § 939.66(2m) "is inconsistent with the general intent of § 939.65, which permits multiple charges under different statutes for a single act and may result in multiple convictions." I doubt there is an inconsistency. A literal reading of § 939.66(2m) does not prohibit multiple charges. Rather, it only prohibits multiple convictions. The majority opinion in ¶¶ 66-67 intimates that the State may avoid all of the restrictions in § 939.66 by simply charging the multiple offenses at the outset. I do not understand this reasoning. The issue of charged versus uncharged offenses was not raised or discussed by the parties.

=== CASE 9739297 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:55.498092+00 ===

SHIRLEY S. ABRAHAMSON, CHIEF JUSTICE
¶ 112. (dissenting). I would affirm the decision of the
court of appeals.
¶ 113. The defendant in the present case was charged with and convicted of two batteries: aggravated battery and battery by a prisoner. Aggravated battery is a battery causing substantial bodily harm. It is a Class D felony under Wis. Stat. § 940.19(6). Battery by a prisoner is a battery (by a prisoner) causing bodily harm. It is a Class D felony under Wis. Stat. § 940.20(1).
¶ 114. In the present case, everyone agrees that the two offenses are not the same in law. The issue, then, is whether there is a clear legislative intent to prohibit multiple punishments. That is, does the legislature's express bar in Wis. Stat. § 939.66(2m) against multiple punishments for batteries of a less serious or equally serious type apply only to batteries created in Wis. Stat. § 940.19, or does it apply to batteries created in § 940.20 as well? The answer lies in legislative intent. "[T]he question of what punishments are constitutionally per*197missible is no different from the question of what punishment the Legislative Branch intended to be imposed."1
¶ 115. On the basis of the language and legislative history of Wis. Stat. § 939.66(2m) and the public policy underlying Wis. Stat. §§ 940.19 and 940.20, I conclude that the legislature clearly expressed its intent that § 939.66(2m) applies to batteries created in § 940.20 as well as batteries in § 940.19. Therefore, multiple pun*198ishments for aggravated battery, that is, a battery causing substantial bodily harm, a Class D felony under Wis. Stat. § 940.19(2), and battery by a prisoner, that is, a battery causing bodily harm, a Class D felony under Wis. Stat. § 940.20(1), are prohibited.
¶ 116.1 examine first the applicable rules of statutory interpretation, and then in turn the language of the statute, the legislative history, and the legislative purpose.
¶ 117. The generally accepted rules for discerning legislative intent should apply in this case as they do in any other case. Legislative intent is legislative intent, regardless of the context in which it is examined. The four factors upon which the majority opinion relies represent a restatement of the traditional rules for discerning legislative intent.2
¶ 118. The majority suggests that it is bound by State v. Grayson, 172 Wis. 2d 156, 493 N.W.2d 23 (1992), to apply a different, more expansive form of statutory construction in the present case.3 The majority's citation to Grayson, however, is inapplicable. In Grayson the accused urged that because the plain language of *199the statute was ambiguous, the court should apply the rule of lenity. The Grayson court concluded that the rule of lenity was not appropriately invoked when although the plain language of the statute was ambiguous, resorting to traditional rules of statutory interpretation enabled the court to discern a reasonable, common-sense interpretation of legislative intent.4 The Grayson case did not determine that multiplicity analysis requires some alternative rules of statutory construction.
II
¶ 119. The first place to look for legislative intent is in the language of the statute.5 In Wis. Stat. § 939.66(2m) the legislature expressly stated its intent to prohibit multiple punishments for certain batteries as follows: If an accused is convicted of battery, the *200accused may not be punished for a battery "which is a less serious or equally serious type of battery than the one charged."6 In Wis. Stat. §§ 940.19 and 940.20, the legislature labeled both offenses of which the defendant was convicted as batteries and established that both batteries are equally serious types of battery; both are class D felonies, each carrying a maximum penalty of 10 years.
¶ 120. It is rare that the plain language of a statute covers the fact situation in issue as clearly as it does in this case. According to the plain meaning of Wis. Stat. § 939.66(2m), the legislature plainly intended not to permit conviction and punishment for both batteries. Indeed, the majority opinion concedes that based on the "plain language" of Wis. Stat. § 939.66(2m), "one would normally conclude that the legislature intended that the defendant not be convicted of both crimes."7
¶ 121. Despite this conclusion, the majority decides that the statute is ambiguous by reading Wis. Stat. § 939.66(2m) in the context of other statutes and case law, much of which supports the literal reading of the statutory language and some of which supports alternative readings.8
*201¶ 122. I applaud the majority's decision to test the "plain meaning" of the statute in this way and do not dispute that there is some support for an alternative reading. Yet it should not get lost in the majority's discussion of ambiguity that the support for the literal reading of § 939.66(2m) greatly overwhelms any support for a contrary reading of the statute.
f-H HH 1 — I
¶ 123. The majority opinion then turns to the legislative history, the context, and the purpose of the statute to clarify the ambiguity it created.9 It is clear on examining these factors that the legislature did not intend the multiple punishments imposed in this case.
¶ 124. The majority opinion examines the 1985 proposed amendment to Wis. Stat. §§ 939.66 adopting subsection (2m). The majority concludes that the 1985 amendment does "not reveal[] an intent to apply Wis. Stat. § 939.66(2m) beyond § 940.19."10 I disagree.
¶ 125. In 1985, in response to State v. Richards, 123 Wis. 2d 1, 365 N.W.2d 7 (1985), the legislature considered an amendment to Wis. Stat. § 939.66 to bar multiple punishments for batteries. The Richards case involved only the first two of the three subsections of § 940.19. The Legislative Reference Bureau's analysis of the proposed amendment noted that although "a *202number of different statutes" proscribe battery and that the potential penalties vary depending "on the circumstances surrounding the act, the actor, the victim and the harm suffered by the victim, the proposed amendment affects only "the first 2 levels of battery," referring to subsections (1) and (2) of Wis. Stat. § 940.19.11 That proposed amendment was not adopted, however.
¶ 126. The proposed amendment that was eventually adopted was silent in language and legislative history regarding any intent to limit the application of § 939.66(2m) to § 940.19.12 Obviously, a strong inference can be drawn that by not adopting the first proposed amendment with its limitation, the legislature refused to limit § 939.66(2m) to the first two subsections of § 940.19. Nonetheless, the majority opinion projects, without any supporting documentation or reasoning, that the defeated version and the adopted version "were anticipated to have the same narrow substantive effect."13
¶ 127. In 1994, additional amendments were proposed to Wis. Stat. §§ 939.66(2m) and 940.19.14 The Legislative Reference Bureau's analysis of the bill that was put before the entire legislature expressly includes within the crime of "battery," those batteries committed under "special circumstances such as when the victim is a peace officer."15 Battery to a police officer was not then (and is not now) set forth in § 940.19. Rather, battery to a police officer is set forth in § 940.20, entitled "Battery: Special Circumstances." Why does the Legislative Ref*203erence Bureau's analysis of an amendment to § 939.66(2m) refer to battery against a police officer, if the proposed amendment to § 939.66(2m) does not affect § 940.20?
¶ 128. Furthermore, as the majority opinion carefully‘notes, two Legislative Council memoranda explaining the 1994 amendments included the texts of both Wis. Stat. §§ 940.19 and 940.20. Why does the Legislative Council, on two occasions, include the text of § 940.20, along with the text of § 940.19, if the proposed amendment to § 939.66(2m) affects only § 940.19, not § 940.20?
¶ 129. It is rare to get a clearer expression of legislative intent from legislative history. This legislative history unambiguously demonstrates that the legislature was advised that the 1994 amendment to Wis. Stat. § 939.66(2m) affects batteries set forth in both Wis. Stat. §§ 940.19 and 940.20. Applying the approach courts take to the legislative process, we assume that the legislature read and understood the materials presented and adopted the amendment understanding that § 939.66(2m) affects batteries set forth in both §§ 940.19 and 940.20. The majority opinion, in contrast, shrugs off this conclusion, stating, "Nonetheless, we believe the stronger inference to be drawn from the legislative history is that the legislature intended to apply subsection (2m) only to § 940.19 and did not intend to prevent multiple cumulative punishments for a special circumstances battery."16
IV
¶ 130. Finally, the majority opinion turns to the purpose of Wis. Stat. § 939.66(2m), that is, to the policy *204considerations underlying the statute, by exploring the nature of the proscribed conduct and the appropriateness of multiple punishments. The majority concludes that the legislature intended to impose multiple punishments because different interests are protected under Wis. Stat. §§ 940.19 and 940.20(1), and that if the legislature concluded that the general battery statute adequately punished the conduct of battery in all circumstances it would not have created additional battery offenses beyond § 940.19. I disagree. The statutes do not support this conclusion.
¶ 131. The majority is correct that the legislature intended to increase the penalty for certain batteries depending on the "special circumstances" of the battery. The legislature's intent to increase the penalties applies, however, only to batteries inflicting "bodily injury," the first level of harm.
¶ 132. Battery committed without any "special circumstances" is a Class A misdemeanor subject to a penalty of nine months. In contrast, Wis. Stat. § 940.20(1) makes it a Class D felony for a prisoner to commit a battery inflicting "bodily injury." Increased penalties for batteries committed under other "special circumstances" in § 940.20 similarly apply only to those batteries that inflict bodily injury, not to those that inflict more serious injuries.17 The legislature could have increased the penalty for batteries under these "special circumstances" that inflicted "substantial bodily *205injury" or "great bodily harm" or "substantial risk of great bodily harm," but it did not.18
¶ 133. Contrary to the majority opinion, I read these statutes to express a legislative purpose to deter batteries causing the least serious harm and committed under "special circumstances" by dramatically increasing the penalty for bodily injury from nine months (a Class A misdemeanor) to ten years (a Class D felony), not to create avenues for imposing multiple punishments for equally serious or less serious batteries. The legislature concluded that the significant prison penalties in Wis. Stat. § 940.19 for equally serious or more serious bodily injuries would be a sufficient deterrent under any circumstance.19
¶ 134. In sum, the majority opinion offers little, if any, trustworthy evidence clearly contradicting the plain language of Wis. Stat. § 939.66(2m) in which the legislature barred multiple punishments for batteries that are less serious or equally serious.20
¶ 135. For the reasons set forth, I dissent.
*206¶ 136. I am authorized to state that Justice ANN WALSH BRADLEY joins this dissent.
State v. Bohacheff, 114 Wis. 2d 402, 410, 338 N.W.2d 466 (1983), instructs: "To determine whether or not the legislature intends multiple convictions ... we look to the language of the statute, the nature of the proscribed conduct, and the appropriateness of multiple punishments. We are also aided in our search for legislative intent by canons of statutory construction." (emphasis added). In keeping with traditional rules of statutory interpretation, a fourth factor, legislative history, appears in cases in which it was available.
Majority op., ¶¶ 108, 110.
"[B]eeause the legislature failed to expressly state the allowable unit of prosecution under sec. 948.22, Stats., this court must determine its intent as to that issue according to 'a common sense reading of the statutes' that will give effect to 'the object of the legislature' and produce a result that is 'reasonable and fair to offenders and society.' ... To determine legislative intent we will examine the four factors ...." State v. Grayson, 172 Wis. 2d 156, 162, 493 N.W.2d 23 (1992) (quoting State v. Tappa, 127 Wis. 2d 155, 170-71, 378 N.W.2d 883 (1985)).
For discussions of plain meaning and the rules of statutory interpretation in Wisconsin, see Fox v. Catholic Knights Ins. Soc'y, 2003 WI 87, 263 Wis. 2d 208, 665 N.W.2d 181; State v. Byers, 2003 WI 86, 263 Wis. 2d 113; 665 N.W.2d 729 (Abraha-mson, C.J., concurring; Crooks, J., dissenting); Bruno v. Milwaukee County, 2003 WI 28, 260 Wis. 2d 633, 660 N.W.2d 656; State v, Delaney, 2003 WI 9, ¶¶ 38-40, 259 Wis. 2d 77, 658 N.W.2d 416 (Abrahamson, C.J., dissenting); State v. Sample, 215 Wis. 2d 487, 508, 573 N.W.2d 187 (1998) (Abrahamson, C.J., concurring).
The statute is quoted at ¶ 10 n.6 and ¶ 66 of the majority opinion.
Majority op., ¶ 58.
See majority op., ¶ 74. Apparently the majority opinion is using a rule of interpretation that counterbalances the plain meaning rule: When separate statutes are read together, rather than in isolation, a plain meaning statute may be rendered ambiguous. State v. Chavez, 175 Wis. 2d 366, 370-71, 498 N.W.2d 887 (Ct. App. 1993).
Almost every rule of interpretation can be countered by an opposing rule. For the lead article discussing the "thrust and parry" of contradictory rules of statutory interpretation, see *201Karl N. Llewellyn, Remarks on the Theory of Appellate Decisions and the Rules or Canons About How Statutes Are To Be Construed, 3 Vand. L. Rev. 395 (1950).
The court's usual statement is that if a statute is ambiguous, the court examines the history, context, subject matter and object of the statute to discern legislative intent. See Heaton v. Larsen, 97 Wis. 2d 379, 394, 294 N.W.2d 15 (1980).
Majority op., ¶ 82.
Quoted at majority op., ¶ 81.
See majority op., ¶ 80.
See id., ¶ 82.
See id., ¶ 84-89.
Quoted at majority op., ¶ 88.
Majority op., ¶ 90.
See also Wis. Stat. §§ 940.201 (increased penalty for battery to a witness causing bodily harm), 940.203 (increased penalty for battery to a judge causing bodily harm), 940.205 (increased penalty for battery to a department of revenue employee causing bodily harm), 940.207 (increased penalty for battery to a department of commerce or a department of workforce development employee causing bodily harm).
Compare Wis. Stat. § 940.195.
See State v. Gordon, 111 Wis. 2d 133, 141, 330 N.W.2d 564 (1983) ("The legislature apparently adopted sec. 939.66(1) because the penalty set by the legislature for the greater offense takes into account the fact that the defendant has also committed a lesser-included offense. Remington and Joseph, Charging, Convicting, and Sentencing the Multiple Criminal Offender, 1961 Wis. L. Rev. 528, 546.").
The majority suggests that its decision in the present case is, at least in part, motivated by the bad acts committed by the defendant. See majority op., ¶ 110. When balancing competing arguments about the proper construction of the law it is essential that the defendant's blameworthiness not tip the balance.

=== CASE 9739298 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:55.788133+00 ===

JUSTICE FITZGERALD delivered the judgment of the court, with opinion. Chief Justice Thomas and Justices Garman and Karmeier concurred in the judgment and opinion. Justice Freeman specially concurred, with opinion, joined by Justice Kilbride. Justice McMorrow dissented, with opinion. OPINION Defendant, Lavelle Hudson, and a cofelon robbed a barbershop. Unbeknownst to the cofelons, a plainclothes off-duty policeman was inside receiving a haircut. In resisting the robbery, the policeman shot and killed the cofelon. Defendant was charged with, inter alia, first degree murder, under a felony-murder theory. 720 ILCS 5/9 — 1(a)(3) (West 2002). The parties tendered differing jury instructions regarding the proximate causation component of the offense to the circuit court of Cook County. The trial court accepted the State’s instruction. A jury thereafter convicted defendant, and the trial court sentenced him to 22 years’ imprisonment. The appellate court affirmed over a dissent. 354 Ill. App. 3d 648. The sole question in this appeal is whether the instruction sufficiently informed the jury of this state’s laws regarding proximate causation in a felony-murder case. We hold that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in giving this instruction, as it adequately stated the law of proximate cause. Accordingly, we affirm the defendant’s conviction and sentence. BACKGROUND On July 30, 1998, the 15-year-old defendant’s fellow gang members Chrispin Thomas and another man also named Lavelle picked up defendant in a maroon two-door Oldsmobile Cutlass Sierra. They told defendant that they were taking him to what they called a “lick,” to rob the Fresh Barbershop, located at 259 East 115th Street in Chicago. At approximately 4:45 p.m. that day, eight or nine people were in the barbershop: five barbers and three or four customers. One of the customers receiving a haircut was an off-duty police officer, Ricky Bean, who sat in a chair under a barber’s smock while in possession of his service revolver. The defendant and Thomas entered the barbershop carrying guns, although defendant’s was inoperable because the trigger had been removed. While defendant remained near the front door, Thomas walked to the back of the barbershop. Thomas pointed his revolver at chest level and waved it from side to side in the air and announced, “This is a stick-up, throw your money on the floor.” After the barbers and patrons initially threw money on the floor, Thomas said “that’s not enough money” and continued waving and pointing the gun and again saying, “Hurry up, throw the money on the floor.” As the victims complied, defendant reached to pick money off the floor. Bean did not initially throw his wallet on the floor because the wallet contained his badge. When Thomas turned his back, and defendant was retrieving money from the floor, Bean pulled out his service revolver, yelling “Police, drop the gun, police,” or “Freeze, police,” multiple times. Thomas turned and pointed his revolver at Bean from two feet away. Bean fired, striking Thomas in the upper right arm. Thomas transferred his gun from his right hand to his left hand. Bean moved closer and placed his gun on Thomas’ chest and said, “Man, drop the gun. Police. Drop the gun.” Thomas tried to point his gun at Bean and the officer fired two more times at Thomas’ chest. He again told Thomas to drop the gun, and this time, Thomas complied. Bean then grabbed Thomas’ right arm to maintain control of him and make sure he would not try to pick the gun back up. Meanwhile, defendant continued to retrieve money from the floor. Bean said, “Police, drop the gun.” Defendant stood up and pointed the gun at the officer. Bean fired once at defendant, striking him in the leg. Defendant turned and ran out of the barbershop. Thomas died of multiple gunshot wounds. Defendant was later apprehended at Roseland Hospital and later admitted to a substantially similar version of events in both an oral and written statement. Defendant was charged with multiple offenses, including first degree murder and attempted armed robbery. Prior to trial, the State nol-prossed all counts except for first degree murder. Defendant confirmed the events in the barbershop during his testimony at trial and also admitted to guilty pleas on two other convictions for armed robberies of barbershops that occurred in the weeks prior to the incident at Fresh Barbershop. Both parties submitted modified versions of Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Criminal, No. 7.01 (4th ed. 2000) (IPI Criminal 4th) at the jury instructions conference. Defendant submitted the following instruction: “A person commits the offense of first degree murder when he commits the offense of attempt [to commit] armed robbery and during *** the commission of that offense, the death of an individual is [the] direct and foreseeable consequence of the commission or attempt to commit that offense, and the defendant contemplated or should have contemplated that his actions could result in death.” The instruction submitted by the State read: “A person commits the offense of first degree murder when he commits the offense of attempt [to commit] armed robbery, and during the course of the commission of the offense of attempt [to commit] armed robheryt,] he sets in motion a chain of events which cause the death of an individual. It is immaterial whether the killing in such a case is intentional or accidental, or committed by a confederate without the connivance of the defendant or even by a third person trying to prevent the commission of the felony.” The trial court used the State’s instruction as to proximate causation. After the jury returned a verdict of guilty on the sole count of first degree murder, the trial court sentenced defendant to 22 years’ imprisonment. A majority of the appellate court affirmed defendant’s conviction, holding that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in giving the instruction. 354 Ill. App. 3d at 655. In so holding, the appellate court rejected defendant’s argument that his due process rights were violated because the phrase “direct and foreseeable consequence” was not mentioned in the instruction. 354 Ill. App. 3d at 649, 655. The appellate court noted that “ ‘when a felon’s attempt to commit a forcible felony sets in motion a chain of events which were or should have been within his contemplation when the motion was initiated, he should be held responsible for any death which by direct and almost inevitable sequence results from the initial criminal act.’ ” 354 Ill. App. 3d at 653, quoting People v. Lowery, 178 Ill. 2d 462, 467 (1997). The appellate court stated that the phrase “sets in motion a chain of events” provided part of the definition of proximate cause. 354 Ill. App. 3d at 654. The court then found that the second paragraph of the instructions, taken from the committee comments to section 9 — 1 of the Criminal Code of 1961 (720 ILCS Ann. 5/9 — 1, Committee Comments — 1961, at 15 (Smith-Hurd 2002)), completed the definition of proximate cause. 354 Ill. App. 3d at 654. The court therefore found that the given modified version of IPI Criminal 4th No. 7.01 sufficiently communicated the concept of proximate causation to the jury to enable it to apply the proper law to the facts. The appellate court also rejected the defendant’s tendered instruction because it contained too strict a foreseeability requirement. 354 Ill. App. 3d at 655. The court stated, “defendant is only required to ‘set[ ] in motion a chain of events which were or should have been within his contemplation.’ [Citations.] Defendant is not required to contemplate that his actions would result specifically in death.” 354 Ill. App. 3d at 655. Presiding Justice Reid dissented, stating that the “instruction given to the jury merely requires that he set in motion the events leading up to the death.” 354 Ill. App. 3d at 658 (Reid, EJ., dissenting). Presiding Justice Reid stated that he would hold that the instruction should have specifically used the language “ ‘and the death is a direct and foreseeable consequence of the actions’ ” to communicate the concept of proximate cause to the jury. (Emphasis omitted.) 354 Ill. App. 3d at 659 (Reid, P.J., dissenting). Presiding Justice Reid did, however, agree with the majority’s rejection of defendant’s instruction as it “raises the ‘direct and foreseeable’ language to the level of an element of the offense.” 354 Ill. App. 3d at 659 (Reid, EJ., dissenting). We granted defendant’s petition for leave to appeal. 177 Ill. 2d R. 315. ANALYSIS Defendant contends that his conviction for felony murder should be reversed because the trial court abused its discretion by improperly instructing the jury as to the causation element of the felony-murder count. Specifically, according to defendant, the instructions did not refer to an essential element of proximate causation— namely, foreseeability. Because the instruction excluded any mention of foreseeability, defendant claims his due process rights were violated because the State was not required to prove beyond a reasonable doubt every element of the crime of felony murder. The State responds that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in submitting the instruction to the jury because the instruction adequately stated the law. We agree with the State. “ ‘The sole function of instructions is to convey to the minds of the jury the correct principles of law applicable to the evidence submitted to it in order that, having determined the final state of facts from the evidence, the jury may, by the application of proper legal principles, arrive at a correct conclusion according to the law and the evidence.’ ” People v. Ramey, 151 Ill. 2d 498, 535 (1992), quoting People v. Gambony, 402 Ill. 74, 81-82 (1948); see also People v. Fuller, 205 Ill. 2d 308, 343 (2002). “Our task is to determine whether the instructions given to the jury in the case at bar, ‘ “considered as a whole, fully and fairly announce the law applicable to the respective theories of the People and the defense.” ’ ” People v. Pollock, 202 Ill. 2d 189, 210 (2002), quoting People v. Terry, 99 Ill. 2d 508, 516 (1984), quoting People v. Kolep, 29 Ill. 2d 116, 125 (1963). We first note that the trial court properly used a non-IPI jury instruction. Supreme Court Rule 451(a) (134 Ill. 2d R. 451(a)) requires a trial court to instruct the jury pursuant to the IPI criminal instructions unless the trial court determines that the IPI instruction does not accurately state the law. Where there is no IPI jury instruction on a subject on which the court determines the jury should be instructed, the court has the discretion to give a non-IPI instruction. Ramey, 151 Ill. 2d at 536. Therefore, we will not disturb a trial court’s decision to instruct a jury using a non-IPI instruction absent an abuse of that discretion. Pollock, 202 Ill. 2d at 211. Section 9 — 1(a)(3) of the Criminal Code of 1961 (720 ILCS 5/9 — 1(a)(3) (West 2002)) provides: “A person who kills an individual without lawful justification commits first degree murder if, in performing the acts which cause the death: * * * (3) he is attempting or committing a forcible felony other than second degree murder.” Accordingly, the relevant IPI instruction on felony murder provides: “A person commits the offense of first degree murder when he kills an individual [without lawful justification] if, in performing the acts which cause the death, * * * [4] he [(is attempting to commit) (is committing)] the offense of_.” IPI Criminal 4th No. 7.01. Because defendant did not perform the acts which caused cofelon Thomas’ death, the parties agree this instruction does not accurately state the law applicable to the facts of this case. Therefore, the trial court properly exercised its discretion to give a non-IPI instruction. We next determine whether the trial court’s instruction submitted to the jury properly stated the law. Whether the court has abused its discretion in giving a particular non-IPI instruction will depend on whether that instruction was an accurate, simple, brief, impartial, and nonargumentative statement of the applicable law. Pollock, 202 Ill. 2d at 211; 177 Ill. 2d R. 451(a). Preliminarily, we reject defendant’s argument that we should conduct a de novo review, as defendant’s sole case citation in support thereof, People v. Daniels, 187 Ill. 2d 301 (1999), did not consider jury instructions but, rather, the effect of double jeopardy protections. We therefore determine if the trial court abused its discretion in submitting the instruction to the jury. In general, Illinois law provides that a defendant may be charged with murder pursuant to the “proximate cause” theory of felony murder. People v. Lowery, 178 Ill. 2d 462 (1997). The term “proximate cause” describes two distinct requirements: cause in fact and legal cause. First Springfield Bank & Trust v. Galman, 188 Ill. 2d 252, 257-58 (1999). We have stated, “We believe that the analogies between civil and criminal cases in which individuals are injured or killed are so close that the principle of proximate cause applies to both classes of cases. Causal relation is the universal factor common to all legal liability.” Lowery, 178 Ill. 2d at 466. Legal cause “is essentially a question of foreseeability”; the relevant inquiry is “whether the injury is of a type that a reasonable person would see as a likely result of his or her conduct.” Galman, 188 Ill. 2d at 258. Foreseeability is added to the cause-in-fact requirement because “even when cause in fact is established, it must be determined that any variation between the result intended *** and the result actually achieved is not so extraordinary that it would be unfair to hold the defendant responsible for the actual result.” 1 W. LaFave, Substantive Criminal Law § 6.4, at 464 (2d ed. 2003). Although foreseeability is a necessary component of a proximate cause analysis, it need not be specifically mentioned in a jury instruction to communicate the idea of “proximate” to a jury. Thus, the IPI civil jury instruction communicates the definition of “proximate cause,” as “[any] cause which, in natural or probable sequence, produced the injury complained of. [It need not be the only cause, nor the last or nearest cause. It is sufficient if it concurs with some other cause acting at the same time, which in combination with it, causes the injury.]” Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Civil, No. 15.01 (2005). We set forth the general parameters of the law of proximate cause in a felony-murder case in Lowery, albeit without the specific mention of the cause-in-fact and legal-cause components: “It is equally consistent with reason and sound public policy to hold that when a felon’s attempt to commit a forcible felony sets in motion a chain of events which were or should have been within his contemplation when the motion was initiated, he should be held responsible for any death which by direct and almost inevitable sequence results from the initial criminal act. Thus, there is no reason why the principle underlying the doctrine of proximate cause should not apply to criminal cases. Moreover, we believe that the intent behind the felony-murder doctrine would be thwarted if we did not hold felons responsible for the foreseeable consequences of their actions.” Lowery, 178 Ill. 2d at 467. Thus, in Lowery, we held that the civil concepts of proximate cause are equally applicable to criminal cases. Whether the instant fact situation can be charged as felony murder was answered by this court in People v. Dekens, 182 Ill. 2d 247 (1998). In Dekens, this court held that “liability attaches ‘for any death proximately resulting from the unlawful activity — notwithstanding the fact that the killing was by one resisting the crime.’ ” Dekens, 182 Ill. 2d at 249, quoting Lowery, 178 Ill. 2d at 465. Further, a defendant may be liable for murder where the one resisting the crime causes the death of the defendant’s cofelon. Dekens, 182 Ill. 2d at 252. We have affirmed our historical adherence to this form of liability in People v. Klebanowski, 221 Ill. 2d 538 (2006), in a parallel fact situation. In rejecting defendant’s request that we adopt Justice Bilandic’s dissent in Dekens (Dekens, 182 Ill. 2d at 254 (Bilandic, J., dissenting, joined by Me-Morrow, J.)), we stated, “In light of the thorough review of the proximate cause theory of liability contained in Dekens, the recency of the decision, and the principles of stare decisis [citations], we determine also that the proximate cause theory of liability is the theory applicable to the case at bar.” Klebanowski, 221 Ill. 2d at 554-55. We therefore consider whether the instruction in this matter sufficiently stated the law of proximate cause to allow the jury to correctly apply the facts adduced in defendant’s trial and arrive at a correct conclusion. The parties do not dispute that the instruction adequately stated the cause-in-fact requirement, as the submitted instruction included the phrase “he sets in motion a chain of events which cause the death of an individual.” As for whether the instruction indicated that the cause must also be “proximate,” a review of the law in this state concerning proximate cause since 1935 demonstrates that the disputed language in the instant case — “it is immaterial whether the killing in such a case is intentional or accidental or committed by a confederate without the connivance of the defendant or even by a third person trying to prevent the commission of the felony” — has long been integral to this state’s felony-murder proximate cause jurisprudence. The proximate cause theory of liability was first set forth in People v. Payne, 359 Ill. 246 (1935). Dekens, 182 Ill. 2d at 250, citing People v. Payne, 359 Ill. 246 (1935). As we stated in Dekens, “Applying the proximate cause theory, the [Payne] court explained that the identity of the person who fired the shot that killed the decedent was immaterial to the murder charge.” Dekens, 182 Ill. 2d at 250. In finding that the jury had been properly instructed, the Payne court stated: “The jury, however, would not misunderstand the instruction in that respect. It reasonably might be anticipated that an attempted robbery would meet with resistance, during which the victim might be shot either by himself or someone else in attempting to prevent the robbery, and those attempting to perpetrate the robbery would be guilty of murder.” Payne, 359 Ill. at 255. We have previously noted that the drafters of section 9—1 of the Criminal Code of 1961 incorporated the holding of Payne. Dekens, 182 Ill. 2d at 250, citing People v. Allen, 56 Ill. 2d 536 (1974). The committee comments to the statute stated, in language identical to the instant jury instructions, “It is immaterial whether the killing in such a case is intentional or accidental, or is committed by a confederate without the connivance of the defendant [citations] or even by a third person trying to prevent the commission of the felony. People v. Payne, 359 Ill. 246, 194 N.E. 539 (1935).” 720 ILCS Ann. 5/9 — 1, Committee Comments — 1961, at 15 (Smith-Hurd 2002). We have recognized that this proximate cause theory was thereafter reaffirmed in People v. Allen, 56 Ill. 2d 536 (1974), People v. Hickman, 59 Ill. 2d 90 (1974), and People v. Lowery, 178 Ill. 2d 462 (1997). Dekens, 182 Ill. 2d at 251-52. Most recently, in People v. Dekens, 182 Ill. 2d 247 (1998), we addressed a parallel fact situation. The Dekens majority addressed the question of whether “a defendant may be charged with first degree murder, on a felony-murder theory, when the decedent is a cofelon who is killed by an intended victim of the defendant and cofelon.” Dekens, 182 Ill. 2d at 248. The parties stipulated that an undercover officer arranged to buy narcotics from defendant. Dekens, 182 Ill. 2d at 248. Prior to the meeting, the defendant and the cofelon formulated a plan to rob the officer, and during the transaction, defendant pointed a shotgun at the officer. Dekens, 182 Ill. 2d at 248. The officer fired several shots at the defendant, and, as the officer was leaving, the cofelon grabbed him. The officer shot and killed the cofelon. This court rejected the defendant’s attempt to employ an “agency theory” of liability. Dekens, 182 Ill. 2d at 249. The Dekens defendant also unsuccessfully argued that the indictment against him should have been dismissed because the “felony-murder doctrine should not apply when the person killed in the felony is an accomplice of the defendant.” Dekens, 182 Ill. 2d at 253. The Dekens court reaffirmed our holdings in the previous proximate cause cases, stating: “Although Lowery, Hickman, Allen, and Payne did not address the precise question raised in this appeal, we believe that our case law compels application of the felony-murder doctrine to the circumstances of this case. As Lowery noted, Illinois follows the proximate cause theory of felony murder, as opposed to the agency theory. Consistent with the proximate cause theory, liability should lie for any death proximately related to the defendant’s criminal conduct. Thus, the key question here is whether the decedent’s death is the direct and proximate result of the defendant’s felony. As our cases make clear, application of the felony-murder doctrine does not depend on the guilt or innocence of the person killed during the felony or on the identity of the person whose act causes the decedent’s death.” Dekens, 182 Ill. 2d at 252. In concluding, the Dekens court returned to the committee comments of the Criminal Code: “In explaining the intended scope of the doctrine in Illinois, the committee comments to section 9 — 1 of the Criminal Code of 1961 state: Tt is immaterial whether the killing in such a case is intentional or accidental, or is committed by a confederate without the connivance of the defendant *** or even by a third person trying to prevent the commission of the felony.’ 720 ILCS Ann. 5/9 — 1, Committee Comments — 1961, at 12-13 (Smith-Hurd 1993). We believe that denying liability when the decedent is a cofelon would conflict with the legislature’s adoption of the proximate cause theory.” Dekens, 182 Ill. 2d at 254. These committee comments are the same comments which the Allen court noted that the legislature had adopted in incorporating the holding of our 1935 decision in Payne. People v. Allen, 56 Ill. 2d 536, 545 (1974), citing Ill. Ann. Stat., ch. 38, par. 9 — 1, Committee Comments, at 9 (Smith-Hurd 1972). Here, we read Dekens to stand for the proposition that the language adopted in the committee comments is tantamount to a definition of the legal-cause component of proximate cause, and therefore coextensive with foreseeability. In other words, we held the phrase “It is immaterial whether the killing in such a case is intentional or accidental, or is committed by a confederate without the connivance of the defendant *** or even by a third person trying to prevent the commission of the felony” is integral to our proximate cause analysis in this state. We return to the instructions which were tendered by the parties to the trial court regarding proximate causation. At the jury instruction conference, both parties submitted modified versions of IPI Criminal 4th No. 7.01. Defendant submitted the following instruction: “A person commits the offense of first degree murder when he commits the offense of attempt [to commit] armed robbery and during *** the commission of that offense, the death of an individual is [the] direct and foreseeable consequence of the commission or attempt to commit that offense, and the defendant contemplated or should have contemplated that his actions could result in death.” The instruction submitted by the State read: “A person commits the offense of first degree murder when he commits the offense of attempt [to commit] armed robbeiy, and during the course of the commission of the offense of attempt [to commit] armed robberyf,] he sets in motion a chain of events which cause the death of an individual. It is immaterial whether the killing in such a case is intentional or accidental, or committed by a confederate without the connivance of the defendant or even by a third person trying to prevent the commission of the felony.” Following argument, the trial court chose to give the State’s instructions. In the present review of the propriety of the instruction, we agree with the appellate court majority, which stated: “In the case at bar, we find that the modified version of IPI Criminal 4th No. 7.01 given sufficiently communicated the concept of proximate causation to the jury to enable it to apply the proper law to the facts. Although the phrase ‘ “direct and foreseeable consequence” ’ may have been a more precise way of defining the concept of proximate causation, the phrase 1 “sets in motion a chain of events” ’ has also been used by the supreme court in characterizing this concept. The second paragraph of the given instruction, apparently taken from the committee comments to section 9 — 1 of the Criminal Code of 1961 (Code) (720 ILCS Ann. 5/9 — 1, Committee Comments — 1961, at 15 (SmithHurd 2002)), completed the definition of proximate causation by providing examples to delineate when homicides committed by individuals other than the defendant would be considered foreseeable consequences of forcible felonies. Thus, the instruction given was not an incorrect statement of the law. See Dekens, 182 Ill. 2d at 254, 695 N.E.2d at 477-78; Lowery, 178 Ill. 2d at 467, 687 N.E.2d at 976. In addition, on the facts of the present case, these examples enabled the jury to properly apply the difficult concept of proximate cause to determine that Thomas’ homicide was a foreseeable result of defendant’s participation in the attempted armed robbery. We further find the instruction to have been simple, brief, impartial, and free from argument. See 177 Ill. 2d R. 451(a); Ramey, 151 Ill. 2d at 536, 603 N.E.2d at 534. Therefore, we cannot say that the circuit court abused its discretion in choosing between the two offered instructions and in giving the State’s instruction.” 354 Ill. App. 3d at 654-55. We believe that is an adequate basis to resolve this case. We would add that the answer to the issue here— whether the second part of the jury instruction based on the committee comments sufficiently informs the jury as to this state’s laws of proximate cause as do the phrases “should have been in his contemplation” or “foreseeable consequence” — is yes. The instruction mirrored the committee comments of the statute. As we have repeatedly held, this concept has been part and parcel of our felony-murder jurisprudence on proximate cause since 1935. The jury was not instructed that a mere chain reaction was sufficient to convict, but rather that a killing by a third party resisting the robbery could also be a proximate cause. Therefore, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in so instructing the jury. Accordingly, defendant’s due process rights were not violated, as the State was required to prove beyond a reasonable doubt all the elements of the offense. Finally, while we hold that the instruction was adequate and that the trial court did not abuse its discretion, in an effort to aid the bench and bar in future cases, we also note that the instruction could have stated the law of proximate cause more precisely. For example, an instruction stating that: “A person commits the offense of first degree murder when he commits the offense of attempt to commit armed robbery and the death of an individual results as a direct and foreseeable consequence of a chain of events set into motion by his commission of the offense of attempt to commit armed robbery. It is immaterial whether the killing is intentional or accidental, or committed by a confederate without the connivance of the defendant or by a third person trying to prevent the commission of the offense of attempt to commit armed robbery,” would have simply and concisely stated the law on proximate cause as set forth in People v. Lowery, 178 Ill. 2d 462, 467 (1997), and as it applies to this case. CONCLUSION For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the judgment of the appellate court affirming the judgment of the trial court. Affirmed.

=== CASE 9739299 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:55.793108+00 ===

JUSTICE FREEMAN, specially concurring: I agree with the majority that defendant, Lavelle Hudson, can be held responsible for the death of his cofelon, Chrispin Thomas. The death occurred as defendant and Thomas attempted to rob a barbershop. The off-duty police officer, a patron of the barbershop, shot and killed Thomas when Thomas, ignoring warnings to drop his gun, pointed the gun at the officer. “Those who commit forcible felonies know they may encounter resistance, both to their affirmative actions and to any subsequent escape.” People v. Hickman, 59 Ill. 2d 89, 94 (1974). Thus, under the felony-murder rule, a defendant may be held responsible for a death occurring during the commission of a felony whether the fatal shot is fired by a cofelon in furtherance of the felony or by a police officer in opposition to the felony. People v. Allen, 56 Ill. 2d 536 (1974). I write separately, however, to explain my views on the instruction the trial court gave to the jury. I believe the court did not properly instruct the jury on the issue of proximate cause. In my opinion, the trial court’s instruction did not give suitable guidance to the jury as to the findings it needed to make to convict defendant of felony murder. The instruction was incomplete and failed to convey clearly the theory of proximate cause as it has developed in our jurisprudence over the years. This court has consistently held that “when a felon’s attempt to commit a forcible felony sets in motion a chain of events which were or should have been within his contemplation when the motion was initiated, he should be held responsible for any death which by direct and almost inevitable sequence results from the initial criminal act.” (Emphasis added.) People v. Lowery, 178 Ill. 2d 462, 467 (1997). In its holding, the majority does away with the foreseeability requirement of proximate cause, while introducing new terms into the lexicon of felony murder and proximate cause. At the same time, however, the majority acknowledges the difficulty presented by its holding and inserts dicta in its opinion offering an alternative instruction which harkens back to the traditional language of proximate cause. With its ruling in this case, the majority brings confusion to an established area of law. It is my view that the better approach in analyzing the issue presented by this appeal is to acknowledge that the instruction given to the jury in this cause is defective and then engage in harmless error analysis. This court has previously held that “an error in a jury instruction is harmless if it is demonstrated that the result of the trial would not have been different had the jury been properly instructed.” People v. Pomykala, 203 Ill. 2d 198, 210 (2003). It is my position that the evidence of defendant’s guilt was so clear and convincing that no jury could have reasonably found defendant not guilty. I therefore agree with the State that because defendant suffered no prejudice as a result of the improper instruction, relief should not be granted. ANALYSIS As explained in Lowery, 178 Ill. 2d 462, Illinois follows the proximate cause theory for imposition of liability under the felony-murder rule. See also People v. Klebanowski, 221 Ill. 2d 538 (2006); People v. Dekens, 182 Ill. 2d 247 (1998). Although the court has borrowed the concept of proximate cause from the law of torts, we have refrained, to date, from defining the concept in terms of cause-in-fact and legal cause. Instead, the court has uniformly explained the proximate cause theory in terms of a chain of events which by direct and almost inevitable sequence results in the death for which liability is sought to be imposed. Thus, in People v. Payne, 359 Ill. 246 (1935), the court affirmed the defendant’s conviction for felony murder where the defendant, although not present at the scene of the robbery, had previously informed his cofelons that the victim had a large sum of money which could be obtained easily, showed the cofelons the location of the victim’s home, and told the cofelons that he expected to receive $500 from the proceeds of the robbery. The court noted first that where “several persons conspire to do an unlawful act and another crime is committed in the pursuit of the common object all are alike guilty of the crime committed if it is a natural and probable consequence of the execution of the conspiracy.” Payne, 359 Ill. at 254. The court also rejected the defendant’s theory that he was only guilty of involuntary manslaughter if the victim was killed by a bullet fired by another victim in resisting the robbery. The court reasoned it “reasonably might be anticipated that an attempted robbery would meet with resistance, during which the victim might be shot either by himself or someone else in attempting to prevent the robbery, and those attempting to perpetrate the robbery would be guilty of murder. *** A killing which happens in the prosecution of an unlawful act which in its consequences naturally tends to destroy the life of a human being is murder.” Payne, 359 Ill. at 255. Likewise, in Hickman, 59 Ill. 2d at 95, the court affirmed the defendant’s felony-murder conviction. Police officers were conducting surveillance at a warehouse. Three conspirators accessed the warehouse by removing a panel and a lock from the side door. When they exited the warehouse, the officers closed in. The conspirators fled upon seeing the officers. In the ensuing pursuit, one officer shot and killed another, mistakenly believing that the victim was one of the conspirators. The jury found two of the conspirators guilty of burglary and murder. The trial court, however, entered an order arresting the judgment of murder. The appellate court reversed. In affirming the judgment of the appellate court, this court reasoned; “Here defendants planned and committed a burglary, which is a forcible felony under Illinois law. [Citation.] One of them was armed. It was their conduct which occasioned the presence of the police. When confronted by approaching officers, the defendants elected to flee. We have previously held that the period of time and activities involved in escaping to a place of safety are part of the crime itself. [Citation.] The defendants were repeatedly told to halt and the police identified themselves, but the defendants continued their attempt to escape. The commission of the burglary, coupled with the election by defendants to flee, set in motion the pursuit by armed police officers. The shot which killed Detective Loscheider was a shot fired in opposition to the escape of the fleeing burglars, and it was a direct and foreseeable consequence of defendants’ actions. The escape here had the same effect as did the gunfire in [People v. Allen, 56 Ill. 2d 536 (1974)], in that it invited retaliation, opposition and pursuit. Those who commit forcible felonies know they may encounter resistance, both to their affirmative actions and to any subsequent escape. As we indicated in a recent felony-murder case, ‘It is unimportant that the defendants did not anticipate the precise sequence of events that followed upon his entry into the apartment of Judy Tolbert. His unlawful acts precipitated those events, and he is responsible for the consequences.’ People v. Smith, 56 Ill. 2d 328, 333-334.” Hickman, 59 Ill. 2d at 94. See also Dekens, 182 Ill. 2d at 254 (explaining that “the focus of the proximate cause theory is on the chain of events set in motion by the defendant”); Allen, 56 Ill. 2d at 545; People v. Johnson, 55 Ill. 2d 62, 69 (1973); People v. Golson, 32 Ill. 2d 398, 408-09 (1965). As defined by this court in the cases discussed above, proximate cause encompasses the concept of foreseeability. The defendant is not liable for any and all deaths that occur concomitantly with the felony, but rather the defendant is liable when he has set in motion a chain of events which were or should have been within his contemplation when the motion was initiated, and which by direct and almost inevitable sequence results in the death. Liability is imposed precisely because those who commit forcible felonies know that they may encounter resistance, both to their affirmative actions and to any subsequent escape. Looking to the instruction at issue in the present case, it is clear that the instruction was overly broad and did not convey the concept of foreseeability to the jury. In the first part of the instruction, the jury was told that: “A person commits the offense of first degree murder when he commits the offense of attempt [to commit] armed robbery, and during the course of the commission of the offense of attempt [to commit] armed robbery[,] he sets in motion a chain of events which cause the death of an individual.” In the second part of the instruction, the jury was told that the killing may be “intentional or accidental, committed by a confederate without the connivance of the defendant or even by a third person trying to prevent the commission of the felony.” The problem, however, is that the “examples” contained in the second part of the instruction did not serve to limit the killings for which a defendant may be held liable beyond the requirement in the first part of the instruction that the defendant have set in motion a chain of events which causes the death. The following illustration highlights the troublesome aspect of the instruction. Defendant X robs an individual at gunpoint. During the robbery, defendant X accidentally discharges the gun. At the forest preserve two blocks away, the victim is riding a horse. The horse bolts at the sound of the gunshot, crosses a busy street, and throws the victim to the ground. An oncoming car cannot stop in a timely fashion and runs over the victim, inflicting the injuries that result in the death. The victim’s death occurred during the course of the robbery. Indeed, the victim’s death was the result of a chain of events initiated by defendant X. Thus, under the first part of the instruction, defendant X may be held hable for the death. Looking to the second part of the instruction, is there any limitation imposed upon the killing for which defendant X may be liable? Hardly. We are simply told that the death may be accidental or intentional, committed by a confederate or by a third party. Indeed, in my example, the death was accidental and was the result of a chain of events set into motion by defendant X. Presiding Justice Reid, in dissent from the appellate court opinion, proffered the following instruction for consideration: “ ‘A person commits the offense of first degree murder when he commits the offense of attempt armed robbery and during the course of the commission of the offense of attempt armed robbery he sets in motion a chain of events which causes the death of an individual and the death is a direct and foreseeable consequence of the actions. It is immaterial whether the killing in such a case is intentional or accidental or committed by a confederate without the connivance of the defendant or even by a third person trying to prevent the commission of the felony. To sustain the charge of first degree murder, the State must prove *** that the defendant, or one for whose conduct he is legally responsible, was committing the offense of attempt armed robbery; and, second, that during the course of the commission of the offense of attempt armed robbery, the defendant, or one for whose conduct he is legally responsible, set in motion a chain of events that, as a direct and foreseeable consequence thereof, caused the death of Chrispin Thomas. And, third, that the defendant did not act under compulsion. If you find from your consideration of all the evidence that each one of these propositions has been proved beyond a reasonable doubt, you should find the defendant guilty. If you find from your consideration of all the evidence that any one of these propositions has not been proved beyond a reasonable doubt, you should find the defendant not guilty.’ ” (Emphasis omitted.) 354 Ill. App. 3d at 659 (Reid, EJ., dissenting). I agree with Presiding Justice Reid that such an instruction provides appropriate guidance for the just application of the proximate cause theory of felony murder and the core concept of foreseeability. I note that, in affirming defendant’s conviction, the appellate court majority candidly admitted that “based on the supreme court’s rationale in Lowery, the best wording for an instruction on proximate causation in felony murder would include either the phrase ‘direct and foreseeable consequence’ or, alternatively, the phrase ‘sets into motion a chain of events which were or should have been within his contemplation when his actions were initiated.’ ” 354 Ill. App. 3d at 655. Rather than analyze the instruction at bar in light of our established precedent on proximate cause, the majority introduces new terms into the lexicon of felony murder, bringing confusion to an established area of law. The majority informs us that “[t]he term ‘proximate cause’ describes two distinct requirements: cause in fact and legal cause.” 222 Ill. 2d at 401. The majority then states: “Legal cause ‘is essentially a question of foreseeability’; the relevant inquiry is ‘whether the injury is of a type that a reasonable person would see as a likely result of his or her conduct.’ [Citation.] Foreseeability is added to the cause-in-fact requirement because ‘even when cause in fact is established, it must be determined that any variation between the result intended *** and the result actually achieved is not so extraordinary that it would be unfair to hold the defendant responsible for the actual result.’ [Citation.] Although foreseeability is a necessary component of a proximate cause analysis, it need not be specifically mentioned in a jury instruction to communicate the idea of ‘proximate’ to a jury.” 222 Ill. 2d at 401. Having laid the foundation for a discussion of cause in fact and legal cause, the majority tells us that the court “set forth the general parameters of the law of proximate cause in a felony-murder case in Lowery, albeit without the specific mention of the cause-in-fact and legal-cause components.” 222 Ill. 2d at 402. There follows a discussion of proximate cause, devoid of the terms cause in fact and legal cause. 222 Ill. 2d at 402-03. The majority then informs us the parties do not dispute that the first part of the instruction establishes the cause in fact requirement. 222 Ill. 2d at 403. Turning to the concept of legal cause, the majority states: “As for whether the instruction indicated that the cause must also be ‘proximate,’ a review of the law in this state concerning proximate cause since 1935 demonstrates that the disputed language in the instant case [the language of the second part of the instruction] has long been integral to this state’s felony-murder proximate cause jurisprudence.” 222 Ill. 2d at 403. The majority launches into a second discussion of proximate cause, once more devoid of the terms cause in fact and legal cause, and concludes that the language of the second part of the instruction “is tantamount to a definition of the legal-cause component of proximate cause, and therefore coextensive with foreseeability” 222 Ill. 2d at 406. I do not dispute that the language of the second part of the instruction has been part of the discussion of proximate cause in previous cases. These cases nowhere intimated, however, that the language was “tantamount to a definition of the legal-cause component of proximate cause.” Indeed, no other Illinois case has ever discussed the proximate cause theory of felony murder in terms of cause in fact and legal cause. Nor has any case indicated that the language at issue was intended to limit the circumstances under which a defendant may be held liable for felony murder to those circumstances which are foreseeable. To add to the confusion, the majority proffers as the rationale for its holding the reasoning of the appellate court majority. 222 Ill. 2d at 407. Although the appellate court majority found the instruction to be a proper statement of the law, the appellate court majority nowhere explained its ruling in terms of cause in fact and legal cause. As noted above, it is the present majority which introduces the terms cause in fact and legal cause into the fabric of the proximate cause theory of felony murder. To support the new verbiage, the majority relies on an opinion which nowhere discusses the terminology at issue. More importantly, the present majority, while acknowledging the concept of foreseeability, approves an instruction which provides no limits and no guidance to a juror regarding foreseeability. As the majority notes: “Foreseeability is added to the cause-in-fact requirement because ‘even when cause in fact is established, it must be determined that any variation between the result intended *** and the result actually achieved is not so extraordinary that it would be unfair to hold the defendant responsible for the actual result.’ ” 222 Ill. 2d at 401, quoting 1 W LaFave, Substantive Criminal Law § 6.4, at 464 (2d ed. 2003). Looking again at the instruction, what part of the instruction limits the defendant’s accountability to a death of which he is the “legal cause”? The second part of the instruction did not state that only killings under the circumstances described are attributable to a defendant. It provided examples but no limitations on the “cause-in-fact” element. As stated, the majority initially informs the bench and bar that the jury instruction given in this matter is a correct restatement of the theory of proximate cause and the core concept of foreseeability, declaring that the language used in the instruction is “tantamount to a definition of the legal-cause component of proximate cause, and therefore coextensive with foreseeability.” 222 Ill. 2d at 406. However, having just proclaimed that the given instruction provides a definitive statement of proximate cause and foreseeability, the majority only a few paragraphs later appears to retreat from its initial position of confidence and states that the instruction given in this cause was merely “adequate.” 222 Ill. 2d at 407. In what appears to be an acknowledgment that its holding in this cause is problematic, the majority believes it necessary to “aid the bench and bar in future cases” by noting that “the instruction could have stated the law of proximate cause more precisely.” 222 Ill. 2d at 408. Despite holding that the given instruction did not violate defendant’s rights to due process in the matter at bar, the majority nevertheless deems it appropriate to insert dicta in its opinion to guide future cases. The majority offers alternative language for the instruction which “would have simply and concisely stated the law on proximate cause *** as it applies to this case.” 222 Ill. 2d at 408.I note that the language proffered by the majority harkens back to the traditional language of proximate cause and mirrors the language advocated by defendant in his brief to this court. Although the majority states that its dicta will assist the bench and bar in future cases, I disagree. The majority’s suggestion of an alternative instruction after having upheld the given instruction sends mixed signals to our courts and practitioners, and will engender confusion and additional litigation. It is my position that the majority could have avoided engaging in this contrarian exercise by simply holding that the jury instruction given in this case was deficient and then applying a harmless error analysis to determine whether the result of the trial would have been different had the jury been properly instructed. Pomykala, 203 Ill. 2d at 210; People v. Johnson, 146 Ill. 2d 109, 137 (1991). In its brief to this court, the State contends that even if the instruction proffered to the jury in this case was erroneous, any error is harmless on the facts presented, as defendant’s guilt is clear. I agree. Based upon the facts in the cause at bar, the outcome of the trial would have been the same, and, accordingly, defendant suffered no prejudice. In other words, the evidence of defendant’s guilt was so clear and convincing as to render the error harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Pomykala, 203 Ill. 2d at 210. CONCLUSION As this court explained in People v. Dennis, 181 Ill. 2d 87, 105 (1998): “Felony murder seeks to deter persons from committing forcible felonies by holding them responsible for murder if a death results. [Citation.] Because of the extremely violent nature of felony murder, we seek the broadest bounds for the attachment of criminal liability. For that reason, in felony murder, *** [a] defendant may be found guilty of felony murder regardless of a lack either of intent to commit murder [citation], or even connivance with a codefendant [citation]. Our continued adherence to a proximate cause approach is further exemplary of how broadly we seek to extend the reaches of criminal liability in the case of felony murder.” While I agree that liability should be imposed under the theory of proximate cause for the killing at issue, I also suggest that the theory of proximate cause does not impose liability for any and every death that occurs concomitantly with a felony. As this court has repeatedly held, a defendant may be held liable only where he has set in motion a chain of events which were or should have been within his contemplation when the motion was initiated, and which by direct and almost inevitable sequence results in the death. See Lowery, 178 Ill. 2d at 467. It is precisely because the theory of proximate cause is intended to cast a broad net that I believe it must be tempered by judicious application of instructions properly conveying the theory of proximate cause and its core element of foreseeability. In the present case, liability is imposed on defendant for the death of his cofelon Thomas at the hands of the off-duty police officer. The instruction, however, failed to limit defendant’s liability to a death proximately caused by his actions. Although I agree with the result reached by the majority, based upon the weight of the evidence at defendant’s trial, I cannot agree with the majority’s rejection of the salutary limits provided by the concept of foreseeability in its holding, and cannot countenance the confusion it engenders by its dicta which appears contrary to its holding. JUSTICE KILBRIDE joins in this special concurrence.

=== CASE 9739300 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:55.797294+00 ===

JUSTICE McMORROWS dissenting: After a jury trial, 15-year-old defendant, Lavelle Hudson, was convicted of first degree murder based on the commission of a felony (felony murder). The charge of murder was premised on the death of Chrispin Thomas, who was shot and killed by an off-duty police officer who happened to be a customer in the barbershop that defendant and Thomas attempted to rob. The issue on appeal is whether the jury was properly instructed regarding proximate cause in relation to felony murder. The majority affirms defendant’s conviction, finding that the State’s proffered non-IPI jury instruction correctly states the law. I disagree. As I explained in People v. Klebanowski, 221 Ill. 2d 538 (2006), I continue to maintain, as I did in People v. Dekens, 182 Ill. 2d 247, 257 (1998) (Bilandic, J., dissenting, joined by McMorrow, J.), that, “[wjhere a cofelon is killed by a third party, the most direct cause of the death is the cofelon’s participation in the felony, not the defendant’s acts.” Accordingly, under the proximate cause theory of liability for felony murder, a cofelon may not be held liable for murder when a third party kills an active coparticipant in the underlying felony. In my view, the felony-murder doctrine simply “does not apply to render a surviving felon guilty of murder where a cofelon is killed by a nonparticipant in the felony.” People v. Dekens, 182 Ill. 2d at 255 (Bilandic, J., dissenting, joined by McMorrow, J.). Here, as in Klebanowski, the notion that the cofelon’s own participation in the felony is the most direct cause of his death is made particularly apparent by the facts. In the case at bar, defendant and Thomas entered a barbershop with the intent to commit a robbery therein. Both carried guns, although defendant’s gun was inoperable. Inside the barbershop, Thomas took charge and demanded that the customers throw their money on the floor. When Thomas was not looking, an off-duty police officer, who happened to be a customer in the shop, drew his service revolver and announced, “Police, drop the gun” or “Freeze, police.” Despite repeated warnings, Thomas pointed his gun at the officer, who responded by shooting Thomas in the right arm. Thomas, however, was not dissuaded. He transferred his gun to his left arm and tried to point it at the officer. The officer walked up to Thomas and, placing his gun on Thomas’ chest, ordered Thomas to “Drop the gun, man.” Thomas still refused to comply. Instead, Thomas tried to point his gun at the officer. Only after the officer shot Thomas in the chest twice, at point-blank range, did Thomas drop the gun. Thomas died as a result of his injuries from these gunshots. It is abundantly clear from the above facts that Thomas’ conduct, not defendant’s, “set in motion” the chain of events which proximately caused Thomas’ death at the hands of the officer. While it is true that defendant participated in the underlying felony of armed robbery, nothing he did during the course of the felony led to the death of his cofelon. In my view, the public policy reasons for holding the felon criminally liable for murder are inapplicable in these circumstances. Thus, I would hold that a conviction for murder in these cases is fundamentally unjust. For this reason, I dissent.

=== CASE 9739301 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:57.813593+00 ===

OPINION
HANSON, Justice.
Appellant State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Company (State Farm) paid for property damage to the vehicle of its insured, Michelle Miller, resulting from a collision with a vehicle driven by Glen Meyer, the insured of Respondent Cincinnati Insurance Company (Cincinnati). State Farm served on Cincinnati a Petition for Arbitration through Arbitration Forum, Inc., pursuant to an intercompany Automobile Subrogation Arbitration Agreement to which both State Farm and Cincinnati are signatories. When Cincinnati refused to arbitrate, contending that it provided no coverage because Meyer had instructed Cincinnati to riot defend or indemnify, State Farm filed a motion in district court under Minn.Stat. § 572.09(a) (2002) for an order compelling arbitration. The district court denied the motion, holding that Meyer’s refusal to tender the defense to Cincinnati precluded arbitration, and the court of appeals affirmed. We reverse. .
On February 24, 2001, Meyer was involved in a car accident with Miller. The damage to Miller’s vehicle amounted to $2,044.33, which was paid by State Farm to the extent it exceeded Miller’s $500 deductible. Meyer refused to reveal the identity of his insurance provider. According to an affidavit executed by Meyer, Cincinnati informed him that any insurance payment on his behalf would result in nonrenewal of his insurance coverage. Meyer had informed Cincinnati that he would decline coverage, negotiate with State Farm independently, and pay any damages out of pocket. State Farm requested that Meyer pay for the damage incurred to Miller’s vehicle. Meyer offered to pay half of the total damages to Miller’s vehicle, believing that Miller was partially responsible for the accident.
State Farm brought suit against Meyer to recover for the damage resulting from the accident. State Farm subsequently confirmed its belief that Cincinnati provided Meyer’s insurance. State Farm and Cincinnati are both parties to an arbitration agreement, which would normally require arbitration of claims, such as this, that involve a minor accident with no personal injury. State Farm made a motion in district court under Minn.Stat. § 572.09(a) to compel Cincinnati to resolve the dispute through arbitration, pursuant to the arbitration agreement. The court *336denied the motion.. The court of appeals affirmed the district court, concluding that an insured must tender a defense of a claim as a condition precedent to compelling arbitration under an intercompany arbitration agreement. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co. v. Cincinnati Ins. Co., 651 N.W.2d 542, 545 (Minn.App.2002).
We review de novo a district court’s determination concerning the scope of an arbitration agreement. Johnson v. Piper Jaffray, Inc., 530 N.W.2d 790, 795 (Minn.1995). State Farm and Cincinnati agree that they are parties to an agreement to arbitrate claims arising from accidents with minor damages of the type incurred here. The parties dispute whether the arbitration agreement mandates that Cincinnati submit the claim to arbitration despite Meyer’s request that Cincinnati not defend or indemnify the claim.
State Farm argues that the arbitration agreement applies because Cincinnati’s only defense to coverage, that Meyer has requested that Cincinnati not defend or indemnify him, amounts to “noncooperation,” and that the arbitration agreement excludes a defense to coverage based on noncooperation. The arbitration agreement includes the following provision:
Signatory companies are bound to forego litigation and in place thereof submit to arbitration any questions or disputes which may arise from any automobile physical damage subrogation or property damage claim not in excess of $100,000.
This Article shall not apply to:
[[Image here]]
(b) any claim as to which a company asserts a defense of lack of coverage on grounds other than
(1) delayed notice
(2) no notice
(3) noncooperation
Cincinnati argues that the arbitration agreement does not apply because Meyer never tendered defense of the claim. Both the district court and the court of appeals held that a tender of defense is a prerequisite to an insurer’s duty to defend or indemnify, that such a tender is likewise a prerequisite to an insured’s duty to cooperate, and that the failure of Meyer to tender the defense therefore could not be noncooperation. We disagree.
The mandatory insurance scheme of the Minnesota No-Fault Automobile Insurance Act would be seriously undermined if each insured had the right to opt out of coverage after the accident occurred. One important purpose of the No-Fault Act is to provide the remedy of arbitration for property damage claims, and to reduce the number of cases filed in court. Minnesota Statutes § 65B.42 (2002) provides:
The detrimental impact of automobile accidents on uncompensated injured persons, upon the orderly and efficient administration of justice in this state, and in various other ways requires that sections 65B.41 to 65B.71 [Minnesota’s No-Fault Automobile Insurance Act] be adopted to effect the following purposes:
* * * *
(4)to speed the administration of justice, to ease the burden of litigation on the courts of this state, and to create a system of small claims arbitration to decrease the expense of and to simplify litigation, and to create a system of mandatory intercompany arbitration to assure a prompt and proper allocation of the costs of insurance benefits between motor vehicle insurers!.]
Permitting the insured to opt out of coverage would deny the other party and his or her insurer the remedy of arbitration and compel them to file an action in district court.
*337Further, the No-Fault Act requirement, that every vehicle is covered by insurance, would be defeated if an owner could simply opt out of coverage after an accident had occurred. Thus, the Act requires every owner of a motor vehicle to maintain insurance by making it a crime to fail to provide proof of such insurance (Minn.Stat. § 169.791, subd. 2 (2002));1 authorizes the revocation of the owner’s driver’s license for failure to provide proof (Minn.Stat. § 169.792, subd. 7 (2002)); and makes it a crime for an owner to allow anyone to operate the vehicle without insurance and for a driver to operate the vehicle without insurance (Minn.Stat. § 169.797, subds. 2-3 (2002)). An owner of a motor vehicle cannot satisfy these requirements by obtaining proof of insurance before an accident but then withholding that insurance after the accident. In fact, the Act requires that the insurance specifically provide that liability becomes absolute with the occurrence of the accident and cannot thereafter be cancelled or annulled by the actions of the insured. Minn.Stat. § 65B.49, subd. 3(3)(a) (2002).
Cincinnati argues that it is merely responding to the reasonable request of a policyholder not to participate in the resolution of a claim where that participation may result in the loss of the policyholder’s insurance coverage. We, recognize that some policyholders may attempt to privately negotiate settlements with the owner or insurer of the other vehicle. But any desire of a policyholder to retain control of the claim, so as to avoid any adverse impact on the underwriting of the insurance policy, does not release his or her insurer from its obligations under the arbitration agreement.
Similarly, Cincinnati’s concern, that' it might breach some duty to Meyer if it arbitrates this claim against Meyer’s specific directions, is unwarranted. Under the No-Fault Act, an insurer is specifically authorized to settle the claim of another insurer for indemnity, with or without the consent of its insured. Id. Thus, Cincinnati has no legal obligation to honor its insured’s request not to arbitrate the claim; to the contrary, Cincinnati has a contractual obligation to honor State Farm’s demand for arbitration.
Accordingly, we reverse the court of appeals and remand to the district court with instructions to enter an order compelling arbitration and staying State Farm’s action against Meyer. Further, to the extent the district court’s denial of State Farm’s claim for attorney fees under the arbitration agreement was based on the conclusion that Cincinnati had no duty to arbitrate absent a tender of defense by Meyer, we direct the district court to reconsider that claim in light of this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.
. Although Minn.Stat. § 65B.48, subd. 3 (2002) permits self-insurance, the requirements are substantial and Meyer did not claim that he attempted to qualify for self-insurance.

=== CASE 9739302 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:57.817482+00 ===

DISSENT
GILBERT, Justice,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent from the majority opinion and would affirm the court of appeals. This case involves a small property damage claim resulting from an accident where the fault between two.drivers is in dispute. Glen Meyer has obtained the mandatory no-fault insurance coverage and as an insured he is not bound to arbitrate the claim that is brought by Michelle Miller. Meyers’ carrier may pursue resolution of the claim on its own, but nothing in the No-Fault Act or the insurance contract prohibits the reparations obligor and *338its insured from allowing an insured to contest such a claim. Furthermore, the liability coverage provided by Cincinnati has not been cancelled or annulled by agreement between the reparation obligor (Cincinnati) and Meyer, its insured. See MinmStat. § 65B.49, subd. S(3)(a) (2002). Cincinnati stands behind whatever liability • and damage for which Meyer is ultimately adjudicated as being responsible.
There are arbitration provisions within Minnesota’s No-Fault Arbitration Insurance Act. The majority incorrectly concludes that a third-party claimant (as opposed to an insured and the reparation obligor) has been provided with the remedy of arbitration for property damage claims. To the contrary, Minn.Stat. § 65B.42 does “create a system of small claims arbitration to decrease the expense of and to simplify litigation.” Minn.Stat. § 65B.42(4) (2002). However, this provision provides for arbitration procedures concerning claims by an insured against the insured’s reparation obligor for collision damage coverage. See Minn.Stat. § 65B.525, subd. 1 (2002). Likewise, there is mandatory intercompany arbitration of certain claims as required in section 65B.42(4), but these provisions are not at issue in this ease. However, there is no statutory or contractual requirement that Miller or Meyer resolve their dispute through arbitration. Thus, contrary to what the majority holds, the purpose of a system of small claims arbitration -would not be frustrated by allowing an insured to prevent the operation of the No-Fault Act by refusing to tender.
Furthermore, Meyer here has not unilaterally opted out of the mandatory insurance scheme after an accident has occurred. He merely wants to litigate the damage issue, which he has also offered to pay directly once the amount and liability have been determined. Obviously, if he does not make that payment, Cincinnati is required to-make that payment. The insured’s actions are motivated because of premium considerations and possible cancellation of his policy, if he has Cincinnati handle the claim directly. One would think that up to at least the amount of the (non-subrogation) deductible of $500 an insured would be freely able to litigate that issue, notwithstanding the “Automobile Subrogation Agreement.”
The majority recognizes that insureds do privately negotiate settlements with the owner of other vehicles. At oral argument State Farm admitted that it knows many of its insureds do the same thing and they have a policy of allowing such private settlements. This not only helps its insured by keeping premiums down and policies in effect, but' also saves administrative costs and expenses of the reparation obligor of otherwise setting up the claim file, investigating and litigating or arbitrating such claim and possibly making payments on those claims. It appears to be understood by everybody in the industry that this is a widespread practice and it is not even in dispute that the reparation obligor is never released from ultimate responsibility.
Accordingly, I would affirm the court of appeals and' allow this practice to continue. The majority is elevating form over substance. Its legal conclusion is premised on an inaccurate assumption about arbitration requirements between two insureds and elevates the subrogation arbitration agreement between two reparation obligors over the separate rights of two insureds.

=== CASE 9739303 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:59.222472+00 ===

OPINION
SULLIVAN, Judge.
Appellant, Ronald Troy Hines, pleaded guilty to one count of Child Molesting as a Class A felony.1 Upon appeal, Hines presents four issues for our review, which we renumber and restate as:
M Whether the trial court erred in ordering Hines to submit to a psy-chosexual evaluation prior to sentencing;
II. Whether Hines knowingly and intelligently waived his rights under Blakely to have the jury find facts used to enhance his sentence;
III. Whether the trial court erred in sentencing Hines;
IV. Whether the trial court committed reversible error in failing to advise Hines of his possible release dates; and
V. Whether the trial court erred in denying Hines's motion to correct error.
We affirm.
The record reveals that on November 1, 2003, Hines, who was then thirty-eight years old, placed his mouth on the vagina of B.C., a friend of Hines's youngest daughter who was staying over at Hines's house that evening. B.C. was eight years old at the time. On February 23, 2004, the State charged Hines with one count of child molesting as a Class A felony. On March 24, 2005, Hines pleaded guilty as charged. After advising Hines of his rights and accepting Hines's plea, the trial
*1278court ordered a "psychosexual evaluation" to be performed.
At a sentencing hearing held on May 12, 2005, the trial court took into consideration the information contained in Hines's pre-sentence investigation report, attached to which was a copy of the psychosexual evaluation report. The trial court, finding that the aggravating cireumstances outweighed the mitigating cireumstances, sentenced Hines to an enhanced sentence of forty-five years, with five years suspended to probation. On June 3, 2005, Hines filed a motion to correct error claiming that certain letters regarding Hines's character were not produced in time to be available at sentencing and that, considering these letters, the mitigators outweighed the ag-gravators. The trial court denied the motion on June 13, 2005. Hines filed his notice of appeal on July 8, 2005.
I
Upon appeal, Hines first claims that the trial court erred in ordering him to undergo a psychosexual evaluation as part of the pre-sentence investigation. Specifically, Hines claims that the trial court erred in relying upon information contained in the evaluation which he claims was obtained in violation of his right against self-incrimination.2 The only case Hines cites in support of his claim is Gardner v. State, 270 Ind. 627, 388 N.E.2d 513 (1979), wherein the defendant claimed that his right against self-incrimination had been violated where the trial court enhanced his sentence based, at least in part, upon statements made by him which were contained in the pre-sentence investigation report. Gardner argued that "he was not told, before his interview with the probation officer, that what he said could affect his sentence." 270 Ind. at 636, 388 N.E.2d at 519. After noting that other factors supported Gardner's sentence, the court rejected Gardner's argument, writing, "the crucial factor in our determination is that the defendant was informed, even before his trial started, that he had the right to remain silent and that anything he said could be used against him. There is no showing of force or coercion during the interview with the probation officer." 270 Ind. at 637, 388 N.E.2d at 519.
Hines claims that, unlike the defendant in Gardner, he was unaware of his right to remain silent "during the presentence process." Appellant's Br. at 18. However, this misreads the Gardner opinion. The *1279Gardner court did not say that a defendant must be informed that he has a right to remain silent during the pre-sentence investigation. Instead, the "crucial factor" was that the defendant had been informed of his right to remain silent "even before his trial started." 270 Ind. at 687, 388 N.E.2d at 519. The same holds true here-Hines was informed of his right to remain silent at the guilty-plea hearing. Moreover, Hines points to no "force or coercion" used during the psychosexual evaluation, other than persistent questioning by the interviewing psychologist regarding Hines's sexually deviant behavior.3 In short, Hines has not established that the trial court erred in ordering him to undergo a psychosexual evaluation or in relying upon such during sentencing.4
II
Hines next argues that he did not knowingly or intelligently waive his rights under Blakely v. Washington, 542 U.S. 296, 124 S.Ct. 2531, 159 L.Ed.2d 403 (2004).5 We agree with the State that this *1280claim may not be addressed upon direct appeal. Hines's argument is essentially one that the trial court erred in accepting his plea of guilty. See Appellant's Br. at 14 ("A trial court shall not accept a plea of guilty from a defendant without first determining the defendant understands the nature of the charges against him and that he is waiving certain constitutional rights."). Although it appears from the state of the current record that there would be little impediment to our viewing the record and determining whether the trial court's advisement of Hines's Blakely rights was sufficient, our Supreme Court has made it clear that challenges to the validity of a guilty plea may not be brought upon direct appeal. See Tumulty v. State, 666 N.E.2d 394, 395 (Ind.1996); Collins v. State, 817 N.E.2d 2830, 231 (Ind. 2004).
Perhaps anticipating the State's argument, Hines argues that his case is distinguishable from Vanzandt v. State, 730 N.E.2d 721 (Ind.Ct.App.2000), a case in which the defendant, after having been found guilty by a jury, admitted certain prior convictions which were to be used to elevate his conviction to a Class C felony and to establish that he was an habitual offender. Upon appeal, the court noted that the defendant had effectively entered a plea of guilty with regard to the enhancements. Id. at 726. The court therefore reasoned that the defendant could seek review of his "guilty plea" only by filing a petition for post-conviction relief. Id.
Hines notes that the defendant in Van-zandt "pleaded guilty" to the enhancements after a jury verdict during the initial phase of the trial, whereas here the advisement given to Hines was made at a guilty plea hearing. We are unable to discern any significant difference between these two scenarios. In both, the defendants pleaded guilty, thereby giving up the right to have the jury determine certain facts used for sentence enhancement. As held by our Supreme Court, a challenge to the validity of a plea must be brought by means of post-conviction relief.
III
Hines's next contention is that the trial court erred in sentencing him. Hines claims that the trial court considered improper aggravating factors and failed to consider certain mitigating factors. Hines also argues that his sentence is inappropriate given the nature of his offense and his character. We address each argument in turn.
The trial court found as aggravating factors that Hines was in a position of trust with the victim, that he had two prior misdemeanor convictions and had violated the terms of his probation, and that Hines admitted to having molested his own daughter. The first aggravator Hines challenges is the trial court's determination that he was "in a position of trust" with the victim, B.C. Hines now claims that there was no indication that B.C. was "in his care" on the night the molestation occurred. We are unable to agree. B.C. was spending the night at Hines's house, sleeping in Hines's bed with Hines's younger daughter. Hines admitted that B.C. was "staying at [his] home" on the evening *1281the molestation occurred. Guilty Plea Tr. at 12. According to the pre-sentence investigation report, Hines further stated, "[B.C.] trusted me when she spent the night at my house." App. at 58. This is tantamount to an admission that Hines was in a position of trust with B.C., which he violated by molesting her. Given these facts, we cannot say that the trial court erred in considering that Hines was in a position of trust with B.C. as an aggravating factor.
Hines also complains that the trial court should not have considered his prior criminal history as an aggravating cireum-stance. Specifically, Hines claims that his criminal history is neither excessive nor related to the instant offense sufficient to justify enhancing his sentence. The pre-sentence investigation report reveals that Hines stated that he had a juvenile record for theft, for which he was ordered to pay restitution and placed on house arrest, but that no juvenile record could be found. As far as Hines's adult criminal record is concerned, he was arrested in 1986 for contributing to the delinquency of a minor, but the disposition of this charge was "nol-lied." App. at 49. In 1987 Hines was arrested for "Desertion/AWOL," but the disposition of this charge was "unknown." 6 Id. In 1990, Hines was charged with misdemeanor operating a vehicle without a license, and the disposition of this charge was a "$54 fine and court costs." Id. Lastly, in 2001, Hines was charged and convicted of misdemeanor battery, which resulted in a one-year sentence suspended to probation. Hines did violate the terms of his probation, and the trial court extended the term of the probation by six months. The trial court apparently only considered Hines's misdemeanor convictions and his violation of probation as aggravating. We agree with Hines that his criminal history is neither excessive nor directly related to the instant offense. As such, it should not act as a significant aggravating factor. However, it does indicate that Hines has had contact with the criminal justice system in the past, and indeed has two misdemeanor convictions and violated his probation at one point. Although his criminal history is not significant, neither is it irrelevant.
Hines also claims that the trial court should not have considered his admission that he had molested his own daughter. During the psychosexual evaluation, Hines admitted that he had molested his older daughter, starting by fondling her when she was nine years old and culminating in having sexual intercourse with her when she was sixteen. Indeed, when sentencing Hines, the trial court listed as a separate aggravating factor that he "admitted molesting his own daughter on repeated occasions, beginning when she was nine years of age." Sentencing Tr. at 9. Upon appeal, Hines claims that using this uncharged prior criminal act as an aggravating factor is akin to a violation of Indiana Evidence Rule 404(b). However, Indiana Evidence Rule 101(c) explicitly states that the rules of evidence, other than those with respect to privileges, "do not apply in ... [plroceedings relating to . sentencing, probation, or parole." We therefore disagree that the trial court's consideration of Hines's admission of molesting his own daughter was even akin to a violation of Evidence Rule 404(b).
Hines's citation to Justice DeBru-ler's dissent in Willoughby v. State, 552 N.E.2d 462 (Ind.1990) is unavailing. In that case, Justice DeBruler disagreed with the majority, which held that the trial court did not err in considering as an *1282aggravating factor that the defendant, who was convicted of the murder of a police officer, admitted to having disposed of the body of a young girl years earlier. Id. at 470-71. In so holding, the court noted that a trial court may consider uncharged crimes as part of a defendant's eriminal history. Id. at 470. Although Justice De-Bruler disagreed, the majority of the court held otherwise.7 In short, we cannot say that the trial court erred in considering Hines's admission that he had molested his own daughter as an aggravating factor.
Hines next claims that the trial court failed to assign enough weight to the four mitigating factors it found: that Hines pleaded guilty, accepting responsibility for his actions, sparing the victim of the trauma of a trial, and sparing the State the costs of a trial; that Hines enjoyed support from his family; that Hines was honorably discharged from the Army; and that Hines was himself sexually abused as a child. With regard to the first mitigator, however, the trial court felt "constrained to minimize" this factor because:
"even after entering of the plea ... in this case, [Hines] was less than forthcoming with Dr. Wax [who performed the psychosexual evaluation]. He continually minimized his own responsibility for this heinous act. He makes it seem almost if it was a serendipitous occurrence that could have happened to anybody; that is hardly the case." Sentencing Tr. at 9-10.
We first note that it is for the trial court to determine which mitigating cireumstances to consider, and the trial court is solely responsible for determining the weight to accord such factors. (Gray v. State, 790 N.E.2d 174, 176 (Ind.Ct.App.2008). The trial court is not obliged to weigh or credit mitigating factors the way a defendant suggests. Hedger v. State, 824 N.E.2d 417, 420 (Ind.Ct.App.2005), trans. denied.
Here, even though Hines claims that there is no evidence to support the trial court's conclusion that he minimized his responsibility despite pleading guilty, we have noted before that a guilty plea is not automatically a significant mitigating factor. Gray, 790 N.E.2d at 177. A defendant who pleads guilty deserves to have some mitigating weight extended to the guilty plea in return. Cotto v. State, 829 N.E.2d 520, 525 (Ind.2005). A guilty plea demonstrates a defendant's acceptance of responsibility for the crime and at least partially confirms the mitigating evidence regarding his character. Id. However, a plea is not necessarily a significant mitigating factor. Id. (citing Sensback v. State, 720 N.E.2d 1160, 1165 (Ind.1999)). In the present case, in exchange for Hines's plea, the State agreed not to file charges in another ongoing investigation, which Hines admits in his brief was an investigation of another claim of child molestation against him. Thus, Hines's plea may have been more of a pragmatic decision than a bona fide effort at taking responsibility. See Wells v. State, 8836 N.E.2d 475, 479 (Ind.Ct.App.2005), trans. denied. The trial court did take Hines's plea into account, as it was required to do under Cotto, supra, but there is no error in the trial court's failing to afford that miti-gator the substantial weight Hines would have preferred.
*1283Hines also claims that the trial court failed to assign sufficient weight to the mitigating factor that Hines had himself been abused as a child. In diminishing the weight to be given to this miti-gator, the trial court stated that Hines "knew first-hand the emotional trauma that a child suffers when molested, and knowing that, he chose to inflict that trauma on this child and on his own daughter." Sentencing Tr. at 10. Hines now claims that there was no evidence regarding how the victim, B.C., or Hines's daughter felt or how Hines felt as a victim himself. The trial court's explanation is sufficient. Even accepting that Hines was a victim of abuse as a child, the trial court failed to assign this fact much weight because Hines chose to create more victims by becoming an abuser himself. No direct evidence on this issue was required. Further, the trial court was not obliged to afford any weight to Hines's childhood history as a mitigating factor in that Hines never established why his past viectimization led to his current behavior. See Coleman v. State, 741 N.E.2d 697, 700 (Ind. 2000) (evidence of a "difficult childhood" warrants little, if any, mitigating weight), cert. denied, 5384 U.S. 1057, 122 S.Ct. 649, 151 L.Ed.2d 566 (2001); Loveless v. State, 642 N.E.2d 974, 976-77 (Ind.1994) (trial court was not obligated to consider defendant's "overwhelmingly difficult" childhood, which included being molested by her father as an infant, witnessing her father's molestation of her sisters, her cousin, and other young girls, witnessing her father's transvestism, witnessing her parents' multiple attempts to commit suicide, being rejected by her mother due to her lesbianism, and witnessing her father attempting to kill her mother, where there was no indication of how the defendant's admittedly painful childhood was relevant to her level of culpability). We cannot say that the trial court abused its discretion by failing to assign significant mitigating weight to Hines's childhood abuse. With regard to the balancing of the aggravating and mitigating factors, we are unable to say that the trial court abused its discretion in finding that the aggravators outweighed the mitigators and supported an enhanced sentence of forty-five years, with five years suspended to probation.
Hines's last attack upon the sentence imposed is to claim that his sentence is "inappropriate." Ind. Appellate Rule 7B). Pursuant to Rule 7(B), this court may revise a sentence authorized by statute if, after due consideration of the trial court's decision, we find that the sentence is inappropriate in light of the nature of the offense and the character of the offender. In this regard, Hines rehashes his argument that the aggravating factors were not significant and that the miti-gators, when considered as he would have us consider them, outweigh the aggrava-tors, and therefore his sentence should be revised due to its inappropriateness. In support of this argument, Hines refers to Walker v. State, 747 N.E.2d 586 (Ind.2001). In that case, the defendant was convicted of two counts of molesting a six-year-old boy he was babysitting by placing his mouth on the boy's penis. The trial court sentenced Walker to two consecutive terms of forty-five years, with five years suspended upon each count. Upon appeal, our Supreme Court held, under former Appellate Rule 17(B), that the aggregate sentence of eighty years was "manifestly unreasonable." Id. at 588. The court observed that crimes against children are "particularly contemptible," that Walker had committed the instant crime while on probation, that Walker had fled jurisdiction, and that the absence of physical injury did not bar an enhanced sentence. Id. But the court further noted that the trial court did not find a history of criminal *1284behavior,8 that there was no physical injury to the victim, and that separate counts were identical and involved the same victim. Therefore, the court revised the sentence so that Walker's sentences ran concurrently. Id.
Here, Hines has a criminal history, albeit a relatively minor one, and there was no evidence of any physical injury to the victim. However, here Hines was not charged with two identical crimes upon the same victim, and he was not ordered to serve two consecutive sentences. Instead, Hines pleaded guilty to one count of child molesting and received a forty-five year sentence, with five years suspended. Although Hines was convicted of only one count, Hines admitted to having molested his older daughter for approximately seven years. Thus, the case before us is not identical to that present in Walker, where the defendant had one victim but two convictions. Hines has one conviction but admitted to having molested two victims, one of whom was his daughter. On the whole, we cannot say that, considering Hines's character and the nature of his offense, that a forty-five year sentence, with five years suspended, is inappropriate.
Hines next claims that the trial court erred in imposing as a condition of his probation that he "refrain from residing within 1 mile of the victim of this offense...." Appellant's App. at 104. Hines claims that by the time he is placed upon probation, the victim, B.C., will be an adult. He argues, therefore, that this condition does not protect the public, and that there is a "possibility" that B.C. might move within a mile of Hines without him even knowing it. Contrary to Hines's claims regarding the trial court's authority to impose such a condition, Indiana Code § 35-38-2-2.3(17) (Burns Code Ed. Repl. 2004) specifically provides that a trial court may require, as a condition of probation, that the defendant "[rlefrain from any direct or indirect contact with an individual." Given what Hines admitted to doing to the victim, we conclude that the trial court's imposition of this restriction was eminently reasonable.
IV
Hines next claims that the trial court erred in failing to advise him of his possible release dates. Indiana Code § 85-38-1-1(b) (Burns Code Ed. Repl. 2004) provides that "[when the court pronounces the sentence, the court shall advise the person that the person is sentenced for not less than the earliest release date and for not more than the maximum possible release date." Hines claims, the State agrees, and our review of the record confirms that the trial court, when pronouncing its sentence, did not so advise Hines. However, Hines's brief argument upon this point in no way alleges that he was prejudiced or harmed in any way by the trial court's failure.9 We will not grant *1285relief based upon harmless error. See Ind. Appellate Rule 66(A).
y
Lastly, Hines claims that the trial court erred in denying his motion to correct error. Attached to Hines's motion were five letters from friends attesting to Hines's character and remorse and asking the trial court to be lenient toward him. According to the motion, these letters "were not produced in time to be submitted to the court for consideration." App. at 115. Upon appeal, Hines claims that the trial court erred in denying his motion in that the letters "could have provided the court with insight as to Hines' character and background." Appellant's Br. at 32. Hines further argues that there is no way to know whether the letters could have been timely filed because the court failed to hold a hearing upon Hines's motion. Hines, however, directs us to no authority which would require a trial court to hold an evidentiary hearing on a motion to correct error. In fact, our research has revealed case law to the contrary. See Bennett v. State, 470 N.E.2d 1344, 1347 (Ind. 1984) (rejecting defendant's claim that trial court erred in overruling his belated motion to correct error without an evidentiary hearing).
Moreover, the trial court's order denying Hines's motion indicates that the trial court did indeed view the letters, but concluded that the motion did not warrant relief. The trial court stated that the letters "d[id] not contain information which would justify a change in the sentence previously imposed herein." App. at 126. Upon review of these letters, we are unable to say that the trial court abused its discretion in concluding as it did. The letters are from a friend of Hines who had known him for a year and a half, a childhood friend, Hines's boss, the wife of Hines's supervisor at work, and Hines's ex-wife, all of whom asked the trial court to be lenient in sentencing Hines. Given the valid aggravating factors present, we cannot say that consideration of these letters would have required the trial court to impose a lesser sentence. In short, the trial court did not err in denying Hines's motion to correct error.
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
KIRSCH, C.J., concurs.
DARDEN, J., dissents with separate opinion.
. Ind.Code § 35-42-4-3 (Burns Code Ed. Repl.2004).
. The focus of Hines's argument is that he told the evaluator about molestation of his elder daughter, an act or acts which were uncharged and unrelated to the molestation of B.C., which prior molestation was then used to enhance his sentence.
In doing so, Hines observes that the evaluation report is not a "neutral, fact centered report'' but is an evaluation by the evaluator of a defendant's "attitudes and personality traits" upon which the evaluator makes a recommendation for punishment. Appellant's Br. at 12. Hines cites no authority for his conclusion that "the neutral facts [are] required by statute." Id.
We would note that Indiana Code § 35-38-1-9 (Burns Code Ed. Repl.1998), concerning the scope of the pre-sentence investigation and report, does not limit the report to "neutral facts." Seemingly to the contrary, the statute contemplates gathering of information concerning, among other things, the defendant's social history, family situation, and personal habits The report, furthermore, may include "any matter that the probation officer conducting the investigation believes is relevant to the question of sentence, and must include: (1) any matters the court directs to be included." L.C. § 35-38-1-9(c) (emphasis supplied). In this instance, the trial court ordered the psychosexual evaluation and that evaluation was attached to and made a part of the pre-sentence investigation report. Accordingly, it appears to us that the presence of the evaluation in the record and its consideration by the sentencing court was authorized by the statute.
. Judge Darden's thoughtful dissent expresses a justifiable concern that information gleaned from the defendant's own mouth is then utilized to greatly enhance his sentence. We recognize that the situation presented reflects a tension between the encouragement to a defendant to be honest and forthcoming in the evaluation process and a seeming encroachment upon self-incrimination protections. Nevertheless, we do not perceive it to be within our prerogative to create, suc sponte, a solution by holding that a defendant's candor is to be encouraged so that the individual might benefit from appropriate treatment, counseling and rehabilitation, but that such admissions or statements may not be used as an aggravating circumstance so as to enhance a sentence. Any such innovations with regard to the law should more properly emanate from our Supreme Court or from the legislature.
. We recognize that in Ryle v. State, 842 N.E.2d 320, 323 n. 5 (Ind.2005), our Supreme Court disapproved of several opinions in which this court had held that a trial court could enhance a defendant's sentence without a jury determination of probationary status because the defendant "admitted" to being on probation by failing to object to a pre-sen-tence investigation report indicating that the defendant was on probation. The Ryle court wrote that "using a defendant's failure to object to a presentence report to establish an admission to the accuracy of the report implicates the defendant's Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination." Id. The Ryle court's comment regarding implication of the right against self-incrimination could be read to call into doubt the Gardner court's holding that the defendant's right against self-incrimination was not violated by the trial court's use of the pre-sentence investigation report. However, because the court in Ryle was concerned with a Blakely analysis, we understand its comments to be limited to cases where the issue is whether the defendant made an "admission" for Blakely purposes. Indeed, prior to Blakely, our Supreme Court itself had held that the failure to object to the facts contained in a pre-sentence investigation report precluded a defendant from challenging the validity of those facts upon appeal. See Howard v. State, 481 N.E.2d 1315, 1319 (Ind.1985) (concluding that defendant presented no error with regard to prior conviction listed in the pre-sentence report, which he alleged had been overturned upon appeal, where there was no showing that defendant was not furnished a copy of the pre-sentence report prior to his sentencing, that he objected in any way to its contents, or that he was not given an opportunity to explain any item therein stated); Gardner, 270 Ind. at 634, 388 N.E.2d at 517-18 {assertions in pre-sentence investigation report will be accepted as true unless challenged by the defendant). As we understand, although the failure to object to facts contained in a pre-sentence investigation report might preclude the defendant from challenging those facts in a non-Blakely context, the failure to object does not constitute an "admission" of those facts for purposes of a Blakely analysis.
. In the case before us, the following advisement was given at the guilty plea hearing:
"THE COURT: Under the current state of the law, as a defendant in a criminal case, you have a right to insist that any aggrava*1280ting circumstances upon which I rely in sentencing you to a sentence which exceeds the presumptive sentence be proved to a trier-o[fl-fact beyond a reasonable doubt. This is normally done at a trial. Since you are asking to dispose of this case without a trial, that won't happen. Are you willing to waive your right to insist that any aggravating circumstances which I consider in sentencing you, be proved to a trier-of-fact beyond a reasonable doubt? Guilty Plea Tr. at 15. MR. HINES: Yes."
. As stated infra, Hines was honorably discharged from the Army.
. It should be noted that "[a] record of arrest, without more, does not establish the historical fact that a defendant committed a criminal offense and may not be properly considered as evidence of criminal history." Cotto v. State, 829 N.E.2d 520, 526 (Ind.2005). Be that as it may, in the case before us, as in Willoughby, the defendant admitted the criminal conduct.
. We would note that an absence of a history of criminal behavior would seem to be inconsistent with the fact that Walker had been on probation when he committed the crimes at issue.
. Indeed, Hines does not explain how the trial court should have determined his possible release dates. Hines was sentenced on May 12, 2005, he spent fourteen days in jail, and he was given fourteen days "good time credit." Thus, his maximum possible release date would have been forty years from May 12, 2005, ie., May 13, 2045, less the twenty-eight days credit he had already accrued, fie. April 15, 2045. The Department of Correction's website lists Hines's earliest possible release date as April 27, 2025, although there is no indication as to how the Department arrives at such a date. In the publication titled Inside the Walls of the Indiana Department of Correction: A Reference Directory for Indiana Judges, there is a "Glossary of DOC Terms," which includes the following entry: *1285"EPRD (EARLIEST POSSIBLE RELEASE DATE, also commonly referred to as EARLIEST PROJECTED RELEASE DATE): The date on which an offender would be entitled to discharge or release, taking into consideration:
1. The term of the sentence;
2. The term of any other concurrent or consecutive sentence which the offender must serve;
3. Credit time which the offender has earned prior to sentencing; and, 4. The maximum amount of credit time which the offender would earn if the offender remained in the current credit class during the period of confinement." Id. at 100.
Given this, and the possible educational credit time an inmate might earn while incarcerated, it would appear that the "earliest possible release date" is simply an estimate.

=== CASE 9739305 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:00.307477+00 ===

JUSTICE GARMAN delivered the judgment of the court, with opinion. Chief Justice Thomas and Justices Fitzgerald, Kilbride, and Karmeier concurred in the judgment and opinion. Justice McMorrow dissented, with opinion, joined by Justice Freeman. OPINION Plaintiff, Detroy Marshall, Jr., as personal representative and administrator of the estate of his son, Detroy Marshall III, filed a negligence action in the circuit court of Winnebago County against Burger King Corporation, Davekiz, Inc., Pamela Fritz, and various insurers. The decedent was killed when a car driven by Fritz crashed through the wall of the Burger King restaurant where the decedent was eating and fatally injured him. Plaintiff alleged that Burger King and Davekiz, Burger King’s franchisee, did not exercise due care in designing, constructing, and maintaining the restaurant and that their failure to do so proximately caused the decedent’s death. Burger King and Davekiz filed a joint motion to dismiss the allegations against them (735 ILCS 5/2 — 615 (West 2002)), which the circuit court granted. The appellate court reversed and remanded the cause for further proceedings. 355 Ill. App. 3d 685. We affirm the judgment of the appellate court and hold that the allegations in plaintiffs complaint are sufficient to establish that Burger King and Davekiz owed a duty of care to the decedent. BACKGROUND According to plaintiffs complaint, on September 27, 2001, Pamela Fritz backed into a lamppost as she was attempting to drive out of the parking lot of a Burger Kang restaurant in Rockford, Illinois. When she drove forward from the lamppost, her accelerator stuck, and she lost control of her car. The car hit a sidewalk adjacent to the restaurant, became airborne, and penetrated the brick half-wall and windows surrounding the restaurant’s entrance. The decedent, who was eating inside the restaurant at the time, was struck by Fritz’s car and fatally injured. On September 24, 2003, plaintiff filed the instant lawsuit in the Winnebago County circuit court as a personal representative of the decedent and as the administrator of the decedent’s estate. Counts V and VI of plaintiffs six-count complaint, which sought damages for spoliation of evidence from various insurers and Fritz, were settled. Only the remaining counts are at issue in this appeal. Counts I through IV of the complaint seek damages for negligence from Burger King and Davekiz on behalf of the decedent’s children and next of kin under the Wrongful Death Act (740 ILCS 180/1 et seq. (West 2000)) and the survival provision of the Probate Act of 1975 (755 ILCS 5/27 — 6 (West 2000)). All of these counts allege that Burger King franchised the restaurant at the Rockford location to Davekiz. Counts I and II allege that Burger King “owned, operated, controlled[,] and maintained” the restaurant “by and through its agents, servants, employees, [and] franchisees.” They also allege that, by and through the same parties, Burger King “directed and controlled the [restaurant’s] design, construction, layout, floor plan[,] and building material specifications.” Counts III and IV contain nearly identical allegations against Davekiz, with the exception that they omit the reference to “franchisees.” All of the counts allege that Burger King and Davekiz did not exercise due care in designing, constructing, and maintaining the restaurant and that their failure to do so proximately caused the decedent’s injuries. Specifically, they state that defendants: “a. Failed to place vertical concrete pillars or poles in the sidewalk by the entrance of said restaurant, which vertical pillars or poles would have prevented the vehicle *** from becoming air born [sic] and coming to rest over the brick half wall, when the Defendants] knew or should have known that failing to put concrete pillars or poles in the sidewalk by the entrance to the restaurant would allow a vehicle to become air born [sic] when driven over the sidewalk, thereby causing the vehicle to come down on top of the brick half wall ***. b. Improperly designed the Burger King restaurant building, by designing the building to be bricked up only a few feet from the ground, when the Defendants[s] knew or should have known[ ] that permitting [the] building to be bricked up only a few feet from the ground may allow a vehicle from the parking lot to drive into the building, and crash through the glass on top of the brick ***. c. Improperly constructed the building and sidewalk of the Burger King restaurant involved in this occurrence, by failing to place vertical concrete pillars or poles near the entrance of said restaurant, contrary to the custom and practice of the industry, when the Defendants] knew or should have known that the custom and practice in the building industry was to place vertical concrete pillars or poles near the entrance to the building when the parking lot is in such close proximity, and vehicles could drive up onto the sidewalk and into the building ***. d. Failed to adequately and securely construct the entrance and front of the Burger King restaurant involved in this occurrence, when the Defendants knew or should have known that the location of this occurrence involved a high traffic count on two major streets, and that vehicles may drive onto the sidewalk and into the building ***. e. Improperly designed and constructed the sidewalk area of the Burger King restaurant involved in this occurrence, in violation of the BOCA Building Code, by designing and constructing a sidewalk which sidewalk when hit by a vehicle causes the vehicle to become air born [szc] and crash into the restaurant building ***. f. Failed to otherwise use due care in the design, construction, and maintenance of the building, parking lot and sidewalk involved in this occurrence.” On November 10, 2003, Burger King and Davekiz filed a motion to dismiss counts I through IV of the complaint pursuant to section 2 — 615 of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/2 — 615 (West 2002)). They argued that plaintiff failed to state a cause of action upon which relief could be granted because they had no duty to protect the decedent from the injury caused by Fritz’s car. The circuit court granted defendants’ motion. The court reasoned that the likelihood of the type of accident at issue was so minor that to guard against it in the manner suggested by plaintiff “would require fortifying every building within striking distance of any crazed or incredibly inept driver,” forgoing “any hope of aesthetically pleasing or business-enticing buildings.” The appellate court reversed the judgment of the circuit court and remanded the cause for further proceedings, with one justice dissenting. 355 Ill. App. 3d 685. The majority held that plaintiff’s complaint states a cause of action against defendants. 355 Ill. App. 3d at 689. It noted that the complaint alleges specific ways in which defendants failed to guard against the possibility of cars penetrating the restaurant and injuring patrons. 355 Ill. App. 3d at 689. Relying on two factually analogous cases, Ray v. Cock Robin, Inc., 57 Ill. 2d 19 (1974), and Marquardt v. Cernocky, 18 Ill. App. 2d 135 (1958), the majority concluded that, based on the allegations in plaintiffs complaint, it could not say as a matter of law that the precautions suggested by the complaint are beyond the duty of reasonable care that a premises owner in defendants’ situation owes to its customers. 355 Ill. App. 3d at 689. The majority also responded to the circuit court’s “policy reasons” for declining to find that defendants owed a duty of reasonable care to the decedent. 355 Ill. App. 3d at 689. According to the majority, plaintiff created a question of fact as to whether defendants’ failure to take precautions was a breach of their duty of reasonable care, regardless of the burdens associated with exercising that duty, by alleging that defendants’ conduct was inconsistent with the custom and practice of the building industry and that it violated the BOCA building code. 355 Ill. App. 3d at 689-90. The majority declined to follow Simmons v. Aldi-Brenner Co., 162 Ill. App. 3d 238 (1987), and Stutz v. Kamm, 204 Ill. App. 3d 898 (1990), both of which found no duty to exist in circumstances similar to those at issue in this case. 355 Ill. App. 3d at 690-92. The dissent opined that plaintiff failed to allege facts sufficient to establish a duty or proximate cause. 355 Ill. App. 3d at 693 (McLaren, J., dissenting). As to the latter, the dissent reasoned that because defendants merely furnished a condition that caused injury as a result of the subsequent, independent act of a third party, the creation of that condition could not be a proximate cause of the injury. 355 Ill. App. 3d at 694 (McLaren, J., dissenting). Instead, the subsequent, independent act of Fritz’s driving broke the causal link between the original wrong and the injury and became the sole proximate cause. 355 Ill. App. 3d at 694 (McLaren, J., dissenting). As to the issue of duty, the dissent criticized the majority for declining to follow Simmons and Stutz and for accepting plaintiffs “blind assertion” that defendants violated the BOCA building code absent specific citations to relevant code sections adopted by the City of Rockford. 355 Ill. App. 3d at 694-95 (McLaren, J., dissenting). Defendants filed a petition for leave to appeal, which we allowed. 177 Ill. 2d R. 315. We granted leave to the Illinois Association of Defense Trial Counsel, the Pacific Legal Foundation, and the Illinois Trial Lawyers Association to file amicus curiae briefs. 155 Ill. 2d R. 345. ANALYSIS A section 2 — 615 motion to dismiss (735 ILCS 5/2— 615 (West 2002)) challenges the legal sufficiency of a complaint based on defects apparent on its face. City of Chicago v. Beretta U.S.A. Corp., 213 Ill. 2d 351, 364 (2004). Therefore, we review de novo an order granting or denying a section 2—615 motion. Wakulich v. Mraz, 203 Ill. 2d 223, 228 (2003). In reviewing the sufficiency of a complaint, we accept as true all well-pleaded facts and all reasonable inferences that may be drawn from those facts. Ferguson v. City of Chicago, 213 Ill. 2d 94, 96-97 (2004). We also construe the allegations in the complaint in the light most favorable to the plaintiff. King v. First Capital Financial Services Corp., 215 Ill. 2d 1, 11-12 (2005). Thus, a cause of action should not be dismissed pursuant to section 2 — 615 unless it is clearly apparent that no set of facts can be proved that would entitle the plaintiff to recovery. Canel v. Topinka, 212 Ill. 2d 311, 318 (2004). We have repeatedly stated, however, that Illinois is a fact-pleading jurisdiction. See, e.g., Weiss v. Waterhouse Securities, Inc., 208 Ill. 2d 439, 451 (2004). While the plaintiff is not required to set forth evidence in the complaint (Chandler v. Illinois Central R.R. Co., 207 Ill. 2d 331, 348 (2003)), the plaintiff must allege facts sufficient to bring a claim within a legally recognized cause of action (Vernon v. Schuster, 179 Ill. 2d 338, 344 (1997)), not simply conclusions (Anderson v. Vanden Dorpel, 172 Ill. 2d 399, 408 (1996)). To state a cause of action for negligence, a complaint must allege facts that establish the existence of a duty of care owed by the defendant to the plaintiff, a breach of that duty, and an injury proximately caused by that breach. Bajwa v. Metropolitan Life Insurance Co., 208 Ill. 2d 414, 421 (2004). Whether a duty exists in a particular case is a question of law for the court to decide. Chandler, 207 Ill. 2d at 340. On the contrary, whether a defendant breached the duty and whether the breach was the proximate cause of the plaintiff’s injuries are factual matters for the jury to decide, provided there is a genuine issue of material fact regarding those issues. Espinoza v. Elgin, Joliet & Eastern Ry. Co., 165 Ill. 2d 107, 114 (1995). Defendants argue that plaintiff failed to state a cause of action for negligence against them. Their general contentions are that they owed no duty of care to the decedent and that, as a matter of law, their conduct did not proximately cause the decedent’s injuries. Plaintiff disputes these contentions. As a preliminary matter, we find that defendants have forfeited their argument regarding proximate cause for purposes of this appeal. Defendants argue for the first time before this court that, as a matter of law, the allegations in plaintiffs complaint are insufficient to demonstrate that their conduct proximately caused the decedent’s injuries. According to defendants, their conduct merely furnished a condition that contributed to harm caused by the subsequent, independent act of a third party. It is well settled that where the appellate court reverses the judgment of the circuit court, and the appellee in that court brings the case before this court as an appellant, that party may raise any issues properly presented by the record to sustain the judgment of the circuit court. In re R.L.S., 218 Ill. 2d 428, 437 (2006), quoting Dineen v. City of Chicago, 125 Ill. 2d 248, 264 (1988), quoting Mueller v. Elm Park Hotel, 391 Ill. 391, 399 (1945). Defendants prevailed in the circuit court, were the appellees before the appellate court, and appealed the judgment of the appellate court to this court. However, defendants moved to dismiss plaintiffs complaint in the circuit court solely on the basis that they owed no duty of care to the decedent. They did not argue proximate cause in their motion to dismiss, and the trial court’s ruling was limited to the issue of whether plaintiff adequately pleaded the existence of a duty. Therefore, the issue of proximate cause is not properly presented by the record in this case. We thus turn to the issue of duty. According to defendants, they owed no duty to the decedent to protect him against the possibility of an out-of-control car penetrating the restaurant and injuring him. They characterize the incident at issue as “highly extraordinary” and “tragically bizarre” and, therefore, not reasonably foreseeable. They also emphasize that the likelihood of similar incidents occurring in the future is very slight and that the burden imposed on them and the business community at large will be considerable if we determine they owed a duty to the decedent. Defendants criticize the appellate court for determining that a duty existed in this case without specifically considering the foreseeability of the decedent’s injury, the likelihood of the injury, the magnitude of the burden of guarding against it, and the consequences of placing the burden on them. Further, they argue that the allegations in plaintiffs complaint regarding their purported violations of the BOCA building code and deviations from the custom and practice of the building industry do not support the finding that they owed a duty to the decedent. Plaintiff disputes defendants’ contention that they owed no duty of care to the decedent. He argues that because the decedent was defendants’ business invitee, defendants owed the decedent a duty to ensure that the premises of their restaurant were reasonably safe for the decedent’s use. Moreover, according to plaintiff, it was readily foreseeable that a customer sitting in the dining area of defendants’ restaurant could be injured in the manner in which the decedent was injured. Plaintiff emphasizes that no protective poles were built around the restaurant, the restaurant was “bricked up” only a few feet from the ground, the restaurant was located in an area with heavy traffic, and the restaurant’s parking lot was located directly adjacent to its entrance and dining area. In addition, plaintiff characterizes the precautions that he alleges defendants could have taken to prevent the decedent’s death as “minimal undertakings at best.” Before addressing the substance of the parties’ arguments on the issue of duty, we must clarify the scope of our inquiry into the sufficiency of plaintiffs complaint. As mentioned, the complaint alleges that Burger King “owned, operated, controlled[,] and maintained” the restaurant at the Rockford location “by and through its agents, servants, employees, [and] franchisees.” It also alleges that, by and through the same parties, Burger King “directed and controlled the [restaurant’s] design, construction, layout, floor plant,] and building material specifications.” The complaint repeats virtually identical allegations with respect to Davekiz, Burger King’s franchisee, and contains specific allegations of negligence against both defendants that refer to the design, construction, and maintenance of the restaurant. Plaintiffs complaint can reasonably be construed as setting forth theories of liability against each defendant in its capacity as the owner, operator, designer, and builder of the restaurant. However, in briefing and orally arguing this case, the parties focused solely on defendants’ potential liability as owners and operators of the restaurant. A cause of action for negligent design is distinguishable from a cause of action for negligent construction. Compare, e.g., Hunt v. Blasius, 14 Ill. 2d 203, 209 (1978) (contractor may be hable in neghgence if it follows specifications that are “so obviously dangerous that no competent contractor would follow them”), with Ferentchak v. Village of Frankfort, 105 Ill. 2d 474, 479-80 (1985) (distinguishing cause of action against contractor in Hunt from cause of action against civil engineer on ground that engineer “was not following the design of [the developer], but instead was creating one”). Furthermore, neither a cause of action for negligent design nor a cause of action for negligent construction is dependent upon an injured party’s status as a business invitee, as may be the case with a cause of action for neghgence against the owner or operator of a business. See, e.g., Rowe v. State Bank of Lombard, 125 Ill. 2d 203, 216 (1988) (“special relationship” between business invitor and business invitee may give rise to duty to protect against the criminal acts of others). Because the parties have presented no arguments regarding the negligent-design and negligent-construction theories set forth in the complaint, we confine our discussion to whether defendants owed a duty to the decedent in their capacities as owners and operators of the restaurant. In addition, we express no opinion at this time on what effect, if any, Burger King’s status as Davekiz’s franchisor may have on Burger King’s liability in this case. See O’Banner v. McDonald’s Corp., 173 Ill. 2d 208, 211-14 (1996) (addressing at summary judgment phase of proceedings whether franchisor was vicariously hable under theory of apparent agency for injuries plaintiff incurred after slipping and falling in franchised restaurant’s restroom). Turning to the arguments of the parties, we initially observe that plaintiff has cited Ray v. Cock Robin, Inc., 57 Ill. 2d 19 (1974), in support of his contention that defendants owed the decedent a duty of care. In Ray, the plaintiffs were seated at a picnic table in front of an ice cream stand owned and operated by Cock Robin, Inc., when they were struck by an out-of-control car. Ray, 57 Ill. 2d at 21. They filed a negligence action against Cock Robin, the driver of the car, and the mechanic who serviced the car before the accident. Ray, 57 Ill. 2d at 20. The jury rendered a verdict in favor of Cock Robin, and the appellate court reversed and remanded the cause for a new trial. Ray, 57 Ill. 2d at 20-21. This court affirmed the judgment of the appellate court. Ray, 57 Ill. 2d at 24. The issue in Ray was whether the trial court erred in excluding testimony from a police officer at trial that would have indicated that he witnessed a car run into a bicycle rack in front of Cock Robin’s picnic tables sometime during the month preceding the accident at issue. Ray, 57 Ill. 2d at 21-22. The testimony would further have revealed that the officer informed one of Cock Robin’s employees that the picnic tables were located in a dangerous area and that the employee told the officer Cock Robin had been informed of the danger. Ray, 57 Ill. 2d at 22. Cock Robin argued that its failure to take measures to protect its patrons against the possibility of a vehicle leaving the roadway and striking them was not a proximate cause of the accident, but merely a condition that made the plaintiffs’ injuries possible through the subsequent, independent act of a third party. Ray, 57 Ill. 2d at 22. In discussing whether the exclusion of the police officer’s testimony was prejudicial to the plaintiffs, this court focused on the effect the evidence would have had on the jury’s assessment of the foreseeability of the accident and, accordingly, on its decision regarding the proximate cause of the accident. See Ray, 57 Ill. 2d at 22-23. This court concluded that because the testimony tended to establish that the defendant was aware of the possible danger that the location of its picnic tables and bicycle rack posed to its patrons (Ray, 57 Ill. 2d at 22-23), the testimony created a “factual question *** about which reasonable persons might differ as to whether the condition of [the defendant’s] property was a proximate cause of the injuries.” Ray, 57 Ill. 2d at 23. Thus, the cause was remanded for a new trial. Ray, 57 Ill. 2d at 23. It is readily apparent that Ray dealt with the issue of proximate cause, not the issue of duty. Notably, in Ray, Cock Robin did not dispute its “duty to protect patrons from unreasonable risks of harm.” Ray, 57 Ill. 2d at 22. Therefore, Cock Robin’s duty to the plaintiffs was not at issue, and this court expressed no opinion on it. See also Marquardt, 18 Ill. App. 2d at 142-46 (based on evidence presented at trial, jury could reasonably have found that landowners’ failure to supervise parking or provide parking barriers proximately caused injuries of plaintiff struck by car that rolled downhill located on landowners’ premises). Accordingly, in this case, we must look elsewhere to determine whether defendants owed a duty of care to the decedent. This court has recognized that “the concept of duty in negligence cases is very involved, complex and indeed nebulous.” Mieher v. Brown, 54 Ill. 2d 539, 545 (1973). Legal scholars have long debated the nature of duty and its proper role in negligence law (see, e.g., W. Powers, Judge and Jury in the Texas Supreme Court, 75 Tex. L. Rev. 1699, 1701-04 (1997)), and the debate has become a subject of renewed interest in recent years (see, e.g., J. Goldberg, Introduction to the Restatement (Third) of Torts: General Principles and the John W Wade Conference, 54 Vand. L. Rev. 639, 639-40 (2001); H. Perlman, The Restatement Process, 10 Kan. J.L. & Pub. Pol’y 2, 2-7 (2000)). Much confusion over duty stems from courts’ tendency to attribute a variety of different meanings to the term. See, e.g., 1 D. Dobbs, Torts § 226, at 577 (2001) (“[L]awyers and judges use the term duty in a variety of different ways, not always with the same meaning. Sometimes they use duty to refer to a general standard or obligation. At other times they use duty as a conclusion about whether the defendant’s particular act or omission should be actionable, irrespective of any general standard”); J. Goldberg & B. Zipursky, The Restatement (Third) and the Place of Duty in Negligence Law, 54 Vand. L. Rev. 657, 698-723 (2001) (distinguishing between four different “senses” in which duty is used in negligence law, including duty as obligation, duty as nexus between breach and duty, duty as breach as a matter of law, and duty as exemption from the operation of negligence law). Belatedly, confusion over duty arises because, as one well-known treatise aptly states, “the existence of a duty is not a discoverable fact of nature.” 1 D. Dobbs, Torts § 229, at 582 (2001). On the contrary, determining whether a duty should be imposed involves considerations of public policy. 1 D. Dobbs, Torts § 229, at 582 (2001); Jones v. Chicago HMO Ltd. of Illinois, 191 Ill. 2d 278, 303 (2000) (“the existence of a duty turns in large part on public policy considerations”). The touchstone of this court’s duty analysis is to ask whether a plaintiff and a defendant stood in such a relationship to one another that the law imposed upon the defendant an obligation of reasonable conduct for the benefit of the plaintiff. Happel v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 199 Ill. 2d 179, 186 (2002); Mieher, 54 Ill. 2d at 541. This court often discusses the policy considerations that inform this inquiry in terms of four factors: (1) the reasonable foreseeability of the injury, (2) the likelihood of the injury, (3) the magnitude of the burden of guarding against the injury, and (4) the consequences of placing that burden on the defendant. Beretta U.S.A., 213 Ill. 2d at 391; Ward v. K mart Corp., 136 Ill. 2d 132, 140-41 (1990); Lance v. Senior, 36 Ill. 2d 516, 518 (1967). In the case before us, the appellate court resolved the duty issue without reference to these factors, focusing instead on the relationship between defendants, as owners and operators of the restaurant, and the decedent, as defendants’ business invitee, in finding that defendants owed a duty of care to the decedent. See 355 Ill. App. 3d at 688-90. Conversely, defendants rely extensively on the factors expressed above in arguing that they owed no duty to the decedent. Plaintiff emphasizes the relationship between defendants and the decedent in arguing that defendants owed the decedent a duty of care, but also asserts that the factors discussed by defendants support the imposition of a duty. As we shall explain, the special relationship between a business invitor and invitee does indeed give rise to a duty of reasonable care that is applicable to this case, and the factors relied on by defendants do not support the creation of an exemption from that duty. Under certain circumstances, a possessor of land may be held liable for physical harm caused to an individual present on the land by a condition on the land (Restatement (Second) of Torts §§ 343, 343A (1965)) or by the acts of third persons (Restatement (Second) of Torts § 344 (1965)). While sections 343, 343A, and 344 of the Restatement address the broader subject of liability, this court has looked to them in the past in determining whether a possessor of land owed a duty to an individual present on the land. See, e.g., Genaust v. Illinois Power Co., 62 Ill. 2d 456, 468-69 (1976) (referring to section 343); Ward, 136 Ill. 2d at 145-46, 149-51 (referring to sections 343 and 343A); Deibert v. Bauer Brothers Construction Co., 141 Ill. 2d 430, 434-35 (1990) (same); American National Bank & Trust Co. of Chicago v. National Advertising Co., 149 Ill. 2d 14, 26-27 (1992) (same); LaFever v. Kemlite Co., 185 Ill. 2d 380, 389-90 (1998) (same); Hills v. Bridgeview Little League Ass’n, 195 Ill. 2d 210, 244 (2000) (referring to section 344). In the case before us, plaintiff does not explicitly mention the Restatement, and defendants refer only to section 344 in arguing that they owed no duty to protect the decedent against the unforeseeable act of a third person. Section 344 provides in relevant part: “A possessor of land who holds it open to the public for entry for his business purposes is subject to liability to members of the public while they are upon the land for such a purpose, for physical harm caused by the accidental, negligent, or intentionally harmful acts of third persons *** and by the failure of the possessor to exercise reasonable care to (a) discover that such acts are being done or are likely to be done, or (b) give a warning adequate to enable the visitors to avoid the harm, or otherwise to protect them against it.” Restatement (Second) of Torts § 344 (1965). As this court has observed in the past (see Hills, 195 Ill. 2d at 243-44), section 344 represents a specific statement of the general rule articulated in section 314A of the Restatement, and long recognized by this court, that certain special relationships may give rise to an affirmative duty to aid or protect another against unreasonable risk of physical harm. See Restatement (Second) of Torts § 314A (1965); Fancil v. Q.S.E. Foods, Inc., 60 Ill. 2d 552, 559-60 (1975). Section 314A and this court recognize four such relationships: common carrier and passenger, innkeeper and guest, custodian and ward, and possessor of land who holds it open to the public and member of the public who enters in response to the possessor’s invitation. Restatement (Second) of Torts § 314A (1965); Fancil, 60 Ill. 2d at 560; Hills, 195 Ill. 2d at 243-44. The latter relationship, which is at issue in this case, may also be referred to as the relationship between business invitor and invitee. See, e.g., Rowe, 125 Ill. 2d at 216; Hills, 195 Ill. 2d at 248-49. This court’s decision in Hills v. Bridgeview Little League Ass’n expresses the rationale for recognizing the duty of reasonable care to which the special relationship between a business invitor and invitee gives rise. In Hills, this court considered whether two Little League organizations owed a duty of care to a coach who was attacked by the manager and assistant coach for an opposing team while he was coaching in a Little League tournament. Hills, 195 Ill. 2d at 212-13. This court ultimately held that no business invitor-invitee relationship existed between the Little League organization that hosted the tournament and the plaintiff coach. Hills, 195 Ill. 2d at 251. Accordingly, the Little League organization owed no duty of care to the coach. Hills, 195 Ill. 2d at 252. In the course of its analysis, the court in Hills observed that when a possessor of land opens his premises to the public for business purposes, he must recognize the risk that has been created, noting: “ ‘[P]laces to which the general public are invited might indeed anticipate, either from common experience or known fact, that places of general public resort are also places where what men can do, they might. One who invites all may reasonably expect that all might not behave, and bears responsibility for injury that follows the absence of reasonable precaution against that common expectation.’ ” Hills, 195 Ill. 2d at 245-46, quoting Feld v. Merriam, 506 Pa. 383, 391, 485 A.2d 742, 745 (1984). While Hills involved a party’s liability for the criminal act of a third person, we find the rationale expressed above to apply with equal force where, as here, the negligent act of a third person is at issue. Cf. Restatement (Second) of Torts § 314A, Comment d, at 119 (1965) (duty to protect against unreasonable risk of physical harm set forth in section 314A extends to risks arising from third-party acts “whether [the acts] be innocent, negligent, intentional, or even criminal”); Restatement (Second) of Torts § 344 (1965) (business invitor’s liability to invitee encompasses “physical harm caused by the accidental, negligent, or intentionally harmful acts of third persons” and invitor’s failure to exercise reasonable care to discover the harmful acts, give warning allowing them to be avoided, or otherwise protect against them). Indeed, as the Restatement suggests, an actor typically has greater reason to anticipate negligence than to anticipate criminal misconduct, as it is generally reasonable for one to assume that a person will not violate the criminal law. See Restatement (Second) of Torts § 302B, Comment d, at 89 (1965). Based on the allegations in plaintiffs complaint, the duty of care that a business invitor owes to invitees to protect them against the unreasonable risk of physical harm is clearly applicable to this case. The complaint alleges that while the decedent was a customer at a restaurant owned and operated by defendants, he was injured by the negligent act of a third person — namely, Fritz’s act of driving her car into the restaurant. Defendants’ business, a restaurant, is undoubtedly of such a nature that it places defendants in a special relationship with their customers, as it is an establishment open to the general public for business purposes. See Hills, 195 Ill. 2d at 246 (generally, nature of business landholder conducts on premises is relevant to determining whether business stands in special relationship with customers), 247-51 (appropriate test for determining existence of business invitor-invitee special relationship is whether premises are open to general public for business purposes). In addition, the duty of care that arises from the business invitor-invitee relationship encompasses the type of risk — i.e., the negligent act of a third person — that led to the decedent’s injuries. See Restatement (Second) of Torts § 314A, Comment d, at 119 (1965); Restatement (Second) of Torts § 344 (1965). Thus, we conclude that plaintiffs complaint alleges facts sufficient to establish that defendants owed a duty of care to the decedent. This conclusion, however, does not end our inquiry into the duty issue. In referring to the four factors this court traditionally considers in its duty analysis, defendants have essentially asked us to create an exemption from the duty of care that stems from the special relationship between a business invitor and invitee. We decline to do so. As noted above, the existence of a duty turns in large part on considerations of public policy. Jones, 191 Ill. 2d at 303. Indeed, this court has stated, in agreement with one well-known treatise, that “ ‘ “duty” is not sacrosanct in itself, but is only an expression of the sum total of those considerations of policy which lead the law to say that the plaintiff is entitled to protection.’ ” Kirk v. Michael Reese Hospital & Medical Center, 117 Ill. 2d 507, 527 (1987), quoting W. Keeton, Prosser & Keeton on Torts § 53, at 358 (5th ed. 1984). Thus, in determining whether a plaintiff and a defendant stand in such a relationship to one another that the law imposes an obligation of reasonable conduct on the defendant for the benefit of the plaintiff (Happel, 199 Ill. 2d at 186), we are confronted with a decision of policy. In the case of a business invitee harmed by the negligent act of a third person, the policy justifying the business invitor’s duty of reasonable care is related to the affirmative action the invitor takes in opening his business to the public and to the potential for harm that a business open to the general public poses. See Hills, 195 Ill. 2d at 245-46. Thus, the policy subjecting defendants to liability in this case is clear. On the contrary, the no-duty rule defendants would have this court adopt lacks a sound basis in policy. As one treatise states, “Rules declaring that no duty exists can easily be made too broad or too narrow. Because they are rules of law, not decisions about particular cases, they cover all cases in the category to which they are addressed. They are expressions of ‘global’ policy rather than evaluations of specific facts of the case. Consequently, no-duty rules should be invoked only when all cases they cover fall substantially within the policy that frees the defendant of liability.” 1 D. Dobbs, Torts § 227, at 579 (2001). Here, none of the considerations defendants rely on compel us to hold that, as a matter of law, landholders who open their land to the public for business purposes have no duty to protect invitees against out-of-control drivers. We see no merit in such an exemption. Initially, we note that it is reasonably foreseeable, given the pervasiveness of automobiles, roadways, and parking lots, that business invitees will, from time to time, be placed at risk by automobile-related accidents. As one court has observed, “what is required to be foreseeable is the general character of the event or harm *** not its precise nature or manner of occurrence.” Bigbee v. Pacific Telephone & Telegraph Co., 34 Cal. 3d 49, 57-58, 665 P.2d 947, 952, 192 Cal. Rptr. 857, 862 (1983); see also Blue v. St. Clair Country Club, 7 Ill. 2d 359, 364 (1955) (“[I]n order for liability to attach, it is not necessary that the exact method by which the injury occurred could have been expected. It is sufficient if some resulting injury could have been reasonably foreseen”). Belatedly, the likelihood that injury will occur to invitees in such instances is quite high, as even a cursory glance at a selection of the cases the parties have cited to us demonstrates. See, e.g., Ray, 57 Ill. 2d at 21; Stutz, 204 Ill. App. 3d at 901; Simmons, 162 Ill. App. 3d at 240; Marquardt, 18 Ill. App. 2d at 137. Finally, the extensive costs to businesses and to the public that defendants claim will arise by not creating an exemption from the applicable duty of care are speculative at best. Defendants argue that businesses will incur an immense financial burden if required to protect their invitees from out-of-control automobiles and that the protective measures businesses take will make buildings everywhere less aesthetically pleasing. These arguments are based on mistaken assumptions about the nature of a duty of care. Recognizing that the duty of reasonable care that businesses owe to their invitees applies to cases where invitees are injured by out-of-control automobiles is not the same as concluding the duty has been breached because a business failed to take a certain level of precaution. Nor is it the same as concluding that the breach was the proximate cause of an invitee’s injuries. In short, merely concluding that the duty applies does not constitute an automatic, broad-based declaration of negligence liability. Further, to the extent defendants suggest we could create a rule of law narrower than the exemption discussed above to absolve them of liability, they are actually requesting that we determine, as a matter of law, that they did not breach their duty of care. It is inadvisable for courts to conflate the concepts of duty and breach in this manner. Courts could, after all, “state an infinite number of duties if they spoke in highly particular terms,” and while particularized statements of duty may be comprehensible, “they use the term duty to state conclusions about the facts of particular cases, not as a general standard.” 1 D. Dobbs, Torts § 226, at 577 (2001); see also 54 Vand. L. Rev. at 712-17 (discussing problems associated with using the duty element of negligence to render decisions that no breach occurred as a matter of law). Thus, the issue in this case is not whether defendants had a duty to install protective poles, or a duty to prevent a car from entering the restaurant, or some such other fact-specific formulation. Because of the special relationship between defendants and the decedent, they owed the decedent a duty of reasonable care. The issue is whether, in light of the particular circumstances of this case, defendants breached that duty. That question cannot be answered at this stage of the proceedings. See Espinoza, 165 Ill. 2d at 114 (issue of breach is for jury to decide provided there is genuine issue of material fact regarding that issue). Finally, we address defendants’ argument that comment f of section 344 of the Restatement supports a finding that they owed no duty to the decedent. Comment f provides: “Since the possessor [of land] is not an insurer of the visitor’s safety, he is ordinarily under no duty to exercise any care until he knows or has reason to know that the acts of the third person are occurring, or are about to occur. He may, however, know or have reason to know, from past experience, that there is a likelihood of conduct on the part of third persons in general which is likely to endanger the safety of the visitor, even though he has no reason to expect it on the part of any particular individual. If the place or character of his business, or his past experience, is such that he should reasonably anticipate careless or criminal conduct on the part of third persons, either generally or at some particular time, he may be under a duty to take precautions against it, and to provide a reasonably sufficient number of servants to afford a reasonable protection.” Restatement (Second) of Torts § 344, Comment f, at 225-26 (1965). Defendants do not specify which of the principles set forth in comment f they believe are applicable to this case. However, based on their citation to Cobb v. Martin IGA & Frozen Food Center, Inc., 337 Ill. App. 3d 306 (2003), they appear to suggest that comment f stands for the proposition that before a duty of care may be imposed on a possessor of land to protect an individual from the negligent conduct of a third person, the possessor of land must have notice of a prior, similar incident of negligent third-party conduct. In Cobb, a child negligently ran into the plaintiff with a grocery cart while the plaintiff was shopping in a store owned and operated by the defendant. Cobb, 337 Ill. App. 3d at 308. A majority of the appellate court affirmed the circuit court’s grant of summary judgment in favor of the defendant. Cobb, 337 Ill. App. 3d at 314. In doing so, the court relied in part on its interpretation of various Restatement comments, including comment f of section 344, as standing for the propositions that “a defendant must have some notice of a prior incident or prior conduct before the law imposes a duty to protect a plaintiff from the conduct of a third party” and “[t]he prior incident must be sufficiently similar to put a defendant on notice that there is a reasonable probability that the acts of the third party are likely to cause physical harm to others.” Cobb, 337 Ill. App. 3d at 313. Because defendants’ argument regarding the imposition of a notice requirement is not fully developed, we limit our discussion to the terms of comment f, which most decidedly do not contemplate a notice requirement as stringent as that suggested by defendants. We find Cobb’s interpretation of the comment unpersuasive, as it is unsupported by citations to authority or references to specific language from the Restatement. See Cobb, 337 Ill. App. 3d at 313. Applying the comment to this case, we observe that plaintiffs complaint clearly falls within its purview, as it alleges that, based on the place and character of defendants’ business, defendants had reason to know that the negligent conduct of third persons was likely to endanger defendants’ customers. See Restatement (Second) of Torts § 344, Comment f (1965). Specifically, the complaint alleges that the restaurant is located in an area with a “high traffic count”; that various aspects of its design, including its “brick half wall,” and its sidewalk, render it susceptible to penetration by out-of-control automobiles; that defendants took no precautions, such as installing “vertical concrete pillars or poles,” to prevent automobiles from entering the restaurant; and that defendants had knowledge of all of the foregoing. Thus, even assuming for the sake of argument that a business invitor’s lack of knowledge of prior, similar incidents of negligent conduct should limit his duty of care (see generally 2 D. Dobbs, Torts § 324, at 877-79 (2001)) (discussing various approaches courts have taken to determining the relevance of prior, similar incidents of criminal conduct to property owners’ negligence liability)), we reject defendant’s contention that comment f supports a finding that defendants owed no duty of care to the decedent. Having determined, based on the allegations in plaintiffs complaint, that defendants owed a duty of reasonable care to the decedent, we briefly examine the effect of our decision on Simmons v. Aldi-Brenner Co. and Stutz v. Kamm. Defendants cited these factually analogous appellate court decisions to this court as authority for their position regarding the duty issue. Simmons is in part distinguishable from the instant case, because it involved the review of a jury verdict, not of a ruling on a motion to dismiss. Simmons, 162 Ill. App. 3d at 240. The plaintiffs in Simmons were injured when a driver blacked out behind the wheel of her car and the car crashed into a grocery store where the plaintiffs were shopping. Simmons, 162 Ill. App. 3d at 240-41. The plaintiffs filed suit against the car’s driver, the owners of the premises, and the lessee of the premises, Aldi-Brenner Company. Simmons, 162 Ill. App. 3d at 240. A jury rendered verdicts in favor of the driver and the owners but against Aldi-Brenner. Simmons, 162 Ill. App. 3d at 240. The appellate court reversed the judgment against Aldi-Brenner and affirmed the judgment in favor of the premises owners. Simmons, 162 Ill. App. 3d at 244. The court stated that the owner or occupier of land owes a business invitee “the duty of exercising ordinary and reasonable care to see that the premises are reasonably safe for use” but qualified this acknowledgment by stating that “a storekeeper is not the insurer of his customers’ safety.” Simmons, 162 Ill. App. 3d at 242. It then went on to decide “whether a duty existed as a matter of law” (Simmons, 162 Ill. App. 3d at 242) and concluded “that a duty did not legally exist requiring [the defendants] to protect against the injury caused by the *** automobile” (Simmons, 162 Ill. App. 3d at 244). The court relied primarily on the observation that it would have been “mere speculation” to say that any of the safety features discussed by the plaintiffs’ expert at trial (see Simmons, 162 Ill. App. 3d at 242-43), including the installation of a protective wall (Simmons, 162 Ill. App. 3d at 244), would have prevented the car from entering the store. Simmons, 162 Ill. App. 3d at 244. It also reasoned that finding the existence of a duty “would place a burden on every store, near a street or parking lot, of constructing barriers adequate to prevent any car from being driven into the building.” Simmons, 162 Ill. App. 3d at 244. In addition, the court opined that the accident was not foreseeable as a matter of law. Simmons, 162 Ill. App. 3d at 244. Simmons applied inaccurate terminology in concluding “a duty did not legally exist” that the defendants owed to the plaintiffs. See Simmons, 162 Ill. App. 3d at 244. Based on our analysis of the duty issue in this case, it is clear that the defendants in Simmons owed the plaintiffs a duty of reasonable care. This, however, does not render Simmons irreconcilable with our decision here. The appellate court’s decision in Simmons was premised on an evaluation of the evidence the parties presented at trial. See Simmons, 162 Ill. App. 3d at 242-44. To the extent Simmons stands for the proposition that, as a matter of law, the evidence failed to establish that the defendants breached their duty of care or proximately caused the plaintiffs’ injuries, it is not inconsistent with our decision in this case, which involves the dismissal of a complaint. Turning to Stutz, we note that it relied heavily on Simmons in holding that the defendants owed no duty to the plaintiffs. See Stutz, 204 Ill. App. 3d at 905-06. Stutz, however, differs from Simmons, in two significant respects. First, Stutz involved two separate duty issues: the duty of a landowner to its business invitees and the duty of an independent contractor to those affected by alleged defects in the contractor’s construction. See Stutz, 204 Ill. App. 3d at 901-04. Second, Stutz was decided at the pleadings stage of the plaintiffs’ negligence actions. Stutz, 204 Ill. App. 3d at 903. In Stutz, a car in the parking lot of a driver’s licensing facility crashed into the facility’s waiting area, killing one woman and seriously injuring another. Stutz, 204 Ill. App. 3d at 900-01. Two separate negligence actions were filed against various parties, including the contractor that constructed the facility’s parking lot and the facility’s owners. Stutz, 204 Ill. App. 3d at 901. The plaintiffs alleged that the contractor breached its duty to perform work on the parking lot in a workmanlike manner and, alternatively, that the specifications the contractor followed were so obviously dangerous that no contractor would have followed them. Stutz, 204 Ill. App. 3d at 901. According to the plaintiffs’ complaints, the contractor negligently failed to build “bumpers or other stops” around the facility and negligently constructed numerous other aspects of the parking lot. Stutz, 204 Ill. App. 3d at 902. In addition, the plaintiffs alleged that the owners of the facility breached the duty of care they owed to the plaintiffs by failing to maintain their building and parking lot in a reasonably safe condition. Stutz, 204 Ill. App. 3d at 902. Both the contractor and the owners filed motions to dismiss, which the circuit court granted. Stutz, 204 Ill. App. 3d at 903. The appellate court affirmed the judgment of the circuit court. Stutz, 204 Ill. App. 3d at 903. The court stated that a premises owner owes “a duty to invitees of reasonable care under the circumstances regarding the state of the premises or acts done or omitted on them.” Stutz, 204 Ill. App. 3d at 904. It also recognized that an independent contractor has a duty to perform its work “in accordance with the plans and specifications in a good workmanlike manner” and to refrain from following plans and specifications that “are so obviously dangerous that no competent contractor would follow them.” Stutz, 204 Ill. App. 3d at 904. However, the court went on to conclude that “considering all the factors present in plaintiffs’ complaints *** a duty did not legally exist requiring defendants to prevent the type of harm which occurred.” Stutz, 204 Ill. App. 3d at 906. In affirming the circuit court’s dismissal of the plaintiffs’ complaints, the appellate court applied the same rationale to the plaintiffs’ claims against the defendant contractor and the defendant owners. Stutz, 204 Ill. App. 3d at 906. Relying on Simmons, the court reasoned that “it would be mere speculation to say the accident would have been prevented if defendants had performed the omissions or not performed the negligent acts which plaintiffs allege in their complaints.” Stutz, 204 Ill. App. 3d at 906. The court further stated that placing a duty upon the defendants to guard against the type of harm at issue would be an “unreasonable burden.” Stutz, 204 Ill. App. 3d at 906. Additionally, the court determined that the accident was not foreseeable as a matter of law. Stutz, 204 Ill. App. 3d at 906. We express no opinion on Stutz’s dismissal of the plaintiffs’ negligence claims against the defendant contractor. Those claims relied on a theory of negligent construction, and our decision regarding defendants’ duty of care to the decedent does not address such a theory. However, insofar as Stutz held that the owner defendants owed no duty of care to the plaintiffs, we find that it was incorrectly decided. Unlike Simmons, Stutz involved a ruling on a motion to dismiss. To the extent Stutz is inconsistent with our decision in this case, it is hereby overruled. Finally, we note that defendants’ reliance on authority from other jurisdictions involving situations where out-of-control vehicles crashed into business establishments is unpersuasive. See Howe v. Stubbs, 570 A.2d 1203 (Me. 1990); Carpenter v. Stop-N-Go Markets of Georgia, Inc., 512 So. 2d 708 (Miss. 1987); Mack v. McGrath, 276 Minn. 419, 150 N.W.2d 681 (1967); Carter v. Gambulous, 748 P.2d 1008 (Okla. App. 1987); Glick v. Prince Italian Foods of Saugus, Inc., 25 Mass. App. 901, 514 N.E.2d 100 (1987); Hendricks v. Todora, 722 S.W.2d 458 (Tex. Ct. App. 1986); Schatz v. 7-Eleven, Inc., 128 So. 2d 901 (Fla. App. 1961); Watkins v. Davis, 308 S.W.2d 906 (Tex. Civ. App. 1957). Significantly, of these eight decisions, five address the propriety of summary judgments (see Howe, 570 A.2d at 1203; Carpenter, 512 So. 2d at 709; Glick, 25 Mass. App. at 901, 514 N.E.2d at 101; Schatz, 128 So. 2d at 902; Hendricks, 722 S.W.2d at 459), and two address the propriety of jury verdicts (see Mack, 276 Minn. at 420-21, 150 N.W.2d at 684-85; Watkins, 308 S.W.2d at 907). Moreover, to the extent these decisions create no-duty exemptions, they provide no reasons for doing so beyond those we have already rejected above. CONCLUSION For the reasons expressed above, we hold that the allegations in plaintiff’s complaint are sufficient to establish that defendants owed a duty of care to the decedent. Accordingly, we affirm the judgment of the appellate court, which reversed the circuit court’s dismissal of plaintiff’s complaint and remanded the cause for further proceedings. Appellate court judgment affirmed.