=== CASE 2214746 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:52.217172+00 ===

212 Cal.App.2d 84 (1963)
THE PEOPLE ex rel. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
D. OWEN ALEXANDER et al., Defendants and Appellants.
Civ. No. 120.
California Court of Appeals. Fifth Dist.
Jan. 18, 1963.
McKinney & Jordan, Thorpe, Sullivan, Clinnin & Workman, Roger M. Sullivan and Henry K. Workman for Defendants and Appellants.
Holloway Jones, Jack M. Howard, A. Matthew Raggio, Homer L. McCormick, Jr., and Robert E. Reed for Plaintiff and Respondent.
CONLEY, P. J.
This is an appeal by defendant landowners, D. Owen Alexander and Perle Alexander, from a judgment of $37,400 in their favor in a condemnation suit. The action was commenced by the State of California acting through the Department of Public Works for the acquisition of access rights only from and to a 17.8-acre parcel of land owned by the Alexanders and situated at the northeast corner of the intersection of Avenue 112, a county road of Tulare County, and U.S. Highway 99. The property is located about one-half mile north of Pixley where the state is constructing a freeway along U.S. Highway 99.
At the time of the acquisition of the property by the state the defendant owners were devoting approximately one acre at the southwest corner of their property to the operation of a drive-in orange juice stand and snack bar. The balance of the land was used for farming. The area in commercial use was paved; there was a 40- by 80-foot overhead aluminum-steel canopy under which automobiles could park; adjacent thereto, but off the paved area, were located a walk-in freezer, *90 rest rooms and a concrete slab next to a trailer, which was used as an office and for sleeping quarters. The improved area was landscaped, and it was defined on one side by a redwood fence.
The appellants feel that they were not awarded sufficient damages and have appealed, alleging errors on the part of the trial court in the admission and exclusion of evidence and also claiming that the court erred in the giving of instructions. The following questions are raised by appellants:
(1) Was it error to refuse to permit one of defendants' valuation witnesses to give his opinion as to the highest and best use of the property?
(2) Was the court wrong in preventing defendants from introducing in evidence an artist's illustration allegedly depicting the adaptability of the property for commercial uses?
(3) Was it error to admit hearsay testimony of the valuation of access openings agreed to by a buyer and a seller of a comparable parcel?
(4) Was it proper to admit the hearsay opinion of an employee of a corporation which made an alleged comparable purchase that the price paid for the property was higher than its market value?
(5) Were there errors in the court's instructions?
The Ruling Preventing the Witness Perry from Giving His Opinion as to the Highest and Best Use of the Property Condemned.
[1, 2a] Defendants called C. H. Perry as one of their valuation witnesses; he had been in business on Highway 99 for about 14 years, operated the Sky Ranch restaurant and the Tulare Inn coffee shop and was vice president of the Tulare Inn Corporation, which owns a large motel on the same side of Highway 99 about 16 miles north of Alexanders' property, at the intersection of that highway and a county road. When Mr. Perry was asked to give his opinion as to the value of the Alexander land and his opinion of its highest and best use, the plaintiff objected on the ground that the witness had not shown proper qualifications to testify. The court thereafter permitted the witness to give his opinion as to the reasonable market value of the property both before and after the taking, but ruled he was not qualified to give an opinion as to the highest and best use of the property. *91 This ruling was contrary to the state's second thought on the combined objection, for respondent's counsel stated to the court: "... if your Honor is inclined to rule that the testimony regarding value should be allowed, then I think in all fairness to the Court I wouldn't urge my objection to the highest and best use solely; ..."
After hearing evidence that Mr. Perry had investigated highway locations between Delano and Fresno in great detail for the purpose of selecting the site for his own motel, the court acted within proper discretionary limits by permitting him to give his opinion as to value of the property taken. [3] It is not necessary that a valuation witness be a professional appraiser or real estate broker in order to qualify as an expert. [4] As is said in City of Stockton v. Ellingwood, 96 Cal.App. 708, 716 [275 P. 228]:
"If a witness, by reason of his skill, learning, or technical training, understands the adaptability of the lands in question for a particular purpose, and the demand for land for such purpose, he may state the market value of the land, although he may be entirely unacquainted with the other elements which would be considered by different buyers competing for the same property. On the other hand, if the witness has knowledge of the market value of the lands, even though he possesses no technical skill, training, or ability, he may state the market value. [5] The different elements considered by the witnesses in giving their opinions as to market value may be inquired into upon cross-examination, and if, upon such cross-examination, it appears to the court that the witness' testimony is based upon improper consideration, or upon what is usually termed as speculative only, it should be stricken from the record or withdrawn from the consideration of the court or the jury." (See also Los Angeles City High School Dist. v. Rodriguez, 135 Cal.App.2d 760, 767-769 [287 P.2d 871]; People v. Marblehead Land Co., 82 Cal.App. 289, 302 [255 P. 553]; People v. Willis, 30 Cal.App.2d 419 [86 P.2d 670]; Remmers v. Ciciliot, 70 Cal.App.2d 432, 437-438 [161 P.2d 257].)
[6] When a witness, having qualified, gives his opinion as to the value of the land sought to be condemned, he may properly give his reasons upon direct examination for his conclusion. [7] As the element of highest and best use is an important factor to be considered in reaching a conclusion with respect to value (Sacramento etc. R. R. Co. v. Heilbron, *92 156 Cal. 408, 409 [104 P. 979]; City of Napa v. Navoni, 56 Cal.App.2d 289 [132 P.2d 566]; 124 A.L.R. 911; San Diego Land etc. Co. v. Neale, 78 Cal. 63, 69 [20 P. 372, 3 L.R.A. 83]; Santa Ana v. Harlin, 99 Cal. 538, 542-544 [34 P. 224]; Olson v. United States, 292 U.S. 246, 255 [54 S.Ct. 704, 78 L.Ed. 1236]; 4 Nichols on Eminent Domain (3d ed.)  12.314, p. 140), it would seem clear that one who is entitled to give an opinion as to the value of real property should necessarily be in a position to give an opinion also with respect to its highest and best use.
[8] In United States v. 25.406 Acres of Land, 172 F.2d 990, 993, it is said: "Testimony as to value would be worth little or nothing if witnesses were not allowed to explain to the jury their qualifications as experts and the reasoning by which they have arrived at the expert opinion to which they testify; and the rule is that they may thus give the grounds of their opinions. Wigmore on Evidence 2d Ed. sec. 562; Lewis, Eminent Domain 3d Ed. sec. 654."
[2b] We therefore conclude that the court erred in not permitting Mr. Perry to state in so many words what his opinion of the highest and best use was. However, the question remains whether this error, considered separately or in conjunction with other alleged errors in the case, would be sufficient to justify a reversal of the judgment. [9] We are bound by the provisions of section 4 1/2 of article VI of the Constitution, and under it we can not reverse a judgment for any reason short of a miscarriage of justice. [2c] In this connection, it should be noted that the error of the court in making its ruling was largely, if not wholly, cured through additional questions and answers of the witness on cross-examination:
"Q. Now is your opinion of this value in before condition based upon any specific plan or proposal that you might have had in mind or that Mr. Alexander might have had in mind? A. Well, I base it on what we have done on our property at Paige Avenue and 99 Freeway with development which could be done there, the filling station and motel and cafe."
"Q. Do you have an idea--strike that. Would this be, sir in your opinion, what a willing buyer would pay a willing seller, say, when we are talking about this fair market value in before conditions, what a willing buyer would pay a willing seller, both knowing all of the adaptabilities and availability of this property, both being fully informed as to the highest *93 and best use of the property on the date of valuation with neither being under any compulsion to sell or under any compulsion to buy? I know that's kind of a complicated thing. Do you understand what I mean? A. You mean what it would have brought on the market then?"
"Q. That's right. A. In when?"
"Q. In the before condition on April--. A. That's April of '60?"
"Q. That's right. A. Well, I think it would bring a $100,000 myself."
"Q. That includes, sir, does it, the improvements that were on it at that time? A. Yes."
"Q. In the after condition, have you given any value to those improvements? A. You mean with it blocked off?"
"Q. That's right. A. Well, the improvements would be worth very little with it blocked off."
The testimony of the witness as a whole was based on his investigation of locations of possible sites for restaurants, motels and similar business establishments along the full line of the highway, and it was necessarily brought home to the jury that Mr. Perry was considering value from the standpoint of a commercial operation such as his own business. We do not believe that the jurors could have missed the implications flowing from his testimony; they must have been well aware of the basis for his opinions with respect to value.
The Offered Artistic Sketch
[10] The defendants sought to introduce a fanciful sketch showing "one of the possible proposed plans of utilization" of the property. The appellants concede that "Perhaps the refusal to admit this exhibit, standing alone, would not have been prejudicial error." The court correctly denied its introduction.
While in certain restricted circumstances a trial court may admit maps, diagrams or illustrations of proposed uses of a property for the purpose of showing physical feasibility and adaptability with respect to the construction of buildings on the land sought to be condemned (Buena Park School Dist. v. Metrim Corp., 176 Cal.App.2d 255 [1 Cal.Rptr. 250]; Los Angeles v. Kerckhoff-Cuzner Mill & Lbr. Co., 15 Cal.App. 676 [115 P. 654]), it would be highly improper to permit exhibits of this kind aimed at the purpose of increasing damages. [11] The correct rule is thus stated in People v. Chevalier, 52 Cal.2d 299 [340 P.2d 598] at page 309: *94
"Defendants finally contend that the court erred in denying admission of an architect's sketch showing a proposed improvement of their land. Defendants sought to show thereby that their property in one single piece, without the street bisection, would be suitable and valuable for building a motel and restaurant project, and that the severance ruined the prospect of such a development. It is true that evidence of a proposed use may be relevant, not to enhance damages but to show that the proposed use is feasible and, as such, might enter into a determination of the market value. (Laguna Salada etc. Dist. v. Pacific Dev. Co., 119 Cal.App.2d 470, 476 [259 P.2d 498].) However, all the experts agreed that the land was suitable and valuable, before but not after the condemnation, for the building of a motel and restaurant project, and that this would have been a feasible plan for the use of the property. It therefore appears that the sketch of a specific plan or development could have no other purpose than to attempt to enhance damages, and its rejection was proper. (People v. La Macchia, 41 Cal.2d 738, 751 [264 P.2d 15]; City of Los Angeles v. Kerckhoff- Cuzner Mill & Lbr. Co., 15 Cal.App. 676, 677-678 [115 P. 654].)"
Testimony as to Value of Access Openings on a Comparable Sale
[12a] The valuation witness Phillipe, called by the plaintiff, testified that one of the elements which he took into consideration in forming his opinion of the value of the subject property was the sale of a 171-acre parcel for $107,000 which had involved six access openings. The witness stated over objection that the buyer and seller there involved had placed an agreed value for the sale on all six openings of $15,700. This allocation was not specified in the deed or in the escrow instructions. The objection here expressly raises the question whether hearsay evidence as to the facts of previous sales may be used by an expert valuation witness in giving his reasons for his own opinion.
Section 1845.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure, first passed in 1957, as amended in 1959, reads as follows: "In an eminent domain proceeding a witness, otherwise qualified, may testify with respect to the value of the real property including the improvements situated thereon or the value of any interest in real property to be taken, and may testify on direct examination as to his knowledge of the amount paid for comparable *95 property or property interests. In rendering his opinion as to highest and best use and market value of the property sought to be condemned the witness shall be permitted to consider and give evidence as to the nature and value of the improvements and the character of the existing uses being made of the properties in the general vicinity of the property sought to be condemned." (Emphasis added.)
Prior to County of Los Angeles v. Faus, 48 Cal.2d 672 [312 P.2d 680], the applicable rule prevented a valuation witness from giving an account of comparable sales on direct examination, but he may now do so. [13] The specific question involved is whether in describing comparable sales the witness may rely for the facts upon his own investigation of records in the recorder's office, and in the courts, the stamps upon deeds and the statements of those who personally participated in the sales. The important evidentiary point involved is whether or not the opinion of value which the witness has given is sustained by proper reasons. From a practical standpoint, if each person previously involved in effecting comparable sales should have to be called to the stand to establish the detailed facts of such sales, it would lengthen litigation of this kind out of all reason and would make it almost impossible for the state or defending landowners to make a proper showing as to valuation opinion within a reasonable time and at reasonable expense. Therefore, within proper limits, facts acquired by hearsay and used by a valuation expert in support of his conclusion that certain sales are comparable and therefore furnish support for his opinion concerning value have been customarily received in evidence in this state. [14] In People ex rel. Dept. of Public Works v. Donovan, 57 Cal.2d 346, 352 [19 Cal.Rptr. 473, 369 P.2d 1], it is said:
"An expert may detail the facts upon which his conclusions or opinions are based, even though his knowledge is gained from inadmissible or inaccurate sources. (Betts v. Southern Calif. etc. Exchange, 144 Cal. 402 [77 P. 993]; McElligott v. Freeland, 139 Cal.App. 143 [33 P.2d 430].)" (See also Covina Union High School Dist. v. Jobe, 174 Cal.App.2d 340, 348 [345 P.2d 78]; Laguna Salada etc. Dist. v. Pacific Dev. Co., 119 Cal.App.2d 470, 475-476 [259 P.2d 498]; Long Beach City High School Dist. v. Stewart, 30 Cal.2d 763, 772-773 [185 P.2d 585, 173 A.L.R.2d 249]; People v. Al. G. Smith Co., Ltd., 86 Cal.App.2d 308, 312 [194 P.2d 750].) [12b] The *96 evidence here complained of was within the permissible scope defined by the authorities. [15] It will be noted that this rule does not permit hearsay evidence of the opinion of other persons as to valuation.
The Claim of Error by Reason of Evidence of a Hearsay Opinion as to Value
[16a] One of the parcels of land referred to in the record was a small area for service station purposes bought by the Union Oil Company. The sale price was $35,000. The witness Wilson, called as a valuation expert by the plaintiff, attempted to explain the effect of this evidence by testifying that in his opinion it was out of line with proper market value; he said that the reasonable value of such an oil station property along this section of the highway, in his opinion, was approximately $16,000, and that the sale in question was not fairly illustrative of market value. In connection with this testimony he said that an employee of Union Oil Company had stated to him that in his opinion the company had paid too much for the land in question.
As an abstract matter, we agree with the appellant that it is improper for an expert witness to bring in hearsay testimony of the opinion of others as to value. In People v. La Macchia, 41 Cal.2d 738 [264 P.2d 15], the court states at page 745:
"As said in Peirson v. Boston El. R. Co., 191 Mass. 223 [77 N.E. 769]: '[T]here is no right to put in evidence of matters which are incompetent as substantive evidence for the purpose of fortifying the opinion of an expert witness, even though they are offered under the guise of the reasons for his opinion, and even though they might properly have been admitted on cross-examination to test and diminish the weight to be given to his opinion.' (Pp. 233-234.) The rule is similarly expressed in United States v. 25.406 Acres of Land, 172 F.2d 990, 993, and Nichols states it in substantially the same language. (5 Nichols on Eminent Domain [3d ed.]  18.45 [1], p. 181.)"
"The general rule which permits a witness to state the reasons upon which his opinion is premised may not be used as a vehicle to bring before the jury incompetent evidence. To so open up the inquiry would create a disastrous break in the dike which stands against a flood of interminable investigation." (See also People v. Nahabedian, 171 Cal.App.2d *97 302, 310 [340 P.2d 1053]; Furtado v. Montebello Unified School Dist., 206 Cal.App.2d 72, 78-79 [23 Cal.Rptr. 476]; Buchanan v. Nye, 128 Cal.App.2d 582, 586 [275 P.2d 767]; California Condemnation Practice (Cont.Ed.Bar 1960) page 301; 5 Nichols on Eminent Domain (3d ed. [revised 1962])  18.45(1), pp. 268-269.)
However, we must look to the record to see whether a proper objection was made to this evidence. The particular question was not objected to. The question with the answer is as follows:
"Q. ... Did they give you any indication as to whether or not they felt that the price that they paid was a fair price or not? A. The indication, they felt that it was above market, considerably above market."
[17] In order to be able to claim error on appeal because of the erroneous admission of evidence, the record must show that appellant attempted to exclude such evidence at the earliest possible moment in the trial court. (3 Cal.Jur.2d, Appeal and Error,  140, p. 604.) This would involve the making of a proper objection to its introduction.
[16b] Prior to the asking of the vital question, counsel for respondent asked the witness what he had found out as a result of talking with Mr. Hubbard Anderson, who was in charge of gasoline sales for the Union Oil Company; counsel for appellants was granted leave to examine the witness on voir dire, after which he stated: "I am going to object to any conversation with a man that is not in the Marketing Division; in other words, he is not one of the persons to talk to." After argument, the court said: "I am going to overrule the objection," and stated to the jury that the evidence would be admitted "... not to establish the truth of what Mr. Anderson said, because it is hearsay testimony, and ... it is allowed for the particular purpose of showing one of the elements upon which the witness on the stand bases his opinion." The then pending question was never answered. Counsel resumed the direct examination of the witness, and after several additional questions, asked the one now objected to. [18] The grounds of objection must be stated with reasonable certainty, and the objection must specify the particular evidence which is sought to be excluded. (Sublett v. Henry's etc. Lunch, 21 Cal.2d 273, 276 [131 P.2d 369]; People v. Willis, 30 Cal.App.2d 419, 421 [86 P.2d 670]; People v. One Ford V8 Coach, 21 Cal.App.2d 445, 448- 449 *98 [69 P.2d 473]. See also 3 Cal.Jur.2d, Appeal and Error,  156, p. 634, and cases there cited.)
[19] If an objection for some reason is not sufficient in form and content, a motion to strike may be resorted to; such motion must be timely, specific and accurate. (Rose v. State of California, 19 Cal.2d 713, 742 [123 P.2d 505]; People v. Loop, 127 Cal.App.2d 786, 800-801 [274 P.2d 885]; 3 Cal.Jur.2d, Appeal and Error,  158, p. 639, and cases there cited.)
[20] The general principle is well established that evidence which is technically incompetent and immaterial under the exclusionary rules, if offered and received without proper objection or motion to strike, may be considered in support of a judgment. (Powers v. Board of Public Works, 216 Cal. 546, 552 [15 P.2d 156], and cases there cited; People v. Willis, supra, 30 Cal.App.2d 419, 421; 19 Cal.Jur.2d, Evidence,  474, p. 238.)
Witkin, California Evidence, pages 751-753, notes that illustrations of this principle are numerous and cover a wide range of evidentiary topics such as incompetent hearsay, secondary evidence violating the best evidence rule, inadmissible opinions, lack of foundation, incompetent, privileged or unqualified witnesses, and violations of the parol evidence rule. (See also 3 Cal.Jur.2d, Appeal and Error,  140-142, pp. 604-609.)
[21] An objection which specifies the wrong ground is as bad as an insufficient general objection, for reliance upon one ground only is treated as a waiver of any other possible grounds. (Estate of Huston, 163 Cal. 166, 173 [124 P. 852]; Griffen v. Jacobsen, 17 Cal.App.2d 68 [61 P.2d 350]; People v. Alves, 123 Cal.App.2d 735 [267 P.2d 858]; Kirkpatrick v. Tapo Oil Co., 144 Cal.App.2d 404 [301 P.2d 274]; Bank of America v. Taliaferro, 144 Cal.App.2d 578 [301 P.2d 393]. See also Witkin, California Evidence, Introduction of Evidence at Trial,  706, p. 738.)
[16c] It would seem that defendants' counsel did not properly preserve his record and that he is not entitled to raise this point on appeal. But even if we should give appellants the benefit of the assumption of a proper objection to the evidence by reason of their counsel's earlier discussion of the subject, we would conclude that such error does not result in a miscarriage of justice and does not warrant a reversal of the judgment. *99
The Instructions
[22] Appellants' contention that there was error in the instructions can only be entertained with respect to four of them which are covered by a stipulation of the parties, in view of the fact that the record does not show which party requested the instructions complained of and given or the instructions refused. In such circumstances, the attempt to urge error must fail. (Deevy v. Tassi, 21 Cal.2d 109, 124 [130 P.2d 389]; Alexander v. McDonald, 86 Cal.App.2d 670, 671 [195 P.2d 24]; Forbes v. Mattos, 35 Cal.App.2d 481, 484 [96 P.2d 166]; Buckley v. Shell Chemical Co., 32 Cal.App.2d 209, 216 [89 P.2d 453]; 4 Cal.Jur.2d, Appeal and Error,  569, pp. 441-442.) However, as to four of the instructions, it was stipulated in open court that they were offered by plaintiff. [23a] These instructions are as follows:
(1) "You are not to consider what the property was worth to the defendants, the owners, for speculation, or merely for possible uses, nor what they claim it was worth to them, nor what it may be worth to plaintiff for highway or other purposes, nor what the property would bring at a forced sale. You are not to consider the price the property would sell for under special or extraordinary circumstances, but its fair market value if offered in the market under ordinary circumstances, a reasonable time being given to make the sale."
[24a] (2) "The income or productive value of an actual or contemplated use is not a measure of compensation. Profits which might be derived from devoting property to a particular purpose depend so much on conditions that can not be foreseen that they have no competency, and are not to be considered by you."
[25a] (3) "In considering the adaptability of property for any particular purpose, a factor to consider is whether its use for such purpose is economically feasible. If it appears that operations under such use can not be carried on except at a loss, the prospect of use for such purpose is not a proper element of value. If you believe, therefore, that use of the property for any specific purpose is not economically feasible, then such a prospective use for the property is not reasonably probable and does not add to the market value of the land and should be disregarded by you." *100
[26a] (4) "Injury or inconvenience to a business is not compensable and does not form an element of and can not be taken into consideration by you in arriving at the damages in this case. In determining the damages in this case to be awarded to the defendants, you must consider the damage to the property only and are not to take into consideration any damage to or loss of any business conducted on the property with the improvements located thereon at the date of valuation."
These instructions are not claimed to be incorrect statements of abstract law, but they are attacked on the ground that they are misleading in that no evidence was produced as to business profits or as to value of the property to defendants personally as distinguished from reasonable market value.
[23b] We cannot agree with appellants. The statements of the law were correct, and we do not think they are misleading. The first instruction quoted above, in effect, stated that market value is not what property may be worth to a particular property owner for some specific use as contrasted with what the property would sell for on the open market. [24b] The second instruction properly points out that income or profits which might be obtained from devoting land to a particular use is not a proper measure of compensation in a condemnation proceeding, as such profits would be variable, depending upon unforeseeable conditions; consideration of such theoretical profits might lead a jury to award damages for remote or merely conjectural possibilities. [25b] The third instruction deals with the question of whether any particular suggested use of the property is economically feasible; if it is not, it could scarcely affect its market value; it is not inconsistent to tell the jury that profits are not a proper measure of value, even though profitability, or its absence, may be considered in determining the highest and best use of such property.
[26b] The fourth instruction correctly told the jury that they were to consider damages to defendants' property only and must not take into consideration any loss of business which might result from the taking; in the absence of this instruction the jury might have given damages for the loss of the orange juice stand business conducted on one acre of the defendants' property, and this would not have been a proper measure of damages.
[27] Are there any errors in the record which alone or *101 in combination would warrant a reversal of the judgment? We believe not. The jury brought in a verdict in the sum of $37,400, which exceeds in amount the value placed upon the condemned property by each of the two qualified expert witnesses produced by the state. The entire tract of land was originally bought by the appellants for the sum of $17,000, and the amount deposited by court order at the beginning of the litigation to permit plaintiff to take immediate possession was $19,490.27. Furthermore, the jury's view of the premises constituted independent evidence which it was entitled to weigh in fixing the value of the property. (Otey v. Carmel Sanitary Dist., 219 Cal. 310, 312 [26 P.2d 308]; Gibson Properties Co. v. City of Oakland, 12 Cal.2d 291, 297 [83 P.2d 942]; Peckwith v. Lavezzola, 50 Cal.App.2d 211, 217 [122 P.2d 678]; Hatton v. Gregg, 4 Cal.App. 537 [88 P. 592]; White v. Walsh, 105 Cal.App.2d 828, 831-832 [234 P.2d 276]; McCarthy v. City of Manhattan Beach, 41 Cal.2d 879, 889 [264 P.2d 932]; Ethel D. Co. v. Industrial Acc. Com., 219 Cal. 699, 704-705 [28 P.2d 919].) We find no errors in the record which would lead to the conclusion that there has been a miscarriage of justice. (Cal. Const., art VI,  4 1/2.)
The judgment is affirmed.
Brown, J., concurred.
Stone, J., being disqualified, did not participate.

=== CASE 2214724 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:51.844493+00 ===

212 Cal.App.2d 155 (1963)
Estate of CHARLES E. VAN DER OEF, Deceased. GRACE S. VAN DER OEF, Petitioner and Appellant,
v.
FRED VAN DER OEF et al., Objectors and Respondents.
Civ. No. 26323.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Three.
Jan. 21, 1963.
David Lynn and Majorell & Majorell for Petitioner and Appellant.
Gordon & Moss and Russell J. Moss for Objectors and Respondents.
SHINN, P. J.
Grace S. Van Der Oef appeals from an order in probate denying her petition for a family allowance from the estate of her deceased husband. She sought an allowance of $350 per month for her support and $350 as attorneys' fees "as a part of her support."
Petitioner was living with and supported by her husband at the time of his death. There are ample assets in the estate to meet her demands and there is no one else who is entitled to a family allowance. After the hearing the court made findings from which it concluded as follows: "I. That the petitioner, Grace S. Van Der Oef, is not entitled to a family allowance inasmuch as she has adequate means for her maintenance from her own properties and estate. II. Under the terms of a Property Settlement Agreement heretofore entered into by and between the decedent and petitioner, Grace S. Van Der Oef, dated January 10, 1958, said petitioner, Grace S. Van Der Oef, waived any beneficial provisions under the laws of inheritance and defeated her claim for family support from decedent's estate. III. That petitioner, Grace S. Van Der Oef, in her petition, prays for attorneys' fees and same should not be allowed as a charge against decedent's estate."
[1] Petitioner alleged in her petition that she did not have adequate estate of her own and was entitled to a reasonable allowance from the estate for her maintenance in accordance with her station and manner of life. This allegation was found to be untrue upon evidence that the petitioner had living expenses of $460 per month and owned numerous properties producing a gross income of $620.70 per month.
The fact that appellant enjoyed an income in excess of the amount of her living expenses and was possessed of capital of a substantial amount was not a sufficient reason for denying her petition outright. (Estate of Secord, 84 Cal.App.2d 783 [192 P.2d 81]; Estate of Baldwin, 190 Cal.App.2d 78 [11 Cal.Rptr. 604].)
The finding that by the terms of the property settlement agreement with her husband appellant waived her right to *157 receive support from his estate represents the court's interpretation of the agreement in the light of the circumstances in which it was entered into.
Appellant and her husband had separated and appellant had sued for divorce. The property settlement agreement was entered into but this was followed by a reconciliation and at the time of the husband's death the parties were living together and appellant was being supported by her husband. It was recited in the agreement that it was the mutual desire of the parties to settle their respective legal relations in and to property, whether community, separate or joint in character, and to separate the properties that were then owned and those that might be acquired in the future. Each of the parties conveyed to the other property specifically described as the separate property of the transferee. Adjustment was made of the community debts and each agreed not to contract any debt or obligation for which the other might be held responsible. The agreement read in part: "8. The wife hereby covenants and agrees that she will not at any time hereafter contract any debts, charges or liabilities whatsoever, for which the husband or his property or his estate shall or may be or become liable or answerable, and the wife covenants and agrees that she will at all times hereafter hold and keep the husband free and harmless of and from any and all debts and liabilities which may hereafter be incurred by her, and the husband hereby covenants and agrees that he will not at any time hereafter contract any debts, charges or liabilities whatsoever, for which the wife or her property or her estate shall or may be or become liable or answerable and the husband covenants and agrees that he will at all times hereafter hold and keep the wife free and harmless of and from any and all debts or liabilities which may hereafter be incurred by him."
"9. Each party hereby waives, relinquishes and releases any and all right, title, interest, claim and demand in and to any and all wages, income, earnings, profits and money of the other except as hereinabove provided, and all wages, income, earnings, profits and money of said parties shall henceforth be the sole and separate property of the party receiving, earning, or possessing the same, free and clear of any and all rights, titles, interests, claims and demands of the other, except by way of enforcement of the provisions of this agreement in that behalf to which said parties are entitled respectively."
"10. The parties shall make, execute and deliver any and all deeds, instruments, documents, papers and things as may *158 be required for the purpose of giving the covenants, terms and conditions of this agreement full effect."
The agreement was clearly and exclusively one for the settlement of the ownership of the properties the parties owned or might thereafter acquire. Under the agreement everything was to be in separate ownership. There was no agreement for a separation nor any agreement on the part of the wife to waive the right of support by the husband during the existence of the marriage or in the event of a divorce. There was no mention of the right of either of the parties who might survive the other to share in the estate of the deceased spouse as the surviving spouse or otherwise.
[2] It has been said that in order for an agreement to be effective as a waiver of widow's right to a family allowance the intention to waive the right must be expressed in clear and express language and that any uncertainty in the language of the agreement should be construed in favor of the right. (Estate of Shapero, 39 Cal.App.2d 144 [102 P.2d 569]; Estate of Bidigare, 215 Cal. 28 [8 P.2d 123].)
[3] Although the rule speaks for itself the reasons which support it are obvious. The widow's right to support from the husband's estate is peculiar to itself. It is distinct from the matters that are usually within the contemplation of the parties in the settlement of their property rights. If the parties are concerned with the rights that normally exist in favor of one or the other after dissolution of the marriage by divorce or death any agreement they may have reached respecting the same will be found to have been reduced to writing. If the agreement is silent with respect to conditions that may exist or rights that may be claimed after dissolution of the marriage the omission can mean only that such rights were not intended to be affected by the agreement. There is nothing whatever in the agreement of the parties which indicates that the wife intended to relinquish her right to a widow's allowance or that the husband intended or understood that she was waiving the right.
In denying appellant's petition for a family allowance the court necessarily included a denial of her right to an allowance for attorneys' fees. However, the question will arise upon a new hearing on the petition when the court grants the same. But the order should not include an allowance for appellant's attorneys' fees. [4] The right of a successful applicant for a family allowance to attorney's fees is not provided for by statute. It does not exist independently of statutory authority. *159 This was the express holding in Estate of Bevelle, 81 Cal.App.2d 720 [185 P.2d 90]. A distinction exists where the application is made by one for the benefit of another and where it is made on one's own behalf as in In re Bundy, 44 Cal.App. 466 [186 P. 811], where the application was for the appointment of a guardian of the person and estate of an alleged incompetent and in Estate of Filtzer, 33 Cal.2d 776 [205 P.2d 377], where the application was made on behalf of an infant son whose legitimacy had been established against the estate of the deceased father. In the latter estate, an allowance to the mother of attorney's fees was affirmed but this was solely upon the ground that the court did not make the allowance of attorney's fees as attorney's fees "but correlated such added relief with the concept of an obligation assumed by her on behalf of the child" to defend his rights to share in the decedent's estate. We understand this to mean that since attorney's fees would have been allowable in a suit by the mother to establish legitimacy of the child during the lifetime of the father pursuant to section 196a of the Civil Code, there should be an equal right to attorney's fees for representing the interests of the child by means of an application for a family allowance under section 680 of the Probate Code. The facts of the present case bring it within the rule of Bevelle and not within the reasoning or the conclusion of the court in Filtzer.
The order is reversed for further proceedings in accordance with the views herein expressed.
Ford, J., and Files, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2214541 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:48.750403+00 ===

251 Cal.App.2d 968 (1967)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
ROLLIS CROSSLIN, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 5405.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. One.
June 22, 1967.
Michael Traynor, under appointment by the Court of Appeal, for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, Robert R. Granucci, John P. Oakes and Edward P. O'Brien, Deputy Attorneys General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
MOLINARI, P. J.
Two informations, one charging defendant with armed robbery at a market on September 21, 1963, and the second charging him in two counts with attempted armed robbery and assault with a deadly weapon at a liquor store on October 11, 1963, having been consolidated for trial, and defendant having been found guilty on the charges in both informations, defendant appeals from the judgment of conviction sentencing him to state prison for consecutive terms on the robbery and attempted robbery charges and withholding sentence on the assault charge. Defendant's contentions on appeal are as follows: (1) The trial court erred in admitting into evidence a card containing defendant's fingerprints; (2) a statement made by defendant in which he identified himself to the police as Tony Collins and a statement which defendant made for voice identification purposes during a lineup were elicited in violation of Escobedo v. Illinois (1964) 378 U.S. 478 [12 L.Ed.2d 977, 84 S.Ct. 1758], and People v. Dorado (1965) 62 Cal.2d 338 [42 Cal.Rptr. 169, 398 P.2d 361], and should therefore not have been allowed *971 into evidence; (3) several articles taken from defendant's apartment at the time of his arrest were the product of an illegal search and seizure and were therefore inadmissible into evidence; and (4) defendant's convictions for attempted armed robbery and assault with a deadly weapon are not supported by substantial evidence.
The Record
The Market Robbery
Dolores Turner, a clerk at Littleman's Supermarket in East Palo Alto, testified that between 4:30 and 5 p.m. on September 21, 1963, while she was working at the checkout stand and waiting on a customer named Mrs. Irish, she noticed a man standing at the side of her cash register holding a gun; that the man told her to give him all the money out of the cash register and the cash box or he would shoot her; that Mrs. Turner took the money from her cash register and cash box, put it in a small bag and gave the bag to the man, who then left the store after telling Mrs. Irish and Mrs. Turner not to move or to say anything until he had gone.
Mrs. Turner described the person who had robbed the market as between 25 and 27 years old, very neat in appearance, with large eyes, gold in the middle of his teeth, "processed" hair, and a mustache; further testified that on the day of the robbery this man had been in the store at least two times before the robbery occurred and on each occasion had bought a can of Country Club beer; and testified that prior to the day of the robbery she had often seen the same man in the store and on one of these occasons the man had purchased a can of Country Club beer and had returned to the store about 15 minutes later and asked to exchange the can as the first can had gotten warm. Mrs. Turner further testified that after the robbery she saw the robber in the store on two occasions, once in October 1964 and the other time in January 1965; that on the former occasion she was working at one checkstand and she saw the robber go through another checkstand; that she and the robber stared at each other for a moment and the robber then came over and checked out at her stand; and that she reported both incidents to the police.
Mrs. Ruby Irish, who testified that she was at Mrs. Turner's checkstand at the time of the robbery, corroborated the testimony of Mrs. Turner concerning the details of the robbery. In addition, Mrs. Irish described the robber as a young Negro man who was very neat and clean in appearance, wore *972 a mustache, and was dressed in an olive-green sweater, light shirt, dark trousers and black shoes. Both Mrs. Irish and Mrs. Turner identified defendant as the person who had robbed the market on September 21, 1963. In addition, when shown photographs depicting five male Negroes, both Mrs. Irish and Mrs. Turner testified that these photographs represented the persons who were present in a lineup which they had viewed at the San Mateo County sheriff's office subsequent to the robbery and that the photograph of defendant appeared to be that of the person who had robbed the market.
The Attempted Robbery and Assault at the Liquor Store
Mrs. Rose Ferrando testified that at around 2 p.m. on October 11, 1963, while she was working at Charlie's Liquor Store at 2380 Cooley Street in East Palo Alto, a man placed a 12-ounce can of Country Club beer on the counter and ordered her to open the cash register; that there then followed a dialogue between the parties which culminated in the man's telling Mrs. Ferrando that he would shoot her if she did not do as he told her; that Mrs. Ferrando still refused to comply with the man's order, whereupon the man shot her in the leg; that the man then went to the front door of the store to close the door and came back to the cash register; that at this point a scuffle ensued and the man struck Mrs. Ferrando on the head; that Mrs. Ferrando then ran outside and called for help, the man meanwhile leaving the store by a back door. Mrs. Ferrando's daughter, Joanna, testified that on the afternoon of October 11, 1963 she was in the rear of the store washing dishes when she heard gunshots in the front of the store and came forward to see what was happening; that when she arrived at the front of the store she heard the man order her mother to open the cash register; that as the man came around the counter and attacked her mother, Joanna stepped on the alarm which signalled for the police.
Mrs. Ferrando described her attacker as a very neat-looking, well-mannered Negro, who was short and had big, black eyes. However, when asked to identify defendant as her attacker she stated that defendant's eyes were similar to those of her attacker but that she did not know if defendant was the attacker. Joanna, who had viewed a lineup subsequent to the attempted robbery, testified that she did not recognize defendant by his features but did recognize his voice when he said, "This is a hold up." When asked if she could identify defendant as the assailant Joanna testified that she was not *973 certain that he was the man and further stated that she had noticed his eyes which were quite large.
Testimony identifying some fingerprints on the Country Club beer can left by the assailant at the liquor store as those of defendant was adduced as follows: Wesley Blum, a deputy sheriff who went to the liquor store in response to a radio call, testified that from the time he arrived at the store until the arrival of Don Harding, a criminologist for San Mateo County, Blum did not allow anyone to touch the beer can which was sitting on the counter. Harding testified that when he examined the beer can at the liquor store he found several latent fingerprints on the can; that he took the can to the laboratory for further examination; and that by comparing the fingerprints lifted from the can with fingerprints on a card which was reputed to contain defendant's fingerprints, he determined that defendant had handled the can. Harding further admitted that he found other prints on the can and could not determine when defendant had handled the can or whether he was the last person to handle the can.
Concerning the fingerprints on the card which were used for comparison with the fingerprints on the can, the testimony was as follows: The card, which was introduced into evidence, purported to show defendant's fingerprints as taken by M. Gunderson on January 23, 1965. According to the testimony of Donald Hartnett, a captain with the San Mateo sheriff's office, this card was part of the records of the San Mateo County sheriff's office. Hartnett further described in detail the fingerprinting system used by the sheriff's office: He described the cards and the method by which they were created, maintained, and filed; he also explained the meaning of certain numbers and entries appearing on the card; in addition he testified that the card in question was prepared in the usual course of business; and finally he stated that he knew the fingerprints on the card were those of defendant because he had compared them with another set of defendant's prints which he had taken himself at a later date.
The Arrest
Sergeant Henry Crossfield, a detective with the San Mateo County sheriff's office, testified that he was assigned to investigate the armed robberies at the liquor store and the market; that this investigation led to the arrest of defendant under the authority of an arrest warrant. Crossfield further testified that at the time he and several other officers went to *974 defendant's Redwood City apartment to arrest defendant, they found him in bed; that when asked for his name or identification defendant stated that his name was Tony Collins and that he had identification in his wallet, which was on the dresser; that the officers searched the wallet for identification and found an identification card from Stanford Research Institute and a temporary California driver's license both bearing the name Tony Collins; that after advising defendant of his right to counsel and his right to remain silent, Crossfield again questioned defendant about his identity but defendant continued to maintain that his name was Tony Collins and that he had never gone under the name of Rollis Crosslin; that the officers then searched defendant's apartment and discovered a marriage certificate bearing the name Rollis Crosslin; and that when confronted with this certificate defendant admitted his true identity.
The Defense
Defendant took the stand on his own behalf, denied the charges, and testified as follows: He and his present wife had lived in Redwood City at the time of the robberies and during this time he had shopped frequently at Littleman's Market and Charlie's Liquor Store. In October 1963 defendant and his wife moved to San Francisco where they lived until January 1964, at which time they moved to Oklahoma. After defendant returned to California in September 1964 he shopped numerous times at Littleman's Market in East Palo Alto and saw Mrs. Turner there several times. Defendant also testified that he normally drank Country Club beer and that he could have touched the can which was found on the counter in the liquor store because he took a can or two out of the cooler and then placed them back, but that he did not recall when that might have occurred. Finally, defendant testified that he had used the name Tony Collins when he was an entertainer and also when he was in Oklahoma.
Admissibility of the Fingerprint Card
[1a] In arguing that the fingerprint card purporting to show defendant's fingerprints as of the date of his arrest was erroneously admitted in evidence, defendant makes two distinct contentions: first, that the card was hearsay testimony and its admission was not justifiable under any of the exceptions to the hearsay rule; and second, that the effect of the card was prejudicial because of the reference contained on the card to charges against defendant which are unconnected with *975 the instant proceedings.  [fn. 1] We consider first the question of whether the fingerprint card, which clearly constituted hearsay evidence, was admissible under an exception to the hearsay rule. In this regard the Attorney General argues that the card was admissible under the "business records" exception to the hearsay rule codified in Code of Civil Procedure section 1953f.  [fn. 2] As pointed out in People v. Gorgol, 122 Cal.App.2d 281, 296 [265 P.2d 69], the Uniform Business Records as Evidence Act, of which section 1953f is a part, "is based on the recognition that records made and relied upon in the regular course of business may be regarded as trustworthy without verification by all the persons who contribute to them."
[2] The object of the statute is, of course, to eliminate the necessity of calling each witness and to substitute the record of the transaction instead. (People v. Gorgol, supra, at p. 296; Nichols v. McCoy, 38 Cal.2d 447, 449-450 [240 P.2d 569]; Cole v. Ames, 155 Cal.App.2d 8 [317 P.2d 662].) The foundation for admitting the record is properly laid "... 'if, in the opinion of the court, the sources of information, method and time of preparation were such as to justify its admission.' (Code Civ. Proc.,  1953f)." (People v. Gorgol, supra, at pp. 300-301; People v. Grayson, 172 Cal.App.2d 372, 380 [341 P.2d 820].) "This places a broad discretion in the trial court which will not be disturbed on appeal." (People v. Grayson, supra, at p. 380; People v. Torres, 201 Cal.App.2d 290, 295 [20 Cal.Rptr. 315]; Cole v. Ames, supra, at p. 18.)
[1b] The foundation for the introduction of the fingerprint card was laid through the testimony of Captain Hartnett. Hartnett testified that he had been taking fingerprints since 1939 and that he had set up the fingerprint section when the jail was opened in the Hall of Justice. He identified the card in question as of the type used only by the San Mateo County sheriff's office. He then proceeded to relate how these cards were prepared, what the various numbers signified, and who prepared them. He also stated that he had checked the *976 date and numbers on the card and found the card to be in the correct location and sequence. Finally, he stated that the card was prepared in the normal course of business on January 23, 1965, this being the same date that defendant was arrested.
From the above it is apparent that it was quite proper for the trial court to conclude that "... the sources of information, method and time of preparation were such as to justify ... [the records] admission." (Code Civ. Proc.,  1953f.) The court properly exercised its discretion and its decision must be upheld.
[3] Defendant, in contending that the card was inadmissible, is apparently making the argument that the foundation for its admission was improper in the respect that the person who actually took defendant's fingerprints was not called as a witness. However, in Gorgol, we find this language with relation to the admissibility of hospital records under section 1953f: "... if a proper foundation is laid, the fact that ... the particular nurse, doctor or person making the record has not been called, does not preclude their admission." (P. 300.) Similarly, in the instant case since the fingerprint card was verified so as to satisfy the trial court as to its authenticity, the fact that the person who actually took defendant's fingerprints and made this card was not called as a witness is immaterial.
Defendant, relying on the case of McGowan v. City of Los Angeles, 100 Cal.App.2d 386 [223 P.2d 862, 21 A.L.R.2d 1206], argues that because Hartnett was unable to testify that the fingerprints on the card were actually those of defendant the card was inadmissible. In McGowan a document entitled "Blood alcohol determination," which purported to be an analysis of the alcoholic content of the blood of the driver of one of the cars involved in an automobile accident in which the plaintiff's father was killed, was offered in evidence. However, it was held in that case that the trial court properly refused to allow this report into evidence under Code of Civil Procedure section 1953f for the reason that oral evidence by the person who himself prepared the report would be inadmissible since there was no proof adduced at the trial that the blood which this person analyzed for the purpose of the report was actually that of the person whose name appeared on the report. Stated the court, "The statute [Code Civ. Proc.,  1953f] does not change the rules of competency or relevancy with respect to recorded facts. It does not make that proof which is not proof. It merely provides a method of proof of *977 an admissible 'act, condition, or event.' It does not make the record admissible when oral testimony of the same facts would be inadmissible. In the absence of proof that the blood analyzed was the blood of Cox, taken from his body prior to the injection of any fluid therein, oral testimony of the result of the analysis would not be admissible." (At p. 392; cf. Nichols v. McCoy, supra, 38 Cal.2d 447, at pp. 448- 450.)
The principle involved in the McGowan case is not applicable to the instant case for the following reasons. Firstly, M. Gunderson, the person who purportedly took the fingerprints, would clearly have been permitted to testify, had he been called as a witness, that he took the impressions of the fingerprints and that these were defendant's fingerprints. This testimony would clearly have been admissible because Gunderson, as the taker of the impressions, would have had personal knowledge that the subject fingerprints were those of defendant. Secondly, there was evidence in the record that the subject fingerprints were actually those of defendant. Hartnett testified that he knew the fingerprints on the card were those of defendant because he compared them with another set of defendant's prints which he himself took at a later date.  [fn. 3]
[4a] We turn next to defendant's contention that it was error to admit the fingerprint card into evidence because of the fact that the card contained reference to charges against defendant which were unconnected with the instant proceedings. The allegedly objectionable information contained on the fingerprint card appears on the back of the card in space provided for various statistics concerning the person whose fingerprints appear on the front side of the card. On the first line appears "Date 1-23-65" followed three lines below by the following: Charge 211 PC 11530 H&S XXXXX-XXXXX CVC." This last notation appears to have reference to the charges which were pending against defendant at the time his fingerprints were taken on January 23, 1965.  [fn. 4] These charges, designated by abbreviations recognizable by judges, lawyers, and law enforcement officers, refer, respectively, to the offenses of robbery, possession or cultivation of marijuana, and certain traffic offenses. Aside from the offense of robbery, *978 the other charges had no connection with the instant case. [5] Evidence of these charges was inadmissible under the rule that evidence of other crimes is generally inadmissible unless it is relevant for some purpose other than to show disposition to commit crime. (People v. Cancimilla, 197 Cal.App.2d 242, 252 [17 Cal.Rptr. 498]; People v. Whipple, 192 Cal.App.2d 179, 186 [13 Cal.Rptr. 378]; People v. Beverly, 233 Cal.App.2d 702, 720 [43 Cal.Rptr. 743]; Witkin, Cal. Evidence (2d ed.)  340, p. 299; former Code Civ. Proc.,  2053, now Evid. Code,  1101, subd. (b).) In the present case it is not contended that evidence of these other charges had any relevancy other than to show disposition to commit crime."
The record discloses that counsel for defendant objected to the admission of the card in its entirety because of the notation thereon of the charges of other offenses. The objection was overruled, apparently on the basis that the admission of the card with the subject notation was not prejudicial.
In United States v. Dressler, 112 F.2d 972, 976-978, it was held that courts cannot annul the rule requiring the exclusion of incompetent and prejudicial information regarding other offenses of a defendant merely to facilitate the use of fingerprint evidence, and that where such information went to the jury room with other exhibits it constituted prejudicial error. The question of prejudicial error was considered in Lester v. State (Okla. Crim.) 416 P.2d 52, 58, where marks on a fingerprint card identifying the defendant as a person who had been arrested for a criminal offense were covered up with cardboard and were not seen by the jury. In holding that there was no reversible error, the appellate court stated the applicable rule thusly: "The introduction in evidence of a fingerprint record containing extraneous material which in itself is incompetent, may or may not constitute reversible error, depending on such factors as whether the material was or was not seen by the jury, or whether the objection thereto, if made, was waived by the defendant." Similarly, in Moon v. State, 22 Ariz. 418 [198 P. 288, 292, 16 A.L.R. 362], the reviewing court held that it was not error to admit into evidence a fingerprint card which also contained the criminal record of the accused where the printing containing such record was covered in such manner as to render such printing invisible.
[4b] In the instant case the subject notation was not covered, obliterated or deleted. Although the record does not disclose whether the jury saw the notation, we must assume *979 that it did since the entire fingerprint card was admitted in evidence and marked as an exhibit. We doubt, however, that even if the jury read the subject notation on the back of the fingerprint card it would have derived any meaning from it because of its abbreviated form. In that form the subject notation was almost meaningless to a layman, and it is doubtful that it would apprise the jury of defendant's criminal record. Moreover, the record discloses that the prosecution offered to stipulate that "those matters be scratched out with a heavy black ink that can't possibly be read." This stipulation was rejected by counsel for defendant on the basis that to do so would call to the jury's attention that "there's something there we don't want them to see." We think that this amounted to a waiver of any objection to the admission of the fingerprint card, particularly since the objection went to the card in its entirely and not to the extraneous material. In our opinion the procedure approved in Lester and Moon is a proper one and one that permits the retention of relevant evidence while excluding that which is irrelevant and prejudicial. Under all of the circumstances, therefore, we perceive no prejudicial error.
Alleged Violations of Escobedo and Dorado
[6] Relying on the cases of Escobedo v. Illinois, supra, and People v. Dorado, supra, defendant contends that (1) the statement which he made to Sergeant Crossfield at the time the latter came to defendant's apartment to arrest defendant, which statement consisted of identifying himself as Tony Collins, was improperly admitted into evidence because defendant was not advised of his right to counsel and his right to remain silent prior to making this statement; and (2) evidence concerning the fact that Miss Ferrando identified defendant's voice in a police lineup when she heard him say "This is a holdup" was similarly inadmissible because defendant was not advised of his rights prior to making this statement. Since the record reveals that defendant at no time during the trial objected to the introduction of this evidence and since the instant case was tried after the decisions in both the Escobedo and Dorado cases, it is clear that defendant is precluded from raising error on appeal as to the admissibility of this evidence. (People v. Palmer, 236 Cal.App.2d 645, 650 [46 Cal.Rptr. 449]; People v. Almond, 239 Cal.App.2d 46, 49-50 [48 Cal.Rptr. 308]; People v. Sanchez, 239 Cal.App.2d 51, 55 [48 Cal.Rptr. 424]; Witkin, Cal. Criminal Procedure (1965 Supp.)  361 N.) *980
Voice Identification
[7] Defendant argues that voice identification such as that involved in the instant case based on words like those used in the crime involved is unconstitutional on the basis that such activity violates the privilege against self-incrimination. In United States v. Wade, 388 U.S. 218, 221-223 [18 L.Ed.2d 1149, 1154, 87 S.Ct. 1926], recently decided, it was held that placing a defendant in a police lineup and having him repeat a phrase used by the culprit at the time of the commission of a robbery does not violate the defendant's Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination upon the rationale that such activity involves no compulsion of the accused to give evidence having testimonial significance. (See Schmerber v. California, 384 U.S. 757, 761 [16 L.Ed.2d 908, 914, 86 S.Ct. 1826].)
[8] The holding of the Wade case also disposes of defendant's contention in the instant case that the voice identification evidence was admitted in violation of the Escobedo-Dorado rule, even if an objection had been made on the basis of this rule. According to Wade, the Escobedo rule safeguards the privilege of self- incrimination and is not applicable to statements of a non-testimonial nature. Moreover, our own Supreme Court has enunciated this principle in holding that the right to counsel established in Escobedo is designed to prevent the use of coercive practices to extort confessions or other incriminating statements and "does not protect a defendant from revealing evidence in other ways." (People v. Graves, 64 Cal.2d 208, 211 [49 Cal.Rptr. 386, 411 P.2d 114].) "It applies only," said the court in Graves, quoting from Escobedo, "when 'the police carry out a process of interrogations that lends itself to eliciting incriminating statements,' ..." (P. 211.) Accordingly, it was held in Graves that the obtaining of handwriting exemplars from the defendant after his arrest without advising him of his right to counsel and to remain silent did not violate Escobedo or Dorado. We think the same rationale is applicable to voice identification, which, as in the instant case, did not elicit incriminating statements from defendant but only requested and secured an identification of his voice.  [fn. 5]*981
The Wade case and Gilbert v. California, 388 U.S. 263 [18 L.Ed.2d 1178, 87 S.Ct. 1951], do hold, however, "that a post indictment pretrial lineup at which the accused is exhibited to identifying witnesses is a critical stage of the criminal prosecution; that police conduct of such a lineup without notice to and in the absence of his counsel denies the accused his Sixth Amendment right to counsel and calls in question the admissibility at trial of the in-court identifications of the accused by witnesses who attended the lineup." (Gilbert v. California, 388 U.S. 263, supra, 272.) While the case at bench is distinguishable from Wade and Gilbert in that the lineup identification occurred prior to the time defendant was informed against and prior to the appointment of counsel to represent him, we need not decide whether the critical stage of the criminal prosecution discussed in Wade and Gilbert had been reached in the instant case because, in any event, the rule of these cases does not apply to the present case. In Stovall v. Denno, 388 U.S. 293 [18 L.Ed.2d 1199, 87 S.Ct. 1967], decided with Wade and Gilbert, it was held that the rulings of Wade and Gilbert affect only those cases and all future cases which involve confrontations for identification purposes conducted in the absence of counsel after June 12, 1967, the date each of these opinions was announced. In the present case such confrontation occurred on January 24, 1965.
Alleged Illegal Search and Seizure
[9] Defendant contends that the admission into evidence of his identification card, temporary driver's license and marriage certificate was improper since these items were obtained by means of an illegal search and seizure. The record discloses, however, that defendant did not object to the admission of these articles into evidence nor did he at any time during the trial raise the question of the legality of the search and seizure resulting in the discovery of these articles. Accordingly, it must be deemed that defendant has waived his right to raise the issue of illegal search and seizure, which issue is being raised for the first time on appeal. (In re Lessard, 62 Cal.2d 497, 503 [42 Cal.Rptr. 583, 399 P.2d 39]; People v. Clapper, 233 Cal.App.2d 34, 38 [43 Cal.Rptr. 105]; People v. Washington, 163 Cal.App.2d 833, 841 [330 P.2d *982 67]; see People v. Webb, 66 Cal.2d 107, 111, fn. 1 [56 Cal.Rptr. 902, 424 P.2d 342].)
[10] Defendant, however, relying on People v. Kitchens, 46 Cal.2d 260, 262-263 [294 P.2d 17], argues that an objection on the ground of illegal search and seizure would have been futile and, therefore, that the making of such an objection was unnecessary. Kitchens involved a situation where trial was held prior to the decision in People v. Cahan, 44 Cal.2d 434 [282 P.2d 905, 50 A.L.R.2d 513], so that the alleged illegally obtained evidence, the admission of which was being objected to for the first time on appeal, was clearly admissible at the time of trial based on the pre-Cahan decisions.  [fn. 6] In holding that the issue of the legality of the search and seizure could be raised on appeal despite the defendant's failure to object to the admission of the evidence in the trial court, the Supreme Court reiterated the rule that ordinarily the admissibility of evidence will not be reviewed on appeal in the absence of an objection in the trial court, but held that this rule did not apply where the law had been changed after the trial so that an objection at trial would have been futile.
As we understand the rule of the Kitchens case, it has no applicability in the instant case since defendant, in urging the inadmissibility of the various articles found in defendant's room, has not demonstrated an unforeseen change in the law occurring subsequent to the trial of the present case which would require an application of the Kitchens decision. Rather, it appears to us that defendant is asking for a change in an established rule of evidence on this appeal. Specifically, defendant is suggesting that we make certain refinements and distinctions with respect to the rules governing searches and seizures, the adoption of which will bring into play the Kitchens rule on the basis that it would be unreasonable to expect that defendant could have anticipated these changes.
The refinements and distinctions urged by defendant are those embraced by some of the federal cases which proscribe evidentiary searches and seizures, whether under the authority of a search warrant or during the course of a search incident to arrest, and which restrict searches and seizures incident to arrest to contraband, instruments of crime, fruits of crime, instrumentalities capable of use for an escape, or inherently injurious objects. (See Beck v. Ohio (1964) 379 *983 U.S. 89, 91 [13 L.Ed.2d 142, 145, 85 S.Ct. 233]; Harris v. United States (1947) 331 U.S. 145 [91 L.Ed. 1399, 67 S.Ct. 1098]; United States v. Rabinowitz (1950) 339 U.S. 56 [94 L.Ed. 653, 70 S.Ct. 430]; Honig v. United States, 208 F.2d 916; Gouled v. United States (1921) 255 U.S. 298, 309 [65 L.Ed. 647, 652, 41 S.Ct. 261]; see also United States v. Lefkowitz, 285 U.S. 452 [76 L.Ed. 877, 52 S.Ct. 420, 82 A.L.R. 775]; Abel v. United States, 362 U.S. 217 [4 L.Ed.2d 668, 80 S.Ct. 683].) Under this rule, argues defendant, the articles taken from his apartment and introduced into evidence were improperly seized because they were merely evidentiary materials and not instrumentalities, fruits or contraband encompassed by the rule.
Counsel for defendant, although acknowledging in his briefs and at oral argument that this federal rule has been rejected by our California Supreme Court in People v. Thayer (1965) 63 Cal.2d 635 [fn. 7] [47 Cal.Rptr. 780, 408 P.2d 108] on the basis that it is not a federal constitutional standard and therefore has no application in California (see Ker v. California (1963) 374 U.S. 23, 33 [10 L.Ed.2d 726, 737, 83 S.Ct. 1623]; see also Elder v. Board of Medical Examiners (1966) 241 Cal.App.2d 246, 264-266 [50 Cal.Rptr. 304]), nevertheless asserted his anticipation that the United States Supreme Court was about to put the matter at rest by holding that the search and seizure of objects which are "mere evidence," whether pursuant to a warrant or a warrantless search incident to a lawful arrest, violate the Fourth Amendment. Since oral argument in this case, the United States Supreme Court has in fact put this question to rest, but contrary to defendant's anticipation. In Warden v. Hayden, 387 U.S. 294 [18 L.Ed.2d 782, 87 S.Ct. 1642], decided on May 29, 1967, the United States Supreme Court held that "The requirements of the Fourth Amendment can secure the same protection of privacy whether the search is for 'mere evidence' or for fruits, instrumentalities or contraband." (P. 306 [18 L.Ed.2d at p. 792].) The high court noted, however, that "There must, of course, be a nexus--automatically provided in the case of fruits, instrumentalities or contraband--between the item to be seized and criminal behavior. Thus in the case of 'mere evidence,' probable cause must be examined in terms of cause to believe that the evidence sought will aid *984 in a particular apprehension or conviction. In so doing, consideration of police purposes will be required." (P. 307 [18 L.Ed.2d at p. 792, 87 S.Ct. 1650].)
In view of the foregoing it is apparent that there has not been any change in the law of search and seizure subsequent to the trial of this case. Accordingly, there is no merit to defendant's contention that his failure to object to the admission of the evidence was justifiable on the ground that such an objection would have been futile. We are persuaded, moreover, that the search in the present case was a reasonable one since there was a nexus between the items seized and defendant's criminal behavior. Here, the police had an arrest warrant for Rollis Crosslin. The defendant, when confronted with this warrant, insisted that he was not Rollis Crosslin but Tony Collins. Accordingly, the police were justified in seeking evidence which would aid in identifying the culprit they were seeking and in believing that the items found would aid in his identification. Under the circumstances what was said in People v. Smith, 63 Cal.2d 779, 798 [48 Cal.Rptr. 382, 409 P.2d 222] is applicable here: "Nor were the police required at this point to abandon their search for 'Jim Snyder' or his true identity. They were not compelled to close their eyes to the contents of the house, and their ensuing search was incidental to the purpose of their entry. While in the house, it was not unreasonable for the officers to look about them for evidence that would identify the suspect, thus far known to them only by one of his several aliases, ..."  [fn. 8]
Sufficiency of the Evidence
[11] Defendant contends that the evidence was insufficient to support his convictions for the attempted robbery and assault charges in connection with the liquor store. The basis of defendant's argument is that there was insufficient evidence identifying defendant as the perpetrator of these crimes. Before considering the evidence in the instant case which supports defendant's conviction for these two charges, we note the rule that governs our scope of review. Under that rule a reviewing court cannot weigh the evidence but must instead assume in favor of the verdict the existence of every fact which the jury could have reasonably deduced from the evidence and must then determine whether such facts are *985 sufficient to support the verdict. (People v. Newland, 15 Cal.2d 678, 681 [104 P.2d 778]; People v. Hillery, 62 Cal.2d 692, 702-703 [44 Cal.Rptr. 30, 401 P.2d 382].)
Turning to the evidence tending to show that defendant was the perpetrator of the liquor store crimes, we note initially that evidence indicating that defendant's fingerprints were on the can of Country Club beer which was placed by the robber on the counter at the liquor store. In this regard we note that "Fingerprint evidence is the strongest evidence of identity, and is ordinarily sufficient alone to identify the defendant." (People v. Riser, 47 Cal.2d 566, 589 [305 P.2d 1]; People v. Massey, 196 Cal.App.2d 230, 234 [16 Cal.Rptr. 402]; People v. Ang, 204 Cal.App.2d 553, 555 [22 Cal.Rptr. 455].) Although defendant attempted to explain the presence of his fingerprints on this can by testifying that it is possible that he went to the liquor store, attempted to purchase several cans of beer and put one or two back, this testimony need not necessarily have been believed by the jury since defendant could not specifically recall when he might have done this. Moreover, it seems highly improbable that an unknown assailant would pick up the exact can as was handled by defendant at an earlier time.
Additional evidence identifying defendant as the person who attempted to rob the liquor store and who assaulted Mrs. Ferrando consists of Mrs. Ferrando's description of her assailant as a Negro, very neat looking, well mannered, short and with big, black eyes. Although Mrs. Ferrando could not positively identify defendant as her assailant, this description which she gave of her assailant matched the one given by Dolores Turner, the grocery clerk who was robbed by defendant and who positively identified defendant as the robber. Finally, Joanna Ferrando, who saw her mother's assailant before he left the liquor store and heard his voice, testified that he had large eyes as does defendant and further testified that she recognized defendant's voice at the police lineup as being the same voice as that of the person who held up her mother.
The judgment is affirmed.
Sims, J., and Elkington, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. Defendant objected to the admissions of the fingerprint card at the trial on the grounds of hearsay and prejudicial effect.
[fn. 2]  2. Code of Civil Procedure section 1953f, as in effect at the time of the trial in the instant case, provides as follows: "A record of an act, condition or event, shall, in so far as relevant, be competent evidence if the custodian or other qualified witness testifies to its identity and the mode of its preparation, and if it was made in the regular course of business, at or near the time of the act, condition or event, and if, in the opinion of the court, the sources of information, method and time of preparation were such as to justify its admission."
[fn. 3]  3. Of some evidentiary value is the fact that the fingerprint card bears the signature of "Tony Collins" as the "person fingerprinted." This was an alias which defendant himself admitted he had used on occasions and was the name he first gave to the arresting officers.
[fn. 4]  4. The information charging defendant with the offenses which are the subject of the instant case were filed on February 8, 1965.
[fn. 5]  5. It should be here pointed out that the Supreme Court in Graves expressly stated that it did not have to decide whether the defendant could have invoked the privilege against self- incrimination and refused to make the exemplars. This question has now been put to rest in Gilbert v. California, 388 U.S. 263, 266 [18 L.Ed.2d 1178, 87 S.Ct. 1951], decided with Wade, supra, that the taking of such exemplars does not violate the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination.
[fn. 6]  6. People v. Cahan held that evidence obtained in violation of constitutional guarantees against unreasonable searches is inadmissible, whereas theretofore such evidence had been held to be admissible.
[fn. 7]  7. Certiorari denied by United States Supreme Court. (384 U.S. 908 [16 L.Ed.2d 361, 86 S.Ct. 1342].)
[fn. 8]  8. Since the evidence obtained in the instant case was the result of a reasonable search and, therefore, properly admitted, we need not consider the issue raised by the People that, in any event, defendant had given valid consent to the search.

=== CASE 9738269 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:47:23.255282+00 ===

*86ANNETTE KINGSLAND ZIEGLER, J.
¶ 1. This is a review of a published decision of the court of appeals,1 which affirmed the judgment entered on a jury verdict by Milwaukee County Circuit Court, Richard J. Sankovitz, Judge. The jury found that when constructing a sewer, the Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage District (the Sewerage District) unreasonably removed groundwater from the property of E-L Enterprises, Inc. (E-L), which caused E-L's building to settle and amounted to a taking of E-L's property without just compensation. The jury awarded E-L damages in the amount of $309,388.
¶ 2. The Sewerage District filed a motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict on the grounds that the damages E-L suffered to its property were consequential damages resulting from governmental action and therefore were not compensable under the takings clause of the Wisconsin Constitution. Alternatively, the Sewerage District moved for a new trial based on insufficient evidence to support the verdict. The circuit court denied the Sewerage District's motions and awarded E-L its attorney fees and costs. The circuit court then entered judgment in the amount of $624,375.48 on behalf of E-L and against the Sewerage District.
¶ 3. The Sewerage District appealed, and the court of appeals affirmed. The Sewerage District petitioned this court for review, and we accepted. We now reverse the decision of the court of appeals.
¶ 4. This case presents the following issues: (1) whether the Sewerage District's conduct constituted a taking of E-L's property without just compensation in violation of Article I, Section 13 of the Wisconsin Con*87stitution and the Fifth Amendment of the United States Constitution;2 and (2) whether E-L has established an inverse condemnation claim under Wis. Stat. § 32.10 (2007-08),3 entitling E-L to attorney fees and costs.4
¶ 5. As a preliminary matter, we need not decide today the panoply of issues that relate to an alleged *88taking of groundwater. In this case, E-L introduced no proof as to the value of the extracted groundwater.5 Instead, E-L seeks damages for the cost to repair its building and for the loss of use of its wood piles. The Sewerage District did not physically occupy the property for which E-L seeks compensation, and no government-imposed restriction deprived E-L of all, or substantially all, of the beneficial use of its property. Accordingly, what remains are mere consequential damages to property resulting from governmental action, which are not compensable under constitutional takings law.6 The damage to E-L's building was caused by the alleged negligent construction of the sewer; hence, E-L's claim sounds in tort and seeks damages for which the Sewerage District is not hable under the doctrine of governmental immunity. For the same reasons, we further conclude that E-L has failed to establish an inverse condemnation claim under Wis. Stat. § 32.10. E-L is therefore not entitled to attorney fees and costs under Wis. Stat. ch. 32. Accordingly, this court reverses the decision of the court of appeals.
*89I. FACTUAL BACKGROUND AND PROCEDURAL POSTURE
¶ 6. In the 1980s, the Sewerage District constructed the Deep Tunnel System, a 19 mile long system of sewers across Milwaukee County "that help[s] reduce water pollution by storing excess wastewater 140 to 330 feet underground" until the wastewater can be treated at reclamation facilities.7 The Deep Tunnel included the 1987-88 construction of the Crosstown 7 sewer (the sewer), a "near-surface collector sewer" that collects sewage overflow and diverts it away from the Menomonee River and into storage in the Deep Tunnel. The sewer was constructed for the Sewerage District by Bowles Contracting Inc./Tomasini Construction Inc. Joint Venture (BCI/TCI). Pursuant to the Sewerage District's contract with BCI/TCI, the means and methods of the construction were left to BCI/TCI's discretion. The contract required BCI/TCI to avoid damage to neighboring buildings and to repair any damage caused by the removal of water from the construction site. Under the contract, BCI/TCI was responsible for any resulting damage to surrounding properties.
¶ 7. To construct the sewer, BCI/TCI dug a trench, installed sewer pipes, and restored the surface. A portion of the sewer was constructed in the Sewerage District's easement under a private alley adjacent to the subject building owned by E-L on North 12th Street in Milwaukee.8 E-L's building was built in 1928 on "wood piles," *90long wooden poles that are capped with concrete and driven into the ground to provide support for the building's foundation. To prevent the wood piles from rotting and weakening, they must be sufficiently saturated with water.
¶ 8. However, in order for BCI/TCI to properly lay the sewer pipe and pour concrete, the trench had to be dry. Accordingly, BCI/TCI pumped groundwater from the trench for 17 days. When the sewer was completed in 1988, groundwater measurements showed that the level of groundwater near E-L's building had been significantly reduced. It took two years for the groundwater level to recover.
¶ 9. In 1998, about ten years after the sewer project was completed, E-L's owner, Joseph Loftus, noticed that cracks in the foundation of his building appeared to be worsening, so he started to monitor the building's settlement rate. In 2001, an engineer examined the building's wood piles and determined that the caps of 14 wood piles had rotted and were no longer able to support the building. Those particular wood piles were under the south wall of E-L's building, nearest to the 1987-88 sewer construction site. In September 2003, E-L notified the Sewerage District of the building damage, and in October, E-L repaired the building. To repair the building, the damaged portions of the wood piles were sawed off and replaced with concrete. The repairs cost a total of $309,388, which includes E-L's attorney fees incurred in litigation with a neighbor who owned the adjacent alley and refused E-L access to make the building repairs. It is undisputed that E-L continued to lease the building throughout this entire period.
¶ 10. On June 23, 2004, E-L filed suit against the Sewerage District and CNA Insurance Companies (CNA), the insurer for the now defunct BCI/TCI. E-L *91alleged causes of action against the Sewerage District for negligence, continuing nuisance, and inverse condemnation and alleged causes of action against CNA for negligence and continuing nuisance.9 The circuit court dismissed E-L's negligence and nuisance claims against the Sewerage District on the basis of governmental immunity under Wis. Stat. § 893.80(4).10 Accordingly, only E-L's inverse condemnation claim remained.11
¶ 11. As to the inverse condemnation claim, E-L's complaint alleged that the Sewerage District's operation and maintenance of the Deep Tunnel System and the pipes constructed as a part of the sewer "physically took portions of the wood piles which rendered them unusable and damaged the E-L Building." E-L alleged that the Sewerage District's acts constituted a taking:
[The Sewerage District's] conduct constitutes a taking of E-L Enterprises' property for public use. *92Specifically, [the Sewerage District's] conduct constitutes a physical invasion that deprived and continues to deprive E-L Enterprises of all beneficial use of the wood piles in violation [of] the Fifth Amendment of the United States Constitution and Article I, Section 13 of the Wisconsin Constitution.
[The Sewerage District] took E-L Enterprises' property without paying E-L Enterprises its just compensation.
In addition to damages, E-L's complaint demanded attorney fees and costs relating to E-L's claim for inverse condemnation.12
¶ 12. E-L's takings claim under Article I, Section 13 of the Wisconsin Constitution proceeded to a jury trial. The special verdict form asked the jury whether the Sewerage District's removal of groundwater from E-L's property was a taking. To assist the jury in answering that question, the circuit court instructed the jury that the law bars the government from taking property for public use without compensating the owner and that "[g]roundwater is considered property of the person who owns the land under which it flows."13 If the jury found that the Sewerage District's removal of groundwater from E-L's property was a *93taking, the jury was required to answer whether the removal of groundwater from E-L's property caused E-L's building to settle. If the jury answered that question in the affirmative, the jury had to determine the sum of money that would "justly compensate E-L for the taking of the groundwater beneath the south end of [E-L's] building."
*94¶ 13. The jury found that the Sewerage District's removal of groundwater from E-L's property was unreasonable, constituted a taking, and caused E-L's building to settle. The jury awarded E-L $309,388 "for the taking of groundwater" beneath its building — an amount equal to the cost to repair E-L's building and the attorney fees E-L incurred litigating with the neighbor who owned the adjacent alley and refused E-L access to make the repairs.
¶ 14. In its November 7, 2007 order, the circuit court denied the Sewerage District's motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict or, in the alternative, a new trial and granted E-L's request for attorney fees and costs under Wis. Stat. ch. 32.14
¶ 15. The Sewerage District appealed, and the court of appeals affirmed, concluding that the jury verdict supported E-L's inverse condemnation claim under Article I, Section 13 of the Wisconsin Constitution and Wis. Stat. ch. 32. E-L Enters., Inc. v. Milwaukee Metro. Sewerage Dist., 2009 WI App 15, ¶ 11, 316 Wis. 2d 280, 763 N.W.2d 231. The court of appeals applied Wisconsin Power & Light Co. v. Columbia Cnty., 3 Wis. 2d 1, 87 N.W.2d 279 (1958), and reasoned that although mere consequential damage to property resulting from government action is not a taking, E-L Enters., 316 Wis. 2d 280, ¶ 9, "the Sewerage District had 'reason to anticipate that damage would result from its acts,'" id., ¶ 10 (quoting Wis. Power & Light, 3 Wis. 2d at 7). Accordingly, the court of appeals concluded that "this case is on the 'taking' side of the line recognized by Wisconsin Power & Light." E-L Enters., 316 Wis. 2d 280, ¶ 10.
*95¶ 16. According to the court of appeals, this case is "most analogous" to this court's decision in Damkoehler v. City of Milwaukee, 124 Wis. 144, 101 N.W. 706 (1904), later clarified in Dahlman v. City of Milwaukee, 131 Wis. 427, 439-40, 111 N.W. 675 (1907), in which we held that the removal of a building's lateral support by street grading constituted a compensable taking as opposed to consequential damages for which there was no remedy. E-L Enters., 316 Wis. 2d 280, ¶ 9. The court of appeals "[saw] no logical basis to distinguish between the removal of soil providing lateral support and the diversion of groundwater performing essentially the same function." Id., ¶ 11. Because "Wisconsin law already recognizes that a property owner's interest in the integrity of water may give rise to a protectable right," id. (citing State v. Michels Pipeline Constr., Inc., 63 Wis. 2d 278, 217 N.W.2d 339 (1974); Price v. Marinette & Menominee Paper Co., 197 Wis. 25, 221 N.W. 381 (1928)), the court of appeals concluded that the Sewerage District's diversion of groundwater from E-L's property constituted a taking. E-L Enters., 316 Wis. 2d 280, ¶ 11.
¶ 17. In concluding that the Sewerage District's conduct constituted an "occupation" under Wis. Stat. § 32.10, id., ¶ 7, the court of appeals explained that "[t]he law in Wisconsin is settled that an entity with the power of condemnation may 'occupy' land without physical entrance onto that land," id., ¶ 8. In particular, the court of appeals cited Wikel v. Department of Transportation, 2001 WI App 214, 247 Wis. 2d 626, 635 N.W.2d 213, for the proposition that "there may be a taking when the entity with the power of condemnation does something outside of the affected property that adversely impacts the owner's use of that property." E-L Enters., 316 Wis. 2d 280, ¶ 8.
*96¶ 18. Finally, the court of appeals concluded that the circuit court did not err in awarding attorney fees and costs to E-L because E-L prevailed on its inverse condemnation claim under Wis. Stat. § 32.10. Id., ¶ 21.
¶ 19. We now reverse the decision of the court of appeals.
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
¶ 20. Whether government conduct constitutes a taking of private property without just compensation is a question of law that this court reviews de novo. R.W. Docks & Slips v. State, 2001 WI 73, ¶ 13, 244 Wis. 2d 497, 628 N.W.2d 781; Howell Plaza, Inc. v. State Highway Comm'n, 92 Wis. 2d 74, 80, 284 N.W.2d 887 (1979) (hereinafter Howell Plaza II). In addition, whether an inverse condemnation claim has been established under Wis. Stat. § 32.10 involves the interpretation and application of a statute, which presents a question of law that we review de novo while benefiting from the lower courts' analyses. C. Coakley Relocation Sys. v. City of Milwaukee, 2008 WI 68, ¶ 14, 310 Wis. 2d 456, 750 N.W.2d 900; see also Koskey v. Town of Bergen, 2000 WI App 140, ¶ 4, 237 Wis. 2d 284, 614 N.W.2d 845.
III. ANALYSIS
A. Takings Claim
¶ 21. Article I, Section 13 of the Wisconsin Constitution provides: "The property of no person shall be taken for public use without just compensation therefor." Likewise, the Takings Clause of the Fifth Amend*97ment of the U.S. Constitution, made applicable to the States through the Fourteenth Amendment, provides that private property shall not "be taken for public use, without just compensation." Lingle v. Chevron U.S.A. Inc., 544 U.S. 528, 536 (2005) (citing Chicago, Burlington & Quincy R. Co. v. City of Chicago, 166 U.S. 226 (1897)). In order to trigger the "just compensation" clause under either the Wisconsin Constitution or the U.S. Constitution, there must be a "taking" of private property for public use. Zinn v. State, 112 Wis. 2d 417, 424, 334 N.W.2d 67 (1983); Howell Plaza II, 92 Wis. 2d at 80.
¶ 22. Under the Wisconsin Constitution, two types of governmental conduct can constitute a taking: (1) "an actual physical occupation" of private property or (2) a restriction that deprives an owner "of all, or substantially all, of the beneficial use of his property." Howell Plaza, Inc. v. State Highway Comm'n, 66 Wis. 2d 720, 726, 226 N.W.2d 185 (1975) (hereinafter Howell Plaza I). Similarly, under the U.S. Constitution, governmental conduct gives rise to a takings claim when there is either (1) "direct government appropriation or physical invasion of private property" or (2) government regulation of private property that is "so onerous that its effect is tantamount to a direct appropriation." Lingle, 544 U.S. at 537. The latter category, deemed a "regulatory taking," is per se compensable under the Fifth Amendment if the regulation "requires an owner to suffer a permanent physical invasion of her property" or "completely deprives an owner of 'all economically beneficial us[e]' of her property." Id. at 538 (quoting Lucas v. S.C. Coastal Council, 505 U.S. 1003, 1019 (1992)).
¶ 23. In this case, E-L does not claim that the Sewerage District's conduct constituted a regulatory *98taking. Rather, E-L claims that the Sewerage District "physically took" E-L's property.15 E-L's brief asserts that the Sewerage District "physically took E-L's groundwater and deprived E-L of the use of that groundwater, resulting in the diminished value of E-L's property." E-L argues that by pumping groundwater from the trench, thereby extracting the groundwater from beneath E-L's adjacent building, the Sewerage District physically oc*99cupied or directly appropriated E-L's groundwater for the construction of the sewer. The removal of the groundwater damaged the building's wood piles, causing the building to settle and reducing the value of E-L's property. Because the groundwater was appropriated in connection with the installation of the sewer, which was created for the public's use and benefit, E-L claims that it is entitled to just compensation under both the Wisconsin Constitution and the U.S. Constitution.
¶ 24. E-L's takings claim must fail. E-L's claim morphed from a complaint that the Sewerage District "physically took portions of the wood piles which rendered them unusable and damaged the E-L Building" into a special verdict form that asked the jury to determine the sum of money that would "justly compensate E-L for the taking of [the] groundwater." The groundwater was indeed that which was extracted by the Sewerage District, but E-L introduced no proof as to the value of the extracted groundwater. Therefore, whether E-L owns the extracted groundwater is inapposite in this case.16 E-L instead seeks damages for the cost to repair its building and for the loss of use of its wood piles. However, the Sewerage District did not physically occupy the property for which E-L seeks compensation, and no government-imposed restriction deprived E-L of all, or substantially all, of the beneficial use of its property. What remains are mere consequential damages to property resulting from governmental action, which are not compensable under Article I, Section 13 of the Wisconsin Constitution or the Takings Clause of the Fifth Amendment.
*1001. Whether E-L owns the extracted groundwater is inapposite in this case.
¶ 25. To determine whether a taking occurred, E-L argues that "the first question that must be addressed is whether property owners have a property right in groundwater." As E-L correctly points out, there can be no takings claim if that which the Sewerage District allegedly took is not E-L's property. However, E-L introduced no proof as to the value of the extracted groundwater. Instead, E-L seeks damages that flow from the allegation that when the Sewerage District pumped groundwater from the trench, the groundwater level beneath E-L's building was lowered, causing the wood piles to dry out and the building to settle. E-L's opening and closing arguments at trial make clear that instead of seeking damages for the value of the extracted groundwater, E-L seeks damages for the cost to repair the wood piles and E-L's building.
¶ 26. In its opening argument, E-L claimed that the Sewerage District took E-L's groundwater but consistently spoke of damage to E-L's wood piles and building:
[The Sewerage District] knew that its partial taking of the property, taking of groundwater would result in a lower value of E-L's building. You take the groundwater, the piles rot, your building sinks, your building is not worth what it was.
As a result of [the Sewerage District] taking groundwater, E-L's property lost value, the entire property. We believe the value of the building lost the value equal to the amount of the repairs that had to be done.
If I'm going to sell a house and you think it's worth $400,000, and I know the roof needs to be repaired for *101$30,000, somebody buying that is going to say, no, it's not $400,000, it's worth 370.
They're going to take out the value. And that's what E-L contends is the amount taken. The loss in the value of their property. And the amount that we're seeking on that is just the amount E-L paid out of pocket.
Everything we show you at trial is for you to see why E-L should be compensated for the taking of the groundwater by [the Sewerage District]. And how much money will equal the value of the groundwater taken by [the Sewerage District] and the harm caused to E-L from the damage to its piles.
¶ 27. Similarly, in its closing argument, E-L reiterated to the jury that E-L was seeking damages for the cost to repair its building:
The next question [on the special verdict form] asks what amount should E-L be paid for its just compensation. And here's where we're going on this.
. . . The reduction in the fair market value was what were the repairs that had to be done on this place.
And the repairs that had to be done are summarized in Exhibit 5117 for you. There's multiple exhibits that have all the invoices, but if you look at Exhibit 51, you're going to find a summary.
*102. . . The number we're asking for when you add up all the number [sic] for the 2003 work, the 2004 work, and the attorney fees, we had to fight, you know, we had an easement that was a very standard easement.18
We had an [sic] to get permission to go underneath and dig under that building....
So, ladies and gentlemen, when you add to the 2,300 from Dahlman, the 2003 expenses, the 2004, and legal fees, the number I come to is 309,388, and that's what I'm going to ask that you find as compensation for the amount of the taking.
¶ 28. It is clear from E-L's opening and closing arguments that instead of seeking damages for the value of the extracted groundwater, E-L seeks damages for the cost to repair the wood piles and E-L's building.
¶ 29. Because E-L introduced no proof as to the value of the extracted groundwater, the court of appeals' reliance on Dahlman is misplaced.19 It is true, as noted *103by the court of appeals, E-L Enters., 316 Wis. 2d 280, ¶ 9, that in Dahlman, this court held that the removal of a building's lateral support by street grading consti tuted a compensable taking. 131 Wis. at 436-40. There is a significant distinction, however, between Dahlman and this case. In Dahlman, we concluded that even though the subsidence of the soil caused no depreciation in the value of the property owners' premises, the *104property owners were still entitled to recover nominal damages for the value of the property taken for public use, which in that case, was soil. Id. In this case, E-L introduced no proof as to the value of the extracted groundwater. Instead, E-L seeks damages for the cost to repair its building and for the loss of use of the wood piles. Because E-L introduced no proof as to the value of the extracted groundwater, we need not decide today whether E-L owns the groundwater. Accordingly, the issue of whether a landowner owns the groundwater beneath his property is not before us today.20
*1052. Mere consequential damage to property resulting from governmental action is not a taking thereof.
¶ 30. Both the United States Supreme Court and this court have consistently recognized that "govern ment action outside the owner's property that causes consequential damages within" does not constitute a taking. Loretto v. Teleprompter Manhattan CATV Corp., *106458 U.S. 419, 428 (1982); see also Howell Plaza II, 92 Wis. 2d at 80; Howell Plaza I, 66 Wis. 2d at 725; Wis. Power & Light, 3 Wis. 2d at 6. "Sec. 13, art. I, like its equivalent in the federal constitution, 'does not undertake, ... to socialize all losses, but only those which result from a taking of property.'" Id. (quoting United States v. Willow River Power Co., 324 U.S. 499, 502 (1945)). As we pointed out previously, the U.S. Constitution and the Wisconsin Constitution, unlike the constitutions of other states,21 provide only that the property of no person shall be "taken" for public use without just compensation; there is no mention of just compensation for property that is merely "damaged" for public use. Howell Plaza II, 92 Wis. 2d at 81; Howell Plaza I, 66 Wis. 2d at 726; Wis. Power & Light, 3 Wis. 2d at 6. Therefore, "in the absence of a physical invasion which ousts the owner from full or partial possession or a total deprivation of beneficial use, mere damage to property (or property value) does not constitute a taking." 2A Julius L. Sackman, Nichols on Eminent Domain § 6.01[11], at 6-19 (3d ed. 2009).
¶ 31. In Wisconsin Power & Light, this court recognized that under the Wisconsin Constitution and the U.S. Constitution, "mere consequential damage to property resulting from government action is not a taking thereof." 3 Wis. 2d at 6. In that case, a utility company alleged a takings claim against Columbia County. Id. at 4. In the process of building a road, the county deposited sand and gravel in a swamp adjacent to the utility *107company's electrical power line and close to one of its towers. Id. at 3. The sand and gravel extended under the surface of the swamp, "displacing the muck and peat so as to create mounds of earth eight to 10 feet high above the surface of the swamp under the power line and to move [the utility company's] tower horizontally and tilt it." Id. As a result, the tower was twisted and bent and had to be replaced. Id.
¶ 32. Like E-L's damaged building and wood piles in this case, the damaged tower "was not taken for public use in the usual sense of those words." Id. at 4. Just as E-L's building and wood piles were not used in connection with the sewer installation, the tower in Wisconsin Power & Light was not used in connection with the county's highway project. Id. Rather, the tower "was merely damaged by accident" as a result of the highway project. Id. Because the issue was one of "only damage, without appropriation to the public purpose," id. at 6, this court concluded that the utility company was unable to recover its damages on the theory of a constitutional taking for public use, id. at 7.22
*108¶ 33. Similarly, in this case, we conclude that the damages E-L suffered are mere consequential damages to property resulting from governmental action, which are not compensable under Article I, Section 13 of the Wisconsin Constitution or the Takings Clause of the Fifth Amendment. E-L seeks damages for the cost to repair its building and the loss of use of the wood piles. *109However, the Sewerage District did not physically occupy E-L's building or wood piles. The Sewerage District did not use the building or wood piles in connection with the sewer installation, and the public obtained no benefit from the damaged building or wood piles. Rather, the wood piles were damaged as a result of the Sewerage District's alleged negligent construction of the sewer. Accordingly, we have in this case "only damage, without appropriation to the public purpose." Id. at 6. Such damage is not recoverable in a takings claim but instead sounds in tort. The circuit court already dismissed E-L's tort claims against the Sewerage District on the grounds of governmental immunity under Wis. Stat. § 893.80(4).23
¶ 34. The court of appeals relied upon our decision in Damkoehler for authority that the Sewerage District's diversion of groundwater that supported the structural integrity of E-L's building constituted a compensable taking, as opposed to mere consequential damage to property for which there is no remedy. See E-L Enters., 316 Wis. 2d 280, ¶¶ 9, 11. In Damkoehler, this court recognized that a landowner has the right to have her property protected against an excavation that causes her property to subside. 124 Wis. at 151. In that case, for purposes of improving the highway, the city of Milwaukee excavated a street adjacent to the plaintiffs property and caused "a considerable part of her land to subside and fall into the street." Id. at 150. We held that the city's actions, in removing the lateral support of the soil of the plaintiffs property, amounted to a compensable taking. *110Id. at 150-51. In so holding, we distinguished the underlying case from our holding in Alexander v. City of Milwaukee, 16 Wis. 247 (1862), in which we concluded that the damages to the plaintiffs property caused by the city's harbor improvements were consequential to the public improvement and were not recoverable from the city. Damkoehler, 124 Wis. at 150. We concluded that the Damkoehler facts fell within an exception to the general rule that consequential damage to property resulting from governmental action is not a taking thereof:
[T]he court [in Alexander\ expressly declare[d] that it [did] not wish 'to be understood as asserting the doctrine that there must be an actual taking or appropriation of the property itself in order to entitle the owner to compensation for damages done him. The city might so build a bridge, or open a street, or excavate a canal along or upon a lot, only appropriating a small amount of it, or perhaps none of the land itself, and yet entirely destroy the value of the property for all purposes' The instant case, in its facts, comes within the exception so distinguished by the court, and cannot be held to be ruled by the decision of that case.
Id. (quoting Alexander, 16 Wis. at 253) (emphasis added). Accordingly, in Damkoehler, the city's actions amounted to a compensable taking because the city, by removing the lateral support of the soil of thé plaintiffs property, caused a substantial part of the plaintiffs land to subside and fall and " 'entirely destroyed] the value of the property for all purposes.'" Id. at 150 (quoting Alexander, 16 Wis. at 253).
¶ 35. The distinction between Damkoehler and this case is significant. In this case, E-L does not claim that by diverting the groundwater beneath E-L's building and thereby reducing the building's structural integrity, the Sewerage District deprived E-L of all, or *111substantially all, of the beneficial use of its building. Nor can E-L so claim. The fact that E-L continued to lease the building throughout this entire period is alone sufficient to show that the value of E-L's building was not destroyed for all purposes. Therefore, this case does not fall under the Damkoehler exception to the well-recognized rule that mere consequential damage to property resulting from governmental action is not a taking thereof.
B. Inverse Condemnation Claim
¶ 36. Wisconsin Stat. § 32.10 is based on Article I, Section 13 of the Wisconsin Constitution and "is the legislative direction as to how the mandate of the just compensation clause is to be fulfilled." Zinn, 112 Wis. 2d at 433. "[A] landowner, who believes that his or her property has been taken by the government without instituting formal condemnation proceedings," may bring an inverse condemnation claim under § 32.10 to recover just compensation for the taking. Id. at 432-33 (recognizing that Wis. Stat. ch. 32 sets out the procedure the government must follow in acquiring private property for public use, and § 32.10 provides a remedy for when the government takes property without first condemning it and paying just compensation under ch. 32). Wisconsin Stat. § 32.10 provides in relevant part:
If any property has been occupied by a person possessing the power of condemnation and if the person has not exercised the power, the owner, to institute condemnation proceedings, shall present a verified petition to the circuit judge of the county wherein the land is situated asking that such proceedings be commenced. ... The court shall make a finding of whether *112the defendant is occupying property of the plaintiff without having the right to do so. If the court determines that the defendant is occupying such property of the plaintiff without having the right to do so, it shall treat the matter in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter ... assuming the plaintiff is not questioning the right of the defendant to condemn the property so occupied.
(Emphasis added.) By its terms, § 32.10 "is designed solely to deal with the traditional exercise of eminent domain by the government: the government has occupied private property, plans to continue such occupation and the landowner is merely requesting just payment for this land." Zinn, 112 Wis. 2d at 433.
¶ 37. To state a cause of action under Wis. Stat. § 32.10 in the absence of actual possession or occupation, this court concluded in Howell Plaza I that the facts alleged must "show that the property owner has been deprived of all, or practically all, of the beneficial use of his property or of any part thereof." 66 Wis. 2d at 730. We later clarified that holding in Howell Plaza II, concluding that short of actual occupation, there must be a legal restraint by the condemning authority that deprives the owner of all, or substantially all, of the beneficial use of his property. 92 Wis. 2d at 81-82, 87-89 (affirming circuit court's judgment in favor of the State Highway Commission in the property owner's inverse condemnation action under Wis. Stat. § 32.10 because if the property owner "was in fact unable to develop its property, it was not due to any restriction imposed upon it by the commission"). Therefore, under this court's jurisprudence, in order to state a claim of inverse condemnation under § 32.10, the facts alleged must show either that there was an actual physical occupation by the condemn*113ing authority or that a government-imposed restriction deprived the owner of all, or substantially all, of the beneficial use of his property.
¶ 38. Still, when a property owner alleges a constitutional taking, the remedy provided by Wis. Stat. § 32.10 is not necessary to enforce the right to just compensation. Zinn, 112 Wis. 2d at 438. The property owner has stated a claim based directly on Article I, Section 13 of the Wisconsin Constitution. Id.
¶ 39. In this case, E-L has failed to establish an inverse condemnation claim under Wis. Stat. § 32.10. It is undisputed that the Sewerage District did not physically occupy the property for which E-L seeks compensation, its building or the wood piles, and no government-imposed restriction deprived E-L of all, or substantially all, of the beneficial use of its property.24 Therefore, the remedy provided in § 32.10 is simply inapplicable.
*114¶ 40. Because E-L has failed to establish an inverse condemnation claim under Wis. Stat. § 32.10, E-L is not entitled to its attorney fees and costs under Wis. Stat. § 32.28(3).
IV CONCLUSION
¶ 41. In summary, we need not decide today the panoply of issues that relate to an alleged taking of groundwater. In this case, E-L introduced no proof as to *115the value of the extracted groundwater. Instead, E-L seeks damages for the cost to repair its building and for the loss of use of its wood piles. The Sewerage District did not physically occupy the property for which E-L seeks compensation, and no government-imposed restriction deprived E-L of all, or substantially all, of the beneficial use of its property. Accordingly, what remains are mere consequential damages to property resulting from governmental action, which are not compensable under constitutional takings law. The damage to E-L's building was caused by the alleged negligent construction of the sewer; hence, E-L's claim sounds in tort and seeks damages for which the Sewerage District is not liable under the doctrine of governmental immunity. For the same reasons, we further conclude that E-L has failed to establish an inverse condemnation claim under Wis. Stat. § 32.10. E-L is therefore not entitled to attorney fees and costs under Wis. Stat. ch. 32. Accordingly, this court reverses the decision of the court of appeals.
By the Court. — The decision of the court of appeals is reversed.
E-L Enters., Inc. v. Milwaukee Metro. Sewerage Dist., 2009 WI App 15, 316 Wis. 2d 280, 763 N.W.2d 231.
The issue of whether the Sewerage District's conduct constituted a taking under the U.S. Constitution was not invoked, argued, or appealed below. However, pursuant to our order, the parties briefed the issue before this court.
All subsequent references to the Wisconsin Statutes are to the 2007-08 version unless otherwise indicated.
Wisconsin Stat. § 32.10, "Condemnation proceedings instituted by property owner," provides:
If any property has been occupied by a person possessing the power of condemnation and if the person has not exercised the power, the owner, to institute condemnation proceedings, shall present a verified petition to the circuit judge of the county wherein the land is situated asking that such proceedings be commenced. The petition shall describe the land, state the person against which the condemnation proceedings are instituted and the use to which it has been put or is designed to have been put by the person against which the proceedings are instituted. A copy of the petition shall be served upon the person who has occupied petitioner's land, or interest in land. The petition shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the circuit court and thereupon the matter shall be deemed an action at law and at issue, with petitioner as plaintiff and the occupying person as defendant. The court shall make a finding of whether the defendant is occupying property of the plaintiff without having the right to do so. If the court determines that the defendant is occupying such property of the plaintiff without having the right to do so, it shall treat the matter in accordance with the provisions of this suhchapter assuming the plaintiff has received from the defendant a jurisdictional offer and has failed to accept the same and assuming the plaintiff is not questioning the right of the defendant to condemn the property so occupied.
Pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 32.28(3), "litigation expenses shall be awarded to the condemnee if: . .. (c) The judgment is for the plaintiff in an action under s. 32.10."
E-L sought damages for the cost to repair its building and the attorney fees and costs E-L incurred litigating with the neighbor who owned the adjacent alley and refused E-L access to make the repairs. At trial, E-L introduced proof of those damages. We are cognizant of the fact that the jury was asked to determine the sum of money that would "justly compensate E-L for the taking of the groundwater"; however, there was no proof introduced at trial as to the value of the extracted groundwater. See infra Part III.A.l.
We have in this case "only damage, without appropriation to the public purpose," and therefore, E-L is unable to recover its damages on the theory of a constitutional taking for public use. See Wis. Power & Light Co. v. Columbia Cnty., 3 Wis. 2d 1, 6-7, 87 N.W.2d 279 (1958).
See the Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage District website http://v2.mmsd.com/deeptunnelhistory.aspx (providing the history of the Deep Tunnel System); http://v2.mmsd.com/ deeptunnelhowitworks.aspx (explaining how the Deep Tunnel works).
It is undisputed that neither BCI/TCI, the construction trench, nor the Sewerage District ever entered E-L's property.
Before trial, CNA settled E-L's negligence and nuisance claims in a confidential agreement.
Wisconsin Stat. § 893.80(4) provides:
No suit may be brought against any volunteer fire company organized under ch. 213, political corporation, governmental subdivision or any agency thereof for the intentional torts of its officers, officials, agents or employees nor may any suit be brought against such corporation, subdivision or agency or volunteer fire company or against its officers, officials, agents or employees for acts done in the exercise of legislative, quasi-legislative, judicial or quasi-judicial functions.
E-L did not appeal the circuit court's dismissal of its negligence and nuisance claims against the Sewerage District; accordingly, that issue is not before this court.
Within its cause of action for "inverse condemnation," E-L alleged both a constitutional takings claim and an inverse condemnation claim under Wis. Stat. § 32.10, although § 32.10 was not expressly referenced.
In its order on July 19, 2007, before trial, the circuit court denied E-L's request for attorney fees and costs on the grounds that E-L did not have a claim for inverse condemnation under Wis. Stat. § 32.10. After the trial, the circuit court reconsidered its earlier order and decided that E-L was entitled to attorney fees and costs under ch. 32. Accordingly, E-L's entitlement to attorney fees and costs is an issue before this court on appeal.
The Sewerage District objected to the circuit court's instruction that "[g]roundwater is considered property of the person who owns the land under which it flows":
*93[The Court]:... [The Sewerage District] deleted the sentence or propose to delete the sentence, "Groundwater is considered property of the person who owns the land under which it flows."
That statement is true. It's not their exclusive property. They don't have the right to exclude others from using it, but they do have the right to use it, and Michels [State v. Michels Pipeline Constr., Inc., 63 Wis. 2d 278, 217 N.W.2d 339 (1974)] recognizes that they have a property interest in it.
So as a matter of fact, it is E-L's property, not its property alone, but it is E-L's property Otherwise if E-L doesn't have any property interest in here, game over. This case ends. If it has no property interest in it, they cannot make a claim for just compensation.
[Attorney James H. Petersen, counsel for the Sewerage District]: Your Honor, I guess that's precisely the point the District is getting at. Groundwater is a common good. If you have property, you have a right to use the groundwater that passes underneath your land, and even some of the groundwater that's under your neighbor's land, by virtue of your property ownership.
But it doesn't mean that that groundwater is yours to the exclusion of others.
[The Court]: I'm not saying that either, and my instructions don't say that either.
[Atty. Petersen]: These instructions allow that. They allow that to be argued.
[The Court]: First of all, it doesn't matter whether they allow that or not. The jury is not being asked to find that this was E-L's property exclusively
In fact, the jury is being instructed to the opposite, that both the District and E-L and anybody else in that neighborhood had the right to use that property as long as they used it reasonably.
See supra note 12.
In its brief, E-L "asserts that the [Sewerage] District's taking was a physical, not regulatory, taking." Although E-L asserts that it is not claiming a regulatory taking, E-L's brief contradicts that by likening the Sewerage District's conduct to government regulatory action analyzed in Loretto v. Teleprompter Manhattan CATV Corp., 458 U.S. 419 (1982).
Loretto is an example of one of two categories of regulatory action that is deemed a per se taking under the Fifth Amendment. See Lingle v. Chevron U.S.A. Inc., 544 U.S. 528, 538 (2005) (citing Loretto as an example of a regulatory taking); Lucas v. S.C. Coastal Council, 505 U.S. 1003, 1015 (1992) (same). In Loretto, the United States Supreme Court held that a New York law requiring landlords to permit cable companies to install cable facilities in apartment buildings amounted to a permanent physical invasion of private property and thus required compensation as a matter of law. 458 U.S. 419. A permanent physical invasion of private property, like the installation of cable facilities occupying portions of a property owner's roof, is different than the "classic taking in which government directly appropriates private property or ousts the owner from his domain." Lingle, 544 U.S. at 539. The former is a per se taking that requires just compensation, id. at 538, "without regard to the public interests that it may serve," Loretto, 458 U.S. at 426; see also Lucas, 505 U.S. at 1015 (stating that permanent physical invasions require compensation "no matter how weighty the public purpose behind it").
At oral argument, E-L reiterated that its claim is based on the classic, not regulatory, category of taking: the Sewerage District's actual occupation or direct appropriation of E-L's property.
While we recognize the significance of this issue, it is our position that its resolution is better reserved for a future case.
E-L's repeated reference to Exhibit 51 as a summary of its damages makes it readily apparent that E-L seeks damages for the cost to repair its building, as opposed to the value of the extracted groundwater. Exhibit 51, a five-page document titled "Costs to Repair the Valley Business Center [or E-L's building]," is a comprehensive list of the repairs made to E-L's building and the costs thereof. The document has a "Detail" list of the repairs made, which includes 'Window work," "Foundation, Interior ...," *102"Installed baseboard, etc.," "Electrical work for wall," 'Wall repairs," "Demo piping, etc.," and like repairs.
The circuit court instructed the jury that it was permitted to award E-L, as part of its just compensation, the attorney fees that E-L incurred in litigation with the neighbor who owned the adjacent alley and refused E-L access to make the building repairs. We conclude that the circuit court's instruction was improper. As the circuit court and the court of appeals correctly noted, under negligence law, when the defendant's wrongful acts caused the plaintiff to expend legal fees with another party, the expenditure is recoverable against the defendant. See Weinhagen v. Hayes, 179 Wis. 62, 65, 190 N.W. 1002 (1922). However, in this case, the Sewerage District is not liable in negligence.
E-L also relies on Dahlman v. City of Milwaukee, 131 Wis. 427, 111 N.W. 675 (1907), but not for the same proposition as the *103court of appeals did. E-L relies on Dahlman. as Wisconsin Supreme Court precedent that "allows the recovery of property losses accompanying a taking of private property where there are foreseeable but unintended consequences." To that end, E-L also relies on Price v. Marinette & Menominee Paper Co., 197 Wis. 25, 221 N.W. 381 (1928). Similarly, in its order denying the Sewerage District's motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, the circuit court cited Dahlman and Price, stating that "at least twice the supreme court has found a taking in circumstances in which the plaintiffs property losses although foreseeable were nonetheless unintended."
We reject E-L's and the circuit court's characterization of Dahlman and Price. In Dahlman, this court concluded that because a property owner, as against the city, is entitled to the lateral support of the soil underlying the owner's property, there was a taking of the soil when the city removed the lateral support in the course of street grading. 131 Wis. at 439-40. Our conclusion that the city's actions constituted a taking hinged on the property owner's right to the lateral support of the soil, id., not on the foreseeability of the property loss. Likewise, in Price, this court held that the plaintiff established a claim under the then-existing inverse condemnation statute when the construction and maintenance of dams across the Menominee River caused the river to overflow onto the plaintiffs land, moistening the soil to the point of destroying the land's agricultural value. 197 Wis. at 26, 28. In that case, our conclusion that the plaintiff stated a takings claim centered on the plaintiffs allegation that the flood waters physically invaded the plaintiffs property and entirely destroyed its value, id.; again, the foreseeability of the property loss played no part in the analysis.
"While we take no position on the issue of whether a landowner owns the groundwater beneath his property, we nevertheless determine that the circuit court erred by instructing the jury that "[glroundwater is considered property of the person who owns the land under which it flows." Contrary to the circuit court's contention, the jury instruction is not consistent with Michels Pipeline, 63 Wis. 2d 278. In that case, the State claimed that the defendants (the Sewerage District, Michels Pipeline Construction, and Milwaukee County) created a public nuisance by pumping water from wells in order to sufficiently dewater the soil to permit tunneling for construction of a sewer. Id. at 281-82. According to the complaint, citizens "were caused great hardship by the drying up of wells, decreasing capacity and water quality in others, and by the cracking of foundations, basement walls and driveways, due to subsidence of the soil." Id. at 282. Concluding that the complaint stated facts sufficient to constitute a cause of action in tort, this court adopted section 858A of the Restatement (Second) of Torts, providing that a landowner may not withdraw groundwater in a manner that causes unreasonable harm to another's property. Id. at 302-03.
Our holding in Michels Pipeline recognized that while a landowner is permitted to withdraw groundwater for a beneficial purpose, he or she may be liable in tort for excessively withdrawing groundwater to the detriment of another's property. The circuit court dismissed E-L's negligence and nuisance claims *105against the Sewerage District on the basis of governmental immunity. As we previously noted, supra note 10, E-L did not appeal the dismissal of those tort claims.
Despite the dismissal of E-L's negligence and nuisance claims against the Sewerage District, the jury was nevertheless asked to determine if the Sewerage District's removal of groundwater from E-L's property was "unreasonable." As we have just explained, the withdrawal of groundwater in a manner that causes unreasonable harm to another's property may give rise to a tort claim. Because the circuit court dismissed the tort claims against the Sewerage District, the jury should not have been asked to evaluate the reasonableness of the groundwater removal.
Likewise, the jury was erroneously asked to determine whether the Sewerage District's removal of groundwater from E-L's property was a taking. Whether government conduct constitutes a taking of private property without just compensation is a question of law. R.W. Docks & Slips v. State, 2001 WI 73, ¶ 13, 244 Wis. 2d 497, 628 N.W.2d 781. While a jury may properly be asked to determine questions of fact pertinent to a takings claim, e.g., the amount of damages that will justly compensate a property owner for a taking, see Stelpflug v. Town Bd., Town of Waukesha, Cnty. of Waukesha, 2000 WI 81, ¶ 26, 236 Wis. 2d 275, 612 N.W.2d 700, the ultimate determination of whether government conduct constitutes a taking is a question of law that is not properly placed before a jury.
In this case, the special verdict form, which questioned the jury as to reasonableness and causation, was framed in terms of a negligence claim rather than a takings claim.
For example, Article I, Section 15 of the Illinois Constitution provides: "Private property shall not be taken or damaged for public use without just compensation as provided by law." (Emphasis added.) For a list of other states with similar constitutional provisions, see 2A Julius L. Sackman, Nichols on Eminent Domain § 6.01[11], at 6-22 n.52 (3d ed. 2009).
To reach its conclusion that the county's conduct did not constitute a taking, this court gave weight to the following facts:
[T]he tower had no utility, direct or indirect, to the highway project, that the county did not need or desire the tower or the land on which it rested and did not intend to acquire or affect either the tower or the land, that the public obtained no benefit from injuring it, that the county had no reason to anticipate that damage would result from its acts, and that the injury to the tower was purely accidental.
Wis. Power & Light, 3 Wis. 2d at 7.
Here, the court of appeals erroneously distinguished those facts from the facts in this case to conclude that the Sewerage District's conduct "is on the 'taking' side of the line recognized by *108Wisconsin Power & Light." E-L Enters., 316 Wis. 2d 280, ¶ 10. The court of appeals first reasoned that "unlike the situation in Wisconsin Power & Light, the Sewerage District had 'reason to anticipate that damage would result from its acts.'" Id. Specifically, evidence "indicated that the Sewerage District was aware of a potential groundwater problem in connection with buildings near the project and, indeed, had directed its contractor to be careful to avoid damage to those buildings as the result of 'removal or disturbance of groundwater Id. The court of appeals further reasoned that "unlike the situation in Wisconsin Power & Light, where 'the public obtained no benefit from injuring' the tower,... draining the groundwater facilitated the Sewerage District's construction" and therefore had utility to the sewer project. Id.
The court of appeals' reasoning is flawed in two respects. First, the fact that this court recognized in Wisconsin Power & Light that "the county had no reason to anticipate that damage would result from its acts," 3 Wis. 2d at 7, does not establish that foreseeability of damages supports a takings claim. To the contrary, we expressly declined to place significance on any of the Wisconsin Power & Light facts standing alone. Id. Rather, we concluded that the facts "collectively" negated a taking in the constitutional sense. Id. Second, the court of appeals' distinction between this case and Wisconsin Power & Light presupposes that E-L is seeking damages for the extracted groundwater. As we pointed out previously, E-L is seeking damages for the cost to repair its building and the loss of use of its wood piles. Accordingly, the issue here is not whether the public obtained a benefit from the draining of the groundwater but instead whether the public obtained a benefit from the damaged wood piles. The public did not.
Still, E-L is not without a remedy for the damage to its building caused by the alleged negligent construction of the sewer. Subject to the parties' confidential agreement, E-L has already been compensated an undisclosed amount by CNA, the insurer for the now defunct contractor.
In concluding that the Sewerage District's conduct constituted an "occupation" under Wis. Stat. § 32.10, the court of appeals explained that "[t]he law in Wisconsin is settled that an entity with the power of condemnation may 'occupy' land without physical entrance onto that land." E-L Enters., 316 Wis. 2d 280, ¶ 8. In particular, the court of appeals cited Wikel v. Department of Transportation, 2001WI App 214, 247 Wis. 2d 626, 635 N.W.2d 213, for the proposition that "there may be a taking when the entity with the power of condemnation does something outside of the affected property that adversely impacts the owner's use of that property." E-L Enters., 316 Wis. 2d 280, ¶ 8.
In Wikel, the court of appeals reversed the circuit court's order dismissing the plaintiffs petition for inverse condemnation under Wis. Stat. § 32.10. 247 Wis. 2d 626, ¶ 1. The Wisconsin Department of Transportation (DOT) condemned a five-foot strip of plaintiffs land for the purpose of constructing a retaining wall to prevent groundwater from entering a new highway. Id., ¶ 3. The plaintiff accepted $4,000 from the DOT as just compen*114sation for the acquisition of that strip of her property. Id. However, according to the plaintiffs petition, in connection with the construction of the retaining wall, the DOT caused structural damage to her residence, rendering her property valueless. Id., ¶ 4.
As the court of appeals recognized," 'Land may be taken for public purposes, within the meaning of the constitutional provision, without actual occupancy or seizure by the taker.'" Id., ¶ 12 (citing Wis. Power & Light, 3 Wis. 2d at 4; Eberle v. Dane Cnty. Bd. of Adjustment, 227 Wis. 2d 609, 621, 595 N.W.2d 730 (1999)). The court of appeals rejected the DOT's argument that the plaintiffs petition was insufficient because it failed to establish either that the government occupied the alleged damaged property or that the property was valueless. Wikel, 247 Wis. 2d 626, ¶ 11. The plaintiff was "entitled to the opportunity to prove her allegation that the [DOT's] actions rendered her property 'uninhabitable and unsaleable' and therefore, constituted a 'total, permanent taking.'" Id., ¶ 17.
Wikel is readily distinguishable from this case. In Wikel, the plaintiff claimed that the DOT's construction of the retaining wall rendered her property "uninhabitable and unsaleable" and therefore constituted a "total, permanent taking." Id., ¶ 4. As discussed supra Part III.A.2, in this case, E-L does not claim that the Sewerage District's diversion of groundwater beneath E-L's building, which reduced the building's structural integrity, rendered E-L's building valueless. E-L cannot so claim because it is undisputed that E-L continued to lease the building throughout this entire period.

=== CASE 9738270 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:47:23.261756+00 ===

ANN WALSH BRADLEY,
¶ 42. J. (concurring). I agree with the majority that mere consequential damage to property resulting from government action is not a taking. Majority op., ¶ 24.1 also agree with the majority that the essence of this case sounds in tort. Id., ¶ 5. Given the circuit court's conclusion that the District is immune from tort liability, I conclude that the District is not hable for these damages to E-L's property.
¶ 43. Over three decades ago, this court established that a property owner's remedy for unreasonable interference with its use of groundwater sounds in tort. State v. Michels Pipeline Constr., Inc., 63 Wis. 2d 278, 217 N.W.2d 339 (1974). The Michels Pipeline court adopted the portion of the then-existing draft of the Restatement *116(Second) Torts which addressed liability for use of groundwater. In relevant part, that section provided:
A possessor of land or his grantee who withdraws ground water from the land and uses it for a beneficial purpose is not subject to liability for interference with the use of water by another, unless
(a) The withdrawal of water causes unreasonable harm through lowering the water table or reducing artesian pressure....
Restatement (Second) Torts, Tentative Draft No. 17, April 26, 1971, § 858A.1
¶ 44. Under the circumstances presented here, the withdrawal of groundwater may have caused unreasonable harm to E-L. But the remedy for this wrong sounds not in takings, but in tort.2
¶ 45. Indeed, as this case was presented to the jury, E-L's "takings" claim strongly resembled a tort claim. E-L argued that the District should have foreseen the harm and could have taken measures to avoid it. Additionally, E-L sought as damages the amount of money that it lost in rent and the amount of money that it paid out of pocket to repair the building.3
*117¶ 46. Further, portions of the jury instructions and special verdict also resembled a tort inquiry. For instance, the jury was instructed to determine whether the District's use of groundwater was unreasonable:
The burden is on E-L to satisfy you by the greater weight of the credible evidence, to a reasonable certainty, that the District's use of E-L's groundwater was unreasonable. In determining whether the District's use of E-L's groundwater was unreasonable, you should consider the District's need for the groundwater, E-L's need for the groundwater, the cost to E-L, if any, of the District's use of the groundwater, the cost to the District, if any, of not using the groundwater or of replacing the groundwater and whether the District's purposes for using E-L's groundwater could have been achieved through other means.
The reasonableness or unreasonableness of the District's actions is not a takings question — it is a tort question.
¶ 47. The circuit court determined that the District is immune from tort liability. E-L's attempt to dress up its tort claim in takings clothes to circumvent the District's immunity is unavailing. Accordingly, I respectfully concur.
This section was modified slightly before it was approved by the American Law Institute in 1979 as Restatement (Second) Torts § 858.
In addition to filing tort and takings claims against the District, E-L also filed tort claims against the insurance company that insured BCI/TCI, the now-defunct subcontractor that constructed the tunnel. E-L and BCI/TCI settled the dispute for an undisclosed sum of money. Based on this record, it is unclear whether E-L has already been compensated in whole, or in part, for the cost of repairing its building.
At closing arguments, E-L's attorney explained: "And the cost to E-L in the District's use of that groundwater... it's *117roughly $309,000 is what it's cost E-L, plus loss of rent, what it's cost E-L because of the removal of the groundwater outside the trench by the District."
When there has been a partial taking, compensation is typically measured as either (1) the fair market value of the portion of the property that was taken; or (2) "severance damages," measured as the difference between the fair market value of the property before the taking and the fair market value of the remaining parcel after the taking. Russell M. Ware, The Law of Damages in Wisconsin § 19.12 (5th ed. 2010); Arents v. ANR Pipeline Co., 2005 WI App 61, ¶ 14, 281 Wis. 2d 173, 696 N.W.2d 194.

=== CASE 9738271 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:47:23.265891+00 ===

*118DAVID T. PROSSER, J.
¶ 48. (dissenting). At trial, a jury found that E-L Enterprises, Inc. (E-L) suffered $309,388 in damages caused by the Metropolitan Milwaukee Sewerage District (MMSD). The majority does not dispute the accuracy of these findings. Rather, it concludes that E-L may not collect the damages awarded because they are "consequential damages" that are not available to an injured party under Wisconsin takings law.
¶ 49. Put in context, this ruling not only overturns a reasonable jury verdict but also deprives E-L of any meaningful remedy for its injury. This case, then, is important beyond the specific issues decided. It exposes the chasm between government wrongdoing and citizen redress. For the reasons stated below, I respectfully dissent.
I
¶ 50. In the 1980s, MMSD undertook construction of deep tunnels to hold sewage until it can be treated, thereby reducing water pollution. As part of this project, MMSD constructed the Cross Town 7 Collector System (CT-7) tunnel, which was located next to E-L's property. Before construction, MMSD detected the presence of groundwater in the vicinity. To construct the tunnel, project managers deemed it necessary to remove groundwater from the trench that would house the tunnel.
¶ 51. In the process of removing groundwater from the soil around the tunnel, MMSD also removed groundwater from E-L's property. The loss of groundwater caused 14 wood piles that were supporting E-L's building to rot. The jury determined that $309,388 was just compensation for E-L's costs to repair the piles.
*119¶ 52. On June 23, 2004, after repairing the piles, E-L filed suit against MMSD and CNA Insurance Companies, the insurers for the private contractors that participated in the construction of the deep tunnel project. E-L's complaint alleged five causes of action: (1) negligence against MMSD; (2) continuing nuisance against MMSD; (3) inverse condemnation;1 (4) negligence against CNA; and (5) continuing nuisance against CNA. E-L settled with CNA prior to the trial of the case.
¶ 53. E-L did not enumerate five causes of action to increase its damages. E-L pled five causes of action because it was confronted with the challenge of grounding its claim for recovery in traditional legal theory. Because the facts of the case were unusual, the appropriate theory for the case was uncertain.
¶ 54. In its complaint, E-L presented its inverse condemnation claim as follows:
51. MMSD's operation and maintenance of the Deep Tunnel and the 48 inch sewer pipes which were constructed as a part of the Cross Town 7 Collector System physically took portions of the woodpiles which rendered them unusable and damaged the E-L Building.
52. MMSD's conduct constitutes a taking of E-L Enterprises' property for public use. Specifically, MMSD's conduct constitutes a physical invasion that *120deprived and continues to deprive E-L Enterprises of all beneficial use of the wood piles in violation of the Fifth Amendment of the United States Constitution and Article I, Section 13 of the Wisconsin Constitution.
(Emphasis added.)
¶ 55. By the time the case went to the jury, E-L had shifted the theory of its takings claim: MMSD did not "take" E-L's wood piles; MMSD "took" E-L's groundwater, thereby causing damage. The jury ultimately answered "yes" to the verdict question: "Was the District's removal of groundwater from E-L's property a taking?"
II
¶ 56. E-L also claimed negligence and nuisance. Both of these claims were dismissed by the circuit court. Initially, in March of 2006, the circuit court refused to dismiss these claims on grounds of governmental immunity. At the summary judgment stage, MMSD argued that its acts were "discretionary," not "ministerial," and therefore it was immune from liability. E-L, on the other hand, pointed to DNR-approved and -mandated groundwater depletion specifications, which prohibited MMSD and its contractors from lowering groundwater below existing levels.
¶ 57. Based on E-L's argument, the circuit court initially concluded that "the act for which E-L seeks to hold MMSD liable — exceeding the groundwater depletion limitation — constitutes a transgression in which MMSD had no discretion to engage." Relying on Lister v. Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System, 72 Wis. 2d 282, 301, 240 N.W.2d 610 (1976), the court concluded that "nothing remained] for judgment or discretion." The court, therefore, denied MMSD's summary judgment motion.
*121¶ 58. In February of 2007, nearly one year after denying MMSD's motion for summary judgment and six months before the case proceeded to trial, the court revisited its earlier decision. In the course of deciding other motions, the court acknowledged a different provision in the same DNR-approved and -mandated specification. This provision required the contractor to control groundwater to perform work in the trenches in the dry, and to remove water when concrete is being placed and pipe is being laid. The circuit court concluded that "[discretion is conferred [by the specification] because MMSD must exercise some judgment on how to obey both the duty to keep the excavation dry and safe as well as its duty not to draw the water down too low." Acknowledging that it made this ruling "relatively late in the game," the court dismissed both the negligence and nuisance claims. As a result, the parties proceeded to trial on the inverse condemnation claim alone.
¶ 59. Query: Isn't the natural remedy for the wrong in this case to be found in the law of negligence? Not if the court persists in unreasonably broad notions of governmental immunity and unreasonably narrow exceptions for tort recovery.2 In any event, because the jury awarded E-L damages under a different legal theory from negligence, questions about governmental immunity were not raised in the petition for review, and the case before us involves only questions pertaining to the inverse condemnation claim.
Ill
¶ 60. In the absence of an adequate remedy in tort law, the only remedy available to E-L comes from the *122Takings Clauses of the United States and Wisconsin Constitutions.3 Yet the majority rejects E-L's takings claim, reasoning that, even if the removal of E-L's groundwater was a taking, the damages E-L seeks are consequential damages, which are unavailable under takings law. In my view, this analysis interprets the scope of damages under takings law too narrowly.
¶ 61. In Luber v. Milwaukee County, 47 Wis. 2d 271, 276, 177 N.W.2d 380 (1970), this court rejected the argument that consequential damages arising from a taking were "to be suffered in legal silence." The court noted that the rule against consequential damages in eminent-domain cases had been attacked on the grounds that the rule ignores the "economic implications of the situation." Id. at 279 (quoting Frank A. Aloi & Arthur Abba Goldberg, A Reexamination of Value, Good Will, and Business Losses in Eminent Domain, 53 Cornell L. Rev. 604, 631 (1968)). The court held:
The importance of allowing recovery for incidental losses has increased significantly since condemnation powers were initially exercised in this country. During the early use of such power, land was usually undeveloped and takings seldom created incidental losses. Thus the former interpretation of the 'just compensation' provision of our constitution seldom resulted in the infliction of incidental losses. The rule allowing fair market value for only the physical property actually taken created no great hardship. In modern society, however, condemnation proceedings are necessitated *123by numerous needs of society and are initiated by numerous authorized bodies. Due to the fact people are often congregated in given areas and that we have reached a state wherein re-development is necessary, commercial and industrial property is often taken in condemnation proceedings. When such property is taken, incidental damages are very apt to occur and in some cases exceed the fair market value of the actual physical property taken.
Id. at 279-80.
¶ 62. In this case, although E-L seeks recovery for damages beyond the value of the groundwater, it does not go so far as to seek the kinds of consequential damages sought in Luber. Luber dealt with consequential damages beyond the reduction in "fair market value" of the property — the landowner sought lost rent. In this case, however, the jury awarded E-L the reduction in fair market value of its property. The circuit court instructed the jury:
If the government takes private property for a public use, the government must pay the owner the fair market value of the property that is taken. If only part of an owner's property is taken, and if taking part of the property reduces the value of the property that remains, the government must pay the difference between the fair market value of the property before the taking and the fair market value of the property after the taking.
¶ 63. Based on this instruction, the jury determined that E-L should be compensated in the amount of $309,388. Even though E-L presented this evidence in terms of the cost of repairing the piles, the cost of these repairs amounted to the reduction in value to E-L's property that resulted from MMSD's taking. The majority now reverses the decision of a properly in*124structed jury that determined the amount of compensation based on the evidence before it.
¶ 64. This point is further emphasized by E-L's initial claim that the "taking" was the taking of "portions of the wood piles" supporting the building. Whether MMSD "took" the wood piles or "took" the groundwater, the result was the same: MMSD took a portion of E-L's property, causing a reduction in fair market value to the remainder of that property.
¶ 65. Two early Wisconsin cases support the conclusion that damages are available in the circumstances here. In Damkoehler v. City of Milwaukee, 124 Wis. 144, 145, 151, 101 N.W. 706 (1904), the city removed the lateral support for a building when grading an adjacent street, causing portions of the lot "to subside and slide into the excavated street." The court rejected the argument that the damages caused by the excavation of highways were "purely consequential," and permitted recovery under the Takings Clause. Id. at 152. The same situation arose in Dahlman v. City of Milwaukee, 131 Wis. 427, 439-440, 111 N.W. 675 (1907), and the court adopted the holding in Damkoehler for the proposition that "where a substantial part of the adjoining owner's land falls into the street by reason of the removal of its lateral support in the course of grading, there was a taking of the soil for public purposes and not a mere consequential damage." Id.
¶ 66. In upholding the jury verdict in the present case, the court of appeals correctly saw "no logical basis to distinguish between the removal of soil providing lateral support and the diversion of groundwater performing essentially the same function — that is, supporting the structural integrity of a building like that owned by E-L Enterprises." E-L Enters., Inc. v. Milwaukee Metro. Sewerage Dist., 2009 WI App 15, ¶ 11, 316 *125Wis. 2d 280, 763 N.W.2d 231. In neither Damkoehler nor Dahlman were the landowners seeking compensation for the specific physical property "taken" by the city: in both cases, the damage was caused by the city's act of grading a street. In both cases, like this case, a pattern of events took place: (1) the government performed an action that "took" part of the landowner's property; and (2) the direct consequence of that taking was a reduction in the value of the landowner's property.
¶ 67. The majority distinguishes Damkoehler on grounds that the landowner lost the entire value of the property. The court in Damkoehler, however, did not limit its holding in that way. It required that the city, in grading a street, "cause no unnecessary damage to an adjoining landowner," and asserted that the city's actions resulted in a taking "to the extent of such injury." Damkoehler, 124 Wis. at 150-51 (emphasis added).
¶ 68. Furthermore, the court in Dahlman held that a takings claim could be maintained "where a substantial part" of the property fell into the street. Dahlman, 131 Wis. at 440-41. In Dahlman, the jury found that the loss of soil "caused no depreciation in the value of the premises." Id. at 439. Yet the court permitted the landowner to recover nominal damages against the city. Id. at 440. This case is legally indistinguishable from Dahlman, save that the jury here determined that the fair market value of E-L's property was reduced by $309,388.
¶ 69. The Damkoehler case has been cited in other jurisdictions, including South Carolina. In White v. Southern Railway Co., 140 S.E. 560, 564 (1927), the South Carolina court wrote:
The word "taken" in the constitutional provision cited is not limited in its meaning and application to cases in *126which there is an actual physical seizure and holding of property, but is broad enough to include cases in which the access to abutting premises is obstructed by the change of grade of a highway or there is such physical injury to property as results in destruction or substantial impairment of its usefulness. See 20 C.J. 697, and the following cases therein cited: Nevins v. Peoria, 41 Ill. 502, 89 Am. Dec. 392; Tinker v. Rockford, 36 Ill. App. 460; Hendershott v. Ottumwa, 46 Iowa 658,26 Am. Rep. 182; Offutt v. Montgomery County, 94 Md. 115, 50 A. 419; Vanderlip v. Grand Rapids, 73 Mich. 522, 41 N.W. 677, 3 L.R.A. 247, 16 Am. St. Rep. 597; Broadwell v. Kansas, 75 Mo. 213, 42 Am. Rep. 406; Mosier v. Oregon Nav. Co., 39 Or. 256, 64 P 453, 87 Am. St. Rep. 652; Stearns v. Richmond, 88 Va. 992, 14 S.E. 847, 29 Am. St. Rep. 758; Kincaid v. Seattle, 74 Wash. 617, 134 P 504, 135 P 820; Damkoehler v. Milwaukee, 124 Wis. 144, 101 N.W. 706; Forbes v. Orange, 85 Conn. 255, 82 A. 559; Walters v. Baltimore [& Ohio R.]R. Co., 120 Md. 644, 88 A. 47, 46 L.R.A. (N.S.) 1128; Coyne v. Memphis, 118 Tenn. 651, 102 S.W. 355; Hamilton County v. Rape, 101 Tenn. 222, 47 S.W. 416.
IV
¶ 70. At the end of the twentieth century, the United States Supreme Court observed that the Takings Clause of the United States Constitution prohibits government "from forcing some people alone to bear public burdens which, in all fairness and justice, should be borne by the public as a whole." Dolan v. City of Tigard, 512 U.S. 374, 384 (1994) (quoting Armstrong v. United States, 364 U.S. 40, 49 (1960)). The Damkoehler court said much the same thing 90 years earlier:
We are not unmindful that other jurisdictions hold that damages resulting from landslides caused by excavations on highways in the course of improving them for public use are purely consequential, and not recover*127able by the owner. We find the doctrine of liability under such circumstances more consonant with reason and justice ....
Damkoehler, 124 Wis. at 152 (emphasis added).
¶ 71. Because the majority expects E-L to suffer in legal silence, I respectfully dissent.
"Inverse condemnation" describes "a cause of action against a governmental defendant to recover the value of property which has been taken in fact by the governmental defendant, even though no formal exercise of the power of eminent domain has been attempted by the taking agency." U.S. v. Clarke, 445 U.S. 253, 257 (1980) (quoting D. Hagman, Urban Planning & Land Development Control Law 328 (1971)).
See Umansky v. ABC Ins. Co., 2009 WI 82, ¶¶ 37-81, 319 Wis. 2d 622, 769 N.W.2d 1 (Prosser, J., concurring).
See U.S. Const, amend. V ("[N]or shall private property be taken for public use without just compensation"); Wis. Const, art. 1, § 13 ("The property of no person shall be taken for public use without just compensation therefor."). The majority decides that E-L's damages are not compensable under both the United States and Wisconsin Constitutions. Majority op., ¶ 24.

=== CASE 2214532 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:48.612921+00 ===

251 Cal.App.2d 347 (1967)
SCOTT, BLAKE & WYNNE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
SUMMIT RIDGE ESTATES, INC., et al., Defendants and Appellants.
Civ. No. 29296.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Three.
May 24, 1967.
Flynn & Rafferty and Owen P. Rafferty for Defendants and Appellants.
Erb, Picone & Calaway for Plaintiff and Respondent.
MOSS, J.
Defendants appeal from a judgment decreeing the foreclosure of plaintiff's mechanic's lien for surveying and engineering services rendered in connection with the subdivision of Tract 23198.
Defendants contend that plaintiff's mechanic's lien is void because (1) the contract under which plaintiff performed its services was not a direct contract with the owner and therefore plaintiff's failure to give the notice of lien required by section 1193 of the Code of Civil Procedure  [fn. 1] rendered its claim of lien invalid; (2) a portion of the services included in plaintiff's claim of lien was rendered for the benefit of land which was not a part of Tract 23198 and some of the improvements designed by plaintiff were not used in the tract; (3) plaintiff's claim of lien was not timely filed by reason of notices of completion filed by defendants; and (4) the award of fees to plaintiff's attorney was excessive.
On August 1, 1959, plaintiff, a licensed land surveyor and civil engineer, entered into a written contract with defendant Summit Ridge Estates, Inc. ("Summit Ridge"), designated in the contract as "developer," to render surveying and engineering services pertinent to the development of Tract 23198 located in the City of Los Angeles. At that time Tract 23198 existed only as a number assigned by a governmental agency to a proposed new residential subdivision. Summit Ridge then owned Lot 12 of Tract 7996 consisting of a seven-acre parcel of mountainous terrain. This seven-acre parcel with certain peripheral changes hereafter noted became Tract 23198 consisting of 19 residential building sites. The official tract map, prepared by plaintiff, was recorded on September 16, 1960. Originally Summit Ridge contemplated only 12 residential lots in the subdivision, but due to minor extensions of the boundaries of the tract made possible by new acquisitions and redesigns developed by plaintiff, Summit Ridge was able *352 to create 19 building sites instead of the contemplated 12 sites. The changes in the original boundary of Lot 12, Tract 7996 consisted primarily of drainage easements, storm easements, sewer easements to and from the tract, grading slope easements to protect the roadway into the tract, and certain fee acquisitions which were made as the result of a slight realignment of the entry road to prevent slippage and slides, and to eliminate loose surface and fill materials. Certain areas of Lot 12, Tract 7996 were excluded from Tract 23198 because their inclusion would not have increased the number or value of the 19 lots into which the tract was ultimately subdivided. Some of these acquisitions were not made of record until after the recording of Tract 23198. The record owners of the acquisition parcels joined in the recorded tract map and later executed conveyances thereof to the defendants.
B.J.K. Development Co., Inc. ("BJK") and La Trobe Construction Company ("La Trobe") were joined as defendants. The general manager of the development during the period commencing before the date of plaintiff's contract with Summit Ridge until after the filing of this action was Earl Kaldenberg, who was also the secretary-treasurer of both Summit Ridge and BJK. Plaintiff dealt primarily with Kaldenberg throughout. BJK and Summit Ridge were joint venturers in the development of Tract 23198. La Trobe supplied the money for the development and prior to March 23, 1961, held an unrecorded deed of trust on the tract as security for its loan. Summit Ridge conveyed Tract 23198 to La Trobe by deed recorded on March 23, 1961 and La Trobe in turn conveyed the tract to BJK by deed recorded August 23, 1961. Summit Ridge transferred title to La Trobe only after La Trobe threatened to record its deed of trust and foreclose it. When BJK was able to obtain financing from lending institutions, La Trobe transferred title to BJK.
Under the contract Summit Ridge agreed to pay plaintiff at designated rates. Plaintiff's total charges were $53,410.27 of which it was paid $36,436.19 leaving a balance due of $16,974.08. Defendants caused to be recorded notices of completion of specific aspects of the work on January 5, 1961, and February 21, 1961, respectively. Plaintiff performed services until March 31, 1961. Plaintiff filed its claim of lien on May 5, 1961, and commenced this action on July 27, 1961. It did not file a notice of lien pursuant to section 1193. No notice of nonresponsibility was given pursuant to section 1183.1 by defendants *353 or any other owner of the property which ultimately became part of Tract 23198.
Defendants contend that the contract of August 1, 1959, was not a "direct contract with the owner" as that term is used in section 1193 and that therefore the failure of plaintiff to give the notice specified in section 1193 invalidates its lien. In support of this contention they point out that on the date of the contract Summit Ridge did not own all of the land that ultimately was included in Tract 23198 and that on May 5, 1961, when plaintiff recorded its claim of lien, Tract 23198 was owned of record not by Summit Ridge but by La Trobe and Margaret E. Rabinowitz.
The pertinent portion of section 1193 provides that "(a) Except one under direct contract with the owner or one performing actual labor for wages, every person who furnishes labor, service, equipment or material for which a lien otherwise can be claimed under this chapter, must, as a necessary prerequisite to the validity of any claim of lien subsequently filed, cause to be given not later than 15 days prior to the filing of a claim of lien a written notice as prescribed by this section, to the owner or reputed owner and to the original contractor."
An owner may be estopped, however, to assert that a claim is invalid because the claimant failed to give him the prior notice required by section 1193. [1a] Where a noncontracting owner has actual knowledge of the improvements being made to his property and fails to avail himself of the mode of exempting his interest from liability for the work provided by section 1183.1, subdivision (b),  [fn. 2] he is estopped to deny that the work was done at his instance and request. (Halspar, Inc. v. La Barthe, 238 Cal.App.2d 897 [48 Cal.Rptr. 293], hrg. denied Feb. 16, 1966.) Under such circumstances the claimant has a "direct contract with the owner" for the purposes of section 1193 and consequently is not required to give the notice prescribed therein. (Halspar, Inc. v. La Barthe, supra, 238 Cal.App.2d 897, 899-900; Benson Elec. Co. v. Hale Bros. Assoc. Inc., 246 Cal.App.2d 686, 693 [55 *354 Cal.Rptr. 73].) "This result is entirely logical as ... the owner is already in possession of the type of information otherwise provided by the prelien notice of section 1193." (Halspar, Inc. v. La Barthe, supra, at p. 900.)
Defendants contend that the reasoning of the Halspar case does not make sense in the light of section 1193, subdivision (b), which provides: "Any agreement made or entered into by an owner whereby the owner agrees to waive the rights or privileges conferred upon him by this section shall be void and of no effect." Defendants say that an owner, before entering into such an agreement, would necessarily have actual knowledge of work being done and that such knowledge has the effect of a waiver of the prelien notice under Halspar contrary to the prohibition contained in section 1193, subdivision (b). This argument ignores the difference between waiver and estoppel. [2] The knowledge of the owner referred to in section 1183.1, subdivision (b), is knowledge of actual construction, not intended construction. (Arthur B. Siri, Inc. v. Bridges, 189 Cal.App.2d 599, 601 [11 Cal.Rptr. 322].) The basis of section 1183.1, subdivision (b), is estoppel. (Halspar, Inc. v. La Barthe, supra, 238 Cal.App.2d 897, 899.) [3] Section 1193, subdivision (b), invalidates a waiver of the right to prelien notice by agreement before construction of the work covered by the agreement commences. [1b] Section 1183.1, subdivision (b), estops an owner from disclaiming responsibility for work performed on his land with his actual knowledge unless he files a notice of nonresponsibility.
[4] The reasoning of Halspar applies to this case provided that the owners of the land which was included in Tract 23198 had actual knowledge of the work done by plaintiff. The evidence is undisputed that they did. Defendant Summit Ridge, the record owner of most of the land that became Tract 23198, made the contract with plaintiff. [5] The court found that defendant BJK was a joint venturer with Summit Ridge to develop the tract. Therefore BJK was charged with the knowledge of Summit Ridge. (Civ. Code,  2332.) Furthermore, since the general manager of the development, Earl Kaldenberg, was an officer of BJK as well as Summit Ridge, his actual knowledge was chargeable to BJK. (Snyder v. Security First Nat. Bank, 31 Cal.App.2d 660, 664 [88 P.2d 760]; 1 Witkin, Summary Cal. Law (1960) Agency,  55, p. 431.) [6] The court found that defendant La Trobe financed the development. There is uncontradicted evidence that one of La *355 Trobe's officers and directors, Mr. Ferrari, personally invested in the tract and followed the progress of the work. Furthermore, there is ample evidence to support the finding that the title to the tract which La Trobe held of record from March 23, 1961, to August 23, 1961, was for security only, and, therefore, whether or not La Trobe had notice of plaintiff's work its interest was subordinate to plaintiff's lien under the provisions of section 1189.1, subdivision (b).  [fn. 3]
[7] There is evidence that Margaret Rabinowitz had actual knowledge of the work done by plaintiff in preparing the subdivision in that she signed the subdivision map which showed on its face that it had been prepared by plaintiff. However, the court did not expressly so find nor did it make any finding from which her knowledge can be implied. Defendants may not complain of this omission, however, since it is apparent from the fact that she participated in the recording of the subdivision map than she had knowledge of plaintiff's services and that had an express finding been made on that issue it would have been adverse to defendants. (See Pry Corp. of America v. Leach, 177 Cal.App.2d 632, 637 [2 Cal.Rptr. 425].)
[8] Defendants urge that the trial court made no express determination of the issue of whether plaintiff's failure to give the prelien notice under section 1193 invalidates its lien, and that therefore no inference of fact in plaintiff's favor on this issue may be made because defendants requested special findings on the issue pursuant to section 634. We agree that the trial court's express finding on the issue was in reality a conclusion of law.  [fn. 4] However, defendant's requested findings did not reach the issue either  [fn. 5] since they were directed to the *356 issue of whether or not the contract was "a direct contract with the owner" rather than the issue of whether the owners had actual knowledge of plaintiff's work.
[9a] Portions of Lot 12 Tract 7996, the parcel originally owned by Summit Ridge, were excluded from Tract 23198 because their inclusion would have added no economic benefit to the subdivision. Defendants contend that plaintiff's lien may not properly include compensation for work done on these excluded parcels. [10] Section 1184.1  [fn. 6] allows a lien to "[a]ny person who, at the instance or request of the owner ... of any lot or tract of land, grades, fills in, or otherwise improves the same. ..." The word "improves" as used in section 1184.1 refers to the improvement of the tract upon which the lien is given (Warren v. Hopkins, 110 Cal. 506, 510 [42 P. 986] [interpreting a predecessor section to section 1184.1]) and includes the engineering services necessary to subdivide the property into residential lots. (Nolte v. Smith, 189 Cal.App.2d 140 [11 Cal.Rptr. 261, 87 A.L.R.2d 996].) [9b] The trial court found that "any and all work, services and material furnished on real property outside the physical boundaries of Tract 23198 were necessary and for the direct benefit" of the tract. This being so, plaintiff was entitled to a lien for its services on Tract 23198 even though those services may also have benefited the surrounding land.
[11] Defendants contend that the amount of the judgment ordering foreclosure of plaintiff's mechanic's lien improperly included compensation for work performed by plaintiff which was not delivered to defendants and which was not used or consumed in the work of improvement. This contention was asserted in defendants' answer and pretrial statement of factual contentions. The trial court found that "none of the allegations or demands of the Answer and Counterclaim or defendants separate legal and factual contentions is true." This finding was sufficient. (See Witkin, Cal. Procedure *357 (1954) Trial,  114, p. 1846.) Since the evidence was in conflict as to whether all the work for which plaintiff sought to foreclose its lien was beneficial to the tract, and since there was substantial evidence to support the last quoted finding of the trial court, we are bound by it.
[12a] Defendants contend that plaintiff's claim of lien was not timely filed insofar as it pertains to work performed by plaintiff in connection with the sewers, storm drains, underground utilities and street in the tract because defendant filed notices of completion as to this work on January 5, 1961, and February 21, 1961. [13] Section 1193.1, subdivision (c), provides that an original contractor shall have 90 days after completion of the "work of improvement" within which to file for record his claim of lien. However, if the owner shall "within 10 days after the completion of the work of improvement file for record a notice of completion" an original contractor must file his claim of lien within 60 days after the date of filing of the notice of completion. One who contracts directly with the owner is an original contractor. (Pacific Mut. Life Ins. Co. v. Fisher, 106 Cal. 224, 232 [39 P. 758].) [14] A notice of completion filed by the owner before actual completion of the work of improvement is premature and does not limit the time within which claims of lien must be filed. (Otis Elevator Co. v. Brainerd, 10 Cal.App. 229, 232 [101 P. 691].) [12b] Plaintiff, having contracted with the owner was an "original contractor" as that term is used in the statute. The trial court found that plaintiff did not complete its services under the contract until March 31, 1961. The determination of the date of completion of a work of improvement is a question of fact. (Mott v. Wright, 43 Cal.App. 21, 26 [184 P. 517].) Since there was a conflict in the evidence on this issue the finding of the trial court must be sustained.
Plaintiff's claim of lien was filed of record on May 5, 1961, within 90 days after the completion of the work of improvement, and therefore was timely filed unless the notices of completion filed by defendants shortened that time. The notices of completion did not have that effect because they were filed before the work of improvement was completed. "Work of improvement" as used in section 1193.1 means "the scheme of improvement as a whole." ( 1182, subd. (b).) The scheme of improvement in this case was a land subdivision. Plaintiff's services were basic to the "scheme of improvement" (Nolte v. Smith, supra, 189 Cal.App.2d 140, 147) and therefore *358 the work of improvement was not completed until plaintiff had completed its services under the contract.
Provision is made in the statute by section 1193.1, subdivision (b), whereby an owner can obtain the benefit of filing a notice of completion as to a portion of the work of improvement, as defendants have attempted to do here, but only where the work of improvement is made pursuant to two or more original contracts each covering a particular portion of the improvement. In such a case if the owner files a notice of completion covering such particular portion of the work, "the original contractor under the contract covered by such notice" must file his claim of lien within 60 days thereafter. The notices of lien filed by defendants on January 5, 1961, and February 21, 1961, did not cover the contract between defendants and plaintiff, but covered work performed by other contractors under contracts to which plaintiff was not a party. Therefore, for this reason as well, the notices of completion did not shorten the time within which plaintiff was permitted to file its claim of lien under section 1193.1, subdivision (b).
[15a] Defendants' final contention is that the trial court abused its discretion in fixing attorney fees recoverable by plaintiff in the amount of $4,000 instead of the sum of $1,290 which would have been the fee had the court applied the schedule in rule 12 section 1(b) of the Rules of the Superior Court of Los Angeles County. Defendants maintain that the trial court was bound by the schedule because plaintiff's counsel did not present to the court an itemized statement of services rendered. [16] "It is well settled that when a judge is informed of the extent and nature of legal services, he can determine what is a reasonable fee from his own knowledge and experience without the necessity of other evidence." (Albertsworth v. Glen Falls Indem. Co., 84 Cal.App.2d 816, 825 [192 P.2d 66].) [15b] This case was tried without a jury before the judge who fixed the fee. The trial took eleven days. No showing has been made that the amount of attorney fees awarded was unreasonable.
The judgment is affirmed.
Ford, P. J., and Cobey, J. concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. All references are to the Code of Civil Procedure unless otherwise specified.
[fn. 2]  2. The pertinent portion of section 1183.1, subdivision (b) provides that every improvement constructed with the knowledge of the owner shall be held to have been constructed at the instance of the owner subject to any lien filed in accordance with the provisions of the mechanic's lien statute unless the owner shall give the statutory notice of nonresponsibility within 10 days after he has obtained knowledge of the improvement.
[fn. 3]  3. Section 1189.1, subd. (b) provides in part: "The liens provided for in Section 1184.1 are preferred to (1) any mortgage, deed of trust, or other encumbrance which may have attached subsequent to the time when the work of improvement of the character referred to in that section in connection with which the lien claimant has done his work or furnished his materials was commenced; or to (2) any mortgage, deed of trust, or other encumbrance of which the lien claimant had no notice and which was unrecorded at the time when such work of improvement was commenced; or to (3) any mortgage, deed of trust, or other encumbrance recorded before the commencement of the work of improvement of the character referred to in that section which was given for the sole or primary purpose of financing such work of improvement ..."
[fn. 4]  4. The court found, "that no fifteen day advance written notice as required by California Code of Civil Procedure, Section 1193 was necessary."
[fn. 5]  5. "1. Was the contract dated August 1, 1959, a direct contract with the owner? 2. Was the contract dated August 1, 1959, ambiguous or uncertain insofar as the designation of Summit Ridge Estates, Inc., as being a developer, rather than the owner, is concerned?"
[fn. 6]  6. Section 1184.1 provides: "Any person who, at the instance or request of the owner (or any other person acting by his authority or under him, as contractor or otherwise) of any lot or tract of land, grades, fills in, or otherwise improves the same, or the street, highway, or sidewalk in front of or adjoining the same, or constructs or installs sewers or other public utilities therein, or constructs any areas, or vaults, or cellars, or rooms, under said sidewalks, or makes any improvements in connection therewith, has a lien upon said lot or tract of land for his work done and materials furnished."

=== CASE 9738272 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:47:26.255918+00 ===

FLEMING, J.
On February 5, 1965, Stella Weeks signed up for telephone answering service with RSYP Answering Service operated by Theresa Roy. In a personal talk with Mrs. Roy, Mrs. Weeks implied she was a prostitute and expressed a desire that her business calls be kept confidential, especially from the police. After some discussion about hours for calls and the handling of difficult callers, referred to as tricks, Mrs. Weeks paid a $15 deposit. As she was leaving Mrs. Roy gave her the following advice: “. . . don’t get greedy, there’s plenty to go around, and check the references of your guys. Don’t take anybody you’re not sure of. $50 or $100 is not worth it if you have to spend two or three thousand dollars and three months in jail. If you just watch your step and be extra careful, there’s no problem. ’ ’
On March 1 Mrs. Weeks telephoned the RSYP Answering Service, secured one call from Mrs. Roy, and voiced her *461disappointment at the lack of other calls, after which the following conversation occurred:
‘11 said, don’t you know anybody that can help me out ?
11 She said, I know a girl.
“Who?
11 She said, Kathy Martin.
‘11 said, I can call her.
11 She said, do you know her ?
‘11 said no.
‘1 She says, very good.
1 ‘ I said, what is she ?
“And she said, she’ll give you lots of business.
‘ ‘ I said, oh, really ?
“She said, uh-huh.
“I said, does she have a number where I can call her? Maybe I could talk-—
“She said no. You call her through me.
‘ ‘ I said all right, I ’ll call you tomorrow.
“And she said, don’t talk about this to my other girls. I’ll ■arrange it for you. ’ ’
The next day Mrs. Weeks telephoned the RSVP Answering Service, talked to Theresa Roy and, after a pause, was connected by Mrs. Roy to Kathy Martin.
Miss Martin said she was completely undressed and expecting company and to telephone back later.
That afternoon Mrs. Weeks again telephoned Mrs. Roy at RSVP and, after some delay, was put through by Mrs. Roy to Kathy Martin, at which time the following conversation occurred:
“I said, things have been kind of slow and she suggested that maybe I get together with you and talk about some business.
“She said, yeah. She said, oh, my, how am I supposed to reach you ?
“I said, well, I’m kind of on a will-call basis still with Terry—you know, Theresa.' ’
Business terms were discussed as follows:
“I said, you know? What’s the percentage, anyway? What’s the deal?
‘1 She said, well, it works on a 60-40.
“I said, 60-40?
“She said, or a trade, but you said you don’t have too much business right now ?
*462“I said, no, or actually I’m just kind of just been on the board recently, so you know, you have to give your number out and that takes a little time, but I don’t like to wait too long.
1 ‘ She said, nobody does. You need the money. ’ ’
There followed a long conversation about some out-oftowners coming to town for a couple of nights:
“Miss Martin said, the thing is with these people coming in towards the end of the week I’d like to see you first, she said, I would like to see you and talk to you. ’ ’
A meeting was arranged for the next afternoon at the cafe of the Hotel Continental.
On March 3 Mrs. Weeks telephoned Miss Martin through Mrs. Roy to cancel the appointment at the Hotel Continental and arrange a meeting for the following week. The appointment was never kept, for, unknown to Mrs. Roy and ICathy Martin, Mrs. Weeks was an undercover policewoman.
On April 1 the police arrested Theresa Roy on the premises of RSVP Answering Service, and seized a listing card from the board marked Kathy Martin and an address book giving Kathy Martin’s name, address, and telephone number. The same day a deputy sheriff arrested defendant Kathy Martin at the address shown on the RSVP listing card and address book, an address which contained the telephone listed by the answering service for Kathy Martin. After she had been warned of her constitutional rights, Kathy Martin said she had been working at that location as a prostitute for the last few months and had been using the RSVP Answering Service. She had two lines, one a straight line and one that went through the RSVP board. A looseleaf notebook was seized on the premises and identified as a trick book, that is to say a directory of a prostitute’s customers.
Theresa Roy and Kathy Martin were indicted for conspiring to commit the crime of prostitution, and six overt acts were charged, including Theresa Roy’s conversation with Stella Weeks on February 5; Theresa Roy’s introduction of Stella Weeks to Kathy Martin on March 2; Kathy Martin’s conversation with Stella Weeks on the same day; and Theresa Roy’s introduction of Stella Weeks to Kathy Martin on March 3.
On defendants’ motion the trial court set aside the indictment as having been returned without probable cause (Pen. Code, § 995). The People have appealed.
*463
Identification of the Conspirators
Apparently the dismissal was based on the theory that there had been insufficient evidence of the identity of Kathy Martin as the person who conspired with Theresa Boy to commit the crime of prostitution. On this point we think it helpful to consider the evidence separately against each defendant.
With respect to Theresa Boy, there was evidence that while operating BSYP Answering Service she referred a supposed prostitute to a woman designated as Kathy Martin as a source of business. There is evidence that the woman using the name Kathy Martin undertook to furnish customers to the supposed prostitute and that business arrangements were negotiated and a meeting arranged between them.  Theresa Boy was indicted for conspiring with another to commit prostitution. If we forget the name Kathy Martin and assume an indictment charging Theresa Boy with conspiring with an unknown Madame X, still such an indictment would be valid, for one individual may be indicted for conspiring with a person or persons unknown. The rule is summarized in 1 Within, California Crimes (1963) p. 105: “. . . a single defendant may be charged with and tried for conspiring with C, an unapprehended coconspirator, or for conspiring with X and U, unknown and unidentified coconspirators. ’ ’ Further statements of the rule are found in People v. Richards, 67 Cal. 412, 416, 419 [7 P. 828, 56 Am.Rep. 716]; People v. Sagehorn, 140 Cal.App.2d 138, 146 [294 P.2d 1062]; and Saugstad v. Superior Court, 183 Cal.App.2d 277, 283, 284 [6 Cal.Rptr. 580], in which it is said: “ ‘ [0]ne person may be convicted under an indictment charging him with having conspired with persons unknown to the grand jury . . ” See also 91 A.L.R.2d 700, 723 et seq. An indictment against Theresa Boy for conspiring with one whose name was unknown would have been valid; the present indictment is rendered no less valid because it has given the presumed name of the other conspirator.
With respect to the indictment of Kathy Martin (indicted under that name but whose true name is Florinda West), we have evidence of a profit-sharing agreement between Stella Weeks, a supposed prostitute, and a person using the name Kathy Martin, who were put in touch with each other by Theresa Boy. The name Kathy Martin was known to the police from prior arrest records for prostitution. The defendant Kathy Martin was arrested on premises whose address and telephone number were listed with BSYP *464Answering Service under the name Kathy Martin. A trick book was found there. After her arrest Kathy Martin admitted she had been working as a prostitute at that address and had been using RSVP Answering Service for her calls. These circumstances provided sufficient evidence to identify Kathy Martin, lmown and admitted prostitute, arrested at the address containing the telephone listed with RSVP Answering Service, with Kathy Martin, the person placed on the telephone line by Mrs. Roy, who agreed to refer customers to Mrs. Weeks, a supposed prostitute, for a percentage of the take. [3] A jury could reasonably infer identity of the person from identity of the name. (Code Civ. Proc., § 1963, subd. 25; Evid. Code, §12; Witkin, Cal. Evidence (1958) § 371.) Whether this deduction is considered a presumption as it was under the old law, or an inference as it is under the new, it provides a sufficient basis from which to conclude that the Kathy Martin who talked on the telephone to Stella Weeks was the same Kathy Martin who was a known and admitted prostitute, listed with RSVP Answering Service, and arrested on April 1.
The rule is summarized in People v. Horace, 127 Cal.App.2d 366, 369 [273 P.2d 923]: “In People v. Lorraine, 28 Cal.App.2d 50, 54 [81 P.2d 1004], cited by appellant, it is said, ‘The identity of the person may be established by proof of recognition of his voice, or by other circumstances which satisfactorily indicate the identity of the individual.’ [Emphasis by the court.] (See also Eastman v. Means, 75 Cal.App. 537 [247 P. 1089]; 71 A.L.R. 5, note.)” The rule was applied in People v. McGaughran, 197 Cal.App.2d 6, 16 [17 Cal.Rptr. 121], where the court said: “Defendant also contends that because Donna’s father had never before heard defendant’s voice over the phone there was no foundation for the admission of the conversation with defendant. However, that fact alone would not prevent its admission. A foundation may be laid by circumstances and the contents of the conversation itself.' ’
There was sufficient proof of identity to support the indictment of the defendant Kathy Martin on a charge of conspiring with Theresa Roy to commit the crime of prostitution.
Proof of the Conspiracy Charged
Do the facts at the preliminary hearing sufficiently make out a charge of conspiracy between Theresa Roy and Kathy Martin to commit prostitution f It is argued that performance *465of a legal act, such as operating a telephone answering service, cannot by itself amount to participation in an unlawful conspiracy, a proposition with which we have no quarrel, that the evidence is insufficient to establish Theresa Roy’s participation in any profit-sharing arrangement between Mrs. Weeks and Kathy Martin, that there is no direct evidence of any conspiracy between Theresa Roy and Kathy Martin to take any particular action or to achieve any particular result.
We think this approach takes too restricted a view of the law of conspiracy and fails to take into account the basic nature of a conspiracy. “Conspire,” said Lord Campbell, “is nothing; agreement is the thing.” (Regina v. Hamp (1852) 6 Cox C.C. 167, 172.)  A person becomes a conspirator by agreeing to participate in an illegal enterprise. The agreement may be tacitly arrived at, and proof of its arrival may be inferred. (People v. Steccone, 36 Cal.2d 234, 238 [223 P.2d 17]; Lorenson v. Superior Court, 35 Cal.2d 49, 57 [216 P.2d 859]; People v. Yeager, 194 Cal. 452, 484 [229 P. 40]; People v. Donnolly, 143 Cal. 394, 398 [77 P. 177].) In the case at bench there is direct testimony that Theresa Roy undertook to further Mrs. Weeks’ supposed activity in the business of prostitution. Theresa Roy, after having advised Mrs. Weeks the precautions she should take in conducting her business as a prostitute (advice which standing alone we would not consider sufficient to make her a participant in a conspiracy) later went beyond the mere tender of general advice and became a collaborator in promoting the success of the supposed business venture. (Direct Sales Co. v. United States, 319 U.S. 703 [87 L.Ed. 1674, 63 S.Ct. 1265].)  Specifically, she promised to introduce Mrs. Weeks to someone who would give her lots of business, and later made good her promise by putting Mrs. Weeks in touch with Kathy Martin on March 2 and again on March 3. Thereafter, detailed arrangements for the splitting of business, the division of fees, and for specific deals were discussed by Mrs. Weeks and Kathy Martin. The agreement which may be inferred from this evidence is one under which Roy agreed to vouch for and introduce Weeks to Martin for the purpose of securing customers for prostitution; Martin, a prostitute with a surplus of customers, agreed to refer her excess clientele to Weeks for a fee; and Weeks ostensibly agreed to prostitute herself to service these customers. The crime of conspiracy was thus complete. More direct evidence of a conspiracy to *466break the law, absent a participant turning state’s witness, is rarely found.
Had Theresa Roy restricted her activities to the operation of a telephone answering service, even with knowledge that some of her customers were prostitutes who used her service to further their business, we agree that she could not have been charged with conspiracy to commit prostitution. Such was the situation in a companion case we decide today, People v. Lauria, post, p. 471 [59 Cal.Rptr. 628], in which a similar charge was brought against the operator of a telephone answering service but whose active participation in the business of prostitution was not established. By contrast Theresa Roy undertook to arrange the sharing of customers between prostitutes, and thus made herself an accessory to their business and a party to an unlawful agreement. Perhaps she was motivated solely by a desire to further the welfare and serve the interest of her customers and acted without thought of added profit for herself. But disinterested loyalty and devotion to the patrons of her service provide no excuse for the promotion of a criminal enterprise. Perhaps she was induced to stray from the path of virtue by importunities which appealed to her sympathetic nature.  But considerations of entrapment are matters for affirmative defense and can not justify the dismissal of an indictment before trial. (People v. Braddock, 41 Cal.2d 794, 803 [264 P.2d 521]; People v. Benford, 53 Cal.2d 1, 11 [345 P.2d 928]; cf. People v. Malki, 181 Cal.App.2d 118, 122 [5 Cal.Rptr. 207].)
Part of the confusion between the operation of a legitimate business and participation in an illegal conspiraos*' may have been caused by the fact that two separate activities were involved: (1) the legitimate business of operating a telephone answering service, for which Mrs. Roy could not have been prosecuted, and (2) the illegitimate business of customer allocation among prostitutes. Mrs. Roy made herself a participant in the latter business by referring one supposed prostitute to another for the explicit purpose of securing customers. By no stretch of the imagination does the making of arrangements for the referral of overflow business from one prostitute to another have anything to do with the legitimate operation of a telephone answering service. The mischief for which Mrs. Roy was indicted had thus been divorced from the operation of the telephone answering service and become a separate venture of its own, even though some of its acts were derived from and dependent upon the use of facilities of the legitimate business. *467In the separation of the two activities we find significant Mrs. Roy’s advice to Mrs. Weeks that the latter should not discuss matters with other girls on the switchboard but should deal with her direct. Legitimate operation of a telephone answering service in no sense provides immunity from prosecution for side ventures of a criminal nature, any more than it would in the way a taxicab driver, bellhop, headwaiter, bartender, hotel clerk, or any other person using the facilities of his occupation to procure customers for prostitutes.
A criminal conspiracy, of course, may be consummated through performance of acts wholly legal in themselves. The case of Lutwak v. United States, 344 U.S. 604 [97 L.Ed. 593, 73 S.Ct. 481] is illustrative of the way in which legitimate and illegitimate activities may parallel each other. There petitioners were convicted of a conspiracy to defraud the United States by obtaining the illegal entry of three aliens as spouses of honorably discharged veterans. They had conspired to have three veterans journey to Paris, go through a marriage ceremony with three aliens, and obtain their entry into the United States under the War Brides Act. The court held the charge of criminal conspiracy to have been made out, even though the marriages in Paris were wholly legal and valid on their face. It was not the trip to Paris nor the marriages in Paris which were criminal but the agreement of the conspirators to perpetrate a fraud upon the United States.
Introducing one prostitute to another to facilitate the sharing of custom can have no legitimate function or purpose. The case thus falls within the rule of People v. McLaughlin, 111 Cal.App.2d 781 [245 P.2d 1076], where the furnishing of wire service information having no other use than to service the illegal operations of bookmakers, made the defendants knowing and intentional participants in a criminal conspiracy to further bookmaking.
The order setting aside the indictment is reversed.
Herndon, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9738273 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:47:26.260586+00 ===

ROTH, P. J.
I dissent.
The offense here charged is that Theresa Roy conspired with Kathy Martin. The indictment charges: “That on or about the 1st day of April, 1965, and for a three year period immediately preceding April 1, 1965, at and in the County . . . defendants,
*468Theresa Roy and Kathy Martin
did . . . feloniously conspire, . . . and agree together to commit the crime of Prostitution in violation of Section 647b of the Penal Code ... in violation of Section 182.1, and did in the course of, . . . said conspiracy, . . . commit the following overt acts. ...”
Appellants rely on the ease of De Mond v. Superior Court, 57 Cal.2d 340, 344 [19 Cal.Rptr. 313, 368 P.2d 865], apparently for the proposition that “ ‘An indictment will not be set aside ... if there is some rational ground for assuming the possibility that an offense has been committed and the accused is guilty of it. ’ ”
The charge at bench is a conspiracy between Roy and Martin. The evidence, however, shows no conversation, contact or act between Roy and Martin, either before or after any of the overt acts charged, from which any rational ground can be deduced upon which an agreement between Roy and Martin to commit the crime of prostitution can be bottomed. The only evidence in the record which by strained inference may suggest such a conspiracy is that Roy, without Martin’s knowledge, put Weeks in touch with Martin, and the hearsay statement of Weeks to Martin “. . . I’m . . . still with Terry—you know, Theresa. ’ ’
All the overt acts charged mean nothing and suggest nothing other than that Roy, the operator of the switchboard, knew some of her patrons were prostitutes and knew that Martin was a prostitute, and that Weeks contacted Martin for the ostensible purpose of making an agreement with Martin to handle some of Martin’s patrons.
Weeks, the policewoman, represented to Roy she suffered from lack of patrons. Roy told Weeks that she knew a girl (Kathy Martin) who received many calls and told Weeks, so far as the record shows, without the knowledge of Martin, to get in touch with Martin and try to arrange with Martin to take care of some of her customers. This conversation between Roy and Weeks might be a conspiracy between Roy and Weeks, but it is not the conspiracy charged. Three sentences, all hearsay as to Roy, culled from three admittedly long telephone conversations between Weeks and Martin, are all there is to show a conspiracy between Roy and Martin.
“I said, things have been kind of slow and she suggested that maybe I get together with you and talk about some business.
*469“She said, yeah. She said, oh, my, how am I supposed to reach you ?
“I said, well, I’m kind of on a will-call basis still with Terry—you know, Theresa. ’ ’
There is no evidence, or even a remote suggestion of any kind, of anything that occurred between Roy and Martin at any time which shows that Martin knew she had been suggested to Weeks by Roy as a source of business or that Roy and Martin at any time had a conversation in respect of doing something for Weeks, or that Martin had indicated to Roy at any time that she would like to have Roy suggest to her the name of one of her patrons who could help her with her business.
There is nothing to show or even remotely suggest what brought Weeks and Martin together at any time or that when Roy put the Weeks call through to Martin, Roy introduced Weeks to Martin over the phone, or otherwise, or talked to Martin at all before or after the first telephone conversation, or any of the telephone conversations. In fact, the very evidence excerpted by the majority and the whole record shows the contrary.
The three sentences above quoted almost demonstrate that Roy had never spoken to Martin about Weeks. If Roy had, Martin would not have found it necessary to say to Weeks “. . . how am I supposed to reach you. ...” She would have known without saying anything on the subject that all she had to do was call Roy or the Roy switchboard, as those arrangements would have been already made.
In People v. Steccone, 36 Cal.2d 234, cited by the majority, the court says at page 238 [223 P.2d 77] : “. . . before evidence of the acts and declarations of an alleged coconspirator is admissible against the other, the fact of the conspiracy must be proved.” At bench there is no evidence except the hearsay declaration of a policewoman posing as a prostitute and the hearsay shows not that there was an agreement between Roy and Martin but the contrary.
In People v. Long, 7 Cal.App. 27, cited by Steccone, supra, the court says at page 33 [93 P. 387] : “The admission of the statement made by the Boland woman to the witness Fletcher was error. There was no evidence of any conspiracy between defendant and the woman. Conspiracies cannot be established by suspicions. There must be some evidence. Mere association does not make a conspiracy. There must be evidence of som§ *470participation or interest in the commission of the offense. Neither was her statement a part of the res gestae. ’ ’
So in the ease at bench, there is nothing but the answer of Weeks to Martin’s query of how to get in touch—“. . . I’m kind of on a will-call basis still with Terry—you know, Theresa” to prove an agreement to conspire between Boy and Martin. On the facts of this case the language of the court in People v. James, 189 Cal.App.2d 14, at pp. 15 and 16 [10 Cal.Rptr. 809, 91 A.L.R.2d 697], is peculiarly appropriate: “. . . There can be no question but that there must be a degree of dependent criminality between coconspirators to violate a criminal statute in order for a conviction to stand. In other words, the guilt of both must concur in order to establish the guilt of either. In the early case of People v. Richards, 67 Cal. 412, 413 [7 P. 828, 56 Am.Rep. 716], the court held that: ‘No one can dispute, or ever has disputed, that the offense cannot be committed by one alone . . .’ (See also People v. Miller, 82 Cal. 107 [22 P. 924]; People v. MacMullen, 134 Cal.App. 81 [24 P.2d 794].)
“In amplification of the rule above enunciated, the court in the MacMullen case at page 82, held that: ‘. . . it is the law that on a charge of conspiracy even though but one person is indicted, the statement of the offense in the indictment must show that two or more persons, even though the other person or persons are unknown, did in fact conspire together to commit the crime. Upon a trial for the offense the evidence must show that at least two of the persons named in the charging part of the indictment committed the offense because the gist of the offense is the conspiracy. If these elements are not present then a conviction cannot be had. ’ ’ ’
The record undoubtedly establishes that Boy knew some of her patrons were prostitutes and that Kathy Martin was a prostitute and used the Boy switchboard. This background does not furnish rational ground here anymore than it does in Lauria (filed concurrently herewith) for assuming the possibility of a conspiracy between Boy and Martin to help Weeks. All the record shows to me is that Boy, the owner of the telephone service, in an effort to keep a policewoman, posing as a prostitute, as a customer, undertook to help the policewoman get some business in her simulated occupation by suggesting that she get in touch with an affluent courtesan, without the knowledge of the courtesan, who is made a party to the conspiracy.
My learned brother who authored Lauria says “When the *471intent to further and promote the criminal enterprise comes from the lips of the supplier himself, ambiguities of inference from circumstance need not trouble us. ’ ’
They trouble me because the record as pointed out shows no contact of any kind and nothing coming “. . . from the lips . . .” of Roy to Martin.
The gratuitous conduct on the part of Roy does not, in my opinion, make a felon of Martin nor does it on the indictment before us make a felon of Roy.
The indictment was properly dismissed.
The petition of respondent Roy for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied July 26, 1967. Peters, J., was of the opinion that the petition should be granted.

=== CASE 2214552 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:48.991193+00 ===

251 Cal.App.2d 471 (1967)
59 Cal. Rptr. 628
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
LOUIS LAURIA et al., Defendants and Respondents.
Docket No. 11661.
Court of Appeals of California, Second District, Division Two.
June 1, 1967.
*473 Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, Evelle J. Younger, District Attorney, Harry Wood and Robert J. Lord, Deputy District Attorneys, for Plaintiff and Appellant.
*474 Jay Plotkin, under appointment by the Court of Appeal, Patrick Coleman, Apple & Dobrin and Irving D. Apple for Defendants and Respondents.
FLEMING, J.
In an investigation of call-girl activity the police focused their attention on three prostitutes actively plying their trade on call, each of whom was using Lauria's telephone answering service, presumably for business purposes.
On January 8, 1965, Stella Weeks, a policewoman, signed up for telephone service with Lauria's answering service. Mrs. Weeks, in the course of her conversation with Lauria's office manager, hinted broadly that she was a prostitute concerned with the secrecy of her activities and their concealment from the police. She was assured that the operation of the service was discreet and "about as safe as you can get." It was arranged that Mrs. Weeks need not leave her address with the answering service, but could pick up her calls and pay her bills in person.
On February 11, Mrs. Weeks talked to Lauria on the telephone and told him her business was modelling and she had been referred to the answering service by Terry, one of the three prostitutes under investigation. She complained that because of the operation of the service she had lost two valuable customers, referred to as tricks. Lauria defended his service and said that her friends had probably lied to her about having left calls for her. But he did not respond to Mrs. Weeks' hints that she needed customers in order to make money, other than to invite her to his house for a personal visit in order to get better acquainted. In the course of his talk he said "his business was taking messages."
On February 15, Mrs. Weeks talked on the telephone to Lauria's office manager and again complained of two lost calls, which she described as a $50 and a $100 trick. On investigation the office manager could find nothing wrong, but she said she would alert the switchboard operators about slip-ups on calls.
On April 1 Lauria and the three prostitutes were arrested. Lauria complained to the police that this attention was undeserved, stating that Hollywood Call Board had 60 to 70 prostitutes on its board while his own service had only 9 or 10, that he kept separate records for known or suspected prostitutes for the convenience of himself and the police. When asked if his records were available to police who might come *475 to the office to investigate call girls, Lauria replied that they were whenever the police had a specific name. However, his service didn't "arbitrarily tell the police about prostitutes on our board. As long as they pay their bills we tolerate them." In a subsequent voluntary appearance before the grand jury Lauria testified he had always cooperated with the police. But he admitted he knew some of his customers were prostitutes, and he knew Terry was a prostitute because he had personally used her services, and he knew she was paying for 500 calls a month.
Lauria and the three prostitutes were indicted for conspiracy to commit prostitution, and nine overt acts were specified. Subsequently the trial court set aside the indictment as having been brought without reasonable or probable cause. (Pen Code, § 995.) The People have appealed, claiming that a sufficient showing of an unlawful agreement to further prostitution was made.
[1] To establish agreement, the People need show no more than a tacit, mutual understanding between coconspirators to accomplish an unlawful act. (People v. Calhoun, 50 Cal.2d 137, 144 [323 P.2d 427]; People v. Yeager, 194 Cal. 452, 484 [229 P. 40].) Here the People attempted to establish a conspiracy by showing that Lauria, well aware that his codefendants were prostitutes who received business calls from customers through his telephone answering service, continued to furnish them with such service. This approach attempts to equate knowledge of another's criminal activity with conspiracy to further such criminal activity, and poses the question of the criminal responsibility of a furnisher of goods or services who knows his product is being used to assist the operation of an illegal business. Under what circumstances does a supplier become a part of a conspiracy to further an illegal enterprise by furnishing goods or services which he knows are to be used by the buyer for criminal purposes?
The two leading cases on this point face in opposite directions. In United States v. Falcone, 311 U.S. 205 [85 L.Ed. 128, 61 S.Ct. 204], the sellers of large quantities of sugar, yeast, and cans were absolved from participation in a moonshining conspiracy among distillers who bought from them, while in Direct Sales Co. v. United States, 319 U.S. 703 [87 L.Ed. 1674, 63 S.Ct. 1265], a wholesaler of drugs was convicted of conspiracy to violate the federal narcotic laws by selling drugs in quantity to a codefendant physician who was supplying them to addicts. The distinction between these two *476 cases appears primarily based on the proposition that distributors of such dangerous products as drugs are required to exercise greater discrimination in the conduct of their business than are distributors of innocuous substances like sugar and yeast.
In the earlier case, Falcone, the sellers' knowledge of the illegal use of the goods was insufficient by itself to make the sellers participants in a conspiracy with the distillers who bought from them. Such knowledge fell short of proof of a conspiracy, and evidence on the volume of sales was too vague to support a jury finding that respondents knew of the conspiracy from the size of the sales alone.
In the later case of Direct Sales, the conviction of a drug wholesaler for conspiracy to violate federal narcotic laws was affirmed on a showing that it had actively promoted the sale of morphine sulphate in quantity and had sold codefendant physician, who practiced in a small town in South Carolina, more than 300 times his normal requirements of the drug, even though it had been repeatedly warned of the dangers of unrestricted sales of the drug. The court contrasted the restricted goods involved in Direct Sales with the articles of free commerce involved in Falcone: "All articles of commerce may be put to illegal ends," said the court. "But all do not have inherently the same susceptibility to harmful and illegal use.... This difference is important for two purposes. One is for making certain that the seller knows the buyer's intended illegal use. The other is to show that by the sale he intends to further, promote, and cooperate in it. This intent, when given effect by overt act, is the gist of conspiracy. While it is not identical with mere knowledge that another purposes unlawful action it is not unrelated to such knowledge.... The step from knowledge to intent and agreement may be taken. There is more than suspicion, more than knowledge, acquiescence, carelessness, indifference, lack of concern. There is informed and interested cooperation, stimulation, instigation. And there is also a `stake in the venture' which, even if it may not be essential, is not irrelevant to the question of conspiracy." (319 U.S. at pp. 710-713, 87 L.Ed. at pp. 1681, 1682.)
While Falcone and Direct Sales may not be entirely consistent with each other in their full implications, they do provide us with a framework for the criminal liability of a supplier of lawful goods or services put to unlawful use. [2] Both the element of knowledge of the illegal use of the *477 goods or services and the element of intent to further that use must be present in order to make the supplier a participant in a criminal conspiracy.
[3] Proof of knowledge is ordinarily a question of fact and requires no extended discussion in the present case. The knowledge of the supplier was sufficiently established when Lauria admitted he knew some of his customers were prostitutes and admitted he knew that Terry, an active subscriber to his service, was a prostitute. In the face of these admissions he could scarcely claim to have relied on the normal assumption an operator of a business or service is entitled to make, that his customers are behaving themselves in the eyes of the law. Because Lauria knew in fact that some of his customers were prostitutes, it is a legitimate inference he knew they were subscribing to his answering service for illegal business purposes and were using his service to make assignations for prostitution. On this record we think the prosecution is entitled to claim positive knowledge by Lauria of the use of his service to facilitate the business of prostitution.
[4] The more perplexing issue in the case is the sufficiency of proof of intent to further the criminal enterprise. The element of intent may be proved either by direct evidence, or by evidence of circumstances from which an intent to further a criminal enterprise by supplying lawful goods or services may be inferred. Direct evidence of participation, such as advice from the supplier of legal goods or services to the user of those goods or services on their use for illegal purposes, such evidence as appeared in a companion case we decide today, People v. Roy, ante, p. 459 [59 Cal. Rptr. 636], provides the simplest case. When the intent to further and promote the criminal enterprise comes from the lips of the supplier himself, ambiguities of inference from circumstance need not trouble us. [5] But in cases where direct proof of complicity is lacking, intent to further the conspiracy must be derived from the sale itself and its surrounding circumstances in order to establish the supplier's express or tacit agreement to join the conspiracy.
In the case at bench the prosecution argues that since Lauria knew his customers were using his service for illegal purposes but nevertheless continued to furnish it to them, he must have intended to assist them in carrying out their illegal activities. Thus through a union of knowledge and intent he became a participant in a criminal conspiracy. Essentially, the People argue that knowledge alone of the continuing use of *478 his telephone facilities for criminal purposes provided a sufficient basis from which his intent to participate in those criminal activities could be inferred.
In examining precedents in this field we find that sometimes, but not always, the criminal intent of the supplier may be inferred from his knowledge of the unlawful use made of the product he supplies. Some consideration of characteristic patterns may be helpful.
[6] 1. Intent may be inferred from knowledge, when the purveyor of legal goods for illegal use has acquired a stake in the venture. (United States v. Falcone, 109 F.2d 579, 581.) For example, in Regina v. Thomas, [1957] 2 All Eng. 181, 342, a prosecution for living off the earnings of prostitution, the evidence showed that the accused, knowing the woman to be a convicted prostitute, agreed to let her have the use of his room between the hours of 9 p.m. and 2 a.m. for a charge of £ 3 a night. The Court of Criminal Appeal refused an appeal from the conviction, holding that when the accused rented a room at a grossly inflated rent to a prostitute for the purpose of carrying on her trade, a jury could find he was living on the earnings of prostitution.
In the present case, no proof was offered of inflated charges for the telephone answering services furnished the codefendants.
[7] 2. Intent may be inferred from knowledge, when no legitimate use for the goods or services exists. The leading California case is People v. McLaughlin, 111 Cal. App.2d 781 [245 P.2d 1076], in which the court upheld a conviction of the suppliers of horse-racing information by wire for conspiracy to promote bookmaking, when it had been established that wire-service information had no other use than to supply information needed by bookmakers to conduct illegal gambling operations.
In Rex v. Delaval (1763) 3 Burr. 1434, 97 Eng.Rep. 913, the charge was unlawful conspiracy to remove a girl from the control of Bates, a musician to whom she was bound as an apprentice, and place her in the hands of Sir Francis Delaval for the purpose of prostitution. Lord Mansfield not only upheld the charges against Bates and Sir Francis, but also against Fraine, the attorney who drew up the indentures of apprenticeship transferring custody of the girl from Bates to Sir Francis. Fraine, said Lord Mansfield, must have known that Sir Francis had no facilities for teaching music to apprentices *479 so that it was impossible for him to have been ignorant of the real intent of the transaction.
In Shaw v. Director of Public Prosecutions, [1962] A.C. 220, the defendant was convicted of conspiracy to corrupt public morals and of living on the earnings of prostitution, when he published a directory consisting almost entirely of advertisements of the names, addresses, and specialized talents of prostitutes. Publication of such a directory, said the court, could have no legitimate use and serve no other purpose than to advertise the professional services of the prostitutes whose advertisements appeared in the directory. The publisher could be deemed a participant in the profits from the business activities of his principal advertisers.
Other services of a comparable nature come to mind: the manufacturer of crooked dice and marked cards who sells his product to gambling casinos; the tipster who furnishes information on the movement of law enforcement officers to known lawbreakers. (Cf. Jackson v. State of Texas (1957) 164 Tex. Crim. Rep. 276 [298 S.W.2d 837], where the furnisher of signaling equipment used to warn gamblers of the police was convicted of aiding the equipping of a gambling place.) In such cases the supplier must necessarily have an intent to further the illegal enterprise since there is no known honest use for his goods.
However, there is nothing in the furnishing of telephone answering service which would necessarily imply assistance in the performance of illegal activities. Nor is any inference to be derived from the use of an answering service by women, either in any particular volume of calls, or outside normal working hours. Night-club entertainers, registered nurses, faith healers, public stenographers, photographic models, and free lance substitute employees, provide examples of women in legitimate occupations whose employment might cause them to receive a volume of telephone calls at irregular hours.
[8] 3. Intent may be inferred from knowledge, when the volume of business with the buyer is grossly disproportionate to any legitimate demand, or when sales for illegal use amount to a high proportion of the seller's total business. In such cases an intent to participate in the illegal enterprise may be inferred from the quantity of the business done. For example, in Direct Sales, supra, the sale of narcotics to a rural physician in quantities 300 times greater than he would have normal use for provided potent evidence of an intent to further the illegal activity. In the same case the court also found *480 significant the fact that the wholesaler had attracted as customers a disproportionately large group of physicians who had been convicted of violating the Harrison Act. In Shaw v. Director of Public Prosecutions, [1962] A.C. 220, almost the entire business of the directory came from prostitutes.
No evidence of any unusual volume of business with prostitutes was presented by the prosecution against Lauria.
Inflated charges, the sale of goods with no legitimate use, sales in inflated amounts, each may provide a fact of sufficient moment from which the intent of the seller to participate in the criminal enterprise may be inferred. In such instances participation by the supplier of legal goods to the illegal enterprise may be inferred because in one way or another the supplier has acquired a special interest in the operation of the illegal enterprise. His intent to participate in the crime of which he has knowledge may be inferred from the existence of his special interest.
Yet there are cases in which it cannot reasonably be said that the supplier has a stake in the venture or has acquired a special interest in the enterprise, but in which he has been held liable as a participant on the basis of knowledge alone. Some suggestion of this appears in Direct Sales, supra, where both the knowledge of the illegal use of the drugs and the intent of the supplier to aid that use were inferred. In Regina v. Bainbridge (1959) 3 Week.L. 656 [(C.C.A. 6) [3 All Eng. 200, 123 J.P. 499, 43 Crim. App. 194], a supplier of oxygen-cutting equipment to one known to intend to use it to break into a bank was convicted as an accessory to the crime. In Sykes v. Director of Public Prosecutions [1962] A.C. 528, one having knowledge of the theft of 100 pistols, 4 submachine guns, and 1,960 rounds of ammunition was convicted of misprision of felony for failure to disclose the theft to the public authorities. [9] It seems apparent from these cases that a supplier who furnishes equipment which he knows will be used to commit a serious crime may be deemed from that knowledge alone to have intended to produce the result. Such proof may justify an inference that the furnisher intended to aid the execution of the crime and that he thereby became a participant. For instance, we think the operator of a telephone answering service with positive knowledge that his service was being used to facilitate the extortion of ransom, the distribution of heroin, or the passing of counterfeit money who continued to furnish the service with knowledge of its use, might be chargeable on knowledge alone with participation in a scheme to extort money, to distribute narcotics, or to *481 pass counterfeit money. The same result would follow the seller of gasoline who knew the buyer was using his product to make Molotov cocktails for terroristic use.
Logically, the same reasoning could be extended to crimes of every description. [10] Yet we do not believe an inference of intent drawn from knowledge of criminal use properly applies to the less serious crimes classified as misdemeanors. The duty to take positive action to dissociate oneself from activities helpful to violations of the criminal law is far stronger and more compelling for felonies than it is for misdemeanors or petty offenses. In this respect, as in others, the distinction between felonies and misdemeanors, between more serious and less serious crime, retains continuing vitality. In historically the most serious felony, treason, an individual with knowledge of the treason can be prosecuted for concealing and failing to disclose it. (Pen. Code, § 38; 18 U.S.C. § 2382.) [11] In other felonies, both at common law and under the criminal laws of the United States, an individual knowing of the commission of a felony is criminally liable for concealing it and failing to make it known to proper authority. (4 Blackstone 121; Sykes v. Director of Public Prosecutions [1962] A.C. 528; 18 U.S.C. § 4.) [12] But this crime, known as misprision of felony, has always been limited to knowledge and concealment of felony and has never extended to misdemeanor. A similar limitation is found in the criminal liability of an accessory, which is restricted to aid in the escape of a principal who has committed or been charged with a felony. (Pen. Code, § 32.) We believe the distinction between the obligations arising from knowledge of a felony and those arising from knowledge of a misdemeanor continues to reflect basic human feelings about the duties owed by individuals to society. Heinous crime must be stamped out, and its suppression is the responsibility of all. (Backun v. United States, 112 F.2d 635, 637.) Venial crime and crime not evil in itself present less of a danger to society, and perhaps the benefits of their suppression through the modern equivalent of the posse, the hue and cry, the informant, and the citizen's arrest, are outweighed by the disruption to everyday life brought about by amateur law enforcement and private officiousness in relatively inconsequential delicts which do not threaten our basic security. The subject has been summarized in an English text on the criminal law: "Failure to reveal a felony to the authorities is now authoritatively determined to be misprision of felony, which is a commonlaw misdemeanour; *482 misprision of treason is punishable with imprisonment for life.... No offence is committed in failing to disclose a misdemeanour....
"`To require everyone, without distinction, as to the nature and degree of the offence, to become an accuser, would be productive of inconvenience in exposing numbers to penal prosecutions, multiplying criminal charges, and engendering private dissension. It may sometimes be more convenient that offences should be passed over, than that all should indiscriminately be made the subject of prosecution; and a law would be considered to be harsh and impolitic, if not unjust, which compelled every party injured by a criminal act, and, still more so, to compel everyone who happened to know that another had been so injured, to make a public disclosure of the circumstances. Here, therefore, there is reason for limiting the law against mere misprisions to the concealment of such crimes as are of an aggravated complexion.'" (Criminal Law, Glanville Williams (2d ed.) p. 423.)
[13] With respect to misdemeanors, we conclude that positive knowledge of the supplier that his products or services are being used for criminal purposes does not, without more, establish an intent of the supplier to participate in the misdemeanors. With respect to felonies, we do not decide the converse, viz., that in all cases of felony knowledge of criminal use alone may justify an inference of the supplier's intent to participate in the crime. The implications of Falcone make the matter uncertain with respect to those felonies which are merely prohibited wrongs. See also Holman v. Johnson (1775) 98 Eng.Rep. 1120 (sale and delivery of tea at Dunkirk known to be destined for smuggling into England not an illegal contract). But decision on this point is not compelled, and we leave the matter open.
[14] From this analysis of precedent we deduce the following rule: the intent of a supplier who knows of the criminal use to which his supplies are put to participate in the criminal activity connected with the use of his supplies may be established by (1) direct evidence that he intends to participate, or (2) through an inference that he intends to participate based on, (a) his special interest in the activity, or (b) the aggravated nature of the crime itself.
[15] When we review Lauria's activities in the light of this analysis, we find no proof that Lauria took any direct action to further, encourage, or direct the call-girl activities of his codefendants and we find an absence of circumstance from *483 which his special interest in their activities could be inferred. Neither excessive charges for standardized services, nor the furnishing of services without a legitimate use, nor an unusual quantity of business with call girls, are present. The offense which he is charged with furthering is a misdemeanor, a category of crime which has never been made a required subject of positive disclosure to public authority. Under these circumstances, although proof of Lauria's knowledge of the criminal activities of his patrons was sufficient to charge him with that fact, there was insufficient evidence that he intended to further their criminal activities, and hence insufficient proof of his participation in a criminal conspiracy with his codefendants to further prostitution. Since the conspiracy centered around the activities of Lauria's telephone answering service, the charges against his codefendants likewise fail for want of proof.
In absolving Lauria of complicity in a criminal conspiracy we do not wish to imply that the public authorities are without remedies to combat modern manifestations of the world's oldest profession. Licensing of telephone answering services under the police power, together with the revocation of licenses for the toleration of prostitution, is a possible civil remedy. The furnishing of telephone answering service in aid of prostitution could be made a crime. (Cf. Pen. Code, § 316, which makes it a misdemeanor to let an apartment with knowledge of its use for prostitution.) Other solutions will doubtless occur to vigilant public authorities if the problem of call-girl activity needs further suppression.
The order is affirmed.
Herndon, J., concurred.
Roth, P.J., concurred in the judgment.

=== CASE 2214561 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:49.126532+00 ===

251 Cal.App.2d 391 (1967)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
GEORGE LARRY HILL, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 12764.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. One.
May 29, 1967.
Laurence M. Sarnoff, under appointment by the Court of Appeal, for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and Lawrence E. Mindell, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
FOURT, J.
This is an appeal from a judgment of conviction of rape.
In an information filed in Los Angeles County on February 18, 1966, defendant was charged with raping Odessa M. Nelson (a person of the age of 16 years), on or about September 25, 1965. Defendant pleaded not guilty and in a jury trial held on April 20, 1966, was found guilty as charged. Probation was denied and defendant was sentenced on May 13, 1966, to one year in the county jail, with good time allowed if earned. A timely notice of appeal was filed.
A resume of some of the facts is as follows: Defendant, who knew that Odessa Nelson was only 15 years of age when he met her in November 1964, engaged in many acts of sexual intercourse with her from the date of meeting her to about September 1965. Odessa became pregnant as a result of the activities with defendant and gave birth to a child on January 12, 1966. Sergeant Gardner, attached to the Watts juvenile division, and Sergeant Oliver talked with defendant after advising him of his rights to remain silent, to the services of an attorney and that anything he said could be used against him. Defendant stated that he was the father of Odessa's child and that he had had frequent acts of sexual intercourse with her.
Defendant now contends that he was denied his right to a speedy trial, that he was not informed of the nature of the accusation against him and that the jury was improperly instructed.
The information was filed on Friday, February 18, 1966, and the trial was had on Wednesday, April 20, 1966, 61 days later.
On February 25, 1966, the date appellant pleaded not guilty, the trial was set for April 18, 1966. On Monday, April 18, 1966, the cause was called for trial and due to a congested calendar trailed to April 19, 1966. On April 19, 1966, due to a congested calendar the matter trailed to April 20, 1966. No *393 motion was made by defendant, nor did he advise the court that he refused to abide by the continuance or that he would insist upon going to trial on April 19. The minutes recite that on April 20, 1966, a jury was sworn, the "[r]eading of the information" was waived, testimony was taken and the matter submitted to the jury at 11:40 a.m. At 1:45 p.m. the jury returned with a verdict of guilty as charged.
[1] The right to a trial within the prescribed statutory and constitutional limits may be waived. (See People v. Wilson, 60 Cal.2d 139, 148 [32 Cal.Rptr. 44, 383 P.2d 452]; Chinn v. United States, 288 F.2d 151, 153; Morland v. United States, 193 F.2d 297, 298; People v. Tahtinen, 50 Cal.2d 127, 131 [323 P.2d 442].)
[2] The rule is clear to the effect that a defendant impliedly consents to a continuance beyond the 60-day limit unless he takes some action to inform the court that he does not waive his right. Failure to object is the equivalent of consent. (See People v. O'Leary, 130 Cal.App.2d 430, 436 [278 P.2d 933]; Ray v. Superior Court, 208 Cal. 357, 358 [281 P. 391]; People v. Hocking, 140 Cal.App.2d 778, 780 [296 P.2d 59]; People v. Tahtinen, supra, 50 Cal.2d 127, 131-132; People v. Johnson, 205 Cal.App.2d 831, 834 [23 Cal.Rptr. 608]; People v. Wilson, supra, 60 Cal.2d 139, 146, 148.) [3] In any event, defendant should not be permitted to wait until the matter is in this court before raising the question.
[4a] At the start of the trial, the court made inquiry whether the reading of the information would be waived and counsel for defendant stated "So waived" and the prosecution said, "So waived, your Honor." The jury was fully aware of the nature of the charge as was appellant. (See People v. Sprague, 53 Cal. 491, 494-495; People v. Twiggs, 223 Cal.App.2d 455, 464 [35 Cal.Rptr. 859].) Appellant was represented by counsel at the arraignment and it will be presumed here, in absence of anything to the contrary, that official duty was performed. [5] One of the purposes of the arraignment is to inform the accused of the charge and to permit him to plead to it or move to set the charge aside. (See People v. White, 222 Cal.App.2d 774, 780 [35 Cal.Rptr. 571]; People v. Williams, 171 Cal.App.2d 267, 268-269 [340 P.2d 294].)
[4b] The waiver of counsel under the circumstances in this case was sufficient. (See People v. Herrera, 209 Cal.App.2d 748, 752 [26 Cal.Rptr. 409]; People v. Hendrix, 197 Cal.App.2d 327, 328 [17 Cal.Rptr. 79]; People v. Shack, 55 Cal.App.2d 16, 19 [130 P.2d 197].) *394
[6] The court gave CALJIC instruction No. 501.  [fn. 1] Appellant now complains that the instruction as given makes no provisions for the situation where the accused thought that the victim was over the age of consent. (See People v. Hernandez, 61 Cal.2d 529 [39 Cal.Rptr. 361, 393 P.2d 673, 8 A.L.R.3d 1092].) No such an instruction was requested and further appellant testified in his own behalf and stated that he understood the charge being made against him, that he had wanted a jury trial, that he knew Odessa was only 15 years of age, that he had had several acts of sexual intercourse with her and that he was the father of her child. Had appellant desired any such modified instruction, he should have requested it. (See People v. Shepherd, 223 Cal.App.2d 166, 173 [35 Cal.Rptr. 497]; People v. Fernandez, 222 Cal.App.2d 760, 767 [35 Cal.Rptr. 370]; People v. Lombardi, 205 Cal.App.2d 803, 805 [23 Cal.Rptr. 325].)
There is no merit to any of appellant's contentions.
The judgment is affirmed.
Wood, P. J., and Lillie, J., concurred.
"An act of sexual intercourse accomplished with a female person, under the age of eighteen years and not the wife of the perpetrator, is declared by our law to be the crime of rape. The offense commonly is termed statutory rape [[TEXT STRICKEN]-[to distinguish it from rape by force or violence as defined elsewhere in my instructions]-]."
"In legal contemplation, a female person under the age of eighteen years and not the wife of the perpetrator is incapable of consenting to an act of sexual intercourse. Therefore upon a prosecution for statutory rape, if the alleged act of sexual intercourse has been proved, the defendant has no defense in the fact, if it be a fact, that the female person involved consented to the act."
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. "Statutory Rape

=== CASE 2214584 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:49.449702+00 ===

891 N.E.2d 587 (2008)
Michael CARPENTER, Appellant-Petitioner,
v.
Shawna CARPENTER, Appellee-Respondent.
No. 48A04-0801-CV-1.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
July 31, 2008.
*590 Richard Ranucci, Indianapolis, IN, Attorney for Appellant.
Christopher A. Cage, Anderson, IN, Attorney for Appellee.
*591 OPINION
ROBB, Judge.
Case Summary and Issues
Michael Carpenter ("Father") appeals from the trial court's order on his petitions for modification of child custody and child support; and for emancipation of child and for child support.[1] Father raises four issues, which we restate as: 1) whether the trial court's finding that Father's son, B.C., was only partially capable of supporting himself was clearly erroneous; 2) whether the trial court improperly declined to order that Father be reimbursed for overpayment of a child support arrearage; 3) whether the trial court improperly modified the initial decree by allowing his former wife to claim two tax exemptions previously used by him; and 4) whether the trial court improperly determined the amount of weekly child support owed by Father. Concluding the evidence does not support the trial court's finding that B.C. is only partially capable of supporting himself, we reverse and remand. We also conclude that the trial court's findings do not support the re-assignment of the tax exemptions, and instruct the trial court to reconsider its determination after addressing the factors set out in the Child Support Guidelines. Finally, we direct the trial court to make findings of fact regarding Father's overpayment, and to issue new findings regarding this issue. Because we are remanding for a new order, we need not address the fourth issue.
Facts and Procedural History
Father and Shawna Carpenter ("Mother") were married in 1987 and had four children. On January 6, 2004, the trial court entered a decree of dissolution and approved the parties' settlement agreement. Under this agreement, Mother was to have custody of the children, and Father was to pay child support in the amount of $345 per week plus an additional $25 per week towards a $6,000 arrearage. Pursuant to the agreement and the trial court's order, these payments were made through wage assignment. The agreement indicated that Mother would assign the four tax exemptions for the children to Father.
On May 13, 2004, the Madison County Prosecuting Attorney intervened to collect child support, and notified the Secretary of the Treasury of Father's child support arrearage so that Father's federal tax refunds could be withheld to pay the arrearage. On February 9, 2006, the trial court issued an order indicating that Father's arrearage had been paid in full. Father then took action to reduce the amount withheld from his wages so that he was no longer paying the $25 per week. As discussed in more detail below, due to either the tax intercept or Father's wage withholdings, Father ultimately overpaid his arrearage by $2,693.
On April 18, 2007, Father filed a Verified Motion for Modification of Child Custody and Child Support, and a Verified Motion for Emancipation of Child and for Modification of Child Support. Although Father has failed to include copies of these motions in his appendix, it is apparent that Father requested that the trial court grant him custody of one child, who had moved out of Mother's residence and in with Father; terminate his child support obligation with regard to B.C., his oldest son; and credit Father for the overpayment on his arrearage. At the hearing on Father's motions, Mother requested that the trial *592 court allow her to retain two of the tax exemptions.
On November 13, 2007, the trial court entered an order along with findings and conclusions. In this order, the trial court concluded that B.C. was partially emancipated, declined to give Father credit for overpayment of his arrearage, ordered Mother to sign a waiver of one tax exemption and allowed her to retain two tax exemptions,[2] and reduced Father's weekly child support obligation to $269.76. Father now appeals.
Discussion and Decision
I. Standard of Review
Indiana places a "strong emphasis on trial court discretion in determining child support obligations." Brown v. Brown, 849 N.E.2d 610, 613 (Ind.2006) (quoting Stultz v. Stultz, 659 N.E.2d 125, 128 (Ind.1995)). We will not reverse a trial court's decision regarding the modification of a child support order unless it is clearly erroneous. Id. On appeal, we do not reweigh evidence or judge witness credibility. See Butrum v. Roman, 803 N.E.2d 1139, 1146 (Ind.Ct.App.2004), reh'g denied, 806 N.E.2d 66 (Ind.Ct.App.2004), trans. denied. We will consider only the evidence and reasonable inferences from that evidence favorable to the judgment. Bales v. Bales, 801 N.E.2d 196, 198 (Ind. Ct.App.2004), trans. denied.
We also note that in this case, the trial court entered findings and conclusions at a party's request. Accordingly, "we are not at liberty simply to determine whether the facts and circumstances contained in the record support the judgment." McGinley-Ellis v. Ellis, 638 N.E.2d 1249, 1252 (Ind.1994). Instead, our standard of review is two-tiered: we will determine whether evidence supports the findings and then whether the findings support the judgment. Dedek v. Dedek, 851 N.E.2d 1048, 1050 (Ind.Ct.App.2006). We "shall not set aside the findings or judgment unless clearly erroneous." Ind. Trial Rule 52(A); see Dunson v. Dunson, 769 N.E.2d 1120, 1123 (Ind.2002). We will conclude a finding is clearly erroneous "when a review of the record leaves us firmly convinced that a mistake has been made." Dedek, 851 N.E.2d at 1050. We will conclude the trial court's "judgment is `clearly erroneous only if (i) its findings of fact do not support its conclusions of law or (ii) its conclusions of law do not support its judgment.'" Dunson, 769 N.E.2d at 1123 (quoting Quillen v. Quillen, 671 N.E.2d 98, 102 (Ind.1996)). Although we defer to a trial court's ability to find the facts, "we do not defer to conclusions of law, and a judgment is clearly erroneous if it relies on an incorrect legal standard." Dedek, 851 N.E.2d at 1050.
We note that in this case, the trial court adopted, verbatim, Mother's findings and conclusions.[3] Although wholesale adoption is not prohibited, we do not encourage trial courts to engage in this practice. See In re Marriage of Nickels, 834 N.E.2d 1091, 1096 (Ind.Ct.App.2005). We have recognized that "this practice weakens our confidence as an appellate court that the findings are the result of considered judgment by the trial court." Safety Nat'l Cas. Co. v. Cinergy Corp., 829 N.E.2d 986, 993 n. 6 (Ind.Ct.App.2005), trans. denied. Our confidence is particularly eroded in cases such as this, where the resolution depends "less on the credibility *593 of witnesses than on the inferences to be drawn from the facts and the legal effect of essentially unchallenged testimony." Village Commons, LLC v. Marion County Prosecutor's Office, 882 N.E.2d 210, 218 (Ind.Ct.App.2008) (quoting Prowell v. State, 741 N.E.2d 704, 708-09 (Ind. 2001)). Although we do not apply an altered standard of review when a trial court adopts a party's findings verbatim, "near verbatim reproductions may appropriately justify cautious appellate scrutiny." Stevens v. State, 770 N.E.2d 739, 762 (Ind. 2002), cert. denied, 540 U.S. 830, 124 S.Ct. 69, 157 L.Ed.2d 56 (2003).
II. Termination of Support Obligation
Indiana parents have a common law duty to support their children. Bales, 801 N.E.2d at 198. The obligation to pay child support usually continues until the child's twenty-first birthday. Lea v. Lea, 691 N.E.2d 1214, 1215 (Ind.1998). However, under Indiana Code section 31-16-6-6:
(a) The duty to support a child under this chapter ceases when the child becomes twenty-one (21) years of age unless any of the following conditions occurs:
* * *
(3) The child:
(A) is at least eighteen (18) years of age;
(B) has not attended a secondary or postsecondary educational institution for the prior four (4) months and is not in enrolled in a secondary or postsecondary educational institution; and
(C) is or is capable of supporting himself or herself through employment. In this case the child support terminates upon the court's finding that the conditions prescribed in this subdivision exist. However, if the court finds that the conditions set forth in clauses (A) through (C) are met but that the child is only partially supporting or is capable of only partially supporting himself or herself, the court may order that support be modified instead of terminated.
Here, it is undisputed that subsections (A) and (B) are satisfied. The only issue is whether the evidence supports the trial court's finding that "[B.C.] is not able to fully support himself without the aid of his parents and has no present ability to bear the full brunt of all the obligations which come with full emancipation." Appellant's App. at 11 (trial court finding of fact 14).
We first pause to clarify the apparent misconception held by Mother and the trial court. Subsection (a)(3) does not deal with the "emancipation" of a child; it merely identifies circumstances under which our legislature has determined a parent's obligation to pay child support should terminate. Whether a child is "emancipated" is an entirely separate inquiry. See Borders v. Noel, 800 N.E.2d 586, 591 (Ind.Ct.App.2003) (recognizing that subsection (a)(3) is an "alternative basis" to emancipation for terminating child support); Marshall v. Marshall, 601 N.E.2d 9, 12 n. 2 (Ind.Ct.App.1992) (recognizing that what is now subsection (a)(3)[4] "does not define emancipation"); Brancheau v. Weddle, 555 N.E.2d 1315, 1317 n. 1 (Ind.Ct.App.1990) (recognizing that because the father argues his support obligation should cease under what is now section (a)(3), "we have no occasion to consider whether [the child] was `emancipated' as the term is used in [what is now section (a)(1) ]"). That is, if the conditions of subsection (a)(3) are met, child support must *594 be terminated even if the child is not emancipated. See Marshall, 601 N.E.2d at 12 n. 2 (recognizing that a finding that the conditions of what is now subsection (a)(3) are met "terminates the parental obligation of support as a matter of law whether or not the court enters a finding of emancipation"). The trial court's findings and its comments at the hearing leave us with a substantial concern that it did not recognize that whether B.C. was emancipated was not determinative of whether support should cease under subsection (a)(3). See Appellant's App. at 14 (trial court finding that B.C. "has no present ability to bear the full brunt of all obligations which come with full emancipation"); Tr. at 14 (trial court stating that B.C. "still lives at home, he's not in school, he graduated from high school and he's got a ten dollar an hour job ... I don't think that makes him emancipated"); id. at 14 (trial court stating: "I lived at home til I was twenty-six (26) and ... I don't know when I became emancipated."); id. ("[I]f he moves out and keeps his own place, I think he clearly is emancipated."); id. at 42 ("Well, I based on what I heard before, he's not emancipated. He had the job, he was working, he was making some money. I don't think the evidence shows he was emancipated at all."). Mother, in her appellate brief, also makes various arguments relating to why B.C. is not or should not be "emancipated." We emphasize that whether B.C. is or should be "emancipated" is not at issue here. We need not decide whether our fear that the trial court misapplied the law renders remand or reversal necessary, however, as we conclude that the trial court's finding that B.C. was not capable of supporting himself is not supported by the evidence.
B.C. testified that he was currently working with an electrician company making $10.50 per hour. He testified that he normally worked forty hours per week, and sometimes more. When explaining why he still lived with Mother, he stated:
Ah, basically, I've gotten myself in a bind to where I've ah, I guess the debt ratio, they call it debt ratio, my debt is so high that the money coming in is, after I pay my bills, basically, I've not enough to move out. Cause I was gonna move in with my friend an he was only gonna charge me three hundred ($300.00) a month, but then once I figured out the luxuries and not having my mom around, you know, not making my lunch, not buying the lunch meat, [i]t'd be, ten bucks ($10.00) extra a month to spend on gas.
* * *
I'd much rather buy all the stuff I want now material wise and then once it's all paid off in a couple of years, move into a house. I'd rather live in a nice house with nice stuff rather than, you know, only have a nice house. If I live with my mom now, I can, don't have any bills. I can buy all my little toys, get them paid off and then when I do decide to move out, I'll have all those with me.
Tr. at 53-54. With regard to his expenses, B.C. identified a satellite bill, cell phone bill, a $1,500 debt with Best Buy for a flat-screen television, his car payment, and insurance for his car and his motorcycle. He also stated that he paid his grandparents periodically for the motorcycle, which they had bought for him as "basically a graduation gift." Id. at 55. He stated that "the reason I can't support myself is because, basically, too many small bills adding up and not enough coming in." Id. at 57.
We recognize that B.C. stated at the hearing that he was considering leaving his employment with the electrician company. However, he also indicated that he wished to stay there until he found another job, *595 that he has told a prospective employer that he would not take a job unless he received the same pay as at his present job, but that he "would almost take a fifty cent, you know pay cut to do what I love." Id. at 64.
We also note another apparent misconception held by the trial court and Mother. Both the trial court's findings and Mother's appellate brief seem to imply that because B.C. lives at home and receives substantial financial benefit from this arrangement, Father's support obligation should continue.[5] However, subsection (a)(3) makes crystal clear that a child need not be actually supporting himself, but must merely be capable of supporting himself. See Robles v. Robles, 855 N.E.2d 1049, 1054 (Ind.Ct.App.2006) ("Subsection (b)(3) requires the child to be self-supporting, while subsection (a)(3) requires the child to be self-supporting or capable of supporting himself or herself." (quoting Butrum, 803 N.E.2d at 1146)); Willard v. Peak, 834 N.E.2d 220, 223 (Ind.Ct.App. 2005) ("[U]nder exception (3) ... we must examine the issue both subjectively  whether she is supporting herself  and objectively  whether she is capable of supporting herself."). The trial court's findings and its statements at the hearing leave us in doubt that the trial court understood this distinction. Before the hearing, the trial court commented that "if he's given up that job, then your case [for ceasing child support] is, is gone." Tr. at 42. Voluntarily giving up a job would impact whether B.C. was actually supporting himself, but would not effect whether he was capable of supporting himself.
Although B.C. does have bills, they result from his purchase and maintenance of luxury items. These expenses are not the type we have previously found to support a conclusion that a child is incapable of supporting himself. See Brancheau, 555 N.E.2d at 1318 (finding that the evidence "establishes that [child] and her mother, with their incomes pooled, are unable to afford basic necessities such as dental care for [child]"). Indeed, the luxury items  a motorcycle in addition to a car, a television costing at least $1,500  are not fairly considered items that one must purchase in order to support himself or herself. B.C. has no dependents, was working fulltime making over $21,000 a year, and has no extraordinary expenses related to the necessities of life. Under these circumstances, the trial court's finding that B.C. was not fully capable of supporting himself is clearly erroneous.[6]Cf. Borders, 800 N.E.2d at 591 (concluding that evidence that the child was working full-time earning $8.55 per hour supported a conclusion that the child was capable of supporting himself).
We therefore reverse the trial court's order and remand with instructions that the court terminate Father's child support obligation with regard to B.C. and recalculate the amount of support. See In re Paternity of H.M.H. by Massey v. Hull, 691 N.E.2d 1308, 1310 (Ind.Ct.App.1998) (reversing the trial court's decision to order an execution of a waiver of an exemption, *596 and noting "that in doing so, the trial court may be required to recalculate support because one change such as this may produce a change in the entire economic situation of the parties").
III. Assignment of Tax Exemptions
In its conclusions, the trial court ordered that "the tax exemptions shall be modified so as to provide that [Father] claim [Co.C.] each year and [Mother] shall be permitted to claim [R.C.] and [C.C.] each year." Appellant's App. at 12. Our reversal of the trial court's decision that B.C. is only partially capable of supporting himself inherently requires the trial court to reconsider the allocation of the tax exemptions, see Hull, 691 N.E.2d at 1310; DeBoer v. DeBoer, 669 N.E.2d 415, 425 (Ind.Ct.App. 1996) ("With the reversal of the order concerning alimony, the trial court must redetermine the tax exemption claim."), trans. denied. However, to guide the trial court in making this determination, we will discuss the applicable law regarding the allocation of these exemptions.
Federal law grants a dependency exemption to the custodial parent, but allows that parent to execute a written waiver of that exemption. See 26 U.S.C. § 152(e). Indiana courts have held that "[i]n a proper case, the trial court may order the custodial parent to sign a waiver of the presumed right to claim the child as a dependent for federal income tax purposes." Skinner v. Skinner, 644 N.E.2d 141, 149 (Ind.Ct.App.1994). When determining whether to order such a waiver, the Child Support Guidelines recommend that a trial court consider the following factors:
(1) the value of the exemption at the marginal tax rate of each parent;
(2) the income of each parent;
(3) the age of the child(ren) and how long the exemption will be available;
(4) the percentage of the cost of supporting the child(ren) borne by each parent;
(5) the financial burden assumed by each parent under the property settlement in the case.
Ind. Child Support Guideline 6, Comment. "Taking into account those factors, a `trial court's equitable discretion should be guided primarily by the goal of making the maximum amount of child support available for the child.'" Sims v. Sims, 770 N.E.2d 860, 867 (Ind.Ct.App.2002) (quoting Lamon v. Lamon, 611 N.E.2d 154, 159 (Ind.Ct.App.1993)). "The noncustodial parent bears the burden of demonstrating the tax consequences of transferring the exemption and how such a transfer would benefit the child." Harris v. Harris, 800 N.E.2d 930, 941 (Ind.Ct.App.2003), trans. denied.
Although the Guidelines are worded in permissive terms ("it is recommended that at a minimum the following factors be considered"), our decisions make clear that a trial court should consider these factors if a party raises the issue of tax exemptions and that this court will assess these factors when determining whether the trial court abused its discretion. See Quinn v. Threlkel, 858 N.E.2d 665, 675 (Ind.Ct.App.2006) (indicating that "there are at least five factors for trial courts to consider when deciding whether to order a release of an exemption," and "considering all of these circumstances" in analyzing whether the trial court abused its discretion); Hull, 691 N.E.2d at 1309 (indicating that in Lamon, "we set forth factors to be considered in determining whether to order the custodial parent to sign a waiver of her right to the income tax dependency exemption" (emphasis added)); Skinner, 644 N.E.2d at 149 (recognizing *597 that there are three factors[7] "to be considered when assessing the trial court's discretion in determining whether to order a release of an exemption" (emphasis added)); Lamon, 611 N.E.2d at 159 (stating that there are three factors "to be considered"); cf. Eppler v. Eppler, 837 N.E.2d 167, 179 (Ind.Ct.App.2005) (concluding the trial court did not abuse its discretion in declining to order the wife to execute a waiver of her right to an exemption where the husband "fail[ed] to specifically demonstrate the tax consequences to the parties if the exemption were transferred and, most importantly, how such transfer would benefit the children"), trans. denied; Harris, 800 N.E.2d at 940 (reversing trial court's decision to order the mother to execute a waiver of the tax exemption where the record did not support a finding that Father would benefit from the exemption); Glover v. Torrence, 723 N.E.2d 924, 938 (Ind. Ct. App. 2000) (citing the five factors and concluding the trial court did not abuse its discretion based on the trial court's finding that the exemption "would serve to reduce the tax liability in Mother's Household").
Here, the trial court's findings do not indicate that it considered the relevant factors, even though Father introduced evidence relating to these factors. Father has also made some showing that his holding the exemption will benefit the children, as he has custody of one child, for whom he supplies a car, and exercises substantial parenting time with the rest of his children. See Sims, 770 N.E.2d at 867 (recognizing that "the noncustodial parent bears the burden of demonstrating ... how such a transfer would benefit the child[ren]").
On remand we direct the trial court to reconsider its decision regarding the tax exemptions in light of the factors discussed above and our observations regarding these factors. We also direct the trial court to make specific findings with regard to its decision. See Shafer v. Lambie, 667 N.E.2d 226, 232 (Ind.Ct.App.1996) (remanding with instructions that the trial court enter specific findings of fact to support its decision); cf. Skinner, 644 N.E.2d at 150 (remanding with instructions that the trial court conduct a new hearing to address the relevant factors and determine whether to order mother to execute a waiver of tax exemption).
IV. Overpayment of Child Support Arrearage
It is undisputed that Father overpaid his arrearage by $2,693. Father claims that "[t]he overpayment was involuntary as a result of tax intercepts." Appellant's Br. at 24. Mother first argues that Father "failed to properly present sufficient evidence to the trial court to support any finding that his overpayments were occasioned by tax intercepts," and appears to *598 argue that the overpayment was the result of his continuing payment towards the arrearage through his wage withholdings after the tax intercept. Appellee's Br. at 10. The trial court found:
7. That Petitioner paid support following the entry of the Court's dissolution decree and the evidence presented indicates that he was aware of the interception of his tax refunds in two separate years which were applied to his arrearage.
8. That Petitioner testified that he was aware of the fact that his arrearage was paid in full on February 7, 2006; and notice was provided to him by the Clerk of this Court.
9. That although aware of the satisfaction of his arrearage, Petitioner took no action to terminate the voluntary wage assignment, nor to seek modification or other relief from the Court for over a year until April 18, 2007 when he filed several motions concerning emancipation, support and custody.
Appellant's App. at 10-11. Based on these findings, the court concluded:
6. That the overpayment made by Petitioner was voluntary as he had requested the Court to withhold the wages from his pay and despite becoming aware of the fact that he was current in February, 2006; he took no action whatsoever to stop the voluntary wage assignment of wages; nor to seek other relief from the Court.
7. That equity and fairness dictate that his overpayment should be considered a gift in light of the facts and circumstances herein.
Id. at 12. Mother also argues that his claim is barred by laches. The trial court agreed, concluding:
8. That even were the Court to accept this overpayment as involuntary, Petitioner has waived or his claim is barred under the doctrine of laches as he asserted no reasonable excuse in asserting a right to reimbursement; acquiesced to the continued payment of this additional support for the next fourteen (14) months; the Respondent who was not notified of this arrearage payment in full continued to use the money received for the support of the children, especially when considering that in the interim period (August, 2006), she was required to pay off an additional business debt discharged by Petitioner in his bankruptcy using funds that may otherwise have been available for the support of the children.
Appellant's App. at 13.
A. Laches[8]
In order for the defense of laches to apply, the party claiming laches must establish three elements: "inexcusable delay in asserting a right, implied waiver from knowing acquiescence in existing conditions, and circumstances resulting in prejudice to the adverse party." Huber v. Sering, 867 N.E.2d 698, 710 (Ind.Ct.App. 2007), trans. denied. "Prejudice may be created if a party, with knowledge of the relevant facts, permits the passing of time to work a change of circumstances by the *599 other party." Gleeson v. Preferred Sourcing, LLC, 883 N.E.2d 164, 180 (Ind.Ct. App.2008). "Mere inconvenience is insufficient to establish prejudice." Ind. Real Estate Comm'n v. Ackman, 766 N.E.2d 1269, 1274 (Ind.Ct.App.2002). The party claiming laches must demonstrate that it "altered [its] position in a detrimental manner." Id.
Here the trial court's findings and conclusions do not identify any prejudice caused to Mother by Father's delay. See Shriner v. Sheehan, 773 N.E.2d 833, 846-47 (Ind.Ct.App.2002) (concluding the trial court abused its discretion in finding laches where it "did not explain how [a party's] claim would be prejudicial, and [the court was] at a loss to see where prejudice lies"), trans. denied. The trial court's conclusion references the fact that Mother paid a debt of Father's that was discharged in bankruptcy.[9] In her appellate brief, Mother also argues that Father's "bankruptcy and resulting shifting of the burden of paying those obligations ... constituted a change in circumstances." Appellee's Brief at 11. However, neither the trial court nor Mother explain how this change in circumstances has caused her prejudice with regard to Father's claim. Although Mother's circumstances may have changed, this change in circumstances did not deprive Mother of any claim or defense relating to Father's instant claims, and Mother can not show a nexus between this change and Father's delay.[10] Therefore, Mother cannot succeed on a claim of laches. See Ackman, 766 N.E.2d at 1274; In re Paternity of K.H., 709 N.E.2d 1033, 1036 (Ind.Ct.App.1999) (recognizing that although there had been a change in circumstances, there was no prejudice caused by this change in circumstances); LaPorte Production Credit Ass'n v. Kalwitz, 567 N.E.2d 1202, 1205 (Ind.Ct.App.1991) (concluding that the change in circumstances did not result in prejudice), trans. denied; Fields v. Evans, 484 N.E.2d 36, 39 (Ind.Ct. App.1985) (opinion on reh'g) (concluding laches was not available where party "did not plead or prove prejudice arising from any alleged delay" (emphasis added)); cf. State ex rel. Atty. Gen. v. Lake Superior Court, 820 N.E.2d 1240, 1256 (Ind.2005) (finding prejudice where a party waited three years to seek an injunction where the county was "now dependent on the results of that process to move forward"), cert. denied, 546 U.S. 927, 126 S.Ct. 398, 163 L.Ed.2d 276 (2005); Oakes v. Hattabaugh, 631 N.E.2d 949, 953 (Ind.Ct.App. 1994) (finding prejudice where a family built a home and purchased additional land in reliance on another's implied acquiescence to the family's violation of restrictive covenants), trans. denied. Mother has not explained, and we fail to discern, how Father's delay in filing the suit caused her any prejudice. Because the trial court's finding of prejudice is not supported by the evidence, we need not address the other elements of laches. See Siddall v. City of Michigan City, 485 N.E.2d 912, *600 916-17 (Ind.Ct.App.1985) (reversing order of summary judgment based on laches where the defendant failed to show prejudice).
As the trial court's conclusion that laches barred Father's claim is clearly erroneous, we will also discuss the merits of his claim.
B. Father's Request for Credit
Initially, we note that the trial court's findings regarding Father's overpayment contain both factual statements unsupported by the record and misstatements of the law. The trial court's findings and conclusions repeatedly refer to and rely on the voluntary nature of Father's wage assignment. We recognize that the parties agreed that "both the current support and arrears payment shall be accomplished by voluntary wage assignment." Appellant's App. at 3. However, the law requires that, absent a showing of extraordinary circumstances, "the court shall order that child support payments be immediately withheld from the income of the obligor." Ind.Code § 13-16-15-0.5(a).[11] Therefore, Father's decision to pay child support via wage withholding was voluntary only in the sense that Father voluntarily complied with the law.
Also, the trial court's finding that Father took no action for over a year after receiving notice that he had satisfied his arrearage is not supported by the evidence. Indeed, the record indicates that on February 17, 2006, just eight days after the trial court approved the order indicating that Father's arrearage was paid in full, Father's support payments decreased from $742 per paycheck to $690 per bi-weekly paycheck. See Appellant's App. at 30-31. This decrease clearly indicates that Father was no longer paying the $25 per week toward his arrearage. True, Father did not file the instant petition until more than a year after learning that he had satisfied his arrearage, but he clearly did not wait a year to ensure that he was not paying more than required.
As the trial court's conclusion that Father is not entitled to credit is based on clearly erroneous factual findings and legal reasoning, under our standard of review we must reverse this part of the trial court's order as well. However, as the trial court is required to issue a new support order on remand, we will address the legal principles implicated by Father's request for credit.
Under most circumstances, Indiana courts "prohibit[ ] child support obligors from attempting to satisfy their future support responsibilities through non-conforming payments that exceed the amount owed the support recipient." Brown v. Brown, 849 N.E.2d 610, 615 (Ind. 2006). Therefore, "child support payments cannot be applied prospectively to support not yet due at the time of the overpayment." Id. (quoting Drwecki v. Drwecki, 782 N.E.2d 440, 448 (Ind.Ct.App.2003)). This rule "prevents a non-custodial parent from building up a substantial credit and then later refusing to make support payments, [as such a situation] `would thwart the court's purpose of providing regular, uninterrupted income for the benefit of the children.'" Id. (quoting Drwecki, 782 N.E.2d at 448-49); see State v. Funnell, 622 N.E.2d 189, 191 (Ind.Ct.App.1993) ("One purpose of child support is to provide regular and uninterrupted support for the children."). Voluntary overpayments of child support are "properly treated as *601 [gratuities] to the children and no credit is granted." Brown, 849 N.E.2d at 615.
However, this rule "does not fully apply . . . where [a parent] did not voluntarily build up a substantial credit." Drwecki, 782 N.E.2d at 449. Therefore, where an overpayment is not voluntary, the amount may be credited to future child support payments. Flowers v. Flowers, 799 N.E.2d 1183, 1192 (Ind.Ct.App.2003) ("The amount of overpayment may then be credited to future child support payments to be made by [Father] or refunded by [Mother]."); Drwecki, 782 N.E.2d at 449-450[12]; cf. Best v. Best, 470 N.E.2d 84, 88 (Ind.Ct.App.1984) (affirming the trial court's order that mother repay father the amount of overpayment for their daughter's educational expenses induced by mother's fraudulent misrepresentations).
Here, all of Father's payments were made pursuant to wage assignments and tax intercepts  manners that clearly conform to the parties' agreement and court orders. Cf. O'Neil v. O'Neil, 535 N.E.2d 523, 524 (Ind.1989) ("[A]n obligated parent will not be allowed credit for payments not conforming to the support order."). As soon as Father received notice that he was current on his arrearage, he took steps to reduce the amount withheld from his bi-weekly paycheck. In sum, nothing in the record indicates that Father voluntarily overpaid his support obligation. We conclude Father's overpayment was not voluntary, and therefore is not subject to the general rule that overpayment of child support is inherently considered a gift. See Matson v. Matson, 569 N.E.2d 732, 734 (Ind.Ct.App.1991) (concluding that an "excess amount withheld [through a tax-intercept] should have been paid to [the father]").
Still, the question remains as to whether Father is entitled to reduced future support payments. Our reading of the federal tax-intercept law indicates that, if Father overpaid as a direct result of a federal tax intercept, he is not. The tax-intercept law allows a State agency to notify the Secretary of the Treasury "that a named individual owes past-due support which has been assigned to such State," and in turn directs the Secretary to withhold from that individual's tax refund "an amount equal to the past-due support." 42 U.S.C. § 664(a)(1). The Secretary then sends this amount to the State agency. Id. Therefore, "[t]he tax-intercept law essentially directs the Secretary to give priority to a State's claim for recoupment of welfare payments made to a family who failed to receive child support . . . over an individual's claim for refund of tax payment." Sorenson v. Sec. of Treas., 475 U.S. 851, 856, 106 S.Ct. 1600, 89 L.Ed.2d 855 (1986).
In response to due process concerns, Congress amended the Social Security Act in 1984 to ensure that the collection of child support through tax-intercepts satisfied due process. See generally, Faye R. Goldberg, Note, Child Support Enforcement: Balancing Increased Federal Involvement With Procedural Due Process, 19 SUFFOLK U.L. REV. 687, 711 (1985). In addition to adding notice and hearing *602 requirements, the 1984 amendments added a provision to section 664 that stated:
In any case in which an amount was withheld under paragraph (1) or (2) and paid to a State, and the State subsequently determines that the amount certified as past-due support was in excess of the amount actually owed at the time the amount withheld is to be distributed to or on behalf of the child, the State shall pay the excess amount withheld to the named individual thought to have owed the past-due support (or, in the case of amounts withheld on the basis of a joint return, jointly to the parties filing such return).
42 U.S.C. 664(a)(3)(D). This section indicates that obligated parents should not pay more than required because of the tax-intercept program. See Matson, 569 N.E.2d at 734. However, the statute's plain language indicates that it is the State that is responsible for reimbursing a parent who has been deprived of an amount of his or her tax refund.[13] 42 U.S.C. § 664(a)(3)(D) ("the State shall pay the excess amount withheld . . ."); see also 45 C.F.R. § 303.72(h)(4) ("If the amount collected is in excess of the amounts required to be distributed under section 457 of the Act, the IV-D agency must repay the excess to the noncustodial parent whose refund was offset or to the parties filing a joint return within a reasonable period in accordance with State law." (Emphasis added)); 49 FR 36780-01, 36790 ("Section 464(a)(3)(D) of the Act requires a State, in any case in which an amount is offset and the State subsequently determines that the amount certified for offset was in excess of the amount owed at the time of offset, to pay the excess to the absent parent or, in the case of amounts withheld on the basis of a joint return, jointly to the parties filing the return." (Emphasis added)). Therefore, if indeed an amount of Father's tax refund was withheld improperly, his complaint is not with Mother, but with the State of Indiana. See Howard v. Howard, 130 Wis.2d 206, 387 N.W.2d 96, 97 (Wis.Ct.App.1986) (recognizing that "this action is not the effort of [father's] ex-wife to enforce payment of arrearages. Rather, it is the effort of a state child support agency . . . to intercept federal tax refunds as provided by law."); cf. 26 C.F.R. § 301.6305-1(d)(3) ("This paragraph (d) [indicating that federal courts do not have jurisdiction to hear any action regarding the assessment or collection of certified amounts through tax-intercepts] does not preclude a State court or appropriate State agency . . . from exercising jurisdiction over a legal, equitable, or administrative action against the State by an individual to determine his liability for any certified amount assessed against him and collected." (Emphasis added)); Satorius v. U.S. Dep't of Treas.  I.R.S., 671 F.Supp. 592, 595 (E.D.Wis.1987) ("The plaintiff's complaint primarily challenges the validity of the underlying child support obligation assessed by [the County] and seeks damages and injunctive relief for the alleged wrongful interception of the plaintiff's tax refund. The tax refund has been transferred to a state agency and the *603 plaintiffs should litigate these claims in state court.").
However, the record is not clear as to whether an excess amount was withheld pursuant to the tax-intercept. It appears possible that Father did not begin to overpay until after the last tax-intercept.[14] If so, we are apparently faced with a situation where, due to delays in the notification process, neither Father nor Mother had received notice that Father had satisfied his arrearage until he had overpaid by $2,693. Although the parties clearly had some obligation to keep track of Father's payments to determine when the arrearage was satisfied, we express dismay that the system established by the State allows such a result. The State has clearly indicated that it prefers noncustodial parents to pay child support through wage withholding. The State therefore must take some responsibility in keeping track of such payments and notifying parents when they have met (or have failed to meet) such obligations.
In situations where the State does not promptly inform parents of an arrearage's satisfaction and a parent overpays, two options seem apparent: 1) reduce the noncustodial's parent's future payments, thereby depriving the children of the regular amount needed to support them; or 2) leave the noncustodial parent with no recourse through the custodial parent for the amount by which he has overpaid through the processes established by Congress and our legislature. Neither of these options is particularly desirable.[15]
On remand, if the trial court determines that the overpayment occurred after the tax-intercept, it is left with the task of weighing the equities and determining whether some reduction of future support payments is proper. In making this determination, the trial court should consider both the importance of payments' "regularity and continuity," and their "overall dollar amount," as these considerations are "equally important." Haycraft v. Haycraft, 176 Ind.App. 211, 216, 375 N.E.2d 252, 255 (1978).
Conclusion
We conclude that the trial court's conclusion that B.C. is "partially emancipated" is clearly erroneous, and remand with instructions that the trial court terminate Father's child support obligation with regard to B.C. We also conclude that the trial court's findings and conclusions do not support its judgment with regard to the tax exemptions or Father's overpayment, and instruct the trial court to issue a new order consistent with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.
BAKER, C.J. and RILEY, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Father has failed to include these petitions in his appendix. We direct counsel to Indiana Appellate Rule 49(A)(2)(f), which indicates the pleadings should be included in the appellant's appendix.
[2]  It appears that the trial court and the parties assume that B.C. will claim himself, thereby precluding Mother or Father from claiming him as a dependent.
[3]  Indeed, the trial court's order is captioned "Respondent's Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law."
[4]  Marshall was decided under Indiana Code section 31-1-11.5-12(d)(3), which is substantially identical to current Indiana Code section 31-16-6-6(a)(3), see Dennison v. Dennison, 696 N.E.2d 88, 90 n. 2 (Ind.Ct.App. 1998).
[5]  This misconception may be merely an extension of the misconception regarding the distinction between emancipation and discontinuing a support obligation under subsection (a)(3). Cf. Dunson v. Dunson, 769 N.E.2d 1120, 1124-25 (Ind.2002) (recognizing that for a child to be emancipated, the child must be outside the parents' control and actually be self-supporting).
[6]  We note that the poverty level for a single individual with no dependents in 2007 was $10,787. See U.S. Census Bureau Poverty Thresholds 2007, available at http://www. census.gov/hhes/www/poverty/threshld/thresh 07.html (last visited July 11, 2008).
[7]  Skinner and Lamon did not cite the current comment regarding tax exemptions. Prior to March 1, 1993, the Guidelines stated merely: "Development of these Guidelines did not take into consideration the awarding of the income tax exemption. Instead, it is recommended that each case be reviewed on an individual basis and that a decision be made in the context of each case." See Child Support Guideline 5, Commentary (1992). Lamon, which was handed down on March 29, 1993, cited the 1992 version of the Guidelines and analyzed cases from other jurisdictions addressing tax exemptions and concluded that the "[f]actors to be considered therefore are whether the noncustodial parent will be paying the majority of the support, the relative incomes of the parties, and the tax consequences of divesting the custodial parent of the exemption." 611 N.E.2d at 159. Skinner did not cite the Guideline's Comment regarding tax exemptions, but instead cited and discussed the three factors identified Lamon. 644 N.E.2d at 149. We note, however, that the three factors identified in Skinner and Lamon cover substantially the same ground as the five factors identified in the Guideline's Comment.
[8]  We note the general rule that laches does not apply to child support cases. See Paternity of J.A.P. ex rel. Puckett v. Jones, 857 N.E.2d 1, 10 (Ind.Ct.App.2006), trans. denied. However, this rule is based on the rationale that "Indiana courts will not penalize a child for his or her parent's delay in pursing child support." In re Paternity of P.W.J., 846 N.E.2d 752, 759 (Ind.Ct.App.206), clarified on reh'g, 850 N.E.2d 1024. This rationale does not apply to situations where a parent seeks credit or reimbursement for overpayment of child support. See id. at 761. Therefore, in the proper case, laches can serve to bar a parent from receiving credit for overpayment of child support.
[9]  It appears that after Father received a Chapter 7 discharge, two of Father's business creditors retained liens on the property owned jointly by Father and Mother during the marriage. Mother retained the property after the divorce. Mother decided to refinance this property on two occasions, February 2004 and August 2006. Both times, she was informed that she was required to first pay off a lien. Mother did not seek legal advice as to these claims, and paid roughly $3,200 in 2004 and roughly $2,600 in 2006.
[10]  Indeed, we find it hard to imagine a situation in which a party's circumstances will have remained absolutely static during a period of time. This element of laches would be hollow if it did not require that the change in circumstance was caused by the delay or worked some disadvantage toward the party in relation to the suit.
[11]  This version of the statute was adopted in 2007. However, the previous version of this statute contained substantially the same requirement. See Ind.Code § 31-16-15-1(a) (2006), repealed by P.L. 103-2007, Sec. 51.
[12]  In Drwecki, this court allowed a parent to recoup his overpayment on the following specific facts:
1) the petitioning parent has stayed current on his support obligation such that little arrearage exists; 2) the petitioning parent continued to follow the trial court's previous order despite a change in circumstances justifying a decrease in the support obligation; and 3) the trial court modified support to a time after the petition was filed.
782 N.E.2d at 449-50.
[13]  Father relies heavily on Matson in arguing that he should receive a future credit. Although Matson does not explicitly state that the father in that case should receive credit on future payments, the opinion implies as much, as it reverses the trial court's order denying the father credit. Although we agree with the Matson court's conclusion that the overpayment was not "voluntary," we disagree with its implication that the custodial parent should receive reduced future payments as a result, as the plain language of the federal statute clearly states that the State shall pay the excess amount withheld to the noncustodial parent.
[14]  On remand, the trial court should make a specific finding as to how this overpayment occurred.
[15]  We note the possibility that the noncustodial parent could have some recourse through the State. However, without statutory authorization for such an action, or caselaw indicating that such an action is sustainable, we make no statement as to whether such an action would be permitted or ultimately successful.

=== CASE 2214587 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:49.481996+00 ===

251 Cal.App.2d 1002 (1967)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
MANUEL SALAZAR MURRIETTA, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 12073.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Two.
June 22, 1967.
Alan F. Charles, under appointment by the Court of Appeal, for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and Edward J. Horowitz, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent. *1003
FLEMING, J.
Manuel Murrietta was convicted of possession of marijuana in violation of Health and Safety Code, section 11530, and committed to the Youth Authority. This appeal is from the judgment.
During daylight hours of May 2, 1965, California Highway Patrolman Norman White answered an accident call, and on his arrival at the scene he saw appellant alongside the driver's side of a car with a broken windshield. The pupils of appellant's eyes were dilated, his speech was slurred, and he was swaying unsteadily on his feet, unable to maintain his balance. His breath did not smell of alcohol. Appellant had sustained a cut above his right eye and a contusion on his forehead, and at the time of Officer White's arrival the blood on appellant's face was congealing. Appellant refused to accept aid or go to the hospital.
After sizing up Murrietta's condition, Officer White concluded that he was under the influence of alcohol or drugs and that because of this he was unable to care for himself. White testified he had investigated 1,000 to 2,000 traffic accidents in which there had been injuries, that 200 of these had involved head injuries, and that as a patrol officer he had observed 500 people who were drunk. Officer White arrested Murrietta for violation of Penal Code, section 647 subdivision (f), which makes it a misdemeanor to be "found in any public place under the influence of intoxicating liquor, or any drug ... in such a condition that he is unable to exercise care for his own safety. ..." Appellant was taken by ambulance to the jail section of Los Angeles County General Hospital to have his injuries checked, and at the hospital he was booked by Officer White and searched in the routine course of booking. The search uncovered a marijuana cigarette in the left breast pocket of his shirt.
Testifying on his own behalf Murrietta denied having the cigarette in his shirt pocket at the time of his arrest, and, alternatively, claimed that he did not know it was there. He obtained the shirt from a friend and had been wearing it for two days. He did not remember being with the officer at any time after the accident, or having been booked and searched at the hospital.
On appeal, Murrietta contends there was no reasonable cause to justify his arrest under section 647 subdivision (f), and, therefore, his arrest was unlawful. Since his arrest was unlawful, his search incident to that arrest was unlawful; since the search was unlawful, the product of that search, the *1004 marijuana cigarette, should have been excluded from evidence, and without that evidence his conviction would fall for want of proof. (People v. Cahan, 44 Cal.2d 434 [282 P.2d 905, 50 A.L.R.2d 513].)
Penal Code, section 836, subdivision 1, allows a peace officer to make an arrest without a warrant when he has reasonable cause to believe that a public offense has been committed in his presence. Being in a public place under the influence of liquor or drugs in such condition that one is unable to exercise care for one's own safety is a public offense, and the sole question before the court is whether the police officer had reasonable cause to take Murrietta into custody and transport him to the jail section of the hospital for booking.
[1] The test of reasonable cause for an arrest is more evidence for than against, so that a man of ordinary care and prudence, knowing what the arresting officer knows, would be led to believe or conscientiously entertain a strong suspicion of the accused's guilt, although reserving some possibility for doubt. (People v. Ingle, 53 Cal.2d 407 [2 Cal.Rptr. 14, 348 P.2d 577]; People v. Carrigan, 221 Cal.App.2d 680 [34 Cal.Rptr. 574]; People v. Steffano, 177 Cal.App.2d 414 [2 Cal.Rptr. 176]; People v. Herrera, 221 Cal.App.2d 8 [34 Cal.Rptr. 305].) Reasonable cause is "such a state of facts as would lead a man of ordinary care and prudence to believe and conscientiously entertain an honest and strong suspicion that the person is guilty of a crime." (People v. Ingle, 53 Cal.2d 407, 412 [2 Cal.Rptr. 14, 348 P.2d 577].) [2] "The court looks only at the facts and circumstances presented to the officer at the time he was required to act." (People v. Murphy, 173 Cal.App.2d 367, 377 [343 P.2d 273]; People v. Ambrose, 199 Cal.App.2d 846, 849 [19 Cal.Rptr. 102].)
[3] Prior to the arrest, Officer White observed that appellant's eyes were dilated, his speech slurred, his feet unsteady, his body swaying in circles and unable to maintain its balance. White saw that appellant had a cut over one eye and a contusion on his forehead, and noted appellant's refusal to go to the hospital. From these observations White concluded "that he [appellant] was under the influence of alcohol and-or drugs of some type," and unable to exercise care for his own safety. White's experience as a highway patrolman tended to strengthen his credibility as a witness on this subject. As a highway patrolman he had investigated 500 accidents involving people who were drunk and 200 accidents involving head injuries. On the basis of this experience White was highly *1005 qualified to draw rational conclusions from his observations at the scene. We agree with the trial court that reasonable cause for the arrest existed, and that Officer White could have reasonably concluded from what he saw and heard that Murrietta was unable to care for himself because of alcohol or drugs and was therefore violating Penal Code, section 647 subdivision (f).
Here, we are dealing with probabilities and not with certainties. By this standard the arrest was authorized, the search was proper, the evidence was admissible, the conviction was supported, and the judgment is valid.
Judgment affirmed.
Roth, P. J., and Herndon, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9738274 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:47:39.428134+00 ===

REGAN, J.
After trial by the court, a jury having been waived, petitioner was found guilty of two counts of violation of section 11501 of the Health and Safety Code (sale of a narcotic other than marijuana). Judgment of conviction was pronounced on November 26, 1963. In his appeal, petitioner, who was represented by counsel, raised the following contentions : insufficiency of the evidence, entrapment, and the denial of the right of confrontation. The judgment was affirmed on November 2,1964.
Petitioner has filed this petition for writ of habeas corpus contending the admission into evidence of a tape recording between petitioner and police officers was prejudicial error. Respondent argues that the objection to its admission could have been raised on appeal and that therefore habeas corpus does not lie, that there was no “process of interrogations” that lent itself to eliciting incriminating statements, and that any error, if error there be, was harmless.
Petitioner’s trial was prior to June 13, 1966, the date on which Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 [16 L.Ed.2d 694, 86 S.Ct. 1602, 10 A.L.R.3d 974], was decided. Thus, that decision is not applicable here. However, the decisions in Escobedo v. Illinois, 378 U.S. 478 [12 L.Ed.2d 977, 84 S.Ct. 1758] and People v. Dorado, 62 Cal.2d 338 [42 Cal.Rptr. 169, 398 P.2d 361], do apply as petitioner’s case, although tried prior thereto, had not become final on June 22, 1964. (People v. Rollins, 65 Cal.2d 681 [56 Cal.Rptr. 293, 423 P.2d 221].)
After examining the entire record we conclude the judgment of conviction rests upon a confession violative of Escobedo and Dorado and therefore cannot stand.
The proscriptions of Dorado are evident here. The investigation was no longer a general inquiry into an unsolved crime but had begun to focus on petitioner; the petitioner was in custody; the police authorities were carrying out a process of interrogation that lent itself to eliciting incriminating statements and that did elicit such statements; the police authorities had not effectively informed petitioner of his right to *371counsel or of his absolute right to remain silent, and there is no evidence here that petitioner waived these rights. (People v. Dorado, supra, 62 Cal.2d at pp. 353-354.)
The evidence produced at the trial was sufficient to support the conviction of petitioner for the sale of a narcotic as charged. Under the provisions of section 31, Penal Code, petitioner was a principal in the crime committed.
At the trial, counsel for petitioner and the state stipulated that the tape-recorded conversation of petitioner and the police officers would be admitted into evidence, and the tape was heard in court. The setting for the recorded interview was the Los Angeles Police Department, with petitioner and three police officers present, and after his arrest. It proceeded by the question and answer technique and elicited statements amounting to a confession.
The questioning of petitioner, who was not given a full and effective warning of his rights at the outset of the interrogation process, was in a police-dominated atmosphere, lacking any semblance of brutalizing practices, but rather a classic example of the soft-sell, in-custody interrogation—psychologically rather than physically oriented. (See Miranda v. Arizona, supra, 384 U.S. 436 [16 L.Ed.2d 694, 86 S.Ct. 1602, 10 A.L.R.3d 974].) The recording1 furnished ample corroboration of the prosecution’s police witness.
We examine now respondent’s contention that petitioner has waived the right to present the Escobedo-Dorado contention on habeas corpus because he failed to present the ques*372tian on direct appeal and citing therefor In re Varnum, 63 Cal.2d 629, 631 [47 Cal.Rptr. 769, 408 P.2d 97] ; In re Spencer, 63 Cal.2d 400 [46 Cal.Rptr. 753, 406 P.2d 33] ; In re Shipp, 62 Cal.2d 547, 551-553 [43 Cal.Rptr. 3, 399 P.2d 571]; and In re Dixon, 41 Cal.2d 756, 759-761 [264 P.2d 513].
*373The general rule is, of course, that habeas corpus cannot serve as a substitute for appeal in the absence of special circumstances. (In re Shipp, supra, 62 Cal.2d at p. 552.) Nevertheless, this court may afford collateral relief on constitutional grounds if the petitioner had no opportunity to raise the constitutional issue at trial and on appeal. (In re Spencer, supra, 63 Cal.2d at p. 406.)
Petitioner’s trial was held on October 30, 1963, prior to Escobedo, which was decided on June 22, 1964. The first Dorado decision was filed on August 31,1964, but a rehearing was granted on September 24, 1964. Petitioner’s conviction was affirmed on appeal on November 2, 1964. The second Dorado decision was filed on January 29, 1965.
It is apparent from the foregoing chronology that petitioner had no opportunity to raise the constitutional issue at his trial. It is true that after the decision in Escobedo the issue could have been raised on appeal by supplemental letter, reply brief, oral argument, or petition for rehearing. As can be seen from the foregoing history, however, the California law on this matter was uncertain and indefinite until after petitioner’s appeal had become final. Thus, there are special circumstances present here. In our view the impact of the Esco*374bedo-Dorado doctrine and its ensuing aftershocks compel us to hold that petitioner had no true opportunity to raise the constitutional issue on appeal and that there could be no waiver. This ease is thus distinguishable from In re Shipp, supra, 62 Cal.2d 547, and petitioner may therefore invoke Escobedo and Dorado and collaterally attack his judgment. (See In re Spencer, supra, 63 Cal.2d 400, 406.)
The writ is granted and the judgment and sentence for violation of section 11501 of the Health and Safety Code is set aside. Petitioner is remanded to the custody of the Superior Court of Los Angeles County for a new trial.
The recording:
“Q. Well, Ted, you probably know what this is all about. I am Heekl. This is Gain. We work narcotics. You probably know what this is all about.
“A. I think I do now. I think I understand.
“Q. A guy plays around a little out there and sooner or later does business with a man—something happens to him, you know.
“A. Yeah, well I’ll tell you officer—in this particular case, being truthful, I never had any narcotics to sell anyone. But I had Tcnown people that do sell it, so when this gentleman approached me I thought he was a user too. Naturally, 1 be short with my money. I was riding with another fellow named. Jim. I couldn’t get out of the car, you Tcnow to go with nobody, but I Tcnew people, and I would tell him where to go to get it from these people. In turn I would get a little something for myself. That is the way it happened.
‘1 How many capers did you cut with this guy here ? Sit down here.
“A. This gentleman here?
“Q. Yeah.
“A. I don’t know. It couldn’t have been a great number.
“Q. Couple, three ?
“A. Two or three, maybe something like that. I didn’t have anything *372in my possession. It was just that I knew somebody that did. So naturally the person approached me, and he was asked whether I knew anybody where he could get a taste. I knew if I used anything I had trouble.
“Q. You use junk?
“A. Yeah, I use a little anytime I have trouble. I do. I am truthful about that.
‘ ‘ Q. That is the only way to be, Otha.
Q. You know, Ted, something funny is going on around here. You take an unfortunate person shifting around and uses a little stuff once in a while. These dudes that don’t use are out there giving you half a taste and charging you $10-$15 for it. They’re eating steaks and driving Cadillacs while some poor boy is hung up. I’d just like to, you know, this is something, you know, I am curious about—don’t understand it. Why do you guys protect these dudes?
“A. Well, I tell you the truth. I am not protecting no one, officer.
“Q. Now you take a fellow like this. Now here is an officer. This is Officer Benton. Now he is a clean dude. He just hits town. How come somebody would attack this poor guy—get him started, get him hooked, put a spike in his arm?
' “A. I understand. See—but now in this particular ease when he approached me I had no idea of knowing that he didn’t use narcotics.
‘ ‘ Q. That is right. You thought he was an old pro.
“A. That is right.
“Q. Because he acted like an old pro.
“A. I would never induce him—say come on, do this or that. When he approached me I had the understanding that he, you know, used narcotics.
“Q. You see I am selfish. I’m looking at this from a policeman’s standpoint, see? You take a guy, you know. He spends a few bills a month with some guy buying these little short bags—$6 or $8 for a gram. Can’t even get straight. Can even wake up in the morning.
■ “A. You’re right. You’re true.
"Q. Now then, you spend a lot of money over a period of time with this dude. He don’t use. He is eating steaks and driving Cadillacs.
“A. Bight. That is right.
‘ ‘ Q. But you show up short some morning with $3 and try to score.
“A. That is right.
“Q. Oh, he’ll buy you a hamburger, soda pop, give you a buck for your gas, you know, man.
“A. Couple of dollars to make up what I was short or something. Yeah, well so far as —
"Q. Cold, huh?
“A. Yeah. It’s happened. It’s happened to me. I couldn’t get out of the car to do anything. That’s right. But just sit there and wait for somebody to do something for me.
‘ ‘ Q. They hang you, and hang you up, and hang you up.
“A. That’s the truth.
I’ll bet you could write a book. I bet it would be interesting, too. You ought to write one.
“A. I’ll probably have enough time to do it. [Laughter.]
*373”Q. Yeah, Ted. It’s rough, but that’s the way the game is—sometimes you win, sometimes you lose.
“A. But just like I say, you know, I can’t deny that I have did this, you know, but I say I never had had a bag oí boca of my own to sell, you know. I always knew people that did have it to sell.
”Q. You know, we have a heck of a program in California. It’s probably the best program in the country. Maybe we can give you some help. I don’t know, but maybe we can try.
"A. Whatever. I don’t know.
”Q. You are just half a man right now. You can make a living.
“A. Yes, I worked for a fellow until he went out of business.
“Q. All right. Bight now you are half a man. When you are using junk, you are half a man. So if you can straighten yourself out, you can make it.
“ A. I know it. I understand that.
‘ ‘ Q. Ted, you are a desperate person on top of all these problems and before that you worked as a clerk. You were a clerk and a damned good clerk, I understand.
“A. Yes, I was. I worked steady.
‘ ‘ Q. Probably you were more dependable than guys who could come to work every day.
“A. I didn’t miss many days.
‘ ‘ Q. Then you got. yourself a habit and couldn ’t work any more ? Here, I’ll get you a cigarette, man;
“A. Okay.
“Q. Ted, do you want a cigarette? Can you make it all right? Take your time, no hurry,” (Italics added.)

=== CASE 9738275 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:47:39.433081+00 ===

FRIEDMAN, J.
I concur. Justice Regan’s opinion fully demonstrates the constitutional error which characterized petitioner’s conviction and its availability as a basis of collateral attack on that conviction. I am troubled, however, by the obtrusive demands of article VI, section 13, of the California Constitution, which prohibits reviewing courts from setting aside convictions unless error has caused a miscarriage of justice. This salutary prohibition applies in habeas corpus as well as appellate review. (In re Spencer, 63 Cal.2d 400, 404-408 [46 Cal.Rptr. 753, 406 P.2d 33]; In re Winchester, 53 Cal.2d 528, 531-532 [2 Cal.Rptr. 296, 348 P.2d 904].)
Aside from petitioner’s incriminating statements to the police, independent evidence fully demonstrated his guilt. He was caught in flagrante delicto, driven in an automobile by a plainclothes officer of the Los Angeles Police Department in company with an informer, directing the officer to the haunts of heroin peddlers and fetching the officer heroin in return for money. He was a commission man who, for each transaction, kept one balloon of heroin for his own use. At the trial the officer testified in detail. The four balloons sold the officer— one red, one blue and two yellow—were admitted in evidence. Petitioner’s plea of innocence was apparently premised on the hopeless notion that he maintained no stock-in-trade and 1 ‘ sold ’ ’ no heroin, but was only a go-between.
The case was tried before a judge sitting without a jury. Putting the confession to one side, the trial court could acquit petitioner only on the unsupported assumption that the plainclothes officer was committing elaborate perjury or an egregious error of identity. (Petitioner is a physically handicapped person.) If endowed in 1963 with a presentiment of the 1964-1965 Escobedo-Dorado development, the prosecutor would doubtless have avoided the confession as a plague. It *375was no more needed than Jack Buby’s admission that he shot Oswald.
Petitioner’s statements formed a confession of guilt, not an exculpatory claim. California decisions during 1965 and 1966 classified erroneous admission of Dorado-type confessions as prejudicial error per se, requiring reversal without regard to the presence of independent evidence of guilt.1 On February 20, 1967, the federal Supreme Court announced its decision in Chapman v. California, 386 U.S. 18 [17 L.Ed.2d 705, 87 S.Ct. 824], That case holds in effect: (a) although some constitutional rights are so basic to a fair trial that their infraction can never be treated as harmless error,2 there are other constitutional errors which in the setting of a particular case are so unimportant and insignificant that they may, consistent with the federal Constitution, be deemed harmless, not resulting in automatic reversal; (b) before a federal constitutional error can be held harmless, the reviewing court must he able to declare a belief that it was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
The Chapman case neither expressly nor implicitly insulates California courts from obedience to article VI, section 13, of the California Constitution. It means only that, in pursuing the inquiry enjoined by the state Constitution, California courts shall observe the “reasonable doubt’’ test rather than the standard California test of ‘ ‘ reasonable probability’’ where there is federal constitutional error. (See People v. Charles, 66 Cal.2d 330, 337, fn. 10 [57 Cal.Rptr. 745. 425 P.2d 545].)
The California Supreme Court has declared that the harmless error test of Chapman should be utilized in determining the reversing effect of a Dorado-type confession. (People v. Talley, filed Apr. 12, 1967, 65 Cal.2d 830, 840, fn. 5 [56 Cal.Rptr. 492, 423 P.2d 564].) In another post-Chapman decision, the court indicated that the effect of the confession, not the reason for excluding it, is the reversal-impelling *376factor. (People v. Spencer, filed Mar. 14, 1967, 66 Cal.2d 158, 163, fn. 2 [57 Cal.Rptr. 163, 424 P.2d 715].) Such statements seem to imply that the rigidities of automatic reversal will no longer be imposed upon reviewing courts in those relatively few cases where the confession is ineffective, and damning independent evidence leaves no reasonable doubt of the confession’s harmless effect upon the fact trier.
Generally, of course, a confession is so persuasive of guilt that a reviewing court cannot regard it as an inconsequential element in the trial court adjudication. (People v. Jacobson, supra, 63 Cal.2d at p. 330.) As we pointed out in People v. Janssen, 238 Cal.App.2d 106, 109-111 [47 Cal.Rptr. 453], an exceptional situation occurs when the defendant is caught red-handed and his confession becomes ‘1 a wisp of straw tossed on a mountain of incrimination” (p. 111). Such an exceptional situation would permit a reviewing court to measure the confession ’s effect upon the trial court proceedings in the light of the Chapman criterion.
To discard the rigid rule of automatic reversal in favor of the Chapman test promotes public security without encouraging violations of suspects’ constitutional rights. Trial court exclusion of illegally obtained evidence plus appellate reversal of convictions influenced by such evidence fully curb unconstitutional enforcement practices. Wise and careful appellate utilization of prejudicial error standards represents the single best means of accommodating the wholesome demands of the Bill of Rights to the realistic administration of criminal justice. The costs of the Bill of Rights will be better understood and more readily borne if they are not needlessly inflated by the drily logical extensions of court-made doctrine.
We need not indulge in the “implicit assumption that the same harmless-error rule should apply indiscriminately to all constitutional violations.” (Chapman v. California, supra, Stewart, J., concurring [17 L.Ed.2d at p. 722].) There is a great deal of difference between the nastiness of a coerced confession and the infirmity of a voluntary one which became unlawful only by subsequently developed standards and was not so heinous as to evoke unlimited retroactivity.3 The differ*377ence between these two kinds of confession reduces to pure speculation any notion that the federal Supreme Court may in the future classify both as reversible error per se.
Nevertheless, the post-Chapman decisions of the California Supreme Court offer no assurance of change in the doctrine of automatic reversal. In two eases the court has simultaneously applied the Chapman test and the rule of automatic reversal. (People v. Talley, supra, 65 Cal.2d at pp. 840-842; People v. Hines, filed Apr. 5, 1967, 66 Cal.2d 348, 354-355 [57 Cal.Rptr. 757, 425 P.2d 557].) The dual approach is workable only when both lead to the same result. At least three other decisions seem to augur continued adherence to the prejudicial error per se doctrine. (People v. Spencer, supra, 66 Cal.2d at pp. 163-165; People v. Davis, filed Mar. 14, 1967, 66 Cal.2d 175, 182 [57 Cal.Rptr. 130, 424 P.2d 682]; People v. Stout, filed Mar. 16, 1967, 66 Cal.2d 184, 195-196 [57 Cal.Rptr. 152, 424 P.2d 704].) Whatever future decisions may hold, I do not believe that California law yet permits intermediate appellate courts to apply any rule other than that of automatic reversal when Dorado-type error is present. Thus I reluctantly concur in granting the writ.
People v. Dorado, 62 Cal.2d 338, 356 [42 Cal.Rptr. 169, 398 P.2d 361]; People v. Schader, 62 Cal.2d 716, 728 [44 Cal.Rptr. 193, 401 P.2d 665], The rule of automatic reversal was subject to a narrowly defined exception where a valid confession was followed by an invalid confession. In that narrow situation inquiry into prejudice was permissible. (People v. Jacobson, 63 Cal.2d 319, 330-331 [46 Cal.Rptr. 515, 405 P.2d 555]; People v. Cotter, 63 Cal.2d 386, 398 [46 Cal.Rptr. 622, 405 P.2d 862].)
At this point, the Chapman v. California opinion furnishes three examples—coerced confessions, right to counsel and right to an impartial judge.
Thus, In re Lopez, 62 Cal.2d 368, 377 [42 Cal.Rptr. 188, 398 P.2d 380], characterizes the Escobedo case in these terms: “The [federal Supreme] court sought to discourage oppressive police practices; it did not seek to undo the procedures of yesterday, which despite their undesirability did not necessarily cause the conviction of the innocent. ’ ’ The quoted statement aptly characterizes the case at hand. The relationship between retroactivity and reversibility becomes evident at this point. *377Perhaps the criteria of complete retroactivity should be the measuring stick of automatic reversibility. (See In re Lopez, supra, 62 Cal.2d at pp. 376-377.)

=== CASE 2214620 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:49.923362+00 ===

251 Cal. App. 2d 720 (1967)
UNITED CALIFORNIA BANK, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
ELSIE O. BEHRENDS, as Executrix, etc., Defendant and Appellant.
Civ. No. 30554.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. One.
June 12, 1967.
Daniel B. Condon for Defendant and Appellant.
Swanwick, Donnelly & Proudfit and Howard D. Hanson for Plaintiff and Respondent. *721
FOURT, J.
This is an appeal from a summary judgment based upon a written agreement made by H. Truman Browne.  [fn. 1]
In a complaint filed on November 30, 1964, in the Superior Court in Los Angeles County, plaintiff alleged that it is a California corporation, that Fapboa Corporation, doing business as La Puente Valley Community Hospital (sometimes hereinafter referred to as Hospital) is a California corporation; that on June 25, 1962, Hospital made and delivered to American Hospital Supply Corporation (sometimes hereinafter referred to as Supply Corporation) a conditional sales contract (a copy of which is attached to the complaint) which provided for the conditional sale and purchase of items of equipment described and set out in the invoices; that the interest of Supply Corporation on August 14, 1962, was assigned to plaintiff, that plaintiff is still the owner and holder of said contract and entitled to payment thereon; that there remained an unpaid balance of $101,234.89 plus interest; that a default had occurred in that the payments had not been made as agreed and that by virtue thereof plaintiff had declared the entire amount due and payable; that the contract provided for attorney's fees if the indebtedness was referred to an attorney for collection; that demand had been made for payment and none had been made. It was further alleged that as a part of the transaction with the plaintiff a guarantee had been executed in writing by H. Truman Browne, a copy of which was attached to the complaint; that by virtue of the guarantee H. Truman Browne guaranteed prompt payment of all indebtedness of Hospital according to the terms of the contract, but not to exceed $175,000. It was alleged that there was due and unpaid on said guarantee the sum of $101,234.89 plus interest; that demand had been made of H. Truman Browne for payment and nothing had been paid. There followed a request for a judgment for attorney's fees and a judgment for the amount due and owing.
H. Truman Browne answered by generally denying that there had been an assignment to plaintiff and denying that he owed anything. He further alleged that the plaintiff had failed to proceed against the principal debtor as required by law and that he had rescinded the written guarantee on July 16, 1965. *722
Plaintiff filed certain declarations  [fn. 2] and a notice of motion for a summary judgment.
H. Truman Browne himself filed no declaration. His attorney did file a declaration, the essence of which is that there was no assignment from Supply Corporation to the plaintiff bank and, as a consequence, the bank had no right to bring the action.
A summary judgment was granted and filed. Timely notice of appeal from the judgment was made.
[1a] The sole question involved is whether the plaintiff established its right to institute the action.
Plaintiff clearly established that it was the assignee of Supply Corporation and the owner and holder of the claim sued upon. On the face of the contract itself, the words "Assignment By Seller" are printed in large type and immediately thereafter it is set forth by Supply Corporation that to induce the plaintiff to purchase the contract it was represented that *723 the sale of the property therein described was bona fide, that there were no encumbrances, liens or adverse claims whatsoever; that there had been full compliance with the law, that the buyer was competent and that Supply Corporation had a right to assign the contract; that the credit information was true. That instrument was executed on August 14, 1962, by the American Hospital Supply Corporation, by its vice-president and treasurer. The contract was delivered thereupon to plaintiff and plaintiff alleges that it is the owner and holder of the contract and entitled to receive payment thereon. The record further recites that the plaintiff bank relied upon the guarantee of defendant, that notice of the assignment to plaintiff bank was given to La Puente Valley Community Hospital *724 by the bank and directed that all payments on the contract be made to the bank and, following such notice of assignment, all payments were made to the bank. Furthermore, H. Truman Browne, by and through his attorney, directed a letter to the plaintiff bank on July 20, 1965, wherein he gave notice that he would not be liable on the guarantee and attempted to rescind. The letter itself is an admission that plaintiff was the assignee and holder of the contract. H. Truman Browne has never made and does not now make a demand or claim upon plaintiff for the return of any money paid to it upon the ground that it is not the assignee and owner of the contract and therefore not entitled to the funds paid to it. Nor has H. Truman Browne personally declared under oath that plaintiff is not the assignee and owner of the contract. H. Truman *725 Browne was president of La Puente Valley Community Hospital and without question knew that plaintiff is the owner and holder of the contract; that his guarantee was made to induce plaintiff bank to purchase the contract from the seller.
[2] "While no particular form of assignment is necessary, the assignment, to be effectual, must be a manifestation to another person by the owner of the right indicating his intention to transfer, without further action or manifestation of intention, the right to such other person, or to a third person ..." (Cockerell v. Title Ins. & Trust, Co., 42 Cal. 2d 284, 291 [267 P.2d 16].)
[1b] There can be no question in the case at bench but that plaintiff established by clear and positive evidence that it is by virtue of the assignment the present owner and holder of the claim under the contract. From the record there can be no *726 possibility of a claim for payment from any source other than plaintiff bank.
Cases cited by appellant hold, in effect, that in such cited cases there was no evidence of an assignment of the claim in question. The facts in the case at bench are very different from those recited in Ford v. Bushard, 116 Cal. 273 [48 P. 119] and Sterling Adjustment Co. v. Laher Auto Spring Co., 116 Cal. App. 100 [2 P.2d 408].
By the declarations heretofore set forth, it is evident that there are not presented in this case any really triable issues and the summary judgment was properly granted.
Nothing is contained in appellant's brief with respect to his first affirmative defense, namely, that plaintiff must first exhaust its remedy against La Puente Valley Community Hospital before proceeding against H. Truman Browne on the guarantee and we assume that he has abandoned any such contention. In any event, there was no merit to the contention in the first instance under the circumstances.
The judgment is affirmed.
Wood, P. J., and Lillie, J., concurred.
"1. I am a citizen of the United States of America over the age of 21 years and if sworn as a witness in the above entitled cause can testify competently to the facts contained herein."
"2. I am a Vice President of United California Bank, a corporation, hereinafter sometimes referred to as 'Bank', the plaintiff herein."
"3. On or about June 25, 1962, the American Hospital Supply Corporation, as seller, and FAPBOA Corporation, doing business as La Puente Valley Community Hospital, as buyer, made and executed a Conditional Sales Contract under the terms of which the seller sold to the buyer and the buyer purchased from the seller, certain items of hospital equipment for the unpaid principal balance of $138,732.49, plus interest at the rate of 6 percent per annum thereon payable monthly. The unpaid principal balance was payable under the terms of said Conditional Sales Contract as follows:"
"59 monthly payments of $2,312.20 each beginning November 25, 1962, and on the 25th day of each succeeding month thereafter and in addition thereto a final monthly payment of $2,312.64;"
That a photo copy of said Conditional Sales Contract signed by said parties is attached to plaintiff's Complaint on file herein, marked Exhibit 'A' and by this reference made a part hereof. (Paragraph III Plaintiff's Complaint and admitted by Defendant).
"4. On August 14, 1962, the interest of the seller, American Hospital Supply Corporation in said Conditional Sales Contract and the equipment described therein was sold and assigned to the Bank in writing as shown by the Assignment signed by the seller on the reverse side of the Conditional Sales Contract attached to the Complaint herein as Exhibit 'A' as aforesaid."
"5. On or about September 5, 1961, defendant, H. Truman Browne, President of the purchasing party, as aforesaid, executed and delivered to the plaintiff, his certain guarantee in writing, annexed to Plaintiff's Complaint herein and marked Exhibit 'B' and made a part hereof by reference."
"6. Under and by virtue of said guarantee, the defendant, H. Truman Browne, in consideration of any financial accommodation given or to be given or continued by the Bank to the La Puente Valley Community Hospital, guaranteed the prompt payment of all indebtedness or liabilities of the La Puente Valley Community Hospital according to the terms thereof or as agreed by any instrument executed by said La Puente Valley Community Hospital which said La Puente Valley Community Hospital then or at any time thereafter owed to said plaintiff whether arising from dealings between the Bank and the La Puente Valley Community Hospital or from other dealings by which the Bank should become a creditor of the La Puente Valley Community Hospital not to exceed at any one time the principal sum of $175,000.00 with interest."
"7. On or about August 14, 1962, at the time plaintiff purchased the Conditional Sales Contract from the seller as aforesaid, plaintiff relied upon said guarantee."
"8. That on August 28, 1962, plaintiff gave the La Puente Valley Community Hospital Notice of the Assignment of said Conditional Sales Contract to plaintiff and directed all payments on said contract to be made to plaintiff. Plaintiff also in said Notice of Assignment, advised the La Puente Valley Community Hospital that:"
" 'No claim or defense against the seller may be asserted against this Bank unless, within 15 days of the date of mailing this Notice of Assignment, you notify this Bank in writing of any facts giving rise to any claim or defense you may have.'"
that no such Notice was ever given to plaintiff by the buyer.
"9. At the time suit was filed herein, there was and still is, a default under the terms of said Conditional Sales Contract in that the payments due by the terms thereof have not been made as agreed. By reason of said default, plaintiff has declared the entire balance thereon to be immediately due and payable."
"10. By the terms of said guarantee, defendant agreed to pay reasonable attorneys fees incurred by the plaintiff in the enforcement thereof; the amount due under said guarantee has not been paid and plaintiff has been compelled to and has placed said guarantee in the hands of attorneys for enforcement."
"11. There is now due, owing and unpaid on account of said Conditional Sales Contract and on said guarantee, the principal sum of $98,706.81; with interest from September 15, 1965 at the rate of 6 percent per annum together with attorneys fees and costs."
"12. Plaintiff is still the owner and holder of said guarantee and the Conditional Sales Contract evidencing the indebtedness of the said La Puente Valley Community Hospital."
"13. On or about July 20, 1965, plaintiff received a letter dated July 16, 1965 from Daniel B. Condon, attorney for defendant, wherein defendant for the first time gave notice to plaintiff that defendant:"
" '... will no longer be responsible for or be bound by the provisions of that certain written guarantee dated September 5, 1961, wherein he guarantees the obligations of La Puente Valley Community Hospital."
said defendant also in said letter, for the first time, gave plaintiff notice that:
" 'said guarantee is hereby withdrawn, rescinded and of no further legal force or effect'"
that a photocopy of said letter is annexed hereto and marked Exhibit 'C' and made a part hereof.
"14. By reason of the facts herein contained, plaintiff claims that there is no defense to said cause and the answer of the defendant was filed merely for the purpose of delaying the entry of judgment herein and the same should therefore be stricken from the files of said cause and judgment entered herein as prayed in plaintiff's complaint, except that the principal amount should be $98,706.81 and interest should be on this amount at 6 percent per annum from September 15, 1965, attorneys fees and costs."
"I certify under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is true and correct."
"Executed on the 14th day of October, 1965 at Los Angeles, California."
"Norman Barker, Jr."
"Vice President"
"I, D. E. Grimes, hereby declare:"
"1. I am a citizen of the United States of America over the age of 21 years and if sworn as a witness in the above entitled cause can testify competently to the facts contained herein."
"2. I am a Vice President of United California Bank, a corporation, hereinafter sometimes referred to as 'Bank', the Plaintiff herein; and Manager of its City of Industry Office."
"3. There was paid on the sum of $138,732.49 representing the unpaid principal balance of said conditional sales contract, Exhibit 'A' to plaintiff's complaint herein, the following sums at the dates set forth opposite such sum to wit:"
Tabular Material Omitted
"4. That interest in the amount of $6,826.56 was paid on account of said conditional sales contract at the rate of 6% per annum on unpaid balance to June 15, 1964, resulting in a shortage of interest due to said date amounting to the sum of $733.80."
"5. That on November 30, 1964 by reason of the default existing in the payments of the principal and interest in accordance with the terms of said conditional sale contract, plaintiff declared the entire principal balance in the sum of $101,234.89 to be immediately due and payable as authorized and permitted under the terms of said contract."
"6. That since the filing of plaintiff's action herein on November 30, 1964, there was paid to plaintiff on January 14, 1965 the sum of $2,528.08 on the principal thus reducing the amount of principal now due and owing to $98,706.81."
"7. That since the filing of this action there has been paid to plaintiff the sum of $3,900.12 to apply on interest from June 15, 1964 to January 31, 1965, resulting in a shortage of interest due to January 31, 1965 in the sum of $757.52; that the statement made in the Declaration of Norman Barker, Jr. in support of plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment that interest was paid to September 15, 1965 (page 3, line 32 and again on page 4, line 27) is in error and inadvertently placed in said Declaration by mistake of counsel preparing the same."
"8. That there is now due and owing to plaintiff under said conditional sales contract and guaranty the principal sum of $98,706.81 and $757.52 interest to January 31, 1965 as aforesaid plus interest at 6% per annum from January 31, 1965 on $98,706.81 amounting to $4,655.56 to November 10, 1965 and $16.45 per day thereafter."
"I certify under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is true and correct."
"Executed on the 10th day of November, 1965 at Los Angeles, California."
"D. C. Grimes"
"Vice President & Manager"
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. H. Truman Browne died subsequent to the entry of the judgment in this case and the executrix of his estate has been substituted in the place and stead of H. Truman Browne.
[fn. 2]  2. "I, Norman Barker, Jr. hereby declare:

=== CASE 2214657 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:50.4945+00 ===

891 N.E.2d 663 (2008)
Samara J. COPAS, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 33A01-0801-CR-3.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
August 13, 2008.
*664 James H. Voyles, Frederick Vaiana, Voyles Zahn Paul Hogan & Merriman, Indianapolis, IN, Attorneys for Appellant.
Steve Carter, Attorney General of Indiana, Joby D. Jerrells, Deputy Attorney General, Indianapolis, IN, Attorneys for Appellee.
OPINION
NAJAM, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Samara J. Copas brings this interlocutory appeal from the trial court's denial of her motion to suppress evidence. Copas raises a single issue for our review, which we restate as whether the State's seizure of a blood sample from Copas while she was unconscious was supported by probable cause, as required by the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution.[1]
We affirm.
*665 FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
On May 20, 2006, shortly after 1:15 a.m., Jerry E. Clapp was driving along County Road 500 S in Henry County. As he approached the intersection of County Road 500 S and State Road 103, he observed a white vehicle on the side of the road near a small SUV, which was inverted. Clapp called 911, exited his vehicle, and saw a woman, later identified as Copas, lying on the ground outside the white vehicle, on the driver's side. Clapp noticed Copas was breathing and tried to inform her that paramedics were on the way, but she was nonresponsive. Clapp also noticed broken alcoholic beverage containers in the white vehicle, and the odor of alcohol coming from that vehicle, but did not notice an alcoholic odor on Copas. Clapp then went to the inverted SUV and informed its driver, later identified as Charles McAlhaney, to "hang in there" and that paramedics were on the way. Transcript at 28. Clapp did not receive a response from McAlhaney, but McAlhaney made "gurgling" sounds that indicated to Clapp that McAlhaney "was drowning in his blood." Id. at 28-29.
At approximately 1:30 a.m., Henry County Deputy Sheriff Michael Rossiter responded to the accident. Deputy Rossiter observed Copas lying on the ground unconscious on the driver's side of a white Chevrolet Suburban. Deputy Rossiter approached the Suburban, in which he noticed shattered alcoholic beverage containers in the driver's seat and on the floorboard in front of the driver's seat. Deputy Rossiter also noticed the smell of alcohol inside the Suburban. Deputy Rossiter did not notice "an odor of alcoholic beverage on" Copas. Id. at 14. When paramedics arrived, Clapp and Deputy Rossiter helped transfer Copas onto a backboard. Copas was then placed in an ambulance and taken to the Henry County Hospital. McAlhaney died at the scene of the accident shortly after the arrival of the emergency personnel.
Sometime over the next hour and a half, Deputy Rossiter prepared a search warrant affidavit, submitted that affidavit to the Henry Superior Court, and received a search warrant. In the affidavit, Deputy Rossiter requested permission to seize a blood sample from Copas, who was unable to give consent due to her unconsciousness, in connection with "evidence of the crime of operating while intoxicated." State's Exh. 1 at 1. Deputy Rossiter stated the following facts as support for his belief that Copas had operated a vehicle while intoxicated at the time of the accident: (1) Copas was an "occupant" of the "Suburban involved in crash"; (2) Deputy Rossiter saw "alcohol beverage containers in view"; (3) the "vehicle smelled of alcohol"; and (4) Jerry Clapp told Deputy Rossiter that Copas "indicated she was in white vehicle and no one else in area of crash." Id. at 1-2. At about 3:00 a.m., Deputy Rossiter executed the search warrant, through medical staff, at the Henry County Hospital. That blood sample allegedly revealed that Copas had a blood alcohol level of 0.15, and it also allegedly revealed that Copas had cocaine in her blood.
On August 31, 2006, the State charged Copas with Causing Death When Operating a Motor Vehicle with Alcohol in the Body, as a Class B felony; Causing Death When Operating a Motor Vehicle with Schedule II Controlled Substance in the Body, as a Class B felony; and Reckless Homicide, a Class C felony. On June 22, 2007, Copas filed a motion to suppress the "blood evidence" on the grounds that the search warrant permitting the seizure of that evidence lacked supporting probable cause, as required by federal and state law. Appellant's App. at 40-42. On October *666 11, 2007, the trial court held a hearing on the motion to suppress, which the court denied on November 21, 2007. The court certified its decision for interlocutory appeal on December 4, 2007, which we accepted.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
Copas contends that the trial court erred in denying her motion to suppress the blood evidence seized pursuant to the search warrant because that search warrant was not supported by probable cause, as required by the Fourth Amendment. Our standard of review here is well-established:
In deciding whether to issue a search warrant, "the task of the issuing magistrate is simply to make a practical, commonsense decision whether, given all the circumstances set forth in the affidavit... there is a fair probability that contraband or evidence of a crime will be found in a particular place." Illinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 213, 238, 103 S. Ct. 2317, 76 L. Ed. 2d 527 (1983). The duty of the reviewing court is to determine whether the magistrate had a "substantial basis" for concluding that probable cause existed. 462 U.S. at 238-39, 103 S. Ct. 2317. It is clear that a substantial basis requires the reviewing court, with significant deference to the magistrate's determination, to focus on whether reasonable inferences drawn from the totality of the evidence support the determination of probable cause. Houser v. State, 678 N.E.2d 95, 99 (Ind.1997). A "reviewing court" for these purposes includes both the trial court ruling on a motion to suppress and an appellate court reviewing that decision. Id. at 98. In this review, we consider only the evidence presented to the issuing magistrate and not post hoc justifications for the search. Seltzer v. State, 489 N.E.2d 939, 941 (Ind.1986).
Query v. State, 745 N.E.2d 769, 771 (Ind. 2001). "Significantly, `probable cause requires only a probability or substantial chance of criminal activity, not an actual showing of such activity.'" Eaton v. State, 889 N.E.2d 297, 299 (Ind.2008) (quoting Gates, 462 U.S. at 245 n. 13, 103 S. Ct. 2317).
The seizure of blood from the body is not a new issue in Fourth Amendment jurisprudence. In Schmerber v. California, 384 U.S. 757, 769-70, 86 S. Ct. 1826, 16 L. Ed. 2d 908 (1966), the United States Supreme Court noted, in the context of a warrantless seizure of blood evidence, that "[t]he interests in human dignity and privacy which the Fourth Amendment protects forbid any such intrusions on the mere chance that desired evidence might be obtained." And "[i]n the absence of a clear indication that in fact such evidence will be found, these fundamental human interests require law officers to suffer the risk that such evidence may disappear unless there is an immediate search." Id. at 770, 86 S. Ct. 1826. However, while "[t]he overriding function of the Fourth Amendment is to protect personal privacy and dignity against unwarranted intrusion by the State," its "proper function is to constrain, not against all intrusions as such, but against intrusions which are not justified in the circumstances, or which are made in an improper manner." Id. at 767-68, 86 S. Ct. 1826; Carr v. State, 728 N.E.2d 125, 128 (Ind.2000).
As an initial matter, Copas suggests that "[t]he search warrant failed to allege an accident occurred resulting in serious bodily injury or death in an effort to meet statutory criteria." Appellant's Brief at 6. But Indiana's implied consent laws do not apply here, for two reasons. First, Copas was unconscious, and the implied consent laws do not require a law *667 enforcement officer to offer a chemical test to an unconscious person. See Ind.Code §§ 9-30-6-2(b)(1), 9-30-7-3(c) (2004). Second, Deputy Rossiter seized Copas' blood pursuant to a search warrant. "The provisions of the implied consent law do not act either individually or collectively to prevent a law enforcement officer from obtaining a blood sample pursuant to a search warrant." Brown v. State, 774 N.E.2d 1001, 1007 (Ind.Ct.App.2002), trans. denied.
Copas also asserts that, under Schmerber, there is a higher burden on the State to seize blood evidence. We respectfully disagree. Schmerber, while useful for general Fourth Amendment guidance, is not controlling because the police in that case acted without a warrant. "Searches and seizures `conducted outside the judicial process, without prior approval by judge or magistrate, are per se unreasonable under the Fourth Amendment  subject only to a few specifically established and well-delineated exceptions.'" Logan v. State, 729 N.E.2d 125, 129 (Ind.2000) (quoting Middleton v. State, 714 N.E.2d 1099, 1101 (Ind.1999)). Here, unlike in Schmerber, the police acted pursuant to a warrant. We review the validity of that warrant accordingly.
Again, the State seized a sample of Copas' blood from her body pursuant to a search warrant. As such, in order for that seizure to have been proper, the State needed to have probable cause that her blood would reveal evidence of criminal behavior. See, e.g., I.C. § 35-33-5-1 ("A court may issue warrants only upon probable cause...."). That is, the State was required to show probable cause that Copas both operated the Suburban and did so while intoxicated. "[T]he amount of evidence needed to supply probable cause of operating while intoxicated is minimal." Hannoy v. State, 789 N.E.2d 977, 989 (Ind. Ct.App.2003), aff'd on reh'g, 793 N.E.2d 1109 (Ind.Ct.App.2003), trans. denied.
The totality of the circumstances stated in Deputy Rossiter's probable cause affidavit is indeed minimal; nonetheless, it is sufficient to establish probable cause that Copas' blood would reveal evidence of criminal behavior. Specifically, the affidavit reveals the following facts: (1) Copas was involved in a motor vehicle accident; (2) Deputy Rossiter "observed... alcohol beverage containers in view"; and (3) Copas' "vehicle smelled of alcohol." State's Exh. 1 at 1. The affidavit also stated that Copas was "unable to consent" to giving a blood sample. Id. at 2. And we note that the alcoholic odor emanated only from Copas' vehicle, not from Copas.[2]
Copas is correct that, taken individually, the facts supporting the search warrant are insufficient to establish probable cause that she operated a vehicle while intoxicated. For example, in Hannoy, we held that the policy of the Marion County Sheriff's Department of seizing, forcibly if necessary, blood samples from the driver of any vehicle involved in an automobile accident was unconstitutional when done without either consent or probable cause. 789 N.E.2d at 987. And in Duncan v. State, 799 N.E.2d 538, 543-44 (Ind.Ct.App.2003), *668 we held that probable cause was not established where the officer "indicated on the affidavit for probable cause that his sole basis for believing [the defendant] was intoxicated was that he saw `alcohol beverage containers in view.'" Further, we agree with Copas' assertion that, following a motor vehicle accident, "broken bottles of alcohol in the car, and the logical odor emanating therefrom, is not per se illegal...." Appellant's Brief at 10.
Nonetheless, we must consider the totality of the circumstances rather than facts in isolation. The totality of the circumstances demonstrates, within a fair probability, that Copas operated the Suburban.[3] The probable cause affidavit placed Copas at the scene of the accident, and specifically stated that there was "no one else in [the] area of [the] crash."[4] State's Exh. 1 at 2. And the totality of the circumstances demonstrates a fair probability that Copas operated the Suburban while intoxicated. There was a vehicular accident, and alcoholic beverage containers, accompanied by the smell of alcohol, were discovered in the Suburban.
All the relevant facts must be taken together, and the conclusion that Copas was operating the Suburban while intoxicated, while not a necessary conclusion, is within the "fair probability" required to establish probable cause. See Query, 745 N.E.2d at 771. While Copas might ultimately challenge the sufficiency of the State's evidence at trial, her arguments are not enough to defeat the "fair probability" that she operated the vehicle while intoxicated, which is all that is required for probable cause. See, e.g., Ware v. State, 859 N.E.2d 708, 720 (Ind.Ct.App.2007) ("The amount of evidence necessary to meet the probable cause requirement ... is determined on a case-by-case basis, and is less than the level of proof necessary to establish guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.") (quoting Ross v. State, 844 N.E.2d 537, 542 (Ind.Ct.App.2006)), trans. denied. Accordingly, we affirm the trial court's denial of Copas' motion to suppress the blood evidence.
Affirmed.
DARDEN, J., and BROWN, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Although Copas makes passing references to Article I, Section 11 of the Indiana Constitution, she does not present any claim or argument that Section 11 requires a different analysis or yields a different result than that produced under the Fourth Amendment. Accordingly, we do not consider the state constitutional issue on appeal. See, e.g., D.L. v. State, 877 N.E.2d 500, 503 (Ind.Ct.App.2007) ("Because [the appellant] cites no separate argument specifically treating and analyzing a claim under the Indiana Constitution distinct from his Fourth Amendment analysis, we resolve his claim on the basis of federal constitutional doctrine only."), trans. denied.
[2]  The probable cause affidavit itself does not contain this information. As we have discussed in the past, "a probable cause affidavit must include all material facts," including "those facts that `cast doubt on the existence of probable cause.'" Ware v. State, 859 N.E.2d 708, 718 (Ind.Ct.App.2007) (quoting Query, 745 N.E.2d at 772), trans. denied. "When the State has failed to include a material term in its application, we will determine the validity of the warrant by considering the omitted information and the information contained in the affidavit together." Id.
[3]  Specifically, Copas states that "[t]he State's only evidence to support the `operation' element is circumstantial. Copas is simply found outside a car registered to her by Clapp. Not one witness saw her operate the Suburban." Appellant's Brief at 11. We note that neither the record from the motion to suppress hearing, the search warrant, nor Deputy Rossiter's probable cause affidavit reflects that the Suburban was registered to Copas.
[4]  Although the affidavit states that Copas told Clapp that she had been an occupant of the Suburban, Clapp testified at the motion to suppress hearing that he did not make that statement to Deputy Rossiter.

=== CASE 2214661 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:50.612483+00 ===

891 N.E.2d 865 (2008)
229 Ill.2d 255
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Appellant,
v.
Vernon ROSS, Appellee.
No. 103972.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
June 5, 2008.
*867 Lisa Madigan, Attorney General, Springfield, Richard A. Devine, State's Attorney, Chicago (Michael M. Glick, Assistant Attorney General, Chicago, James E. Fitzgerald, Alan J. Spellberg, Aisha T. Cornelius and Ashley Romito, assistant State's Attorneys, of counsel), for the People.
Michael J. Pelletier, Deputy Defender, Rebecca I. Levy, Assistant Appellate Defender, Office of the State Appellate Defender, Chicago, for appellee.
OPINION
Justice FITZGERALD delivered the judgment of the court, with opinion:
The central issue in this case is what remedy exists for a post-conviction petitioner whose trial attorney failed to file a notice of direct appeal. The State appeals the decision of the appellate court, affirming the circuit court of Cook County's order allowing petitioner Vernon Ross to file a late notice of appeal. No. 1-05-2806 (unpublished order under Supreme Court Rule 23). For the reasons that follow, we affirm.
BACKGROUND
On January 18, 1999, just before midnight, Doyinsola Odumuyiwa was walking to his home on Chicago's north side. Concerned about his safety, Odumuyiwa began walking down the middle of the street, when he noticed another man walking in the opposite direction. As they passed, the man abruptly changed direction and began following Odumuyiwa. At an intersection, the man reached Odumuyiwa and spoke to him. Odumuyiwa did not respond *868 and kept walking. The man crossed to the sidewalk on the right side of the street, and as Odumuyiwa proceeded to the sidewalk on the left side, the man called out, "Come here." When Odumuyiwa turned around, he saw the man pointing a small gun at him.
Odumuyiwa approached, stopping less than five feet from the man. The man pointed the gun at his chest and demanded his wallet; Odumuyiwa complied. The man took the wallet and asked Odumuyiwa if he had any money. Odumuyiwa said that he had only one dollar and a credit card. After two minutes, the man told him that he was free to leave. Odumuyiwa ran away and at the next street immediately encountered a car occupied by plainclothes police officers. The police officers drove Odumuyiwa back to the scene of the robbery and, moments later, found the petitioner, whom Odumuyiwa identified as his assailant. As the police officers neared the petitioner, he threw some items into a bush, where an officer retrieved Odumuyiwa's wallet and a pellet gun, which Odumuyiwa identified as the one used in the robbery.
The petitioner was arrested and indicted for armed robbery. At the petitioner's bench trial, Odumuyiwa, the police officer who recovered the gun, and the petitioner all testified. Odumuyiwa stated that the petitioner pointed "a black, very portable gun" at him, adding the gun was "small" and "something you can conceal." The police officer stated that the gun was a "4.5 BB caliber gun with a three inch barrel." The State did not offer the gun itself into evidence, but the inventory sheet lists a "MARKSMAN PLAINSMAN * * * 4.5 BB CAL. PELLET GUN 3 INCH BARREL BLACK IN COLOR," but does not mention any pellets. The petitioner was convicted and sentenced to eight years' imprisonment. He filed a posttrial motion, arguing that the State failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the gun was a dangerous weapon. The trial court denied this motion, stating:
"[T]he testimony in the record was that the victim was in fear of his life when he observed what he thought to be a small gun that could be easily concealed. The officers recovered the gun. The victim observed the gun. Everything in the record suggested to this Court that the victim clearly believed it to be a dangerous weapon."
There was no direct appeal.
Nearly two years later, the petitioner filed a pro se postconviction petition, alleging that his trial attorney was ineffective for failing to file a timely notice of appeal and for failing to argue on appeal that the pellet gun was not a dangerous weapon. The trial court appointed counsel for the petitioner, and the State filed a motion to dismiss his petition. The trial court denied the State's motion and conducted an evidentiary hearing on the petitioner's claims. After hearing testimony from the petitioner and his attorney, the trial court concluded that defense counsel was ineffective for failing to file a notice of appeal. The court decided that the proper remedy would be to allow the petitioner to file a late notice of appeal nunc pro tunc to the date that he was sentenced.
In his direct appeal, the petitioner again argued that the State had failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the gun was a dangerous weapon. The State responded that the appellate court did not have jurisdiction because the notice of appeal was untimely under Supreme Court Rule 606. See 210 Ill.2d R. 606. The State also asserted that the trial court could have inferred that the gun was a dangerous weapon.
The appellate court stated that the trial court was incorrect in making the notice of *869 appeal nunc pro tunc to the date of the petitioner's sentencing, because there was no notice of appeal filed at all. "Nonetheless," continued the appellate court, "a criminal defendant must at some point be afforded the equivalent of direct review and an appellate advocate." After discussing this court's holding in People v. Moore, 133 Ill.2d 331, 338, 140 Ill.Dec. 385, 549 N.E.2d 1257 (1990), the court observed that because appellate jurisdiction was never invoked, the defendant's recourse was filing a postconviction petition. According to the appellate court, the order granting leave to file a notice of appeal was a proper remedy under the Post-Conviction Hearing Act (725 ILCS 5/122-1 et seq. (West 2004)). The court turned to the merits and concluded that the State did not prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the pellet gun was a dangerous weapon. The appellate court reversed the petitioner's armed robbery conviction and remanded so the trial court could enter judgment on the lesser-included offense of robbery and sentence the petitioner accordingly. No. 1-05-2806 (unpublished order under Supreme Court Rule 23). We allowed the State's petition for leave to appeal. 210 Ill.2d R. 315(a).
ANALYSIS
The Post-Conviction Hearing Act provides a procedural mechanism through which a criminal defendant can assert "that in the proceedings which resulted in his or her conviction there was a substantial denial of his or her rights under the Constitution of the United States or of the State of Illinois or both." 725 ILCS 5/122-1 (West 1998). In a postconviction proceeding, the trial court does not redetermine a petitioner's innocence or guilt, but instead examines constitutional issues that escaped earlier review. People v. Blair, 215 Ill.2d 427, 447, 294 Ill.Dec. 654, 831 N.E.2d 604 (2005). Here, the petitioner alleged that he received ineffective assistance of counsel when his attorney failed to file a notice of appeal and, consequently, failed to argue on appeal that the gun used in the robbery was not a dangerous weapon.
Ineffective assistance of counsel claims are evaluated under the now-familiar two-prong test of Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 104 S.Ct. 2052, 80 L.Ed.2d 674 (1984). People v. Albanese, 104 Ill.2d 504, 526-27, 85 Ill.Dec. 441, 473 N.E.2d 1246 (1984). Under Strickland, a defendant must prove that defense counsel's performance fell below an objective standard of reasonableness and that this substandard performance caused prejudice. People v. Johnson, 218 Ill.2d 125, 143-44, 299 Ill.Dec. 677, 842 N.E.2d 714 (2005).
In Roe v. Flores-Ortega, 528 U.S. 470, 120 S.Ct. 1029, 145 L.Ed.2d 985 (2000), the Supreme Court extended Strickland to ineffective-assistance claims based upon defense counsel's failure to file a notice of appeal: "[W]hen counsel's constitutionally deficient performance deprives a defendant of an appeal that he otherwise would have taken, the defendant has made out a successful ineffective assistance of counsel claim entitling him to an appeal." Flores-Ortega, 528 U.S. at 484, 120 S.Ct. at 1039, 145 L.Ed.2d at 1000.
The performance and prejudice prongs of Strickland still apply, but they are tailored to fit this context. Regarding performance, it is professionally unreasonable to disregard specific instructions from the defendant to file a notice of appeal. Rodriquez v. United States, 395 U.S. 327, 89 S.Ct. 1715, 23 L.Ed.2d 340 (1969).[1]*870 Here, the petitioner filed a pro se notice of appeal after he was found guilty by the trial court, but before sentencing, and withdrew it as premature. After he was sentenced on August 10, 2000, he did not file another notice of appeal, and neither did his attorney. In his pro se postconviction petition, the petitioner alleged:
"It was the duty and obligation of [defense counsel] to protect [petitioner's] rights by filing a timely Notice of Appeal. [Petitioner] was not in agreement with the guilty finding and sentence he received and made it clear to [defense counsel] that he wanted to appeal this judgment. [Defense counsel] stated that he would file [a] Notice of Appeal on behalf of his Client and Petitioner assumed that a Notice of Appeal had been filed in this case."
At the evidentiary hearing on his petition, the petitioner testified that he told defense counsel after the trial court's finding of guilt that he wished to appeal his conviction. Defense counsel could not recall such a conversation.
The record thus reveals that the petitioner communicated his desire for a direct appeal to defense counsel. As the trial court correctly stated, filing of a notice of appeal is a ministerial task (see Flores-Ortega, 528 U.S. at 477, 120 S.Ct. at 1035, 145 L.Ed.2d at 995), and defense counsel's performance in failing to file that notice was substandard.
Regarding prejudice, a defendant must demonstrate that there is a reasonable probability that, but for counsel's deficient representation, the defendant would have appealed. Flores-Ortega, 528 U.S. at 484, 120 S.Ct. at 1039, 145 L.Ed.2d at 1000. Stated differently, prejudice may be presumed when defense counsel's ineffectiveness rendered appellate proceedings nonexistent, essentially denying the defendant's right to appeal. Flores-Ortega, 528 U.S. at 484, 120 S.Ct. at 1038-39, 145 L.Ed.2d at 999-1000.
In Moore, the defendant was convicted of first degree murder and attempted armed robbery and sentenced to 80 years' imprisonment. His trial attorney filed a timely notice of appeal, but the appeal was dismissed for want of prosecution after the attorney failed to file a docketing statement. Years later, the defendant filed a motion to reinstate his appeal, which the appellate court denied. This court reinstated the defendant's appeal. Moore, 133 Ill.2d at 336, 140 Ill.Dec. 385, 549 N.E.2d 1257. Reviewing Evitts v. Lucey, 469 U.S. 387, 105 S.Ct. 830, 83 L.Ed.2d 821 (1985), we observed that a defendant whose appeal is dismissed due to ineffective assistance of counsel has two procedural routes to relief: a motion to reinstate the appeal, addressed to the appellate court, or a postconviction petition, addressed to the trial court. Moore, 133 Ill.2d at 337, 140 Ill.Dec. 385, 549 N.E.2d 1257. We continued:
"[G]iven the Evitts decision and the United States Supreme Court's subsequent decision in Penson v. Ohio[, 488 U.S. 75, 86, 109 S.Ct. 346, 352-54, 102 L.Ed.2d 300, 312-14 (1988)], it would appear that a criminal defendant must at some point be afforded the equivalent of direct review and an appellate advocate; a court cannot deny a defendant an attorney-assisted appeal by examining the record and determining that defendant would not have succeeded on appeal in any event. [Citation.] Strickland v. Washington (1984), 466 U.S. 668, *871 104 S.Ct. 2052, 80 L.Ed.2d 674, cannot be applied where a defendant is effectively denied appellate counsel; in such an instance prejudice is presumed to have resulted. [Citation.] Although a post-conviction proceeding can, and should, be utilized in certain circumstances as a remedy for a lost right of appeal, where it is used, no showing of prejudice is required where counsel failed to perfect defendant's appeal." Moore, 133 Ill.2d at 339, 140 Ill.Dec. 385, 549 N.E.2d 1257.[2]
The question becomes, then, simply what relief a postconviction court may order to remedy defense counsel's failure to file a notice of appeal.
According to the State, the trial court had no authority to allow the petitioner to file a late notice of appeal because Supreme Court Rule 606 does not permit a postconviction trial court to disregard the time limits for filing notices of appeal and late notices of appeal. A notice of appeal confers jurisdiction on the appellate court (210 Ill.2d R. 606(a)), and it must be filed within 30 days after the entry of the final judgment or a timely motion to reconsider that judgment (210 Ill.2d R. 606(b)). Supreme Court Rule 606(c) provides for late notices of appeal:
"On motion supported by a showing of reasonable excuse for failing to file a notice of appeal on time filed in the reviewing court within 30 days of the expiration of the time for filing the notice of appeal, or on motion supported by a showing by affidavit that there is merit to the appeal and that the failure to file a notice of appeal on time was not due to appellant's culpable negligence, filed in the reviewing court within six months of the expiration of the time for filing the notice of appeal, in either case accompanied by the proposed notice of appeal, the reviewing court may grant leave to appeal and order the clerk to transmit the notice of appeal to the trial court for filing." 210 Ill.2d R. 606(c).
Thus, the appellate court can allow a defendant to file a late notice of appeal within 30 days of the expiration of the appeal period, if the defendant shows a reasonable excuse, or within six months of the expiration of the appeal period, if the defendant shows a meritorious issue and a lack of culpable negligence. The State argues that because neither the trial court nor the appellate court may excuse compliance with our rules governing appeals (see Wauconda Fire Protection District v. Stonewall Orchards, LLP, 214 Ill.2d 417, 427, 293 Ill.Dec. 246, 828 N.E.2d 216 (2005), quoting Mitchell v. Fiat-Allis, Inc., 158 Ill.2d 143, 150, 198 Ill.Dec. 399, 632 N.E.2d 1010 (1994), quoting In re Smith, 80 Ill.App.3d 380, 382, 35 Ill.Dec. 635, 399 N.E.2d 701 (1980)), the trial court here improperly allowed the petitioner to file a late notice of appeal more than five years after he was sentenced, well beyond the time limits of Rule 606(c).
The State relies upon People v. Lyles, 217 Ill.2d 210, 298 Ill.Dec. 752, 840 N.E.2d 1187 (2005). In Lyles, the defendant was convicted of voluntary manslaughter and two counts of first degree murder. He was sentenced to death for the murders and 14 years' imprisonment for voluntary manslaughter. On appeal, this court affirmed the defendant's convictions, but vacated *872 his sentences and remanded because of prosecutorial misconduct during the sentencing hearing. On remand, the defendant was sentenced to life imprisonment for the murders and 14 years' imprisonment for voluntary manslaughter. The defendant filed a pro se postconviction petition, alleging ineffective assistance of trial and appellate counsel. The trial court dismissed the petition, and the appellate court affirmed.
The defendant then filed a second pro se postconviction petition, alleging that his sentence violated Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466, 120 S.Ct. 2348, 147 L.Ed.2d 435 (2000). The trial court dismissed this petition as well, and the defendant filed a notice of appeal. The trial court appointed the State Appellate Defender to represent the defendant. After four extensions, appellate counsel never filed a brief for the defendant, and the appellate court dismissed the defendant's appeal for want of prosecution. More than a month later, appellate counsel filed a motion to reinstate this appeal; the State did not object, and the appellate court granted the motion and allowed the defendant to file his brief instanter. In its response brief, however, the State argued that the appellate court lost jurisdiction when its dismissal order became final 21 days after it was entered. The appellate court agreed, vacated its order reinstating the appeal, and dismissed the appeal for lack of jurisdiction. This court granted the defendant's petition for leave to appeal.
Initially, we noted two competing considerations: Supreme Court Rule 367(a) requires that a petition for rehearing must be filed within 21 days after a judgment is entered, but postconviction petitioners are entitled to an appeal and appellate counsel. Lyles, 217 Ill.2d at 215-16, 298 Ill.Dec. 752, 840 N.E.2d 1187. We stated, "these are not interests which the appellate court can balance." Lyles, 217 Ill.2d at 216, 298 Ill.Dec. 752, 840 N.E.2d 1187. That is, the appellate court cannot excuse compliance with this court's rules governing appeals; its power to reinstate an appeal ends when its jurisdiction does, and it does not possess the supervisory authority of this court. Lyles, 217 Ill.2d at 216, 298 Ill.Dec. 752, 840 N.E.2d 1187. Thus, we held that the appellate court acted correctly in vacating its order and dismissing the defendant's appeal, but we used our supervisory authority to reinstate the defendant's appeal. Lyles, 217 Ill.2d at 216, 220, 298 Ill.Dec. 752, 840 N.E.2d 1187.
Lyles does not mention Rule 606, but to some appellate court panels, its application is unmistakable. In People v. Gutierrez, 376 Ill.App.3d 182, 315 Ill.Dec. 233, 876 N.E.2d 233 (2007), the defendant was convicted of first degree murder and attempted first degree murder, and he was sentenced to 60 years' imprisonment. After sentencing, private defense counsel withdrew, and the trial court appointed the State Appellate Defender to proceed with the defendant's appeal. No notice of appeal was filed. Nearly three years later, the defendant filed a postconviction petition, alleging that defense counsel was ineffective for failing to file a notice of appeal. The trial court allowed the defendant to file a late notice of appeal.
The appellate court ordered the parties to brief the issue of jurisdiction, and then dismissed the defendant's appeal. Gutierrez, 376 Ill.App.3d at 183, 315 Ill.Dec. 233, 876 N.E.2d 233. The appellate court observed that the defendant was not culpable in the loss of his direct appeal, but referred to Rule 606, which sets time limits for filing a notice of appeal or a late notice of appeal. The court stated:
"No one can reasonably deny the notice of appeal ordered by the trial court was outside the authority of Rule 606(b). *873 The question in this case is whether the trial and appellate courts are free to bypass the rule when appointed counsel does not file a timely notice of appeal. The supreme court supplied the answer in [Lyles]." Gutierrez, 376 Ill.App.3d at 184, 315 Ill.Dec. 233, 876 N.E.2d 233.
After briefly reviewing Lyles, the appellate court concluded that the answer was an "emphatic no." Gutierrez, 376 Ill.App.3d at 184, 315 Ill.Dec. 233, 876 N.E.2d 233.
According to the State, Supreme Court Rule 606(c) is not the only impediment to allowing the petitioner to file a late notice of appeal. The State asserts that section 122-6 of the Post-Conviction Hearing Act does not list a late notice of appeal among the remedies available to a postconviction trial court. See People v. Ferro, 195 Ill. App.3d 282, 287, 141 Ill.Dec. 850, 551 N.E.2d 1378 (1990) ("there is no authority granted in section 122-6 of the [Post-Conviction Hearing] Act to order a new appeal"); accord People v. Hightower, 233 Ill.App.3d 188, 191, 174 Ill.Dec. 285, 598 N.E.2d 482 (1992). Section 122-6 provides: "If the court finds in favor of the petitioner, it shall enter an appropriate order with respect to the judgment or sentence in the former proceedings and such supplementary orders as to rearraignment, retrial, custody, bail or discharge as may be necessary and proper." 725 ILCS 5/122-6 (West 2004).
Though it does not involve a claim that defense counsel failed to file a notice of appeal, People v. Golden, 369 Ill.App.3d 639, 308 Ill.Dec. 37, 860 N.E.2d 1119 (2006), which we also accepted for review and have resolved this date (People v. Golden, 229 Ill.2d 277, 322 Ill.Dec. 569, 891 N.E.2d 860 (2008)), is relevant here. In Golden, the appellate court, relying on Ferro and Hightower, noted, "Section 122-6 mentions only trial proceedings as the subjects of the trial court's power. Appellate proceedings are nowhere mentioned." Applying the maxim of statutory construction expressio unius est exclusio alterius, the court concluded that section 122-6 does not authorize the trial court to allow a late notice of appeal. Golden, 369 Ill. App.3d at 642-43, 308 Ill.Dec. 37, 860 N.E.2d 1119. This interpretation of section 122-6, stated the appellate court, harmonizes that statute with Rule 606(c). Golden, 369 Ill.App.3d at 643, 308 Ill.Dec. 37, 860 N.E.2d 1119. The appellate court, however, did not foreclose all avenues of relief:
"Our holding that a trial court has no authority to allow a late notice of appeal does not leave without a remedy a defendant whose direct appeal was frustrated by the errors of appellate counsel. The defendant may bring a postconviction challenge arguing that his appellate counsel was ineffective under the performance-prejudice test of Strickland." Golden, 369 Ill.App.3d at 645-46, 308 Ill.Dec. 37, 860 N.E.2d 1119.
If a defendant still wants a direct appeal, his recourse lies in the supervisory authority of this court. Golden, 369 Ill.App.3d at 646, 308 Ill.Dec. 37, 860 N.E.2d 1119, citing Moore, 133 Ill.2d at 332, 140 Ill.Dec. 385, 549 N.E.2d 1257.
The State is correct: section 122-6 does not specifically mention leave to file a late notice of appeal among the remedies available to a trial court in a postconviction proceeding. The State, tracking Golden, insists that the statute is consequently limited to actions within the trial court's jurisdiction and includes "steps that the trial court is both able and best-suited to make." Allowing the petitioner to file a late notice of appeal is unnecessary, the State argues, because "the trial court has other actions it may take to fashion a suitable remedy for a successful petitioner." These actions include treating a post-conviction *874 petition as the "functional equivalent" of a direct appeal. According to the State, "once a defendant establishes that he was denied a direct appeal as a result of ineffective assistance of counsel, he should be permitted to raise in a post-conviction proceeding any claim he could have raised on direct appeal without the particular restrictions of the Post-Conviction Hearing Act (such as waiver, timeliness and the requirement of a constitutional claim) imposing obstacles of relief." The State then, while insisting that the Act's listed remedies are exclusive, apparently willing to relax the Act's requirement of a constitutional claim.
A postconviction claim of ineffective assistance of counsel in failing to perfect an appeal implicates both the right to counsel on appeal and the right to appeal. Cf. People v. Frank, 48 Ill.2d 500, 504, 272 N.E.2d 25 (1971) (holding that the Act is also the "proper vehicle for review of those issues as to which review by direct appeal has been unconstitutionally denied by the deprivation of the right to appeal, the right to competent counsel on appeal, or the concept of fundamental fairness"). A criminal defendant has no federal constitutional right to a direct appeal, but under the Illinois Constitution the right to appeal a criminal conviction is fundamental. See Ill. Const.1970, art. VI, § 6. Though the right to counsel and the right to appeal overlap, a petitioner, like Ross, who claims that defense counsel was ineffective for failing to file a notice of appeal is chiefly arguing the right to appeal was denied. The concern is the appeal itself, not necessarily its outcome. The defendant's trial may have been procedurally and substantively unassailable, but the defendant was deprived of the constitutional right to direct review of the conviction and sentence by an appellate panel. The remedy, then, should fit the wrong. A defendant whose attorney never filed a notice of appeal is entitled to that appeal, not its functional equivalent. See Peguero v. United States, 526 U.S. 23, 28, 119 S.Ct. 961, 965, 143 L.Ed.2d 18, 24 (1999) ("when counsel fails to file a requested appeal, a defendant is entitled to * * * an appeal").
A postconviction petition is no substitute for a direct appeal. See People v. West, 187 Ill.2d 418, 425, 241 Ill.Dec. 535, 719 N.E.2d 664 (1999) (a postconviction petition is a collateral attack upon a prior conviction and sentence, not a substitute for or an addendum to a direct appeal). A postconviction petition is considered by a single trial court judge; a direct appeal is considered by three appellate court judges. A postconviction petition must present the gist of a constitutional claim, or face summary dismissal by the trial court; a direct appeal may present any issue of trial error, constitutional or not. Most importantly, a defendant is entitled to effective assistance of counsel in a direct appeal, but there is no corresponding constitutional right to effective assistance of postconviction counsel. See People v. Pinkonsly, 207 Ill.2d 555, 567, 280 Ill.Dec. 311, 802 N.E.2d 236 (2003).
We have declined to apply the general rule that a defendant is bound by the acts of defense counsel in cases involving appeals dismissed for want of prosecution. In People v. Brown, 39 Ill.2d 307, 235 N.E.2d 562 (1968), we stated:
"For a representative system of litigation to function, it is self-evident that under most circumstances clients must be bound by the acts of their lawyers. However, it is equally self-evident that a mechanical application of this legal proposition can lead to harsh results repugnant to commonly held notions of justice and fair play. [Citation.] These results can be even harsher in a criminal case than a civil one since in the latter suit *875 the aggrieved client has, in theory, a malpractice action against his attorney for damages, while in the former no attorney can restore his client's lost liberty. This distinction in itself mitigates against inflexibly applying this agency rule to waive substantive rights of defendants in criminal prosecutions." Brown, 39 Ill.2d at 310-11, 235 N.E.2d 562.
See also People v. Jacobs, 61 Ill.2d 590, 592, 338 N.E.2d 161 (1975) ("From the record before us it appears that the defendant has been deprived of his right to direct appeal as a consequence of circumstances over which he had little, if any, control"); accord People v. Mims, 82 Ill.2d 63, 66, 44 Ill.Dec. 246, 411 N.E.2d 215 (1980); People v. Aliwoli, 60 Ill.2d 579, 582, 328 N.E.2d 555 (1975).
A line of appellate court cases has taken this reasoning and afforded relief in the form of late notices of appeal, despite Rule 606(c) and section 122-6, to defendants whose attorneys have failed to file notices of appeal. In People v. Perez, 115 Ill. App.3d 446, 71 Ill.Dec. 182, 450 N.E.2d 870 (1983), the defendant was convicted of murder, attempted murder, and two counts of armed violence, and sentenced to 50 years' imprisonment. More than a year after sentencing, the defendant filed a postconviction petition, requesting appointed counsel for a direct appeal and leave to file a late notice of appeal. The trial court denied the State's motion to dismiss the petition and allowed the defendant to file a late notice of appeal. On appeal, the State argued that the trial court lacked the authority to grant this relief. The appellate court answered, "Although the relief granted by the trial court in this instance is not the usual remedy provided in a post-conviction proceeding, under these circumstances it was the appropriate relief." Perez, 115 Ill.App.3d at 451, 71 Ill.Dec. 182, 450 N.E.2d 870. The appellate court quoted the Act, and concluded that the trial court is limited in fashioning a remedy not by section 122-6, but only by the purpose of the Act, "which is to promote the concept of fundamental fairness." Perez, 115 Ill.App.3d at 451, 71 Ill.Dec. 182, 450 N.E.2d 870, citing Frank, 48 Ill.2d at 504, 272 N.E.2d 25.
Subsequent cases have tracked Perez, holding that the trial court may allow the defendant to file a late notice of appeal, even if it has lost jurisdiction. See People v. Thomas, 292 Ill.App.3d 891, 895, 227 Ill.Dec. 40, 686 N.E.2d 1196 (1997); People v. Swanson, 276 Ill.App.3d 130, 132, 212 Ill.Dec. 824, 657 N.E.2d 1169 (1995); People v. Scott, 143 Ill.App.3d 540, 542, 97 Ill.Dec. 545, 493 N.E.2d 27 (1986); see also People v. Cole, 287 Ill.App.3d 147, 222 Ill.Dec. 671, 678 N.E.2d 78 (1997). These decisions reflect a concern with providing any defendant who so desires at least one full appellate review of a conviction. And they are consistent with Moore, where we expressed a preference for appellate court proceedings: "We see no reason to waste the time and resources of an already overburdened circuit court by requiring yet another circuit judge to rule on matters pertaining to defendant's trial, only to have the matter ultimately return to the appellate court on appeal from the circuit court's post-conviction ruling." Moore, 133 Ill.2d at 339-40, 140 Ill.Dec. 385, 549 N.E.2d 1257.
Perez and its progeny reach a result that best serves the constitutional interests involved when defense counsel's ineffectiveness results in a denial of the right to appeal. The broad purpose of the Act is to enable the trial court "to review the constitutional integrity or `fundamental fairness' of the trial proceedings." See People v. Kubik, 214 Ill.App.3d 649, 658-59, 158 Ill.Dec. 152, 573 N.E.2d 1337 (1991). Section 122-6 is flexible enough to *876 include leave to file a late notice of appeal among the remedies available to a trial court in a postconviction proceeding. The Act, thus construed, constitutes a very limited exception to Rule 606. We hold that when a postconviction petitioner demonstrates that defense counsel was ineffective for failing to file a notice of appeal, the trial court may allow the petitioner leave to file a late notice of appeal.
After finding that the petitioner's late notice of appeal supplied jurisdiction, the appellate court here addressed the merits of his appeal. Likewise, we turn to the merits. The appellate court determined that the State had failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the pellet gun used in the robbery was a dangerous weapon. The State argues that the appellate court failed to apply the appropriate standard of review to the sufficiency of the evidence.
Due process requires proof beyond a reasonable doubt in order to convict a criminal defendant. People v. Cunningham, 212 Ill.2d 274, 278, 288 Ill.Dec. 616, 818 N.E.2d 304 (2004). When presented with a challenge to the sufficiency of the State's evidence, a reviewing court must determine whether "`after viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution, any rational trier of fact could have found the essential elements of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt.'" (Emphasis in original.) People v. Collins, 106 Ill.2d 237, 261, 87 Ill.Dec. 910, 478 N.E.2d 267 (1985), quoting Jackson v. Virginia, 443 U.S. 307, 319, 99 S.Ct. 2781, 2789, 61 L.Ed.2d 560, 573 (1979). Under this standard, the reviewing court does not retry the defendant, and the trier of fact remains responsible for making determinations regarding the credibility of witnesses, the weight to be given their testimony, and the reasonable inferences to be drawn from the evidence. See People v. Emerson, 189 Ill.2d 436, 475, 245 Ill.Dec. 49, 727 N.E.2d 302 (2000). But merely because the trier of fact accepted certain testimony or made certain inferences based on the evidence does not guarantee the reasonableness of its decision. A conviction will be reversed where the evidence is so unreasonable, improbable, or unsatisfactory that there remains a reasonable doubt of defendant's guilt. People v. Smith, 185 Ill.2d 532, 542, 236 Ill.Dec. 779, 708 N.E.2d 365 (1999).
A person commits armed robbery when he or she commits robbery while armed with a dangerous weapon. See 720 ILCS 5/18-1, 18-2(a) (West 2004). In People v. Dwyer, 324 Ill. 363, 155 N.E. 316 (1927), we construed the predecessor to the current armed robbery statute and acknowledged that some weapons are dangerous (or deadly) per se, and other weapons are dangerous in the manner they are used:
"A gun, pistol or dirk-knife is itself deadly, while a small pocket knife, a cane, a riding whip, a club or baseball bat may be so used as to be a deadly weapon. [Citations.] A weapon with which death may be easily and readily produced is a deadly weapon; anything made for the purpose of destroying life or for another purpose * * * if it is a thing with which death can be easily and readily produced, the law recognizes as a deadly weapon. [Citation.] Where the weapon in question and the manner of its use are of such character as to admit of but one conclusion, the question whether or not it is deadly is one of law for the court to determine, but when the character of the weapon is doubtful or the question depends upon the manner of its use it is a question for the jury to determine from a description of the weapon, from the manner of its use and the circumstances of the case." Dwyer, 324 Ill. at 365, 155 N.E. 316.
*877 Our holding in Dwyer is less than clear. Although that case hints that any gun is dangerous per se because it is an object that can readily produce death, it is difficult to characterize an unloaded gun as such an object. The appellate court aptly summarized the authorities in People v. Greer, 53 Ill.App.3d 675, 681-82, 11 Ill.Dec. 388, 368 N.E.2d 996 (1977):
"Illinois case law indicates that a gun is a dangerous weapon per se, unless it is shown that the particular weapon involved in the robbery was not dangerous or, in other words, that the law presumes that an object which has the outward appearance of a gun is dangerous (i.e., loaded and operable), but this presumption may be rebutted by proof that it is not."
The Greer court noted that, while this approach is sensible, it remains constitutionally suspect because the presumption shifts to the defendant the burden of proving that the weapon was not dangerous. Greer, 53 Ill.App.3d at 682 n. 1, 11 Ill.Dec. 388, 368 N.E.2d 996.
The appellate court here seized upon this statement in holding that the presumption identified in Greer is an unconstitutional mandatory rebuttable presumption (see People v. Pomykala, 203 Ill.2d 198, 203, 271 Ill.Dec. 230, 784 N.E.2d 784 (2003)), and that "the State may not rely on the presumption that a BB gun is loaded or [ ]operable." No. 1-05-2806 (unpublished order under Supreme Court Rule 23). The State argues that the trial court did not rely upon a mandatory presumption but instead made a permissible inference from the evidence presented. "Ultimately," contends the State, "whether the gun was dangerous was an issue properly resolved by the trial court sitting as trier of fact, and the trial court's finding that the gun was a dangerous weapon should have been viewed in the light most favorable to the [State]."
Our decision in People v. Skelton, 83 Ill.2d 58, 46 Ill.Dec. 571, 414 N.E.2d 455 (1980), is instructive. In Skelton, the defendant robbed a discount store, and a toy gun was found in his waistband shortly thereafter. The gun was made of hard plastic except for the barrel, which was made of thin "tinny metal." The gun was 4½-inches long, and it was quite light. The defendant was convicted of armed robbery and sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment. The appellate court reversed, holding that the toy gun was not a dangerous weapon. We allowed the State's petition for leave to appeal.
Initially, we noted a split in authorities on whether a toy gun could be considered a dangerous weapon. Skelton, 83 Ill.2d at 62, 46 Ill.Dec. 571, 414 N.E.2d 455. Courts using a subjective approach look to the victim's perception of the gun, while courts using an objective approach look to the nature of the gun. Both approaches, we stated, suffer from "logical and practical difficulties." Skelton, 83 Ill.2d at 62, 46 Ill.Dec. 571, 414 N.E.2d 455. Based on the language of the armed robbery statute, which requires a person to carry or to be armed with a dangerous weapon, we concluded that the legislature had rejected the subjective approach. Skelton, 83 Ill.2d at 63, 46 Ill.Dec. 571, 414 N.E.2d 455. Though the "weight of authority" employing the objective approach holds that unloaded guns are dangerous weapons, we acknowledged that this result was problematic. Skelton, 83 Ill.2d at 63-64, 46 Ill. Dec. 571, 414 N.E.2d 455. We clarified:
"[A] weapon can be dangerous, even though used in a manner for which it was not designed or intended. Thus, a rifle or shotgun, whether loaded or not, may be used as a club with devastating effect. Similarly, a handgun, when *878 gripped by the barrel and used as a bludgeon, is equally dangerous whether loaded or unloaded. [Citations.]
* * *
* * * Most, if not all, unloaded real guns and many toy guns, because of their size and weight, could be used in deadly fashion as bludgeons. Since the robbery victim could be badly hurt or even killed by such weapons if used in that fashion, it seems to us they can properly be classified as dangerous weapons although they were not in fact used in that manner during the commission of the particular offense. It suffices that the potential for such use is present; the victim need not provoke its actual use in such manner." Skelton, 83 Ill.2d at 64-66, 46 Ill.Dec. 571, 414 N.E.2d 455.
Whether an object is sufficiently susceptible to use in a manner likely to cause serious injury is generally a question of fact. Skelton, 83 Ill.2d at 66, 46 Ill.Dec. 571, 414 N.E.2d 455.
Since Skelton, appellate court cases have refined the common law definition of dangerous weapon by dividing dangerous objects into three categories: (1) objects that are dangerous per se, such as loaded guns; (2) objects that are not necessarily dangerous, but were actually used in a dangerous manner during the robbery; and (3) objects that are not necessarily dangerous, but may become dangerous when used in a dangerous manner. See People v. Lindsay, 263 Ill.App.3d 523, 528, 200 Ill.Dec. 212, 635 N.E.2d 551 (1994); People v. Burge, 254 Ill.App.3d 85, 90, 193 Ill.Dec. 310, 626 N.E.2d 343 (1993). This effort at categorization is nothing more than a recognition of the proper role for the trier of fact. Contrary to the holding of the appellate court here and in Greer, Illinois cases do not create a mandatory presumption that any gun is a dangerous weapon. Instead, our cases conclude that the trier of fact may make an inference of dangerousness based upon the evidence. The State may prove that a gun is a dangerous weapon by presenting evidence that the gun was loaded and operable, or by presenting evidence that it was used or capable of being used as a club or bludgeon. Here, the State did neither.
In People v. Thorne, 352 Ill.App.3d 1062, 288 Ill.Dec. 513, 817 N.E.2d 1163 (2004), the defendant was charged with armed robbery. At trial, the victim testified that the defendant stuck a "black pistol" in his back and to his head. A police officer described the gun as a hard object and identified it as a Marksman .177-caliber black BB gun. The State did not introduce the gun into evidence and provided no pictures of it. The defendant was convicted, and he appealed.
The appellate court held that the State's evidence was insufficient. Thorne, 352 Ill. App.3d at 1073, 288 Ill.Dec. 513, 817 N.E.2d 1163. Relying upon earlier appellate court cases involving toy guns and pellet guns, the appellate court stated:
"In all the cases that have found guns that are incapable of firing bullets to be dangerous weapons under the armed robbery statute, there was either evidence (1) that the gun was actually used in a dangerous manner, or (2) that the character of the weapon was such that it could conceivably be used as a bludgeon. [Citations.] In every case finding that an unloaded gun could have been used as a bludgeon and, therefore, could be considered a dangerous weapon, there was evidence presented as to the physical characteristics (weight or metallic nature) of the weapon. Here, the State failed to present such evidence." Thorne, 352 Ill.App.3d at 1072-73, 288 Ill.Dec. 513, 817 N.E.2d 1163.
*879 The State proved only that the defendant had a small BB gun and that it was a hard object. Thorne, 352 Ill.App.3d at 1073, 288 Ill.Dec. 513, 817 N.E.2d 1163.
As in Thorne, the evidence regarding the petitioner's gun was thin. Odumuyiwa testified that the gun was small, portable, and concealable; the police officer testified that the gun was a .177-caliber pellet gun with a three-inch barrel. The State never presented the gun or photographs of the gun at trial. There was no evidence that the gun was loaded, there was no evidence that it was brandished as a bludgeon, and there was no evidence regarding its weight or composition. The trial court incorrectly based its ruling on the subjective feelings of the victim, rather than the objective nature of the gun. The appellate court correctly concluded that the evidence was insufficient to prove that the gun was a dangerous weapon, and correctly directed the trial court to enter a judgment of conviction for simple robbery and sentence the petitioner accordingly.
CONCLUSION
For the reasons that we have stated, we affirm the judgment of the appellate court.
Affirmed.
Chief Justice THOMAS and Justices FREEMAN, KILBRIDE, GARMAN, KARMEIER, and BURKE concurred in the judgment and opinion.
NOTES
[1]  This is not a case in which the defendant's wishes were unclear and defense counsel failed to consult with the defendant regarding an appeal. In such a case, the performance calculus is different. See People v. Torres, 228 Ill.2d 382, 320 Ill.Dec. 874, 888 N.E.2d 91 (2008).
[2]  In a noncapital case, an appeal is perfected by filing a notice of appeal, and later filing a docketing statement, the record, and an appellant's brief. See People v. Mena, 337 Ill. App.3d 868, 872, 275 Ill.Dec. 315, 792 N.E.2d 790 (2003); see generally Coppedge v. United States, 369 U.S. 438, 442, 82 S.Ct. 917, 919, 8 L.Ed.2d 21, 26 (1962) ("The only requirements a defendant must meet for perfecting his appeal are those expressed as time limitations within which various procedural steps must be completed").

=== CASE 2214662 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:50.620434+00 ===

251 Cal.App.2d 732 (1967)
STEWART J. LONG, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
L. KAY LONG, Defendant and Appellant; MRS. RAY VALENTINE, Intervener and Respondent.
Civ. No. 768.
California Court of Appeals. Fifth Dist.
June 12, 1967.
Bradford, Cross, Dahl & Hefner and Theodore M. Marois for Defendant and Appellant.
No appearance for Plaintiff and Respondent.
Zarick & Zarick and Marco S. Zarick for Intervener and Respondent.
STONE, J.
Appellant, the mother of a minor child, appeals from an order denying her application for a modification of the child custody provisions of a divorce decree. She and Stewart J. Long were married May 28, 1955; Dawni Long, their child, was born May 20, 1956. They separated in September 1957, and the father instituted divorce proceedings against the mother in Sacramento County in 1959. The interlocutory decree of divorce, entered April 2, 1959, recites: "... by stipulation it was agreed ... that said minor child reside with Mrs. Ray Valentine, the maternal great-aunt of the child until further order of this Court; ..."
The custody order, entered pursuant to the stipulation, awarded legal custody to the father and physical custody to the child's maternal great- aunt.
Appellant moved to Colorado and in July 1960 married *734 Waldon Faulkner, her present husband. At that time she had a son, Nickie, born in 1958, whom Faulkner later adopted. They now have two children of their own.
Meanwhile, Dawni remained with her great-aunt, Mrs. Ray Valentine, in Sacramento, and at some time which is not precisely specified, her name was changed to Cheryl Valentine by order of the Sacramento Superior Court.
In the present proceedings, Stewart Long, the father, and Mrs. Ray Valentine were ordered to show cause why custody of the child should not be awarded to appellant mother. Long, who appeared without counsel, did not oppose the motion. Mrs. Valentine appeared with counsel and vigorously opposed the application for a custody change. The basic issue, of course, was the mother's present fitness to have custody of her child.
Appellant admitted that her son, Nickie, was born out of wedlock; that in 1958 she left her former husband, Stewart Long, to go with one Louis Mantzouranis, the father of Nickie; that in 1959 she went to Colorado because Mantzouranis was in prison in Canyon City. She testified that she had not heard from him since the early part of 1960. She also testified that she had been convicted of forgery in 1958 but since then she has not been involved in any criminal matter. She explained that she consented to the custody arrangement set out in the interlocutory decree because at the time of the divorce her attorney advised her that she had little chance to obtain custody of Dawni and suggested that she place the child with Mrs. Valentine, appellant's aunt, until appellant could establish herself and seek a change in custody.
She and her husband testified that they did not feel they were financially able to support Dawni until the commencement of the modification proceedings in 1965. In May 1962, they purchased a $15,000 three-bedroom home in Arvada, Colorado, located about three blocks from the school Nickie is now attending. They are members of the Arvada Methodist Church and attend services every Sunday. Their children are included in most of their activities, such as softball, bowling, fishing and attending picnics, church activities and football games. In the summer of 1964, their financial condition had improved enough to allow appellant to give up her gainful employment as a keypunch operator and remain at home, devoting her time to the family and the home. At the time of the hearing appellant was 31 years of age and her health was good. *735
On cross-examination, appellant admitted that since December 1958 she had sent Dawni one present the first Christmas, and one birthday present; that she had sent two birthday cards; that she sent Christmas cards to Mrs. Valentine and family and kept herself informed as to Dawni's welfare through correspondence with Mrs. Valentine and with her own mother, who resides in Sacramento; that she did not visit Dawni from 1959 until 1964; that she visited the child in the summer of 1964 and again in the summer of 1965, at the Valentine home in Sacramento.
Waldon Faulkner, appellant's husband, testified that he is 30 years of age; that his general health is excellent; that he is regularly employed by Caterpillar Tractor Company, earning roughly $500 per month as take-home pay, and, in addition, sells insurance. He believes he has the financial ability to support Dawni and desires to do so.
A duly authenticated copy of a "Final Decree of Adoption" of Dawni Kay Long by Waldon W. Faulkner was introduced in evidence, reflecting that it was entered by the District Court in and for the County of Jefferson, State of Colorado, on August 9, 1965. Pursuant thereto the Department of Public Health of the State of California, on September 17, 1965, issued a "Certificate of Live Birth" showing the name of the child to be Dawni Kay Faulkner and the name of the father to be Waldon W. Faulkner. The natural father, Stewart Long, testified that he relinquished the child for adoption, by a consent in writing.
The only testimony other than that of appellant and her husband relating to her fitness to have custody of Dawni, is that of Mrs. Valentine. She testified, in substance, that appellant infrequently contacted the child during the period from 1959 until 1964, that she received a total of 15 letters from appellant over the years, that the child received two presents sent by appellant and was visited by her three times in 1964 and 1965.
At the conclusion of the evidence, the probation officer was ordered to make an investigation and to file a report with the court. This order was made by the court on its own motion, as it clearly had the authority to do. (Welf. & Inst. Code,  582; Cal. Family Lawyer (Cont. Ed. Bar) p. 577.) However, no provision was made for service of a copy of the report upon the parties, or for the parties to object to the contents of the report.
The counterpart of Welfare and Institutions Code section *736 582, pursuant to which the case was referred to the probation officer, is Code of Civil Procedure section 263. This section delineates the procedure to be followed in counties authorized to have domestic relations cases investigators. Under section 263 the investigator is required to file his report not less than 10 days before the hearing, and a copy of the report must be served upon each party not less than 10 days before trial. It also provides that: "Such investigator or investigators who have investigated the care, welfare and custody of the minor children ... shall be present at the trial of the divorce action of the parties who are the parents or custodians of such minor children, and may be called to testify by the judge or either party as to any matter which they have investigated. The testimony of such investigators shall be subject to questions direct and cross which are proper, and shall be competent as evidence." (Italics added.)
Welfare and Institutions Code section 582 provides no procedural guidelines, and no requirements similar to those in Code of Civil Procedure section 263. [1a] Nevertheless, reports filed pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code section 582 are hearsay evidence, and this fact accentuates the need to carefully protect the rights of the parties affected by them. Due process of law requires that each party (a) receive a copy of the report, (b) be given an opportunity to cross-examine the investigative officer and to subpoena and examine persons whose hearsay statements are contained in the report, and (c) be permitted to introduce evidence by way of rebuttal.
The case before us points up the possibility of a grave injustice resulting if an interested party is deprived of these rights. While on the witness stand, under oath and confronted by his former wife, the father of the child said nothing about the mother's failure to rehabilitate herself, nor did he deny that his consent to the adoption of the child was given in good faith. Once outside the courtroom, he said he was tricked into signing the consent to adoption, and that the mother of the child had not rehabilitated herself.
[2] To deny a litigant the right to cross-examine a witness who testifies against him is a denial of due process of law. (Caesar's Restaurant v. Industrial Acc. Com., 175 Cal.App.2d 850 [1 Cal.Rptr. 97]; Fewel v. Fewel, 23 Cal.2d 431, 436 [144 P.2d 592].) The error is compounded when hearsay evidence directly contradicts testimony given under oath in open court and in the presence of the litigant.
[1b] There is no denial of due process, however, when a *737 litigant waives his right to object to the contents of a report and his right to examine the probation officer or to present counter-evidence. He may waive these rights by failure to make timely objection (Forslund v. Forslund, 225 Cal.App.2d 476, 495 [37 Cal.Rptr. 489]) or, as here, by stipulation that the probation officer's report may be received and considered by the court as evidence without further hearing. (Exley v. Exley, 101 Cal.App.2d 831, 837 [226 P.2d 662].)
[3] The reporter's transcript reflects that when appellant's counsel objected to the scope of the investigation and report, the court replied: "I understand. You have got a running objection to the whole thing. That is fine. ..." (Italics added.) Standing alone, this would appear to constitute an objection to the report, but the "Amended Memorandum and Minute Order" appearing in the clerk's transcript recites: "It was also stipulated by counsel for both sides that the probation report could be received by the court as evidence pertaining to the issue of fitness of Lorna K. Faulkner."
This language implies that the matter was to stand submitted upon filing of the report, without further hearing. The correctness of the memorandum and order reflecting the stipulation has not been challenged and, in this circumstance, we must presume the court's order reflects what occurred. In the face of the stipulation we find no denial of due process.
The probation officer's report is not made a part of the record, and we do not have it before us. Since it would be highly improper for a court to privately discuss a case with a witness without notice to all parties, we assume the father's contradictory statements were relayed to the court via the probation officer's report. That the court relied heavily upon this information is manifest from the memorandum and order. Had it been obtained in a "private conversation" with the judge, out of the presence of appellant, a reversal would be impelled, but when received pursuant to stipulation as part of a probation report, there is no error.
[4] Appellant is quite right in contending here, as well as below, that the fitness of the maternal great-aunt is not an issue; appellant petitioned for custody upon the ground of her present fitness, and this is the sole issue before the court. However, receiving testimony concerning the fitness of the great-aunt is not cause for a reversal since the court did not purport to award custody to her. The sole finding as to fitness *738 is that appellant failed to satisfy the court she is presently a fit and proper person to have the custody of the child.
[5] The second portion of the order, from which the mother has also appealed reads: "... secondly, It Is Hereby Ordered that for the well being and protection of the said child Dawni Kay Long, a petition be filed in the Juvenile Court of Sacramento to determine whether or not this child should be made a ward of that court. It is also the feeling of this Court that the Juvenile Court should appoint counsel to represent Dawni Kay Long in these proceedings."
It appears to us the court had no alternative but to make the order, in view of the peculiar circumstances brought out during the child custody hearing. The decree of divorce awarded legal custody to the father and, pursuant to stipulation of the parties, ordered the child placed in the physical custody of the maternal great-aunt. Physical custody was thus derived through, and was dependent upon, legal custody in the father. During the present hearing, a properly authenticated copy of a Colorado adoption decree was received in evidence. The record reflects that the father of the child consented to the adoption by appellant's present husband. Since the authenticity of the adoption decree stands unchallenged, it is entitled to full faith and credit as the judgment of a sister state. Consequently the natural father no longer enjoys a legal relationship to the child. This, in turn, undermines the basis for physical custody in the great-aunt of the child.
In light of the determination that the natural mother is not entitled to custody, the adoption decree presented a new facet to the case as it established that the father is legally a stranger to his child. The adoptive father did not assert his right to custody, and that issue was not before the court. Thus the legal custody of the child was in limbo. To surmount this impasse, the court ordered a petition filed in juvenile court so that a temporary order for custody could be made pending resolution of the question where legal custody lies.
The order is affirmed.
Conley, P. J., and Gargano, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2214703 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:51.53571+00 ===

212 Cal.App.2d 685 (1963)
VICTOR BENNETT, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
BERNARD FRANCIS BROWN, Defendant and Appellant.
Civ. No. 10506.
California Court of Appeals. Third Dist.
Feb. 5, 1963.
Desmond & Miller for Defendant and Appellant.
A. John Merlo for Plaintiff and Respondent.
SCHOTTKY, J.
This is an appeal from an order retaxing costs.
Victor Bennett brought an action against Bernard Francis Brown to recover damages for personal injuries incurred as a result of an assault and battery.
On August 28, 1959, Bennett filed his complaint. On March 17, 1961, Brown served on counsel for Bennett an offer of compromise which read:
"Offer of Defendant to Compromise"
"To the Plaintiff Victor Bennett and to A. John Merlo, His Attorney:"
"You and each of you will please take notice that the defendant, Bernard Francis Brown, does offer to allow judgment to be taken against him in the above-entitled action in the sum of $600.00 pursuant to the provisions of Section 997, Code of Civil Procedure of California."
This offer was refused. The cause proceeded to trial and the jury returned a verdict of $500 in favor of Bennett. Bennett filed a cost bill totaling $198.40. Brown filed a cost bill of $570.30. The trial court awarded Bennett his costs and denied Brown's costs. This appeal followed:
[1] Section 997 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides: "The defendant may, at any time before the trial or judgment, serve upon the plaintiff an offer to allow judgment to be taken against him for the sum or property, or to the effect therein specified. If the plaintiff accept the offer, and give *687 notice thereof within five days, he may file the offer, with proof of notice of acceptance, and the clerk, or the judge where there is no clerk, must thereupon enter judgment accordingly. If the notice of acceptance be not given, the offer is to be deemed withdrawn, and cannot be given in evidence upon the trial; and if the plaintiff fail to obtain a more favorable judgment, he cannot recover costs, but must pay the defendant's costs from the time of the offer."
This section has been construed to mean that the plaintiff in an action may recover his costs accruing in his favor before an offer of judgment though he may recover a less favorable judgment and that he is to be charged with the defendant's costs after that time. (Douthitt v. Finch, 84 Cal. 214 [24 P. 929]; Robinett v. Brown, 167 Cal. 735 [141 P. 368]; Smith v. New York, O. & W. R. Co., 119 Misc. 506 [196 N.Y.S. 521].)
In 13 California Jurisprudence 2d it is stated at page 230: "Although ordinarily a plaintiff, upon a judgment in his favor, is entitled as a matter of course to his costs in an action for recovery of money or damages or of personal or real property, where the defendant in good faith and with ability to perform offers, before trial or judgment, to allow judgment to be taken against him by way of compromise, and the plaintiff fails to accept and obtains a judgment less favorable than that offered, the plaintiff may not recover his costs incurred subsequent to the offer, but must pay the defendant's costs incurred after the offer."
In the case at bench plaintiff's costs at the time of defendant's offer and before trial as taxed by the court were the following:
Tabular Material Omitted
The amount of the verdict was $500. Plaintiff's costs at the time the offer was made were $99.45. This is a total of $599.45 or below the amount of the offer which was $600.
Respondent does not challenge the sufficiency of the offer but his principal argument is that the judgment as entered after the trial must be viewed in order to determine whether *688 the judgment is more favorable than the offer. The trial court expressed the same view.
[2] It is a cardinal rule of statutory construction that a statute should, if possible, be given an interpretation which will give effect to the legislative intent and which is consistent with the real object and purpose of the statute. [3] We believe that the Legislature enacted section 997 of the Code of Civil Procedure for the purpose of encouraging the settlement of litigation without trial. The section was designed to give a defendant the right to offer to allow judgment to be taken against him for a specified amount and to provide that if the plaintiff did not accept said offer he could not recover any costs incurred after the date of the offer if he failed "to obtain a more favorable judgment." To determine whether a plaintiff has recovered a more favorable judgment costs incurred after the offer has been received must be excluded. If not, the portion of section 997 denying plaintiff his costs becomes meaningless.
[4] It is true, as respondent contends, that one must look to the judgment in order to determine whether it is more favorable than the offer of settlement. If, for example, the judgment grants relief in addition to damages in favor of a plaintiff, such as specific performance or an order quieting title, then the mere fact that the damages recovered were below the amount of the offer of settlement would not preclude a plaintiff from recovering his total costs. [5] But when you have a cause of action seeking damages only and the verdict of the jury is less than the offer of settlement plus costs incurred to that time, the judgment is not more favorable and the rule of section 997 must be applied.
If the rule were as contended by the respondent and all costs incurred could be included in determining whether the recovery was more favorable than the offer of settlement, then a plaintiff could in many instances by costs alone insure a more favorable judgment. Such result would defeat the purpose of the section and does not comport with the decisions of the decided cases. (See Douthitt v. Finch, supra, 84 Cal. 214; Robinett v. Brown, supra, 167 Cal. 735.)
In view of the foregoing, we conclude that under a proper construction of section 997, with a view to carrying out what was undoubtedly the object sought to be accomplished by the Legislature, since the amount of the verdict ($500) and plaintiff's costs up to the time of the offer ($99.45) totaled less than the $600 offered by defendant, the plaintiff failed *689 "to obtain a more favorable judgment," and as provided in the section "he cannot recover costs, but must pay defendant's costs from the time of the offer." We therefore hold that the court erred in concluding that the plaintiff was entitled to recover his costs and that the defendant was not entitled to recover his costs from the time of the offer.
The order retaxing costs is reversed with directions to the trial court to grant defendant's motion to strike plaintiff's costs after the time of the offer and to allow defendant the amount of his costs incurred after defendant's offer of compromise.
Pierce, P. J., and Van Dyke, J.,  [fn. *] concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Retired Presiding Justice of the District Court of Appeal sitting pro tempore under assignment by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.

=== CASE 9738279 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:47:57.623928+00 ===

JUSTICE GREIMAN delivered the opinion of the court: Following a bench trial, defendant Pedro Salinas was convicted of unlawful possession of a controlled substance (720 ILCS 570/ 402(a)(2)(D) (West 2004)) and sentenced to 10 years’ imprisonment. On appeal, defendant seeks reversal of his conviction, asserting that the trial court erred in denying his pretrial motion to quash arrest and suppress evidence because: (1) the traffic stop that resulted in the seizure of the controlled substance violated his constitutional right to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures; and (2) the trial court improperly relied on evidence outside the record in delivering its ruling. We affirm. Following a narcotics surveillance operation, defendant was charged with possession of a controlled substance with intent to deliver (720 ILCS 570/401(a)(2)(D) (West 2004)) when police officers recovered 5,118 grams of cocaine from defendant’s vehicle on April 1, 2004. The surveillance operation also resulted in the arrests of codefendants Carlos Ayala and Tomas Cantuo, who were also charged with narcotics offenses. Prior to trial, defendant, through counsel, filed a motion to suppress, seeking to suppress the cocaine the police recovered from his vehicle, contending that the search and seizure violated his fourth and fourteenth amendment rights to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures. In his motion, defendant argued that at the time police stopped his car for an improper lane change, “the police did not possess probable cause to arrest, or a reasonable suspicion to support a ‘Terry’ stop.” Nonetheless, defendant contended that police ordered him out of the vehicle, handcuffed him, and “performed a full search of the vehicle,” during which they recovered a box containing cocaine. Defendants argued that the search and seizure was illegal and, accordingly, sought suppression of “all fruits derived illegally from the search and seizure.” Codefendants Ayala and Cantuo also filed motions to suppress, and the trial court conducted a hearing on all three motions. At the hearing, Officer Andrew Carvajal testified that on April 1, 2004, he was a member of the Chicago police department’s long-term narcotics investigation team when he met with, and received information from, a paid confidential informant. Officer Carvajal classified the informant as “reliable” and indicated that he had received information from this informant on approximately 30 to 40 occasions over the past two years, and that the informant’s information had led to a number of arrests as well as the seizure of narcotics. He could only recall three occasions where the informant’s tip did not prove to be accurate. On this occasion, the informant told Officer Carvajal that “he had information that a shipment of cocaine had arrived” at a residence located at 4405 South Trumbull “either the night before or *** two nights before.” The informant further informed Carvajal that a man named “Carlos” resided at that address and described him as a short Hispanic male with a slim build who was in his late thirties. The informant did not identify defendant or provide any specific information pertaining to him. Moreover, the informant did not provide any information as to how the narcotics were packaged. At the conclusion of the conversation with his confidential informant, Officer Carvajal conducted a meeting and relayed the information provided by the informant to the other members of his team. After hearing the substance of the informant’s tip, the team decided to conduct a surveillance operation at 4405 South Trumbull. Accordingly, Officer Carvajal and approximately 10 other officers commenced surveillance at the South Trumbull address at approximately 3:30 p.m. In explaining his role in the surveillance operation, Officer Carvajal testified that he wore plain clothes and sat alone in an unmarked car parked in an alley near the residence. He had radio contact with the other members of his team. At some point, Officer Robert Bertermann, who was engaged in surveillance in the front of the residence, informed the other officers over the radio that defendant was in the area. Specifically, Officer Bertermann relayed over the radio that defendant and a female approached 4405 South Trumbull in a vehicle, that defendant conversed with a man later identified as codefendant Carlos Ayala, that Ayala then entered the house, retrieved a bag, which he handed to defendant, and that defendant and the woman accompanying him returned to their vehicle and drove away. Officer Carvajal never saw defendant from his surveillance position in the rear of the South Trumbull residence. He explained that defendant was not arrested after receiving the bag because no one had seen defendant commit a crime. Instead, mobile surveillance commenced on defendant’s vehicle. Officer Bertermann confirmed that he assumed a surveillance position at the front of the South Trumbull residence on April 1, 2004, at approximately 3:30 p.m. He further confirmed that at approximately 5:30 p.m, he saw defendant arrive at 4405 South Trumbull in a Jeep vehicle that contained a female occupant, who was later identified as Candelaria Vargas, and converse with Carlos Ayala on the front steps of the residence. From his surveillance position, he was unable to hear the contents of the five-minute conversation. At the conclusion of the conversation, Officer Bertermann observed Ayala enter the residence and emerge shortly thereafter with a large plastic bag containing a square-shaped box that was approximately 15 inches high and 6 inches wide. Although he was unable to see the contents of the box, Officer Betermann saw Ayala hand the box to defendant, who then placed it in the Jeep and proceeded to drive northbound on Trumbull Avenue. Several members of the surveillance team then commenced mobile surveillance on defendant’s vehicle. Officer Fernando Velez was part of the four-person team that engaged in mobile surveillance on defendant’s car. Mobile surveillance commenced on South Trumbull Avenue and concluded approximately one hour later at 4000 North on the Kennedy Expressway. Officer Velez explained he witnessed defendant make two lane violations near Diversey Avenue. Specifically, he observed defendant change lanes without using his turn indicator. However, because Officer Velez was driving an unmarked police vehicle that was not equipped with flashing lights or emergency equipment, he was unable to pull over defendant’s vehicle. Accordingly, he obtained the assistance of several officers from the 17th District, who curbed defendant’s vehicle. At the time of the traffic stop, Officer Velez conceded that he possessed neither a search warrant nor an arrest warrant. Nevertheless, after defendant’s vehicle was stopped, Officer Velez walked to defendant’s car, identified himself as a police officer, revealed that he was part of a narcotics investigation, and that defendant had been seen accepting a box from the South Trumbull residence that was under surveillance. Defendant immediately acknowledged that he had received a box containing narcotics at the residence. Defendant further stated that Candelaria Vargas, his passenger, was not involved in the transaction. Following defendant’s confession, Officer Velez recovered a Mr. Coffee box containing 5,118 grams of shrink-wrapped cocaine, which was sitting in plain view in the backseat of the vehicle. After he recovered the narcotics, Officer Velez placed defendant in custody and used his radio to inform the remaining members of the surveillance team that narcotics had been recovered from defendant’s car. Officer Velez acknowledged that defendant did not receive a ticket for the traffic violations and that he did not mention the lane violations in the report that he prepared of defendant’s arrest. Candelaria Vargas confirmed that she was a passenger in defendant’s car on April 1, 2004, when police stopped the vehicle at approximately 6:30 p.m. She testified that defendant was a friend of her father’s and denied that he was her boyfriend. Vargas acknowledged that she and defendant had visited 4405 South Trumbull earlier in the day and that defendant conversed with Carlos Ayala; however, she did not see Ayala hand defendant a package. After leaving the South Trumbull residence, Vargas explained that defendant “was driving fine.” She did not observe defendant make any lane changes without using his turn indicator; rather, “[i]f he did move, he did put the signal on.” After police stopped defendant’s vehicle, two officers approached the car, and one of the officers immediately removed defendant from the car and “quickly” placed him in handcuffs without engaging in any prior conversation. Vargas then exited the car herself and was also handcuffed and led away from the vehicle. She then saw an officer remove a bag from the rear of the car. Vargas denied that any conversation had taken place prior to the removal of the bag because “[t]here wasn’t any time.” While Officer Velez commenced mobile surveillance on defendant’s car, Officers Carvajal and Bertermann remained in their surveillance positions near the South Trumbull residence. At approximately the same time that Officer Velez stopped defendant’s vehicle after defendant had made two illegal lane changes, Officer Bertermann observed codefendant Cantuo arrive at the South Trumbull residence. Officer Bertermann saw Ayala hand Cantuo a box that was approximately 10 inches long and 8 inches wide. After observing the second transaction, Officer Bertermann believed he had witnessed narcotics transactions and commenced mobile surveillance on Cantuo’s vehicle. He then heard Officer Velez’s radio transmission that narcotics had been recovered from defendant’s vehicle. Thereafter, Officer Bertermann confronted Cantuo, who consented to a search of his vehicle. During the search, Officer Bertermann recovered a box containing cocaine from the backseat of Cantuo’s vehicle. Defendant and Cantuo were then both transported back to 4405 South Trumbull. Thereafter, police entered the South Trumbull residence, arrested codefendant Carlos Ayala, and recovered a suitcase containing cocaine from the trunk of a vehicle parked in Ayala’s garage. Upon the conclusion of the live testimony, the parties delivered closing arguments. Defense counsel initially emphasized that the informant’s tip did not mention defendant and did not contain sufficient detail; rather, the informant simply provided an address and the name “Carlos.” Accordingly, counsel argued that at the time of the stop, the police did not have reasonable suspicion that defendant was involved in a narcotics transaction based on the informant’s tip. Thereafter, counsel conceded that the issue of whether defendant actually committed the alleged traffic violations was essentially a credibility determination based on the conflicting testimony of Officer Velez and Candelaria Vargas. However, counsel argued that even if the police were initially justified in curbing defendant’s vehicle after witnessing two lane violations and conducting an investigatory Terry stop, their subsequent actions were not reasonably related to the scope of the stop. Counsel noted that instead of inquiring about the lane violations, Officer Velez immediately began discussing the narcotics investigation with defendant. Counsel emphasized that the police never ticketed defendant for the purported traffic violations and that the violations were not mentioned in the police report. Accordingly, counsel argued that “this was not a Terry type stop. They were not investigating a lane change. They were making a lack of probable cause type of stop in this case,” and, accordingly, suppression was warranted. After reviewing the evidence, the trial court denied defendant’s motion to suppress. In delivering its ruling, the trial court found no credibility in Vargas’s testimony, noting that she was unable to provide details as to any social itinerary that took place on April 1, 2004, and further found that Vargas’s testimony was tainted by bias, which was “predicated on her relationship, whatever that might be, with defendant.” In contrast, the trial court found that “the officers’ testimony was succinct and accurate and credible.” Based on their testimony, the trial court found that the police were justified in stopping defendant’s vehicle after witnessing defendant execute illegal lane changes. The court further found it of “no concern” that the officers’ “initial interaction did not relate to the [traffic violation] that could be observed,” stating: “I don’t believe the Constitution would constrain that officer to address that item first. I have no problem with the officers initially making these inquiries relative to this narcotics investigation, letting [defendant] know he has been watched for a period of time. I consider that good police work. It is likely in my view that we never reached the traffic stop when a Defendant — -certainly consistent with what I believe to be common sense — immediately puts himself in a situation where he is admitting then, not now, that the narcotics are his and not Ms. Vargas’ out of some sense of nobility ***. The Defendant at that juncture makes the admission, and the traffic stop, the citations, the presence or absence of a Driver’s License or insurance, falls a completely distant second in the investigation.” Thereafter, the court classified defendant’s admission as “spontaneous” and found that “he made a knowing, intelligent, and voluntary waiver when he agreed to the search of the vehicle sui [sic] sponte after being confronted with the investigation alone.” After the trial court denied his motion to suppress, defendant retained new counsel, and with the assistance of his newly retained counsel, filed a motion seeking to suppress the incriminating statement that he made to police following the traffic stop. He argued suppression was warranted because he was never informed of his Miranda rights and because the statement was made after he was subjected to “psychological and mental coercion.” Thereafter, the trial court conducted a hearing on defendant’s newly filed motion to suppress his statement. Before evidence was presented, however, defense counsel informed the court that defendant withdrew his contention that suppression of his statement was warranted due to purported police coercion and specified that the sole issue before the court was whether suppression was warranted because his Miranda rights were violated. Officer Velez was the first witness called upon to testify and his testimony was consistent with that offered at the prior hearing. Specifically, Officer Velez testified that after commencing mobile surveillance on defendant’s car, he witnessed defendant make two improper lane changes. Once defendant was pulled over, he approached defendant, and upon learning that defendant did not speak English, conversed with defendant in Spanish and informed defendant that he was a police officer engaged in a narcotics surveillance operation and that defendant had been seen removing a box from the South Trumbull location. Defendant immediately acknowledged that he had picked up a box and that there were narcotics in the box, but denied that his passenger was involved in the narcotics transaction. Officer Velez testified that at the time defendant “volunteered [the] statement,” defendant had not been placed under arrest and he had not informed defendant of his Miranda rights. Moreover, defendant was not handcuffed prior to giving his statement. Officer Velez acknowledged that there were eight other police officers nearby, but denied that defendant was surrounded at the time he provided his statement. Following defendant’s confession, Officer Velez recovered the box from the backseat of the vehicle. Defendant testified on his own behalf. He explained that after he was pulled over by police, the officers “came close to the car and they surrounded us. They opened the doors. They pulled us out of the car. And they put the handcuffs on us.” Thereafter, he and Vargas were placed in separate police cars and he was driven to a parking lot, where the police commenced a search of his vehicle. Defendant confirmed that he had not been informed of his Miranda rights, but indicated that he never conversed with the police. Specifically, he denied that he informed the officers that he was in possession of narcotics or gave them permission to search his vehicle. After hearing the aforementioned testimony, the trial court denied defendant’s motion to suppress his statement. The court initially noted that defendant acknowledged in his written motion that he had made a statement to police and, accordingly, the allegations in the motion were inconsistent with defendant’s live testimony. The court indicated that it would accept the allegations in the written motion that a statement had, in fact, been made, and held that suppression was not warranted because the statement “was voluntary to the extent the Defendant was not under arrest at the point it was made and there was no obligation under Miranda to give him any rights at that time.” Following the denial of defendant’s pretrial motions, the parties proceeded to trial. At the start of defendant’s bench trial, the parties stipulated to the testimony provided at the two prior suppression hearings. Officer Velez was the sole witness to provide live testimony. At trial, he explained that on April 1, 2004, he recovered a cardboard Mr. Coffee box encased in a plastic bag that contained “ten and half kilograms of cocaine, heat sealed.” The parties then stipulated that the chain of custody was properly maintained and that 5,118 grams of cocaine were recovered from the box. After reviewing the prior hearing transcripts, the trial court declined to convict defendant of possession of a controlled substance with intent to deliver and, instead, found him guilty of the lesser-included offense of possession of a controlled substance. The trial court then presided over defendant’s sentencing hearing, and after considering the arguments advanced in aggravation and mitigation, sentenced defendant to 10 years’ imprisonment, “the minimum [sentence] allowable under the law” based on the amount of cocaine recovered from defendant’s vehicle. Defendant filed a posttrial motion, seeking a reduction of his sentence, which the trial court denied. Thereafter, he filed a timely notice of appeal. On appeal, defendant solely contests the trial court’s denial of his motion to suppress the cocaine seized from his car. He advances no argument contesting the trial court’s denial of his pretrial motion to suppress his statement based on purported Miranda violations.  Initially, we must address the State’s argument that defendant has forfeited appellate review of this issue because he failed to properly preserve this claim. Specifically, defendant failed to challenge the trial court’s ruling on his motion to suppress in a posttrial motion. As a rule, to properly preserve an issue for appellate review, the defendant must make a timely objection at trial and include the error in a written posttrial motion. People v. Enoch, 122 Ill. 2d 176, 186 (1988); People v. Jones, 364 Ill. App. 3d 740, 748 (2006). However, in this case, we note that defense counsel orally informed the court that he wished to preserve all of defendant’s “appellate rights with regard to legal motion that [was] previously filed,” and the State made no objection to defense counsel’s statement. Moreover, following the trial, defense counsel made an oral motion for a new trial, and again, the State made no objection. See People v. Ramirez, 312 Ill. App. 3d 1, 2 (2000) (declining to view the defendant’s argument as waived when the State made no objection to defense counsel’s oral motion to preserve the defendant’s appellate rights); see also Enoch, 122 Ill. 2d at 188 (recognizing that the State can waive its right to assert forfeiture based on the defendant’s failure to raise a trial objection and file a written posttrial motion if the State fails to object to the defendant’s oral motion for a new trial). Furthermore, because defendant’s claim implicates fundamental constitutional concerns it is subject to plain error review. People v. Bui, 381 Ill. App. 3d 397 (2008); 134 Ill. 2d R. 615(a). For these reasons, we will address the merit of his appeal. As another preliminary matter, we note that defendant acknowledges in his opening brief that he has failed to provide transcripts of the portion of the joint hearing conducted on December 14, 2004. As a general rule, it is the appellant’s burden to provide a sufficiently complete record to allow for meaningful appellate review and all doubts arising from the incompleteness in the record will be resolved against the appellant. Foutch v. O’Bryant, 99 Ill. 2d 389, 391-92 (1984); Koppel v. Michael, 374 Ill. App. 3d 998, 1007-08 (2007). In this case, the joint hearing commenced on October 6, 2004, and was conducted over a period of several days. On October 26, 2004, the hearing was continued until December 14, 2004, to allow codefendants’ counsel to call one additional witness. Defendant, however, has been unable to procure the transcript from the December 14, 2004, continuance date. At oral argument, defense counsel informed this court that when he contacted the court reporter’s office he was told that the case was not on call for that date; however, he has been unable to obtain an affidavit from the court reporter because she has been on medical leave. Counsel further informed this court that he believes the December 14, 2004, hearing date is not relevant to resolve defendant’s appeal. We now turn to the merit of defendant’s appeal.  In reviewing an appeal from a trial court’s ruling on a motion to suppress, we apply the two-part standard of review adopted by the United States Supreme Court in Ornelas v. United States, 517 U.S. 690, 699, 134 L. Ed. 2d 911, 920, 116 S. Ct. 1657, 1663 (1996). People v. Luedemann, 222 Ill. 2d 530, 542 (2006). Accordingly, the trial court’s factual findings are reviewed for clear error and will only be reversed if they are against the manifest weight of the evidence. People v. Sorenson, 196 Ill. 2d 425, 431 (2001); In re Mario T., 376 Ill. App. 3d 468, 472 (2007). However, the trial court’s ultimate decision as to whether suppression is warranted is reviewed de novo. Sorenson, 196 Ill. 2d at 431; Mario T., 376 Ill. App. 3d at 472. In this case, defendant does not challenge any of the trial court’s factual determinations. Accordingly, the sole issue before this court is his legal challenge to the trial court’s ultimate disposition, which we review de novo.  On appeal, defendant contends that the trial court erred in denying his motion to suppress because police violated his fourth amendment right to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures when they stopped defendant’s car after he committed several traffic violations and immediately engaged in conversation about their narcotics investigation instead of inquiring into the traffic offenses. Defendant maintains that at the time of the stop, police lacked reasonable suspicion to believe he had committed a narcotics offense, and, accordingly, the police unjustifiably prolonged the traffic stop when they commenced discussion of their narcotics investigation. The State responds that the officers who stopped defendant’s car had reasonable suspicion to believe that defendant had committed a narcotics offense based on the tip provided by Officer Carvajal’s confidential informant. Accordingly, the police were justified in engaging defendant in a discussion about their narcotics surveillance operation immediately after they curbed his vehicle. The fourth amendment of the United States Constitution recognizes the “right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures.” U.S. Const., amend. IV* 1 The guarantees of the fourth amendment apply to states through the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment. People v. James, 163 Ill. 2d 302, 311 (1994). Reasonableness is the “ ‘central requirement’ ” of the fourth amendment. Illinois v. McArthur, 531 U.S. 326, 330, 148 L. Ed. 2d 838, 847, 121 S. Ct. 946, 949 (2001), quoting Texas v. Brown, 460 U.S. 730, 739, 75 L. Ed. 2d 502, 512, 103 S. Ct. 1535, 1542 (1983); see also People v. Conner, 358 Ill. App. 3d 945, 949 (2005). Pursuant to the United States Supreme Court’s ruling in Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 20 L. Ed. 2d 889, 88 S. Ct. 1868 (1968), “an officer may ‘briefly stop a person for temporary questioning if the officer has knowledge of sufficient articulable facts at the time of the encounter to create a reasonable suspicion that the person in question has committed or is about to commit a crime.’ ” People v. Richardson, 376 Ill. App. 3d 612, 617 (2007), quoting People v. Lee, 214 Ill. 2d 476, 487 (2005). Reasonable suspicion “is a less exacting standard than probable cause” (People v. Ward, 371 Ill. App. 3d 382, 412 (2007)) and “exists when ‘articulable facts which, taken together with the rational inferences from those facts, *** warrant a reasonably prudent officer’ to investigate” (People v. Lampitok, 207 Ill. 2d 231, 255 (2003), quoting Maryland v. Buie, 494 U.S. 325, 334, 108 L. Ed. 2d 276, 286, 110 S. Ct. 1093, 1098 (1990)). Under some circumstances, an informant’s tip may provide police officers with the reasonable suspicion necessary to effectuate a proper Terry stop. People v. Lee, 214 Ill. 2d 476, 487 (2005); People v. Miller, 355 Ill. App. 3d 898, 901 (2005). The informant’s classification as a citizen informant or a paid informant is “unimportant.” People v. Munson, 206 Ill. 2d 104, 123 (2002); see also People v. Nitz, 371 Ill. App. 3d 747, 752 (2007) (recognizing that “[cjourts no longer employ rigid presumptions based on the distinction between citizen informants and paid informants”). Rather, to determine whether an informant’s tip provides reasonable suspicion, it is important to consider the informant’s reliability as well as the quality and content of the information that he or she provided. Lampitok, 207 Ill. 2d at 257; Miller, 355 Ill. App. 3d at 901. Specifically, courts should consider “the detail of the tip, whether the tip established the informant’s basis of knowledge, whether the informant indicated he or she witnessed any criminal activity, and whether the tip accurately predicts future activity of the suspect.” People v. Kline, 355 Ill. App. 3d 770, 776 (2005); see also Lampitok, 207 Ill. 2d at 257-58. Indeed, “[a]n informant’s ability to predict a person’s future behavior is an important indicator of reliability because ‘[w]hen significant aspects of the [informant’s] predictions [are] verified, there [is] reason to believe not only that the [informant] was honest but also that he was well informed, at least well enough to justify the stop.’ ” People v. Chavez, 327 Ill. App. 3d 18, 32 (2001), quoting Alabama v. White, 496 U.S. 325, 332, 110 L. Ed. 2d 301, 310, 110 S. Ct. 2412, 2417 (1990). Generally, “where the information lacks sufficient detail and the informant does not claim to have witnessed any criminal activity, the information is not reliable without corroboration and a stop may not be warranted.” People v. Jackson, 348 Ill. App. 3d 719, 731 (2004). Both parties rely on Chavez to support their respective arguments as to the existence, or lack thereof, of reasonable suspicion in this case based on the informant’s tip. In Chavez, police commenced a surveillance operation upon the receipt of information from a known confidential informant who had provided police with information on nine prior occasions, eight of which resulted in the seizure of contraband. On this occasion, the informant revealed that “Victor,” a 5-foot-10-inch tall “ ‘Latino male’ ” weighing 180 pounds, would drive a Ford automobile to a specific tavern to pick up two kilograms of cocaine. From their surveillance position near the tavern, police observed the defendant arrive at the tavern at approximately 7:50 p.m. driving a Ford Taurus. The defendant entered the tavern and exited five minutes later carrying a brick-shaped object, which he placed in the backseat of his car. Police stopped the defendant’s car one block from the tavern, and after learning that the defendant’s name was Victor Chavez, seized the brick-shaped object, which consisted of wrapped cocaine, from the vehicle. Chavez, 327 Ill. App. 3d at 23-24. The trial court denied the defendant’s motion to suppress, and thereafter, he was convicted of possession of a controlled substance with intent to deliver. On appeal, the defendant sought reversal of his conviction, asserting, in pertinent part, that the informant’s tip did not provide police with reasonable suspicion to effectuate a Terry stop. We disagreed. Initially, we noted that the informant had a “formidable track record of rehable information” based on the fact that eight out of his nine prior tips resulted in the seizure of contraband. Chavez, 327 Ill. App. 3d at 32. Thereafter, we noted: “Importantly, the officers were also able to confirm the informant’s prediction of defendant’s future behavior as they were able to observe defendant carry what looked like two kilogram bricks of cocaine out of the tavern. It is critical that the cocaine bricks were visible as defendant crossed the street and were also visible from the outside of defendant’s vehicle. Had the bricks been obscured from view, the police would not have had sufficient confirmation of specific and articulable facts that the defendant had committed, or was about to commit, a crime.” Chavez, 327 Ill. App. 3d at 32. Because the informant’s tip provided police with the reasonable suspicion necessary to effectuate a Terry stop, we upheld the defendant’s conviction. Chavez, 327 Ill. App. 3d at 32, 36. In this case, Officer Carvajal’s informant, like the informant in Chavez, had a “formidable track record of reliable information.” Chavez, 327 Ill. App. 3d at 32. Officer Carvajal testified that his informant had provided him with tips on 30 to 40 occasions and that the tips had resulted in the seizure of contraband on all but three occasions. Despite the informant’s impressive track record, however, we do not find his tip provided officers with reasonable suspicion that defendant had committed a narcotics offense. Unlike the tip in Chavez, the informant’s tip in this case was devoid of any prediction of future behavior. The informant simply revealed to Officer Carvajal that “he had information that a shipment of cocaine had arrived” at a residence located at 4405 South Trumbull “either the night before or *** two nights before” and that a man named “Carlos,” who was a slim Hispanic male in his late thirties, resided at that address. In addition to the lack of prediction of future behavior, the tip also failed to establish the informant’s basis of knowledge. See In re D.W., 341 Ill. App. 3d 517, 523 (2003). Indeed, the informant did not reveal that he had witnessed any criminal act or explain how he garnered his information. Jackson, 348 Ill. App. 3d at 732. We also find that the informant’s tip in this case lacks specificity. Ward, 371 Ill. App. 3d at 413 (finding that an informant’s tip, alone, did not provide police with reasonable suspicion because it lacked specificity). Notably, the informant did not provide any details of the cocaine shipment, including the amount of cocaine that was shipped, the method of shipment, or the manner in which the cocaine was packaged. Finally, there is nothing to suggest that police were able to corrobórate any of the details that were provided by the confidential informant at the time of the stop. See Kline, 355 Ill. App. 3d at 776-77 (finding that an informant’s tip did not provide police with reasonable suspicion because the tip did not contain sufficient details that police were able to corroborate prior to seizing the defendant). Indeed, while the cocaine bricks in Chavez were visible to the officers engaged in surveillance in that case, Officer Bertermann testified that he was unable to see the contents of the bag that defendant had received from Ayala. Chavez, 327 Ill. App. 3d at 32. Moreover, Officer Carvajal testified that the first time that police learned that the man who resided at the South Trumbull residence was named Carlos was at the time of Ayala’s arrest. Although the State emphasizes that defendant was stopped after police observed two suspicious transactions, the record actually reveals that defendant’s car was seized at approximately the same time that codefendant Cantuo arrived at the South Trumbull residence. While Officer Bertermann testified that he heard Officer Velez’s radio transmission that narcotics had been recovered from defendant’s car within seconds after he commenced mobile surveillance on codefendant Cantuo’s vehicle, the record is devoid of evidence that Officer Velez was aware of the second transaction at the time he stopped defendant’s vehicle. Indeed, Officer Velez testified that at the time he made his radio transmission informing other members of his team that he had recovered narcotics from defendant’s vehicle, he did not know what his other team members were doing. Accordingly, we disagree with the State that the informant’s tip in this case provided police with reasonable suspicion to believe that defendant had engaged in a narcotics transaction at the time they stopped his vehicle. We must now determine whether the police, absent reasonable suspicion to believe defendant had committed a narcotics offense, violated defendant’s constitutional right to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures when they stopped defendant’s car for a traffic violation and immediately initiated conversation regarding the narcotics surveillance operation. Defendant, relying on People v. Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d 220 (2003), contends that although Officer Velez was justified in stopping defendant’s vehicle after defendant had changed lanes without signaling, his subsequent conduct in confronting defendant with evidence of the narcotics surveillance operation was impermissible because it “was in no way reasonably related to the lane change violations” and necessarily prolonged the duration of the stop. The State, however, citing our supreme court’s recent decision in People v. Harris, 228 Ill. 2d 222 (2008), responds that it is immaterial that Officer Velez’s questioning was not reasonably related to the lane change violation and that there is no evidence his questioning unreasonably increased the duration of the stop. Initially, we note that the parties agree that defendant was seized when police stopped his vehicle. Berkemer v. McCarty, 468 U.S. 420, 436-37, 82 L. Ed. 2d 317, 332, 104 S. Ct. 3138, 3148 (1984) (“ ‘stopping an automobile and detaining its occupants constitute a “seizure” ’ ” under the fourth amendment), quoting Delaware v. Prouse, 440 U.S. 648, 653, 59 L. Ed. 2d 660, 667, 99 S. Ct. 1391, 1396 (1979); see also People v. Bunch, 207 Ill. 2d 7, 13 (2003). The parties also agree that Officer Velez’s decision to stop defendant’s vehicle was reasonable and, accordingly, the initial seizure lawful, because he had probable cause to believe that defendant had committed a traffic violation. Whren, 517 U.S. at 810, 135 L. Ed. 2d at 95, 116 S. Ct. at 1772; Harris, 228 Ill. 2d at 232; Sorenson, 196 Ill. 2d at 433. Indeed, Officer Velez testified that he witnessed defendant change lanes without signaling on two occasions, a clear violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code. See 625 ILCS 5/11 — 804(d) (West 2004). However, because “ ‘a seizure that is lawful at its inception can violate the Fourth Amendment if its manner of execution unreasonably infringes interests protected by the Constitution’ ” (Harris, 228 Ill. 2d at 235, quoting Illinois v. Caballes, 543 U.S. 405, 407, 160 L. Ed. 2d 842, 846, 125 S. Ct. 834, 837 (2005)), we must evaluate the reasonableness of Officer Velez’s conduct following the initial stop. Prior to Harris, Illinois courts analyzed the propriety of police conduct during a traffic stop in accordance with the framework set forth in People v. Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d 220 (2003). In Gonzalez, the court analogized a typical traffic stop to a Terry investigative stop and held that Terry’s “dual inquiry” should be applied to determine the reasonableness of police conduct during the course of the stop. Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 228. Specifically, reviewing courts were directed to consider: (1) whether the stop was “ ‘justified at its inception’ ” (i.e. whether the officer had probable cause to believe that the defendant committed a traffic violation); and (2) whether the officer’s conduct during the course of the stop “ ‘was reasonably related in scope to the circumstances which justified the [stop] in the first place.’ ” Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 228, quoting Terry, 392 U.S. at 19-20, 20 L. Ed. 2d at 905, 88 S. Ct. at 1879. With respect to the second prong, the court explained that for an officer’s conduct to be considered lawful, the officer could neither “impermissibly prolongt ] the detention” nor “change[ ] the fundamental nature of the stop.” Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 235. Applying these principles to the case at hand, the court held that the defendant’s fourth amendment rights were not violated when an officer requested the defendant, a passenger in a vehicle subject to a lawful traffic stop, to provide identification because the officer’s request did not prolong the defendant’s detention or change the nature of the traffic stop. Gonzalez, 204 Ill. 2d at 236. Thereafter, two subsequent United States Supreme Court cases cast doubt on the viability of the “alteration of the fundamental nature of the stop” portion of the scope prong established in Gonzalez. In Illinois v. Caballes, 543 U.S. 405, 160 L. Ed. 2d 842, 125 S. Ct. 834 (2005), the court addressed the question of “[w]hether the Fourth Amendment requires reasonable, articulable suspicion to justify using a drug-detection dog to sniff a vehicle during a legitimate traffic stop.” The defendant in Caballes was lawfully stopped after he was observed exceeding the speed limit. While one state trooper wrote up a speeding ticket, another officer walked around the defendant’s car with a trained narcotics-detection dog. The dog alerted at the trunk, and based on the dog’s alert, the officers searched the defendant’s trunk, found marijuana, and arrested the defendant. After the defendant’s motion to suppress was denied, he was convicted of a narcotics offense. Caballes, 543 U.S. at 406-07, 160 L. Ed. 2d at 845-46, 125 S. Ct. at 836-37. In rejecting the argument that the officer’s use of a narcotics-detection dog infringed on the defendant’s constitutional rights, the Court explained that the initial stop was lawful because it was based on probable cause that the defendant had committed a traffic violation. Caballes, 543 U.S. at 407, 160 L. Ed. 2d at 846, 125 S. Ct. at 837. The Court then recognized that a lawful seizure may become unlawful if police conduct following the initial seizure unreasonably prolonged the stop, but accepted the state court’s conclusion that the dog sniff did not impermissibly extend the duration of the stop because it was conducted while the officer wrote up the traffic warning. Caballes, 543 U.S. at 407-08, 160 L. Ed. 2d at 846, 125 S. Ct. at 837. Thereafter, the Court rejected the argument that the dog sniff fundamentally changed the character of the traffic stop, explaining that “[ojfficial conduct that does not ‘compromise any legitimate interest in privacy’ is not a search subject to the Fourth Amendment. [Citation.] We have held that any interest in possessing contraband cannot be deemed ‘legitimate,’ and thus, governmental conduct that only reveals the possession of contraband ‘comprises no legitimate privacy interest.’ [Citation.]” (Emphasis omitted.) Caballes, 543 U.S. at 408, 160 L. Ed. 2d at 847, 125 S. Ct. at 837. Accordingly, because the use of the narcotics dog did not prolong the stop and did not infringe on the defendant’s legitimate interest in privacy, the Court concluded that the defendant’s rights under the fourth amendment were not violated. Caballes, 543 U.S. at 410, 160 L. Ed. 2d at 848, 125 S. Ct. at 838. Approximately two months later, the Supreme Court again addressed the propriety of police conduct during a lawful seizure in Muehler v. Mena, 544 U.S. 93, 161 L. Ed. 2d 299, 125 S. Ct. 1465 (2005). In Muehler, Iris Mena was detained in handcuffs by police who were executing a search warrant of the premises in which she and several others resided to search for a suspect in a recent gang-related shooting. While she was detained during the search of the residence, an officer asked Mena to provide her name, date and place of birth, as well as her immigration status. Following her detention, Mena filed a section 1983 (42 U.S.C. §1983 (2000)) lawsuit against the officers, claiming the officers detained her “ ‘for an unreasonable time and in an unreasonable manner,’ ” thus violating her rights under the fourth amendment. Muehler, 544 U.S. at 96, 161 L. Ed. 2d at 306, 125 S. Ct. at 1469. The Supreme Court rejected the contention that the officers’ questioning of Mena about her immigration status constituted a fourth amendment violation. Finding that Mena was lawfully seized during the officers’ execution of the search warrant, the Court concluded that the officers’ questioning of Mena did not constitute an additional fourth amendment violation, explaining, “[w]e have ‘held repeatedly that mere police questioning does not constitute a seizure.’ [Citations.] ‘[E]ven when officers have no basis for suspecting a particular individual, they may generally ask questions of that individual; ask to examine the individual’s identification; and request consent to search his or her luggage.’ [Citation.]” Muehler, 544 U.S. at 101, 161 L. Ed. 2d at 308, 125 S. Ct. at 1471. Accordingly, like the dog sniff in Caballes, because there was no evidence the questioning prolonged Mena’s detention, “no additional Fourth Amendment justification [z.e., reasonable suspicion] for inquiring about Mena’s immigration status was required.” Muehler, 544 U.S. at 101, 161 L. Ed. 2d at 309, 125 S. Ct. at 1472. Thus, no fourth amendment violation occurred. Muehler, 544 U.S. at 102, 161 L. Ed. 2d at 309, 125 S. Ct. at 1472. Our supreme court was called upon to interpret and apply the Caballes and Muehler holdings in People v. Harris, 228 Ill. 2d 222 (2008).2 The defendant in Harris was a passenger in a car that was stopped by police after the driver had made an illegal left turn. After the vehicle was stopped, the officer requested the defendant and the driver of the vehicle to provide identification. The officer returned to his squad car, searched the information provided by the defendant and the driver and discovered that there was an outstanding arrest warrant for the defendant. The officer conceded that he had not had reasonable suspicion to believe that there was a warrant for the defendant’s arrest at the time of the search. However, based on the results of the search, the officer arrested the defendant and discovered cocaine in the defendant’s jacket pocket during the search incident to the arrest. Thereafter, the defendant was charged and convicted of unlawful possession of a controlled substance. Harris, 228 Ill. 2d at 224-27. In determining whether the defendant’s fourth amendment rights were violated, our supreme court initially concluded that the defendant was lawfully seized because the arresting officer had probable cause to stop the vehicle after observing the driver make an illegal left turn. Harris, 228 Ill. 2d at 232. Thereafter, the court reasoned that based on the decisions in Caballes and Muehler, the United States Supreme Court had “rejected [the] reasoning that led to this court’s adoption of the ‘fundamental alteration of the nature of the stop’ portion of the ‘scope’ prong of Gonzalez. All that remains is the duration prong. During a lawful seizure, as occurred in both Muehler and Caballes, the police may ask questions unrelated to the original detention and are not required to form an independent reasonable suspicion of criminal activity before doing so.” Harris, 228 Ill. 2d at 242. Ultimately, the court concluded that the warrant search, like the dog sniff in Caballes, did not unnecessarily prolong the stop and did not implicate any constitutionally protected privacy interests because “a warrant is a matter of public record.” Harris, 228 Ill. 2d at 233. Thereafter, the court, relying on Muehler, further found that the officer’s initial request for identification was permissible, concluding: “The same principles that permit the questioning of Mena regarding her immigration status without the requirement of individualized reasonable suspicion permit an officer to request the passenger in a stopped vehicle to provide identification.” Harris, 228 Ill. 2d at 244. Accordingly, the court concluded that neither the officer’s request for identification nor the warrant search violated the defendant’s rights under the fourth amendment and affirmed his conviction. Harris, 228 Ill. 2d at 249. Applying the reasoning of Caballes, Muehler, and Harris to the facts at hand, we conclude that no fourth amendment violation occurred. Because defendant was lawfully seized, Officer Velez was not required to have reasonable suspicion to commence a conversation with defendant about the narcotics surveillance operation. Harris, 228 Ill. 2d at 242-43 (“During a lawful seizure, *** police may ask questions unrelated to the original detention and are not required to form an independent reasonable suspicion of criminal activity before doing so”). Moreover, because “the possession of contraband ‘compromises no legitimate privacy interest’ ” (Caballes, 543 U.S. at 408, 160 L. Ed. at 847, 125 S. Ct. at 837, quoting United States v. Jacobsen, 466 U.S. 109, 123, 80 L. Ed. 2d 85, 100, 104 S. Ct. 1652, 1661 (1984)), the conversation did not infringe on defendant’s constitutionally protected interest in privacy. Accordingly, as long as Officer Velez’s actions did not unreasonably prolong the duration of the stop, no fourth amendment violation occurred. Although defendant adamantly contends that the conversation necessarily prolonged the duration of the stop, he cites to no evidence to substantiate his claim. The record reveals once defendant was stopped, Officer Velez immediately informed defendant of the surveillance operation and revealed that defendant had been seen accepting a box from the South Trumbull residence. Defendant, in turn, immediately acknowledged that he had received a box from the residence, admitted the box contained narcotics, and informed Officer Velez that his passenger was unaware of the narcotics transaction. Indeed, at oral argument, defense counsel conceded that the conversation was “brief.” Accordingly, the facts in this case are readily distinguishable from those present in People v. Bunch, 207 Ill. 2d 7 (2003), and People v. Parra, 352 Ill. App. 3d 584 (2004), the primary cases defendant relies upon to support his contention that the police in this case prolonged the stop, because the records in Bunch and Parra revealed that the officers engaged in conversations unrelated to the purpose of the traffic stops with the defendants after they had concluded their investigations of the traffic stops. See Bunch, 207 Ill. 2d at 19 (finding that the defendant’s fourth amendment rights were violated when “the purpose of the traffic stop concluded” but “[t]he officer’s directions to defendant *** continued”); Parra, 352 Ill. App. 3d at 589 (explaining that “[b]ecause [the officer’s] questions occurred after the purpose of the stop was completed, the questions impermissibly prolonged defendant’s detention”). Here, in contrast, the purpose of the stop had not concluded when Officer Velez commenced his conversation with defendant about the narcotics surveillance operation. Based on the facts in this case, we find the conversation initiated by Officer Velez, although unrelated to the traffic stop, did not infringe on defendant’s fourth amendment rights. Accordingly, we find that the trial court correctly found that defendant’s motion to suppress lacked merit. Notwithstanding the lack of merit of defendant’s motion to suppress, defendant contends that he is entitled to a new suppression hearing because the trial court improperly relied upon evidence outside of the record in denying his motion, thus violating his constitutional right to a fair and impartial trial. Specifically, defendant contends that the trial court relied on facts outside the record when finding that the testimony offered by Candaleria Vargas at the suppression hearing was not credible. The State again contends that defendant failed to properly preserve this argument, asserting that defendant’s failure to object to the trial judge’s statements at trial and in a posttrial motion resulted in forfeiture of this argument. Enoch, 122 Ill. 2d at 186. Defendant acknowledges that he failed to properly preserve this claim but correctly notes that claims of error involving judicial misconduct are not generally subject to the same rules of waiver. See People v. Dameron, 196 Ill. 2d 156, 171 (2001); People v. Jennings, 364 Ill. App. 3d 473, 483 (2005). Accordingly, defendant’s argument concerning the trial court’s conduct is subject to plain error review. People v. Hamilton, 361 Ill. App. 3d 836, 847 (2005); Jennings, 364 Ill. App. 3d at 483. However, even if we determine an error occurred, the error will be deemed harmless “where we can safely conclude that the proceedings below would have produced the same result had the error not occurred.” Hamilton, 361 Ill. App. 3d at 848; Jennings, 364 Ill. App. 3d at 483. We now address the merit of defendant’s argument. The federal and Illinois state constitutions afford criminal defendants due process of law, and, accordingly, every defendant is guaranteed the right to a fair and impartial trial. U.S. Const., amends. VI, XIV; Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, §8. In a bench trial, the trial judge is presumed to know and properly apply the law (People v. Robinson, 368 Ill. App. 3d 963, 976 (2006)) and it is permissible for the trial judge to comment on the credibility of witnesses (People v. Hawkins, 243 Ill. App. 3d 210, 220 (1993)). However, a defendant’s due process rights are violated when the trial judge’s findings are based on evidence outside the record. See People v. Hamilton, 361 Ill. App. 3d 836, 849 (2005) (“In a bench trial, a judge’s determination based on his own private knowledge, that is untested by cross-examination or the rules of evidence, amounts to a denial of due process”). Defendant initially contends that the trial court relied on facts not in evidence when it deemed Candelaria Vargas’s testimony incredible due to her romantic relationship with defendant. Defendant bases his contention on the remarks made by the trial court in delivering its ruling. Specifically, defendant points to the following statement: “[Tjhis is a woman 20 years junior to the Defendant. She accompanies him, according to her, didn’t really know where they were going, didn’t have any social itinerary other than to the Tram-bull Street address and then to the Milwaukee Street address. I don’t find any credibility in her testimony. That belief and my view of her credibility is based upon circumstances in which she was, on the facts introduced by the Police Department, and in the manner in which and what I would view as bias predicated on her relationship, whatever that may be, with [defendant].” Defendant asserts that “[t]he implication of the court’s statement— that [defendant] and Vargas were in a romantic relationship — is rebutted by the record,” because Vargas denied that defendant was her boyfriend. Accordingly, defendant contends that the trial court impermissibly relied on facts not in evidence when it found Vargas’s testimony to be incredible due to her romantic relationship with defendant. We disagree that the trial court improperly characterized the relationship between Vargas and defendant as a romantic one. Rather, the court found that Vargas’s bias was “predicated on her relationship, whatever that may be, with [defendant].” (Emphasis added.) Contrary to defendant’s argument, the trial court did not characterize the relationship; it merely acknowledged the existence of their relationship and indicated some uncertainty as to the precise nature of that relationship. Because “feelings of bias and the relationship of [a] witness to a defendant are of material relevance” (People v. Gvojic, 160 Ill. App. 3d 1065, 1070 (1987)), and the trial court may comment on witness credibility (Hawkins, 243 Ill. App. 3d at 220), we do not find that the trial court erred in finding Vargas’s testimony less credible than that offered by the police officers due to her relationship with defendant. Defendant also notes that the court found that Vargas’s testimony lacked credibility based on the fact that she “didn’t have any social itinerary other than to the Trumbull Street address and then to the Milwaukee Street address” even though there was no testimony offered by any party regarding a Milwaukee Street address. Defendant is correct that the record is devoid of any reference to a Milwaukee Street address. At the suppression hearing, Vargas testified that on April 1, 2004, she resided in Rockford, Illinois, and she accompanied defendant to the South Trumbull address. Accordingly, to the extent that the trial court mentioned a Milwaukee Street destination, this was an error. However, we deem this error harmless. The court correctly noted that Vargas failed to provide details concerning her travel plans with defendant other than acknowledging a brief visit to the South Trumbull address. Moreover, the court’s finding that Vargas’s testimony was less credible than that offered by the police officers was not based solely on the details or lack thereof provided by Vargas; rather, the court’s decision was based in large part on her relationship with defendant. Finally, defendant contends that the court relied on facts outside the record in denying his motion to suppress when it found that defendant orally consented to a search of his vehicle. Defendant is again correct that there is no evidence in the record that defendant consented to a search of his vehicle. Accordingly, the court’s reliance on defendant’s consent to uphold the search was error. However, we find that this error, too, was harmless, because we conclude the result would have remained the same absent this error. Notably, while defendant challenged the constitutionality of the stop itself, he never challenged Officer Velez’s recovery of the cocaine following his confession. Indeed, notwithstanding defendant’s lack of consent to search the vehicle, Officer Velez’s recovery of the box was lawful. After defendant confessed to receiving a box containing cocaine from the South Trumbull residence, Officer Velez had probable cause to arrest defendant and was justified in seizing the box, which was sitting in plain view, in the backseat of defendant’s vehicle. See generally People v. Jones, 215 Ill. 2d 261, 272 (2005), quoting Texas v. Brown, 460 U.S. 730, 741-42, 75 L. Ed. 2d 502, 513, 103 S. Ct. 1535, 1543 (1983), quoting Payton v. New York, 445 U.S. 573, 587, 63 L. Ed. 2d 639, 651, 100 S. Ct. 1371, 1380 (1980) (during a traffic stop, police may seize an object that is in plain view “ ‘ “assuming there is probable cause to associate the property with criminal activity” ’ ” (emphasis omitted)). Accordingly, we affirm the judgment of the trial court. Affirmed. THEIS, J., concurs.  We note that a similar constitutional guarantee is also reflected in article I, section 6, of the Illinois State Constitution. Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, §6 (“people shall have the right to be secure in their persons, houses, papers and other possessions against unreasonable searches, [and] seizures”). On appeal, however, defendant solely challenges the legality of the search and seizure under federal grounds.   This is the second time our supreme court has filed an opinion in this case. The court initially considered this case in 2003, when it filed an opinion affirming the judgment of the appellate court (People v. Harris, 325 Ill. App. 3d 262 (2001)) reversing the defendant’s conviction. People v. Harris, 207 Ill. 2d 515 (2003). However, the United States Supreme Court vacated the court’s judgment and remanded for reconsideration in light of the Caballes decision. Illinois v. Harris, 543 U.S. 1135, 161 L. Ed. 2d 94, 125 S. Ct. 1292 (2005).

=== CASE 9738280 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:47:57.630774+00 ===

JUSTICE CUNNINGHAM, dissenting: I respectfully dissent and would reverse the defendant’s convictions. We are presented with prosecution testimony which “taxes the gullibility of the credulous” and therefore cannot support a criminal conviction. People v. Wright, 147 Ill. App. 3d 302, 318, 497 N.E.2d 1261, 1271 (1986). The trial court should have granted the defendant’s motions to quash his arrest, excluded the evidence seized, and suppressed the defendant’s alleged statements. It is axiomatic that upon review of a criminal conviction, great deference is afforded to the credibility findings of the trier of fact. We must affirm a conviction challenged as based on insufficient evidence or incredible testimony if any rational trier of fact, looking at that testimony and evidence, could have found that the essential elements of the crime were proven beyond a reasonable doubt. People v. Smith, 185 Ill. 2d 532, 541, 708 N.E.2d 365, 369 (1999). However, a reviewing court also has the solemn duty to reverse a conviction where the evidence is insufficient to prove the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. Smith, 185 Ill. 2d at 541, 708 N.E.2d at 369. Where, as in this case, the State’s main witness has been impeached as to a critical element of his testimony, coupled with his incredible testimony regarding how the drugs came to be discovered in the defendant’s car, the issue of reasonable doubt is raised. “While due weight must be given to the trier of fact as to the credibility of *** witnesses, ‘it is our duty to reverse the judgment if the evidence is not sufficient to remove all reasonable doubt ***.’ ” People v. Morgan, 69 Ill. 2d 200, 206-07, 370 N.E.2d 1063, 1066 (1977), quoting People v. Nunes, 30 Ill. 2d 143, 146, 195 N.E.2d 706, 707 (1964). In the case at hand, unlike the majority, I do not believe that we can or should say that the evidence presented by the State was sufficient to remove all reasonable doubt as to the propriety of the police conduct and therefore the defendant’s guilt. People v. Mathis, 133 Ill. App. 3d 1027, 1039-40, 479 N.E.2d 966, 978 (1985). The police officer who stopped the defendant’s car claimed that he did so for lane change violations. But by his own admission he never mentioned these violations to the defendant. Instead, he told the defendant he was the subject of a drug investigation. The police officer claimed that immediately upon hearing this statement, the defendant abandoned all caution and common sense and admitted that he had just received a box of drugs and pointed to a box on his backseat. Because I find the testimony of the arresting police officer in this case to be fantastic and incredible, I would find no basis for the stop of the defendant. This in turn would require suppression of his statement to the police and the evidence recovered from his vehicle, necessitating reversal of his conviction. I therefore would not reach the issue of whether the police stop was unlawfully extended. The State asserts that the police officers who stopped the defendant’s car had a reasonable suspicion that the defendant was transporting illegal drugs which he had just obtained from a home where according to a reliable informant, a shipment of cocaine had been received one or two days earlier. I concur with the majority’s determination that the police had insufficient cause for a stop on this basis. The arresting police officer knew that another police officer had seen the defendant stop at the home on South Trumbull Avenue and receive from an occupant of the home, a plastic bag which appeared to contain a square box. The defendant then drove away in his car. The arresting police officer acknowledged that his police report erroneously stated that the defendant was seen carrying a Mr. Coffee box from the house on South Trumbull. Despite what the State asserts was ample cause to stop the defendant’s car, the police officers, who were several blocks away from the residence when they saw the defendant’s car, chose to follow him rather than immediately stop him. They followed him for one hour, in rush hour traffic, ultimately using seven police vehicles. When they did stop the defendant one hour later, on the Kennedy Expressway, it was allegedly because 12 blocks earlier a police officer had observed the defendant making two lane changes without using his turn indicator. If true, this would have supported a stop of the vehicle for a traffic violation. But the arresting police officer’s report of the incident did not mention any lane change violations. The arresting police officer admitted that when he walked up to the defendant’s car after it was stopped, he made no mention to the defendant of any traffic violation whatsoever, nor did he ask the defendant for his driver’s license, insurance card, vehicle registration, or any other identification customarily requested during a traffic stop. Instead, he immediately told the defendant that, as part of a narcotics investigation, the defendant had been seen accepting a “box” from a residence. The police officer asserted this even though he had previously admitted that he was told only that the defendant had received a “bag” which appeared to contain a box. The defendant then allegedly spontaneously volunteered that he was transporting drugs which he had received from a man named Carlos at the house on South Trumbull. He also allegedly told the arresting police officer that his passenger was not involved in that drug transaction. Based upon this stunning, spontaneous admission, the police seized a Mr. Coffee box from the backseat of the defendant’s car, found it to contain 5,118 grams of apparent cocaine in 10 bags, and arrested the defendant and also took his companion into custody. No citation was ever issued to the defendant for the two traffic violations for which the police officers testified they had stopped him in the first place. In fact the only mention of any traffic violation came much later, first appearing at the hearing on the defendant’s motion to suppress. The testimony of the defendant and his companion at the hearing on the motion to suppress the defendant’s statements differed significantly from that of the police. The defendant and his companion testified that he was stopped by the police without having committed any traffic violations. The companion testified that she did not observe the defendant changing lanes without using his signal. When the police stopped the defendant, two police officers immediately approached the car and one of them took the defendant out of his car and handcuffed him without saying a word to him. The defendant had not spoken to them at that point. The defendant’s companion also got out of the car and was handcuffed. Without any conversation with the defendant, the police searched the car and removed a bag from it. If true, this version of the events would necessitate suppression. The majority defers entirely to the trial court’s credibility determinations. As I have noted, although great deference is to be afforded to such findings, we as a reviewing court are not to act as a rubber stamp, agreeing in all instances with the findings of the trial court no matter how patently improbable the testimony. The facts presented by this case give new meaning to testimony that “taxes the gullibility of the credulous” as described in Wright. It is significant that the trial judge could have convicted the defendant of the charged offense of possession of cocaine with intent to deliver. He was found to be in possession of 5,118 grams of a substance of which 995.3 grams were tested and found to be cocaine. But the trial judge convicted him only of the lesser included offense of possession of a controlled substance and sentenced him to the minimum prison term permitted by law. Even considering that the defendant had no prior convictions, these are not indications of a strong belief in the State’s case. Again, we as a reviewing court have a duty to examine the totality of the facts and circumstances presented as evidence and to reverse a conviction if the evidence is insufficient to remove all reasonable doubt of the defendant’s guilt. I find that the testimony of the arresting police officer was grossly improbable and incredible as to the basis for the stop, the subsequent events, and the defendant’s spontaneous confession immediately upon being stopped. Because the entirety of the State’s case was based upon that evidence, the defendant’s conviction should be reversed.

=== CASE 2214706 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:51.569321+00 ===

212 Cal.App.2d 901 (1963)
CHALLENGE CREAM AND BUTTER ASSOCIATION, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
ROYAL DUTCH DAIRIES, Defendant and Appellant.
Civ. No. 26444.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. One.
Feb. 13, 1963.
A. P. G. Steffes for Defendant and Appellant.
Knapp, Gill, Hibbert & Stevens and Karl K. Roos for Plaintiff and Respondent.
WOOD, P. J.
Appeal by defendant Royal Dutch Dairies from an order denying its motion to discharge a writ of attachment. (A motion of defendants Veldhuis and Hilarides, individually, as copartners doing business as Firestone Dairies, to discharge writ of attachment [as to them] was granted.)
On March 30, 1961, defendant Royal Dutch Dairies assigned its assets to defendant Richard M. Durall for the benefit of creditors. The assignee, Durall, conducted the business of Royal Dutch Dairies about nine months (until December 26) when the assignor (Royal Dutch Dairies), pursuant to court order in another action, took possession of the assets then held by the assignee. During the last month that Durall was acting as assignee he purchased milk from the plaintiff herein, Challenge Cream and Butter Association.
The present action, in which the writ of attachment was issued, is to recover $22,927.92 for milk sold by plaintiff to the *903 assignee, and to recover $101.09 representing the amount of an unpaid check drawn by the assignee.
The affidavit for attachment stated that defendants are indebted to plaintiff in the sum of $23,029.01 "upon an implied contract" for the direct payment of money, to wit: reasonable value of goods sold and delivered.
The sheriff attached the place of business of Royal Dutch Dairies, including furniture, equipment, and milk processing machinery.
Prior to the assignment, Royal Dutch Dairies, a corporation, was engaged in the retail business of selling milk which it had purchased at wholesale prices from Firestone Dairies, a partnership, the members of which were defendants Ray Veldhuis and Peter Hilarides.
When the assignment was made to Durall by Royal Dutch Dairies, the directors of that corporation were Ray Veldhuis, president, Peter Hilarides, secretary, and Durall (who was then the attorney for the corporation).
The assignment provided, among other things, that the assignee should hold the assets in trust and reduce them to money as soon as that could prudently be done, or to continue the business, whichever in the judgment of the assignee would be best calculated to net the best returns for the creditors; that any contract made by the assignee in connection with the trust shall not be binding upon him in his personal capacity, "but shall bind said assignment estate and the assignee in his representative capacity."
The assignee continued to purchase milk from Firestone Dairies until November 23, 1961, at which time he began purchasing milk from plaintiff, Challenge Cream and Butter Association.
On November 2, 1961, in an action commenced by Durall (case no. 779497, Superior Court, Los Angeles County), he, upon filing a $10,000 bond, obtained a preliminary injunction restraining Royal Dutch Dairies, Veldhuis, and Hilarides from doing certain acts which allegedly interfered with the business which he, as assignee, was conducting. On December 4, 1961, upon a motion of the parties thus restrained, an order was made in said case (no. 779497) that the injunction be dissolved on December 8, 1961, unless Durall filed a bond in the amount of $125,000. He did not file the bond. On December 26, 1961, in an action commenced by Royal Dutch Dairies apparently for the purpose of rescinding the *904 assignment (case no. 728893, Superior Court, Los Angeles County), it (Royal Dutch), upon filing a $165,000 bond, obtained a preliminary injunction restraining Durall from withholding possession of the assets of said business. On said date, Royal Dutch took possession of the assets. (The references in this paragraph to the two other cases are based upon the original files in the county clerk's office, which files were considered by the trial judge, as stated in his memorandum opinion.)
The first three of the six causes of action in the complaint are to the effect that Durall is indebted to plaintiff. The first cause of action is based on a written contract between plaintiff, as seller of milk, and Durall, the assignee, as purchaser; and it is to recover $22,927.92 for milk sold to the assignee between November 22 and December 26, 1961. The second cause of action is to recover $101.09 upon a dishonored check which was drawn by the assignee. The third cause of action alleges that between said dates, at the special instance and request of the assignee, the plaintiff sold to the assignee dairy products of the agreed value of $22,927.92.
[1a] The fourth cause of action alleges that the assignee's purchases of dairy products, as alleged in the first cause of action, were for the use and benefit of defendant Royal Dutch Dairies; that said defendant received the benefit of said purchases in that it sold said products to its customers and has received and now retains the revenue derived from said sales; that although plaintiff demanded that defendant Royal Dutch Dairies pay $22,927.92, the reasonable value of said milk products, and that it pay $101.09, the amount of the dishonored check, it has refused to pay any part thereof; that by reason of said premises, the defendant Royal Dutch Dairies has been unjustly enriched in the amount of $23,029.01.
The fifth cause of action alleges that on December 26, 1961, defendants Veldhuis and Hilarides, individually, and as co-partners doing business as Firestone Dairies, and defendant Royal Dutch Dairies, took possession and control of the assets of Royal Dutch Dairies by reason of a preliminary injunction restraining Durall from interfering with said defendant's possession, and since said date said defendants have retained possession of said assets from which the amount of $23,029.01, now due to plaintiff from Durall, as assignee, could have been paid.
The sixth cause of action alleged that defendant New *905 Hampshire Insurance Company had obligated itself as surety for Durall for the benefit of plaintiff.
This action was commenced on January 31, 1962.
On February 8, 1962, Royal Dutch Dairies made a motion to discharge the writ of attachment on the grounds that: the writ was issued improperly; plaintiff's purported cause of action against said defendant is not founded upon a contract, express or implied; it appears from plaintiff's first three causes of action against Durall, as assignee, that plaintiff sold all milk pursuant to plaintiff's contract with Durall, and that title to the milk passed exclusively to him; Durall at all times was acting as the purported assignee for the benefit of creditors, but he, in obtaining the milk from plaintiff, was not acting for the benefit of Royal Dutch Dairies, and was acting adversely to it; plaintiff sold milk to Durall over the repeated objections of Royal Dutch Dairies; all the milk was delivered to Durall while he was in possession of the premises of Royal Dutch Dairies adversely to its claims; when Royal Dutch Dairies was restored to possession of its premises, it had filed a $165,000 bond to indemnify Durall, as assignee, against any damage he might sustain by reason of the injunction.
The affidavit of Ray Veldhuis, in support of the motion to discharge the writ, stated in part: That before plaintiff (Challenge) began selling milk to Durall, he (Durall) had obtained a restraining order which deprived Royal Dutch of possession of its premises, and during the time it was deprived of possession, the defendant Durall was conducting the business in his own name and as the sole proprietor. Durall retained all the proceeds from milk delivered to him by Firestone Dairies. The defendants, other than Durall, objected to the sale of milk by plaintiff to Durall. When Durall discontinued buying milk from Firestone he owed $5,337.42 to Firestone for milk delivered, and at a later date he gave a check to Firestone for that amount but the bank refused payment thereof because insufficient funds were on deposit. All money which was on the premises when Royal Dutch repossessed the business was used to pay accrued wage claims, and Royal Dutch did not obtain any property belonging to plaintiff.
The affidavit of George E. Atkinson, in support of the motion to discharge the writ, stated in part: He is the attorney for Veldhuis, Hilarides, and Royal Dutch. On November 21, *906 1961, Durall as assignee served notice of cancellation of his contract to purchase milk from Firestone. Thereupon, affiant told Mr. Hibbert, one of the attorneys for plaintiff, that Durall was acting as assignee for the benefit of the creditors of Royal Dutch, that there was serious controversy between the assignee and the assignor, that the assignee had not paid Firestone for milk, and that if plaintiff sold milk to him it (plaintiff) might not be paid. Later, Mr. Hibbert informed affiant that plaintiff had decided to enter into a contract to sell milk to Durall, as assignee. On December 4 affiant caused a written notice (notice by Royal Dutch of rescission of assignment--marked exhibit A and attached to affidavit) to be served on plaintiff, but plaintiff did not reply to the notice. None of the milk sold by plaintiff to Durall, as assignee, was used for the benefit of Royal Dutch, and no revenue from the sale of such milk was received by Royal Dutch. (The written notice, exhibit A, which was given to plaintiff by Royal Dutch, was in substance that the authority of Durall to act as assignee of Royal Dutch had been rescinded.)
The affidavit of defendant Durall, in opposition to the motion to discharge the writ, stated in part: The creditors of Royal Dutch included 86 unsecured creditors. Since the assignment, Veldhuis and Hilarides have followed a course of harassment and threats to force affiant to sell the assets of Royal Dutch to them for less than a fair price. After Royal Dutch had posted the bond ($165,000 bond) in its action against Durall, he (affiant) was willing for Royal Dutch to go into possession of the assets as constructive trustee for affiant, but he expected that the current obligations would be paid from the assets. Royal Dutch has not paid the current obligations, although it has collected approximately $75,000. When Royal Dutch took possession, Veldhuis, as president, received about $1,500 cash from affiant, and received milk of the approximate value of $3,000, and received current accounts receivable in the amount of $32,269.69, of which amount at least $27,000 was from sale of milk delivered by plaintiff (Challenge). On January 26, 1962, affiant received from Hilarides an offer to buy the assets of Royal Dutch for $331,100. On January 31 affiant accepted the offer, but Hilarides has not purchased the assets.
Another affidavit of Ray Veldhuis was in substance a denial of the statements in Durall's affidavit, except that Veldhuis stated that Hilarides did make an offer to buy the assets, *907 but that the offer was made because Durall had represented to the court that by reason of the injunction (in favor of Royal Dutch) he would be prevented from selling the assets for $331,000. That Hilarides offered to purchase all the property for a greater amount ($331,100).
Appellant's contention or points on appeal are in substance the same as its statement of grounds for the motion to discharge the writ. It (Royal Dutch) argues the sale was to Durall; there was no relationship of debtor and creditor between it and plaintiff (Challenge); the first three causes of action show that the contract was solely with Durall; the fact that the fourth and fifth causes of action resemble common counts does not confer upon plaintiff a right of attachment; any claim of plaintiff that there was an implied contract with Royal Dutch is disproved by the first three causes of action wherein it is alleged that the milk was sold and delivered to Durall; appellant was not unjustly enriched when it was restored, pursuant to a preliminary injunction, to assets claimed by it.
The first three causes of action allege that Royal Dutch made an assignment to Durall for the benefit of its creditors. It is true that those causes of action are directed only against the assignee, and are based upon the written contract between Challenge (plaintiff) and the assignee. An argument of appellant (Royal Dutch) seems to be that since Challenge has a cause of action against the assignee upon the express written contract, there cannot be liability on the part of the assignor upon a theory of implied contract arising from circumstances connected with the transaction. The fourth and fifth causes of action also allege that Royal Dutch made an assignment to Durall for the benefit of its creditors. These causes of action are to the effect that the purchases by Durall, the assignee, were for the use and benefit of the assignor (Royal Dutch), which received the benefit thereof in that it sold said milk products and retained the revenue derived therefrom; that the assignor has been unjustly enriched; and that the assignor, pursuant to court order, has taken possession of the assets which were in possession of the assignee, and from which assets the amount due to Challenge could have been paid. Under the assignment the assignee was authorized to continue the business, and it was further provided therein that any contract made by the assignee in connection with the business should "bind the assignment estate." The assignee *908 continued or operated the business and made the contract under which he created the indebtedness to Challenge. It appears from the fourth and fifth causes of action and the affidavits that the assignor Royal Dutch rescinded its assignment for the benefit of creditors and took possession of the assigned assets and other assets which accumulated during the operation of the business by the assignee. In so taking possession of such assets for its own benefit, it is presupposed, for the purposes of this motion, that Royal Dutch not only accepted the benefit of the Challenge contract (which, according to the assignment, bound the "assignment estate"), but also accepted the detriment of it, or obligation to pay the reasonable value of the milk. In viewing the affidavits in the light favorable to the order of the trial court, it appears, for the purposes of this motion, that Royal Dutch, in so taking possession of the assets, received about $1,500 from Durall, and also received Challenge milk and accounts receivable from sale of Challenge milk (by the assignee) of the approximate value of $30,000; and thereby Royal Dutch was unjustly enriched.
[2] In Major-Blakeney Corp. v. Jenkins, 121 Cal.App.2d 325, 339-340 [263 P.2d 655], it was said: "[T]he gravamen of a quasi-contractual action grounded on unjust enrichment is the equitable principle that a person should not be allowed to enrich himself at the expense of another. [Citations.] It presupposes the acceptance and retention of a benefit by one party with full appreciation of the facts, under circumstances making it inequitable for the benefit to be retained without payment of the reasonable value thereof."
[1b] In the present case the trial court could properly conclude that the fourth and fifth causes of action, as against appellant (Royal Dutch), were upon an implied contract for the direct payment of money. Section 538 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides that a writ of attachment may be issued in an action upon such a contract.
[3] An issue as to the extent of a defendant's liability, if any, may not be determined on a motion to discharge a writ of attachment. (See Minor v. Minor, 175 Cal.App.2d 277, 280 [345 P.2d 954]; Rose v. Pearman, 163 Cal.App.2d 480, 484 [329 P.2d 501].)
[4] Appellant asserts further that the affidavit for a writ of attachment was defective and insufficient to justify the issuance of the writ, for the reason the "subscribed and *909 sworn to" certificate signed by Marguerite E. Lavery does not show that she was a notary public or other person authorized to administer an oath. It is true that the words "Notary Public" do not appear in writing in connection with the certificate, and it is true that the portion of the seal as shown on the photostatic copy of the affidavit in the clerk's transcript does not show that she is a notary public. The imprint of the seal on the original affidavit in the superior court file shows the following words: "Marguerite E. Lavery Notary Public Los Angeles Co. Cal." The affidavit was sufficient.
The order is affirmed.
Fourt, J., and Lillie, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9738281 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:47:59.059604+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE GILLERAN JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the court: The defendant, Terry R. Munyer, was charged in three separate cases with reckless driving (625 ILCS 5/11 — 503 (West 2004)). The defendant agreed to be tried on all three charges at a single bench trial. After the Village of Kildeer presented its evidence, the defendant moved for a directed finding. The trial court granted the defendant’s motion with respect to two of the cases but sua sponte ruled that it was going to consider the evidence presented on those charges as evidence of the defendant’s motive and intent on the remaining charge. Following the presentation of the defendant’s evidence, the trial court found the defendant guilty of reckless driving and sentenced him to one year of conditional discharge, plus fines and costs. On appeal, the defendant argues that (1) it was error for the trial court to admit the other-crimes evidence sua sponte-, (2) the admission of the other-crimes evidence was improper; and (3) he was not proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt of reckless driving. For the reasons that follow, we reverse and remand for a new trial. I. Background The defendant was charged with reckless driving (625 ILCS 5/11—503 (West 2004)) in three separate cases. In case No. 06—TR—168184, the defendant was charged with reckless driving against Ellen Filley and Amy McAuley on September 18, 2006 (the September 18 case). In case No. 06—TR—168182, the defendant was charged with reckless driving against Todd Williams on October 7, 2006 (the October 7 case). In case No. 06—TR—168180, the defendant was charged with reckless driving against Kaitlin Williams on October 9, 2006 (the October 9 case).1 The parties agreed that, although the three incidents occurred on different days and involved different witnesses, the court would hear all three cases together. A bench trial took place on December 20, 2006. According to the bystander’s report, the following facts were adduced at trial. Todd Williams testified that on October 7, 2006, at approximately 3:15 p.m., he was driving his vehicle on Oak Ridge Lane when the defendant, who was driving a red truck, approached his vehicle from the opposite direction. The defendant swerved his truck toward Williams’ vehicle, forcing Williams to leave the road to avoid being struck by the defendant’s truck. Williams did not call the police. There had been bad feelings between himself and the defendant for some time, and he believed that there were problems between the defendant and other people in the neighborhood. Kaitlin Williams, Todd Williams’ daughter, testified that she was 16 years old. On October 9, 2006, at approximately 10 a.m., she was driving the family car east on Pheasant Hill Road, which is a neighborhood road with no center line, when she saw the defendant approaching her from the west in a Cadillac Escalade. The defendant’s son was in his vehicle. The defendant’s vehicle was partially on Kaitlin’s side of the road, causing her to steer off the road to avoid being struck by the defendant. Two of her vehicle’s wheels left the road. There was no contact between the two vehicles. Ellen Filley and Amy McAuley testified to an incident that allegedly occurred on September 18, 2006, at approximately 11:30 a.m. Both testified that they live in the same neighborhood as the defendant and the Williamses. On September 18, Filley and McAuley were driving their vans toward each other near the intersection of Oak Ridge Lane and Pheasant Hill Road, and they stopped at the intersection to talk. While stopped at the intersection, with the open driver-side windows of their vehicles next to each other, they saw the defendant drive his vehicle in their direction. They did not move. They thought the defendant was going to strike their vehicles, but he pulled his vehicle away at the last minute to avoid striking them. The defendant’s vehicle left the road to avoid striking them. Thereafter, the prosecution rested. The defendant moved for a directed finding in each case, arguing that the evidence was insufficient and that the complaints were inadequate for failing to give factual descriptions of the alleged acts sufficient to support the charges. On the latter ground, the court granted the defendant’s motion with respect to the October 7 case and the October 9 case. Nevertheless, the court stated that it would consider the testimony in those cases in determining whether the defendant was guilty in the September 18 case. Defense counsel asked the court on what legal basis it was doing so. The court stated that it would consider the evidence in regard to the defendant’s motive and intent. The defendant testified that he was a self-employed contractor and that he lived in the same neighborhood as the prosecution witnesses. The defendant denied committing any of the alleged acts. With respect to the September 18 case, the defendant testified that on September 18, 2006, from 11 a.m. to 12:15 p.m., he was repairing shelves at the Toma-Rosa restaurant in Arlington Heights. The defendant submitted a work order in support of his testimony. Prior to leaving the restaurant, the defendant ordered a sandwich to take with him. The defendant submitted a receipt for payment showing a time stamp of 12:16 p.m. The restaurant is approximately 10 miles from his neighborhood, and it is about a 20-minute drive away. The defendant testified that he was not at the intersection of Oak Ridge Lane and Pheasant Hill Road at 11:30 a.m. With respect to the October 7 case, the defendant testified that on October 7, 2006, he was working at the home of John Nerlinger in Arlington Heights between the hours of 1 and 4 p.m. When he finished the job, he drove home, arriving at approximately 5 p.m. He was not on Oak Ridge Lane at 3:15 p.m., and he did not commit any of the acts alleged by Todd Williams. With respect to the October 9 case, the defendant testified that on October 9, 2006, he left his house at 9 a.m. with his son, and they went to breakfast at Alemar’s Restaurant in Arlington Heights. The defendant was driving a red truck. They finished breakfast shortly before 10 a.m., and they proceeded to the Arlington Coin and Card Shop, where the defendant purchased two coins. The defendant submitted a receipt from the Arlington Coin and Card Shop. The defendant and his son left the store at approximately 11 a.m. The defendant was not in the area of the alleged incident at 10 a.m., and he never forced Kaitlin Williams’ vehicle off the road. Tommy Munyer, the defendant’s son, testified that he was 10 years old. He was with the defendant on October 9, 2006, because it was a school holiday. They went to breakfast and then to a coin store, where the defendant purchased two coins. They rode in the defendant’s red truck, and they returned home around 11 a.m. He never saw the defendant force anyone off the road. Rose McCarthy testified that she owned the Toma-Rosa Restaurant. On September 18, 2006, the defendant worked at the restaurant from 11 a.m. to 12:15 p.m. Before leaving, the defendant ordered a hamburger to take with him. The work order and the food receipt submitted by the defendant were true and accurate copies of the bill for the work performed and the receipt for the food ordered on September 18, 2006. Frank Starkey testified that he owned the Arlington Coin and Card Shop. He was present on October 9, 2006, when the defendant and his son came into the store. He knew the defendant and his son from previous visits to the store. They arrived at approximately 10 a.m. and stayed for about half an hour. While there, the defendant purchased coins. The receipt submitted by the defendant was a true and accurate copy of the receipt Starkey wrote for the coins. When the defendant and his son left the store, Starkey saw them enter a red pickup truck. John Nerlinger testified that he hired the defendant to do some repairs at his home. On October 7, 2006, the defendant arrived at his house at approximately 1 p.m. and stayed until 4:30 p.m. The defendant was at his house at 3:15 p.m. that day. The trial court found the defendant guilty of reckless driving, and it sentenced the defendant to one year of conditional discharge with driving school, plus fines and costs. The defendant moved for a new trial, arguing that the court erred in considering the evidence presented on the October 7 and October 9 cases. The defendant also argued that the evidence was insufficient to find him guilty. In support of this argument, the defendant attached photos of the street where the alleged incident occurred. The defendant argued, based on the photos and the fact that Filley and McAuley were blocking the entire road with their vehicles, that the defendant had to leave the road to avoid a collision. Following the denial of his motion for a new trial, the defendant timely appealed. II. Discussion A. Admission of Other-Crimes Evidence We first address the defendant’s contention that the admission of the other-crimes evidence was improper. Evidence of other crimes is admissible if its probative value outweighs the risk of unfair prejudice to the defendant. People v. Gwinn, 366 Ill. App. 3d 501, 515 (2006). Other-crimes evidence is admissible to prove any material fact relevant to the case (People v. Donoho, 204 Ill. 2d 159, 170 (2003)), but it is inadmissible if it is relevant only to demonstrate a defendant’s propensity to engage in criminal activity (People v. Hendricks, 137 Ill. 2d 31, 52 (1990)). Such evidence may be admissible when it is relevant to show, among other things, motive, intent, identity, absence of mistake or accident, modus operandi, or the existence of a common plan or design. People v. Wilson, 214 Ill. 2d 127, 135-36 (2005). “ ‘[Bjefore such evidence is admitted, the State must first show that a crime took place and that the defendant committed it or participated in its commission.’ ” (Emphasis omitted.) Gwinn, 366 Ill. App. 3d at 515, quoting People v. Thingvold, 145 Ill. 2d 441, 455 (1991). “Proof that the defendant committed the crime, or participated in its commission, need not be beyond a reasonable doubt, but it must be more than a mere suspicion.” Gwinn, 366 Ill. App. 3d at 515; see also People v. Bedoya, 325 Ill. App. 3d 926, 938 (2001) (the standard for admissibility of other-crimes evidence has not been clearly established in Illinois; it is more than mere suspicion, but less than beyond a reasonable doubt); People v. Osborn, 53 Ill. App. 3d 312, 322 (1977) (noting that “acquittal of the prior offense does not necessarily render evidence thereof incompetent,” the court allowed a witness to testify about the details of an attempted rape committed against her by the defendant, even though after a preliminary hearing the attempted rape charge was dismissed for no probable cause). In addition, “if another crime has a tendency to make the existence of a fact of consequence to the determination of the case more probable than it would be without that evidence, then it is relevant and admissible regardless of whether the other crime occurred before or after the crime charged.” People v. Kimbrough, 138 Ill. App. 3d 481, 489 (1985); see also People v. Bartall, 98 Ill. 2d 294, 312-14 (1983). The other-crimes evidence in this case was relevant to demonstrate the defendant’s intent to commit the charged offense. To prove that the defendant committed reckless driving, the State had to show that the defendant drove his “vehicle with a willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property.” 625 ILCS 5/11—503(a)(1) (West 2006). Thus, reckless driving requires proof of a willful or wanton mental state. People v. Paarlberg, 243 Ill. App. 3d 731, 735 (1993). In Paarlberg, the Third District broke down reckless driving cases into three categories: (1) cases involving “the commission of multiple traffic offenses which together demonstrate the driver’s willful and wanton disregard for the safety of persons and property”; (2) cases involving “a driver’s conscious disregard for the particular surroundings and circumstances that rises to the level of willfulness and wantonness”; and (3) cases “where willful and wanton conduct is based, in part, upon the driver’s intoxication.” Paarlberg, 243 Ill. App. 3d at 735-36 (and cases cited therein). In this case, the first and third categories are inapplicable — there was no evidence that the defendant committed multiple traffic offenses or was impaired on September 18. This leaves the second category of cases. According to the defendant, “[i]t would be a stretch for the court to find that Defendant’s acts were willful and wanton with a conscious disregard to the safety of others.” It is true that the required mental state is often implied by the manner in which a defendant operated his vehicle. See People v. Stropoli, 146 Ill. App. 3d 667, 671 (1986) (evidence that the defendant rapidly backed his vehicle six car lengths for no apparent reason and then made a wide turn around the corner at a fast rate, causing the car to fishtail and point momentarily toward a 31/2-year-old child before straightening out, was sufficient to prove reckless driving); People v. Tuell, 97 Ill. App. 3d 849, 852-53 (1981) (evidence that the defendant accelerated from a stop and drove in the center of a two-way street toward a pedestrian, forcing her to run out of the way, was sufficient to prove willful disregard for the pedestrian’s safety). Here, we might agree with the defendant that his alleged driving on September 18, by itself, was not so outrageous as to imply criminal intent. However, the evidence that on October 7 and October 9 the defendant drove his vehicle toward oncoming vehicles, causing those drivers to swerve off the road to avoid being hit, was relevant to establish the defendant’s mental state as to the September 18 case. See People v. Jones, 337 Ill. App. 3d 546, 554 (2003) (evidence is relevant if it makes more probable any material fact). Although the defendant was not convicted in the October 7 and October 9 cases, the evidence that the defendant committed the acts rose beyond a mere suspicion. See Gwinn, 366 Ill. App. 3d at 515. Accordingly, it was not improper for the other-crimes evidence to be admitted against the defendant. See Gwinn, 366 Ill. App. 3d at 515. B. Propriety of Trial Court’s Sua Sponte Consideration of Other-Crimes Evidence Having determined that it was not improper for the trial court to consider the other-crimes evidence, we next consider whether the way the trial court considered that evidence was improper. The record reveals that, prior to the trial court’s ruling on the defendant’s motion for a directed finding, the Village did not ask the trial court to consider the defendant’s acts on October 7 and 9 to demonstrate that he intended to commit a crime on September 18, 2006. Rather, the trial court indicated that it would, sua sponte, consider the other crimes as evidence that the defendant intended to commit a crime on September 18, 2006. The defendant argues that the trial court’s action was improper because it demonstrates that the trial court ceased to be impartial and instead assumed the role of advocate for the prosecution. At the outset, we note that at oral argument the Village argued that the defendant had waived this contention because he did not object at trial. We agree that the defendant has not properly preserved this issue for our review. See People v. Enoch, 122 Ill. 2d 176, 187 (1988) (arguments not raised at trial or in a posttrial motion are waived for review). Nonetheless, we elect to consider the defendant’s contention under the plain-error rule pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 615(a) (134 Ill. 2d R. 615(a)). “The plain error [rule] may be invoked in a criminal case to review an error that has not been properly preserved if either the evidence was closely balanced or the error was of such magnitude that the defendant was denied a fair trial.” People v. Hindson, 301 Ill. App. 3d 466, 473-74 (1998). Here, because the defendant claims that the trial court improperly acted as an advocate on the State’s behalf, the defendant’s right to a fair trial is at issue, and we will therefore consider the merits of his contention under the plain-error doctrine. See People v. Phuong, 287 Ill. App. 3d 988, 993 (1997) (when a judge displays signs of bias against the defendant, the system ceases to function as it properly should, resulting in plain error and requiring reversal). “[I]t is generally never improper for a judge to aid in bringing out the truth in a fair and impartial manner, although no inflexible rule can be applied in such matters.” People v. Kuntz, 239 Ill. App. 3d 587, 591 (1993). “ ‘It is the judge’s duty to see that justice is done, and where justice is liable to fail because a certain fact has not been developed or a certain line of inquiry has not been pursued it is his duty to interpose and either by suggestions to counsel or an examination conducted by himself avoid the miscarriage of justice, but in so doing he must not forget the function of the judge and assume that of the advocate.’ ” People v. Franceschini, 20 Ill. 2d 126, 132 (1960), quoting People v. Lurie, 276 Ill. 630, 641 (1917). “It is an abuse of discretion for a trial judge to assume the role of an advocate.” People v. Smith, 299 Ill. App. 3d 1056, 1064 (1998). Our research reveals that no Illinois case has addressed the precise issue that we are confronted with in this case. However, several Illinois cases have addressed whether the trial court “crossed the line” between serving as an impartial judge and serving as an advocate for the State. In Kuntz, the defendant filed a petition to rescind his summary suspension. At the hearing on the petition, after the presentation of all of the evidence, defense counsel argued for a finding in the defendant’s favor based on the State’s failure to present evidence that the Breathalyzer machine was working properly. In response, the State’s Attorney chose to rely on his evidence, stating, “ T have nothing beyond that.’ ” Kuntz, 239 Ill. App. 3d at 592. The trial court then asked the State if it “ ‘want[ed] time to bring in the logbooks.’ ” Kuntz, 239 Ill. App. 3d at 590. The defendant objected, but the court granted a continuance, and it allowed the State to reopen its case and present additional evidence the following day. The judgment was reversed on appeal. The court held that “the trial judge impermissibly acted as an advocate when he prompted the State to seek a continuance and present additional evidence.” Kuntz, 239 Ill. App. 3d at 592. The court stated: “It is clear that but for the court’s intervention, the State would have failed to rebut the defendant’s prima facie case and the petition to rescind summary suspension would had to have been granted.” Kuntz, 239 Ill. App. 3d at 592. In People v. Hicks, 183 Ill. App. 3d 636 (1989), at the completion of an evidentiary hearing on a motion to suppress, the trial judge instructed the parties to present evidence on the issue of inevitable discovery. Hicks, 183 Ill. App. 3d at 641. The trial judge raised the issue of inevitable discovery sua sponte. Hicks, 183 Ill. App. 3d at 641. After the parties presented additional evidence, the trial judge found that the State had sustained its burden of proving inevitable discovery, and he denied the motion to suppress. Hicks, 183 Ill. App. 3d at 641-42. The reviewing court held that, in sua sponte raising the inevitable discovery issue, the trial judge had not abandoned his role as a judge and become an advocate. Hicks, 183 Ill. App. 3d at 646. The reviewing court explained that the trial judge merely raised the issue and gave both parties ample opportunity to address it. Hicks, 183 Ill. App. 3d at 646. The reviewing court concluded that the trial judge had properly fulfilled his duty to see that justice was done. Hicks, 183 Ill. App. 3d at 646. In In re R.S., 117 Ill. App. 3d 698 (1983), R.S. was adjudicated delinquent based on his commission of a burglary. At the dispositional hearing, the trial judge called as a witness an individual who was not listed as a witness for the State in its discovery answer. The trial judge knew that, during a previous court appearance on charges against him, the individual had admitted his involvement in the burglary. The judge believed that the individual knew R.S. was a participant and thought that it was unusual that he was not being called as a witness. The individual ultimately admitted that R.S. was an accomplice. The reviewing court held that “the trial judge exceeded the bounds of judicial discretion by calling [the individual] to testify. *** Although the judge asked only one question of [the individual], the response incriminated the minor. The judge helped establish the State’s case against the minor. *** In this case the judge took on the role of prosecutor.” R.S., 117 Ill. App. 3d at 704-05. In People v. Walter, 90 Ill. App. 3d 687 (1980), after the prosecutor had completed his examination of a witness, the trial judge asked him whether he still needed to have the witness give testimony establishing venue and identification of the defendant. Walter, 90 Ill. App. 3d at 688. The prosecutor then presented testimony identifying the defendant as the offender and establishing venue. Walter, 90 Ill. App. 3d at 688. On appeal, the reviewing court held that the trial judge’s conduct had not been improper. Walter, 90 Ill. App. 3d at 689. After noting the trial judge’s obligation to see that justice was done, the reviewing court stated that the trial judge had simply acted to see that evidence essential to a proper disposition of the case was not inadvertently omitted. Walter, 90 Ill. App. 3d at 688-89; see also People v. Costello, 95 Ill. App. 3d 680, 686 (1981) (noting that a trial judge may question a witness to elicit the truth or to enlighten material issues that seem obscure). In Kuntz and R.S., the reviewing courts determined that the trial court had “crossed the line” in serving as an advocate for the State. We believe that the facts in those cases are more egregious than those we are confronted with here. In this case, there is no issue of the trial court calling a witness whom the State itself did not seem to know existed. Cf. R.S., 117 Ill. App. 3d at 704-05. Moreover, as we will discuss in more detail below, the defendant could have been convicted even without the trial court’s direct intervention. Cf. Kuntz, 239 Ill. App. 3d at 592. In Hicks and Walter, the reviewing courts determined that the trial courts had not “crossed the line” in serving as an advocate for the State. We believe that the facts in those cases are less egregious than those presented in the instant case. In each of those cases, the trial court raised questions as to the evidence that had been admitted. See Hicks, 183 Ill. App. 3d at 641; Walter, 90 Ill. App. 3d at 688. Following the questions, the State presented additional evidence. See Hicks, 183 Ill. App. 3d at 641-42; Walter, 90 Ill. App. 3d at 688. Conversely, in the case here, the trial court did not raise any questions as to the admissibility of the other-crimes evidence or provide the Village with an opportunity to argue why that evidence should be considered. Rather, the trial court indicated, without requesting any input from the Village, that it would be considering the other crimes as evidence that the defendant intended to commit a similar crime on September 18, 2006. We believe that the trial court’s conduct here created the appearance that it was working in tandem with the Village to prosecute the defendant. Not only is it important that the trial court avoid explicitly acting as an advocate for the prosecution, it is equally important that the trial court avoid appearing as if it is advocating on behalf of the prosecution. The right to procedural due process entitles a person to an impartial and disinterested tribunal. Marshall v. Jerrico, Inc., 446 U.S. 238, 242, 64 L. Ed. 2d 182, 188, 100 S. Ct. 1610, 1613 (1980). This disinterested tribunal “preserves both the appearance and reality of fairness, ‘generating the feeling, so important to a popular government, that justice has been done.’ ” Marshall, 446 U.S. at 242, 64 L. Ed. at 188, 100 S. Ct. at 1613, quoting Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Committee v. McGrath, 341 U.S. 123, 172, 95 L. Ed. 817, 854, 71 S. Ct. 624, 649 (1951) (Frankfurter, J., concurring); see also J.E.B. v. Alabama ex rel. T.B., 511 U.S. 127, 161 n.3, 128 L. Ed. 2d 89, 117 n.3, 114 S. Ct. 1419, 1438 n.3 (1994) (Scalia, J., dissenting, joined by Rehnquist, C.J., and Thomas, J.) (“Wise observers have long understood that the appearance of justice is as important as its reality”); see generally 155 Ill. 2d R. 62 (a judge should avoid impropriety and the appearance of impropriety in all of the judge’s activities). In People v. Lang, 346 Ill. App. 3d 677 (2004), this court recently discussed this exact rule of law. In Lang, a Lake County assistant State’s Attorney followed the defendant until he observed the defendant commit a crime. Lang, 346 Ill. App. 3d at 678-79. Charges were then filed against the defendant, based on the assistant State’s Attorney’s observations. Lang, 346 Ill. App. 3d at 679. At a jury trial, the assistant State’s Attorney was questioned by another assistant State’s Attorney about the defendant’s alleged criminal conduct. Lang, 346 Ill. App. 3d at 679. This questioning led to the testimony that was the basis for the defendant’s conviction. Lang, 346 Ill. App. 3d at 679. On appeal, the defendant argued that the trial court erred in denying his motion to appoint a special prosecutor where the complainant and key eyewitness for the State was an assistant State’s Attorney closely involved in the prosecution of the case. Lang, 346 Ill. App. 3d at 679. We reversed the defendant’s conviction and remanded for a new trial, determining that the facts created an improper appearance that the State was too involved with the underlying case to be fair in its prosecution of the defendant. Lang, 346 Ill. App. 3d at 684. We concluded that a special prosecutor should have been appointed so as not to risk diminishing the public’s esteem and confidence in the criminal justice system. Lang, 346 Ill. App. 3d at 684. Here, as in Lang, an appearance of impropriety undermined the perceived fairness of the defendant’s trial. In Lang, the appearance developed when the State’s Attorney’s office served in two capacities at the defendant’s trial: as prosecutor and as primary witness. It was not improper for an assistant State’s Attorney to serve as the primary witness; however, the integrity of the criminal justice system was undermined when the State’s Attorney’s office prosecuted the defendant. See Lang, 346 Ill. App. 3d at 684. In the instant case, as explained earlier, it was not improper for the trial court to consider the other-crimes evidence. However, the trial court should have considered that evidence only upon the Village’s motion to do so. See Hicks, 183 Ill. App. 3d at 641-42; Walter, 90 Ill. App. 3d at 688. The trial court created the appearance that it was assisting in the prosecution of the defendant by admitting the other-crimes evidence without seeking the Village’s input and allowing defense counsel to respond to the Village’s arguments. As such an appearance is improper, we must reverse the defendant’s conviction. Relying on People v. Enoch, 189 Ill. App. 3d 535 (1989), the Village argues that, even if we find that the trial court erred in sua sponte admitting the evidence, reversal is not warranted, because “the court’s conduct did not play a material role in defendant’s conviction.” We disagree. Based on the circumstances of this case, we do not believe that the defendant was required to demonstrate how he was prejudiced. See Chapman v. California, 386 U.S. 18, 17 L. Ed. 2d 705, 87 S. Ct. 824 (1967) (an impartial tribunal is so basic to a fair trial that its infraction can never be treated as harmless error). An appearance that the trial court was working in tandem with the Village to convict the defendant is reason alone to reverse the defendant’s conviction. See Lang, 346 Ill. App. 3d at 684-85; see also People v. Courtney, 288 Ill. App. 3d 1025, 1033 (1997) (requiring appointment of special prosecutor even though no demonstration of actual prejudice to defendant was shown). Furthermore, even if it were appropriate to consider whether the defendant would have been convicted absent the other-crimes evidence, we could not say that he would have been convicted anyway, because the evidence against him was not overwhelming. The Village’s evidence established that on September 18, 2006, at approximately 11:30 a.m., Filley and McAuley were in their vehicles at an intersection, having a conversation. The defendant drove his vehicle in their direction. They thought the defendant was going to strike their vehicles, but he pulled his vehicle away at the last minute, leaving the road to avoid striking them. As we noted, absent the other-crimes evidence establishing the defendant’s intent, his conduct as alleged does not necessarily imply willful or wanton disregard for the safety of Filley and McAuley. See 625 ILCS 5/11 — 503(a)(1) (West 2006). C. Sufficiency of the Evidence Having determined that the defendant’s conviction must be reversed, we must now address his third contention, as to the sufficiency of the evidence, to determine whether this cause may be remanded for a new trial. The defendant argues that, based on the circumstances, his driving was within the standard of care expected of a reasonable person. The defendant further contends that he presented unimpeached alibi evidence that demonstrates he was not in the area when, according to the complainant’s testimony, the incident occurred. When viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution, the evidence introduced at trial was sufficient to support a finding of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. See People v. Collins, 106 Ill. 2d 237, 261 (1985). To establish the defendant’s guilt, the prosecution was obligated to show that the defendant drove his “vehicle with a willful and wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property.” 625 ILCS 5/11—503(a)(1) (West 2006). In this case, the prosecution presented evidence reflecting that the defendant drove his vehicle in the direction of Filley’s and McAuley’s stopped vehicles and then pulled his vehicle off the roadway to avoid striking them. Both Filley and McAuley believed that the defendant was going to strike their vehicles. Two other witnesses testified that, on separate occasions, the defendant had committed similar acts and had caused them to drive off the road. See People v. Olivera, 164 Ill. 2d 382, 393 (1995) (“for purposes of double jeopardy all evidence submitted at the original trial may be considered when determining the sufficiency of the evidence”). From such evidence, the trial court could have concluded beyond a reasonable doubt that defendant drove his vehicle with a willful and wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property. Although the defendant presented alibi evidence, the trial court clearly found that such evidence was not credible. See Tuell, 97 Ill. App. 3d at 851 (noting that trial court is in the best position to judge credibility of the witnesses). Even assuming the authenticity of defendant’s September 18 lunch receipt with a time stamp of 12:14 p.m., this evidence did not preclude the trial court from concluding beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant was present at the crime scene at 11:30 a.m., as the complainants testified. Accordingly, as the evidence was sufficient to prove the defendant guilty of the charged offense beyond a reasonable doubt, the defendant will not be subjected to double jeopardy by a retrial. See People v. Taylor, 76 Ill. 2d 289, 309 (1979). III. Conclusion For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of Lake County is reversed and the cause is remanded for further proceedings. Reversed and remanded. CALLUM, J., concurs.  The bystander’s report states that “Case number 06 TR 168180 charged the Defendant with Reckless Driving on October 19, 2006 against the Complainant Kaitlin Williams.” However, all of the testimony with respect to this incident indicates that it occurred on October 9, 2006. (Although the bystander’s report states that copies of the complaints are attached, they are not in the record.) Therefore, we will assume that the October 19, 2006, date is a typo and that the incident took place on October 9, 2006.