=== CASE 9739791 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:55.32951+00 ===

Landis, C. J.
— This was an action against appellant-hospital, a charitable corporation, for personal injuries received by appellee while a patient at such hospital. Appellee recovered a judgment upon a jury’s verdict in the amount of $7,500.00.
Appellant’s first contention on this appeal is that *72appellant-hospital being a charitable corporation, could not be liable for the negligence alleged in this case.
Appellee’s complaint alleged in substance that appellee as a paying out-patient was operated upon in appellant-hospital to have a loose cartilege removed from a joint of his left thumb. That in the course of said operation there was injected into appellee’s left thumb by the surgeon a fluid appellant had prepared, placed in a container, and labeled as novocaine anesthetic, which appellant had delivered to appellee with knowledge the fluid would be used by appellee as a novocaine anesthetic and injected into his body. That the fluid was not a novocaine anesthetic, but was a poisonous and deleterious fluid, the composition of which was known to appellant but not to appellee. That said fluid was prepared, placed in a container and labeled by an employee of appellant, one Ruth Rossi. That said fluid was delivered to appellee by an employee of appellant. That said fluid caused great pain and swelling to appellee’s left hand and arm and caused an ulcer at the base of appellee’s left thumb necessitating skin graft operations upon appellee, and the removal of a nerve. That as a result, appellee sustained permanent scars and impairment to specified parts of his body and also medical expense and loss of earnings.
It was further alleged the injuries to appellee were proximately caused by appellant’s negligence in improperly arranging the method or system for the preparation and dispensing of novocaine solution so as to see that the preparation dispensed to the surgeon for appellee was in fact novocaine.
Wherefore appellee demanded judgment for $25,000 damages, etc.
*73Appellee contends that since, under prior decisions of this state and elsewhere, a charitable corporation has been held liable for a failure to exercise due care in the selection of its employees as a result of which injury or damage has occurred, that similarly a charitable hospital corporation is liable for negligence in failing to employ proper instrumentalities and facilities in the preparation, bottling and dispensing of drugs as a result of which injury to patients has occurred.
We believe appellee’s position to be well taken, and note that it is generally supported by numerous authorities from other jurisdictions irrespective of whether such jurisdictions follow an immunity rule as to the liability of charitable corporations for torts. See: Volk v. City of New York (1940), 284 N. Y. 279, 30 N. E. 2d 596; Holtfoth v. Rochester Gen. Hosp. (1952), 304 N. Y. 27, 105 N. E. 2d 610, 612, 31 A. L. R. 2d 1113; Medical and Surgical Memorial Hospital v. Cauthorn (1950, Texas Civ. App.), 229 S. W. 2d 932; Evans v. Lawrence & Memorial Associated Hospitals (1946), 133 Conn. 311, 50 A. 2d 443; Fields v. The Mountainside Hospital (1944), 22 N. J. Misc. 72, 35 A. 2d 701; Clampett v. Sisters of Charity (1943), 17 Wash. 2d 652, 136 P. 2d 729.
In Volk v. City of New York, supra, plaintiff was a patient in defendant-hospital and was treated with decomposed morphine solution, causing the loss of use of an arm. Plaintiff charged the defendant with corporate or administrative negligence in making available decomposed medical supplies. The supervisor knew the decomposed morphine was among the medical supplies and that it was not to be used, but did nothing. The Court of Appeals of New York held the defendant-charitable corporation liable for negligence in the performance *74of an administrative duty in failing to have a fresh morphine solution available.
Similarly, in Medical and Surgical Memorial Hospital v. Cauthorn, supra, the plaintiff recovered a jury verdict for the negligence of the defendant-charitable corporation in furnishing a defective heat cradle or lamp. In affirming the judgment of the trial court the Texas Court of Civil Appeals, after recognizing that a charitable corporation may be liable for negligence in hiring or retention of employees, said at p. 934 of 229 S. W. 2d:
“ ... It seems it must follow as a matter of course a hospital is liable to a patient for the failure to provide proper and safe instrumentalities for the treatment of ailments it undertakes to treat, because such is in the conduct of the institution. The agents and servants do not supply the instrumentalities. It is the institution that does that. Of course, it may not be said it must undertake to treat every ailment that comes but when it undertakes the treatment then it is incumbent upon it to supply suitable and safe applicances and instrumentalities. The ordinary patient submits himself without knowledge and without question of what may be proper and necessary. Such seems to be the conclusion reached by courts in other states holding as do our courts as above indicated. ...”
Appellant has further complained of error in the giving of instruction No. 11 which was as follows:
“When an accident happens, resulting in injury to a person, where it appears that the instrumentalities that caused it were unknown to such person and were under the exclusive control or management of the defendant, and the accident is such that under the ordinary course of things it would not occur if those who have control and management used reasonable and ordinary care, then, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, this would be evidence that the accident occurred *75from the lack of reasonable and ordinary care. In such case the happening of the accident creates the presumption of negligence; on the face of it, it makes a case for the plaintiff because the thing is said to speak for itself. The defendant may then come forward with evidence to show that notwithstanding such presumption against him, the thing was not in fact caused by his negligence. Then the jury must weigh all the evidence on the subject, and finally determine whether the plaintiff has proved the negligence' alleged in the complaint by the preponderance of the evidence.”
Appellant contends this instruction was based upon the theory of res ipsa loquitur and was erroneously given as the rule of res ipsa loquitur was not applicable under the facts of this case, citing: Prest-O-Lite Co. v. Skeel (1914), 182 Ind. 593, 599, 106 N. E. 365, 367, Ann. Cases 17A, 474, 476; Union Traction Co. v. Mann (1919), 72 Ind. App. 50, 124 N. E. 510.
It is apparent to us, however, that the facts in the cited cases are entirely distinguishable from the case at bar.
In Prest-O-Lite, plaintiff was a workman employed by a contractor to build a building pursuant to plans and specifications prepared by an architect employed by the owner. The building collapsed during the process of construction, and plaintiff brought suit against the owner. It was clear in that case that the defendant owner did not have control over the construction of the building by plaintiff’s employer, and that the circumstances did not indicate that in the ordinary experience of mankind the accident would not have happened unless the defendant had been negligent. The court therefore properly held res ipsa loquitur was not applicable. Similarly, in Union Traction, plaintiff was a passenger in a street car which was stopped and was struck from *76behind by a car operated by another company, but plaintiff brought suit against the company operating the car in which she was a passenger. There being no state of facts in such case which suggested plaintiff’s carrier appeared to have been negligent, the doctrine obviously did not apply.
In the case before us, the instrumentality which injured appellee was the solution prepared, stored and dispensed by appellant and delivered by it to appellee. It was not the procaine hydrochloride (novocaine) crystals (salt) which injured appellee, but rather the solution of which such crystals were only a part. Appellant, after obtaining such novocaine crystals from a commercial drug company, assumed complete dominion and control over them, and in fact changed their nature entirely by the manufacturing process of putting them into solution in various proportions with a saline solution, also prepared by appellant. The mere fact that the various ingredients of the solution, including the regular salt, the water, and the bottles, caps and tags used, as well as the procaine salt (novocaine) were purchased from someone else is insignificant when, according to the uncontradicted evidence, it is shown that appellant took these various components and by its own process changed their nature entirely and produced the commodity which caused the injury to appellee.
In fact if res ipsa loquitur did not apply to the case at bar it would be difficult to understand the basis of the landmark case of Byrne v. Boadle (1863), 2 H & C 722, 159 Eng. Reprint 299, which involved the barrel rolling out of the upper window of defendant’s place of business and gave birth to the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur.
Appellant’s own evidence in the present case negated any inference there- was anything wrong with the pur*77chased crystals. The hospital pharmacist who testified for appellant stated the procaine crystals were purchased in five pound packages, lasting about one year. The evidence further showed eight instances of injuries from the novocaine solution within a two week period in June and July of 1953. If the crystals purchased by appellant-hospital had been noxious, it would seem the same would have been evident up to a year earlier if the crystals from which the solution was made were the last of a five pound box, or if the box had been opened subsequently it would appear there would have been later complaints as to the solution, but no subsequent injuries appear to have occurred.
The only logical deduction from the evidence is that appellant was negligent with regard to the particular system it maintained for the preparation, storage and dispensing of the solution. Here the instrumentalities for injecting the solution, the syringe, the needle, and other equipment were furnished by appellant.,The surgeon administering the solution to appellee did nothing to change its character and was merely a conduit to assure that it reached appellee in the place and manner intended. There was no allergic reaction to the novocaine solution in this case.
Appellant had complete control over the solution until it was given to appellee in the manner appellant intended, and the uncontradicted evidence negates any suggestion that the injuries were caused by someone else. This leaves but one inference, that appellant was guilty of negligence.
That this Court is further committed to the application of res ipsa loquitur in cases such as the case at bar is evident from our recent opinion in New York, Chi., etc., R. R. Co. v. Henderson (1958), 237 Ind. 456, 146 N. E. 2d 531, 147 N. E. 2d 237 (opinion by Judge *78Arterburn in which Judges Achor and Landis concurred, and a further concurring opinion by Judge Emmert). In such case it should be noted that we stated (at p. 463 of 237 Ind., and p. 536 of 146 N. E. 2d):
“ . . . Since then [the Byrne v. Boadle decision] the doctrine has been applied to train derailment cases, falling objects, surgical and dental operations and treatment resulting in unusual injuries, and failure of mechanical devices within the exclusive control of the defendant, among various other sets of facts. As complicated mechanical devices of our modern age achieve greater perfection and greater reliance upon them is justified, it follows that the doctrine has a broader application than originally.”1 (Emphasis added.) See also: Knoefel v. Atkins (1907), 40 Ind. App. 428, 81 N. E. 600; Cleveland, etc., R. Co. v. Hadley (1908), 170 Ind. 204, 82 N. E. 1025, 16 L. R. A. (N. S.) 527, 16 Ann. Cases 1; Kickels v. Fein (1937), 104 Ind. App. 606, 10 N. E. 2d 297; Sweeney v. Erving (1913), 228 U. S. 233, 240, 33 S. Ct. 416, 57 L ed. 815, 819.2
*79In our judgment the facts here made out a case of res ipsa loquitur and appellant’s objection to the giving of the instruction in question is therefore not well taken.
Although it is not necessary to a determination of this case, appellant and appellee have devoted considerable argument in their briefs to the question of charitable immunity in view of the fact that appellant-hospital was a charitable corporation and under such doctrine would not generally be liable for its negligence in causing injury to patients. Appellant argues for the doctrine of charitable immunity, while appellee points out that in thirty-two jurisdictions in this country,3 the doctrine has now been repudiated and in still other states remedial legislation has been enacted.
*80The legislature of this state has by statute dealt with some of the vexing problems of sovereign immunity of the State (the King'can do no wrong concept)4 by the passage of ch. 52 of the Acts of 1941 (Burns’ §89-1818, 1952 Repl., et seq.), authorizing the purchase of liability insurance by instrumentalities of the state and limiting liability in such event to the amount of such insurance coverage.
While some of the wording contained in such statute indicates it is not a model of excellence in - legislative draftsmanship, we believe legislation of this character should be encouraged to deal with the problem that exists in this area.
As heretofore indicated, in view of the result we have reached, it is not necessary to express any opinion as to whether the charitable immunity doctrine is or is not presently the law of this state.
The judgment of the lower court is affirmed.
Arterburn and Myers, JJ., concur; Achor, J., dissents with opinion; Jackson, J., dissents without opinion.
. The use of automation devices in modern hospitals such as for monitoring patient’s temperature, pulse and respiration is today an accomplished fact. According to a recent study a vast number of electronic devices can be expected to continually release the nurses from drudgery and make more efficient the hospital.
See : Study of Dr. Mark S. Blumberg, senior health economist of Stanford Research Institute.
. In the Sweeney case appears an oft-cited definition of res ipsa loquitur, viz:
“In our opinion, res ipsa loquitur means that the facts of the occurrence warrant the inference of negligence, not that they compel such an inference; that they furnish circumstantial evidence of negligence where direct evidence of it may be lacking, but it is evidence to be weighed, not necessarily to be accepted as sufficient; that they call for explanation or rebuttal, not necessarily that they require it; that they make a case to be decided by the jury, not that they forestall the verdict. Res ipsa loquitur, where it applies, does not convert the defendant’s general issue into an affirmative defense. When all the evidence is in, the question for the jury is whether the preponderance is with the plaintiff.” Sweeney v. Erving (1913), 228 U. S. 233, 240, 33 S. Ct. 416, 57 L. ed. 815, 819.
. See: Tucker v. Mobile Infirmary Association (1915), 191 Ala. 572, 68 So. 4, L.R.A. 1915D 1167; Moats v. Sisters of Charity of Providence (1952), 13 Alaska 546; Ray v. Tuscon Medical Center (1951), 72 Ariz. 22, 230 P. 2d 220; Malloy v. Fong (1951), 37 Cal. 2d 356, 232 P. 2d 241; O’Connor v. Boulder Assn. (1939), 105 Colo. 259, 96 P. 2d 835, 133 A.L.R. 819; Durney v. St. Francis Hosp. (1951), 46 Del. 350, 83 A. 2d 753; President and Directors of Georgetown College v. Hughes (1942), 76 App. D. C. 123, 130 F. 2d 810; Nicholson v. Good Samaritan Hospital (1940), 145 Fla. 360, 199 So. 344, 133 A.L.R. 809; Morton v. Savannah Hospital (1918), 148 Ga. 438, 96 S. E. 887; Wheat v. Idaho Falls Latter Day Saints Hospital (1956), 78 Idaho 60, 297 P. 2d 1041; Moore v. Moyle (1950), 405 Ill. 555, 92 N. E. 2d 81; Haynes v. Presbyterian Hosp. Assn. (1950), 241 Iowa 1269, 45 N. W. 2d 151; Noel v. Menninger Foundation (1954), 175 Kans. 751, 267 P. 2d 934; Mullikin v. Jewish Hospital Assn. (Ky. 1961), 348 S. W. 2d 930; Parker v. Port Huron Hospital (1960), 361 Mich. 1, 105 N. W. 2d 1; Mulliner v. Evangelischer, Diakonniessenverein (1920), 144 Minn. 392, 175 N. W. 699; Mississippi Baptist Hosp. v. Holmes (1952), 214 Miss. 906, 55 So. 2d 142, 56 So. 2d 709, 25 A.L.R. 2d 12; Howard v. Sisters of Charity of Leavenworth (1961), U. S. D. C. Mont., 193 F. Supp. 191; Welch v. Hospital (1939), 90 N.H. 337, 9 A. 2d 761; Callopy v. Newark Eye and Ear Infirmary (1958), 27 N. J. 29, 141 A. 2d 276; Bing v. Thunig (1957), 2 N. Y. 2d 656, 143 N. E. 2d 3; Rickbeil v. Grafton Deaconess Hospital (1946), 74 N. D. 525, 23 N. W. 2d 247, 166 A.L.R. 99; Avellone v. Hospital (1956), 165 Ohio St. 467, 135 N. E. 2d 410; Sisters of the Sorrowful Mother v. Zeidler (1938), 183 Okla. 454, 82 P. 2d 996; Hungerford v. Portland Sanatarium & Benev. Assn. (1963), 235 Ore. 412, 384 P. 2d 1009; Glavin v. Rhode Island Hospital (1879), 12 R. I. 411, 34 Am. Rep. 675; *80Vanderbilt University v. Henderson (1938), 23 Tenn. App. 135, 127 S. W. 2d 284; Sessions v. Thos. D. Dee Memorial Hospital Association (1938), 94 Utah 460, 78 P. 2d 645; Foster v. Roman Catholic Diocese (1950), 116 Vt. 124, 70 A. 2d 230, 25 A.L.R. 2d 1; Pierce v. Yakima Valley Etc., Ass’n. (1953), 43 Wash. 2d 162, 260 P. 2d 765; Kojis v. Doctor’s Hospital (1961), 12 Wis. 2d 367, 107 N. W. 2d 131, 107 N. W. 2d 292; Taverez v. San Juan Lodge No. 972, B.P.O.E. (1948), 68 Puerto Rico 681.
. State etc. v. Marion Cir. Ct. (1958), 238 Ind. 637, 643, 153 N. E. 2d 327, 330.

=== CASE 9739792 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:55.33418+00 ===

Dissenting Opinion
Achor, J.
— I do not concur in the majority opinion for several reasons.
One: Although the majority opinion purports “not at this time to express any opinion as to whether the charitable immunity doctrine is or is not the law of this *81state,” as applied to charitable hospitals, it occurs to me that, under the facts stated in the majority opinion, it does, in effect, repudiate such doctrine.
Two: The majority opinion purports to support the decision therein upon the proposition of law that a charitable hospital corporation is liable for the negligence of persons in a managerial or supervisory capacity in failing to employ proper instrumentalities and facilities, as a result of which injury or damage occurs to a patient. However, the majority opinion cites no evidence of any negligence on the part of any person in a managerial or supervisory capacity with regard to such “instrumentalities and facilities,” which are alleged to have resulted in injury to the patient. In fact, the evidence recited negates any negligence on the part of such persons. The negligence, if any, was in the preparation of the purported novocaine anesthetic, and this, the majority opinion states, “was prepared, placed in a container and labelled by an employee of appellant,” and was delivered to the doctor for injection by another employee. [My emphasis.] In my opinion, these facts clearly distinguish the case at bar from those cited and relied upon in the majority opinion.
Upon this proposition, the majority opinion cites and quotes, with approval, from the case of Medical and Surgical Memorial Hospital v. Cauthorn (1950, Texas Civ. App.), 229 S. W. 2d 932. However, in that case the court clearly distinguished the circumstances under which a hospital, as distinguished from its agents and servants, would be held liable for negligence. The court stated:
“ . . . [A] hospital is liable to a patient for the failure to provide proper and safe instrumentalities for the treatment of ailments it undertakes to treat, because such is in the conduct of the institu*82tion. The agents and servants do not supply the instrumentalities. It is the institution that does that.
...” [My emphasis.]
As previously noted, in the case at bar the majority opinion recites no evidence that anyone connected with the management of the hospital was negligent in either the procuring or processing of the novocaine, which is alleged to have injured the patient. To the contrary, it occurs to me that the only reasonable inference which may be drawn from the evidence is that, if there was negligence or error in the processing of the novocaine, such negligence or error was solely that of the “agents and servants” of the hospital, for which, under the prior decisions of this state, the institution itself is not liable.1
Three: My strongest objection to the majority opinion is that it not only affirms a judgment in damages against a charitable hospital for error or negligence, which is assumed to have existed on the part of the agents and servants of the hospital, the majority opinion resorts to an application of the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur to establish an inference or presumption that there was any negligence at all on the part of the hospital or its agents and servants. It is my opinion that the application of the doctrine, under the circumstances of the case, was error. And, further, I fail to comprehend how the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur can be applied without abrogating the charitable immunities doctrine, since under the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur no issue is contemplated as to whether the negligence presumed is that of an employee as distinguished from that of his respondeat superior.
*83The limited facts and the certain scientific principles which were involved in the early English case of Byrne v. Boadle (1863), 2 H & C 722, 159 Eng. Reprint 299, cited in the majority opinion, wherein a barrel rolled out of an opening in the second floor of a building, is one thing; the operation of a hospital is quite another. The latter involves too many people of varying degrees of responsibility to the hospital, and too many human factors and frailties, which must be considered in the treatment of a patient in a hospital to warrant the application of the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur.2
The care and treatment of the patients involves first, and foremost, the doctor, over whom the hospital has very little control. There are interns, over whom the hospital may have more, but very little, control. There are nurses, upon whom the hospital must rely primarily for the care and treatment of the patients. Yet, the nurses are also under the control of the doctors whose patients are the patients of the hospital. Then, there are student nurses, nurses’ aids, practical nurses, volunteers, orderlies, a varitable galaxy of human personalities of varying skills, upon whom the hospital must rely.
Consider the human errors which might reasonably result in the limited area of the communication between doctor and nurse, over which the hospital would *84have almost no control. The handwriting of doctors is notoriously illegible. Because of this illegibility, and the practice of doctors to use abbreviations in their written prescriptions, a nurse may confuse digitoxin with digoxin (or digitalis). She confuses the abbreviation for gram (gm.), or the abbreviation for teaspoonful (tsp.) for tablespoon (tbs.). Or, she mistakes the direction for an intravenous injection (IV) with that for an intramuscular injection (IM).
Similar errors, rooted in human frailty, might occur when a nurse calls a doctor by ‘phone regarding the condition of a patient and medication is on an oral or telephone order. For example, a doctor may say castor oil, but a nurse hears camphor oil. He says 15 milligrams of a drug, but she understands it as 50 milligrams. He says argyrol; she interprets it as agoral. He says pavatrine; she hears it as papaverine. He says signemycin, she hears it as sigmagen.
To complicate all this, there is the unremitting pressure of a shortage of nurses and the multiplicity of new drugs, and of patients. The nurse has increasingly little time to handle her duties, yet, she must know much more about many more drugs than ever before. In the ten-year period from 1951 through 1960, it is said that an average of 357 new drugs and 106 new dosage forms (ampules, for example, instead of tablets) were produced every year. It has been estimated that three out of every four prescriptions written today are for drugs and drug forms that did not exist 25 years ago. It is difficult enough for trained pharmacists to keep pace with all the new drugs and their uses. It is still more difficult for nurses, who have many other duties besides their pharmacy work which they are required to do as professionals, in the employ of hospitals.
*85Or consider the circumstance where the patient himself is largely responsible for his own injury or fatality. There is the patient who wilfully refuses to follow the instructions of the nurses. He may secretly take food, alcohol, narcotics, or other drugs which are prohibited to him. Or he may profess to take medication which he does not take. He may get out of bed and over-exert himself, or open a window and over-expose himself, from which complications, such as pneumonia and death, may occur. In each of these events the cause of injury or death would probably remain unknown to the management of the hospital and might remain unknown to its agents and servants.
Too, there is the known fact that the human body is such that it responds differently to the same medication and treatment. Thus, untoward results frequently occur, which are beyond explanation.
The above are only a few circumstances and reasons which, in my opinion, demonstrate that even though a charitable hospital may be held liable for the negligence of persons in managerial or supervisory capacities for their failure to provide proper instrumentalities used in the operation of a hospital, the hospital cannot be held liable for the negligence of all its agents and servants, over many of whom it has only limited control; and there is much less reason, grounded upon both public policy and the rules of evidence, why such hospitals should be charged with the burden of proving their lack of negligence, under the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur, merely because a patient experiences an untoward result from his care and treatment.
Four: Finally, in my opinion, if the rule of liability as applied to charitable hospitals is to be so drastically changed, the change in public policy should be effected *86by an act of the legislature, and not by a decision of this court.
Note. — Reported in 196 N. E. 2d 274.
. St. Vincent’s Hospital v. Stine (1924), 195 Ind. 350, 144 N. E. 537.
. “The doctrine of res ipsa loquitur, which is recognized in almost all jurisdictions, is that, where the thing which caused an injury is shown to he under the management of defendant or his servants and the accident is such as in the ordinary course of things does not happen if those who have its management or control use proper care, it affords reasonable evidence, in the absence of explanation by defendant, that the accident arose from want of care.” 65 C.J.S. §220(2), p. 987.
“As a general rule, the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur is inapplicable unless the management and control of the injuring agency were exclusively in the person charged at the time of the accident or, according to some authorities, at the time of the negligence.” 65 C.J.S. §200(8) bb., p. 1014. [My emphasis.]

=== CASE 9739793 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:58.373531+00 ===

McCORMICK, Justice.
This is the fourth appeal in a derivative action brought by policyholders of LeMars Mutual Insurance Company (LeMars) to an*581nul the takeover of LeMars by Iowa Mutual Insurance Company of DeWitt (Iowa Mutual). Prior appeals are reported at 230 N.W.2d 905 (Iowa 1975), 282 N.W.2d 639 (Iowa 1979), and 347 N.W.2d 630 (Iowa 1984). In the most recent appeal this court decided certain financial issues arising from the court-ordered separation of the two companies. The present appeal is taken by the plaintiff policyholders from the district court’s decision of the remaining issue in the case, an order establishing a plan for election of a new board of directors for LeMars. We find that we have jurisdiction of the appeal and that the district court did not abuse its discretion in adopting the election plan proposed by the LeMars interim board.
In its initial decree ordering separation of LeMars from Iowa Mutual, the district court stated it would appoint an interim board of directors to govern LeMars. The court also said:
As soon as practicable, the court shall also order and supervise the election of a new board of directors for LeMars Mutual. Interim directors shall be eligible to succeed themselves. The successor board shall not be elected until the interim board has had full opportunity to assess the present status of LeMars Mutual, consult with the Iowa insurance commissioner, retain competent management for the company and establish and implement a plan for the careful separation of LeMars Mutual and Iowa Mutual.
This portion of the decree was affirmed in the second appeal. See 282 N.W.2d at 657. In upholding the provision this court said that the traditional policy of courts to keep hands off corporate affairs had to give way to the responsibility of an equity court to fashion unusual relief to meet unusual circumstances. Id. The separation of the companies having subsequently been completed, the time came for the district court to decide the manner in which the new LeMars board was to be elected.
LeMars, through its interim board, devised an election plan that was submitted to the court for approval. Plaintiffs, in their capacity as policyholders, objected to the plan, and a hearing was held. The court decided to accept the plan and ordered it carried out, reserving jurisdiction in the case only “to police, amend, extend, and to resolve disputes concerning [the] plan, any elections held pursuant thereto, and of any matters requiring court approval thereunder.” Plaintiffs appealed and this court raised an issue of finality of the district court order. The jurisdictional issue was briefed by the parties and was ordered submitted with the appeal.
I. Jurisdiction. Appeals are available as of right only from final orders, and we lack jurisdiction of appeals from interlocutory orders unless permission to appeal is granted. See Iowa R.App. 1 and 2. Ordinarily a final judgment conclusively adjudicates all of the rights of the parties. If it stands, the court cannot put the parties in their original positions. Shoemaker v. City of Muscatine, 275 N.W.2d 206, 208 (Iowa 1979).
We have recognized that it is not always clear whether an order is final. To allow for the small fraction of eases where a party may improvidently attempt an appeal as of right from an order that is determined to be interlocutory, we added Iowa Rule of Appellate Procedure 1(c) to permit the papers in those cases to be treated as an application for interlocutory appeal under rule 2. In so doing, we did not change the standard for determining when interlocutory review should be granted. See In Interest of Long, 313 N.W.2d 473, 477 (Iowa 1981). Because interlocutory review is granted very sparingly, no party should take an appeal as of right from an interlocutory order in the hope it will be saved from dismissal by application of rule 1(c).
In the present case, the district court resolved the final issue in the litigation but did not foreclose the parties from raising additional issues during the course of implementation of the election plan. If plaintiffs are precluded from challenging the plan now, however, their objections will *582become moot because the district court’s jurisdiction terminates only when the plan has been carried out. If the plan were carried out, the court would not be able to return the parties to their former positions. The adjudication lacks finality only if it makes a difference that the district court reserved jurisdiction to decide issues that may arise while the adjudication is being implemented. We find that the adjudication is final because the case falls within the rule that a case may have more than one final order. See Green v. Advance Homes, Inc., 293 N.W.2d 204, 207 (Iowa 1980); Lyon v. Willie, 288 N.W.2d 884, 887 (Iowa 1980); Johnson v. Johnson, 188 N.W.2d 288, 293 (Iowa 1971).
The situation is analogous to the one in Green. There a landowner sued a contractor alleging that its road excavation had deprived her farmland of lateral support. She sought damages and a mandatory injunction requiring restoration of the land to its prior condition. The trial court entered a judgment in the landowner’s favor, including a provision ordering the contractor to submit a plan for restoring lateral support. 293 N.W.2d at 206. Upon the contractor’s appeal, this court held that the judgment was final. We reasoned that the judgment settled the relative rights of the parties, “leaving only the particulars of the equitable relief to be worked out.” Id. at 207. The district court went one step further in the present case by adjudicating the particulars of equitable relief, leaving.unsettled only issues that might arise during implementation of the plan.
We hold that the district court decision was final for purposes of appeal. Plaintiffs thus had a right to appeal and we have jurisdiction.
II. The merits of the election plan. Pursuant to its initial decree the district court appointed eleven persons to an interim board of directors for LeMars. The board employed new management for Le-Mars and established and carried out procedures to separate LeMars from Iowa Mutual as directed by the court. Iowa Mutual controlled LeMars for approximately ten years and it took more than two years to separate the two companies. Finally in December 1982 the LeMars interim board determined that its tasks were complete and that the court should adopt a plan for supervising the election of a new board.
The plan proposed by LeMars called for a reduction in board size to nine members, the number called for in the LeMars bylaws. The interim board was to be reduced to that size by attrition or resignation of named members, if necessary. Board members were divided into three categories with three directors to be replaced at the annual meeting of the company in each of three years starting in April 1984. The supervised election process would be completed in April 1986, after which elections were to be held pursuant to the LeMars articles and bylaws.
Procedures for the supervised elections included notice on two occasions in six designated newspapers in advance of each annual meeting. To be eligible for nomination, candidates would have to be policyholders at the time of election between 21 and 67 years old. A nominating committee comprised of the board chairman, the company president, and a LeMars agent selected by the directors was to nominate not less than three nor more than six persons for the three directorships to be filled at the annual meetings.
Policyholders were to propose candidates by letter or petition addressed to the nominating committee, signed by not less than five policyholders, containing names and addresses of persons proposed, accompanied by a statement of the candidate consenting to serve and establishing eligibility. A credentials committee was to investigate each candidate’s eligibility and qualifications and report to the nominating committee. The credentials committee would include a company director, a LeMars agent, and a “prominent businessman or businesswoman residing in northwestern Iowa,” all appointed by the nominating committee.
All policyholders could vote at the annual meeting in person or by proxy, but only the company could solicit proxies. The plan *583provided that the company could, if it desired, “solicit and procure proxies without any conditions or limitations as to their use in order to ensure an adequate interest in and representation of policyholders at the annual meeting.”
Plaintiffs objected to the election plan, asserting that it effectively denied the policyholders the right to elect the board for three years. .Plaintiffs proposed that the court directly supervise an election, notifying each policyholder by mail and inviting nominations. The court would then screen the nominations to be sure that none were connected with the defendants in the derivative suit. Under plaintiffs’ proposal the court would subsequently mail ballots to the policyholders accompanied by a one page statement from each nominee. The nine nominees receiving the most mailed ballots would be declared elected.
After a hearing, the district court overruled plaintiffs’ objections and adopted the LeMars plan. Plaintiffs contend the court erred in failing to adopt procedures for a fair and timely election. They attack the nomination and proxy limitations, the notice provisions, the duration of court supervision, and the lack of corporate democracy in the plan. LeMars argues that the plan is a reasonable means for assuring the stability of LeMars while control is returned to its policyholders in an orderly process.
The parties agree that our review of the district court’s order is for abuse of discretion. This discretion is embraced within the court’s authority, affirmed in the second appeal, to supervise the election of a new board of directors for LeMars. We reverse for abuse of discretion only when such discretion was exercised on grounds or for reasons clearly untenable or to an extent clearly unreasonable. Glenn v. Farmland Foods, Inc., 344 N.W.2d 240, 243 (Iowa 1984).
The district court was convinced that the election plan proposed by the interim board served the best interests of the policyholders by ensuring the stability of LeMars during the transition from court to policyholder control. The court was persuaded by a number of circumstances to which the parties agreed LeMars’ witnesses would testify. LeMars argued that qualified directors are difficult to find for a small insurance company like LeMars, that the litigation had divided LeMars employees and agents so that a destructive fight for control of the company might occur, that an immediate election of an entirely new board would threaten the continuity of management, that the president selected by the interim board needed continued support from the directors, that a sudden change of control could jeopardize the company’s operations because of a shortage of qualified and experienced middle management people, and that LeMars was in the midst of establishing its own system of data processing which would take several years to complete. LeMars contended that an abrupt shift of control to a new board in these circumstances would put the survival of the company at risk. In resisting plaintiffs’ proposal for mailing notices and ballots, the board asserted that mutual insurance companies do not generally provide such mailings even under normal conditions and that the cost of doing so could be as much as $500,000.
The question that divides the parties is not whether but when LeMars should have a democratically elected board. The special limitations on election procedures imposed by the court would delay the return of total control of LeMars to the policyholders for three years. Plaintiffs argue that these limitations are unnecessary and undesirable, and LeMars argues otherwise. Cases relied on by plaintiffs involve successful challenges to bylaw restrictions on regular election procedures. See, e.g., Brennan v. Minneapolis Society for the Blind, Inc., 282 N.W.2d 515 (Minn.1979), and Dozier v. Automobile Club of Michigan, 69 Mich.App. 114, 244 N.W.2d 376 (1976). These cases are inapposite here. The present case does not involve the validity of LeMars bylaws. Nor does it involve a mutual insurance company in normal circumstances. Instead it involves a mutual *584company that was illegally taken over at a time when democratic election procedures were in place and whose governance has been the subject of complex litigation for more than ten years. As a result of the litigation the corporation was run for more than two of those years by directors appointed by an equity court. Charged with a duty to supervise the transition from the interim board to an elected board, it was not unreasonable for the court to impose temporary restraints on election procedures to ensure the stability of the company during the transition period.
We find no abuse of discretion in the district court’s order adopting the LeMars election plan.
AFFIRMED.
All Justices concur except CARTER, J., who concurs specially.

=== CASE 2220970 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:01.533108+00 ===

46 Ill. App. 2d 172 (1964)
196 N.E.2d 526
William H. Barrick and William C. Jackson, Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
Donald H. Barnes and Mary Lou Barnes, Defendants-Appellants.
Gen. No. 11,826.
Illinois Appellate Court  Second District.
February 24, 1964.
*173 Berry & Simmons, of Rockford (Bernard F. Healy, Jr., of counsel), for appellants.
Robert W. Gosdick, of Rockford (Robert W. Gosdick, of counsel), for appellees.
CARROLL, J.
[1] On August 29, 1962 the Circuit Court of Winnebago County entered judgment by confession on a promissory note in favor of plaintiffs and against defendants, Donald H. Barnes and Mary Lou Barnes, in the amount of $3,987.26. On September 26, 1962 defendants filed a motion supported by affidavit to open the judgment. The affidavit recited that subsequent to the execution of the note upon which the judgment was confessed, the defendant, Donald H. Barnes was adjudicated a bankrupt, and that plaintiffs had actual notice of said bankruptcy proceeding. On the same date defendants filed a jury demand. On October 11, 1962 plaintiffs filed a motion which is captioned "Motion for denial of request to re-open judgment by confession" and in which they prayed that defendants' motion be quashed and denied. A counter-affidavit was attached to such motion. The counter-affidavit is in the form of an answer to matters set forth in defendants' affidavit and in addition it recites that plaintiffs had no knowledge as to when *174 the defendant was adjudicated a bankrupt until March 30, 1962. Defendants filed an answer on October 18, 1962 at which time the motion came on for hearing. The record recites that after hearing a portion of the arguments of counsel the court continued the matter to November 2, 1962. Upon leave of court being granted the defendants filed a supplemental affidavit in which it is averred that the amount of the judgment is excessive. Since it fails to set forth the facts upon which such conclusion was based, it disclosed no additional defense. The hearing was resumed on November 2, 1962 at which time the court heard the testimony of a number of witnesses. Subsequently an order was entered denying the motion to open the judgment. The defendants have appealed.
[2-5] The practice on motions to open a judgment by confession is regulated by Supreme Court Rule 23, section 101:23, chap 110, Illinois Revised Statutes, 1961. Under the above rule such a motion must be supported by an affidavit setting forth the facts upon which the defense is based and shall be accompanied by an answer which defendants propose to file. If the motion and affidavit disclose a prima facie defense the court shall set the motion for hearing. Plaintiff has a right to file counter-affidavits. If on the hearing it appears that defendant has a defense on the merits and has been diligent in presenting his motion, the courts shall sustain the motion and the case then proceeds to trial upon the complaint, answer and any other pleading which may be filed. The scope of the hearing on such motions is confined to the question whether the defendants' motion and affidavits to open the judgment disclose a prima facie defense. ILP Judgments, Section 195. Lietz v. Ankrom, 350 Ill. App. 437, 113 NE2d 184. The taking of oral testimony on controverted fact questions is not authorized. Determination as to whether defendant has a meritorious *175 defense is to be determined solely on the affidavits and for such purpose the allegations of the affidavits are to be taken as true. Walrus Mfg. Co. v. Wilcox, 303 Ill. App. 286, 25 NE2d 132. In passing on the question whether the defendant has a defense entitling him to a trial on the merits, the court does not inquire into the merits of such defense. If it were permissible to do so it would result in the court determining the merits of the defenses upon affidavits. Lietz v. Ankrom, supra.
In the instant case the motion of defendants to open the judgment set forth a prima facie defense to plaintiffs' case against the defendant, Donald H. Barnes. Proof that said defendant was entitled to the benefits of the Bankruptcy Act would be a good defense to plaintiffs' case. It is apparent from the record, which includes a transcript of the oral testimony of witnesses who testified on the hearing, that the trial court's consideration of the motion was not confined to the affidavit and counter-affidavit. Evidence as to the merits can be considered only on a trial after the judgment has been opened and the defendant has been given leave to plead.
[6, 7] We think defendants' motion sets up a meritorious defense to the case against Donald H. Barnes, and the trial court erred in denying the motion as to such defendant. However, we are of the further opinion that the defendants' motion did not disclose a prima facie defense to plaintiffs' claim against Mary Lou Barnes. Bankruptcy was a personal defense as to Donald H. Barnes, and did not defeat plaintiffs' right to a judgment against his co-defendant. Goodman American Ice Cream Co. v. Mendelsohn, 274 Ill. App. 253.
For the reasons indicated the judgment as to Donald H. Barnes is reversed and the cause remanded with directions to the trial court to grant the motion to *176 open the judgment and for leave to plead. As to the defendant, Mary Lou Barnes, the judgment is affirmed.
Reversed and remanded with directions.
ABRAHAMSON, P.J. and MORAN, J., concur.

=== CASE 9739795 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:02.779057+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE BRYANT delivered the opinion of the court: This is an appeal from a decree of the Superior Court of Cook County entered on June 23, 1962, approving the report of a Master and overruling exceptions thereto, and decreeing specific performance of a shareholders’ agreement, ordering the defendants to account for all monies received by them from the corporation since September 25, 1956, and retaining jurisdiction of the cause and of the parties to effectuate the aforementioned decrees and orders. The court expressly found that there is no just reason for delaying enforcement or appeal of this decree in accordance with Section 50(2) of the Civil Practice Act. There is little dispute as to the facts of this case. Defendants never took the stand in their own behalf and the plaintiff established her own version of the facts. This suit was brought by Emma Galler, the wife of the deceased Benjamin Galler, to enforce an agreement entered into between Benjamin and his brother, Isadore, in July, 1955, for the purpose of providing income for the support and maintenance of their immediate families. Benjamin and Isadore each owned 47%% of the stock of the Galler Drug Company. The remaining 5% of the stock was owned by Mandel Rosenberg, a trusted employee, who did not complain of the agreement and who subsequently disposed of his stock to Isadore and his wife Rose. Subsequent to the death of Benjamin Galler, Isadore refused to enforce the provisions of the agreement. The defendants-appellants attack the decree and orders of the court below for the following reasons: (1) the agreement violates the Illinois Business Corporation Act and is therefore invalid and unenforceable; (2) by her acquiescence in the continuation of a board of three directors, and in the management of the corporation by defendants, and by her acceptance of the benefits thereof, plaintiff is estopped from maintaining this action; (3) the Master erred in excluding relevant testimony; (4) the court erred in ordering an accounting; (5) the Master’s fee is excessive.  We can see no substantial basis to appellants’ points 2 and 3. No basis for estoppel exits. The plaintiff testified uncontroverted and sufficient justification for her actions appears of record. The testimony which was excluded by the Master was not called to the attention of the Chancellor for review and was therefore waived. Seely v. Rowe, 370 Ill 336, 344, 18 NE2d 874; 3 Nichols Illinois Civil Practice, Ch 52, § 2937, p 357.  Aside from the separate matters of the accounting and the Master’s fees, in both of -which we think the court erred, the real issue of this appeal is whether the shareholders’ agreement as a matter of law violated the Business Corporation Act or the public policy of our state. The purpose of the agreement is to provide income and support for the immediate families of Isadore and Benjamin. The contested sections of the agreement provide: (2) that the bylaws of the corporation will be amended to provide for a board of four directors; that the necessary quorum shall be three directors; and that no directors’ meeting shall be held without giving ten days notice to all directors. (3) The shareholders will cast their votes for the above named persons (Isadore, Bose, Benjamin and Emma) as directors at said special meeting and at any other meeting held for the purpose of electing directors. (4, 5) In the event of the death of either brother his wife shall have the right to nominate a director in place of the decedent. (6) Certain annual dividends will be declared by the corporation. The dividend shall be $50,000 payable out of the accumulated earned surplus in excess of $500,000. If 50% of the annual net profits after taxes exceed the minimum $50,000, then the directors shall have discretion to declare a dividend up to 50% of the annual net profits. If the net profits are less than $50,000, nevertheless the minimum $50,000 annual dividend shall be declared, providing the $500,000 surplus is maintained. Earned surplus is defined. (9) The certificates evidencing the said shares of Benjamin Galler and Isadore Galler shall bear a legend that the shares are subject to the terms of this agreement. (10) A salary continuation agreement shall be entered into by the corporation which shall authorize the corporation upon the death of Benjamin Galler or Isadore Galler, or both, to pay a sum equal to twice the salary of such officer, payable monthly over a five-year period. Said sum shall be paid to the widow during her widowhood, but should be paid to such widow’s children if the widow remarries within the five-year period. (11, 12) The parties to this agreement further agree and hereby grant to the corporation the authority to purchase, in the event of the death of either Benjamin or Isadore, so much of the stock of Galler Drug Company held by the estate as is necessary to provide sufficient funds to pay the federal estate tax, the Illinois inheritance tax and other administrative expenses of the estate. If as a result of such purchase by the estate of the decedent and the amount of dividends to be received by the heirs are reduced, the parties shall nevertheless vote for directors so as to give the estate and heirs the same representation as before (2 directors out of 4, even though they own less stock), and also that the corporation pay an additional benefit payment equal to the diminution of the dividends. In the event either Benjamin or Isadore decides to sell his shares, he is required to offer them first to the remaining shareholders and then to the corporation at book value, according each six months to accept the offer.  There are several factors which the courts commonly discuss when considering shareholders’ agreements: (1) the purpose or object of the agreement; (2) the concepts of public policy prevailing in the jurisdiction regarding literal interpretation of provisions of the Business Corporation Act to close corporations; (3) whether or not all of the shareholders in the corporation are parties to the agreement; (4) the length of time during which the agreement will control the shareholders’ right to vote their shares; (5) who is challenging the agreement. Appellants contend that the rule in Illinois is that an agreement which has as its sole purpose or object the financial support of the families of the shareholders is void. We have not found a case in Illinois in which this argument has been applied although the principal has been stated by text writers (1 O’Neal Close Corporations, Ch V, § 5.15), and appears often as dicta (Venner v. Chicago City Ry. Co., 258 Ill 523, 101 NE 949). Hale Private Corporations, 1916, Ch X, § 140, states the rule at 197: “In determining whether a voting agreement or a voting trust is valid, we must look to its purpose. Its purpose is always for the benefit of the persons who enter into the trust, otherwise it would not be created; but such benefit to participating stockholders may be achieved through a benefit to the corporation, or at the expense of the corporation, and to the detriment of the nonparticipating stockholders. In order to be legal, a voting trust must contemplate the benefit of its participants through the corporation, i. e., the plan of the trust must be for the benefit of the participants as stockholders and not as individuals, or at least it must not in any of its phases be an injury to the corporation or to the other stockholders. If the voting agreement or trust is for the benefit of the individuals who compose it and not for the benefit of the corporation or its other stockholders, it will be invalid.” This case stands midpoint between those cases striking down agreements which provide that a certain person be elected to a specific office for a number of years and emphasize the disregard of fiduciary duties by the directors to the corporation (Teich v. Kaufman, 174 Ill App 306, 312; Amos v. Helwig, 19 Ill App 2d 220, 153 NE2d 245), or the injury or unfairness to noncontracting shareholders (Odman v. Oleson, 319 Mass 24), and those cases upholding agreements because the purpose of the agreement is to carry out a policy beneficial to the corporation as a whole (Faulds v. Yates, 57 Ill 416; Kantzler v. Bensinger, 214 Ill 589, 73 NE 874; E. K. Buck Retail Stores v. Harkert, 157 Neb 867). The agreement in this case is admittedly for the benefit of the families of the majority shareholders as individuals. Since we have found little case law bearing on this exact situation this purpose is not of itself determinative and will be weighed with other factors. The public policy of most jurisdictions allows some latitude in an agreement among shareholders of a close corporation from the rule that the business of a corporation shall be managed by a board of directors (Ill Rev Stats, c 32, § 157.33). No court will completely ignore the provisions of the Corporation Act. Kantzler v. Bensinger, 214 Ill 589, 600, 73 NE 874. Indeed, there is no objection to provisions (2) (3) and perhaps (4) standing alone. Similar provisions have been consistently upheld. Thompson v. J. D. Thompson Carnation Co., 279 Ill 54, 116 NE 648; Kantzler v. Bensinger, 214 Ill 589, 73 NE 874; Faulds v. Yates, 57 Ill 416. Appellants contend that this agreement violates Section 28 (Cumulative voting provision); Section 41 (Directors shall declare dividends); Section 6 (Corporation may not purchase its own shares when its net assets are less than its stated capital); Section 42.8 (Directors who assent to the declaration of any prohibited dividend to a director shall be guilty of conspiracy) ; and Section 58 (No purchase of redeemable shares shall be made which will reduce the remaining assets of the corporation below an amount sufficient to pay debts and liabilities of the corporation as they mature). Although each of these violations technically occurred, some of them are of the type which courts customarily disregard when dealing with a close corporation and need not he discussed. Provision 6 of the Caller agreement is a carefully worked out mandatory schedule for the payment of dividends. The declaration of dividends is generally considered to be within the discretion of the board of directors. 1 O’Neal Close Corporations, Ch V, § 5.21, p 281; Hornstein, Stockholders’ Agreements in the Closely Held Corporations, 59 Yale LJ 1040, 1045. Agreements which place reasonable restrictions on powers of the directors by prohibiting the declaration of dividends are usually sustained. Fitzgerald v. Christy, 242 Ill App 343. Very few cases have upheld a compulsory affirmative dividend policy. See Clark v. Dodge, 269 NY 410. The agreement construed in Kantzler v. Bensinger, 214 Ill 589, 73 NE 874 contained a provision providing for the payment of dividends. The court however did not discuss this provision in its opinion. (The provision in the Kantzler case was part of a purchase agreement. The dividend provision was clearly part of the consideration for the sale.) Too many factors are involved in the declaration of dividends for all to be explicitly detailed in advance. The infirmity in these provisions is not so much that they provide for the payment of dividends but that they are mandatory. See comment, 43 Cornell LQ 68, 79 (1957). Standing alone we would be compelled to strike down the dividend provision of the Caller agreement. Although the salary continuation provision is precatory in form it suffers from other infirmities. There are very few cases treating a salary continuation to the widow of an officer and shareholder of a corporation; those that do, however, state the general rule to be that a gift of its property by a corporation not created for charitable purposes is in violation of the rights of its shareholders and is ultra vires. 6A Fletcher Cyclopedia of Corporations, § 2939, pp 667, 668. This rule has been applied to widows who receive compensation and who have never rendered service to a corporation even where there was a precatory clause. See Moore v. Keystone Macaroni Mfg. Co., 370 Pa 172; 29 ALR2d 1256, 1263. Although the specific charge of ultra vires is not raised and perhaps could not be raised by any shareholders here, we take note of it in weighing the validity of the agreement. Provisions (11) and (12) are objected to as infringing on the constitutional requirement of cumulative voting in that they give voting power to a shareholder disproportionate to his holding of the corporation’s voting shares. This exact contention was presented to the Nebraska Court in E. K. Buck Retail Stores v. Harkert, 157 Neb 867, 45 ALR2d 774, 806, in upholding the provision and after pointing out that the right to cumulative voting is personal and may not be abridged by the corporation the court stated: “It is asserted, however, that an agreement between stockholders as to how stock shall be voted at the election of directors ipso facto changes the manner of election prescribed by the constitution. To so hold would have the effect of invalidating existing statutes relating to voting trusts and all other forms of voting combines by a majority of the stock to control the management of the corporation, which were recognized at common law.” The above reasoning would apply equally well in Illinois. (It is to be noted that throughout E. K. Buck v. Harkert, supra, the court emphasized that the purpose of the agreement was to induee Buck to bring needed money into the corporation.) Standing alone provisions (11) and (12) do not violate the constitutional cumulative voting requirement. An important factor in determining the validity of a shareholders’ agreement is whether the rights of minority holders are protected. In this case there are no minority holders. Mandel Rosenberg sold his 5% to Isadore Galler, and, although the ownership is involved in litigation, it is unlikely that the final owner of that stock will be a new minority holder. Where there are no minority holders courts are inclined to relax a strict application of public policy and statutory considerations. Faulds v. Yates, 57 Ill 416; Kantzler v. Bensinger, 214 Ill 589, 73 NE 874. There is no time limitation to the Galler agreement. The appellees urge that it is clearly limited by the life span of Rose and Emma Galler. In our view it has an unpredictable duration and may reasonably have lasted in excess of twenty-five years. (According to “Vital Statistics of the United States,” U. S. Dept. of Health, Education and Welfare, 1959, Emma Galler, who was 51 at the time of the death of her husband, had a life expectancy of 26.9 years.) The time factor is usually not in itself determinative providing that there is no legislation to the contrary. 1 O’Neal Close Corporations, Ch V, § 5.09, p 245. Odman v. Oleson, 319 Mass 24, invalidated an agreement with an unlimited time duration. Leventhal v. Atlantic Finance Corp., 316 Mass 194; Clark v. Dodge, 269 NY 410; and E. K. Buck Retail Stores v. Harkert, 157 Neb 867, upheld agreements of indefinite duration. The appellants argue that the spirit of the voting trust statute (Ill Rev Stats, c 32, § 157.30(a)) establishes a ten year-limitation for all forms of voting control agreements. The only case in which we have found a similar contention considered was Wallace v. Southwestern Sanitarium Co., 160 Kan 331. The court there felt that the same policies did not apply. The main objective of the voting trust statutes has been to prevent the separation of voting power from beneficial ownership for a long period of time, and by registration to serve as notice to potential stock purchasers and to the state that a corporation is in the grips of a control combine. Since there are usually no potential purchasers to a closely held corporation the registration provisions need not be discussed. There is merit to appellants’ position that at some point any control agreement constitutes a separation of voting power from beneficial interest. See note, 3 University of Chicago Law Review, 640, 641. The courts will usually presume that when a shareholder binds his vote on a corporate policy for a short period of years he knows what he is doing. Where the duration of the agreement contemplates a longer period, the courts will look more carefully at the purpose and effect of the agreement. There is probably no absolute point at which an agreement becomes illegal. The ten-year limitation of the voting trust statute is arbitrary. At common law voting trusts were held valid in excess of twenty years. The unpredictable duration of the Galler agreement warrants a more than cursory consideration of its purpose and its deviation from corporate norms. Undoubtedly a party to a control agreement is not in as advantageous a position to complain of the invalidity of that agreement as might be a creditor or a minority shareholder. See Kantzler v. Bensinger, 214 Ill 589, 600, 73 NE 874; Faulds v. Yates, 57 Ill 416, 421; Fitzgerald v. Christy, 242 Ill App 343, 360; Bausch & Lomb Optical Co. v. Wahlgren, 1 F Supp 799, 803; E. K. Buck Retail Stores v. Harkert, 157 Neb 867. In the above cases the party setting up the illegality of the contract as a defense to his breach was doing so for personal reasons. The courts emphasized unconscionable conduct, taking advantage for a number of years and estoppel. In none of the above cases did the question of whether the affirmance of the agreement be for the best interests of the corporation arise. See note, 3 University of Chicago Law Review 640, 650. We are presented with that element here. No part of this agreement was performed, although, Emma Galler stands ready to perform an acceptance of the largesse written into the agreement for the benefit of Rose and her. The record shows that Isadore and Rose after signing the agreement never had any intention of enforcing it following the death of Benjamin. The record further shows that the immediate motivation for the signing of the agreement was the concern of all parties for the wishes of the failing Benjamin Galler. Negotiation concerning the terms of the agreement would have been highly inappropriate at that time. Prior to the death of Benjamin all appearances indicate that there existed nothing but good feelings between the members of the family. This is not a contractual background to which a court would apply the terms unconscionable and estoppel. Determining whether an agreement should be stricken in whole or whether unobjectionable provisions should be severed is a confusing problem. Corbin discusses the rule in the following words: “It is generally assumed that enforceability depends on ‘divisibility,’ and that ‘divisibility’ depends on the terms of the bargain and the expressed intention of the parties. It is believed, however, that such an assumption makes the cart pull the horse in most cases, and that a bargain is described as ‘divisible’ only after the court has determined on grounds of policy that a part of it should be enforced. Public policy is not determined by the ‘intention’ of the parties or the ‘terms’ in which they have expressed their intention. To search for ‘divisibility’ generally obscures the factors that should control the decision and that in almost all cases do in fact control it. “The commonly repeated statement that a bargain that is illegal in part will be enforced as to the lawful part if the bargain is ‘divisible’ renders no good service so long as we have no workable test or definition of ‘divisibility.’ The converse statement that no part of such a bargain is enforceable if the bargain is ‘entire’ is equally useless. Not much better is the statement sometimes found, that the lawful part of a bargain will be enforced if it can be separated from the unlawful part without destroying the ‘symmetry’ of the bargain. It is only a little more enlightening to say that no part will be enforced if the unlawful is so intimately connected with the lawful as to ‘taint’ the whole. With no better generalizations than those to rely upon, the court is in fact rendering its decision on the basis of its judicial instinct for ‘justice’ or of some inarticulate major premise as to the requirements of ‘public policy’. These are indeed a sounder basis for judicial action than are inaccurate analysis or the repetition of an ancient ‘rule’ no longer in harmony with living needs and practices. But as a system of law matures with experience, the sources of ‘instinct’ can be made known and the ‘inarticulate’ can be expressed.” 6A Corbin on Contracts, Ch 90, § 1520, pp 754, 755. In the case of Teich v. Kaufman, supra, the court was persuaded that the element of “illegal consideration” tainted the entire contract. In this case there are conflicting considerations. The fact that all shareholders were parties to the agreement encourages divisibility, but the undue duration, stated purpose and numerous deviations from the Business Corporation Act demand total illegality. The fact that the attacking party himself is a party to the agreement is somewhat mitigated since the attach is based upon the charge that the agreement disregards and is detrimental to the interests of the corporation. We feel that the undue duration, stated purpose and substantial disregard of the provisions of the Corporation Act outweigh any considerations which might call for divisibility and that the public policy of this state demands voiding this entire agreement.  The recommendations of the Master as approved by the court provided that the defendants, Isadore and Aaron Caller, shall account to the corporation for all monies received by each of them from the corporation since September 25, 1956, and such accounting shall be rendered by them to the corporation during said period, the burden to be upon them to prove the fair value of such services. The Master especially found that the accounting should go to the salaries of Isadore and Aaron Caller. Section 45 of the Corporation Act provides: “Nothing herein contained shall impair the power of any court of competent jurisdiction, upon proof by a shareholder of proper purpose, . . . , to compel by mandamus or otherwise the production for examination by such shareholder of the books and records of accounts, minutes, and record of shareholders of a corporation.” (Ill Rev Stats 1961, c 32, §157.45.) There is no doubt that Emma Caller’s desire to examine the records and have an accounting is a proper purpose. See Miller v. Spanogle, 275 Ill App 335. It is even more important in the close corporation than in the publicly-held corporation that every shareholder should be able to compel an inspection of corporate records and an accounting of monetary disbursements. See, 1 O’Neal Close Corporations, Ch 3, § 3.63. Aaron and Isadore Galler have drawn salaries as President and Chairman of the corporation. They were validly elected officers prior to the death of Benjamin Galler and they receive no more compensation than was thought reasonable prior to the death of Benjamin. It is true that Aaron’s salary was improperly raised $5000, and he should be made to account for that amount. The general rule remains that the failure of a corporate body to elect officers or directors does not end the terms of those previously elected. 2 Fletcher Cyclopedia Corporations, Ch 11, § 344. The same salary continues, but where there is a change of circumstances, the question of the amount of salary may become one of fact. 5 Fletcher Cyclopedia of Corporations, Ch 16, § 2136. In this case an accounting as to the salaries of these officers would be mere harassment. The record offers no basis for a finding that salaries whieh were reasonable prior to the death of Benjamin Galler should become suddenly unreasonable following his death. The record shows that the company’s gross sales and profits increased substantially from 1957 to 1959, while the business was under the exclusive control of these two men. The salaries of $42,000 and $20,000 do not seem unreasonable for the chief officers of a $9,000,000 per year business. Emma Galler is further entitled to an accounting of monies, if any, received in excess of salaries received by Isadore and Aaron.  The Master’s fees in this case are excessive. Originally the Master asked for $18,200 or $40 per hour for 455 hours work. The Chancellor reduced this fee to $15,925 or $35 per hour for 455 hours work. We believe that the Chancellor’s determination is also excessive. The correct rule in awarding Master’s fees is as simply stated in Kerner v. Peterson, 368 Ill 59, 82,12 NE2d 884: “The master’s position and responsibility are inferior to those of the chancellor and his daily compensation should not be equal to or exceed the chancellor’s compensation when reduced to a per diem basis.” See also Klekamp v. Klekamp, 275 Ill 98, 113 NE 852; 3 Nichols Illinois Civil Practice (1961), Ch 52, § 2950, pp 369, 370. We believe that a determination of a Chancellor’s per diem should be made on the basis of a 229-day work year—reflecting weekends, one month’s vacation and ten legal and court holidays. The highest possible salary of a Chancellor sitting on the Circuit or Superior Court of Cook County during the period of these hearings was $25,000. These hearings were conducted between February, 1960 and February, 1962. The Fees and Salaries Act (Ill Rev Stats 1961, c 53, § 3) makes no provision for a $29,000 salary for a judge elected prior to November 6, 1962. A five-hour day (approved in Strom v. Strom, 13 Ill App2d 354, 360, 142 NE2d 172) should be the daily measure. Using the above formula a Chancellor’s approximate per diem earnings are $110 or $22 per hour. On this basis the Chancellor would receive $10,010 for 455 hours work. Although a Master’s “position and responsibility are inferior to those of the Chancellor,” the Master’s hourly rate can be justified on the same basis because the Master must personally bear the cost of his office space and his staff while the Chancellor need not. We believe that a Master’s fee of $10,010 in this case properly reflects the time and costs expended. In accordance with the views of this opinion the decree awarding specific performance should be reversed, the orders directing an accounting to be taken should be affirmed in part and reversed in part, the order awarding Master’s fees should be reversed with directions to enter an amount in conformity with the views expressed herein, and the cause should be remanded for proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion. Decree reversed in part, and affirmed in part, and remanded with directions. FRIEND, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739796 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:02.784351+00 ===

BURKE, P. J., dissenting in part: The majority opinion agrees with the contention of the defendants that the 1955 agreement violates the Illinois Business Corporation Act and is therefore invalid and unenforceable. I am of the opinion that the agreement is valid, that it does not violate the Business Corporation Act and that it is enforceable. The agreement is not a voting trust. It was never intended to be a voting trust. The agreement does not contain the essential characteristics of that kind of a trust: the divorce of stock ownership from voting control. The shareholders remain shareholders. They hold and vote their own shares. They did not transfer or agree to transfer title or voting rights to any one. There is no alienation, no trust, no trustees or voting agents. Sec 30a of the Business Corporation Act deals only with voting trusts and its 10-year provision is obviously not applicable to the agreement. Agreements such as the one in the instant case have been upheld by the Supreme Court, regardless of their duration, in a line of decisions going back to Faulds v. Yates, 57 Ill 416. The fact that the Galler agreement is not limited to 10 years is of no legal consequence. It is clear that this agreement has an inherent time limitation. Its essential provisions are operative only during the lives of Emma Galler and Rose Galler. They with their husbands agreed to constitute a four-member board of directors, and agreed that when a husband died his widow would have the right to nominate a director to take his place. A wife could be a director and exercise her right to nominate a fellow director only during her lifetime. The duration of the agreement is thus limited. If one Galler family were to dispose of its shares to strangers, the strangers would be bound to cast their votes for the remaining widow and her nominee. If all the husbands and/or wives died, or disposed of all their shares, then the agreement would no longer be operative. Manifestly, the agreement is not for perpetuity. But the time element would have no bearing on its validity because it is not a voting trust and there is no public policy subjecting it to the time limitation imposed by the statute upon voting trusts. In Venner v. Chicago City Ry. Co., 258 Ill 523, 101 NE 949, the court said at 539: “There is no rule of public policy in this State which prohibits the combination of the owners of a majority of the stock of a corporation for the purpose of controlling the corporation.” A policy against agreements in which the voting rights are separated from stock ownership was at one time sanctioned in Luthy v. Ream, 270 Ill 170, 110 NE 273. But straight contractual voting control agreements never fell within the rule of Luthy. This was emphasized in Thompson v. J. D. Thompson Carnation Co., 279 Ill 54, 116 NE 648, wherein a control agreement of indefinite duration was upheld because it does not divest or attempt to divest J. M. Thompson of his control or ownership of his stock, or his right to vote the same. That straight contractual voting control agreements are not to be confused with voting trusts is emphasized in Fletcher Cyclopedia of Corporations, Permanent Vol 5, Sec 2064, at page 254, citing Thompson v. J. D. Thompson Carnation Co. The legislature saw fit when it enacted the voting trust statute in 1947 not to limit all voting control agreements to a 10-year period. The statute makes no reference whatsoever and expresses no public policy with respect to straight voting agreements, although they have been common since before 1870 and they have often extended for more than 10 years, as in the Thompson case approved by the Supreme Court in 1917. Defendants cite Abercrombie v. Davies, 130 A2d 338 (Del 1957) for the proposition that a statute sanctioning voting trusts for a 10-year period must be construed as limiting the duration of nontrust agreements. The Abercrombie decision does not so hold. This decision supports the proposition that the one essential feature that characterizes a voting trust is the separation of voting rights of the stock from other attributes of ownership. The Delaware Court held that the elaborate disguise resorted to in Abercrombie was fruitless and that it could not cover up the fact that the substance of the voting trust already existed. Abercrombie expressly recognizes that the agreement whereby shareholders undertake to combine in voting their own shares without the intervention of “agents,” trustees or irrevocable proxies is valid. The Caller agreement is not a disguised, concealed or camouflaged voting trust. The argument of the defendants that the agreement is violative of the statutory provisions vesting the duty to manage the affairs of the corporation in its board of directors, authorizing the shareholders to elect directors and restricting the corporation’s right to purchase its own stock cannot be sustained. The gist of defendants’ contention is that the 1955 agreement contains provisions which, it is claimed, the owners of 95% of the shares could not enter into without the consent of the then minority shareholder Manuel Rosenberg, who in 1954 contracted to purchase the other 5% of the shares. The enforcement of the contract, as decreed, did not and could not work any advantage to a majority, or injury to a minority, for the reason that the minority interest had ceased to exist a year before the decree was entered. Isadore banned his brother’s widow from the premises and would give her no voice in the affairs, despite the fact that she owned the same number of shares as Isadore. It is clear that the 1955 agreement is valid and binding. Persons owning a majority of shares of a corporation have the unquestioned right to agree in advance to elect themselves directors and officers. Our Supreme Court was among the first to enunciate this rule in Faulds v. Yates, 57 Ill 416, setting a clear precedent which has been followed in other jurisdictions. Rosenberg’s position as a minority shareholder had been secure under the terms of the October 1, 1945 contract with Benjamin and Isadore and would have remained secure had he chosen to remain a shareholder. When the several monetary benefits provided in Rosenberg’s contract are compared to the limited pension provided for a widow under the 1955 agreement, it becomes evident that in ratio to his 5% stock interest the minority shareholder was on a par with, if not actually better treated, than a shareholder with a 47^% interest. It is apparent that the 1955 agreement was not intended and could not have adversely affected the minority shareholder. The Faulds decision was followed by Kantzler v. Bensinger, 214 Ill 589, 73 NE 874; Venner v. Chicago City Ry. Co., 258 Ill 523, 101 NE 949 and Thompson v. J. D. Thompson Carnation Co., 279 Ill 54, 116 NE 648. The defendants support their position by citing Teich v. Kaufman, 174 Ill App 306. This Appellate Court opinion could not and does not take a contrary view to that taken by the Supreme Court in Faulds and Kantzler. The Teich opinion recognizes that a contract entered into by majority shareholders to elect one another as directors, acquire control and management of the company and secure options on one another’s stock is not against public policy. It is significant that the cases cited in Teich all involved agreements enhancing the personal profit of the contracting parties. The Galler agreement does not guarantee any salaries to officers, but contains only a widow’s limited pension arrangement, which is not disproportionate to the death benefit the minority shareholder’s widow or estate would have been entitled to had he died while a shareholder. The Teich case is not applicable to the factual situation of the case at bar. The fact that the Supreme Court cited Faulds v. Yates in its decision in Venner v. Chicago City Ry. Co., following the decision in Teich, makes it clear that Teich is not to be considered as changing the principle announced in Faulds v. Yates with respect to a noncomplaining minority. Where the minority makes no complaint and where it does not appear that their interests would be adversely affected, the Faulds decision is directly in point. The agreement in no way impairs or diminishes the voting rights of the shareholders. Each outstanding share of Galler stock is entitled to one vote and in all elections for directors every shareholder has a right to vote for the number of shares owned by him. The agreement binds the parties to cast their votes for the widow and her nominee. It does not cut off the votes of any shares. The defendants urge that the dividend provisions of the agreement are in conflict with Sec 41 of the Business Corporation Act. Although dividends are to be declared by the board of directors as provided by Sec 41, defendants say that the agreement curtails the discretion of the board. The dividend provisions of the Galler agreement are prudent and unexceptionable. They are predicated upon earned surplus and net earnings. Earned surplus must at all times be maintained at not less than $500,000. The directors are not required to declare any dividend if its payment would reduce the earned surplus to below $500,000. They are only required to declare a minimum dividend of $50,000 if its payment would not reduce the earned surplus below the $500,000 mark. If fifty percent of net earnings after taxes exceeds $50,000, then the directors may, in their discretion, declare a dividend of up to 50% of such annual profits. The reasonableness of these provisions becomes evident in the light of the financial condition of the company. In 1957, it had earned surplus of $1,380,510; its net earnings after taxes that year were $144,885. In 1958, its earned surplus increased to $1,543,270, and its earnings to $202,759. In 1959, its earned surplus further increased to $1,680,079, while its earnings were $172,964. The minority shareholder, had he continued to hold his stock, would have benefited proportionately from the dividend provisions. In Kantzler v. Bensinger, the Supreme Court upheld a provision for dividends in a shareholder’s agreement similar to the one in the instant case. In Fitzgerald v. Christy, 242 Ill App 343, the court approved an agreement which bound the directors not to declare any dividends whatsoever except upon unanimous vote. In Lydia E. Pinkham Medicine Co. v. Gove, 20 NE2d 482 (Mass 1939) the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts upheld the bylaw of a corporation requiring dividends to be declared each year in a sum equal to the net earnings in excess of the amount required to maintain a surplus of $1,000,000. In essence, there is no difference between the bylaw of a corporation and an equivalent agreement of the majority shareholders and directors empowered to establish such a bylaw, as in the case of the Galler agreement. I agree with, the holding of the majority that the plaintiff is not estopped. The evidence establishes that the defendants took unfair advantage of the plaintiff. The principle of estoppel operates only in favor of an innocent party who has changed position to his detriment in reliance upon fraudulent representations. It is the plaintiff who is the innocent party and the defendants who are guilty of oppressive misconduct and breach of faith. There should be an accounting as required by the decree. As the defendants did not ask the Chancellor to review any of the Master’s rulings on the evidence as required by Rule 9.4 of the Superior Court, they are not in a position to urge that the Master erred in the exclusion of the proffered testimony. In 1961 the legislature increased the annual salary of the Circuit and Superior Court Judges of Cook County to $29,000, effective on reelection. In applying the formula discussed in the opinion, effect should be given to the $29,000 salary. The decree should be modified only to the extent required to determine Master’s Fees in accordance with the $29,000 salary discussed, and as modified only as to the Master’s fees should be affirmed.

=== CASE 9739797 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:03.273942+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE BRYANT delivered the opinion of the court. This is an interlocutory appeal from an order of the Circuit Court of Cook County entered on November 4, 1963, decreeing a writ of temporary injunction restraining defendant Anthony Mannina, and others, from (1) picketing at or near the nursing home located at 901 South Austin Boulevard; (2) publicly stating in any manner that plaintiff’s nursing home and/or the construction thereof are in violation of any building code and/or that safety is impaired therein; (3) engaging in any other conduct for the purpose of coercing or inducing persons who might otherwise lawfully transact business with plaintiff by becoming patients in said nursing home not to do so; (4) doing any other thing to in any manner injure or interfere with plaintiff, its property or business; (5) combining or conspiring for the purpose or with the effect of doing anything prohibited above; (6) engaging in any other conduct for the purpose of eoercing or inducing persons who might otherwise lawfully transact business with plaintiff by becoming patients in said nursing home not to do so, or with the ultimate objective of coercing and forcing plaintiff to abide by defendants’ interpretation of the Chicago Building Code rather than the interpretation whieh has been made by the Building Commissioner of the City of Chicago and applied over a period of many years. The appellants after acquiescing to the breadth of the injunction in the lower court and again in oral argument before us nevertheless maintain that the injunction is unnecessarily broad. It is true that the appellants have engaged only in picketing and that courts generally are more reticent to enjoin forms of more protected communication. Since this objection was never presented to the chancellor nor preserved in the record we shall disregard the breadth of the injunction and confine our remarks solely to the question of picketing. Plaintiff, Austin Congress Corporation, secured a building permit on or about July 27, 1962, for the construction of a six story nursing home and received approval of plans calling for pyrobar and plaster partitions. On or about June 26, 1963, inspectors from the Department of Buildings determined that the partitions had been constructed of % inch sheet rock material affixed to steel studs. Because of this variation from the approved plans, construction was ordered stopped by the Department of Buildings. On June 27, 1963, revised plans were submitted for approval and approved immediately as being in accordance with the provisions of the Chicago Building Code. Specifically, the commissioner of buildings in a letter dated August 21, 1963, found that although -the work was not being done in accordance with originally approved plans; the assembly used for interior partitions had been erected in accordance with ASTM Fire Endurance and Hose -Stream Test; .and this test indicates that the assembly of materials being used has a one hour fire rating in accordance with building code requirements; and this material was installed in accordance with the revised approved plans. On June 26, 1963, the defendants began picketing the almost completed nursing home carrying placards which read, “Building Code Violated — Safety Impaired” and “Walls and Partitions in This Building are Combustible.” The defendants continued their picketing throughout the summer and until the day of the injunction order. The plaintiff made no attempts to restrain the picketing until September 15, 1963, when the complaint was filed. The plaintiff felt that it would be impossible to fill its building now that it had been completed while pickets paraded before the building. It is no secret that the picketing has been fostered and supported by the “plastering” interests and that this incident is but one in a long standing controversy between proponents of “dry wall” and proponents of “real plaster” walls. The defendants-appellants maintain that the building was constructed of combustible material (material which, will ignite when heated to a temperature at or below 1200° Fahrenheit; Chicago, Ill., Municipal Code § 65-2(a), 1957) and, therefore, is in violation of the Building Code. Section 53.3(a) requires: “Partitions enclosing corridors required as a means of exit and partitions enclosing bedrooms or bed wards shall be of noncombustible construction providing fire resistance of not less than one hour. . . .” (Chicago, Ill., Municipal Code § 53-3(a), 1949.) They contend that there is an absolute right to picket providing that such picketing is peaceful, truthful and informational. They point out that the plaintiffappellee has admitted for the purposes of this appeal that the material is combustible, and, therefore, a violation of the building code. The plaintiff in its answer denies that “dry wall” is combustible and has offered and will be required to prove that “dry wall” does not burst into flames at or before 1200° Fahrenheit. For the purposes of this appeal, however, plaintiff has taken the position that the combustibility of the “dry wall” is irrelevant since the injunctive relief was granted solely on the merits of plaintiff’s first four counts. (Although on appeal this concedes the issue of combustibility, it does not concede the question of building code violation.) The record clearly shows that the court adopted the position of the plaintiff and granted the temporary injunction on the merits of plaintiff’s counts one through four. The theory of count one is that if defendants continue the picketing complained of or commit other unlawful acts for the same purpose, plaintiff’s property, business, reputation and goodwill will be substantially damaged and numerous persons who would otherwise transact lawful business with plaintiff by becoming patients in said nursing home will not do so, as a direct consequence of which plaintiff will suffer substantial monetary damage and that with continued picketing those damages will be unascertainable and irreparable. Count two alleges that the conduct complained of is malicious and intended by defendants to coerce or induce persons who might otherwise transact lawful business by becoming patients in the nursing home not to do so and that such conduct is the intended result of an -unlawful combination and conspiracy. Count three sets up the approval by the "building commissioner of the revised construction plans and alleges that such plans have consistently over a period of years been approved as being in accordance with all of the provisions of the Chicago Building Code and that the purpose of the picketing is to coerce and force plaintiff to abide by defendants’ interpretation of the Chicago Building Code. Count four alleges that the conduct complained of in Count three is the intended result of an unlawful combination and conspiracy to persuade persons from becoming patients in plaintiff’s home and to force compliance with defendants’ interpretation of the building code. Begardless of the merits of granting injunctive relief, the appellants maintain that the writ was prematurely granted and that a simple oven test of the combustibility of “dry wall” would settle the matter. The primary purpose of a temporary injunction is to preserve the matters in status quo until the court has had an opportunity to decide the case upon its merits. Hoagland v. Bibb, 12 Ill App2d 298, 304, 139 NE2d 417; Bowman Shoe Co. v. Bowman, 21 Ill App2d 423, 440, 158 NE2d 112; 3 Nichols Illinois Civil Practice, ch 38, § 2267. The merits of a controversy are usually not brought before the reviewing court by an interlocutory appeal, Shatz v. Paul, 7 Ill App2d 223, 234, 129 NE2d 348; Hebenstreit v. Consolidated Coal Co., 3 Ill App2d 453, 459, 122 NE2d 843; Scholz v. Barbee, 344 Ill App 630, 638-639, 101 NE2d 845; Nestor Johnson Mfg. Co. v. Goldblatt, 371 Ill 570, 574, 21 NE2d 723. This controversy is not as easily disposed of as appellants would lead us to believe. Presuming that a factual determination of the combustibility of “dry wall” could be demonstrated in open court, there still remains the question of what is a “partition.” The building code permits the use of combustible paint, wallpaper and other material for surface decoration and interior trim when affixed to a non-combustible base. Is sheet rock any different from plaster covered with wallpaper? A determination that there has been a building code violation and that the building commissioner exceeded his authority in permitting a deviation from the originally approved plans must necessarily be entwined with the combustibility question. These are complex questions of law and fact going to the merits of the case and without adequate briefing here. The chancellor properly deferred consideration until hearing on the permanent injunction. We need only determine whether the chancellor properly allowed an injunction based on the first four counts of the complaint. Prom the face of the complaint irreparable damage is alleged and apparent. Appellants have invited our attention to four cases in opposition to the issuance of the temporary injunction. In the case of Huerbinger Drug Co. of Glenview v. Topp’s of Niles, 28 Ill App2d 336, 339, 170 NE2d 653, this court in reversing a temporary injunction order emphasized that there was no showing of an emergency because the course of the case with respect to the pleadings and the hearing had been unhurried; it was probable that the status quo was being upset rather than maintained; and, there was an apparent inconsistency in the restraint since there was a finding of irreparable damage, but the defendant was permitted to indulge the alleged unlawful conduct for several weeks. There is no evidence here of an unhurried approach by the plaintiffs in the lower court. The hearing dates were determined to conform to the work load of the court and to the completion of discovery procedures. The plaintiff emphasized before the lower court that prospective residents were being driven away daily and urged an earlier hearing date. This case also differs from Huerbinger (supra) because the status quo is easily ascertained as the period before picketing began and there is no inconsistency here in the order of the eourt. Appellants’ suggestion that the status quo to be maintained is that of peaceful picketing is indefensible. Although picketing continued unrestrained throughout the summer while the construction was being completed, it was not until in the natural course of events plaintiff sought to fill its home that the injurious consequences of appellants’ activities- were felt. The reason we are compelled to view the matter in this light was well stated in O’Brien v. Matual, 14 Ill App2d 173, 186-187, 144 NE2d 446: “The primary purpose of a temporary injunction is to preserve matters in status quo until the court has had an. opportunity to consider the cause upon its merits, or upon a motion to dismiss, i. e., to prevent suek acts during tke pendency of tke aetion as would preclude the court from giving the plaintiff or counter-claimant his remedy at the end of the litigation if he be entitled to such. Any other conclusion would place a premium upon seizing and establishing possession in fact by force rather than by seeking to alter the status in an orderly way by legal procedure. The status quo which should be preserved by a temporary injunction is the last, actual, peaceable, uncontested status which preceded the pending controversy, and the necessity of the temporary injunction should be made apparent by appropriate allegations showing that a change in the status would cause irreparable injury: Lincoln Trust & Savings Bank v. Nelson (1931) 261 Ill App 370; Gillam v. 661 Sheridan Apts., Inc., [1 Ill App2d 11]; Kabureck v. Stookey (1954) 1 Ill App2d 181; Nestor Johnson Mfg. Co. v. Goldblatt (1939) 371 Ill 570; Arends v. Naughton [11 Ill App2d 227] ; Scholz v. Barbee (1951) 344 Ill App 630.” The last peaceable uncontested status in this case prior to the injunction was that status before picketing began. Northern Illinois Coal Corp. v. Langmeyer, 340 Ill App 423, 92 NE2d 802; Peoples Gas Light & Coke Co. v. Cook Lumber Terminal Co., 256 Ill App 357; and, Meredith v. Aurora, E. & C. R. Co., 142 Ill App 475, add nothing to an understanding of this case. The chancellor properly exercised the discretion vested in him. Appellants can not seriously contend that a grant of a temporary injunction necessitating a postponement of a hearing on the merits of the case constitutes a denial of due process. This case will be .returned to the lower court with directions for an immediate hearing on the merits regardless of the outcome here. If the plaintiff’s nursing home should be filled by the time that the hearings might be concluded in appellants’ favor we presume that there is no doctrine of estoppel which would prevent compliance with the building code-even at that late date. To interject a lengthy hearing on the merits before granting a temporary order, on the other hand, would severely harass and injure the plaintiff in its efforts to fill its nursing home. The complaint states that the plaintiff has expended or obligated itself approximately $750,000 prior to the opening of the nursing home. Appellants’ main point is that picketing is a form of speech and when done in a peaceful, truthful and informational manner must be accorded the same freedom as other areas of speech and may not be enjoined or otherwise restrained. We believe that in addition to appellants’ understanding of the law there is an element of public policy which in every ease must be weighed by the court considering the presented factual situation. As stated by Justice Frankfurter in Hughes v. Superior Court, 339 US 460, 464-466 and as applied by courts throughout the country: “But while picketing is a mode of communication it is inseparably something more and different. Industrial picketing ‘is more than free speech, since it involves patrol of a particular locality and since the very presence of a picket line may induce action of one kind or another, quite irrespective of the nature of the ideas whieh are being disseminated.’ Mr. Justice Douglas, joined by Black and Murphy, JJ., concurring in Bakery & Pastry Drivers & Helpers Local v. Wobl, 315 US 769, 775, 776. Publication in a newspaper, or by distribution of circulars, may convey the same information, or make the same charge as do those patrolling a picket line. But the very purpose of a picket line is- to exert influences, and it produces consequences, different from other modes of communication. The loyalties and responses evoked and exacted by picket lines are unlike those flowing from appeals by printed word. See Gregory, Labor and the Law 346-48 (rev ed 1949); Teller, Picketing and Free Speech, 56 Harv L Rev 180, 200-02 (1942); Dodd, Picketing and Free Speech: A Dissent, 56 Harv L Rev 513, 517 (1943); Hellerstein, Picketing Legislation and the Courts, 10 NCL Rev 158, 186-87, n 135 (1932). “Third. A State may constitutionally permit picketing despite the ingredients in it that differentiate it from speech in its ordinary context. Senn v. Tile Layers Protective Union, 301 US 468. And we have found that because of its element of communication picketing under some circumstances finds sanction in the Fourteenth Amendment. Thornhill v. Alabama, 310 US 88; American Federation of Labor v. Swing, 312 US 321; Bakery & Pastry Drivers & Helpers Local v. Wohl, 315 US 769; Cafeteria Employees Union v. Angelos, 320 US 293. However general or loose the language of opinions, the specific situations have controlled decision. It has been amply recognized that picketing, not being the equivalent of speech as a matter of fact, is not its inevitable legal equivalent. Picketing is not beyond the control of a State if the manner in which picketing is conducted or the purpose which it seeks to effectuate gives ground for its disallowance. See Dorchy v. Kansas, 272 US 306; Milk Wagon Drivers Union v. Meadowmoor Dairies, Inc., 312 US 287; Hotel and Restaurant Employees’ International Alliance v. Wisconsin E. R. B., 315 US 437; Carpenters & Joiners Union v. Ritter’s Cafe, 315 US 722; Giboney v. Empire Storage & Ice Co., 336 US 490. ‘A state is not required to tolerate in all places and all circumstances even peaceful picketing by an individual/' Bakery & Pastry Drivers & Helpers Local v. Wold, supra at 775/’ For cases enunciating a similar view, see International Brotherhood of Teamsters v. Hanke, 339 US 470; International Brotherhood of Teamsters v. Vogt, Inc., 354 US 284. Nor has the present court adopted a dissimilar position. The eases of Edwards v. South Carolina, 372 US 229 and Fields v. South Carolina (per curiam), 372 US 522, cited by appellants, both upholding the right to picket for the purpose of furthering a racial integration policy, merely reflect a judicial awareness of an overriding national policy in favor of integration. These cases cited none of the classic picketing cases, but emphasized instead that line of cases dealing with the dissemination of ideas which are provocative and challenging and tend to induce a condition of unrest. See, Feiner v. New York, 340 US 315; Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 315 US 568; Terminiello v. Chicago, 337 US 1; and Cantwell v. Connecticut, 310 US 296. The courts of Illinois have held no differently. In the landmark ease of Montgomery Ward & Co., Inc. v. United Retail, Wholesale & Dept. Store Employees, 400 Ill 38, 79 NE2d 46, a case in which picketing was not involved, Mr. Justice Gunn reviewed the case law pertaining to injunction against publications. The opinion nowhere states that picketing must be accorded every right of free speech and continually emphasizes that where coercion is present there is an exception to the general rule that publications may not be enjoined. Nor could this case be brought under the main point of the Montgomery Ward case* — that equity does not have jurisdiction to enjoin the commission of crimes and libels. For the purpose of this appeal the plaintiff is waiving any reference to the truth or falsity of the statements on the placard and is willing to rest upon the proposition that in this ease the mere presence of pickets constitutes unlawful coercion as a matter of public policy.  Recent Illinois cases go further and explicitly cite with approval the rule of Hughes v. Superior Court (supra), and have stated the question to be one of public policy. See, Bitzer Motor Co. v. Teamsters, Local 604, 349 Ill App 283, 289, 110 NE2d 674. Jersey County Motor Co. v. Local Union No. 525, 21 Ill App2d 38, 45, 156 NE2d 633, cites International Brotherhood of Teamsters v. Vogt, Inc. (supra), for the proposition that a state has the right to curtail free speech when, in the exercise of its authority to declare and establish its public policy, either legislatively or judicially, it determines that such curtailment is necessary to protect the public interest and property rights. That picketing for the purpose of harassment and to cause economic ruination even under the cloak of publicizing the truth of a purported building code violation is violative of the public policy of the State of Hlinois is well settled. In Carpenters’ Union v. Citizens’ Committee to Enforce Landis Award, 333 Ill 225, 246, 164 NE 393, our Supreme Court stated: “No persons, individually or by combination, have the right to directly or indirectly interfere with or disturb another in his lawful business or occupation or for the sake of compelling him to do some act which in his own judgment his own interest does not require. Losses wilfully caused by another from motives of malice to one who seeks to exercise and enjoy the fruits and advantages of his own enterprise, industry, skill or credit will sustain an action.” And at 247: “Coercion is as easily accomplished without threats of violence as with them, and fear of loss of or injury to business unless one submits to demands is as effective as fear of violence to his person. No person has a right to make war on another and to compel others to break off business relations with him to his injury. If an evil motive does not make a lawful act unlawful, it is equally true that what may be regarded as a good motive will not make an unlawful act lawful.” See also Bitzer Motor Co. v. Teamsters, Local 604, 349 Ill App 283, 290, 293, 294, 110 NE2d 674.  A consideration of the above discussed authorities compels us to affirm the decree of the lower court. Presuming that the motive of the appellants here was no other than to publiely proclaim what they believed to be a building code violation, and thereby stop the plaintiff’s business, they were nevertheless properly enjoined. The effect of the picketing was to severely and irreparably prevent the plaintiff from developing its property in the natural course of its business in violation of the public policy of this state. In bringing about this effect the picketing was economically coercive. It is particularly so because the plaintiff’s building conformed to the revised plans approved by the building commissioner. The temporary injunction is further appropriate because the plaintiff would be very likely ruined without it while the appellants and the public suffer no injury economically or otherwise. We direct that the case be returned to the lower court for immediate hearings on the merits. The order for a temporary injunction is affirmed with directions. Affirmed. FRIEND J., concurs. BURKE, P. J., dissenting.

=== CASE 9739798 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:03.278494+00 ===

BURKE, P. J., dissenting: I-t is undisputed that the walls and partitions in a nursing home must have a fire resistance rating of one hour and that they must also he of noncombustible material. The building commissioner gave no consideration whatsoever to the requirement of combustibility or heat resistance and considered only the requirement of fire resistance. The requirements of the ordinance are conjunctive. The material must not only be fire resistant for one hour; it must also be noncombustible. In many types of constructions it may not be essential that both requirements be met, but in nursing homes the City Council has properly provided as a measure of protection for the aged and infirm, that both safety features be considered because of the large number of people occupying these units. To protect the numerous occupants it is not only important that the walls be merely resistant to fire, they must be resistant to heat. It is essential in a crowded building that the walls themselves not burst into flame should a fire get out of control. The requirement of noncombustibility was never considered by the building commissioner. Thus there was no administrative determination to collaterally attack. Moreover, the plaintiff has stipulated for the purposes of this appeal that the wall board which it used will ignite at temperatures below 1200° Fahrenheit, the ordinance minimum. The walls and partitions are combustible. Safety is impaired. The signs carried stated the-truth. As far as the building permit is concerned the defendants made no contentions in their signs with regard to whether or not there is or is not a valid permit. What the defendants have stated in the signs is that the building code is being violated. On that issue the cases make it clear that the existence or nonexistence of a permit is immaterial. As the building code was being violated the commissioner had no authority to permit construction of this type of building with gypsum board. A void administrative action binds no one. In Sinclair Refining Co. v. City of Chicago, 246 Ill App 152, wherein the plaintiff sued to enjoin the City from interfering with the erection of a filling station in Chicago, the plaintiff had previously sought and obtained both a permit from the City to install gasoline tanks and a permit from the Commissioner of Buildings to erect the building. Thereafter the City forbade plaintiff from building his station because of an ordinance prohibiting gas storage tanks within 200 feet of a public school, church or hospital. The court in rejecting the argument that there could be an estoppel based on the two prior permits, said (162): “To hold that merely the acts of an employee could be the basis for such an estoppel as is claimed in the instant case, would be going in the direction of suspending and repealing ordinances without any action on the part of the city council; in other words, making acts of the employees or agents, though beyond the scope of their authority, and known by the parties to be such, the equivalent of legislation;” See also Meltzer v. City of Chicago, 152 Ill App 334. The plaintiff did not construct the building in reliance upon a permit for gypsum wall board, but rather sought ex parte, ex post facto approval after it had violated the building permit calling for plaster. The following cases also hold that a permit in contravention of the city building code is a nullity: J. Burton Co. v. City of Chicago, 236 Ill 383, 86 NE 93; Hibbard, Spencer, Bartlett & Co. v. City of Chicago, 173 Ill 91, 50 NE 256, and People ex rel. Younger v. City of Chicago, 280 Ill 576, 117 NE 779. Although numerous of the criminal and stop order provisions of the ordinances refer to building without a permit, most of them broadly provide penalties for all conduct which fails to conform with the provisions of the code. Plaintiff departed from .the plans. No new permit was ever issued. No new permit could be issued as there had not been removal of material in violation of the code. Bestrictions on collateral attack are part of the doctrine of res judicata which applies only to parties and their privies, but not to strangers. Plaintiff claims that the defendants are strangers to the dispute. Defendants cannot be affeeted by an adjudication of the commissioner in a matter to which they were not parties or privy. See Hedlund v. Miner, 395 Ill 217, 69 NE2d 862. The plaintiff has admitted for the purposes of this appeal that the materials are combustible. The chancellor refused to permit the defendant to present its factual defenses. A charge of violation of the code is made on the placards. The reply filed by the plaintiff states that these signs are false and untrue. Plaintiff has put in issue the charges that the walls and partitions in the nursing home are combustible and that a building code violation exists. Plaintiff interrogated a witness to establish that the charges made on -the signs were untrue. The defendants had a clear right to refute any. charges by direct evidence and by cross-examination of witnesses. Any issue of fact could hav-e been speedily and convincingly resolved by permitting the defendant to bring in his oven and prove before the chancellor that the materials were combustible in violation of the ordinance. It is the law of this state that where it appears that a plaintiff cannot have the ultimate relief he seeks, the application for a preliminary injunction should be denied. Biehn v. Tess, 340 Ill App 140, 91 NE2d 160; Tidd v. General Printing Co., 257 Ill App 596. It is well settled that equity will not enjoin -a libel nor impose an order of restraint on freedom of speech. Montgomery Ward & Co. v. United Retail, Wholesale & Dept. Store Employees of America, C.I.O., 330 Ill App 49, 70 NE2d 75, affd 400 Ill 38, 79 NE2d 46. The Supreme Court there pointed out that there are exceptions to the rule relating to prior restraints on freedom of speech. None of these restraints is applicable to the case at bar. It is undisputed that the picketing has been peaceful. The Montgomery Ward case is the most recent expression of the law of Illinois respecting restraints of freedom of speech. The leading case in the U. S. Supreme Court concerning peaceful picketing is Thornhill v. Alabama, 310 US 88. In that ease the court struck down an Alabama statute that made it unlawful for any person to picket the works or place of business of persons, firms, corporations or associations of persons for the purpose of hindering, delaying or interfering with or injuring any lawful business or enterprise of another. In Thornhill the eourt said that the freedom of speech and of the press guaranteed by the Constitution embraces “at least the liberty to discuss publicly and truthfully all matters of public concern without previous restraint or fear of subsequent punishment.” In A.F. of L. v. Swing, 312 US 321, the court held that the constitutional guarantee of freedom of speech was infringed by an Illinois common law poliey limiting peaceful picketing to cases of a labor controversy between an employer and its own employees. In Hughes v. Superior Court of California, 339 US 460, a Negro group demanded that the store owner hire Negro help in proportion to the Negro trade and, when the demand was refused, the Negroes began picketing the store. The Federal Supreme Court said (p 467) that “California chose to strike at the discrimination inherent in the quota system by means of the equitable remedy of injunction to protect against unwilling submission to such a system,” and that “it is not for this Court to deny to California that choice from among all ‘the various weapons in the armory of the law.’ ” The Federal Court in affirming the decree in the Hughes case decided not to interfere with the carrying out of the public policy of California. The opinion concluded (p 469) that “The injunction here was drawn to meet what California deemed the evil of picketing to bring about proportional hiring. We do not go beyond the circumstances of the case. Generalizations are treacherous in the application of large constitutional concepts.” The Hughes case cannot give any comfort to the plaintiff. All that case did was to affirm the public policy of California against segregation. In the case at bar the injunction violates the public policy of Illinois expressed in well considered opinions, that peaceful picketing when asserting the truth is valid. The court cannot enjoin the telling of the truth. Defendants have a legitimate grievance with the building commissioner for failing to enforce the building code in this instance. They have a separate grievance against the plaintiff who put up the building in violation of the code. They have a right to publicize these grievances in a peaceful and truthful manner. The City Council’s determination that only noncombustible materials may enter into construction of nursing homes merits the concern of all citizens. Any citizen has the right to peacefully manifest that concern. The cases cited by plaintiff relate to picketing for an unlawful purpose. Plaintiff has failed to show an unlawful purpose in the picketing of its building. Plaintiff makes the contention that in .some way liberty of speech and the right of assembly and to petition for a redress of grievances, are geographically limited to the Court House Square because, he says defendant’s sole dispute is with the building commissioner. Were such a proposition correct, there would be very little left of the constitutional freedom of speech and of the right to petition for a redress of grievances. The injunction not only requires the removal of the person or persons with placards, denominated “pickets,” hut it bars defendants from communicating in any way with any person who might become an oeeupant of the home and telling him of the dispute raised by plaintiff’s law suit. Defendant union and the individuals enjoined are actively engaged in the construction industry and in the building trades. Defendants are at the scene of building. Their opportunity to observe violations as shown here are unequalled. Their right to organize to protect effectively the endangering of life and health and the lowering of standards is the right enjoyed by all business, trade and professional groups within our society. Plaintiffs have failed to make out a ease for relief. The injunction shields a law violator from just criticism. Illinois law does not permit a court of chancery to do this. The ease- is not returned to the trial court. The case has been in the trial court and the hearing may proceed when issue is joined. This is an appeal from an interlocutory order. The order granting the injunction should be reversed.

=== CASE 2220982 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:01.752002+00 ===

357 N.W.2d 206 (1984)
218 Neb. 543
STATE of Nebraska, Appellee,
v.
John PISKORSKI, Appellant.
No. 84-158.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
October 26, 1984.
*208 James C. Cripe, Papillion, for appellant.
Paul L. Douglas, Atty. Gen., and Lynne R. Fritz, Lincoln, for appellee.
KRIVOSHA, C.J., and BOSLAUGH, WHITE, HASTINGS, CAPORALE, SHANAHAN, and GRANT, JJ.
KRIVOSHA, Chief Justice.
The appellant, John Piskorski, was convicted by a jury of first degree sexual assault on a child under 16 years of age in violation of Neb.Rev.Stat. § 28-319(1)(c) (Reissue 1979). This offense is a Class II felony, punishable by imprisonment for not less than 1 nor more than 50 years. The trial court sentenced Piskorski to serve an indeterminate term of not less than 2 nor more than 5 years' imprisonment and gave him credit for 128 days previously served in jail awaiting trial and sentence. Piskorski now appeals his conviction to this court, maintaining that the conviction must be set aside because (1) the information charging Piskorski with the crime was fatally defective, (2) the evidence was insufficient to establish a violation of the crime charged, and (3) he was deprived of a fair trial. We have reviewed the record and have concluded that the conviction and sentence should be affirmed.
Piskorski's first assignment of error is based upon his claim that the information was so vague and indefinite that he could not have known the specific nature of the charges against him and could not plead this conviction as a bar to any subsequent prosecution involving the same matter, thereby subjecting him to double jeopardy in violation of both the Constitution of the State of Nebraska and the Constitution of the United States. Specifically, Piskorski cites our decision in Benedict v. State, 166 Neb. 295, 297, 89 N.W.2d 82, 85 (1958), wherein we said: "`An information must inform the accused with reasonable certainty of the charge against him that he may prepare his defense and be enabled to plead the judgment thereon as a bar to a later prosecution for the same offense....'" Although we agree with that statement, we do not believe that the record in this case supports Piskorski's claim that he was not sufficiently informed of the charges or would not be able to plead the judgment in this case as a bar to a later prosecution for the same offense.
The complaint in the county court initially charged that Piskorski violated the laws of the State of Nebraska, in that
[o]n or about December, 1982, at or near 7408 Gertrude, in Sarpy County, *209 Nebraska, the said John Piskorski did then and there subject [name of victim] to sexual penetration and overcame such person by force, threat of force express or implied, coercion or deception, in violation of Section 28-319(1)(a), R.R.S. Nebraska. (Class II Felony)
This complaint, in the language of the statute, advised Piskorski that during a specific period of time he subjected a named individual at a specific location to sexual penetration in violation of a specifically identified statute. Other than being able to specify the exact time and hour, we can conceive of no way in which the complaint could be more specific, other than to recite in detail all of the evidence. This, of course, the State is not required to do. We have frequently held that a complaint or information charging an offense in substantially the words of the statute is generally sufficient. See, State v. John, 213 Neb. 76, 328 N.W.2d 181 (1982); State v. Abraham, 189 Neb. 728, 205 N.W.2d 342 (1973).
The rule first appears to have been announced by this court in Cowan v. State, 140 Neb. 837, 2 N.W.2d 111 (1942), when we specifically addressed the question of whether an information charging the crime in accordance with the language of the statute was sufficient to sustain a conviction. In holding that it was sufficient, we analyzed the history of criminal pleadings and stated:
Constitutional provisions require that a defendant be convicted by due process of law, that he be charged in writing either by indictment or information, and that the accused shall have the right to demand the nature and cause of accusation and to have a copy thereof. This does not mean that detailed particulars of the crime must be stated in the information or indictment in the meticulous manner prescribed by the common law. The trend is in the direction of simplification of statement and the elimination of technical formalities. A proper administration of justice does not require our adherence to outmoded methods or the retention of legal fictions and absurdities. The legislature has the power to determine what constitutes a crime, and when it has performed this function it may likewise determine within constitutional limits what information must be included in the written charge to sufficiently advise the accused of the nature of the offense for which he must answer. Due process of law requires only that the accused be given sufficient notice of the nature of the charge against him in order that he may prepare a defense and plead the judgment as a bar to any subsequent prosecution for the same offense.
Id. at 839, 2 N.W.2d at 113.
We then went on in Cowan to set out the requirements for a sufficient information, saying:
We have come to the conclusion that an indictment or information meets all constitutional requirements (1) if it shows that the acts which defendant is charged with committing amounted to a crime which the court had power to punish, and that it was committed within the territorial jurisdiction of the court, (2) if it informs the defendant of the nature of the charge against him, and (3) if it constitutes a record from which it can be determined whether a subsequent proceeding is barred by the former adjudication. And to the third requirement, it cannot be said that the indictment or information alone must be full protection against double jeopardy, for the reason that in many cases, such as where several acts constitute a single crime, the defendant is often required to allege facts outside the record to support his plea of former adjudication. If the information or indictment apprises the defendant with reasonable certainty of the accusation against him so that he may prepare his defense and plead the judgment as a bar to a subsequent prosecution for the same offense, it meets the fundamental purposes of an information or indictment, as well as constitutional requirements.
Id. at 840, 2 N.W.2d at 113. See, also, State v. Adams, 181 Neb. 75, 147 N.W.2d *210 144 (1966); Sedlacek v. State, 147 Neb. 834, 25 N.W.2d 533 (1946). Certainly, the initial complaint met all of the requirements of law as first announced in Cowan.
On the day after the initial complaint was filed, the State sought leave to file an amended complaint. This motion was unopposed by Piskorski, and the trial court granted the State leave to file the amended complaint. The principal difference between the two complaints was that in the amended complaint the name of the victim was deleted and the State alleged that the crime was committed by subjecting a person of less than 16 years of age to sexual penetration in violation of subsection (1)(c) of § 28-319 rather than (1)(a). In all other respects the two complaints were the same. Piskorski waived a preliminary hearing on the amended complaint and was bound over to the district court to stand trial. Again, we believe that the amended complaint, being in the language of the statute, was sufficient. Furthermore, as we recently observed in State v. John, 213 Neb. 76, 328 N.W.2d 181 (1982), where the defendant pleads to the general issue, defects that might otherwise have been excepted to by a motion to quash are taken to have been waived.
The State then filed an information in the district court for Sarpy County nearly identical to the amended complaint previously filed in the county court, except that the information alleged that the offense had occurred "[o]n or after December 11, 1982 and before December 25, 1982 ...."
On the day set for trial it was discovered that Piskorski had never been formally arraigned. He filed a motion to quash the information for the reason that the information was too vague and was, therefore, defective. The motion to quash was denied, Piskorski was arraigned and entered a plea of not guilty, and the trial commenced.
At the close of its case the State moved to amend the information to conform to the evidence. Over Piskorski's objection, the information was amended to allege that the assault occurred on or after September 1, 1982, and before December 25, 1982, and the name of the child was again inserted in the amended information. This amendment did not make any new or additional charges nor raise matters with which Piskorski was not previously aware. It simply attempted to cause the information to conform to the proof. No one could determine the date of the assault any closer than sometime between September 1, 1982, and December 25, 1982. The fact that the date upon which the crime is alleged to have been committed was expanded to conform to the proof is of no moment. It has long been the rule in this jurisdiction, as in others, that charging an individual with the commission of a crime anytime within the statute of limitations is sufficient. See, Sledge v. State, 142 Neb. 350, 6 N.W.2d 76 (1942); Palin v. State, 38 Neb. 862, 57 N.W. 743 (1894). Further, the reinsertion of the child's name certainly was to Piskorski's benefit and would assist him in later being able to raise this judgment as a bar to any subsequent prosecution for the same offense. The trial court in the instant case simply exercised its discretion in permitting the information to be amended before the verdict to an extent that it neither charged a different offense nor prejudiced the substantial rights of Piskorski. See State v. Gascoigen, 191 Neb. 15, 213 N.W.2d 452 (1973).
Piskorski argues to us, however, that because the State introduced evidence of several occasions between September and December when Piskorski may have violated the statute in question, he has no way of knowing which specific act was involved in this conviction and which one is now barred. We do not believe that to be the case. As we have already indicated, one may go outside the information itself to determine what charge the conviction was based upon in order to raise it as a bar to a subsequent prosecution. See Cowan v. State, 140 Neb. 837, 2 N.W.2d 111 (1942). In State v. Adams, 181 Neb. 75, 79, 147 N.W.2d 144, 149 (1966), we said:
An indictment or information alone need not be full protection against double *211 jeopardy because a defendant may allege and prove facts outside the record in support of a plea of former adjudication. Cowan v. State, supra. The remedy of a bill of particulars is available to assist a defendant in preparing his defense and to protect him against a second prosecution for the same offense. Myers v. United States, 15 F.2d 977 [8th Cir. 1926].
Other jurisdictions addressing this question have reached similar conclusions. See, Hsu v. United States, 392 A.2d 972 (D.C. App.1978); State v. Smith, 102 Idaho 108, 626 P.2d 206 (1981); Russell v. United States, 369 U.S. 749, 82 S. Ct. 1038, 8 L. Ed. 2d 240 (1962); People v. King, 41 Colo. App. 177, 581 P.2d 739 (1978); State v. Roberts, 101 Idaho 199, 610 P.2d 558 (1980).
The instructions to the jury in this case, in particular instruction No. 11, specifically advised the jury that it was only to consider testimony with regard to one specific event testified to by both the minor child and her mother. The court went on further in instruction No. 11 to tell the jury: "You are specifically instructed not to consider the testimony of [the child] as to other sexual acts, for the reasons those alleged acts completely lack any corroboration and the defendant was never identified as the actor therein."
When one reviews the information, the instructions to the jury, and the record in this case, one can be left with no doubt that the act charged, and upon which Piskorski was convicted, was a specific act involving assault on the young child while the mother was present. The record makes it clear that only one such event occurred while the mother was present, although other violations, not charged in this information, may have occurred. Therefore, it would not be difficult to establish which act was involved that resulted in the conviction and is a bar to a subsequent prosecution for the same offense. The information satisfied all of the constitutional requirements, and the trial court was correct in refusing to sustain the motion to quash.
Piskorski's second argument is that the evidence was insufficient to establish the elements of the crime. The facts involving the incident are despicable, and we shall not cause further harm to the child by detailing them here. We must, however, recite a minimum number of facts to explain why the evidence was sufficient to sustain the conviction.
The evidence at trial, as testified to by the mother, established that Piskorski was babysitting while the mother was at work. When the mother returned from work that evening, she had several drinks with Piskorski, and they proceeded to engage in sexual intercourse on the living room floor. The child came downstairs from her bedroom during this act, and Piskorski suggested that she remain with them. The three then engaged in various sexual activities involving touching. The mother testified that while her daughter's clothes were off, the defendant touched the child between the legs with his hands, rubbed her between the legs, and then kissed her between the legs. Piskorski argues that the testimony establishing that he placed his head between the child's legs and kissed her did not prove the elements of the crime. With that argument we cannot agree.
Piskorski concedes that the instructions given by the court to the jury regarding the meaning of "sexual penetration," as defined by Neb.Rev.Stat. § 28-318(5) (Reissue 1979), and the meaning of "cunnilingus" were correct. However, Piskorski argues in his brief that "[a]ssuming he put his head down between the victim's legs in an unspecified place and that he was kissing her in an unspecified place, he cannot be said to have performed cunnilingus on the victim." Brief for Appellant at 18.
Section 28-318(5) defines sexual penetration to include cunnilingus, an act which, as instructed to the jury, includes licking, kissing, sucking, or otherwise fondling the sex organ of the female with the mouth or tongue. By its very definition the act of *212 kissing the sex organ of a female, which is the act of cunnilingus, constitutes sexual penetration within the meaning of § 28-319(1), even though there is not in fact intrusion into the body. In any event, the jury could reasonably reach the conclusion that the statute had been violated, based upon the testimony.
As we observed in State v. Buchanan, 210 Neb. 20, 312 N.W.2d 684 (1981), one accused of a crime may be convicted on the basis of circumstantial evidence if, taken as a whole, the evidence establishes guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. The State is not required to disprove every hypothesis but that of guilt. We further said in State v. Buchanan, supra at 29, 312 N.W.2d at 689:
"It is only where there is a total failure of competent proof in a criminal case to support a material allegation in the information, or where the testimony adduced is of so weak or doubtful a character that a conviction based thereon could not be sustained, that the trial court will be justified in directing a verdict of not guilty."
We believe that a complete examination of the evidence in this case could not support action by the trial court in directing a verdict of not guilty, but, rather, raised questions of fact which were for the jury to determine. Having made that determination, it is not for this court to reverse. See, State v. Morosin, 200 Neb. 62, 262 N.W.2d 194 (1978); State v. Fallis, 205 Neb. 465, 288 N.W.2d 281 (1980). Piskorski's contention that the trial court erred in not directing a verdict of not guilty must be overruled.
Piskorski's final claim is that he was denied a fair trial. His claim is based upon the assertion that the prosecutor was actively involved in coaching the victim on her testimony, in telling her what to say when she testified, and in compelling the mother to relate her "tasteless and baseless tale." This argument is simply without any basis. Because we have concluded that there was sufficient evidence to convict Piskorski, that the information was not defective, and that there was no fault in the testimony of the child, we are unable to, in any manner, ascertain how Piskorski was denied a fair trial. The testimony of the mother was tasteless due to acts of which Piskorski was a party. He is in no position to maintain that the mother's telling of the truth, tasteless as it was, denied him a fair trial. Persons who commit tasteless crimes will be subjected to hearing tasteless testimony in court. That does not constitute denial of a fair trial. Piskorski has simply failed to point out any facts which would support his third assignment of error, and it also must be overruled. For these reasons the conviction and sentence are affirmed.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 9739799 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:06.232938+00 ===

*45Arterburn, J.
— This is an appeal from an action of mandate filed by the appellees, Northwest Indiana Crime Commission, Inc., et al. v. Charles O. Hendricks, Secretary of State of the State of Indiana. The action was brought to mandate the Secretary of State to print, certify and distribute Senate Enrolled Act No. 339 of the 93rd General Assembly of the State of Indiana as a duly enacted law of the state. The lower court granted the relief asked.
The complaint is based upon the theory that the Governor failed to act upon the bill within three (3) days (Sunday excepted) after it was presented to him, as provided in the Constitution, and it therefore became a law without his signature. The authority for this action is based upon State ex rel. Mayr, Secretary of State v. Marion Circuit Court (1931), 202 Ind. 501, 176 N. E. 626.
The bill in general authorizes a change of prosecuting attorney and the appointment of a special prosecuting attorney upon the proof of bias, prejudice, or voluntary inaction of such official when racketeering, professional gambling, corruption, and high crime is found to exist in any county since the citizens are helpless in their attempts to have an active, good-faith prosecution of such alleged crimes. It is said the bill is modeled somewhat after a New York statute enacted for the purposes of effectively prosecuting syndicated gambling and racketeering in that state. Although some claim is made that the constitutional right of a prosecuting attorney to act or refuse to act as he personally pleases with immunity in the local prosecution of crime, we are not impressed with such contentions, since there is as much if not greater reason for a change of prosecuting attorney if prejudice exists, as in the case of a circuit judge who *46is also a constitutional officer. In fact, there is a duty on the court to relieve a prosecuting attorney where he is disqualified by reason of prejudice or hostility towards the state’s interest. State ex rel. Latham v. Spencer C. C. (1963), 244 Ind. 552, 194 N. E. 2d 606.
The Constitution of the State of Indiana provides as follows:
“Every bill which shall have passed the General Assembly, shall be presented to the Governor; if he approve, he shall sign it; but if not, he shall return it, with his objections, to the House in which it shall have originated; which House shall enter the objections, at large upon its journals, and proceed to reconsider the bill. If, after such reconsideration, a majority of all the members elected to that House shall agree to pass the bill, it shall be sent, with the Governor’s objections, to the other House, by which it shall likewise be reconsidered; and, if approved by a majority of all the members elected to that House, it shall be a law. If any bill shall not be returned by the Governor within three days, Sundays excepted, after it shall have been presented to him, it shall be a law, without his signature, unless the general adjournment shall prevent its return; in which case it shall be a law, unless the Governor, within five days next after such adjournment, shall file such bill, with his objections thereto, in the office of Secretary of State; tvho shall lay the same before the General Assembly at its next session, in like manner as if it had been returned by the Governor. But no bill shall be presented to the Governor, within two days next previous to the final adjournment of the General Assembly.” (Our italics) Ind. Const. Art. 5, §14 (1851).
The factual background to which the application of this constitutional amendment is pertinent is as follows:
The 93rd General Assembly passed Senate Enrolled Act No. 339 and the same was presented to the Governor *47of this State on March 9, 1963. This was Saturday. The General Assembly adjourned generally on March 11th. The Governor immediately thereafter called a special session of the legislature to convene the next day, March 12, 1963. The appellees contend that the Governor had three days, not including Sunday, in which to sign the bill (Senate Enrolled Act No. 339), or return it, with his objections, after it was presented to him on March 9, 1963; and that pursuant to the express provisions of Art. 5, §14 of the Indiana Constitution, since the Governor was not prevented from returning it by reason of the special session, it became a law without his signature.1
All the parties hereto have made reference to, cited and reviewed the constitutional history and legislative journals in their briefs and arguments. It seems to us little, if any, light is thrown upon the question here or meaning of this section of the Constitution from that source.2 Likewise, a search of cases from various jurisdictions is not helpful in but very few instances. We find none of them dealing with a special session immediately following a regular session where the constitutional provision is worded exactly as that in Indiana. However, other states have somewhat similar *48constitutional provisions to that of Indiana, particularly Kentucky and New York.
Article I, §7 (2) of the United States Constitution reads as follows:
“Every bill which shall have passed the house of representatives and the senate, shall, before it become a law, be presented to the President of the United States; if he approve he shall sign it, but if not he shall return it, with his objections to that house in which it shall have originated, who shall enter the objections at large on their journal, and proceed to reconsider it. If after such reconsideration two-thirds of that house shall agree to pass the bill, it shall be sent together with the objections, to the other house, by which it shall likewise be considered, and if approved by two-thirds of that house, it shall become a law. But in all such cases the vote of both houses shall be determined by yeas and nays, and the names of the persons voting for and against any bill shall be entered on the journal of each house respectively. If any bill shall not be returned by the President within ten days (Sundays excepted) after it shall have been presented to him, the same shall be a law, in like manner as if he had signed it, unless the congress, by their adjournment, prevent its return, in which case, it shall not be a law.”
In Okanogan, etc., Indian Tribes v. United States (1929), 279 U. S. 655, 49 S. Ct. 463, 73 L. Ed. 894, the United States Supreme Court held a bill passed by congress does not become a law when the President is prevented from returning it to the house from which it originated, by an adjournment terminating the session before the expiration of the ten day calendar period. This case gives quite a considerable discussion of the matter and turns purely, in our opinion, upon the fact of whether or not the congress is in session at the time the ten day period has run and whether or not the President, as a result of congress not being in session, *49is “prevented” from thus returning the bill to the congress. The court stated:
“We think that under the constitutional provision the determinative question in reference to an ‘adjournment’ is not whether it is a final adjournment of Congress or an interim adjournment, such as an adjournment of the first session, but whether it is one that ‘prevents’ the President from returning the bill to the House in which it originated within the time allowed. It is clear, and, as we understand, is not questioned, that since the President may return a bill at any time within the allotted period, he is prevented from returning it, within the meaning of the constitutional provision, if by reason of the adjournment it is impossible for him to return it to the House in which it originated on the last day of that period.” (Our italics) Okanogan, etc., Indian Tribes v. United States, supra, at 680.
The United States Constitution refers only to an “adjournment” (temporary or sine die), while the Indiana Constitution refers specifically to a “general adjournment” (or a sine die adjournment). It follows, therefore, that an interim or temporary adjournment could prevent the return of a bill by the President under the United States Constitution, while only a general adjournment (not a temporary or interim adjournment) must concur under the Indiana Constitution with a preventing factor to avoid the three day period. In other words, interim or temporary adjournments of the General Assembly of Indiana during a session do not affect the three day period (Sundays excepted) within which the Governor must return a bill, if he desires to veto the same.
For cases where state constitutions use the word “adjournment” only, as distinguished from general or sine die adjournment, as in the Indiana Constitution, *50See: State ex rel. Sullivan v. Dammann (1936), 221 Wis. 551, 267 N. W. 433; Wood v. State Administrative Board (1931), 255 Mich. 220, 238 N. W. 16; In Re an Act Concerning Public Utilities (1912), 83 N. J. L. 303, 84 Atl. 706; See Generally, 64 A. L. R. 1450.
It was the same 93rd General Assembly which met in special session following the regular session. The statute provided for the carry-over of all unfinished business from the regular session (Burns’ §34-203). The Governor’s proclamation calling the special session referred to it as the 93rd General Assembly.
The United States Supreme Court also held that the bill must be returned to the same “house” in which it originated, just as the Indiana Constitution so provides, namely: “ ... he shall return it, with his objections to the house in which it shall have originated. ...”
The appellant contends that Art. 5, §14 of the Indiana Constitution means that a general adjournment prevents, in all cases, the return of a bill to the house from which it originated, and the convening of a special session immediately following a general session of the General Assembly (such as occurred in this case before the three day period had expired) nevertheless extends the period to five days within which the Governor, if he desires to exercise a veto, is required to return the bill with his objections, to the office of the Secretary of State, rather than to the General Assembly then in special session. The Secretary of State is then required to send the bill to the house of its origin in the next session of the General Assembly, which would here be the existing special session. If we accept such an interpretation, then the drafters of the Constitution provided a rather circuitous method of doing an act when the General Assembly is in session at the time, *51where it could have been done directly by sending the bill to the house in which it originated, rather than through the office of the Secretary of State.
The appellant would have Art. 5, §14 of the Indiana Constitution interpreted so as to eliminate the word “prevent”. That is to say, appellant would have that portion of the section which reads: “unless the general adjournment shall prevent its return” to read simply: “unless there is a general adjournment”.3
One of the fundamental rules of constitutional construction is that no word shall be assumed to be mere surplusage. It is an essential corrollary that every word must be given a meaning if possible.
In Chadwick, Treasurer v. City of Crawfordsville (1940), 216 Ind. 399, 24 N. E. 2d 937, 129 A. L. R. 469, we said:
“The authorities agree that the words used in the Constitution must be presumed to have been carefully chosen so that each word would have a meaning. It has been said that each word must be thought of as having been deliberately selected and intentionally placed as though it had been ham*52mered into the instrument. Each word therefore must be given effect....”
We may assume that the drafters of the Constitution of 1851 meant what they said. If they had intended to mean that in all cases a general adjournment of the General Assembly shall extend the time to five days within which the Governor may consider a bill and determine to veto it, it would have accordingly drafted the section to say exactly that. The drafters, however, qualified the general adjournment with the use of the word “prevent”, thereby raising the implication that not all “general adjournments” would automatically extend the period from 3 to 5 days within which the Governor could consider a bill submitted to him, but rather assuming thereby that there would or could be situations where a general adjournment occurs, and yet the Governor is not prevented from returning the bill within the three day period. We have such a situation before us now in which the special session immediately following the general adjournment did not prevent the return of the bill within the three day period fixed.
The word “prevent” in the constitutional section considered must be given meaning, and be given a reasonable meaning. The Governor was not prevented from returning the bill to the house of its origin by the general adjournment of the General Assembly, since it was in special session at the end of the three day period and the bill could have been returned “to the house in which it shall have originated.”
The veto power is a restriction upon the legislative branch of the government and is in derogation of the general plan of government for the separation of powers.
This power, therefore, must be strictly construed. 82 *53C. J. S., Statutes, §52; Wood v. State Administrative Board (1931), 255 Mich. 220, 238 N. W. 16.
Senate Enrolled bill 339 was not vetoed by the Governor in accordance with the constitution of this state; hence it became a law without his signature.
Judgment affirmed.
The interpretation of this section of the Constitution being a matter of public importance affecting other legislation, the clerk of this court is directed to certify to the court below immediately this opinion.
Landis, C. J., concurs. Achor, J., concurs with opinion. Myers, J., dissents with opinion. Jackson, J., concurs in dissenting opinion.
. From the briefs and in argument we are reminded that there are other bills whose validity as a statute turn upon the same points by reason of the special session immediately following the regular session of 1963: Senate Enrolled Bill No. 160 (Reapportionment bill), No. 132 (Kerr-Mills bill). No. 1127 (Repealing requirements with reference to bank examiner reports 'to Board of Directors).
. Reference is made to the fact that the Senate Journal shows that Senate Enrolled Bill 160 was returned to the Secretary of State and then to the Senate for reconsideration upon the theory that the Governor vetoed the same, and that by one vote the Governor’s action had been sustained. This one example can not be accepted as a custom or practice, particularly in view of the fact that the three other bills similarly involved in the question here were never resubmitted to the Senate,
. The Hawaiian case [Haw’n Airlines v. Pub. Ut. Com. T.H. (1959), 43 Haw. 216] turns upon this very point. The first paragraph of Section 51 of the organic act plainly says that a bill must be signed or vetoed by the Governor within ten days after it is delivered to him “unless the legislature adjourns sine die prior to the expiration of such ten days.” For that reason a second paragraph using somewhat similar language to that in the Indiana Constitution was interpreted in the light of the above statement. The phraseology therefore of the entire section was not similar to that in the Indiana Constitution. The second reason why that case does not support the appellants here is that the Hawaiian court concluded that upon a sine die adjournment, unfinished business of the regular section was not transferred to the calendar of the succeeding special session. In Indiana the contrary exists. It was the same 93rd General Assembly that met in special session. This is also supported by specific legislation to that effect. Burns’ §34-203. (1949 Repl.).

=== CASE 9739800 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:06.237597+00 ===

Concurring Opinion
Achor, J.
— There are several aspects of this case which, in my opinion, should receive further consideration.
Numerous cases have been cited from other courts as providing controlling precedent for the case before us. However, it is to be noted that the pertinent provisions in the Indiana Constitution and in the Constitution of the United States [and in most jurisdictions which follow the U. S. Constitution] are clearly distinguishable, and, therefore, the cases decided under the latter constitutional provision are not controlling of the case now before us.
The respective constitutional provisions are set out in the majority opinion and are, therefore, not here repeated.
The Constitution of Hawaii follows very closely the provision of the United States Constitution. The distinguishing feature was noted in the case of Haw’n *54Airlines v. Pub. Ut. Com., T. H. (1959), 43 Hawaii 216, at p. 219, in the following statement:
“ . . . Nowhere in the Organic Act is there an indication that the right of the legislature to consider the governor’s objections, once lost by a sine die adjournment of the regular session, may be revived by the convening of a special session.” [My italics.)
Thus, under the United States Constitution, and other constitutions similar thereto, it necessarily follows that the general [sine die] adjournment operated to effect an end of the whole matter. Stated otherwise, since the Organic Law of such jurisdictions contain no provision that, after a general adjournment, any bill vetoed by the Chief Executive may be presented to another session of the Legislature, it necessarily follows that such a general adjournment of one session of the Legislature operates as a matter of law to “prevent” and render “impossible” the transmitting of any bills by the Chief Executive to another session of the Legislature. It is for this reason that the United States Supreme Court properly held in the case of Okanogan, etc., Indian Tribes v. United States (1929), 279 U. S. 655, 681, 49 S. Ct. 463, 467, 73 L. Ed. 894, 898, that:
“ . . . [S]ince the President may return a bill at any time within the allotted period, he is prevented from returning it, within the meaning of the constitutional provision, if by reason of the adjournment it is impossible for him to return it to the House in which it originated on the last day of that period.”
However, the Indiana Constitution contains express and explicit provision that [except as to bills sent to the Governor during the last two days of the .session] all bills passed by the Legislature and presented to.the *55Governor but not signed by him must be returned to the Legislature for reconsideration. Because the Indiana Constitution is unique in this respect, the cases cited and relied upon by the appellant from other jurisdictions are of little or no assistance in deciding the question before us.
We therefore proceed to give consideration to the construction of the constitutional provision without the benefit of judicial reasoning or precedent, since the unique provision of our constitution has not previously been considered by this court. In doing so, we are urged first to give consideration to the contention that the Legislature, by its own action, has demonstrated an intention to construe the constitutional provision, so as to provide that the Governor is not required to return a bill vetoed by him to a subsequent session of the Legislature, in event such session is in progress on the third day following the delivery of the bill to him, but that he may wait until the fifth day and transmit such bill to the Secretary of State, which was the practice followed in this instance.
In considering appellant’s contention, there are two further facts which bear upon the matter. First, no instance has -been cited prior to the instant case, where a special session of the Legislature immediately succeeded a prior session after a general adjournment and bills passed by the prior session not signed by the Governor could have been, but were not, transmitted by the Governor to such special session of the Legislature. Secondly, although the conduct of the Legislature may be indicative of the legislative intention, regarding the acts of the Legislature, itself, such conduct is not controlling as to the construction which must be placed upon the Organic Law itself. Upon this subject, this court in the case of Tucker et al. v. State of In*56diana (1941), 218 Ind. 614, 676, 35 N. E. 2d 270, stated:
“ . . . But the Legislature did not enact the Constitution, and a legislative intention as to how the Constitution is to operate is of little value in determining the intention of the drafters of the Constitution, especially where the legislative interpretation involves the usurpation of powers which the Constitution vests in the other departments of government....”
In construing the provision of our constitution, we must look to the express language of the provision, itself; and, if there is any ambiguity as to what is a proper construction of the provision, we must then consider the provision as it is related to other provisions within the constitution, and the intention of the framers of the constitution, as indicated by the history of the development of the particular provision.
The pertinent part of the constitutional provision, which we must here consider, is as follows:
“Every bill which shall have passed the General Assembly, shall be presented to the Governor; if he approve, he shall sign it; but if not, he shall return it, with his objections, to the House in which it shall have originated;... if approved by a majority of all members elected to that House, it shall be a law. If any bill shall not be returned by the Governor within three days, Sundays excepted, after it shall have been presented to him it shall be a law, without his signature, unless the general adjournment shall prevent its return; in which case it shall be a law unless the Governor, within five days next after such adjournment, shall file such bill, with his objections thereto, in the office of Secretary of State; who shall lay the same before the General Assembly at its next session, in like manner as if it had been returned by the Governor. But no bill shall be presented to the Governor, within two days next previous to the final adjourn*57ment of the General Assembly.” Art. 5, §14, Indiana Constitution.
It is to be noted that the second sentence of the above quoted provision prescribes the procedure which must be followed, with respect to a bill, in event it is vetoed by the Governor and not returned to the Legislature before adjournment. It is this sentence which we must construe. It is in three separate clauses. The first clause provides that “If any bill shall not be returned by the Governor within three days, Sundays excepted, after it shall have been presented to him it shall be a law, without his signature, unless the general adjournment shall prevent its return.” In this case, by reason of the special session of the Legislature having been called upon the third day after the bill had been presented to the Governor, under the clear, cold and unqualified language of the provision the general adjournment of the 93rd session of the Legislature did not prevent the Governor from returning the bill to the Senate [the House in which it originated] on that date.
However, it is asserted that the second and third clauses of the provision demonstrates a constitutional intention to restrict the procedure by which a bill is transmitted to a subsequent session of the Legislature to the procedure therein contained. As above stated, this provision states, “unless the Governor, within five days next after such adjournment, shall file such bill, with his objections thereto, in the office of Secretary of State; who shall lay the same before the General Assembly at its next session, in like manner as if it had been returned by the Governor.” [My emphasis.] It occurs to me that these two clauses do not necessarily demonstrate the constitutional intention asserted by the appellants. For example, what is the meaning *58of the term “such bill,” as used in the above provision ? Reasonably, it would mean the bill, as described and qualified in the previous clause of the same sentence. Thus, it could only reasonably mean a bill which could not be returned to the House of its origin, with the objections of the governor thereto, within three days of its receipt by him. As explained above, the bill with which we are here concerned was not such a bill, since the bill could have been returned to the House of its origin within the prescribed three day period. Furthermore, the last clause of the sentence provides that [the Secretary of State] “who shall lay the same before the General Assembly at its next session, in like manner as if it had been returned by the Governor.” The phrase “in like manner as if it had been returned by the Governor,” carries a clear implication that, under other provisions within the procedure prescribed in the same sentence, it is intended that the Governor may lay bills before the General Assembly at its next session. Otherwise, this aspect of the directive to the Secretary of State has little or no meaning within the sentence in which it is cast. Thus, the second and third clauses of the sentence support the clear and unequated provision contained in the first clause thereof, which provides that unless a general adjournment of the Legislature shall prevent the return of a bill by the Governor to the House in which it originated upon the third day after it is presented to him, it shall be a law without his signature.
However, assuming arguendo that there is ambiguity ’as to the construction of the above provision, we must consider this ambiguity liberally in favor of the Legislature and strictly against the Executive. In this case, the rule of construction is grounded upon two facts. *59First, we are dealing with a legislative enactment under a constitution which provides:
“The Legislative authority of the State shall be vested in the General Assembly, which shall consist of a Senate and a House of Representatives. ...” Art. 4, §1, Indiana Constitution.
Since the Indiana Constitution provision granting veto power of the Governor has been transferred from the Legislative branch of the government to the Executive branch of our government, it is merely a limitation on the power fundamentally vested in the Legislature. Such limitation should therefore be exercised only as it is expressed in clear and unambiguous terms within the constitutional provision, itself.
Furthermore, if we are to construe the constitutional provision, it is proper that we give consideration to the history of the particular constitutional provision. Without resorting to a belaboring discussion of the issue, it is to be noted that there is a clear and progressive intention to restrict the veto power of the Chief Executive. Briefly, this intention is demonstrated by the changes in the provision, as it originally appeared in the United States Constitution, and has subsequently been modified by the Constitutional Conventions of Kentucky, the Indiana Constitutional Convention of 1816, and, finally, to its present form and status, as stated by the Indiana Constitutional Convention of 1851.
It is significant that the veto power of the President was, by the Constitution of the United States, cast within the Legislative branch of the government itself. It was provided that the President have ten days in which to exercise his power of veto, which veto could only be overwritten by two-thirds of the majority of both Houses of Congress. He could pocket veto any bill pre*60sented to him within ten days of the general adjournment of the Congress and, in event of his veto of. a bill, he had no obligation whatsoever to refer the bill to any subsequent session of the Congress.
The -President’s broad powers of veto, which, by the Constitution, were cast within the Legislative branch of the government itself, are in marked contrast with the greatly restricted veto power of the Governor under .our present constitution. First, it is to be noted that the veto power of the Governor is removed from the Legislative branch of government and cast with the executive branch. The Governor is required to return a bill which he does not sign within three days instead of ten. To override his veto, it is necessary that the bill pass each House of the Legislature by a mere majority, and, furthermore, any bill which is presented to the Governor [except within the last two days of the session] must be returned to the next session of the Legislature for its action, notwithstanding the general adjournment thereof.

=== CASE 9739801 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:06.241466+00 ===

Dissenting Opinion
Myers, J.
— I disagree with the majority opinion for the reason that it has completely misinterpreted the plain meaning of the Indiana Constitution and fallen into a murky morass of semantics which has utterly twisted the true interpretation of certain sections thereof. It is agreed that Section 14 of Article 5 is the principal and most important part of the Indiana Constitution to be interpreted herein. We need not repeat it as it has been set forth in full in the majority opinion. It proceeds to spell out exactly what happens when the Governor receives a bill passed by the General Assembly. During the session he may do one of three things: he may sign it, in which case it becomes a *61law according to its terms; he may not sign it, in which case, after the passage of three days, Sundays excepted, it becomes the law without his signature; or he may return it, with objections, within three days after receiving it, to the House in which it originated for new action to be taken thereon. There is a special provision wherein, if the General Assembly adjourns before he can exercise his right to return it with objections during the three-day period and thereby prevents such return, it gives him five days after adjournment to file the bill with the Secretary of State, together with his objections thereto, who must present it to the next session “as if it had been returned by the Governor.” If no action is taken by the Governor during the passage of these five days, the bill automatically becomes law.
Here the bill was presented to the Governor on the 59th day of the General Assembly’s regular session. It went into general adjournment two days later. The Governor did not have the full three days within which to return it to the House from whence it came with his objections. He thereupon presented it with his objections on the fourth day (after the adjournment) to the Secretary of State. It is claimed that, since on the third day after he received the bill he had called a special session, he could have returned the bill with his objections to the Senate on the third day since the Senate was in session at that time. The trial court upheld this viewpoint and entered judgment overruling a demurrer to the complaint which has the effect of declaring the Special Prosecutors’ Bill to be law. The majority of this court has listened to and upheld the very enticing but erroneous arguments presented in masterful fashion by appellees.
*62The fact is overlooked that the Constitution of Indiana clearly separates a regular session of the General Assembly from a special session. The two cannot be merged although they both may be termed, as here, the 93rd General Assembly. Section 9 of Article 4 of the Indiana Constitution states that the “sessions” of the General Assembly shall be held biennially, or if, in the opinion of the Governor, the public welfare shall require it, he may, by proclamation, call a “special session.” Section 29, Article 4, declares that no “session” of the General Assembly (except the first one, under the 1851 Constitution) shall extend beyond the term of sixty-one days, and no “special session” beyond the term of forty days. This means that our regular biennial session of the General Assembly is strictly limited in point of time. When that time is up, it is finished and can never be reconvened as a “session.” Section 14 of Article 5 refers to “general adjournment” and “final adjournment” of the General Assembly. Such terms usually mean adjournment sine die. Black’s Law Dictionary, Fourth Edition, page 63. After such adjournment, that session has passed away forever. Of course, the Governor may call a special session within minutes of the general adjournment of the regular session, but it is a new, unusual and extraordinary session. See Black’s Law Dictionary, Fourth Edition, page 1569, for interpretation of “session.”
As Section 14, Article 5, says, if a bill shall not be returned by the Governor within three days, Sundays excepted, it shall become a law “unless the general adjournment shall prevent its return,” et cetera.
Appellees point out in their brief that this phrase is very similar to one used in the United States Constitution, which is as follows:
*63“If any bill shall not be returned by the President within ten days (Sundays excepted) after it shall have been presented to him, the same shall be a law, in like manner as if he had signed it, unless the congress, by their adjournment, prevent its return, in which case, it shall not be a law.” (Our emphasis.) Section 7 [2], Article 1, United States Constitution.
Appellees, as well as this court, cite the case of Okanogan, etc., Indian Tribes v. United States (1929), 279 U. S. 655, 681, 49 S. Ct. 463, 467, 73 L. Ed. 894, 898, in which the court stated:
“ . . . since the President may return a bill at any time within the allotted period, he is prevented from returning it, within the meaning of the constitutional provision, if by reason of the adjournment it is impossible for him to return it to the House in which it originated on the last day of that period.”
Appellees urgently urge that this court make a similar interpretation concerning the underscored phrase as to make the word “prevent” mean that it is “impossible.”
The General Assembly entitles its actions as “Laws of the State of Indiana Passed at the Special Session of the 93rd General Assembly Begun on the Twelfth Day of March A.D. 1963.” In Chapter 25, Section 3, Page 51, Acts 1963 (Spec. Sess.), the act also refers to the expiration of any “regular session.” Chapter 27 of such Acts provides for expenses of such members, referring to them as members of the “Special Session of the Ninety-third General Assembly.”
The plain interpretation of the word “prevent” follows exactly what appellees urge, that it is impossible to return a' bill to the regular session of the General Assembly if a final adjournment has taken place. It can *64only be done by means of the Secretary of State at a new and future session. The Governor’s procedure in this case was correct. It made no difference that some of the five days granted to him after adjournment overlapped some of the days of the new special session. We think the case of Haw’n Airlines v. Pub. Ut. Com., T. H. (1959), 43 Haw. 216, 219, 220, 221, is authority for this. In that case, under a somewhat similar state of facts as the one at bar, the court said as follows:
“ ‘It follows from what has been said that only an adjournment sine die can prevent the return of a bill, and this is the only kind of adjournment referred to in section 34 of the Organic Act.’...
“But a special session is not a continuation of the regular session. It is a new session, like a Congressional session convened by the President on extraordinary occasion, of which it is stated in Jefferson’s Manual, section LI, as follows: ‘The Constitution authorizes the President “on extraordinary occasions, to convene both Houses, or either of them.” Constitution, 1, 3. If convened by the President’s proclamation, this must begin- a new session, and of course determine the preceding one to have been a session.’ ”
The clear meaning of the word “prevent” in this section of the Constitution is to “prohibit” or “forbid by law.” After the general adjournment it was “impossible,” to use appellees’ expression, for him to have returned the bill to the Senate because the Senate of the regular session of the 93rd General Assembly had ceased to exist, even though there was a Senate in existence under the new special session. The record does show that the Secretary of State did return the bill to the special session as required by law.
The judgment of the trial court herein should be re*65versed and the cause remanded, with directions to sustain the demurrer of appellant to the complaint.
Jackson, J., concurs in dissent.
Note. — Reported in 196 N. E. 2d 66.

=== CASE 9739802 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:09.790163+00 ===

Per Curiam.
Claimant, Stanley Razmus, appeals as of right a circuit court order affirming a decision of the Michigan Employment Security Commission Board of Review disqualifying him from eligibility for unemployment benefits pursuant to MCL 421.29(l)(b); MSA 17.531(l)(b) because of misconduct. We reverse.
Razmus was terminated from employment with Kirkhof Transformer on April 7, 1981. He was discharged in accordance with a collective-bargaining agreement in effect between his union and Kirkhof after he committed his third "Group II” violation of shop rules. The Group II violations which justified his discharge included two violations of wasting time and loitering on company property and one violation of safety rules.
A hearing was held before a referee to review the decision of the MESC disqualifying Razmus from eligibility for unemployment benefits. Testimony was taken at the hearing before the referee regarding the circumstances surrounding the violations.
*314The first violation occurred on January 17, 1981. Razmus testified that he had just finished doing some welding and was waiting for the lead to cool. While he was waiting, he went to the cafeteria to buy a pack of cigarettes, get his lunch, and bring it back to his work area. While walking back to the work area, the foreman came up to him and wrote him up for wasting time and loitering. Razmus claimed that his going to get cigarettes did not interfere with his job and that other employees similarly left to get cigarettes.
On January 22, 1981, the foreman reprimanded and wrote up Razmus for not wearing his safety glasses. Razmus admitted that he knew safety glasses were required, but claimed that he only took off the glasses for a short time because they kept slipping off. There was testimony that other employees did not always wear safety glasses.
The third violation occurred on April 7, 1981. Razmus had finished welding and, while waiting for the lead to cool, he went out to his car to get some cigarettes and to check on the car’s battery because he had had problems with it earlier in the day. Razmus claimed that before going outside he looked for his foreman to obtain permission, but couldn’t find him. Razmus was absent from his work station for 20 to 25 minutes.
The chief union steward testified that a grievance was filed against the company for acting maliciously in discharging Razmus. He claimed that, although it was against company rules, other employees went to the cafeteria during work time. He felt that Razmus was being singled out by the employer.
The hearing referee determined that the three violations amounted to misconduct within the meaning of MCL 421.29(l)(b); MSA 17.531(l)(b). *315The decision was affirmed by the MESC Board of Review and the circuit court. On appeal from decisions of the MESC Board of Review, this Court may review questions of law or fact, but will reverse only if the board’s decision is contrary to law or unsupported by competent, material, and substantial evidence on the record, MCL 421.38[1]; MSA 17.540[1]. Chrysler Corp v Sellers, 105 Mich App 715; 307 NW2d 708 (1981). In the instant case, where there is no dispute as to the underlying facts, this Court must decide whether Razmus’ actions were, as a matter of law, misconduct within the meaning of MCL 421.29(l)(b); MSA 17.531(l)(b).
The Michigan Supreme Court has defined the type of misconduct sufficient to disqualify an employee from receiving unemployment benefits.
" 'The term misconduct * * * is limited to conduct evincing such wilful or wanton disregard of an employer’s interests as is found in deliberate violations or disregard of standards of behavior which the employer has the right to expect of his employee, or in carelessness or negligence of such degree or recurrence as to manifest equal culpability, wrongful intent or evil design, or to show an intentional and substantial disregard of the employer’s interests or of the employee’s duties and obligations to his employer. On the other hand mere inefficiency, unsatisfactory conduct, failure in good performance as the result of inability or incapacity, inadvertencies or ordinary negligence in isolated instances, or good-faith errors in judgment or discretion are not to be deemed "misconduct” within the meaning of the statute.’ ” Carter v Employment Security Comm, 364 Mich 538, 541; 111 NW2d 817 (1961), quoting from Boynton Cab Co v Neubeck, 237 Wis 249, 259-260; 296 NW 636 (1941).
In his decision, the referee noted that Razmus’ violations were arguably "minute”, but stressed *316that the rules were part of the collective-bargaining agreement. The violation of an employer’s rules or a provision of the collective-bargaining agreement is not, per se, misconduct within the meaning of the statute. Linski v Employment Security Comm, 358 Mich 239; 99 NW2d 582 (1959); Jones v Employment Security Comm, 4 Mich App 300; 144 NW2d 795 (1966).
In Linski, supra, the Supreme Court held that an employee’s participation in a strike prohibited by the collective-bargaining agreement did not evince an "intentional and substantial disregard of the employer’s interests”. In Jenkins v Employment Security Comm, 364 Mich 379; 110 NW2d 899 (1961), an employee was discharged because he left early on Christmas eve after he was refused permission to do so. The Supreme Court stated that the elements of misconduct were clearly not present. On the other hand, an employee’s continual violations of an employer’s rules may amount to a substantial disregard of the employer’s interests. Booker v Employment Security Comm, 369 Mich 547; 120 NW2d 169 (1963).
We hold that the three violations which were the basis for Razmus’ discharge do not constitute "misconduct” within the meaning of MCL 421.29(l)(b); MSA 17.531(l)(b). Razmus’ actions do not suggest an intentional and substantial disregard of his employer’s interests or of his duties and obligations to his employer.
The safety violation, if anything, evinces an intent to further his employer’s interest. Razmus removed his safety glasses because they kept falling off and interfering with his helping a new employee.
Razmus’ first violation occurred when he left for only a few minutes to get a pack of cigarettes from *317the cafeteria. The third violation occurred when he left for 20 to 25 minutes to check on the battery in his car. On both occasions, Razmus left his work station only after he had finished welding and was waiting for the lead to cool. Two other employees verified Razmus’ assertion that other employees sometimes temporarily left their work station to go to the cafeteria.
The purpose of the Michigan Employment Security Act is to alleviate the distress of unemployment. Linski, supra, p 245. Razmus’ violations may have justified his discharge under the collective-bargaining agreement, but they do not constitute misconduct such as is necessary to justify the denial of unemployment compensation benefits. Such a denial would serve only to impose a sanction unwarranted by precedent or public policy.
Reversed and remanded to circuit court for remand by it to the board of review and disposition there in accord with this opinion.

=== CASE 9739804 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:10.091922+00 ===

Achor, J.
— This is an appeal for temporary injunction issued by the Circuit Court of Marion County which prohibited the appellant from “doing any and all acts to carry out the project set forth in Improvement Resolution No. 17988 of the Board of Public Works of the City of Indianapolis.” In said Resolution, as modified, appellant undertook to take certain of appellees’ property by eminent domain, pursuant to Acts 1933, ch. 15, §1, et seq., p. 37, being §§48-2101 — 48-2124, inch, Burns’ 1963 Repl., described as the “ ‘Eminent Domain Act for First Class Cities.’ ” [§48-2102, Burns’ 1963 Repl.]
The sole question which must be decided in this action is whether the Circuit Court of Marion County *631had jurisdiction over this particular subject-matter. The answer to this question in turn rests upon a determination as to whether appellees’ exclusive remedy is that prescribed by the special statute [§48-2101, et seq., supra] under which the condemnation proceedings were instituted by the appellant, or whether, because of errors committed by appellant in such proceedings, the proceedings for review therein provided are inadequate to protect appellees’ constitutional rights and, therefore, that appellees having no adequate remedy at law are entitled to the equitable relief herein granted by the trial court.
The sequence of events which occurred prior to the filing of appellees’ complaint for injunction against the appellant, is stated by appellant substantially as follows:
Prior to November 14, 1961, the Standard Oil Company (The American Oil Company) was the owner of the real estate involved in this litigation. On November 28, 1961, a deed was recorded from American Oil Company to Roselyn Bakeries, Inc. A quit claim deed was recorded from Roselyn Bakeries, Inc. to John Clark, Inc., and a lease was recorded from John Clark, Inc. to Roselyn Bakeries, Inc., as lessee.
On December 14, 1961, the Board of Public Works of the City of Indianapolis adopted its Improvement Resolution No. 17988 providing for the condemning of a portion of the said real estate for the purpose of widening the intersection of Michigan Street and Tibbs Avenue, and set a first hearing on said Resolution for January 18, 1962, all pursuant to §48-2101, et seq., supra,.
On January 2, 1962, notice was sent to the Standard Oil Company of the proposed hearing for January 18, 1962.
*632Appellees received the notice of the hearing for January 18, 1962, from the Standard Oil Company and appeared in person and filed a written remonstrance to the taking at said hearing.
On January' 18, 1962, the Board of Public Works confirmed the said Resolution, as amended, taking the Southeast triangular corner from the subject real estate, containing approximately 1/15 of an acre, and ordered a primary assessment roll prepared awarding damages jointly to Roselyn Bakeries, Inc., and John Clark, Inc., in the sum of $6,082.40, and appellees were advised that they would be notified of the time and date of the hearing as to said damages.
On February 1, 1962, the Board approved the primary assessment roll and ordered the same advertised for hearing on the final roll for March 8, 1962.
On February 20, a defective notice of a public hearing on March 8, 1962, was mailed to John Clark, Inc. addressed to the wrong address. However, on February 21, 1962, the attorney for both appellees appeared and requested a postponement of the final hearing on the assessment roll. On March 8, 1962, and pursuant to said request, the hearing was postponed to March 22, 1962.
On March 22, 1962, the Board held its “final hearing” on the said assessment roll and both appellees were present by their attorney, by their corporate officers, and by their appraiser, and both appellees submitted evidence as to the amount of damages incurred by them. At this hearing, the Board adopted a resolution confirming a final roll of damages to John Clark, Inc. and Roselyn Bakeries, Inc. jointly in the amount of $6,082.40. However, the record book of the Board of Public Works which contained the final assessment *633roll and bore the stamp and signatures of the members of the Board, recited that damages were awarded solely to John Clark, Inc. Neither appellee filed a remonstrance as to the finding and decision of the Board made and entered pursuant to said hearing, and neither filed an appeal to the Circuit or Superior Courts from said action of the Board.
■ However, on April 6, 1962, both appellees filed their “Petition for Supplementary Proceedings” to set aside the final assessment roll and to reconsider and reopen the award of damages and to correct errors, irregularities, ommissions and other defects in the proceedings, and, on April 12, 1962, the Board ordered the same set for hearing on April 26, 1962.
' ,.,On April 26, 1962, said Supplemental Petition was submitted to the Board and considered by it. The appellees were represented by their attorney and corporate officers. Upon the conclusion of said hearing, a motion was made and seconded for the adoption of a resolution to correct the errors complained of by the appellees and to “reconfirm” the damages to John Clark, Inc. and Roselyn Bakeries, Inc. jointly, in the sum of $6,082.40. However, action on the motion was deferred until a meeting called for May 3, 1962, and the attorney for the appellees was not notified of the meeting and provided copies of the proposed resolution, to be acted upon at said meeting.
On May 3, 1962, after a further discussion of the motion at said hearing, the Board unanimously adopted a' resolution correcting the defects of which the appellees were complaining, and reconfirming .the award of damages to both appellees. The resolution further stipulated that damages had been awarded jointly to both appellees by the minutes of the Board *634even though the assessment roll, before amendment, did not so state, and that the real estate involved was properly described in the records and there was no confusion over the identity of the subject real estate even though it had been improperly described in one notice of hearing.
No remonstrance was filed to the proceedings of May 3, 1962, nor was any appeal taken therefrom to the Circuit or Superior Courts of Marion County. Instead, the appellees filed their complaint for injunction against the alleged wrongful taking of real property. It is from the granting of a temporary injunction on this complaint that the appellant is appealing.
It is appellant’s position that although there were procedural errors and deficiencies in said proceedings, the appellees were not thereby deprived of any rights because they appeared at every hearing, filed the contemplated remonstrances and presented evidence at every hearing and made no objection to such defects in the proceedings until after the purported final award of damages as determined on March 22, 1962. Therefore, appellant contends that all procedural deficiencies which appellees asserted in their “Supplementary Petition” of April 6, 1962, and of which they now complain, were by them waived. In this we concur.
However, even though appellees, by their appearance and voluntary participation in all aspects of the proceedings, have waived all the many proeedural deficiencies therein, the trial court, and this court on appeal, is presented with the problem as to whether, under the statute and circumstances of this case, the appellees are afforded their constitutional right to a judicial review of a final determination of the condemnation proceedings by the Board.
*635If appellees were, under the statute which created a new substantive right, also afforded procedure for the judicial review of a final finding and determination of these proceedings by the Board, then it follows that they were restricted to the procedure therein provided for such review. State ex rel. Public Serv. Comm. v. Marion C. C. (1961), 242 Ind. 145, 177 N. E. 2d 397; Pub. Ser. Comm. et al., v. City of Indianapolis (1956), 235 Ind. 70, 131 N. E. 2d 308; Ballman v. Duffecy (1952), 230 Ind. 220, 102 N. E. 2d 646; 1 I. L. E. §62, p. 191. However, if appellees were denied an opportunity for such judicial review, then they were justified in resorting to the present collateral suit in equity to secure themselves in their constitutional right not to have their property taken without just compensation. McAfee v. Reynolds (1891), 130 Ind. 33, 28 N. E. 423; Fesler, Auditor v. Bosson (1920), 189 Ind. 484, 128 N. E. 145; 19 Am. Jur. §100, p. 108.
Several factors must be considered in resolving this problem.
One: As previously noted, although the Board found in its Resolution of March 22, 1962, that Roselyn Bakeries, Inc. owned an interest in the property jointly with appellee John Clark, Inc., and that both corporations were entitled to damages for such taking, the assessment roll awarding such damages, entered of record and signed by the Board, did not include Roselyn Bakeries, Inc.1 The statute bearing upon this situation provides:
*636“The board shall render its final decision as to all assessments and awards to conform to its findings in any respects as aforesaid, and shall compíete said rolls showing the apportionment and the total amount of special benefits and awards of damages opposite each name and description of each piece of property on said roll. When so completed, said assessment and damage roll, or rolls, shall be delivered forthwith to the department of finance.” §48-2109, at page 228, Burns’ 1963 Repl.
The Board, like a court, speaks by its record. Obviously, the record of the Board did not constitute a final decision as to all persons for whom, in the finding of the Board, it was determined that an assessment of damages be awarded, as prescribed by the statute. It did not, therefore, constitute a “final decision” as to the assessment roll from which appellees were obliged to appeal, any more than would be true of a judgment in a court of law from which there could have been no appeal, since the decision did not finally dispose of all the issues as to all of the necessary parties in the case. See: West’s I. L. E., Appeals, §§25 and 26.
Two: The statute provides the procedure whereby errors of this specific character may be corrected, by the filing of a supplementary proceedings. §48-2117, supra. The appellees filed a petition for such proceeding. The action taken by the Board pursuant to the petition for supplementary proceedings, filed by appellees on April 6, 1962, was the first and only complete and “final decision” in the proceedings as to both the appellees, from which an appeal to a court could be taken.
We are aware that §48-2117, supra, contains the unique provision that if such proceedings are initiated *637by the Board any petitioner or party to the proceedings may appeal from the action in the manner prescribed by the statute, but it further provides that if the proceedings are initiated by a party seeking similar relief the action of the Board “shall be final and conclusive on such petitioners and no appeal shall lie therefrom.”2
Appellees rely upon this prohibition in the statute, which purports to deny appellees the right of appeal, as supporting their contention that they have no adequate remedy at law and are, therefore, entitled to the equitable relief which they seek in this action for injunction. However, the provision of the statute which would grant the Board, but deny the appellees, as petitioners, the right of appeal, is unconstitutional since it would deny the appellees the right to judicial review and appeal from the first and only final decision of the Board. Slentz, et al. v. City of Fort Wayne, et al. (1954), 233 Ind. 226, 118 N. E. 2d 484; Indianapolis Life Ins. Co. v. Lundquist (1944), 222 Ind. 359, 53 N. E. 2d 338; Warren v. Indiana Telephone Co. (1940), 217 Ind. 93, 26 N. E. 2d 399.
*638Based upon the matters above considered, we conclude that the statuté [§48-2117, supra] must be considered as though the unconstitutional provision “but its action thereon shall be final and conclusive on '.such petitioners and no appeal shall lie therefrom,” were deleted.3 However, the deletion of the above quoted provision does not operate to leave the appellees without specified procedure for judicial review within the purview of the act itself. Where the provisions of an act are severable, so that one provision which is declared unconstitutional can be deleted without destroying the general purpose or effectiveness of the act, the remaining portions will be upheld as valid. W. A. Barber Grocery Co. v. Fleming (1950), 229 Ind. 140, 96 N. E. 2d 108; Perry Tp. v. Indianapolis Power & Light Co. (1946), 224 Ind. 59, 64 N. E. 2d 296; Ettinger v. Studevent; Hole v. Dice (1942), 219 Ind. 406, 38 N. E. 2d 1000; 82 C. J. S., §94, p. 161. After the deletion of said illegal provision, the reasonable construction of the statute would necessarily contemplate that the otherwise applicable provision regarding appeal would be effective, namely, that:
“. .. . [R] emonstrance in writing must be filed with the board within five. .[5] days after the date of its decision is duly made in such supplementary proceedings and that such appeal must be filed and perfected in court within twenty [20] days after the date of the board’s decision upon' such remonstrance. . . [§48-2117.]
*639■ We conclude, therefore, that, under the uncontroverted facts in the case, the appellees have waived , all issues in the case except as to the amount of damages assessed and awarded for their property, and that they have an adequate and prescribed procedure at law for obtaining a judicial review of that issue. And, having reached this conclusion, we further conclude that the trial court is without jurisdiction, by either a temporary or permanent injunction to collaterally attack the condemnation proceedings which are the subject of this controversy.
For the reasons herein stated, the trial court is orderéd to sustain appellant’s motion to dismiss. However, because the statute in express terms, purported to deny appellees any right in the supplementary proceedings herein had, and, whereas, this court has, by this opinion and decision of first impression, held that said provision is unconstitutional, appellees are given the statutory period of five [5] days after the certification of this opinion to file their remonstrance to the determination of the Board in said supplemental proceedings and twenty [20] days after the Board’s decision on such remonstrance to file and perfect an appeal in the trial court.
Appellant’s motion to dismiss sustained.
Landis, C. J., Arterburn and Myers, JJ., concur. Jackson, J., dissents [without opinion].
. The Board of Public Works, in its Resolution of May 3, Í962, pursuant to the petition for Supplementary Proceedings,' stated,
“5. . . . [Tjhrough inadvertence, the Final Assessment Roll of the Board of Public Works recited that said damages were awarded to John Clark, Inc., solely, when in truth and in fact they were awarded jointly to John Clark, Inc., and Roselyn Bakeries, Inc., on March 22, 1962, and that said Assessment Roll is hereby ordered' corrected to so recite.”
. “. . . Said supplementary proceedings shall be_ conducted and concluded as provided for the original proceedings under this act relating to the adoption and confirmation of the assessment roll, or in such substantial conformity thereto as will remedy, supply or correct any such matters, except as any parts of such procedure may be waived in writing by any petitioner or party thereto; and with the same right of remonstrance and appeal as hereinbefore provided, from any final decision thereon, where not expressly waived in writing by the party affected: Provided, That such remonstrance in writing must be filed with the board within five [5] days after the date of its decision is duly made in such supplementary proceedings and that such appeal must be filed and perfected in court within twenty [20] days after the date of the board’s decision upon such remonstrance. Said board may also, in its discretion, receive and act upon any petitions filed with it seeking any similar relief, but its action thereon shall be final and conclusive on such petitioners and no appeal shall lie therefrom. . . .” §48-2117, Burns’ 1963 Repl.
. It seems apparent that for the same reasons the following provision in §48-2112, Burns’ 1963 Repl. is unconstitutional and must be considered deleted therefrom: “The decision and judgment of the court shall be final and conclusive and on all parties thereto, and no further appeal shall be taken. . . .” This provision was written into the act in 1983, prior to Warren v. Indiana Telephone Co. (1940), 217 Ind. 93, 26 N. E. 2d 399.

=== CASE 9739805 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:10.097443+00 ===

On Petition For Rehearing.
Achor, G. J.
— Appellant objects to the opinion and decision of this court as hereinbefore issued for two reasons.
*6401. Appellant asserts that the court should have denied the appellees any right to judicial review because of noncompliance with the statute [§§48-2110, 48-2117 and 48-4501]. Appellant complains that if the statutes are permitted to be “misused as herein, the taxpayer can drag and stall along and toy with a government unit, and confuse and snarl procedures. The court by its decision thus promotes a misuse of the appropriation procedure of cities.” This statement compels us to comment that much of the delay in the proceedings was caused by appellant’s own carelessness in the clerical aspects of the proceedings, for which neither the appellees nor this court is chargeable.
2. Appellant asserts that the court’s opinion is in conflict with the general rule that if the property owner at a final hearing receives no award, the decree “amounts to a negative finding” as to him, and if he is dissatisfied, “the sole and exclusive judicial remedy is remonstrance and appeal as provided by statute.” In support of this statement of the law appellant cites the cases of Neff v. Indianapolis (1935), 209 Ind. 203, 198 N. E. 328; Windhorst v. Indianapolis (1934), 99 Ind. App. 225, 188 N. E. 328.
However, the facts in this case do not bring it within the general rule as urged by the appellant. Here, at the hearing on such remonstrance, the Board entered a finding that one of the parties was entitled to an award of damages but simply did not enter a decree to that effect. The only proper procedure under such circumstances Avas to file a petition asking that the decree be modified, which was the procedure followed by appellees in this case.
Finally, the. appellant asks that in event the opinion of this court is permitted to stand, the court *641establish “guidelines and standards as to the admissible evidence,” on the issue of “damage to a going bakery not in existence at the time of original appropriation.” Evidence upon that issue was admitted in the trial court.
We are aware of the authorities cited by appellant in support of its position. However, as it was stated in the opinion heretofore written:
“The sole question which must be decided in this action is whether the Circuit Court of Marion County had jurisdiction over this particular subject-matter. . . .” [196 N. E. 2d 896, at page 897.]
Thus the measure of damages allowable to appellees is not a proper subject for consideration in this case.
Appellees, in turn, have filed a response to appellant’s petition for rehearing in which they also ask that the court modify its opinion in two particulars, but that, in the alternative, it deny appellant’s petition for rehearing.
First, appellees contend that because of the many defects in the proceedings before the Board of Public Works this court should have held that such Board was without jurisdiction, and that it was error to hold that appellees “have waived all the many procedural deficiencies therein.” This conclusion, appellees assert, “is completely contrary to the holding in Elliott v. City of Indianapolis (1957), 237 Ind. 287, 142 N. E. 2d 911, and either that case or this must be reconsidered.”
However, the case at bar and the Elliott case, supra, are distinguishable. In the Elliott case a hearing was had on the final assessment roll and a decree was entered which showed no benefits and no damages to appellant. The hearing in that case was had without *642appellant being notified, and without him appearing and filing a remonstrance to the assessment roll as originally published. Later, after learning of the action of the Board, the appellant filed a remonstrance which the Board caused to be dated back to the date of the hearing, so as to permit appellant to file his appeal. In that case, this court held that the decree confirming the roll of ■ benefits and damages was a nullity as to the appellant since he had not been properly notified nor had he appeared and been given an opportunity to be heard before the Board entered its decree, as to the final assessment roll.
In that case the Board was not vested with jurisdiction over the hearing in question, either by notice to the appellant or by reason of his personal and- timely appearance in the proceedings.
However, in the case at bar, although notices, descriptions, etc., were defective, the condemnees did appear in person and by counsel and filed a timely remonstrance in the proceedings prior to the hearing and ‘determination of the issue which was before the Board. Under these circumstances this action by the appellees 'constituted a waiver of the above cited defects.
The petition for rehearing is therefore denied.
Arterburn, Landis and Myers, JJ., concur. Jackson, J., dissents. ...
Note. — Reported in 196 N. E. 2d 896. Rehearing denied 201 N. E. 2d 336.

=== CASE 9739806 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:10.71556+00 ===

Mote, J.
This action was commenced when appellees, owners of real estate in the Worthington Gas Storage Field in Greene County, Indiana, filed a complaint in the nature of a petition with the Public Service Commission of Indiana.
The complaint named as respondents, appellants herein, the following entities: (1), Citizens Gas & Coke Utility, which is a utility district and instrumentality of the City of Indianapolis, Indiana, (2), seven named individuals joined as members of, and constituting the Board of Directors of Utilities of the City of Indianapolis, and (3), Citizens By-Products Coal Company, a West Virginia corporation which is admitted to do business in Indiana and which is wholly owned by Citizens Gas & Coke Utility.
The appellants moved to dismiss the complaint on the ground, among others, that the Public Service Commission is without jurisdiction “either of the subject matter or the person of any of the respondents”, since a municipal utility rather than a public utility is involved herein.
The Commission overruled the motion to dismiss and on July 20, 1962, entered an order stating that the *300Commission did have jurisdiction. It based its order on the premise that the allegation that appellants were furnishing gas to inhabitants of Greene County alone was sufficient to give the Commission authority to undertake an investigation.
Appellants petitioned for a rehearing and appellees moved to strike the petition. The Commission overruled both the petition and the motion. Appellants then instituted this proceeding for review and assigned as error, (1), the Commission’s overruling of the appellants’ motion to dismiss, (2), the assertion of jurisdiction by the Commission, and (3) that the Commission’s ruling is contrary to law, all of which are prejudicial to appellants, who also ask this Court permanently to enjoin the enforcement of the order.
A motion to dismiss the action in this Court has been filed by part of the appellees. The contention, asserted in support of dismissal, is that the action is premature since (1) the order complained of is not a final order, and (2) the order, since it is procedural only, does not adversely affect appellants.
Appellants, on the other hand, contend that such an attack may be made at any time, since the issue of jurisdiction is subject to judicial review at any timé.
At the outset, therefore, we are faced with the following question: May the jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission of Indiana be challenged in our courts by a party who does not first exhaust his administrative remedies?
Indiana courts have held that the issue of jurisdiction over the subject matter may be raised at any stage of the proceedings. See Board of Commissioners of the County of Marion v. Jewett (1915), 184 Ind. 63, 110 N. E. 553. The question *301of whether judicial relief may be obtained without exhausting administrative remedies is different, howevér, and has been subject to great diversity of opinion in' this country. The United States Supreme Court, in the case of Petroleum Exploration, Inc. v. Public Service Commission (1938), 304 U. S. 209, 58 S. Ct. 834, 82 L. Ed. 1294, refused to enjoin a hearing of the Kentucky Public Service Commission. The Kentucky Commission had issued an order asserting its jurisdiction over the appellant and ordering the appellant to present evidence at a public hearing and also to make its records available for examination. The injunction was refused, since there was no showing of irreparable injury, other than expense of litigation which was said to be insufficient reason to interfere with the administrative proceedings.
The contrary view was taken in Public Utilities Commission of Ohio v. United Fuel Gas Co. (1943), 317 U. S. 456, 63 S. Ct. 369, 87 L. Ed. 396. The same issue faced the court; however, exhaustion of administrative remedies was not required and the court decided the case on its merits.
Other cases in the United States Supreme Court are similarly divided. See Allen v. Grand Central Aircraft Co. (1954), 347 U. S. 535, 74 S. Ct. 745, 98 L. Ed. 933; Franklin v. Jonco Aircraft Corp. (1953), 346 U. S. 868, 74 S. Ct. 126, 98 L. Ed. 378.
Cases in other states fluctuate as to the requirement of exhaustion of administrative remedies when the jurisdiction of the agency is challenged. Some courts refuse judicial review until all administrative remedies have been exhausted. See Abelleira et al. v. District Court of Appeal (1941), 17 Cal. 2d 280, 109 P. 2d 942, 132 A. L. R. 715; United States v. Superior Court *302(1941), 19 Cal. 2d 189, 120 P. 2d 26; Stoddard v. Public Utilities Commission (1941), 137 Me. 320, 19 A. 2d 427; Brass Rail Restaurant Co. v. Pennsylvania Labor Relations Board (1953), 375 Pa. 213, 100 A. 2d 80. Other cases allow the jurisdiction of the agency to be challenged without exhausting administrative remedies. St Luke’s Hospital v. Labor Relations Commission (1946), 320 Mass. 467, 70 N. E. 2d 10. A few states take a modified approach and allow jurisdiction to be challenged without exhaustion of administrative proceedings if the question is one of law and not of fact. Idaho Mut. Ben. Ass’n. v. Robison (1944), 65 Idaho 793, 154 P. 2d 156; or if it would appear to be of no avail to pursue the administrative remedies. Kirn v. Noyes (1941), 262 App. Div. 581, 31 N. Y. S. 2d 90; or if irreparable harm is shown. See Thomas v. Ramberg (1953), 240 Minn. 1, 60 N. W. 2d 18.
Indiana has held that an assertion of jurisdiction by the Public Service Commission is an initial and integral step in a regulatory scheme and such an order is immediately subject to judicial review. Boone County Rural Electric Membership Corporation, et al. v. Public Service Commission of Indiana (1958), 129 Ind. App. 175, 155 N. E. 2d 149.
In view of this, we think the application to this Court for judicial review is not premature; therefore, we come to the only other question presented herein.1
*303The complaint before the Public Service Commission alleged, among other things, that since the year 1959, and thereafter, appellant, Citizens Gas & Coke Utility, has drilled twenty-three (23) wells in the Worthington Gas Storage field, hired a research corporation to determine the amount of natural gas in place, represented to appellees and other Green County property owners that said Citizens Gas & Coke Utility would exercise its power of eminent domain as to those owners who would not voluntarily enter into leases; that said utility would render gas service to said Greene County property owners; and that said utility is not subject to Greene County taxes; that Citizens Gas & Coke Utility, directly or otherwise, entered into purported leases with appellees by which the appellant contracted to pay less than the full market value of natural gas in place and to pay an annual lease rental which is also far less than the reasonable market value of the land for gas storage purposes; that said appellant assigned the leases and operation of the Worthington Gas Storage field to appellant, Citizens By-Products Coal Company, a wholly owned subsidiary of appellant, Citizens Gas & Coke Utility; that said appellants furnish gas service to inhabitants of Greene County, Indiana, which is approximately sixty-five (65) miles from the utility district of Citizens Gas & Coke Utility.
The prayer for relief asked the Commission to undertake an investigation of the alleged operations, declare the operations to be in violation of the Public Service Commission Act of Indiana, declare the said leases void, order appellants to cease and desist from said operations, and to institute legal action through the Attorney General’s Office for collection of statutory penalties and to grant all other proper relief.
*304The Commission asserted its jurisdiction in its order which, omitting formal parts, reads as follows:
“Having read and examined the petition, having read and considered briefs filed by counsel, and having heard the oral argument of counsel and being duly advised in. the premises, the Commission now finds:
1. That the Motion to Dismiss filed by Respondents, Citizens Gas & Coke Utility et al., of February 21, 1962, states in two of its paragraphs the basis of said motion, and we quote: ‘2. This Commission does not have jurisdiction of either the subject matter or the person of any of the Respondents. Since Respondents operate as a municipal utility and not as a public utility, this Commission has no jurisdiction or power to conduct the investigation or grant any of the relief requested by Complainants. 3. The complaint of Complainants does not allege facts upon which any of the relief requested by Complainants might property be granted.’
2. That there is no question but that the Commission’s jurisdiction over the Respondent, a municipal utility, is not the same as its jurisdiction over a public utility; that the primary statute upon which jurisdiction of the Commission would be determined is 48-7101 et seq;, Burns’ Indiana Statutes, Annotated; that said Acts do state certain areas in which the Commission would have jurisdiction over Citizens Gas & Coke Utility; that the parties do not cite nor is the Commission able to determine any previous Indiana decisions or any constitutional or legislative provisions with respect to the jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission over extraterritorial service on the part of a municipal utility; and, therefore, this is a matter of first impression in Indiana.
3. That the Motion to Dismiss filed in this cause is in the nature of a demurrer to a complaint; and, therefore, the Commission must accept the allegations set forth in the Complaint of January 30, 1962.
“as true; that among said allegations, we find on Page 6 of the Complaint, Rhetorical Paragraph *305‘7. (f) Furnished gas service to inhabitants of Greene County’; that this allegation alone, if proven, would give this Commission authority to grant the relief prayed for in Paragraph (a) of the prayer of Complainants, that is, to undertake an investigation; that the Commission need not consider at this time the other questions raised by the pleadings or briefs.
“It is a fundamental principle of law that every Commission of Indiana that the Motion to Dismiss filed by the Respondents in this cause be, and it is hereby denied; that this cause be set down for hearing by the Commission.”
Appellant contends that since it is a municipal utility the Public Service Commission has no jurisdiction over it, under any circumstances. The Public Service Commission is a creature of statute and its jurisdiction is derived therefrom. In the case of Boone County REMC et al. v. Public Service Commission, supra, it was said:
“It is a fundamental principle of law that every administrative agency of the state of Indiana must find the source of its authority in the statute conferring it, and it can only exercise the power conferred in conformity with the statute. See State Board Tax Comm. v. McDaniel (1928), 199 Ind. 708, 160 N. E. 347; State ex rel. v. Clamme (1922), (T. D. 1923), 80 Ind. App. 147, 134 N. E. 676.
“Both the Supreme Court and our court have held that the Commission derives its authority from the statutes and possesses only such power as is conferred by statutes. See Chicago & E. I. R. Co. v. Public Service Comm. (1943), 221 Ind. 592, 49 N. E. 2d 341; State ex rel. v. Vandalia R. Co. (1915), 183 Ind. 49, 108 N. E. 97; American Foundry Co. v. C. I. & L. R. R. Co. (1931) (T. D. 1934), 100 Ind. App. 111, 178 N. E. 295.”
We must therefore look to the statutes from which the Commission derives its authority. In §54-105, *306Burns’ 1951 Replacement (1963 Supp.) we find the following:
“Definition of terms — Short title of act. — The term ‘public utility’ as used in this act shall mean and embrace every corporation, company, individual, association of individuals, their lessees, trustees, or receivers appointed by any court whatsoever, that now or hereafter may own, operate, manage or control any street railway or interurban railway or any plant or equipment within the state for the conveyance of telegraph or telephone messages, or for the production, transmission, delivery or furnishing of heat, light, water or power, or for the collection, treatment, purification and disposal in a sanitary manner of liquid and solid waste, sewage, night soil and industrial waste, but said term shall not include a municipality that may now or hereafter acquire, own, or operate any of the foregoing facilities.
«
“The term ‘municipality’ as used in this act shall mean any city or town of the state of Indiana.
tt
“The term ‘municipally owned utility’ shall include every utility owned or operated by a municipality.”
The Commission is granted authority to conduct investigations and hearings in §54-408, Burns’ 1951 Replacement, as follows:
“Complaints — Investigations and hearing.— Upon a complaint made against any public utility by any mercantile, agricultural or. manufacturing society or by any body politic or municipal organization or by ten [10] persons, firms, corporations or associations, or ten [10] complainants of all or any of the aforementioned classes, or by any public utility, that any of the rates, tolls, charges or schedules or any joint rate or rates in which such petitioner is directly interested are in any respect unreasonable or unjustly discrimina*307tory, or that any regulation, measurement, practice or act whatsoever affecting or relating to the service of any public utility, or any service in connection therewith, is in any respect unreasonable, unsafe, insufficient or unjustly discriminatory, or that any service is inadequate or can not be obtained, the commission shall proceed, with or without notice, to make such investigation as it may deem necessary or convenient. But no order affecting said rates, tolls, charges, schedules, regulations, measurements, practice or act complained of, shall be entered by the commission without a formal public hearing. [Acts 1913, ch. 76, §57, p. 167.]”
The Commission is empowered to enforce the Public Service Commission Act by §54-714, Burns’ 1951 Replacement, which provides:
“Enforcing provisions of act. — The commission shall inquire into any neglect or violation of the laws of this state or the ordinances of any city or town by any public utility doing business therein, or by the officers, agents or employees thereof, or by any person operating the plant of any public utility, and shall have the power, and it shall be its duty, to enforce the provisions of this act, as well as all other laws, relating to public utilities. Any forfeiture or penalty herein provided shall be recovered and suit therein shall be brought in the name of the state of Indiana in the circuit or superior court where the public utility has its principal place of business. Complaint for the collection of any such forfeiture may be made by the commission or any member thereof, and, when so made, the action so commenced shall be prosecuted by the general counsel [Acts 1913, ch. 76, §124, p. 167.]”
Examination of the statutes, above set forth, discloses that municipal utilities, and particularly appellant, a municipal utility of a first class city as in the instant case, are not subject to the general grant of authority to the Public Service *308Commission. It is not contested that appellants are within the definition of a municipal utility, or óf a municipal utility of a first class city.
Appellees point out, however, that in some instances the Public Service Commission does have jurisdiction over municipal utilities; Certain statutes do require the Commission’s formal • approval, at least, of municipal utilities’ acts. An example of this is rate making. See §48-7103, Burns’ 1963 Replacement. We think the two statutes are not necessarily in conflict. Where one statute deals with a subject in general terms, and another statute deals with a part of the same subject in a more detailed manner, the two statutes should be harmonized, if possible. State ex rel. Davenport v. International Harvester Co. (1940), 216 Ind. 463, 25 N. E. 2d 242. The more detailed statute will prevail, as to the portion of the subject matter that it covers, if there is a conflict. See New Albany v. Lemon (1925), 198 Ind. 127, 149 N. E. 350. It would seem, therefore, that in those areas specifically set forth by statute the Commission may have jurisdiction; but in areas not specifically set forth, the general statute exempting municipal utilities from Public Service Commission jurisdiction controls.
It may be contended, however, that the appellants, by doing the alleged acts outside their statutory authority and territory lost the status as a municipal utility and, in effect, became a public utility. We feel, however, that we need not decide this proposition.
Our Legislature granted authority to “any person, firm, or corporation authorized to do business in this state and engaged in thé business of transporting or distributing gas by means of pipelines into, within or *309through this state for ultimate public use, or any municipal corporation so engaged” to condemn subsurface strata or. formations in land and necessary rights incident thereto, for constructing, maintaining, drilling, utilizing and operating an underground gas storage reservoir. See Acts of 1959, ch. 5, §2, p., 16; §3-1730, Burns’ 1946 Replacement (1963 Supp.). It appears, therefore, that, with one exception, the acts alleged in the petition before the Commission were not without the statutory authority of the appellants, who assert that they come within the statutory grant.
It seems, then, that the only allegation in the petition which could furnish a basis for the contention is that appellants were furnishing gas service to inhabitants of Greene County, since, as to all other allegations, the Commission is clearly without any jurisdiction over appellants.
The Commission held that it had authority to grant the appellees’ request in the prayer for relief, due to the said allegation as to gas service. We must disagree with this assertion. The Commission has authority to conduct an investigation, on petition of ten (10) persons, of rates, tolls, charges, schedules, joint rates, or any regulation, measurement, practice or act affecting or relating to the service of any public utility which is in any respect unreasonable, unsafe, insufficient or unjustly discriminatory. See §54-408, supra. However, the question involved here is whether or not appellants are operating. extraterritorially by furnishing gas service outside the . statutory limit, thereby violating the law. The Commission, therefore, has no authority to conduct an investigation on this question on petition by the appellees herein. .
The, Commission is empowered by §54-714, supra, *310to enforce the Public Service Commission Act. Perhaps the Commission may have authority to inquire into any violation of the laws of this state and recover any forfeiture or penalty by bringing a suit in the name of the state of Indiana, in the proper circuit or superior court. That question, of course, is not before us and we need not decide it.
It appears that the allegations of the petition and prayer for relief have no proper place in an administrative hearing of this type. Such things as fraud and rescission of contracts are, instead, proper items for the judicial branch of our government.
In our opinion, the petition fails to set forth sufficient ultimate facts to establish jurisdiction in the Public Service Commission.
Reversed.
Carson, C. J., Hunter, P. J., Kelley and Ryan, JJ., concur.
Pfaff, J., dissents with opinion.
Cooper and Faulconer, JJ., not participating.
. We think the Legislature did not intend generally by the enactment of § 54-449, Burns’ 1951 Replacement (1963 Supp.), that this Court should serve as a referee m the conduct of hearings before the Public Service Commission. This Court generally will decline jurisdiction of appeals from the Commission unless all administrative remedies before the said Commission are exhausted; however, as here, an order of the Commission in relation to its jurisdiction appears to warrant the recognition of a petition for review.

=== CASE 9739807 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:10.721054+00 ===

Dissenting Opinion.
Pfaff, J.
A mature reflection on the jurisdictional questions involved in this appeal compels me to dissent from the holding of the majority opinion herein.
I am convinced that this appeal is premature for the reason that in my opinion the Public Service Commission has not rendered any final order or determination upon which this attempted appeal for review can be predicated. I am also convinced that under the particular allegations in the appellees’ petition relied upon by the Commission and mentioned *311in the main opinion, the Commission had and correctly-entertained jurisdiction to determine the truth of the appellees’ charge that the appellant Utility was furnishing gas to consumers in Greene County, Indiana, without any authority or power so to do. If the said appellant was actually doing and carrying on the furnishing of gas as alleged in the petition, the Public Service Commission, which is charged with the duty of regulating utilities being consumed and used by the general public, may have considered that the appellant was engaged in competition with other public utilities furnishing gas to consumers in that area without control or regulation over the practices, rates, etc., of appellant. I think the Commission has not only the jurisdiction, but an absolute duty to the citizens of this state to investigate such matters and prevent unfair and unregulated competitive practices.
I would remand this cause to the Public Service Commission with instructions for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.
Motion to Dismiss.

=== CASE 9739808 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:10.724541+00 ===

Mote, J.
Although the petition for rehearing filed herein by individual appellees is argumentative, not in proper form and does not comply with the provisions of the Rules of the Supreme Court, particularly Rule 2-22 thereof, instead of dismissing the said motion, we are inclined to and do hereby deny the same, that the said appellees may have an opportunity further to pursue their objections to the decision and opinion rendered herein.
It should be clear that this court by its decision and opinion, other than not requiring exhaustion of administrative remedies in this case alone, before the *312Public Service Commission of Indiana, merely declared that the Public Service Commission of Indiana does not have jurisdiction to consider the matters within 'the • framework- of the complaint or. petition filed with it by said individual appellees, inasmuch as rates,. regulations, etc., as set forth in §54-40.8, Burns’ 1951 Replacement, are not involved.
It follows that the said Public Service Commission is not bound by the decision and opinion in any other area or field; hence, the failure to rule on its motion to dismiss the appeal does not appear to be of a prejudicial nature. Therefore, the motion of the Public Service Commission of Indiana for a ruling on its motion to dismiss the appeal is denied, as is also its motion for a rehearing.
Carson, C. J., Hunter, P. J., Kelley and Ryan, JJ., concur.
Pfaff, J., dissents with opinion.
Cooper and Faulconer, JJ., not participating.

=== CASE 9739809 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:10.728527+00 ===

Dissenting Opinion.
Pfaff, J.
This case (see 196 N. E. 2d 290) again comes before us on a petition for rehearing.
A general conference of the court sitting in banc by a majority vote denied appellees’ petition for rehearing with opinion. I again cannot agree with this action taken by the court and hereby voice my dissént for the following reasons:
Judicial review of a Public Service Commission order by the Appellate Court is a statutory action. §54-443 et seq;, Burns’ 1968 Supp. The statute provides that appeals shall be taken from final orders within SO days. The statute also provides that the *31330-day time limit may be extended if the appellant files a petition for rehearing with the Commission, §54-444, Burns’ 1963 Supp., pursuant to Commission rules, §54-446, Burns’ 1963 Supp.
In the case before us a complaint was filed with the Commission asking for an investigation of the operations of Citizens Gas and Coke Utility, a municipal utility of the City of Indianapolis, and its foreign subsidiary, Citizens By-Products Coal Company, within Greene County. The complaint alleges that Citizens Gas and Coke Utility is limited by §48-7103, Burns’ 1963 Replacement, to operating and furnishing gas within the. City of Indianapolis, and within 5 miles beyond in' Marion County; that Citizens By-Products Coal Company, as a West Virginia corporation, is prohibited by §54-603, Burns’ 1951 Replacement, from operating anywhere in Indiana as a public utility; that both said corporations are engaged in the storage óf gas and the furnishing of gas service within Greene County, which is 65 miles outside Marion County and three counties away.
The Commission statute gives the Commission jurisdiction over municipal utilities and only exempts them from its jurisdiction if their operations are confined to the particular municipality and within 6 miles beyond. §54-105, Burns’ 1963 Supp.; §§54-602, 54-607, 54-707, Burns’ 1951 Replacement; 54-609, Burns’ 1963 Supp. The Citizens Gas and Coke Utility statute of creation limits its operations to the City of Indianapolis and 5 miles beyond, and makes its rules and rates subject to the approval of the Commission. §48-7103, Burns’ 1963 Replacement. The Underground Storage of Gas acts declare such storage to be a public use. §3-1729 et seq., Burns’ 1963 Supp.
*314In the case before us the only thing which has so far occurred is that appellant filed a motion to dismiss, on which oral argument was heard, after which the Commission denied the motion to dismiss, holding:
“. . . said Acts do state certain areas in which the Commission would have jurisdiction over Citizens Gas and Coke Utility;... .
“. . . the Motion to Dismiss ... is in the nature of a demurrer to the complaint; and, therefore, the Commission must accept the allegations set forth in the Complaint ... as true; that among said allegations, we find on Page 6 of the Complaint, Rhetorical Paragraph ‘7. (†) Furnished gas service to inhabitants of Greene County’; that this allegation alone, if proven, would give this Commission authority to . . . undertake an investigation; ....
“. . . the Motion to Dismiss ... is hereby denied; that this cause be set down for hearing by the Commission.” (Emphasis supplied.)
It is a factual question whether or not Citizens Gas and Coke Utility has committed acts which exceed its statutory authority and whether or not those acts exceed the exemption portions of the Public Service Commission Act. Those facts can only be determined by the Commission upon hearing held and evidence heard. §54-112, Burns’ 1351 Replacement.
No hearing has been held and no evidence has been heard. Since there has been no hearing, there could be no petition for rehearing and appellant could not extend its appeal time by filing one. The order denying the motion to dismiss was entered on July 20, 1962, but appellant did not perfect its appeal until October 26, 1962, which is 98 days later and 68 days too late.
Section 54-408, Burns’ 1951 Replacement, provides as follows:
*315“Upon a complaint made against any public utility by any mercantile, agricultural or manufacturing society or by any body politic or municipal organization or by ten (10) persons, firms, corporations or associations, or ten (10) complainants of all or any of the aforementioned classes, or by any public utility, that any of the rates, tolls, charges or schedules or any joint rate or rates in which such petitioner is directly interested are in any respect unreasonable or unjustly discriminatory, or that any regulation, measurement, practice or act whatsoever affecting or relating to the service of any public utility, or any service in connection therewith, is in any respect unreasonable, unsafe, insufficient or unjustly discriminatory, or that any service is inadequate or can not be obtained, the commission shall proceed, with or without notice, to make such investigation as it may deem necessary or convenient. But no order affecting said rates, tolls, charges, schedules, regulations, measurements, practice or act, complained of, shall be entered by the commission without a formal public hearing.” (Emphasis supplied)
The only action which the Commission has taken is to deny a motion to dismiss. This is an interlocutory and procedural ruling. There has been no final order entered.
The majority opinion questions whether the jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission of Indiana may be challenged in our courts by a party who does not first exhaust his administrative remedies, and in discussing this question cites numerous federal and foreign state authorities. It is my opinion that such authorities cannot be relied upon by this court when the result reached thereby is contrary to a ruling precedent of the Indiana Supreme Court. It is stated in City of E. Chicago v. Sinclair Ref. Co. (1953), 232 Ind. 295, 306, 111 N. E. 2d 459:
*316“Where, as here, an administrative remedy is provided, it must be exhausted before judicial review may be requested. (Cases cited)”
The case before us is simply a case of a premature appeal which does not comply with the statute defining our jurisdiction. The case of Shank v. Federal Power Commission (5th Cir. 1956), 236 F. 2d 830, 834-835, is exactly in point, the pertinent parts of which read as follows:
“. . . petitioner is prematurely seeking a judicial review without having first exhausted its administrative remedy and that by resorting to this Court before the Commission had set the date for hearing and prior to its decision and the issuance of a definitive order in the pending proceedings before it, petitioner is attempting to substitute this Court for the Commission as the tribunal to hear and determine what Congress declared the Commission should hear and determine in the first instance.....
it
“. . . we think it plain these orders are . . . mere procedural steps taken at the inception of and not upon the completion of the administrative process. All that the Commission did in the exercise of its regulatory jurisdiction was to enter preliminary, interlocutory orders which do not bear upon the merits of the controverted fundamental issues which must ultimately be adjudicated by the Commission.....
“The petitioner is thus before this Court without a record, without a single established fact or finding, and without evidence, asking us to exercise our power of review when, in fact, there is no ‘order’ to review. This being the situation, it is plain that petitioner is prematurely seeking review of the Commission’s action without having first exhausted the prescribed administrative remedy. Myers v. Bethlehem Shipbuilding Corp., 303 U. S. 41, 50-51, 58 S. Ct. 459, 82 L. Ed. 638. This case thus falls squarely within the well es*317tablished rule which requires that there be no judicial intervention until administrative action has reached its complete development. Aircraft & Diesel Equipment Corp. v. Kirsch, 331 U. S. 752, 767, 67 S. Ct. 1483, 91 L. Ed 1796; Union Oil Company v. Federal Power Commission, 5th Cir. 236 F. 2d 816.
“ . . . the petition must be and the same is hereby dismissed. See also Sun Oil Co. v. Federal Power Commission (5th Cir. 1962), 304 F. 2d 290, 292.
In a recent decision of this court it has been specifically held that the Commission has not only the power, but the duty, to investigate and hold a hearing to determine the truth of the matter alleged, regardless of the form and contents of the petition filed. In New York Central R. R. v. Public Serv. Comm. (1962), 133 Ind. App. 680, 183 N. E. 2d 609, the court had before it the question of whether or not the Commission acted properly in failing to hold a hearing on an unauthorized petition which contained allegations as to the possible violation of a Commission rule. In holding against the Commission that a hearing should have been held on such allegations, this court said, on page 691:
“It is to be granted that appellant’s petition was unorthodox and unauthorized. However, the Commission had broad powers of its own as to investigations and hearings. After the filing of the petition, it could have initiated a proceeding according to statute and held a formal hearing on the entire matter regardless of the form and contents of the petition. Sections 54-412, 54-413, Burns’ Ind. Stat., 1951 Replacement.” (Emphasis supplied)
In view of the above statutes and authorities, it is my opinion that appellees’ motion to dismiss this appeal for lack of jurisdiction should be sustained, or *318in any event, the Commission’s preliminary order denying appellants’ motion to dismiss, and setting the cause for hearing, should be affirmed.

=== CASE 9739810 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:10.732491+00 ===

Dissenting Opinion.
Pfaff, J.
Again this case comes before us on appellees’ joint and several motions asking this Court to reconsider its denial of their respective petitions for rehearing, or in the alternative, for the Court on its own motion to correct its error in assuming jurisdiction of this statutory review proceeding. Appellees call to the Court’s attention in said motions that the Court has still failed to rule on Individual Appellees’ Motion to Dismiss for Lack of Jurisdiction, filed December 3, 1962. Said still-pending motion to dismiss challenges the Court’s jurisdiction to review any order of the Public Service Commission of Indiana which is not a final order by any appeal not taken within thirty days thereof, as required by §54-443, Burns’ 1963 Cum. Supp.
By a majority vote of the members present the following entry was made on the 20th of April, 1964: “Motion Dismissed”.
I again dissent to the action taken and the entry made. It is my opinion that appellees’ motion to reconsider should be sustained, or that the Court should correct Its own error by ruling on said motion to dismiss.
The record shows that there has been no hearing held or final order entered by said Commission in the administrative proceeding which is still pending before it. The record also shows that appellants failed to file their appeal within thirty days of the order of which they complain, but instead they attempted to file *319their appeal ninety-eight days after the entry of said order. Since there had been no hearing by the Commission, a petition for rehearing did not lie within the terms of §54-444, Burns’ 1963 Cum. Supp., and appellants’ time for taking their appeal was not extended by the filing of such a motion.
The record shows that individual appellees raised these jurisdictional questions immediately by filing their said motion to dismiss and briefs in support thereof on December 3, 1962. The Court, on February 21, 1963, deferred its ruling on said motion to dismiss until final determination. However, in its decision of February 19, 1964, the majority of this Court reversed the preliminary ruling of said Commission without ruling on said motion to dismiss. This failure to rule on said motion was called to the Court’s attention by appellees by their respective petitions for rehearing filed March 9,1964. In denying said petitions, on April 6, 1964, this Court again failed to rule on said motion to dismiss.
Appellees have again, in their joint and several motions to reconsider or correct, filed April 9, 1964, pointed out the failure of the Court to rule on said motion. I must dissent from the majority’s denial of said motions on April 20, 1964, which denial is tantamount to a refusal to rule on said motions.
In this special statutory review proceeding, this Court is a Court whose jurisdiction is limited to the scope of review prescribed by the Legislature in the statute which creates the action and limits the jurisdiction. If an appellant fails to bring its action within the terms of the statute, no jurisdiction is conferred upon the Court other than to dismiss the action for lack of jurisdiction.
*320In my opinion the Court must rule upon the jurisdictional motion to dismiss, and on the basis of the record in this proceeding, the only ruling that should be made is to sustain said motion and dismiss the action for lack of jurisdiction.
The Court’s limited statutory review of orders of the Public Service Commission cannot be enlarged by ignoring either the statute, or motions to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction, or the plain facts which make dismissal mandatory. In ignoring the statute, the motion and the facts, it is my belief that the majority opinion is in error, and since the decision exceeds the Court’s jurisdiction, it is further my opinion that the decision is void.
Note.—Reported in 196 N. E. 2d 290. Petition for rehearing denied 197 N. E. 2d 312. Dissenting opinion on motion to reconsider denial of petition for rehearing reported in 197 N. E. 2d 771.

=== CASE 2221005 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:02.237145+00 ===

137 Mich. App. 353 (1984)
357 N.W.2d 696
AUER
v.
DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY
Docket No. 67137.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided July 10, 1984.
Rothstein, Erlich & Rothstein (by Stewart I. Erlich), for petitioners.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Louis J. Caruso, Solicitor General, and Richard R. Roesch and Curtis G. Beck, Assistants Attorney General, for respondent.
Before: BRONSON, P.J., and R.B. BURNS and R.L. BORSOS,[*] JJ.
PER CURIAM.
This case is an appeal from the Michigan Tax Tribunal, which affirmed a deficiency assessment against petitioners for intangibles tax liability. We affirm.
The deficiency assessments apply to tax years 1975 and 1977. In addition, petitioners did not file an intangibles tax return for 1978, but the tribunal found petitioners liable in the amount of $4,063, plus interest and penalty. The deficiency for 1975 and 1977 totalled $8,437, plus interest and penalty.
The controversy arises out of the Department of Treasury's audit of Clintonview Care Center, Inc., as a subchapter S corporation, which provides nursing home health care services in the State of Michigan and of which petitioner E. David Auer is a 25 percent shareholder and officer. The Department of Treasury audited petitioners for tax years *355 1975 and 1977. Subsequently, a notice of intent to assess was issued on July 19, 1979, and notices of final assessment were issued on August 9, 1979, and on December 12, 1980. The notices erroneously indicated that the involved assessment was for tax years 1974 and 1975. A "corrected assessment", indicating that the years involved were 1975 and 1977, was later issued. Respondent contends that the corrected assessment was requested on August 23, 1979, and issued in the latter part of that month. Petitioner E. David Auer stated, however, that he did not remember receiving such corrected assessment.
On November 23, 1979, the Department of Treasury also sent petitioners the notice of assessment for the tax year 1978. Since petitioners had not filed an intangibles tax return for the year 1978, respondent computed the assessment using the 1977 audit base plus 10 percent.
During the years in question, the records of the corporation indicated substantial distributions of dividends to petitioners. The amounts received by petitioners from the corporation during these years were reported in their federal and state income tax returns as being dividend income. Further, the corporation did not issue any wage statements to petitioners indicating payment of wages or salary to Mr. Auer.
Mr. Auer testified that he provided various services to the corporation and that the payments he received from the corporation were actually earned income for such services. These services included his managing of financial and real estate matters, as well as general maintenance and the chairing of several committees. He further contended that the payments received by him were not reported as compensation because he did not *356 want to jeopardize Clintonview's participation in Medicare/Medicaid programs. He asserted that the amounts due and paid him as owner would not be permissible under federal and Michigan Department of Social Services regulations. According to Mr. Auer, these regulations permit an administrator to earn only $65,000 annually. Since the Center's administrator was paid a salary of $50,000, there remained only $15,000 which could be considered compensation for comparable services. This amount had to be divided among himself and the other shareholders who performed services. Mr. Auer claimed that his classification of the income for purposes of meeting federal and state regulations did not affect the true nature of the income, i.e., compensation for services. Accordingly, he argued that his federal and state tax returns were not determinative for intangibles tax liability. Finally, he testified that his compensation (in fact) was to be between $115,000 and $120,000 per year, so that he reported as dividends subject to intangibles tax only that income which exceeded $120,000. The corporation's other shareholders, however, even though not providing services to the corporation, received distributions in proportion to their holdings and equal to those received by him.
During the evidentiary hearing before the tribunal, petitioners indicated that 1978 payments received from the Clintonview Care Center amounted to $116,000, and respondent stipulated that the 1978 tax year assessment should be reduced by $583.20.
The tribunal affirmed the Treasury Department's intangibles tax deficiency assessment for the years 1975 and 1977, and also affirmed the department's intangibles tax deficiency assessment for tax year 1978, as modified by the stipulated *357 agreement of the parties at the time of the hearing.
Petitioners claim that the respondent failed to give proper notice of a deficiency assessment for 1977 so that petitioners are not liable for any tax imposed upon them for that year.
MCL 205.23; MSA 7.657(23) provides that if the department determines that a taxpayer has not satisfied his tax liability, the taxpayer shall be notified of that determination. This section became effective September 16, 1980; however, MCL 205.143; MSA 7.556(13) formerly provided that actual notice must be given to the taxpayer of an intent to assess. Also, if a taxpayer does not pay the tax upon notice of the intent to assess, the taxpayer must be give notice of a final assessment. Respondent first notified petitioners that the years in question were 1974 and 1975. Petitioners claim that there was never any notice with respect to 1977, that notice is a condition precedent to the imposition of tax and that therefore the Tax Tribunal erred in finding petitioners liable for any tax for 1977.
The statutory notice provisions are ostensibly designed to provide due process of law, viz., the purpose is to provide the taxpayer with notice that deficiency assessments have been levied for certain tax years and to afford the taxpayer an opportunity to contest them. A defect in formal notice does not violate due process where notice in fact was given. See Building Owners & Managers Ass'n of Metropolitan Detroit v Public Service Comm, 131 Mich. App. 504; 346 NW2d 581 (1984).
In this case, the evidence supported and the tribunal correctly found that petitioners were, in fact, on notice that their intangibles tax liability for 1977, not 1974, was at issue. The spirit and intent of the notice provisions were complied with.
*358 The audit report indicates that the years 1975 through 1977 were being audited. Such "work papers" were sent to petitioners. Petitioners were also afforded a department-level informal conference on August 13, 1980, at which the years 1975-1977 were discussed. In addition, a "corrected assessment" was issued and there is no indication that tax year 1974 was ever involved or that petitioners were ever required to provide information on that year. Finally, petitioner David Auer's testimony that he does not "recall" whether he received the corrected notice is insufficient in the face of the above evidence of notice.
Petitioners also claim that the respondent erred by finding that the compensation was dividends and not ordinary income. MCL 205.131(d); MSA 7.556(1)(d) describes income subject to intangibles tax:
"`Income' includes: (1) interest received upon tangible personal property; (2) dividends on other distributions, whether in the form of cash or property, to the extent that they represent the yield of intangible personal property * * * (3) all other earnings or yield of intangible personal property regardless of the name by which designated. For the purpose of computing the tax imposed under this act, the gross income, including taxes, charges and other deductions which may be made therefrom, shall be the basis upon which the tax shall be measured." (Emphasis added.)
In Consumers Power Co v Corporation & Securities Comm, 326 Mich. 643, 651; 40 NW2d 756 (1950), it was observed that the burden is always on the state to establish the necessary facts to sustain a claim for taxes or revenue. Therefore, the issue is whether the state can "sustain a claim for taxes" under the facts. We conclude that the state has carried its burden.
*359 First, the income was in fact reported as dividend income on petitioners' state and federal income tax returns. Although the intangibles tax act does not rely upon the definition of "dividend" used for federal income tax purposes, Davis v Dep't of Treasury, 124 Mich. App. 222; 333 NW2d 521 (1983), this is not a case of conflicting definitions, but, rather, involves a taxpayer's choice in the first instance to classify certain income as dividend income in order to receive desired treatment in another forum. Thus, there is at least an inference that the taxpayer has in fact earned income subject to the intangibles tax act.
Second, petitioners have pointed to no wage statements (W-2) indicating that the income was compensation. There has also been no showing of an employment agreement or anything else demonstrating that the income was intended to be compensation for services. While it is true that Mr. Auer is entitled to receive compensation for services rendered, the only support for this contention was his testimony that it was "agreed" that he would receive between $115,000 and $120,000 per year as compensation. Curiously, Mr. Auer chose to employ the higher figure as his "earned" compensation so that his intangibles tax liability would be diminished. While there was testimony that petitioner performed many valuable managerial services, there was no evidence as to the amount of such services, so that even accepting his contention regarding the understanding on his compensation, there is no explanation why his compensation was placed at $120,000 per year rather than $115,000. In the situation of a subchapter S corporation, where the line between compensation and dividends is very fine, there must be more than a naked assertion that, because *360 a petitioner was entitled to compensation, the monies received were compensation.
Third, and most compelling, the testimony indicated, and the tribunal found, that Mr. Auer's "compensation" was proportional to his interest in the corporation vis-a-vis the other shareholders, i.e., the distributions were made from corporate earnings and profits in relative proportion to stock ownership. "The distribution of profits in this manner * * * constituted a dividend, whether denominated such or not. Barnes v Spencer & Barnes Co, 162 Mich. 509; 127 N.W. 752 (1910)." Erdman v Yolles, 62 Mich. App. 594, 597; 233 NW2d 667 (1975).
Affirmed.
NOTES
[*]  Circuit judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.

=== CASE 9739811 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:12.500315+00 ===

WOLLMAN, Justice.
The trial court entered judgment granting both parties a divorce on the ground of extreme mental cruelty. Plaintiff, Dr. Ruth M. Saint-Pierre, appeals from the judgment. In turn, defendant, Mark S. Saint-Pierre, has filed a notice of review with respect to certain provisions of that judgment. We affirm in part and reverse and remand in part.
*253We note that the trial that culminated in the judgment being appealed from consisted of some ten days of testimony, resulting in 1,726 pages of transcript.* Our task of summarizing the evidence introduced at this lengthy trial has been made easier by virtue of the trial court’s memorandum decision, incorporated into the findings of fact and conclusions of law.
Plaintiff and defendant were married on November 20, 1971. At the time of trial, March 1983, they were both 32 years of age.
Two children were born to the marriage, a daughter, born January 25, 1974, and a son, was born September 23, 1975.
At the time of their marriage, the parties were college students. Following their graduation from college in May of 1972, defendant obtained employment with the Sioux Youth Development Association in Eagle Butte, South Dakota, in late summer of 1972. Plaintiff obtained employment in Eagle Butte as a teacher’s aide. In the spring of 1973, defendant became employed with the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe.
Plaintiff was accepted as a student in the University of South Dakota School of Medicine, and the parties moved to Vermillion in late summer of 1974. Defendant obtained employment with the University of South Dakota School of Education in September of 1974 at a salary of $11,500 per year. Defendant later worked at the Division of Allied Health and in the Indian Studies Program at a salary of $17,500 per year. He also wrote a book on Indian art and earned his master of arts degree during the time that plaintiff was earning her medical degree.
Plaintiff received a waiver of her tuition in return for her agreement that she would practice medicine in South Dakota. She also received student loans in the amount of $350 to $400 per month for other school expenses. Plaintiff graduated from medical school in June of 1978. The parties then moved from Vermillion to Yankton, where plaintiff completed her residency training. Upon the completion of plaintiff’s residency, the parties purchased some property in the Trojan community near Deadwood, where defendant commenced building a home while plaintiff began practicing medicine in Eagle Butte as a part of her three-year commitment to pay off her student loans. Although defendant made a desultory attempt to find employment in Eagle Butte, he soon became depressed and ceased his search for employment, whereupon plaintiff suggested that he return to their property at Trojan and work on their house, which he did. Plaintiff became frustrated with her practice in Eagle Butte and moved to the family home in Trojan, where she became associated in the practice of medicine with the Black Hills Medical Center in Deadwood.
The parties’ marriage was a stormy one. The trial court found that both parties had inflicted extreme mental suffering upon the other. The record reveals that in December of 1982 defendant struck plaintiff in the eye with such force that she was required to seek medical attention.
The trial court awarded custody of the children to defendant and ordered plaintiff to pay $400 per month per child in the way of child support. The trial court divided the marital property and denied both parties’ claims for alimony and attorney fees. The issues raised by plaintiff’s appeal and defendant’s notice of review cover the areas of child custody, valuation and division of property, the amount of child support, and the denial of defendant’s claim for attorney fees and alimony.
CHILD CUSTODY
Plaintiff contends that the trial court abused its discretion in awarding custody of the two minor children to defendant. The trial court found the custody question to be a most troublesome issue in view of the testimony to the effect that both parties have rather volatile personalities and appear to be somewhat self-centered individuals. The trial court had the benefit of *254a home study report prepared by the South Dakota Department of Social Services. This report recommended that custody of the children be awarded to plaintiff. The trial court also had before it a report from Dr. James Hess, a Spearfish, South Dakota, psychologist who had interviewed the children and who had administered psychological tests to the children and to defendant. In Dr. Hess’ opinion, defendant has a healthy, loving relationship with his "children. The report stated that the children had expressed to Dr. Hess a desire to live with defendant and appeared to have a very positive relationship with defendant.
In addition to considering the report from the Department of Social Services, the court had the benefit of the in-court sworn testimony of most of the persons who had been interviewed by the Department’s social workers.
Notwithstanding its concern over defendant’s behavior towards plaintiff in the presence of the children during the months immediately prior to trial, as well as the concern generated by defendant’s demean- or during the course of the divorce trial, the trial court found that it would be in the best interests of the children that they be placed in the custody of defendant, subject to liberal visitation rights in plaintiff. The court further found that the best interests of the children would be served by the court’s reviewing the custody arrangement one year from the date of entry of judgment. Accordingly, the decree of divorce provides in part that
Defendant is awarded the temporary care, custody and control of the minor children of the marriage for a period of one year, at which time the Court shall review the custody of the children upon application of either party.
Before considering the merits of the custody decision, we must dispose of defendant’s contention that because the custody order is temporary in nature, it could be appealed only in accordance with SDCL 15-26A-13, a procedure that plaintiff did not follow. We do not agree. Granted that the custody provision of the divorce decree is unusual insofar as the trial court indicated its willingness to review the matter of custody after the period of one year upon the application of either party, SDCL 25-4-45 provides that in divorce actions the trial court may at any time after judgment vacate or modify its order granting custody over the children of the marriage. In a technical sense, then, all custody orders are temporary inasmuch as they are always subject to being modified, subject, of course, to the prerequisite showing of a substantial and material change in circumstances. See, e.g., Sneesby v. Davis, 308 N.W.2d 565 (S.D.1981); Engels v. Engels, 297 N.W.2d 489 (S.D.1980); Menning v. Menning, 272 N.W.2d 828 (S.D.1978); Masek v. Masek, 90 S.D. 1, 237 N.W.2d 432 (1976). Though temporary in this sense, custody orders do not lapse or become ineffective merely by the passage of time. As we read it, the custody award provision of the divorce decree before us does nothing more than spell out the trial court’s amenability to a review of custody after the expiration of one year. Accordingly, we conclude that the custody award falls within the classification of those judgments and orders that are appealable as a matter of right under the provisions of SDCL 15-26A-3(4). In any event, on an appeal from a judgment, we may review any determination by the trial court. SDCL 15-26A-7.
Turning, then, to the merits of the custody award, we apply the well-settled rules of appellate review to the effect that the trial court has broad discretion in awarding custody of minor children, and that the trial court’s decision regarding custody will be reversed on appeal only upon a clear showing of an abuse of that discretion. See, e.g., Wolff v. Wolff, 349 N.W.2d 656 (S.D.1984); Watt v. Watt, 312 N.W.2d 707 (S.D.1981); Engels v. Engels, supra; Haskell v. Haskell, 279 N.W.2d 903 (S.D.1979); Spaulding v. Spaulding, 278 N.W.2d 639 (S.D.1979).
The paramount consideration in deciding the issue of child custody is the best interests of the child. SDCL 30-27-19; Wolff v. *255Wolff, supra; Haak v. Haak, 323 N.W.2d 128 (S.D.1982); Watt v. Watt, supra.
After viewing the voluminous record in the light of the foregoing principles of appellate review, we cannot say that the trial court’s findings of fact that resulted in an award of custody of the children to defendant are clearly erroneous. In re Estate of Hobelsberger, 85 S.D. 282, 181 N.W.2d 455 (1970). Without belaboring the evidence, we agree with the trial court’s observation that there is considerable testimony in the record to the effect that defendant was more involved than plaintiff with the day-to-day parenting duties during the years when plaintiff was a medical student, as he has been during the time that plaintiff has been engaged in the practice of medicine. Likewise, not surprisingly there is testimony that plaintiff’s professional obligations limit the time she has available to be with the children. There is evidence these obligations cause plaintiff considerable stress. Moreover, the evidence supports the trial court’s finding that defendant better meets the emotional needs of the children, while plaintiff better satisfies their basic physical needs.
It quite clearly appears from the record that both parties are highly intelligent, highly motivated, highly goal-oriented, and somewhat high-strung and temperamental individuals. It would serve no useful purpose to set forth in clinical detail the various clashes, both physical and emotional, between the parties that culminated in plaintiff’s bringing this action for divorce. Suffice it to say that we cannot say that the trial court clearly abused its discretion in awarding custody of the two minor children to defendant.
In reaching this conclusion, we wish to make crystal clear that we are in no way intimating that a woman who pursues a separate career, whether it be in medicine, law, education, business, or any other vocation, forfeits her right to the custody of her minor children. Indeed, had the trial court in the instant case concluded, based upon its observation of the demeanor of the parties as well as that of the other witnesses who testified in this proceeding, that custody should be awarded to plaintiff, we would have been hard-pressed to say that that decision represented a clear abuse of discretion. Based as it was, however, upon the court’s first-hand opportunity to gauge the credibility and the emotional stability of the parties as reflected by their testimony and demeanor during the lengthy trial, the trial court’s decision must be given the appropriate deference mandated under our scope of appellate review. Accordingly, we affirm this portion of the judgment.
PROPERTY DIVISION
After leaving Eagle Butte and moving to the family home at Trojan, plaintiff became associated in August of 1982 with Black Hills Medical Center (the Medical Center), a professional medical corporation in Deadwood, by purchasing for $150 five shares of stock in the Medical Center pursuant to a buy/sell agreement that requires her to sell the shares back to the Medical Center for the amount of the purchase price upon the occurrence of a termination event, as defined in the agreement. Plaintiff has incorporated her practice as “Ruth M. Saint-Pierre, M.D., P.C.” which is the entity that receives plaintiff’s share of the Medical Center’s distributable income.
Much testimony, some of which was confusing, was offered regarding the value of plaintiff’s individual medical corporation and the value of her interest in the Medical Center. The trial court found that notwithstanding the value of plaintiff’s shares in the Medical Center as specified in the buy/sell agreement, plaintiff’s individual professional corporation had a value of $55,000. The trial court found that plaintiff’s interest in the Medical Center had a value of $1,000.
Plaintiff contends that the finding that her professional corporation has a value of $55,000 is clearly erroneous, while defendant contends that the trial court erred in failing to include good will as a component of valuation when arriving at the value of plaintiff’s individual professional corpora*256tion. Except as noted below, we conclude that neither contention is well taken.
There was evidence from which the trial court could properly find that plaintiffs earned share of the Medical Center’s undisbursed income, which is distributed to the six doctor-shareholders every three months, together with plaintiffs individual accounts receivable had a value of $55,000. See Stern v. Stern, 66 N.J. 340, 331 A.2d 257 (1975). The trial court did apparently fail to take into account, however, some $12,000 that plaintiff acknowledged was held in her professional corporation’s bank account at the time of trial. On remand, the trial court should make whatever adjustment, if any, that is necessary to correct this oversight. Guindon v. Guindon, 256 N.W.2d 894 (S.D.1977).
The trial court did not err in refusing to place a value on the good will component of plaintiff’s individual professional corporation. Under the terms of the buy/sell agreement, plaintiff is restricted to selling her shares back to the Medical Center. Apart from her interest in the Medical Center, plaintiff has no history of private medical practice that could be valued in terms of good will, assuming that that is a valid component of valuation in a professional corporation. Cf. Fait v. Fait, 345 N.W.2d 872 (S.D.1984). See, e.g., In re Marriage of Fenton, 134 Cal.App.3d 451, 184 Cal.Rptr. 597 (1982); In re Marriage of Nichols, 43 Colo.App. 383, 606 P.2d 1314 (1980); In re Marriage of White, 98 Ill.App.3d 380, 53 Ill.Dec. 786, 424 N.E.2d 421 (1981); Stern v. Stern, supra, 331 A.2d at 261, n. 5; In re Marriage of Fleege, 91 Wash.2d 324, 588 P.2d 1136 (1979). But see Nail v. Nail, 486 S.W.2d 761 (Tex.1972).
Turning to the remainder of the valuation and division of property, the trial court found that at the time of their marriage the parties owned no significant assets other than their personal belongings and modest savings. Both parties contributed to the accumulation of the marital property. As indicated above, defendant earned as much as $17,500 annually while working at the University of South Dakota. Since moving to their home at Trojan, defendant has operated the Northern Lights Art Gallery in Deadwood. During 1982 he helped develop the Sundance Mountain Ski Resort in Wyoming. Neither of these businesses is yet profitable. As a practicing physician, plaintiff’s income is much higher than defendant’s. In 1982 her professional corporation received $62,903.58 as her distributable share of the Medical Center’s income, and for the period January-February 1983, $37,824.83. Plaintiff testified that she anticipated receiving as much as $120,000 as her share of the medical corporation’s distributable income in 1983. The accountant for the Medical Center testified that plaintiff’s 1983 income should be between $160,-000 and $165,000.
The parties’ residence consists of a custom log home situated on twelve acres in the Trojan area of rural Lawrence County. The parties also own an eighteen acre tract of unimproved land. The parties also own real estate in Deadwood, which houses the Northern Lights Art Gallery and a rental apartment.
The court ordered a third party to conduct an inventory and appraisement of the parties’ personal property located in the residence, the art gallery, and in plaintiff’s medical office. This inventory and ap-praisement, which runs to some 56 pages, lists the parties’ personal property in exhaustive detail.
The trial court divided the property as follows:
Plaintiff
Assets
Family residence (12 $ 70,000.00 acres)
Medical practice (includes 6 shares BHMC and accounts receivable) 55,000.00
Liabilities
1st Federal home mortgage $ 46,500.00
Education loans 45,000.00
Note to Miners & Merchants (rug) 2,000.00
*257Plaintiff
Assets
Partnership interest Northern Hills Medical Association $ 1,000.00
Personal property at medical office 2,610.50
Clock at repair shop 500.00
Personal property (residence) (70%) 57,399.23
$186,509.73
Liabilities
Visa $ 1,000.00
Note to St. Joseph Hospital 5,000.00
Aldenvilla credit union 900.00
$100,400.00
Net Share $ 86,109.73
Defendant
Assets
18 acres Trojan area $ 42,500.00
Real estate 31 Charles (gallery) 45,000.00
Gallery (fixtures & inventory) 10,600.00
Partnership interest Sun-dance Mt. 5,000.00
Ford tractor, van, 2 wheel trailer, motorcycles and other personal property at ski area 2,500.00
’79 Jeep Cherokee 2,500.00
Personal property at gallery 23,556.00
Personal property (residence) (30%) 24,599.67
$156,255.67
Liabilities
Contract for deed (31 Charles) $ 30,700.00
Mortgage on 18 acres and gallery property (M&M Bank) 18,000.00
Business debts gallery 9,300.00
$ 58,000.00
Net Share $ 98,255.67
As a part of the division, the trial court ordered that defendant should have his choice of items from the residence to the extent of thirty percent of the total, with the balance to be retained by plaintiff.
Both parties attack the property division as constituting an abuse of discretion on the part of the trial judge. Plaintiff contends that the trial court erred in giving defendant first choice of the personal property items in the family residence. Defendant contends that the trial court erred in failing to award him the marital home, in failing to exclude from the valuation of the marital property some $5,400 worth of personal property that the parties had stipulated should be set aside to the children, and in failing to set aside to defendant some $8,000 worth of family heirlooms which defendant and his brother had inherited from defendant’s grandfather. He also contends that the trial court erred in including the value of certain personal property twice in arriving at the value of certain fixtures and inventory of the Northern Lights Art Gallery.
Trial courts have full power to make an equitable division of the property belonging to the parties to a divorce action, and in making such division of the property they shall have regard for equity and the circumstances of the parties. SDCL 25-4-44. In making a division of property in a divorce action, the trial court is bound by no mathematical formula. See, e.g., Booth v. Booth, 354 N.W.2d 924 (S.D.1984); Owen v. Owen, 351 N.W.2d 139 (S.D.1984); Wolff v. Wolff, supra; Kressly v. Kressly, 77 S.D. 143, 87 N.W.2d 601 (1958). The trial *258court must take into consideration the duration of the marriage, the value of the property owned by the parties, the ages of the parties, the health of the parties, the competency of the parties to earn a living, the contribution of each party to the accumulation of the property, and the income-producing capacity of the property owned by the parties. See, e.g., Booth v. Booth, supra, Owen v. Owen, supra; Wolff v. Wolff, supra; Watt v. Watt, supra; Hansen v. Hansen, 273 N.W.2d 749 (S.D.1979).
The trial court has broad discretion in dividing property, and a division of property will not be set aside or modified on appeal unless it clearly appears that the trial court abused its discretion. Id.
The record reveals that the trial court took each of the above-cited factors into consideration in arriving at its division of the marital property. As indicated above, the parties are of the same age. The trial court found that their health was generally good. Both parties have the skills and training necessary to earn a living, plaintiff, of course, having by far the greater earning capacity. In the light of contemporary statistics, the parties’ marriage was a fairly lengthy one. Both parties contributed to the accumulation of the marital property. The property awarded to plaintiff is not of an income-producing nature, while that awarded to defendant has the potential for becoming profitable.
We conclude that the trial court did not err in failing to award the marital home to defendant. It is true that our trial courts have broad authority to award possession of the marital home to the custodial parent. See Johnson v. Lowary, 81 S.D. 202, 132 N.W.2d 823 (1965); Stearns v. Stearns, 80 S.D. 443, 126 N.W.2d 124 (1964). This does not mean, however, that possession of the marital home must necessarily be awarded to the custodial parent. As a part of the division of the marital property, the trial court as a practical matter was required to,award the art gallery and the ski resort property to defendant, given plaintiffs preoccupation with her medical practice. An award to plaintiff of the marital home was necessary in order to bring the property division into anything approaching an equitable balance. Accordingly, we cannot say that the trial court ignored the best interests of the children or abused its discretion in awarding the home to plaintiff.
With respect to his contention that the trial court erred in failing to set aside certain personal property which the parties had stipulated was to be given to the children and in including certain property in the Northern Lights Art Gallery twice in the valuation of property, we note that defendant’s objections to plaintiff’s proposed findings of fact and his own proposed findings of fact did not clearly bring these alleged errors to the attention of the trial court. In the usual case, therefore, defendant would be precluded from urging these matters on appeal. See Burke v. Lead-Deadwood Sch. Dist. # 40-1, 347 N.W.2d 343 (S.D.1984). In view of the fact, however, that we are reversing the judgment in part so that the trial court may take into account the $12,000 held by plaintiff’s professional corporation, we will also reverse the judgment to the extent that the trial court apparently failed to carry out the stipulated .intention of the parties with respect to the property to be given to the children and in apparently counting certain items of property twice in arriving at the total value of the personal property.
Turning to defendant’s contention that the trial court erred in not setting aside certain inherited family heirlooms, as we recently pointed out in Booth v. Booth, supra, although the trial court is to consider the fact that one of the parties inherited certain property, it is not bound to set such property aside to that party and may consider it as part of the property to be divided. See also Laird v. Laird, 322 N.W.2d 254 (S.D.1982); Balvin v. Balvin, 301 N.W.2d 678 (S.D.1981); Buseman v. Buseman, 299 N.W.2d 807 (S.D.1980); Clement v. Clement, 292 N.W.2d 799 (S.D.1980).
*259We have considered defendant’s remaining challenges to the property division award and conclude that they are without merit, as is plaintiffs contention that the trial court erred in giving defendant first choice of thirty percent of the property in the family home.
CHILD SUPPORT
Plaintiff contends that the amount of child support that she has been ordered to pay is excessive in view of defendant’s ability to support the minor children. She points to SDCL 25-7-7, which makes the parents of a child jointly and severally obligated to provide the necessary maintenance, education, and support of the child in accordance with their respective means.
We will not disturb a child support award on appeal unless it appears that the trial court clearly abused its discretion in the award. See, e.g., Gross v. Gross, 355 N.W.2d 4 (S.D.1984); Rykhus v. Rykhus, 319 N.W.2d 167 (S.D.1982). “The amount of child support depends on the reasonable expenditures suitable to the children’s circumstances at the time of divorce and the payor’s financial means and ability to pay.” Barrett v. Barrett, 308 N.W.2d 884, 885 (S.D.1981); Gross v. Gross, supra; Rykhus v. Rykhus, supra; Wallahan v. Wallahan, 284 N.W.2d 21 (S.D.1979).
After reviewing the record in the light of these principles, we are satisfied that the trial court did not clearly abuse its discretion in ordering plaintiff to pay $400 per month per child in the way of child support. In addition to having the duties attendant upon being the primary custodian of the children, defendant has the task of either liquidating the two money-losing business enterprises or devoting such time to them as necessary to make them profitable. On the other hand, plaintiff has a demonstrated ability to earn a substantial income from her medical practice. Although the children are still relatively young, they no doubt have grown accustomed to the standard of living that plaintiff’s income has provided in the past. Wallahan v. Wallahan, supra. Accordingly, we will not set aside the child support provisions of the judgment.
DEFENDANT’S CLAIM FOR ALIMONY AND/OR LUMP SUM COMPENSATION
Defendant contends that because he gave up his career in order to move to Vermillion so that plaintiff could attend medical school and because he made a substantial contribution to plaintiff’s attainment of her medical degree and attendant increase in future earning capacity, he should be compensated for his contributions by being awarded the family home, or, in the alternative, being awarded alimony in such an amount and for such period of time as necessary to enable him to attain competency to earn at a level equivalent to that which he would have had had he not sacrificed his career to support plaintiff in her career pursuits.
As defendant correctly observes, most courts have refused to classify a professional degree as an asset for the purposes of property division in a divorce action. See, e.g., Wisner v. Wisner, 129 Ariz. 333, 631 P.2d 115 (1981); In re Marriage of Graham, 194 Colo. 429, 574 P.2d 75 (1978); In re Marriage of Goldstein, 97 Ill.App.3d 1023, 53 Ill.Dec. 397, 423 N.E.2d 1201 (1981); Inman v. Inman, 648 S.W.2d 847 (Ky.1982); Mahoney v. Mahoney, 91 N.J. 488, 453 A.2d 527 (1982); Frausto v. Frausto, 611 S.W.2d 656 (Tex.Civ.App.1981); Grosskopf v. Grosskopf, 677 P.2d 814 (Wyo.1984); Annot., 4 A.L.R.4th 1294 (1981).
As we did in Wehrkamp v. Wehrkamp, 357 N.W.2d 264, (S.D.1984), we agree with those holdings. As the Supreme Court of Colorado stated in holding that an educational degree is not property,
It does not have an exchange value or any objective transferable value on an open market. It is personal to the holder. It terminates on death of the holder and is not inheritable. It cannot be assigned, sold, transferred, conveyed, or pledged. An advanced degree is a cumulative product of many years of previous *260education, combined with diligence and hard work. It may not be acquired by the mere expenditure of money. It is simply an intellectual achievement that may potentially assist in the future acquisition of property. In our view, it has none of the attributes of property in the usual sense of that term.
In re Marriage of Graham, supra, 574 P.2d at 77.
Likewise, the Supreme Court of New Jersey, in holding that a professional license or degree is not property to be valued in a divorce action, stated:
A professional license or degree is a personal achievement of the holder. It cannot be sold and its value cannot readily be determined. A professional license or degree represents the opportunity to obtain an amount of money only upon the occurrence of highly uncertain future events....
Equitable distribution of a professional degree would similarly require distribution of “earning capacity” — income that the degree holder might never acquire. The amount of future earnings would be entirely speculative. Moreover, any assets resulting from income for professional services would be property acquired after the marriage; the statute restricts equitable distribution to property acquired during the marriage_
Valuing a professional degree in the hands of any particular individual at the start of his or her career would involve a gamut of calculations that reduces to little more than guesswork....
Even if such estimates could be made, however, there would remain a world of unforeseen events that could affect the earning potential — not to mention the actual earnings — of any particular degree holder.
Mahoney v. Mahoney, supra, 91 N.J. at 496-97, 453 A.2d at 531-32 (emphasis in original).
Having concluded that plaintiffs medical degree does not constitute property that is subject to division in a divorce action, we turn to the question whether there is an alternative method by which defendant might be compensated for his contributions to plaintiffs professional training and the enhanced earning capacity flowing therefrom.
In recent years a number of courts have been called upon to deal with the ever more common situation in which a marriage terminates in divorce after the spouse of one of the parties has helped to finance his or her spouse’s professional education. As the Supreme Court of Wisconsin has recently stated,
The problem this case poses is not uncommon. University degree-divorce decree cases are frequent. In many marriages, while one spouse pursues an undergraduate, graduate, or professional degree or license, the other works to support the couple and foregoes his or her own education or career and the immediate benefits of a second income which the student spouse might have provided. The couple typically expects that the degree will afford them a higher shared standard of living in the future. That standard of living is never realized by the supporting spouse when the marriage breaks up just as the newly educated spouse is beginning the long-awaited career. In addition, little marital property has accumulated, because the couple’s income was used for education and living expenses.
Haugan v. Haugan, 117 Wis.2d 200, 206, 343 N.W.2d 796, 800 (1984) (footnote omitted). (For a comprehensive citation of cases and authorities on this point, see n. 3 at 343 N.W.2d 799.)
When faced with such a situation, the courts have responded with various solutions. In DeLa Rosa v. DeLa Rosa, 309 N.W.2d 755 (Minn.1981), the Supreme Court of Minnesota affirmed the trial court’s award of some $29,000 to a wife who had worked full-time and supported the parties while her husband completed his pre-medical studies and the first year of medical school prior to their divorce. The court noted that the trial court’s award, which was ordered paid on an installment *261basis in increasing amounts, was grounded in equitable principles and represented restitution of the financial support that the wife had provided to her husband.
In Mahoney v. Mahoney, supra, the Supreme Court of New Jersey adopted the concept of reimbursement alimony.
The concept properly accords with the Court’s belief that regardless of the appropriateness of permanent alimony or the presence or absence of marital property to be equitably distributed, there will be circumstances where a supporting spouse should be reimbursed for the financial contributions he or she made to the spouse’s successful professional training. Such reimbursement alimony should cover all financial contributions towards the former spouse’s education, including household expenses, educational costs, school travel expenses and any other contributions used by the supported spouse in obtaining his or her degree or license.
91 N.J. at 501, 453 A.2d at 534 (emphasis in original).
In In re Marriage of Graham, supra, the Supreme Court of Colorado held that
[a] spouse who provides financial support while the other spouse acquires an education is not without a remedy. Where there is marital property to be divided, such contribution to the education of the other spouse may be taken into consideration by the court. Greer v. Greer, supra [32 Colo.App. 196, 510 P.2d 905 (1973)]. See also Carlson v. Carlson, 178 Colo. 283, 497 P.2d 1006 [1972], Here, we again note that no marital property had been accumulated by the parties. Further, if maintenance is sought and a need is demonstrated, the trial court may make an award based on all relevant factors. Section 14-10-114(2). Certainly, among the relevant factors to be considered is the contribution of the spouse seeking maintenance to the education of the other spouse from whom the maintenance is sought.
194 Colo. at 433, 574 P.2d at 78.
In In re Marriage of Lundberg, 107 Wis.2d 1, 318 N.W.2d 918 (1982) the Supreme Court of Wisconsin, in applying a relatively recent amendment to that state’s divorce statutes, held that the supporting spouse was entitled to be fairly compensated for the contribution to the support of the student spouse, the trial court to examine all of the relevant circumstances of the particular case.
Reimbursement or restitutionary alimony will not always be appropriate or necessary. In some cases an award of what the New Jersey Supreme Court has termed “rehabilitative alimony” may be more appropriate. This is especially true in a case in which the contributing supporting spouse requires a lump sum or a short-term award to achieve economic self-sufficiency or to improve or refresh his or her job skills. See Mahoney v. Mahoney, supra. See also Bussell v. Bussell, 623 P.2d 1221 (Alaska 1981).
In Booth v. Booth, supra, we recognized the concept of rehabilitative alimony and held that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in awarding the wife $600 per month alimony for a period of fifteen months to aid her in updating her job skills.
In Wallahan v. Wallahan, supra, we in effect adopted and approved the concept of reimbursement and rehabilitative alimony in affirming an award of $700 per month alimony. In holding that this award did not constitute an abuse of discretion, we wrote:
The record is replete with evidence that plaintiff made substantial contributions as a homemaker and mother during the couple’s twenty-two years of marriage, that she gave up her career as a nurse to raise the children, that her earnings during the early years of their marriage were dedicated to putting defendant through college and law school, that she has not practiced her profession for fifteen years, and that she provided moral support and encouragement to defendant during the twenty-two years that the parties’ assets were accumulated. Taken together, these facts support and justify *262the trial court’s division of property and award of alimony_ The court properly considered the fact that plaintiff is removed from her profession by fifteen years and still has obligations with regard to raising her children. Although evidence was presented to the effect that nursing positions are available in Rapid City, the trial court could properly balance job availability against plaintiffs long absence from the labor market and her family responsibilities.
284 N.W.2d at 26-27.
In accord with our holdings in Booth and Wallahan, supra, as well as on the basis of the other authorities cited above, we hold that in a proper case the trial court should award alimony as reimbursement to the supporting spouse for his or her contribution to the non-working spouse’s obtaining of an advanced training or in the way of rehabilitative alimony to enable the supporting spouse to refresh or enhance the job skills that he or she needs to earn a living. We do not propose that the trial court be bound by any specific formula or approach in determining the amount of such alimony. Cf. DeLa Rosa v. DeLa Rosa, supra; In re Marriage of Lundberg, supra; Mahoney v. Mahoney, supra. Just as the trial court is not bound by any mathematical formula in dividing marital property, neither should the trial court be bound by a rigid, inflexible formula in awarding reimbursement or rehabilitative alimony. Rather, the trial court should consider all relevant factors, including the amount of the supporting spouse’s contributions, his or her foregone opportunities to enhance or improve professional or vocational skills, and the duration of the marriage following completion of the nonsupporting spouse’s professional education. See Mahoney v. Mahoney, supra, 453 A.2d at 534, and n. 5 at 535.
We conclude that the trial court did not err in refusing to award defendant either a lump sum reimbursement by way of transfer of the marital home or in the way of reimbursement alimony. Contrary to his contention, defendant did not forego any career plans or advancement as a result of moving to Vermillion in order to be with plaintiff during her medical education. Indeed, as pointed out above, defendant secured employment with the University of South Dakota. At the same time, he was able to complete a book on Indian art and to obtain his master of arts degree in school administration. This is hardly the type of personal sacrifice and self-deprivation that is characteristic of so many cases in which one’s spouse contributes to the professional education of his or her partner. Moreover, plaintiff incurred financial obligations of her own in financing her medical school education. As indicated above, she secured a waiver of tuition by agreeing to practice medicine in the state. Moreover, she incurred student loans that have left her with an outstanding loan balance of $45,000 to repay. As with the award of alimony in any case, see, e.g., Guindon v. Guindon, supra, the decision whether to award reimbursement or rehabilitative alimony, and, if so, in what amount and for what length of time, is committed to the sound discretion of the trial court. After considering all of the relevant factors in the case before us, we cannot say that the trial court abused its discretion in denying defendant’s request for alimony.
DENIAL OF ATTORNEY FEES AND COSTS
The final issue for our consideration is defendant’s claim that the trial court abused its discretion in denying his request for attorney fees and costs. We conclude that this argument is not well taken.
SDCL 15-17-7 provides that in cases of divorce the trial court shall have the power to order payment of attorney fees where the allowance of the same seems warranted and necessary to the court. As we have held many times, the allowance of attorney fees in a divorce action is a matter which rests within the sound discretion of the trial court. See, e.g., Ver Meer v. Ver Meer, 90 S.D. 351, 241 *263N.W.2d 571 (1976) and Jameson v. Jameson, 90 S.D. 179, 239 N.W.2d 5 (1976).
In Wallahan v. Wallahan, supra, we said that
[i]n determining the portion that should be paid by the husband, the trial court should consider the property owned by each party, their relative incomes, whether the wife’s property is in liquid or fixed assets, whether the actions of the wife or of the husband unreasonably increased the time spent on the case.
284 N.W.2d at 28.
We conclude that the trial court acted well within its discretion in denying defendant’s request for attorney fees and costs.
CONCLUSION
To the extent that it fails to take into account the $12,000 bank account balance held by plaintiff’s professional corporation at the time of trial, includes personal property that the parties had stipulated should be set aside to their children, and includes certain property twice in the valuation of the personal property located in the Northern Hills Art Gallery, the judgment is reversed, and the case is remanded to the circuit court with directions to make whatever adjustments may be necessary to correct these errors. In all other respects, the judgment is affirmed.
FOSHEIM, C.J., MORGAN, J., and DUNN, Retired Justice, concur.
HENDERSON, J., concurs specially.
DUNN, Retired Justice, participating.
WUEST, Circuit Judge, Acting as Supreme Court Justice, not participating.
Plaintiff’s counsel on appeal did not represent her at trial.

=== CASE 9739812 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:12.507417+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(specially concurring).
I am of the belief that a timely concurring opinion may suffice to check an extension of any court’s holding or a newly announced doctrine, and thereby better serve our jurisprudence. A concurring opinion can be of value by sounding a warning that a new holding or doctrine must not be pressed too far. As students of the law, we often see a majority opinion announce a new holding or doctrine which is jurisprudentially sound when applied to the facts before the court, but if given a general application, would be wholly unsound. Concurring opinions, without negatively detracting from the majority opinion can shed light on a majority opinion and permit the student of the law, and the Bar, a greater insight into the scope and breadth of the decision. A different viewpoint arises from different reasoning and often an author of a special writing can agree with the decision, holding, or doctrine, but cannot subscribe to the language embracing the decision. Down the road, in appellate time, an appellate justice discovers himself in an uncomfortable position if he has embraced the language of a decision to which he does not fully subscribe. Thus, I specially concur herein.
In Wehrkamp v. Wehrkamp, 357 N.W.2d 264 (S.D.1984), we essentially held that a college degree is not “property” to be divided nor is the potential earning capacity stemming therefrom distributable property. We left the door open for rehabilitative alimony, but said that it did not fit the facts.
I concur with the entirety of this decision but cannot accept the language of that aspect of the opinion denominated under “DEFENDANT’S CLAIM FOR ALIMONY AND/OR LUMP SUM COMPENSATION.” I am fearful, as I prefaced above, that this aspect of the opinion widens the door to such extent that a college degree becomes susceptible to a distribution of sorts — as property. I note that, conceptually, courts have adjudicated upon lump sum compensation, reimbursement alimony, restitution alimony, and rehabilitative alimony. To me, rehabilitative alimony is an award of a monthly sum of money to rehabilitate a deserving spouse so that he or she may obtain the skills necessary to fend for himself or herself in life, by education or job training. Once lump sum compensation, alimony by reimbursement, or alimony by restitution is created by a trial court, it is recognition of a college degree as distribu*264table property — it is accomplishing indirectly that which the court does not wish to directly accomplish. I would restrict the holding to rehabilitative alimony and would not permit the other concepts to come into play in meting out the equities.

=== CASE 2221009 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:02.312502+00 ===

347 Mass. 107 (1964)
196 N.E.2d 642
WILFRED BOYER
vs.
NEW ENGLAND CITRUS BOWL, INC.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Worcester.
February 3, 1964.
February 28, 1964.
Present: WILKINS, C.J., SPALDING, KIRK, SPIEGEL, & REARDON, JJ.
Joseph F. Sawyer, Jr., for the defendant.
Stanley B. Milton for the plaintiff.
KIRK, J.
In this action of tort for negligence the sole question is whether the defendant was entitled to a directed verdict.
It is not disputed that on January 6, 1961, the plaintiff, while standing at the foot of a conveyor or slide, was struck and injured by a carton of canned goods placed on the conveyor by an employee of the defendant. The circumstances preceding and attending the injury, as gathered from the agreed bill of exceptions, must be stated in detail for a proper presentation of the issue. We state them in the light most favorable to the plaintiff. Howes v. Kelman, 326 Mass. 696, 696-697. On the day of the injury, the forty-nine year old plaintiff had been employed for ten months by Clark University, at Worcester, as a maintenance man. In addition to cleaning and painting he assisted in the unloading *108 of trucks. On January 6, 1961, he was instructed to assist in the unloading of a two and one-half ton van truck in which the defendant was making delivery of canned goods and groceries to the cafeteria of the university. The truck had been backed up to the loading platform of the cafeteria by an employee of the defendant. The platform was four feet above the ground, six feet wide and fifteen feet long. One of the two doors on the platform opened into the elevator shaft in the building. The defendant's two truck employees set up a conveyor, fifteen feet long, with rollers (like the wheels of roller skates) on axles connecting the metal sides, in the following manner: one end rested upon cases inside the truck; the other rested upon one or two cases on the platform at the door to the elevator shaft. An angle of thirty to forty-five degrees was formed by the planes of the conveyor and the platform.
The plaintiff took his position on the platform at the lower end of the conveyor which was approximately at knee level. He had never unloaded from a conveyor before. There was no conversation with the defendant's employees before the unloading began. Alternately the two employees of the defendant, from positions inside the truck, placed cartons of canned goods on the conveyor. The cartons weighed approximately forty-five pounds, and were twenty-four inches long, eighteen inches wide and nine inches high. The plaintiff faced the truck and as each carton came down the conveyor he caught it from the rollers, lifted it, pivoted to the left on his left foot, and moved his right leg around so that his back was to the truck and he was facing the elevator, in which he placed the carton. He then straightened up and turned to face the truck and to receive the next carton. Eight cartons had thus been received by the plaintiff and each put by him in a different place in the elevator. The interval between putting the cartons on the conveyor was determined by the defendant's employees' observing that the plaintiff was ready to catch the carton when it was put on. The injury to the plaintiff occurred when a fifty pound carton, placed on the conveyor by one of the defendant's employees while the plaintiff's back was turned, as *109 described, slid down and off the conveyor and struck the plaintiff on the side of his right knee knocking him over. Both employees of the defendant had an unobstructed view of the plaintiff, and saw that his back was turned when the carton was started on its way down the conveyor.
The evidence presented a question for the jury on the issue of negligence. The case involves the application of the elementary rule whether the employees of the defendant exercised the degree of care which a person of ordinary prudence and caution would have exercised in similar circumstances. The jury could find that they did not. The defendant's employees knew that the plaintiff had to turn his back to them in order to put each carton in place in the elevator, that the time interval would vary, however slightly, with the time required to put each in place, and that a carton sliding down the conveyor, unless stopped, would go off the conveyor at knee level and strike a person standing where they knew the plaintiff was standing. Clearly, the jury could find that the act of starting the carton down the conveyor while the plaintiff's back was turned was a negligent act.
The defendant, relying upon Sprague v. Great Atl. & Pac. Tea Co. 342 Mass. 711, contends, nevertheless, that it was entitled to a directed verdict. The resemblance between the two cases is superficial. In both cases there was a conveyor, a knowledge by the plaintiff of its purpose, a box propelled along it by an employee of the defendant, and an injury to the plaintiff from contact with the box. There the resemblance ends. In the Sprague case, in contrast to the case before us, there was no knowledge on the part of the defendant's employee that the plaintiff, a customer with a physical abnormality, would in any way be endangered by the movement of the box on the conveyor; nor was there any showing "that the defendant's servant should have anticipated that someone might be standing with his body projecting over the conveyor, or could have, by means of an unobstructed view, looked and seen the plaintiff before pushing the grocery box ... [nor was it] clear whether the plaintiff was standing with his back protruding over *110 the conveyor ... [before the box was pushed] or whether he moved into that position after the grocery box was in motion ...."
These differences in the evidence in the two cases, all bearing upon the question of the reasonableness of the conduct of the defendant's employees in the existing circumstances, distinguish the two cases on the issue of negligence.
On the issue of contributory negligence, it is sufficient to say that the defendant had the burden of proving that the plaintiff's reliance upon the expectation that the defendant's employees would not start a box down the conveyor while his back was turned was unreasonable. This issue also was for the jury.
It follows that the denial of the motion for a directed verdict was right, and the order must be
Exceptions overruled.

=== CASE 2221014 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:02.409614+00 ===

136 Mich. App. 772 (1984)
357 N.W.2d 764
BERRIEN COUNTY
v.
STATE OF MICHIGAN
Docket No. 72521.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided August 20, 1984.
Thomas E. Nelson, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for plaintiffs.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Louis J. Caruso, Solicitor General, and Janis Meija and William K. Basinger, Assistants Attorney General, for defendants.
Before: D.E. HOLBROOK, JR., P.J., and CYNAR and T. GILLESPIE,[*] JJ.
PER CURIAM.
In this case plaintiffs challenge the Medicaid reimbursement system implemented by the state pursuant to 1980 PA 391, amending MCL 400.109; MSA 16.490(19). Plaintiffs appeal as of right from an order of summary judgment entered in favor of defendants.
The instant dispute concerns the operation of certain Medicaid provisions covering nursing home services in county-operated medical care facilities and hospital long-term care units (LTCUs), also known as chronic care units. At issue is the Medicaid funding to Berrien County Hospital's LTCU. Prior to 1980, funding or reimbursement for days of care provided to Medicaid recipients in such facilities was made by Medicaid at less than the facility's per diem cost. The "old rate" was a prospective rate based on previously established annual cost figures, including an inflationary adjustment. A limit on the amount of reimbursement from Medicaid was set at the cost level of the 80th percentile of all providers, with the facilities whose costs were in the upper 20% of all providers of a given class being considered inefficient. In *776 1980, however, the Legislature enacted 1980 PA 391, effective January 7, 1981, which raised the reimbursement rate to such a facility to its actual cost but also required that the county make so-called "maintenance-of-effort" (MOE) payments to the state in reimbursement of 90% of the additional amount paid in the new, higher Medicaid payments. 1980 PA 391, § 1, MCL 400.109; MSA 16.490(19), provides in relevant part:
"(c) * * * The state department shall pay for nursing home services in accordance with the state plan for medical assistance adopted pursuant to section 10 and approved by the United States department of health and human services. A county shall reimburse the state at 90% of the county rate for each day of nursing home services provided to eligible persons in facilities owned by the county and licensed to provide nursing home services. As used in this subdivision:
"(i) `County rate' means the difference between the routine service cost per diem and the prospectively established rate, as determined pursuant to the state plan for medical assistance, for the county's full fiscal year immediately before the effective date of this subparagraph, or the second full fiscal year of operation for a recently constructed county-owned facility, as defined in the state plan for medical assistance, whichever occurs later, adjusted by the rate of change in routine cost per diem for each subsequent county fiscal year.
"(ii) `Routine service cost per diem' means the routine service cost divided by the total number of inpatient days, or the variable cost limit plus the plant cost component, whichever is less. Routine service cost, variable cost limit, and plant cost component as used in this subparagraph shall be determined pursuant to the state plan for medical assistance."
Plaintiff county refused to make the MOE payment required by the statute. As a result, defendants notified the Berrien County Treasurer that *777 they were going to take an offset against the county's revenue-sharing receipts in November, 1982, to reimburse the state for plaintiffs' unremitted MOE payments. Thereafter, in order to prevent further offsets against the next quarterly revenue-sharing payment, plaintiffs brought suit against the state and certain departments thereof, alleging that 1980 PA 391 violated their right to equal protection of the law; that the offset from revenue-sharing payments in the amount of the county's MOE obligation violated Michigan law; that hospital CCUs were not subject to the MOE reimbursement provisions; that the inclusion of "institutional code days" (ICDs) (those days of care paid for by individual patients before they became entitled to Medicaid payments) in the calculation of the MOE was improper; and that 1980 PA 391 violated the Headlee Amendment to the Michigan Constitution, Const 1963, art 9, §§ 25 and 29. A temporary restraining order was issued on February 15, 1983, restraining further offsets against revenue sharing, and an order to show cause why a preliminary injunction should not issue was set for April 6, 1983.
Defendant filed a response to the order to show cause and moved for summary judgment. At the hearing on the order to show cause held on April 6, 1983, the lower court dissolved the temporary restraining order and denied preliminary injunctive relief. Subsequently, plaintiffs filed a cross-motion for summary judgment, with both motions for summary judgment being heard on June 7, 1983. At the June 7 hearing, the lower court granted defendants' motion for summary judgment, finding that plaintiffs' complaint failed to state a claim upon which relief could be granted, pursuant to GCR 1963, 117.2(1).
*778 I
Does the MOE provision of 1980 PA 391 violate plaintiffs' rights to equal protection of the law?
Plaintiffs maintain that equal protection is violated as to Berrien County because county hospitals are arbitrarily required to reimburse the state for a portion of Medicaid funding they receive, while other municipal hospitals are not so required, and as to David Peterson because he may suffer increased health care expenses.
Defendants correctly assert that in Williams v Mayor & City Council of Baltimore, 289 U.S. 36, 40; 53 S. Ct. 431; 77 L. Ed. 1015 (1933), the United States Supreme Court held that a municipal corporation "has no privileges or immunities under the federal constitution which it may invoke in opposition to the will of its creator", i.e., the state. This statement was made in the context of an equal protection challenge.
Moreover, in DeWitt Twp v Clinton County, 113 Mich. App. 709, 717; 319 NW2d 2 (1982), this Court, after citing Williams, supra, and in response to an equal protection challenge under the state constitution, stated that there is "no reason why a local governmental unit's assertion of equal protection and due process rights under our state constitution should lead to a different result". Thus, equal protection challenges against the state by a municipality have been rejected under both federal and Michigan constitutions.
Plaintiffs cite language from Chicago v Sturges, 222 U.S. 313; 32 S. Ct. 92; 56 L. Ed. 215 (1911), in support of their position that there are exceptions to the rule that municipalities have no equal protection rights. Sturges, however, was decided *779 long before Williams made the rather definitive statement that municipalities, being creatures of the state, have no privileges vis-a-vis the state. Furthermore, the notion that the Equal Protection Clause "protect[s] people, not states" and, therefore, also does not apply to municipalities, was again more recently stated in Pennsylvania v New Jersey, 426 U.S. 660, 665; 96 S. Ct. 2333; 49 L. Ed. 2d 124 (1976). Plaintiff county's equal protection challenge does not state a claim upon which relief may be granted.
As to plaintiff Peterson, his claim is that the state's requirement that county hospitals remit MOE payments to the state affects him indirectly as a taxpayer and perhaps as a potential patient because essential services may be reduced. This, plaintiffs maintain, is a matter which should have been developed factually, so that summary judgment was improper. Although it cannot be gainsaid that plaintiff Peterson enjoys equal protection rights, his assertions are purely speculative. First, he is not a Medicaid recipient who has been adversely affected by implementation of the MOE provisions. Peterson has also failed to allege with particularity how the MOE system will cause him to suffer loss or damage as a taxpayer. Menendez v Detroit, 337 Mich. 476, 482; 60 NW2d 319 (1953); Killeen v Wayne County Civil Service Comm, 108 Mich. App. 14, 18; 310 NW2d 257 (1981). We conclude that this individual plaintiff lacks standing to assert his equal protection claim, having failed to show a concrete interest "in the outcome of this litigation sufficient to invoke the controversy-resolving powers of the judiciary". Michigan License Beverage Ass'n v Behnan Hall, Inc, 82 Mich. App. 319, 325; 266 NW2d 808 (1978). See also Rayford v Detroit, 132 Mich. App. 248; 347 NW2d 210 (1984); *780 Karrip v Cannon Twp, 115 Mich. App. 726, 732-734; 321 NW2d 690 (1982).
II
Does the MOE provision, by its terms, apply to plaintiff county's long-term care units?
Act 391 provides that counties must reimburse the state at the specified rate for nursing home services by facilities "owned by the county and licensed to provide nursing home services". Plaintiffs would construe the act as excluding county LTCUs. Plaintiffs point to MCL 333.20109(1); MSA 14.15(20109)(1) for support:
"Sec. 20109. (1) `Nursing home' means a nursing care facility, including a county medical care facility, but excluding a hospital or a facility created by Act No. 152 of the Public Acts of 1885, as amended, being sections 36.1 to 36.12 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, which provides organized nursing care and medical treatment to 7 or more unrelated individuals suffering or recovering from illness, injury, or infirmity." (Emphasis added.)
Further, MCL 333.21711(2); MSA 14.15(21711)(2) provides:
"(2) `Nursing home', `nursing center', `convalescent center', `extended care facility', or a similar term or abbreviation shall not be used to describe or refer to a health facility or agency unless the health facility or agency is licensed as a nursing home by the department under this article." (Emphasis added.)
Accordingly, plaintiffs posit that a nursing home does not include a hospital or facility which, like a county LTCU, is not licensed as a nursing home.
Defendants correctly argue, however, that Act 391 does not require a facility to be licensed as a *781 nursing home, but rather, that it be licensed to provide nursing home services. They also direct this Court's attention to MCL 333.20106(6); MSA 14.15(20106)(6), which states:
"(6) `Hospital long-term care unit' means a nursing care facility, owned and operated by and as part of a hospital, providing organized nursing care and medical treatment to 7 or more unrelated individuals suffering or recovering from illness, injury, or infirmity". (Emphasis added.)
Thus, a hospital, without being licensed as a "nursing home", is clearly contemplated to provide nursing home services as a "nursing care facility".
Plaintiffs also contend that "nursing home services" (not being defined anywhere) must refer to services provided by nursing homes, especially since MCL 333.21711(2) and (3); MSA 14.15(21711)(2) and (3), respectively, require licen-sure in order for any agency or facility to use the term "nursing home" or the like and licensure for services normally provided in a nursing home. But these provisions are less specific than MCL 333.20106(6); MSA 14.15(20106)(6), which recognizes that an LTCU may be operated as part of a hospital and that such may provide "organized nursing care". Our review of the foregoing provisions persuades us that the MOE provisions were intended to be applicable to hospital LTCUs. The lower court did not err in rejecting plaintiffs' proposed construction of Act 391.
III
Was the MOE calculation erroneous in that it included "institutional code days"?
Plaintiffs complain that in calculating the MOE *782 payment charged to plaintiff county, defendants inappropriately included institutional code days, or ICDs. ICDs, again, are days of care which must be paid by patients as a requisite to receipt of Medicaid benefits. The issue turns on construction of the following language from Act 391:
"A county shall reimburse the state at 90% of the county rate for each day of nursing home services provided to eligible persons". (Emphasis added.) MCL 400.109(c); MSA 16.490(19)(c).
Defendants have construed the phrase "eligible persons" in the preceding context to include persons for whom benefits are contingent upon payment of their ICD obligation; important to this construction is the fact that under the Medicaid program eligibility is determined in advance.
We note that this issue must be reviewed with respectful consideration of the Department of Social Service's interpretation, since due-deference is accorded the construction placed upon legislation by the agency responsible for its administration. Mutual Life Ins Co of New York v Ins Bureau, 121 Mich. App. 386, 391; 328 NW2d 638 (1982). We find defendant's interpretation of "eligible persons" within the meaning of MCL 400.109(c); MSA 16.490(19)(c) to be eminently reasonable.
Plaintiffs also contend that the MOE payment should not include ICDs because the statutory language provides for a reimbursement. Plaintiffs maintain that, because the patient must pick up the tab for ICDs, recoupment of costs by the state based upon ICDs provides the state with a profit rather than a reimbursement. Both plaintiffs and defendants have set forth mathematical illustrations in an attempt to establish their respective positions. Plaintiffs address the scheme in the *783 context of how it would operate if ICD obligations were not included; however, they do not attempt to compare the present scheme with the former "prospective rate", as do defendants. This latter comparison illustrates that the Medicaid contribution is greater under the present system and that the MOE payment essentially equalizes the burden imposed under the present and former methods. Due to the increased Medicaid rate per diem, the patient's ICD contribution covers a lesser number of days than it previously did, requiring Medicaid to pay a correspondingly greater number of days per month, and at a higher rate. The result is that the state pays a greater amount in gross, so that there can be no claim that it is recouping money which it never expended, i.e., that it is making a "profit".
Under this broader view of the Medicaid program, we do not perceive inclusion of ICDs in the MOE calculation as inconsistent with the statutory reference to reimbursement. We sustain the lower court's conclusion on this issue.
IV
Does the MOE system as applied to plaintiff county violate the Headlee Amendment, Const 1963, art 9, §§ 25 and 29?
Const 1963, art 9, § 29 provides:
"The state is hereby prohibited from reducing the state financed proportion of the necessary costs of any existing activity or service required of units of Local Government by state law. A new activity or service or an increase in the level of any activity or service beyond that required by existing law shall not be required by the legislature or any state agency of units of Local Government, unless a state appropriation is *784 made and disbursed to pay the unit of Local Government for any necessary increased costs. The provision of this section shall not apply to costs incurred pursuant to Article VI, Section 18." (Emphasis added.)
Under this provision, the state must continue to finance, at the same level, that portion of a state-mandated service or activity which it was financing for local units of government on December 22, 1978, the date the Headlee Amendment went into effect. In this connection, the case sub judice involves the questions of whether Medicaid funding through MOE payments by the county amounts to a reduction of state financing or, alternatively, an increase in an existing state-mandated activity within the meaning of the Headlee Amendment, and if so, whether the increased costs are "necessary costs" within the meaning of § 29.
To begin, MCL 21.234(4); MSA 5.3194(604)(4), part of the act passed by the Legislature in 1979 to implement the Headlee Amendment, provides that "state law" means a state statute or agency rule. Further, MCL 400.109(c); MSA 16.490(19)(c)  Act 391  states that the county shall reimburse the state at the prescribed rate. Thus, it seems clear that Act 391 is a "requirement of state law". The central issue here, however, is whether this requirement increases the necessary costs of an existing requirement. In this connection, this Court's recent decision in Ann Arbor v Michigan, 132 Mich. App. 132; 347 NW2d 10 (1984), supports a conclusion that nursing home services as described in Act 391 are not "requirements of state law", so that a requirement that the county reimburse the state would not run afoul of the Headlee Amendment. In Ann Arbor, supra, pp 136-137, this Court stated:
*785 "This Court has not yet interpreted the meaning of the phrase `activity or service required * * * by state law' as used in the above provision. Under MCL 21.234(4); MSA 5.3194(604)(4), which implements this constitutional provision, however, `state law' is defined as `a state statute or agency rule'. MCL 21.234(5)(h); MSA 5.3194(604)(5)(h) provides that a statute or rule allowing a local unit of government to perform an activity or service, but not requiring it, is not a `requirement of state law'.
"Because it is dispositive, we address only the issue of whether the furnishing of fire protection services by plaintiff municipal corporations is an activity required by state law and hold that it is not.
"Although charter townships and townships are authorized by statute to provide fire protection, MCL 41.181, 41.801, 42.13; MSA 5.45(1), 5.2640(1), 5.46(13), each of these statutes is clearly permissive rather than mandatory.
"The home rule cities act, MCL 117.1 et seq.; MSA 5.2071 et seq., requires that such cities provide in their charters `[for] the public peace and health and for the safety of persons and property'. MCL 117.3(j); MSA 5.2073(j). Nothing in the act, however, specifically requires that home rule cities provide fire protection. Indeed, fire protection has long been considered a purely local matter. Davidson v Hine, 151 Mich. 294; 115 N.W. 246 (1908). This conclusion is also supported by other statutes which recognize that it is optional for cities to have fire departments." (Emphasis added.)
Relevant here is MCL 331.202; MSA 14.1150(2), which provides that "it shall be competent and lawful for the board of supervisors of any county * * * to acquire, own, construct, establish, maintain, and operate a hospital * * *. The board of supervisors shall also determine the sum or sums of money to be appropriated for the acquisition, ownership, construction, establishment, maintenance, operational and equipment purposes." Thus, such hospitals are permissive, and once *786 established, the county is given the authority to operate them. If the running of the hospital itself is permissive, a function thereof, i.e., Medicaid-funded nursing home services, may also be considered permissive.
Alternatively, an increase in a state-mandated activity must have the effect of reducing the state-financed proportion of "necessary costs". The Legislature has defined "necessary cost" in MCL 21.233(6); MSA 5.3194(603)(6) as follows:
"(6) `Necessary cost' means the net cost of an activity or service provided by a local unit of government. The net cost shall be the actual cost to the state if the state were to provide the activity or service mandated as a state requirement, unless otherwise determined by the legislature when making a state requirement. Necessary cost does not include the cost of a state requirement if the state requirement satisfies 1 or more of the following conditions:
"(a) The state requirement cost does not exceed a de minimus cost.
"(b) The state requirement will result in an offsetting savings to an extent that, if the duties of a local unit which existed before the effective date of the state requirement are considered, the requirement will not exceed a de minimus cost.
"(c) The state requirement imposes additional duties on a local unit of government which can be performed by that local unit of government at a cost not to exceed a de minimus cost.
"(d) The state requirement imposes a cost on a local unit of government that is recoverable from a federal or state categorical aid program, or other external financial aid. A necessary cost excluded by this subdivision shall be excluded only to the extent that it is recoverable."
The exclusions from "necessary costs" contained in subdivisions (6)(b) through (6)(d) above indicate *787 that the costs involved here are not "necessary" within the meaning of the Headlee Amendment. To begin with, the MOE obligation is offset by increased payments to the hospital. Plaintiffs argue that the county cannot be equated with the hospital so that there is no offset. We do not find this argument persuasive. MCL 331.202; MSA 14.1150(2) provides the county with the authority to establish, maintain, and operate a county hospital. The county also determines the amount of funds to be appropriated therefor. And, pursuant to MCL 331.203 and 331.204; MSA 14.1150(3) and 14.1150(4), the county has the authority to raise necessary funds through taxation for the county facility and to appoint the board of trustees for the hospital. Thus, it cannot be maintained that the county is not the beneficiary of the offset in savings created by an increased per diem Medicaid rate. We find no violation of the Headlee Amendment to the Michigan Constitution.
V
Was defendants' use of an offset against revenue-sharing payments in order to collect plaintiffs' MOE obligation improper or in violation of Const 1963, art 4, §§ 24 and 25?
Section 11 of the State Revenue Sharing Act of 1971, MCL 141.911; MSA 5.3194(411), couches in mandatory terms the payment of revenue-sharing funds to the counties:
"Sec. 11. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the department of administration shall cause to be paid during each August, November, February and May, to counties on a per capita basis the collections from the state income tax as certified by the department of treasury for the quarter periods ending *788 the prior June 30, September 30, December 31 and March 31 which are available for distribution to and retention by counties." (Emphasis added.)
However, the 1981 and 1982 Department of Social Services appropriations acts specifically provide for offsets against revenue-sharing payments:
"The state shall be authorized to offset county obligations from payments made to counties under section 11 of Act No. 140 of the Public Acts of 1971, being section 141.911 of the Michigan Compiled Laws." 1981 PA 35, § 61; 1982 PA 257, § 43.
Plaintiffs have advanced several arguments to the effect that these offset provisions are illegal or unconstitutional; we find one of these arguments dispositive. Plaintiffs claim that these provisions affront Const 1963, art 4, § 25, which provides:
"No law shall be revised, altered or amended by reference to its title only. The section or sections of the act altered or amended shall be reenacted and published at length."
It is plaintiffs' position that had the Legislature wished "to place a contingency upon the county's right to receive revenue sharing under MCL 141.911, then the same would require an amendment of the applicable portions of the state's revenue-sharing legislation to accomplish the same, and could not constitutionally be accomplished through adding a phrase to a section buried within a Department of Social Services Appropriation bill". Defendants do not address this argument.
In this case the thrust of MCL 141.911; MSA 5.319(411) seems clear, and is, in our view, altered by the above-quoted setoff language from *789 the appropriations bills. Since the bills amended the revenue-sharing provision by reference to its title only, they are unconstitutional and may not be invoked to support the setoff of MOE payments against the state's revenue-sharing obligations.
Affirmed in part; reversed in part and remanded for proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion. No costs.
NOTES
[*]  Circuit judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.

=== CASE 3784431 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:08.933578+00 ===

The question presented is not whether power may be reposed in or taken away from the county auditor by the Legislature but whether taking away the auditor's authority to proceed further upon presentation of the certificate of immunity is unconstitutional. The constitutionality of an act is to be judged by its effect rather than its form.
The immunity provision of Section 5398, General Code, divides personal property taxpayers into two classes — those who have been honest and careful enough to make full returns and comply with the laws relating to taxation and those who have not made full returns and have thus dishonestly or heedlessly evaded taxation — and allows retention of taxes of those who have complied with legal requirements while in effect it releases those who have not. When we hold that such an enactment is not class legislation denying the equal protection of the law, we open the door to legislative discrimination against law-abiding taxpayers in favor of taxpayers who fail to make full and complete returns and thereby evade just taxation. Such discrimination is a violation of the guaranty contained in the equal protection clause of the organic law.
There are other grounds upon which the constitutionality of that provision could be challenged but the ground stated is all-sufficient. *Page 61
Since the cause involves returns of deceased made during his lifetime, the right to a certificate of immunity pursuant to Section 5398-1, General Code, in order to avoid criminal prosecution is not involved.
WEYGANDT, C.J., concurs in the foregoing dissenting opinion.

=== CASE 2221020 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:02.529043+00 ===

357 N.W.2d 268 (1984)
STATE of South Dakota, Plaintiff and Appellee,
v.
Steven Allen HEADRICK, Defendant and Appellant.
No. 14463.
Supreme Court of South Dakota.
Considered on Briefs September 14, 1984.
Decided October 24, 1984.
*269 Richard H. Wendt, Asst. Atty. Gen., Pierre, for plaintiff and appellee; Mark V. Meierhenry, Atty. Gen., Pierre, on brief.
Joseph Neiles of Zimmer, Richter & Duncan, Parker, for defendant and appellant.
WUEST, Circuit Judge, acting as a Supreme Court Justice.
This is an appeal from a judgment of conviction for burglary in the third degree, pursuant to SDCL 22-32-8. We affirm.
Appellant, Steven Allen Headrick (Headrick), was charged with the crime of burglary in the third degree, SDCL 22-32-8, and petty theft in the second degree, SDCL 22-30A-1 and 17. He pled not guilty and a jury trial was held, with the jury returning verdicts of guilty on both counts. He was charged as an habitual offender, pursuant to SDCL 22-7-7 and admitted the allegation. He received a sentence of ten years on the third-degree burglary charge.
Sometime during the weekend of July 8, 9, and 10, 1983, the East River Legal Services Office (E.R.L.S.) in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, was burglarized. Approximately $ 875.00 in cash was taken from the premises. The office is located in the same building as the Albert House Hotel. Gene Stamp (Stamp), a night clerk at the Albert House, testified on behalf of the State that Headrick checked into the hotel around 8:30 p.m. on July 10, 1983. Stamp testified that he had seen Headrick one other time, Labor Day weekend of 1982, in the basement of the hotel, which adjoins the E.R. L.S. library. Stamp had gone to the basement, which was used for storage, and was startled to find Headrick, who said he had been sleeping there. Bedding was on the floor, supporting Headrick's explanation of his presence. Headrick was not a registered guest at the hotel at that time.
An officer from the Sioux Falls Police Department went to E.R.L.S. on the morning of July 11, 1983. The officer took a report of the burglary-theft and received a cash box and "Band-Aid" box which had contained some of the stolen money. Ray Cuccaro, an identification officer with the police department, received these items as exhibits, lifting a latent fingerprint off the metal cash box. Maria Schuetts-Hendrickson, an analyst from the South Dakota *270 State Division of Criminal Investigation Laboratory, testified that Headrick's fingerprint had appeared on the cash box.
Dennis Beck (Beck), a detective with the local police department, went to E.R.L.S. on July 11 and examined all entrances, including the basement door. Beck noticed that the frame around the basement door was partially pulled out, with scuff marks on the wood and scratch marks on the latch. Beck noticed no other damage or signs of forced entry on any of the other doors.
Beck talked with Headrick twice during his investigation. Beck talked with Headrick on July 12, 1983, at the Main Avenue Manor (Manor). Beck encountered Headrick in the main lobby of the Manor and they went to Headrick's room, where Headrick was advised of his Miranda rights. Beck interviewed Headrick concerning a burglary at the Good Will Industries Building in Sioux Falls, and other general matters. The E.R.L.S. burglary was not mentioned at that time and no admissions were made by Headrick.
On July 21, 1983, Beck went to the Manor and arrested Headrick, escorted him to the Public Safety Building where Beck advised him of his Miranda rights upon arriving at the interview room. Beck testified at trial that Headrick agreed to talk about the E.R.L.S. burglary, admitting that he had gone through a wooden door of the premises and had taken money from a filing cabinet.
Headrick contends that his admission, relating to the E.R.L.S. burglary, was coerced and that because such confession was not obtained after a voluntary and intelligent waiver of his constitutional right against self-incrimination the trial court should not have allowed it into evidence. Upon a motion to suppress the confession at trial, however, the court found that Headrick's statement concerning the E.R. L.S. burglary "was voluntary beyond a reasonable doubt and that he waived his right beyond a reasonable doubt." We agree.
This court has adopted the position that it must consider the evidence in the light most favorable to support the trial court's decision. State v. Cowell, 288 N.W.2d 322 (S.D.1980); State v. Kiehn, 86 S.D. 549, 199 N.W.2d 594 (1972); State v. Thundershield, 83 S.D. 414, 160 N.W.2d 408 (1968). The trial judge has the responsibility for making the decision as to whether or not the State has met its burden of proof and the test is in view of the totality of the circumstances. Cowell, supra; State v. Lyons, 269 N.W.2d 124 (S.D.1978); State v. Stumes, 90 S.D. 382, 241 N.W.2d 587 (1976); State v. Adkins, 88 S.D. 571, 225 N.W.2d 598 (1975). If the trial court finds that the confession was voluntary beyond a reasonable doubt, such a finding is binding upon the reviewing court unless it is clearly erroneous. Cowell, supra; State v. Dubois, 286 N.W.2d 801 (S.D. 1979); Mobridge Community Industries v. Toure, 273 N.W.2d 128 (S.D.1978); State v. Lewis, 90 S.D. 615, 244 N.W.2d 307 (1976).
Headrick contends that the trial court's ruling concerning the voluntariness of his confession was clearly erroneous. Headrick supports this proposition by alleging that he is of low intelligence, was drunk when the admission was made, and was coerced into making the statement by virtue of the fact that the interrogating officers offered him a "deal" if he confessed and would charge him with other crimes if he did not confess.
We find the evidence in this case to the contrary. It is uncontradicted that Headrick had a low intelligence quotient. The facts, however, indicate that he was not of such low intelligence that he could not understand his right against self-incrimination. Headrick was given Miranda warnings on each occasion that he spoke with Beck. Indeed, after his arrest, he agreed to talk about the E.R.L.S. burglary after he had thought about the matter. There was no testimony that Headrick was drunk, other than his own statement that he had six beers. Headrick's testimony indicated that he was a regular drinker and that he had a tolerance for this quantity of alcohol. Furthermore, the alleged coercive element of *271 Headrick's statement to the interrogating officers related to a "clear out," that is, the officers' attempt to clear up as much of the downtown district's nonviolent criminal activity as they could. Upon being informed of the evidence against him in the E.R.L.S. burglary, Headrick made statements as to his involvement in other burglaries in the downtown Sioux Falls area. It is clear from the evidence that these admissions were made after Headrick's statement concerning the E.R.L.S. break-in.
We cannot say, in view of the totality of the circumstances, that the trial court was clearly erroneous in its determination that Headrick's confession, regarding the E.R.L.S. burglary, was voluntarily and knowingly made.
Accordingly, the trial court's judgment is affirmed.
All the Justices concur.

=== CASE 9739813 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:17.880298+00 ===

Achor, J.
— This is an appeal from a judgment in a statutory action for the review of a judgment, under authority of Acts 1881 (Spec. Sess.), ch. 38, §665, p. 240, being §§2-2604, et seq. The judgment in the action, of which appellants sought review, was made by the Gibson Circuit Court, in Cause No. 9927, captioned: “In re: Petition of Stephen A. Blood, Jr. et ah, for a Levee in Gibson and Posey Counties, Indiana.” Said judgment determined benefits, approved and confirmed assessments, and declared the proposed levee established. The action in that proceeding was brought under the Drains and Levees Act [§27-801, et seq., Burns’ 1960 Repl.].
The judgment establishing the levee was entered on September 23, 1959. The complaint for the review of that judgment was filed on December 22,1959.
Certain of the defendants in the action to review, who are now appellees in this appeal, filed a demurrer to appellant’s action to review. The demurrer was sustained. The plaintiffs-appellants refused to plead further and, therefore, judgment was entered for the defendants-appellees on the basis of the pleadings.
The memorandum in support of the demurrer relied upon the single ground that there was a defect of parties to the action. On appeal before this court, the appellees also assert as ground for affirming the judgment of the trial court, or for dismissal of the appeal, that the action to review the orig*450inal judgment was not timely filed. This they may properly do, since the timely filing of an appeal from the judgment establishing the levee was jurisdictional. Under such circumstances, the law governing the time allowed for appeals has been stated by F. W. & H. Ind. Tr. & App. Pract., Vol. I, p. 419, as follows:
“If an action to review for errors of law is not filed until after the time for taking an appeal has expired, the plaintiff in the action to review may not appeal from an adverse decision. Plaintiff may appeal, however, if the action to review was filed within the time for taking an appeal. American Creosoting Co. v. Reddington (1925), 83 Ind. App. 365, 146 N. E. 761; In re: Boyer’s Guardianship, Rittenour v. Hess (1933), 96 Ind. App. 161, 174 N. E. 714; Talge Mahogany Co. v. Astoria Mahogany Co. (1924), 195 Ind. 433, 141 N. E. 50, rehearing denied 195 Ind. 433, 145 N. E. 495. ...”
Thus the question which this court must determine is whether the judgment must be affirmed, either (1) because the trial court properly sustained the demurrer in the present action, or (2) because the appellees did not timely file their action for review.
We first consider appellees’ contention that appellants’ action is fatally defective because of a defect of parties. In this case there were 938 persons to whom benefits were assessed, or for whom damages were awarded in connection with these proceedings. It is not necessary that we decide whether all of these persons were necessary parties to the action for review, and we do not decide this issue since the parties have provided us with no substantial authority with respect thereto. However, it does seem clear that all persons who were petitioners, or who were remonstrators, were necessary parties to the ac*451tion to review and also in the appeal to this court from said action, since substantial costs had been incurred in connection with the establishment of the levee and they were all subject to a judgment for such costs, depending upon the outcome of the case. There was a defect of parties in that all said petitioners and remonstrators were not named in the action. Acts 1881 (Spec. Sess.), ch. 38, §20, p. 240, being §2-219, Burns’ 1946 Repl.; 22 I. L. E. Parties, §32, p. 402, §34, p. 407. Admittedly, the record discloses that in the action to review appellants failed to name two of the petitioners in the original proceedings or to substitute any parties in their stead.
We conclude that the demurrer to the complaint was properly sustained because of a defect of parties. §2-219, supra; Acts 1911 [as amended], ch. 157, §2, p. 415, being §2-1007, Burns’ 1946 Repl.; Demarest v. Holdeman (1901), 157 Ind. 467, 62 N. E. 17; Eel River R. Co. v. State ex rel. (1900), 155 Ind. 433, 57 N. E. 388; Hutcheson v. Hanson (1951), 121 Ind. App. 546, 98 N. E. 2d 688.
Although the decision in this case could be made to rest upon the issue above determined, in order that the further issue raised by the appeal might be resolved, we do also consider whether this court can, with propriety, entertain this appeal by reason of the alleged belated filing of the action to review the original judgment.
As above noted, the primary action in this case involved a statutory proceeding for the establishment of a levee. The statute not only established new and substantial rights with regard to the parties involved, it also prescribed the procedure, and provided certain limitations with regard to appeals from judgments in such proceedings. Therefore, the limita*452tions upon the time prescribed in the statute for taking such appeals, if valid, are controlling as the time limitation specified in the statute for appeals, insofar as such limitation in the special statute is more restrictive than that prescribed in general statutes or the rules of this court. F. W. & H. Ind. Tr. & App. Pract., Vol. II, §2473, p. 196; State ex rel. Gary v. Lake Sup. Ct. (1947), 225 Ind. 478, 493, 76 N. E. 2d 254; State ex rel. Mar. C. Pl. Comm. v. Mar. S. C. et al. (1956), 235 Ind. 607, 609, 135 N. E. 2d 516.
Admittedly, the action for review of judgment was not filed within the 30 day period specified in the above statute for the taking of appeals. That portion of the statute which prescribes the procedure, with respect to appeals from judgments of the trial court establishing such levees, is as follows:
“ . . . The order of the court approving and confirming the assessments and declaring the proposed work established shall be final and conclusive, unless an appeal therefrom to the Supreme • Court be taken and an appeal bond filed within thirty [30] days,...
In the event, however, the petition states that the petitioners accept the applicable provisions of the federal law to obtain federal aid, the order of court approving and confii-ming the assessments and declaring the proposed work established shall be final and conclusive from which there shall be no appeal, ...” Acts 1947, ch. 249, §2, p. 1003, being §27-803, at page 685, Burns’ 1960 Repl.
However, it is contended that all limitations in the act with regard to appeals are void, and, particularly, that the 30 day period prescribed in the act for the filing of appeals is inoperative for the reason that the act also contains an unconstitutional provision that there shall be no appeals in such proceedings if, as in this case, the petitioners accept the applicable provisions *453for federal aid. Therefore, it is contended that Rule 2-2 of this court, which permits the filing of appeals within 90 days, is controlling. Specifically, it is contended that the following portion of §27-803, supra, of the Levees Act, pertaining to appeals, is unconstitutional, to-wit:
“In the event, however, the petition states that the petitioners accept the applicable provisions of the federal law to obtain federal aid, the order of court approving and confirming the assessments and declaring the proposed work established shall be final and conclusive from which there shall be no appeal,...”
We agree that the above quoted provision in the act, which purports to provide that the judgment of the trial court is conclusive and not subject to appeal, is unconstitutional. Slentz et al. v. City of Fort Wayne et al. (1954), 233 Ind. 226, 118 N. E. 2d 484; Indianapolis Life Ins. Co. v. Lunquist (1944), 222 Ind. 359, 53 N. E. 2d 338; Warren v. Indiana Telephone Co. (1940), 217 Ind. 93, 26 N. E. 2d 399. However, we do not agree that that portion of the provision of the act which limits appeals to a period of 30 days, is also unconstitutional, merely because the provision above recited is unconstitutional. Where the provisions of an act are severable, so that one provision which is declared unconstitutional can be deleted without destroying the general purpose or effectiveness of the act, the remaining portions will be upheld as valid. W. A. Barber Grocery Co. v. Fleming (1950), 229 Ind. 140, 96 N. E. 2d 108; Perry Tp. v. Indianapolis Power & Light Co. (1945), 224 Ind. 59, 64 N. E. 2d 296; Ettinger v. Studevent; Hole v. Dice (1942), 219 Ind. 406, 38 N. E. 2d 1000; 82 C. J. S., §94, p. 161.
*454In this case, the action for review of judgment was filed 90 days after the judgment establishing the levee; whereas, the statute prescribed the filing of an appeal from such a judgment to 80 days. Under these circumstances, for the reasons heretofore stated, this court will not disturb the judgment of the trial court.
The judgment is, therefore, affirmed.
Landis, C. J., Arterburn and Myers, JJ., concur. Jackson, J., dissents [without opinion].

=== CASE 9739814 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:17.885514+00 ===

On Petition For Rehearing.
Achor, C. J.
— Appellants, in support of their petition for rehearing, assert that the opinion as heretofore written is in error in two particulars.
First, although it appears from the record that there was a defect of parties in this appeal, in that, as stated in the opinion, “appellants failed to name two of the petitioners in the original proceedings or to substitute any parties in their stead,” appellants seek to explain away this fact by now filing a supplemental “affidavit of the parties.”
As noted in the opinion, there were other defects of parties, as a result of which a different ruling on the above issue would not change the result reached in the opinion. However, upon this point, we note that the applicable law to the practice sought to be employed by appellants is well stated as follows:
“ ... It may be said in passing that it must be remembered that in appeals to this court the certified transcript of the record imports upon its face absolute verity, and statements of parties or their counsel, whether verified or unverified, are not available to dispute the record, or to supply any matter not therein disclosed. . . .” *455[Our emphasis.] Whisler v. Whisler (1904), 162 Ind. 136, 141, 67 N. E. 984, 70 N. E. 152.
Some of the numerous additional authorities to the same effect are Kain v. State (1955), 234 Ind. 160, 123 N. E. 2d 177, 125 N. E. 2d 436; Bayman v. Farmers Mutual Fire Ins. Assn. (1938), 213 Ind. 389, 12 N. E. 2d 945; Chicago, etc., R. Co. v. Public Service Commission (1919), 188 Ind. 334, 121 N. E. 276, 123 N. E. 465.
In addition, no pleading or brief of appellants heretofore filed has ever raised the question here sought to be raised concerning the fact of or the date of the death of certain of the petitioners. Thus appellants’ supplemental “affidavit of the parties” presents new matter not previously considered. A new question cannot first be raised on petition for rehearing. Such questions are considered waived. Hutchinson’s Estate v. Arnt, Admx. (1936), 210 Ind. 509, 1 N. E. 2d 585, 4 N. E. 2d 202; Chicago, etc., R. Co. v. Steele (1918), 187 Ind. 358, 118 N. E. 824, 119 N. E. 483; In re Petition of the Pittsburgh, etc., Railway Company (1897), 147 Ind. 697, 47 N. E. 151.
Secondly, appellants reassert that their action herein, to review a prior judgment, was timely filed since it was filed within 90 days after the judgment in the original action.
Upon this issue some amplification of the original opinion seems justified. The applicable part of the statutory provision, quoted by this court in its original opinion, is as follows:
“. . . The order of the court approving and confirming the assessments and declaring the proposed work established shall be final and conclusive, unless an appeal therefrom to the Supreme Court be taken and an appeal bond filed within thirty [30] days, ...” Acts 1947, ch. 249, §2, p. 1003, being §27-803, Burns’ 1960 Repl., p. 685.
*456Supreme Court Rule 2-2 does not enlarge this rule, as argued by appellants, but requires conformity therewith. It provides, in part:
“In all appeals and reviews the assignment of errors and transcript of the record must be filed in the office of the Clerk of the Supreme Court within 90 days from the date of the judgment or the ruling on the motion for a new trial, unless the statute under which the appeal or review is taken fixes a shorter time, in which latter event the statute shall control....” [Our emphasis.]
Appellants quote Pullin et al. v. Arnold et al. (1954), 234 Ind. 13, 15, 122 N. E. 2d 858, 859, in which this court stated:
“In special statutory proceedings like this, ‘the rules of civil practice prevail, except when it is otherwise provided, or when they are plainly inapplicable.’ ” (Cases cited.) [Our emphasis.]
However, the above case supports an opposite position to that of the appellants in this case.
Thus the applicable rule of civil procedure is that, where a special statute expressly provides the procedure to be followed, that procedure shall control. In this case, the requirement is that an appeal from a judgment establishing a levee must be taken within thirty [30] days after the judgment. §27-803, supra.
The levee act contains an elaborate detailing of the procedural steps and clearly shows a legislative intention that the matter be handled expeditiously. After a levee petition has been filed and found sufficient, the court must refer the petition to commissioners within twenty [20] days after the hearing date. §27-802, Burns’ 1960 Repl. If an appeal is to be taken from the preliminary report of the commissioners, it must be taken within thirty [30] days, and if no appeal is *457taken from the preliminary report, all prior proceedings are conclusive. §27-802, supra. After the commissioners have filed their final report, remonstrances to the final report must be filed within ten [10] days. §27-803, supra, p. 683. And, finally, as heretofore stated, it is provided that:
“ . . . The order of the court approving and confirming the assessments and declaring the proposed work established shall be final and conclusive, unless an appeal therefrom to the Supreme Court be taken and an appeal bond filed within thirty [30] days,...” §27-803, supra.
Under the above circumstances, it is not reasonable to say that the legislature intended that a motion for new trial might be interposed, which would prolong the 30-day period prescribed for the taking of appeals, but simply failed to mention such intention in the statute above quoted.
Petition for rehearing denied.
Arterburn, Landis and Myers, JJ., concur. Jackson, J., dissents.
Note. — Reported in 196 N. E. 2d 745. Rehearing denied 199 N. E. 2d 712.

=== CASE 2221029 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:02.73046+00 ===

347 Mass. 197 (1964)
196 N.E.2d 840
COMMONWEALTH
vs.
RAYMOND F. LEHAN.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
November 4, December 2, 1963.
March 6, 1964.
Present: SPALDING, WHITTEMORE, CUTTER, KIRK, & SPIEGEL, JJ.
Wilbur G. Hollingsworth for the defendant.
Joseph A. Sullivan, Assistant District Attorney, for the Commonwealth.
James W. Bailey, Assistant Attorney General, for the Commonwealth, submitted a brief.
Lee H. Kozol, Assistant Attorney General, Director of the Division of Civil Rights and Liberties, amicus curiae, submitted a brief.
WHITTEMORE, J.
These are appeals under G.L.c. 278, §§ 33A-33G, as amended, from concurrent sentences upon convictions on two indictments: (1) for possession of burglarious implements, and (2) for breaking and entering a dwelling house in the night time with intent to steal.
The defendant contends that it was error to deny his two motions to suppress evidence, the first filed and heard be *199 fore trial and the second filed and heard after the jury had been empanelled. The defendant's exceptions were duly saved.
At the hearings on the motions a police officer testified in substance as follows: On February 21, 1963, he and another officer were on duty in a patrol car on Main Street in the Charlestown district of Boston. They saw the defendant (Lehan) carrying two cardboard cartons or large boxes. Lehan was known to the officer who testified as the man whom he had been assigned to watch for a two week period three and a half years before "in relation to ... his activities in the early morning hours ... [there having been] numerous ... housebreaks ... in the neighborhood." The officers stopped their automobile and asked Lehan what he was carrying. Lehan replied that it was stuff belonging to his wife. The officers asked where he was going with it. Lehan replied that he was on his way "down to his room on Main Street." When asked where the room was Lehan said it was in the Clipper House and "he was moving out because his wife and he had an argument, and [he] was taking the stuff with him." The officers inquired what was in the boxes and Lehan said it was a hair dryer and silverware, gifts and presents. The officers then inquired why "if he was moving out on his wife ... he didn't have shaving gear ... [or] his own personal items, rather than his wife's items, and he said that was it." The officers then looked in the cartons  "he told us what was in there, and we looked for ourselves." The cartons had loose end flaps.
The officers asked Lehan if he would accompany them to his wife's house where they could talk with her. Lehan said, "Yes." Q. "If he wanted to get out of the police car, would you let him...?" A. "If he wanted to get out, we would have placed him under arrest at that time." The three went in the automobile to Bartlett Street and the officer who did not testify went into the house and talked with Lehan's wife. When the officer came out he said, "Raymond, you are under arrest. Your wife says that the stuff isn't hers, and furthermore when you left the house *200 tonight you were on very good conditions"; Lehan and his wife had parted "on good terms, had no argument." Lehan replied, "That is my story." It was then a little before 11 P.M.
The officers took Lehan to the police station. At about 12:30 or 12:45 A.M., February 22, word came to the station of a burglary in which, as it turned out, the articles Lehan had been carrying had been stolen. At 12:50 A.M. Lehan was booked on the charges later embodied in the indictments. In the meantime, Lehan was questioned and denied guilt.
Testimony of the officers at the trial somewhat amplified the foregoing testimony. That testimony indicated that Lehan's walk was rapid, that he waved to the officers as they passed in their car, and that his coat bulged. It also showed that a search of Lehan had disclosed in his pockets a watch in a case, a manicure set, a file, a screw driver, powder, and perfume. According to the officers this search took place at the police station. The officers also testified at the trial that after 12:30 A.M. they told Lehan that the owner of these articles and those seen on Main Street had identified them and had said that a radio and sewing machine were also missing. Lehan denied knowledge of the radio but said that the sewing machine was in his back yard under the porch of his house and that he would lead the officers to the machine. He did go with them in the police car, told them where to look, and remained in the car while one of them retrieved the sewing machine from the back yard. Lehan took the stand at the trial and testified that he told the officers what was in the boxes and that when asked, "Did I mind if they would have a look?" he replied, "Yes, all right." He also testified that his pockets were searched when he was stopped on Main Street.
The two cartons and their contents were in evidence and are before us. One, an apparently new carton, is labelled on each of its six faces "Deluxe Hair Dryer." The cartons measure in inches, respectively, 17 x 11 1/2 x 3 7/8 and 15 x 15 x 5 1/2. With their contents they weigh about seventeen pounds. In each is an inner box which has to be removed *201 from the carton to discover the contents. The inner boxes contain articles which agree with what Lehan told the officers were in the cartons.
The first motion to suppress recited that on February 21, 1963, Lehan was "illegally arrested and certain articles taken from his person and home" and moved to suppress all such articles. The second motion was substantially the same as the first.
To justify the initial detention and search, the Commonwealth relies on G.L.c. 41, § 98, which provides, in part, as follows: "During the night time ... [police officers] may examine all persons abroad whom they have reason to suspect of unlawful design, and may demand of them their business abroad and whither they are going.... Persons so suspected who do not give a satisfactory account of themselves ... may be arrested by the police, and may thereafter be safely kept by imprisonment or otherwise unless released in the manner provided by law, and taken before a district court to be examined and prosecuted."
This statute may be thought to restate the powers of the New England night watch[1] and may have been a forerunner of the Uniform Arrest Act, § 2.[2] This provision of the uniform act has been adopted with some variations in New Hampshire (N.H. Rev. Sts. Anno. [1955] c. 594, § 2); Rhode Island (R.I. Gen. Laws [1956] § 12-7-1); and Delaware (Del. Code Anno. tit. 11, § 1902 [1953]).
1. We do not agree with Lehan that he was arrested or unlawfully detained when accosted on Main Street. That the police may make brief threshold inquiry of a citizen has been generally assumed. "It is obvious that an officer may *202 ask an individual a question ... provided that he does not confine or restrain the individual without his consent." Remington, The Law Relating to "On the Street" Detention, Questioning and Frisking of Suspected Persons and Police Arrest Privileges in General, J. of Crim. L., Criminology and Police Science, 386, 389 (1960). Commonwealth v. Merrick, 255 Mass. 510, 512-513. People v. Henneman, 367 Ill. 151, 154. See comment, 37 Mich. L. Rev. 311 (1938).
Henry v. United States, 361 U.S. 98, appears to hold that officers could not stop an automobile on suspicion unless they then had probable cause to believe that the occupants had committed a crime. The dissent points out that the government "unnecessarily" had conceded that the "arrest" was made when the car was stopped; the dissenters took the view that the "suspicious activities of the petitioner ... warranted the stopping of the car," that cartons in the car in open view gave the officers cause to believe that a crime was being committed, and that this warranted the ensuing arrest and search.
We think a more recent case, Rios v. United States, 364 U.S. 253, 262, recognizes that some threshold inquiry even with brief detention may be constitutional though cause to arrest is absent. The court said "[T]he Government argues that the policemen approached the standing taxi only for the purpose of routine interrogation, and that they had no intent to detain the petitioner beyond the momentary requirements of such a mission. If the petitioner thereafter voluntarily revealed the package of narcotics to the officers' view, a lawful arrest could then have been supported by their reasonable cause to believe that a felony was being committed in their presence. The validity of the search thus turns upon the narrow question of when the arrest occurred, and the answer to that question depends upon an evaluation of the conflicting testimony of those who were there that night."[3]
*203 People v. Mickelson, 59 Cal.2d 448, 451-452, holds that a State rule authorizing a brief, preliminary, on-the-street detention does not violate the Federal Constitution. The opinion interprets the Henry and Rios cases and Brinegar v. United States, 338 U.S. 160, as elaborating a Federal rule that would bar any detention unless probable cause exists. The court held that the Federal constitutional proscription of unreasonable searches and seizures does not bar reasonable State rules covering on-the-street interrogation.
Ker v. California, 374 U.S. 23, was decided after the Mickelson case. It holds that Fourteenth Amendment due process embodies the Fourth Amendment standard which requires a warrant to search a suspect's domicil unless the search is incident to a lawful arrest and is of reasonable scope. 374 U.S. 23, 30-35, 41-42. However, it was also said that the States are not precluded from developing workable rules governing arrests, searches, and seizures to meet "the practical demands of effective criminal investigation and law enforcement" provided those rules do not violate the constitutional proscription of unreasonable searches and seizures. 374 U.S. 23, 34. The case thus recognizes that, although established Federal standards are regarded as binding on the States, there will be incidents of the exclusionary rule not so established which State courts may fashion, at least in the first instance.[4]
This court has not yet dealt with the problems raised by threshold police inquiry. Commonwealth v. McCleery, 345 Mass. 151, was decided after the Henry and Rios cases; *204 there an officer stopped an automobile because of illegal equipment and after verifying the driver's credentials proceeded to rummage through the car. See G.L.c. 90, §§ 7, 9, 11 (all as amended), and 25. The authority of an officer to stop a pedestrian or motorist for threshold inquiry was not involved.
We are of opinion that G.L.c. 41, § 98, constitutionally permits a brief threshold inquiry where suspicious conduct gives the officer "reason to suspect" the questioned person of "unlawful design," that is, that the person has committed, is committing, or is about to commit a crime. What is reasonable within the principle of threshold inquiry must be decided in each case. An individual who acts in a suspicious way invites threshold investigation. It does not unreasonably invade the individual's right of privacy to hold that the price of indulgence in suspicious behavior while abroad at night is a police inquiry. See Barrett, Personal Rights, Property Rights, and the Fourth Amendment, 1960 Sup. Ct. Rev. 46, 57-65; Leagre, The Fourth Amendment, and the Law of Arrest, 54 J. of Crim. L., Criminology and Police Science, 393, 406-419 (1963); Remington, The Law Relating to "On the Street" Detention, Questioning and Frisking of Suspected Persons and Police Arrest Privileges in General, supra, at 386-388; Traynor, Mapp v. Ohio at Large in the Fifty States, 1962 Duke L.J. 319, 333-334. But see Kamisar, Book Review, 76 Harv. L. Rev. 1502, 1510-1512 (1963); Foote, Law and Police Practice: Safeguards in the Law of Arrest, 52 Northwestern U.L. Rev. 16, 36-45 (1957).
Turning back to the testimony of the officer on the motions to suppress and applying these principles we conclude that, although the officers did not have ground reasonably to believe that Lehan had committed a felony, they did have reasonable grounds for brief initial inquiry, and, in view of the first answers, to continue the questioning. Of possible explanations of Lehan's unusual conduct and his first answers, one, and by no means the least likely, was theft.
2. The authorities discussed in the foregoing section lead us, however, to the conclusion that the right of threshold *205 inquiry does not include the right to search for evidence of crime in the absence of probable cause for arrest. Hence the officers might not constitutionally inspect the packages without Lehan's consent. We are of the opinion, however, that an officer may act reasonably to assure that the inquiry can proceed in a manner consistent with the officer's safety. People v. Martin, 46 Cal.2d 106. The Uniform Arrest Act, § 3.[5] See Leagre, The Fourth Amendment and the Law of Arrest, supra, at 419. But the inspection of the packages was to verify Lehan's story, not to search for weapons. The Commonwealth does not argue otherwise. There was no evidence on the motions to suppress that warranted a different conclusion. People v. Simon, 45 Cal.2d 645, 650. People v. Mickelson, supra, 452-454. Furthermore, this is the first time that any rule as to on-the-street inquiry has been stated in this Commonwealth. In the circumstances the denial of the motions to suppress ought not to be sustained on the possibility that the judge might have inferred that the officers were searching for weapons. The provision in G.L.c. 41, § 98, for arrest of a suspect who fails to give a satisfactory account of himself does not validate the inspection of the packages. As noted, arrest without probable cause is unconstitutional. Henry v. United States, 361 U.S. 98, 100-101. Ker v. California, 374 U.S. 23, 30-35. We do not construe G.L.c. 41, § 98, to authorize arrest without probable cause. We do not consider a threshold inquiry an arrest. See point 1 above.
We assume that if the judge had found (Steele v. United States No. 2, 267 U.S. 505, 510-511) that Lehan had freely consented to the inspection of the packages, the inspection would not have violated Lehan's rights. United States v. Burke, 215 F. Supp. 508, 511 (D. Mass.). See Watson v. United States, 249 F.2d 106, 108 (Ct. App. D.C.). The officer's testimony did not permit the conclusion that the officers had asked or obtained Lehan's consent. The motions to suppress should have been granted as to the articles *206 inspected on Main Street and those articles should have been excluded at the trial.
Lehan's subsequent testimony indicative of assent to the inspection does not make the error harmless. We assume this testimony would have permitted the conclusion that Lehan gave assent free of the coercion of police inquiry. This testimony, however, was given at the trial when the issue of suppressing the exhibits was not before the court. Lehan was entitled to have the question of consent ruled on by the judge when the issue of the admissibility of the seized articles was before him. In the circumstances we are unable to rule that the articles seized on Main Street were properly in evidence. Their status in subsequent proceedings, however, will be determined by the evidence then produced.
3. The motions were also addressed to the articles taken from Lehan's person and his home and although the arguments before us and the testimony taken on the motions to suppress concerned only the articles inspected on Main Street, the status of the other articles may be in issue at another trial.
We rule that if the search of Lehan took place at the police station, it was incident to a lawful arrest. Commonwealth v. Holmes, 344 Mass. 524, 525. What the officers had learned from Mrs. Lehan, with what he had told them, gave them reasonable cause to believe that he had committed a felony. This was so quite apart from their inspection of the boxes which had confirmed what Lehan had said as to their contents. Reliable hearsay may provide probable cause to support an arrest without a warrant. See Jones v. United States, 362 U.S. 257, 267-272, and cases cited. Compare Wong Sun v. United States, 371 U.S. 471, 479-482. It is not determinative that the officers had not been notified of a particular crime. See Henry v. United States, 361 U.S. 98, 104.
The arrest, we think, was not the result of an illegal inspection of the boxes or of an illegal detention prior to the interview with Mrs. Lehan. We need not determine whether Lehan was illegally forced to accompany the officers *207  that is, arrested  when they asked if he would accompany them and he agreed to do so. Nor need we determine whether the privilege of threshold inquiry included a right to require him to accompany them for verification of his story. It was their duty, after hearing Lehan's improbable answer to their initial questions, to inquire of Mrs. Lehan. This duty did not depend upon their inspection of the boxes or upon Lehan's presence. Having ascertained through Mrs. Lehan that Lehan's story was in all probability false, they had cause to arrest Lehan. For purposes of the arrest prior to any search they would have been warranted in assuming that Lehan had rightly described the contents of the boxes. Lehan's immediate availability for arrest, of course, stemmed from his having accompanied the officers. But even if that was an illegal detention we think the officers were not obliged to let Lehan escape when they had cause to arrest him. As indicated, probable cause for the arrest was shown by (1) Lehan's statement on valid initial inquiry and (2) Mrs. Lehan's information. We hold, therefore, that the arrest did not stem from any "exploitation of ... [the] illegality," if such it was, of securing Lehan's availability, or from any exploitation of the earlier verification of the contents of the boxes. Wong Sun v. United States, 371 U.S. 471, 488. Commonwealth v. Palladino, 346 Mass. 720, 725. If Lehan's pockets were searched on Main Street the principles stated in point 2 of this opinion will be applicable.
We express no opinion as to whether the sewing machine was obtained during an illegal search. Lehan, under arrest, could, if free of compulsion, voluntarily surrender it. United States v. Burke, 215 F. Supp. 508, 511 (D. Mass.). See Watson v. United States, 249 F.2d 106, 108 (Ct. App. D.C.). If the judge should find that the police came by it in this way, it would be admissible. If the evidence was not volunteered and was seized without proper warrant, it must be excluded.
4. The judgments are reversed and the causes remanded to the Superior Court for proceedings consistent herewith.
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  36th Report of the Judicial Council (1960), Pub. Doc. No. 144, pp. 68-70.
[2]  See Warner, The Uniform Arrest Act, 28 Va. L. Rev. 315, 319. Section 2 of the Uniform Arrest Act states: "(1) A peace officer may stop any person abroad who he has reasonable ground to suspect is committing, has committed or is about to commit a crime, and may demand of him his name, address, business abroad and whither he is going. (2) Any person so questioned who fails to identify himself or explain his actions to the satisfaction of the officer may be detained and further questioned and investigated. (3) The total period of detention provided for by this section shall not exceed two hours. The detention is not an arrest and shall not be recorded as an arrest in any official record. At the end of the detention the person so detained shall be released or be arrested and charged with a crime." For complete text see Warner, supra, 343-347.
[3]  One Federal case decided after the Henry case has apparently recognized a limited privilege of detention. United States v. Bonanno, 180 F. Supp. 71 (S.D.N.Y.) (Kaufman, J.). After the decision in the Bonanno case, which involved a motion to suppress, the trial resulted in verdicts of guilty. On appeal the counts involved were ordered dismissed on grounds not touching the decision on the motion to suppress. United States v. Bufalino, 285 F.2d 408 (2d Cir.). However, the decision on the motion to suppress was questioned. Id. at 420, n. 3 (Clark, J., concurring). The Bonanno case was later cited approvingly in United States v. Vita, 294 F.2d 524, 530 (2d Cir.). The Vita case did not cite the Henry case and said that a detention for a reasonable time for questioning to determine if a defendant should be arrested does not violate § 5 (a) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure (1946), 327 U.S. 835, requiring that an arrested person be taken before a commissioner without unnecessary delay.
[4]  The issue in the Ker case was the validity of an unannounced entry into an apartment by means of a passkey, the police having probable cause to arrest the occupants. Four Justices (a fifth concurred in the result) held that the California judicially declared rule that an explanation and a demand for admission are not required if the arrest would be frustrated was not an unreasonable rule. Four Justices were of the opinion that the unannounced intrusion violated the constitutional requirement of reasonableness.
[5]  Section 3 reads in part, "A peace officer may search for a dangerous weapon any person whom he has stopped or detained to question ... whenever he has reasonable ground to believe that he is in danger if the person possesses a dangerous weapon...."

=== CASE 2221035 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:02.868881+00 ===

46 Ill. App.2d 355 (1964)
196 N.E.2d 489
Arthur Hambric and Josephine Hambric, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
Field Enterprises, Inc., and Jack Mabley, Defendants-Appellees.
Gen. No. 48,991.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District, Third Division.
January 30, 1964.
*356 Mosely & Foster, of Chicago, for appellants.
Bell, Boyd, Lloyd, Haddad & Burns, of Chicago (Charles T. Martin and J. William Hayton, of counsel), for appellees.
MR. JUSTICE DEMPSEY delivered the opinion of the court.
This is an action for libel which was brought to the court.
This is an action for libel which was brought to recover damages for an allegedly defamatory article written by the defendant Jack Mabley, and published in the Chicago Daily News, a newspaper owned by the defendant Field Enterprises, Inc. The defendants moved to dismiss the complaint on the ground that it was insufficient in law because the article was not reasonably susceptible to a libelous interpretation, did not identify the plaintiffs and the allegations of damages were general and vague. The motion was sustained. The plaintiffs elected to stand by their complaint, the suit was dismissed, judgment was entered for the defendants and the plaintiffs have appealed.
*357 [1] The motion to dismiss admitted the well-pleaded facts of the complaint but did not admit the conclusions of law or fact. The objection that the allegations of damages are general and vague was well founded. The complaint is in two counts. The first one alleges that the publication of the article damaged the plaintiff Arthur Hambric's good name, reputation and business, exposed him to public hatred and obloquy, attracted to his place of business persons of bad character whose presence tended to drive away respectable clientele and exposed him to constant investigation and harassment by the police department, all to his damage in the sum of $250,000. The second count alleges that the plaintiff, Josephine Hambric, wife of Arthur, was damaged to the extent of $150,000 by publication of the article which damaged her good name and reputation, exposed her to public hatred and obloquy, subjected her to derision, insults and indecent proposals, which caused her to become ill.
[2] Allegations such as these are descriptive of general damages only; special damages must be alleged with particularity. Wright v. F.W. Woolworth Co., 281 Ill. App. 495. If the language used in the article was not libelous per se, if extrinsic facts and explanations were needed to show how it would be injurious, the plaintiffs were required to allege the special, specific damage that resulted from its publication. If the article was libelous per se, it was not necessary for them to allege special damages, because both damage and malice would be presumed from words obviously libelous. John v. Tribune Co., 28 Ill. App.2d 300, 171 NE2d 432; Cowper v. Vannier, 20 Ill. App.2d 499, 156 NE2d 761; Gogerty v. Covins, 5 Ill. App.2d 74, 124 NE2d 602; Campbell v. Morris, 224 Ill. App. 569. The issue in this case therefore narrows to this: was the article complained of defamatory per se? If it was, the failure to allege special damages is *358 inconsequential; if it was not, the plaintiffs' complaint is defective.
The article carries the headline: "S. Side Vice Wide Open  Here's Proof" and, after intervening paragraphs (which are unknown to us because they were not attached to the complaint and are not in the record) is as follows:
"Leaving these saloons, the investigator entered one down the block at 458 E. 61st Street. About 30 men and women were in the place watching a woman stripping in the center of the floor.
"When she had removed all of her clothing, she gave a few shakes, then picked up her clothes and ambled to the rear of the saloon.
"Beer sold for 50 cents here, 15 or 20 cents higher than at competitors with no strippers."
It is uniformly held that words allegedly libelous must be read in their best possible sense and if they are capable of an innocent interpretation they must be declared nonactionable at law. John v. Tribune Co., 24 Ill.2d 437, 181 NE2d 105; Epton v. Vail, 2 Ill. App.2d 287, 119 NE2d 410; Tiernan v. East Shore Newspapers, Inc., 1 Ill. App.2d 150, 116 NE2d 896; Eick v. Perk Dog Food Co., 347 Ill. App. 293, 106 NE2d 742. Many cases hold that in determining if words are libelous per se, they must be read without the aid of innuendo to bring forth any latent, injurious meaning which may be imputed to them. Life Printing & Publishing Co. v. Marshall Field III, 324 Ill. App. 254, 58 NE2d 307; Latimer v. Chicago Daily News, Inc., 330 Ill. App. 295, 71 NE2d 553. Some cases hold that the court must view the words stripped of all innuendo, colloquium, or extrinsic or explanatory circumstances. Lundstrom v. Winnebago Newspapers, Inc., 27 Ill. App.2d 128, 169 NE2d 369; LaGrange Press v. Citizen Pub. *359 Co., 252 Ill. App. 482. It also has been held that an averment of fact extrinsic to the words used in an article, and essential to an identification of the article with the person complaining, cannot be embodied in an innuendo. Voris v. Street & Smith Publications, 330 Ill. App. 409, 71 NE2d 338.
No matter by which of these standards the article in question is judged, it is not prima facie libelous. It merely states that on this one occasion, in a saloon at 458 E. 61st Street, a woman performed what is commonly known as a strip-tease act. At the worst there is an implication (because of the price charged for beer) that such acts may have been presented with some regularity. That is all. The article does not become libelous by construing it as a whole and reading it in relationship to the headline which accompanied it. The portion of the article complained of does not support the headline, and the headline does not expand the content of the article. One must turn to the complaint for background and information, for an interpretation of the article and to learn how it is susceptible of a defamatory meaning.
[3] One must also resort to the complaint to ascertain its application to the plaintiffs, for the article does not name either plaintiff directly or indirectly and it does not even mention the name of the saloon visited by the investigator. However, we think recourse to a complaint is permissible insofar as it may be necessary for the purpose of identifying a person allegedly libeled. The prohibition against considering colloquium in ascertaining if an article is libelous per se (LaGrange Press v. Citizen Pub. Co., supra) seems to us to be unduly restrictive and illogical. The question of whether words are libelous per se is separate and distinct from the question of whether they refer to the plaintiff. National Refining Co. v. Benzo Gas Motor Fuel Co., 20 F.2d 763 (8th Cir).
*360 The complaint by way of colloquium states that the so-called defamatory matter was written concerning the plaintiffs. It states by way of inducement that Arthur Hambric is the sole owner of a tavern at 458 E. 61st Street, that it is called "Josephine's Lounge" and that it is named after his wife who assists him in its operation; that he had a respectable clientele, had been in the tavern business for many years, enjoyed a good reputation and had the confidence of good citizens in the neighborhoods where his taverns had been located. Through the office of innuendo the defamatory imputation is explained to be that the article created the impression that the place was a hangout for prostitutes, that it pictured the plaintiffs as permitting vice in their tavern and as presenting lewd performances to attract business.
The article would more nearly approach being libelous per se if it is considered as being written in regard to the plaintiffs in their business or trade. Such words may be actionable without proof of special damages. Hudson v. Slack Furniture Co., 318 Ill. App. 15, 47 NE2d 502; Cavanagh v. Elliott, 270 Ill. App. 21. In Clifford v. Cochrane, 10 Ill. App. 570, the general rule in relation to speaking of one in a particular calling was stated as follows:
"... any words spoken of such a person in his office, trade, profession, or business, which tend to impair his credit, or charge him with fraud, or indirect dealings, or with incapacity, and that tend to injure him in his trade, profession, or business, are actionable, without proof of special damage."
In Cavanagh v. Elliott, supra, the court approved the following quotation from 36 CJ 1181, sec 69:
"The ground of the action in such cases is that the party is disgraced or injured in his profession *361 or trade or exposed to the hazard of losing his office, employment, or business in consequence of the defamatory words, and not that his general reputation in the community is affected by them."
But even if the article is so considered, it fails, and no presumption of damages can arise from its publication. This is an action for the libel of the individual plaintiffs; it is not an action for trade libel or business disparagement. The article does not charge the plaintiffs with being unfit to operate their business, with dishonest dealing, with selling adulterated beverages or with defrauding the public. It does not charge the plaintiffs with conduct incompatible with the business in which they are engaged. There are establishments which feature strip-tease performers; some such places might consider publicity of this sort a contribution to their business. Without the aid of facts extrinsic to the article, it cannot be said that the article tends to prejudice the plaintiffs in their business. If we turn to the complaint for further information, we find there is no allegation that it was the only saloon located at the address given in the article, none as to the kind of a saloon the plaintiffs operated and none as to its reputation. Further, there is no allegation that the words were written in relation to the plaintiffs' business. Although they assert that their business was injured, they allege that the words constituted a personal libel upon themselves. "In order to make words, either written or spoken of or concerning one engaged in a particular calling, actionable per se, they must have been used of the party in relation to his or her occupation." Campbell v. Morris, 224 Ill. App. 569.
[4] There must be precision in charges of libel and words must be strictly construed. McDonald v. Chicago Daily News Pub. Co., 252 Ill. App. 61. Complaints *362 such as the one before us have been held to be insufficient in law in both slander and libel cases. Trembois v. Standard Ry. Equipment Mfg. Co., 337 Ill. App. 35, 84 NE2d 862; Harkness v. Chicago Daily News Co., 102 Ill. App. 162. In the latter case the plaintiff was the owner and operator of a bakery. The newspaper article was about the bakery. The Appellate Court noted that the alleged libel concerned the business of the plaintiff; that it related solely to her trade or occupation. The court stated that the plaintiff's declaration should have charged that the libel related to the business, but instead it charged that the libel was published of and concerning the plaintiff. The court found that the declaration was deficient in that it lacked an indispensable element of good pleading.
[5, 6] It is for the trial court in the first instance to determine whether words are libelous per se. The plaintiffs charged that the article greatly damaged their reputations and subjected them to public hatred and obloquy, but such consequences do not naturally follow from the statements contained in the article. It is not obvious from the article itself that the plaintiffs' standing in the business community or in society would be lowered and there is no indication, and no reasonable inference could be drawn from it, that they purveyed vice or supplied a hangout for prostitutes. Extrinsic facts would be needed before it could be said that the plaintiffs had been defamed. Inasmuch as the article was not libelous per se and did not set out special damages, the court correctly sustained the motion to dismiss.
The judgment is affirmed.
Affirmed.
SCHWARTZ, P.J. and McCORMICK, J., concur.

=== CASE 2221036 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:02.874831+00 ===

357 N.W.2d 304 (1984)
Charles A. COX, Appellee,
v.
Thomas G. COX and Arthur A. Cox, Individually, and as Trustees of the Arthur J. Cox Trust, and Sarah E. Rigler, Appellants.
No. 83-1360.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
November 14, 1984.
L. Call Dickinson, Jr., and Barbara G. Barrett of Dickinson, Throckmorton, Parker, Mannheimer & Raife, Des Moines, for appellants.
John T. Nolan and Marc B. Moen of Rate, Nolan, Bohanan, Moen & Lucas, Iowa City, for appellee.
Considered by REYNOLDSON, C.J., and McCORMICK, LARSON, SCHULTZ, and CARTER, JJ.
REYNOLDSON, Chief Justice.
This is an interlocutory appeal from the trial court's order granting plaintiff's summary judgment motion. We affirm the trial *305 court's holding that a contingent remainderman of a trust may compel an accounting absent a showing of mismanagement or waste.
I. The controversy involves a trust established in 1944 by the will of Arthur Cox, an Iowa City resident. Cox was survived by his wife, Elizabeth, and three children: Louisa, Sarah and Thomas G. A fourth child, Frederick G., predeceased the testator. After bequests of personal property and the homestead in the Cox will, the residue of the estate was directed to be placed in a trust. One third of the trust income was to be paid to Elizabeth for life; the remaining two thirds was to be divided equally between Sarah, Thomas and Frederick G. for life.[1] At Elizabeth's death, her income share was to be divided equally among Sarah, Thomas and Frederick G. for life. On the death of any of the three children, the child's income share was to be paid to the child's spouse for life. On death or remarriage of the surviving spouse, that income share was to go to the deceased child's descendants. Any descendant so receiving an income share was entitled to have the principal from which the descendant was receiving the income paid to him or her at age thirty.
Elizabeth Cox died in 1964. Surviving daughter Sarah and son Thomas therefore each hold a one third income interest for life. The parties agree that Mary Anderson Cox, widow of Frederick G. and the plaintiff's grandmother, is entitled to the remaining one third. In his petition, plaintiff Charles A. Cox alleges the one ninth share falling to Mary by virtue of Elizabeth's death has never been paid to her. Instead, plaintiff alleges, that one ninth share was paid to his father, Frederick G. Cox, Jr., and his uncle, Arthur A. Cox. Plaintiff's father died in 1978.
September 23, 1980, plaintiff filed a petition in the Iowa District Court for Johnson County, naming as defendants two trustees, Thomas G. Cox and Arthur A. Cox, and one beneficiary, Sarah E. Rigler.[2] In five counts, plaintiff sought the following relief: (1) a declaration that he now is entitled to receive the one eighteenth income share received by his father until the latter's death; (2) an order surcharging defendants for alleged breach of fiduciary duty in distributing the one eighteenth share referred to in count (1) to Alma Van Hook; (3) an accounting; (4) a declaration that, upon the occurrence of certain contingencies, he will be entitled to trust income and a share of the principal; and (5) an order declaring the named defendants representatives of present and future beneficiaries.
October 25, 1982, plaintiff moved for summary judgment on counts (1) and (3) of his petition. April 27, 1983, defendants moved for summary judgment on counts (1) through (4), and dismissal of count (5).
August 31, 1983, the court granted defendants' motions for summary judgment on counts (1), (4) and (5). Addressing count (4), the court held plaintiff was a contingent remainderman of the trust, but never would become an income beneficiary under any circumstance. The court denied the motions of both parties on count (2). It granted plaintiff's motion on count (3), holding that "as a contingent beneficiary the plaintiff ... is an interested party entitled to an accounting."
September 27, 1983, defendants filed notice of appeal on the count (3) issue. We have treated the appeal as interlocutory, see Iowa R.App.P. 1(c), 2, and now affirm.
II. The sole issue presented is whether plaintiff, as a contingent remainderman of the trust, may compel an accounting absent a showing of mismanagement or waste.
Two rules contend for our acceptance. Defendants argue a contingent remainderman of a trust has a right to an accounting *306 only if he or she can make a showing of waste or mismanagement. This purportedly is the majority rule. See G. Bogert, The Law of Trusts and Trustees § 961 (rev. 2d ed. 1983); Note, Potential Beneficiary's Right to Compel Trustee to Render a Formal Accounting and Disclose Information, 65 Mich.L.Rev. 981, 983 (1967). Plaintiff contends as a contingent remainderman he is entitled to an accounting so that he may prevent waste and mismanagement. This rule has substantial support among the commentators. See G. Bogert, supra, at §§ 963, 970; G. Bogert, Handbook of the Law of Trusts § 142 (5th ed. 1973); 2 A.W. Scott, The Law of Trusts §§ 172, 173 (3d ed. 1967); Restatement (Second) of Trusts § 172 comment c (1959). Iowa has few cases bearing on the question.
III. The most succinct statement of the rule plaintiff advances appears at section 172 of the Restatement (Second) of Trusts. It states:
Duty to Keep and Render Accounts. The trustee is under a duty to the beneficiary to keep and render clear and accurate accounts with respect to the administration of the trust.
Comment:
c. Duty to render accounts. The beneficiary may by a proper proceeding compel the trustee to render to the proper court an account of the administration of the trust....
The trustee may be compelled to account not only by a beneficiary presently entitled to the payment of income or principal, but also by a beneficiary who will be or may be entitled to receive income or principal in the future. This is true even though the interest of the beneficiary is contingent.
Such a rule is justified by several policy considerations. Accountability is the hallmark of a trust. Property cannot be the subject of a trust where its application for the purposes of the trust depends upon the uncontrolled discretion of the one to whom legal title has been entrusted. Ponzelino v. Ponzelino, 238 Iowa 201, 203, 26 N.W.2d 330, 331 (1947); Louis G. Allen Trust v. United States, 558 F. Supp. 152, 157 (D.Kan.1982). Unbridled discretionary powers are inconsistent with the existence of a trust relationship. Hanson v. Birmingham, 92 F. Supp. 33, 42 (N.D.Iowa 1950). "No trust is created if the transferor does not manifest an intention to impose enforceable duties upon the transferee." Restatement (Second) of Trusts § 125 comment a (1959); see also 2 A.W. Scott, supra, at § 172.
Because the trustee acts on his or her behalf, the beneficiary is "entitled to know what the trust property is and how the trustee has dealt with it." 2 A.W. Scott, supra, at § 173. We assume defendants would not contest a vested beneficiary's right to an accounting. We find no good reason to hold a contingent beneficiary's right to an accounting must await a trustee's breach of trust. Even contingent remaindermen are entitled to guard against damage to their interest. See Skelton v. Cross, 222 Iowa 262, 271-72, 268 N.W. 499, 504-05 (1936) (Contingent remaindermen included within the scope of section 12285 of the 1935 Iowa Code (now section 649.1), providing that anyone having an interest in real property may bring an action to quiet title.); Ward v. Meredith, 186 Iowa 1108, 1116, 173 N.W. 246, 249 (1919) (Court of equity will not refuse its protection to a contingent remainderman attempting to protect his or her title to land solely because that interest is not yet, and might never be, vested.); Blackett v. Ziegler, 147 Iowa 167, 174, 125 N.W. 874, 877 (1910) (Contingent remainderman may maintain an action to preserve trust property wrongfully sold to third party, even though his or her interest in property is inchoate.); Northwestern National Bank v. Pirich, 215 Minn. 313, 317, 9 N.W.2d 773, 776 (1943) (Although his or her interest may be remote, a contingent remainderman is not required to sit idly by without taking necessary steps to have the trust provisions executed according to the intentions of the settlor.). See also Katz Investment Co. v. Lynch, 242 Iowa 640, 648-49, 47 N.W.2d 800, 805-06 (1951) (restating the holding of *307 Skelton v. Cross, cited above). We are unpersuaded by the decisions defendants rely on that do not give full recognition to a contingent remainderman's interest.
Our holding is supported by similar cases from other jurisdictions. See Day v. Walker, 445 S.W.2d 422, 424 (Ky.1969) (Contingent remainderman entitled to compel trustee to provide certain information relating to management of the trust.); Engelsmann v. Holekamp, 402 S.W.2d 382, 388-89 (Mo.1966) (court approvingly quoted section 173 of Scott, The Law of Trusts and section 172 of the Restatement in holding a remainderman is entitled to an accounting even though the trustee may expend the trust corpus in support of life beneficiary). See also In re Matter of Polson, 21 Wash.App. 489, 496, 585 P.2d 840, 843 (1978) (Washington Trustees Accounting Act broadly construed to bring remainderman with no present interest within its scope).
We hold the plaintiff, as a contingent remainderman, need not make a showing of mismanagement or waste to obtain an accounting. This is especially true where, as here, the trust deed charges the trustees with a duty to keep the accounts plaintiff seeks.
AFFIRMED.
NOTES
[1]  Since Frederick G. was then dead, his share went to his widow, Mary Anderson Cox. Louisa previously had been provided for in an inter vivos trust and was not a beneficiary of the testamentary trust.
[2]  Sarah E. Rigler was never served and thus is not a party to this action.

=== CASE 2221037 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:02.898744+00 ===

46 Ill. App. 2d 7 (1964)
196 N.E.2d 703
Heinrich Stegmann, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Philip L. Zachariah, Defendant-Appellant.
Gen. No. 64-F-21.
Illinois Appellate Court  Fifth District.
February 18, 1964.
*8 Reed and Armstrong, of Edwardsville, for appellant.
Griffith and Hoefert, of Alton, for appellee.
WRIGHT, JUSTICE.
This is an action by the plaintiff to recover damages occasioned by the alleged negligence of the defendant in the operation of his automobile. Defendant filed a counterclaim to recover damages occasioned by the alleged negligence of the plaintiff in the operation of his automobile. The issues made by the complaint and answer, the counterclaim and answer thereto, were submitted to a jury resulting in a verdict in favor of the plaintiff against the defendant in the sum of $1,500, and a verdict in favor of the plaintiff on the counterclaim of defendant. The trial court granted a remittitur in the sum of $500 and entered judgment for the plaintiff and against the defendant for the sum of $1,000, and entered a judgment for the plaintiff on the counterclaim of the defendant. Defendant appeals from the judgment entered against him.
Defendant contends that the plaintiff was guilty of contributory negligence and that defendant was free of any negligence as a matter of law and that, therefore, the trial court erred in refusing to direct verdicts for the defendant at the close of the plaintiff's case and at the close of all of the evidence.
Defendant further contends that the verdicts are contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence; that the court erred in giving Plaintiff's Jury Instruction No. 2 and that the court erred in allowing Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 3 to be introduced in evidence and taken to the jury room.
This action arises out of an automobile collision which occurred on September 25, 1962, at approximately 9:15 p.m. in the One Hundred block of Broadway Street in Alton, Illinois. Broadway Street at the *9 scene of the collision runs east and west having four driving lanes and one lane next to the north curb and one lane next to the south curb for parallel parking. The two eastbound lanes of travel and the two westbound lanes of travel are marked by a center line, and there is a center line dividing the east and westbound lanes.
The defendant was driving his automobile in an easterly direction in the right hand eastbound lane. When he arrived at the end of the block, he noticed a car backing into the lane he was traveling in order to park at the south curb. The defendant then slowed his automobile and stopped in the right hand lane about a car length behind the parking space that the vehicle was backing into. While the defendant was so stopped, he was struck in the rear by the automobile operated by the plaintiff, who was also traveling east in the right hand lane of traffic and to the rear of the defendant.
The evidence is conflicting as to what occurred immediately before and at the time of the collision. The evidence on behalf of the defendant is to the effect that there were no vehicles between plaintiff and defendant for a distance of at least one block, and that the plaintiff had a clear view of defendant's automobile, and the headlights and taillights of defendant's car were burning at all times. There was evidence offered on behalf of defendant that the plaintiff was traveling at a fast rate of speed.
Plaintiff testified that prior to the collision he was following a small truck in the right hand eastbound lane of traffic and immediately prior to the collision the truck turned to the left and proceeded east in the left hand lane to pass defendant's stopped vehicle. Plaintiff further testified that he attempted to turn left to pass the defendant's stopped vehicle but was prevented from doing so because another vehicle was *10 following close behind him in the left hand east-bound lane, and that he could not avoid colliding with defendant's stopped vehicle. Plaintiff also testified that defendant's taillights were not on at the time of the collision but defendant turned them on afterwards and before the police arrived. He testified that just prior to the collision, he was driving twenty miles an hour.
[1] We cannot say as a matter of law that the plaintiff was guilty of contributory negligence and that defendant was free from negligence. Questions of negligence and due care are ordinarily questions of fact for a jury to decide. Questions which are composed of qualities sufficient to cause reasonable men to arrive at different results should never be determined as a matter of law. The jury is the tribunal under our legal system to decide that type of issue. To withdraw from the jury the determination of questions of fact is to usurp its function. Ney v. Yellow Cab Co., 2 Ill. 2d 74, 117 NE2d 74. Similarly, under the conflicting evidence in the record before us, the verdict cannot be deemed to be contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. Winters v. Richerson, 9 Ill. App. 2d 359, 132 NE2d 673.
A motion for a directed verdict at the close of the plaintiff's case and at the close of all of the evidence presents the single question whether there is in the record any evidence, which standing alone and taken with all its intendments most favorable to the party resisting the motion, tends to prove the material elements of his case. Farr v. Chicago & E.I.R. Co., 8 Ill. App. 2d 168, 131 NE2d 120. In reviewing the action of the court of which complaint is made, the evidence is not weighed. We look only at that which is favorable to the plaintiff. Olympia Fields Country Club v. Bankers Indemnity Ins. Co., 325 Ill. App. 649, 60 NE2d 896; Rose v. City of Chicago, 317 Ill. App. 1, 45 NE2d 717. The fact that witnesses did not agree in every *11 particular as to what occurred cannot be considered. If the testimony regarding material facts is conflicting and the conclusion to be reached depends largely upon the credit to be given opposing witnesses, it is for the jury to determine wherein the truth lies and it is error to direct a verdict. People v. O'Grady, 339 Ill. 263, 171 N.E. 143. The trial court did not err in refusing to direct verdicts for the defendant at the close of the plaintiff's case and at the close of all the evidence.
[2] The defendant urges that the trial court committed reversible error in giving to the jury Plaintiff's Instruction No. 2 which is as follows:
"There was in force in the State of Illinois at the time of the occurrence in question a certain statute which provided that: No person shall park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, on the roadway side of any vehicle parked at the edge or curb of a street.
"If you decide that the defendant violated the statute on the occasion in question, then you may consider that fact together with all of the other facts and circumstances in evidence in determining whether or not the defendant was negligent before and at the time of the occurrence."
Upon the trial of this case, it was the theory of the plaintiff that defendant had parked his automobile on the roadway side of a vehicle parked at the edge or curb of a street when not necessary to do so in order to avoid conflict with other traffic, in violation of c 95 1/2, § 90, Ill Rev Stats 1961. The defendant admitted there was no other traffic on the street and that he could have pulled around the car in front of him but he just "wasn't in a hurry." The driver of the car in front of the defendant testified that there was plenty of room for the defendant to have gone around him. In this state of the record, the jury instruction *12 complained of was supported both by plaintiff's theory and by evidence in the record.
[3] The plaintiff is a German and gave his testimony in the German language through his daughter as an interpreter who translated the German answers of the plaintiff into English. During the course of cross-examination of the plaintiff, he volunteered in an unresponsive answer that in Germany he had received the watch he was wearing for driving 100,000 kilometers with one motor in a Volkswagen and he had eight of them. On redirect examination of the plaintiff by his own counsel, the plaintiff testified that the watches were presented to him by the Volkswagen Company and that each watch represented driving one Volkswagen for 100,000 kilometers without accident or dent in the car and with one motor. He further testified on redirect examination that for the eight watches he drove 800,000 kilometers without an accident, or dent and no repairs to the automobile. Counsel for the defendant did not object to any of this testimony. The watch that plaintiff was then wearing, which he had received from the Volkswagen Company, was admitted into evidence as Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 3 over the objection of counsel for the defendant. On the back of the watch there was an inscription with the letters "VW" and the figure "100,000 kilometers" was inscribed through the letters. Defendant contends that the testimony concerning the watches and the admission into evidence of the watch identified as Plaintiff's Exhibit No. 3, constituted reversible error for the reason that evidence of conduct of a person on another occasion or occasions is irrelevant on the question of his conduct on the occasion in issue.
The evidence concerning the eight watches given to plaintiff by the Volkswagen Company and the admission in evidence of one of the watches (Plaintiff's *13 Exhibit No. 3) would under normal circumstances be clearly not admissible and prejudicial. However, a review of the record reveals that counsel for the defendant at no time objected to such testimony. Also, some of this testimony was given in cross-examination of the plaintiff by defense counsel and the answer concerning the watches was not responsive. Defendant did not disclaim the answers or ask that they be stricken and the jury instructed to disregard them. The point of error concerning this testimony has been waived by defense counsel and has not been preserved for review.
[4] Defendant did object to the admission of the watch into evidence. The objection was overruled. The admission of the watch in evidence was error, but in view of all the testimony about it without objection we hold that such error was harmless and not reversible. A court of review will not reverse a judgment unless it appears that real justice has been denied or that the verdict of the jury and the judgment of the court may have resulted from such error. O'Brien v. Musfeldt, 345 Ill. App. 12, 102 NE2d 173.
We, therefore, conclude that the defendant was not prejudiced by any error in this record and the proof is not so unsatisfactory as to justify us in reversing the case.
Judgment affirmed.
DOVE, P.J. and REYNOLDS, J., concur.

=== CASE 2221126 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:04.636588+00 ===

369 Mass. 819 (1976)
343 N.E.2d 851
VERA M. BARTEVIAN
vs.
JAMES J. CULLEN.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Plymouth.
October 7, 1975.
March 3, 1976.
Present: REARDON, QUIRICO, BRAUCHER, & WILKINS, JJ.
*820 Bernard I. Kaplan (Arnold S. Dane with him) for the plaintiff.
Walter L. Sullivan for the defendant.
WILKINS, J.
In October, 1923, Gregory Bartevian conveyed real estate (premises) in Plymouth (town) to his wife, Vera M. Bartevian (plaintiff), and the deed was duly recorded. The town did not assess the premises for the purpose of collecting taxes until many years after 1923. In June, 1966, the town made a purported tax taking of the premises for nonpayment of 1965 taxes assessed in the amount of $16.29. In August, 1968, the town made a purported sale of the premises to the defendant pursuant to the provisions of G.L.c. 60, § 79, concerning the sale of land of low value taken for nonpayment of taxes. The plaintiff, who apparently did not learn of the tax taking and the sale to the defendant until 1972, brought this bill in equity for declaratory relief to establish her title to the premises. She challenges the legality of various procedures by which the town and then the defendant purported to acquire title to the premises. A decree dismissing the bill was entered in the Land Court. The plaintiff appeals. We reverse that decree.
We need discuss only one of the plaintiff's contentions because we conclude that the town's collector of taxes failed to comply with statutory requirements in mailing the demand on the plaintiff to pay the 1965 taxes on the premises and that the defendant has not shown that this error was insubstantial. Consequently, the plaintiff is still the owner of the premises.[1]
*821 The plaintiff argues that the town did not have a valid tax title to the premises and hence had nothing to convey to the defendant. The provisions of G.L.c. 60, § 79, declaring the title to land acquired from a municipality on a tax sale to be absolute "upon the recording of such deed of the treasurer" in the proper registry of deeds, do not bar the plaintiff from asserting now that the town had no title to convey to the defendant. The protection of this statute is available only if the title acquired was a valid one. McHale v. Treworgy, 325 Mass. 381, 385 (1950). See Johnson v. McMahon, 344 Mass. 348, 356 (1962).
The plaintiff argues that the collector failed to comply with the requirement of G.L.c. 60, § 16, that a demand for payment of taxes must be sent "by mailing the same to the last or usual place of business or abode, or to the address best known to him...." The demand was mailed to "Vera M. Bartevian, Plymouth, Mass."[2] She never received any tax bills or a demand for payment of real estate taxes from the town. The plaintiff never has lived in Plymouth or even spent a night there. She never has had a post office box or mailing address of any kind there. The 1923 deed to the plaintiff from her husband recited the grantee's address as "29 Forest Avenue, West *822 Newton, Mass." That was the home of her parents where she then lived. Since 1936, the plaintiff and her husband have lived on Centre Street in Newton and have been so listed in the city's records. Since 1936, Gregory Bartevian, whom the 1923 deed states to be Vera's husband, has been listed in the appropriate telephone book as residing on Centre Street, Newton. No other family named Bartevian has lived in Newton since at least 1936.
The mailing of a demand to the plaintiff in Plymouth did not comply with the mandate of G.L.c. 60, § 16, that the collector mail the demand to the owner's "last or usual place of business or abode" or "to the address best known to him." Plymouth was never a "place of business or abode" of the plaintiff. Thus the demand was sent properly only if Plymouth was the address best known to the collector. We think it clear that the address best known to the collector was not Plymouth. Instead, it was the address appearing on the same recorded deed as that from which the name "Vera M. Bartevian" was acquired by town officials for the purpose of assessing the premises in her name. There was consequently "an irregularity in the service of the demand." See Boston v. Boston Port Dev. Co., 308 Mass. 72, 75 (1941).[3]
General Laws c. 60, § 37, as appearing in St. 1943, c. 478, § 1, provides that "any error or irregularity which is neither substantial nor misleading" will not invalidate a tax title. Fall River v. Conanicut Mills, 294 Mass. 98, 99-100 (1936). The question here is whether the collector's error was "substantial." The judge made no determination whether the error was substantial. Once an error has been shown, the party who asserts the insubstantiality *823 of the error has the burden of proving that fact. See Marlborough v. Poorvu, 305 Mass. 124, 127 (1940). Cf. Tiberio v. Methuen, 364 Mass. 578, 580-581 (1974). The defendant has not shown that the failure to send the demand to "Vera M. Bartevian, 29 Forest Avenue, West Newton, Mass." was an insubstantial error. There is no evidence to warrant the conclusion that, if the demand had been sent to the plaintiff's former address, the demand probably would not have reached the plaintiff.[4]
The defendant argues that the plaintiff cannot object to the mailing address used because she did not give notice of her address to the town clerk pursuant to G.L.c. 60, § 39. If she had, the collector would have been required to serve the demand for payment of taxes on the plaintiff at that address. Although § 39 grants an opportunity to a taxpayer, it does not diminish the safeguards of G.L.c. 60, § 16, or impose an obligation on the property owner. The plaintiff's failure to advise the town of her new address would have justified the use of her address appearing in the 1923 deed, but it cannot justify the use of Plymouth as her address.[5]
*824 The defendant also argues that the plaintiff's failure to receive a demand sent in accordance with G.L.c. 60, § 16, is immaterial because § 16 provides that "failure to receive the ... [demand] shall not invalidate a tax or any proceedings for the enforcement or collection of the same." The short answer is that § 16 says failure to receive is not a defect, but it does not validate a tax title purportedly acquired without compliance with the requirements of § 16 concerning the sending of notice. If the defendant's contention were valid, discussion in our opinions concerning the adequacy of service of demands under § 16 would not have been necessary. See, e.g., Johnson v. McMahon, 344 Mass. 348, 352 (1962); Boston v. Boston Port Dev. Co., 308 Mass. 72, 75 (1941); Franklin v. Metcalfe, 307 Mass. 386, 389 (1940); Lynn v. Lynn Commercial Realty Co., 286 Mass. 368, 370 (1934).
The defendant argues further that the statutory pattern should be construed consistently with the statutory purpose to facilitate the collection of unpaid taxes without placing an onerous burden on the agents of a municipality. We agree that there is no burden on the collector of taxes to conduct his own investigation of the whereabouts of a seemingly errant taxpayer. All we hold here is that the use of the town in which the taxable premises lie as "the address best known" to the collector is defective, where there is no basis for using that address and another address is shown on the deed by which the taxpayer acquired the property. From prior to the time the plaintiff acquired the premises, a grantee's residence and post office address had to appear on every deed presented for record. St. 1917, c. 62. See now G.L.c. 183, § 6, as appearing in St. 1969, c. 497. See G.L.c. 185, § 61, as to registered land. The plaintiff's name *825 obviously was acquired from the 1923 deed for the purpose of assessing the tax which led to the demand, and the address on that deed should have been used in making the demand on the plaintiff.
Decree reversed.
NOTES
[1]  The evidence is reported, and the judge made a voluntary report of material facts. In this circumstance, we give due weight to the judge's findings, which will not be reversed unless plainly wrong, and may make our own findings of fact where the judge made none. Paone v. Gerrig, 362 Mass. 757, 759 (1973). Aronson v. Sharon, 346 Mass. 598, 600 (1964). See All Stainless, Inc. v. Colby, 364 Mass. 773, 776 (1974). All proceedings in the Land Court, including the claim of appeal and the designation of the record, occurred prior to July 1, 1974, the effective date of the new Massachusetts Rules of Civil Procedure and the new Massachusetts Rules of Appellate Procedure. The nature of our role on review in this case is a question of procedure, and, consequently, it is to be determined by "pre-July 1 procedure" as directed by Mass. R. Civ. P. 1A, 365 Mass. 730, 731 (1974). See Foreign Auto Import, Inc. v. Renault Northeast, Inc., 367 Mass. 464, 466 (1975).
[2]  The judge does not make a finding as to where the demand was sent. A copy of the demand is not in the record. However, documents in evidence prepared by the town describe the plaintiff as of Plymouth. The defendant admits that the demand was mailed to the plaintiff at "Plymouth, Massachusetts."
[3]  Although a seasonably recorded instrument of taking is prima facie evidence of facts essential to the validity of a municipality's title, such as the proper service of a demand for payment of taxes (G.L.c. 60, § 54), the undisputed facts show as matter of law that the demand was not made properly.
[4]  Evidence introduced by the plaintiff, and recited earlier in this opinion, shows that there was only one Bartevian family living in Newton at the time the demand was mailed. We cannot rule, as matter of law, that such a demand would not have been received by the plaintiff and that, therefore, the error in the mailing was insubstantial. The question of insubstantiality "must be decided according to the circumstances of each case." Fall River v. Conanicut Mills, 294 Mass. 98, 100 (1936). McHale v. Treworgy, 325 Mass. 381, 384 (1950). If the plaintiff had moved from Newton with no forwarding address or had a more common name, the error might be insubstantial on its face. Because of the failure of the mailing to meet the requirements of the statute, we do not reach the question whether such a notice would satisfy constitutional due process requirements.
[5]  If the town had assessed taxes on the premises in 1923 or immediately thereafter, the failure of the plaintiff to inquire about a tax bill might have a bearing on the plaintiff's rights, especially where any exercise of judicial discretion might be involved. See Johnson v. McMahon, 344 Mass. 348, 350 n. 2 (1962). Here, however, the town lulled the plaintiff into a state of inattentiveness concerning the payment of taxes by not assessing any taxes against the premises in 1923 or for many years thereafter.

=== CASE 9739833 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:54.709367+00 ===

ERICKSTAD, Chief Justice.
Barrett Mobile Home Transport, Inc. [Barrett] appeals from a district court judgment affirming an order of the North Dakota Public Service Commission [PSC] which approved an application by Skjonsby Truck Line, Inc. [Skjonsby] to transfer a part of its motor carrier authority to Morgan Drive-Away, Inc. [Morgan], We affirm.
Skjonsby possesses Special Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity No. 641, which, in relevant part, authorizes Skjons-by to transport:
“(4) Factory-manufactured buildings or sections of buildings, not including stick-built buildings: Between points in North Dakota.”
On December 15, 1982, Skjonsby filed an application with the PSC to sell, and Morgan to purchase, a part of the authority it held under paragraph four of its certificate. Skjonsby proposed to transfer to Morgan the authority to transport:
“ ‘Factory manufactured buildings or sections of buildings, not including stick built buildings, except those transported *230on ordinary flat-bed or lowboy trailers: Between points in North Dakota.’ ”
Skjonsby proposed to retain the authority to transport:
“ ‘Factory manufactured buildings or sections of buildings, not including stick built buildings, when transported on ordinary flat-bed or lowboy trailers: Between points in North Dakota.’ ”
On August 18, 1983, a hearing was held and appearances were entered on behalf of Skjonsby, Morgan and Barrett. On October 21, 1983, the PSC issued its findings of fact, conclusions of law and order approving the application.
The PSC found as facts that: (1) Skjons-by has conducted operations under the part of the certificate to be sold “both in tow-away service and in the transportation of buildings on trailers which are two distinct, and mutually exclusive, types of service;” (2) although Skjonsby has provided such service “only to a limited extent, it has held itself out to perform such service in the form of filing appropriate tariffs and there is no evidence that it has refused to perform such service on any occasion;” (3) Skjonsby is operating under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Act which has limited its operations, and approval of the application “would improve its financial ability to continue its operations;” (4) Morgan possesses the necessary equipment, personnel, finances and facilities and is thus “fit, willing and able to provide the proposed transportation service;” (5) Barrett holds authority to provide service substantially as contained in the part of the certificate sought to be transferred and “fears diversion of traffic if this application is granted;” and (6) division of paragraph four of Skjonsby’s certificate “will be consistent with the public interest and Public Convenience and Necessity require the granting of this application.”
Barrett appealed from the PSC’s order to the district court, which affirmed the PSC’s decision. Barrett now appeals from that judgment.
Barrett asserts on appeal that the PSC erred in approving Skjonsby’s application because: (1) the PSC has no statutory authority to approve a transfer of only a part of a certificate of public convenience and necessity; (2) the PSC did not consider all of the factors set forth in § 49-18-14, N.D.C.C.; (3) the PSC’s finding that Skjonsby conducted two distinct and mutually exclusive types of service is not supported by a preponderance of the evidence; (4) the PSC’s finding that a division of Skjonsby’s authority will be consistent with the public interest and public convenience and necessity is not supported by a preponderance of the evidence; and (5) Skjonsby has abandoned the authority it seeks to transfer to Morgan.
In an appeal from a decision of an administrative agency, we review the decision of the administrative agency rather than the decision of the district court, and look to the record compiled by the agency. Garner Public School v. Golden Valley County Committee, 334 N.W.2d 665, 671 (N.D.1983); Application of Nebraska Public Power Dist., 330 N.W.2d 143, 146 (N.D.1983). Our review of an administrative agency decision involves a three-step process whereby we determine whether or not the findings of fact are supported by a preponderance of the evidence, the conclusions of law are sustained by the findings of fact, and the decision is supported by the conclusions of law. Appeal of Dickinson Nursing Center, 353 N.W.2d 754, 757 (N.D.1984); Grant Farmers Mutual v. State by Conrad, 347 N.W.2d 324, 326 (N.D.1984); § 28-32-19, N.D.C.C. We do not make independent findings of fact or substitute our judgment for that of the qualified experts in the administrative agency, but determine only whether or not a reasoning mind reasonably could have determined that the factual conclusions reached were proved by the weight of the evidence from the entire record. Appeal of Dickinson Nursing Center, supra; Application of Nebraska Public Power Dist., supra; Power Fuels, Inc. v. Elkin, 283 N.W.2d 214, 220 (N.D.1979).
*231Administrative agency decisions on questions of law are fully reviewable by our Court. Appeal of Dickinson Nursing Center, supra; Grant Farmers Mutual, supra. An agency’s interpretation of a certificate of authority issued by it is generally treated with deference by the courts and is not set aside unless the interpretation is unreasonable, arbitrary or capricious. Skjonsby Truck Line, Inc. v. Elkin, 325 N.W.2d 271, 274 (N.D.1982).
Barrett initially contends that the PSC has no power to transfer only a part of the authority granted in a certificate of public convenience and necessity. Section 49-18-26, N.D.C.C., provides in pertinent part that a “certificate or permit shall be transferable only upon approval by the commission, after opportunity for hearing, giving notice to all interested parties; ...”
Although § 49-18-26, N.D.C.C., neither expressly authorizes nor specifically prohibits a partial transfer of a certificate of public convenience and necessity, we have stated that “the practical construction of a statute by the agency administering the law is entitled to some weight in construing the statute, especially where the agency interpretation does not contradict clear and unambiguous statutory language.” Clapp v. Cass County, 236 N.W.2d 850, 856 (N.D.1975). See also In re Dilse, 219 N.W.2d 195, 200 (N.D.1974); State Tax Commissioner v. Tuchscherer, 130 N.W.2d 608, 615 (N.D.1964).
We find unpersuasive Barrett’s argument that the PSC has no authority to approve partial transfers. In Hentz Truck Line, Inc., Etc. v. Elkin, 294 N.W.2d 774, 778 (N.D.1980), we indicated that if the evidence established that only a part of a certificate had been abandoned, the certificate could be amended in a transfer proceeding under § 49-18-26, N.D.C.C. Courts in several other jurisdictions have held that it is within the power of an administrative agency to permit division of a motor carrier certificate into two or more parts and to approve the sale of less than all of the parts. See Eagle Motor Lines v. Alabama Public Service Com’n, 343 So.2d 767 (Ala.1977); Houston & North Texas Motor Freight Lines v. Johnson, 140 Tex. 166, 166 S.W.2d 78 (1942); State v. Washington Public Service Commission, 54 Wash.2d 382, 340 P.2d 784 (1959). See generally Annot., 15 A.L.R.2d 883, § 5 (1951 and Later Case Service). But see Braddock v. Public Utilities Commission, 137 Ohio St. 59, 27 N.E.2d 1016 (1940).
We agree with the rationale of the Texas Supreme Court in Houston & North Texas Motor Freight Lines, supra, 140 Tex. at 169-170, 166 S.W.2d at 80:
“Since the Commission by this Act is vested with full authority to grant such certificates and to approve the sale thereof, and to supervise and regulate motor carriers for the purposes and to the extent above provided for, we see no reason why it should not be held that it has authority, under the above Act, to permit the division of the route covered by a certificate into two or more parts and the sale of a portion thereof to a third party. In other words, if the Commission had the authority in the first instance to have granted one certificate ... we see no reason why, under the broad powers embodied in the foregoing Act, it should not be permitted upon request of the owner to divide the certificate previously granted, and to permit sale of portions thereof to different purchasers.”
We therefore conclude that the PSC has the authority to approve a division and transfer of a part of the authority granted in a certificate of public convenience and necessity.
Barrett also asserts that the PSC erred in approving the transfer without taking into consideration all of the factors outlined in § 49-18-14, N.D.C.C., which provides:
“49-18-14. Factors to be considered by commission in granting certificate. Before granting a certificate to a common motor carrier, the commission shall take into consideration:
1. The need for service proposed by the applicant;
*2322. The increased cost of maintaining the highway concerned;
3. The effect on other existing transportation facilities;
4. The fitness and ability of applicant to provide service;
5. Adequacy of proposed service; and
6. Such other information as the commission may deem appropriate.
If the commission finds that the transportation to be authorized by the certificate is not consistent with the public convenience and necessity the commission shall not grant such certificate.”
We do not believe it was the intent of the Legislature when it enacted the transfer statute to require the PSC, as a prerequisite to authorizing a transfer, to follow all of the requirements and procedures applicable to the granting of a new application for a certificate. All of the factors set forth in § 49-18-14, N.D.C.C., including the need for the service itself, were previously considered by the PSC when the original certificate was issued to Skjonsby. To adopt Barrett’s argument that upon every application for a transfer of an existing certificate, the PSC must specifically consider all of the factors in § 49-18-14, N.D.C.C., would render the transfer statute meaningless.
We conclude, as have courts in many other jurisdictions, that an independent determination of each of the factors of public convenience and necessity is not required in a transfer proceeding so long as the PSC prevents the expansion of old services, the revival of dormant rights, or the creation of dual authorities from the single authority being sold. See Bradley v. United States, 322 F.Supp. 369 (D.Alaska 1971); Bowman Transportation, Inc. v. United States, 308 F.Supp. 1342 (N.D.Ala.1970); Churchill Truck Lines v. Transportation Regulation Board, Etc., 274 N.W.2d 295 (Iowa 1979); Spector Freight System, Inc. v. Herman Bros., 197 Neb. 835, 251 N.W.2d 376 (1977); Application of Transit Homes, Inc., 173 Neb. 391, 113 N.W.2d 638 (1962); Application of Transport, Inc. of South Dakota, 75 S.D. 340, 64 N.W.2d 313 (1954); Tarry Moving & Storage Co. v. Railroad Commission, 367 S.W.2d 322 (Tex.1963). The PSC’s inquiry in a transfer proceeding should be directed to whether or not the proposed transfer would be in the public interest, and only those specific factors in § 49-18-14, N.D.C.C., which cannot be presumed to have been determined when the original certificate was issued, such as the fitness and ability of the transferee, need be considered. See Churchill Truck Lines, supra; Application of Transit Homes, Inc., supra; Tarry Moving & Storage Co., supra. As the South Dakota Supreme Court stated in Application of Transport, Inc. of South Dakota, supra, 75 S.D. at 344, 64 N.W.2d at 315: “[I]n the absence of proof to the contrary, the assumption is warranted that public convenience and necessity require continuation of the services previously authorized.”
Barrett next asserts the PSC’s finding that Skjonsby conducted two distinct and mutually exclusive types of service is not supported by a preponderance of the evidence, and therefore its approval of the transfer created dual authorities arising from a single operating right. We disagree.
The record discloses that Skjonsby had transported “factory-manufactured buildings” by two methods, depending upon the design of the building to be transported. When the building was construct,ed with its own undercarriage, it was towed to the residential site and, in most instances, the undercarriage was left with the building. The other type of building, which was not built with its own undercarriage, was loaded onto trailers and hauled to the residential site where it was unloaded from the trailer. The evidence also reveals that it would be economically unfeasible or impractical to attempt to transport by one manner a building designed to be transported by another manner. The evidence indicates that whether or not a “factory-manufactured building” is towed or loaded on a trailer and hauled, is not merely a matter of choice or convenience of the carrier, but is dictated by the design and *233construction of the building itself. We conclude that the PSC’s finding that Skjons-by’s tow-away service and its transportation of buildings on trailers are two distinct and mutually exclusive types of service is supported by a preponderance of the evidence, and that dual authorities did not arise as a result of the transfer.
Barrett also contends that the PSC’s finding that the transfer was consistent with the public interest and public convenience and necessity is not supported by a preponderance of the evidence because the PSC failed to consider each of the specific factors set forth in § 49-18-14, N.D.C.C. As noted earlier herein, all of the factors in § 49-18-14, N.D.C.C., need not be considered in a transfer proceeding under § 49-18-26, N.D.C.C., if no new services are created. The finding that the transfer is consistent with the public interest is amply supported by the record.
Finally, relying principally on this Court’s decisions in Dan Dugan Transport Co. v. Maas Transport, 275 N.W.2d 855 (N.D.1979), and Hentz Truck Line, Inc., Etc. v. Elkin, 294 N.W.2d 774 (N.D.1980), Barrett asserts that the PSC erred in approving the transfer application because Skjonsby had abandoned its tow-away authority.
In Dan Dugan Transport Co., supra, we held that a common motor carrier’s nonuse of authority, accompanied by its inability to render services to the public, justified the PSC’s conclusion that a certificate had been abandoned. We also noted in that decision that a demand for services and refusal by the carrier to transport a tendered shipment is not a prerequisite to a finding of abandonment. In Hentz Truck Line, Inc., supra, we upheld the PSC’s finding of abandonment where the record was devoid of any evidence of an attempt on the part of the carrier to hold itself out to the public in the area it was authorized to serve under the certificate, and where the evidence revealed that the carrier had no equipment, no terminal, no salesman, and no listed telephone number in its principal place of authority.
These cases are distinguishable from the present case. The record reflects that Skjonsby has maintained equipment, personnel, and terminal facilities in its area of authority, and has held itself out as willing to provide tow-away service. The evidence also reveals that Skjonsby did in fact provide tow-away service as late as 1982, before filing its transfer application. We conclude that there is sufficient evidence in the record to establish that Skjons-by had not abandoned its tow-away service.
We have reviewed the record in this case and conclude that the PSC’s findings of fact are supported by a preponderance of the evidence, the conclusions of law are sustained by the findings of fact, and the decision is supported by the conclusions of law.
The judgment is affirmed.
SAND, GIERKE and PEDERSON, JJ., and MUGGLI, Surrogate Judge, concur.
MUGGLI, Surrogate Judge, sitting in place of VANDE WALLE, J., disqualified.

=== CASE 2222439 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:38.775295+00 ===

335 N.E.2d 239 (1975)
Leon LUEKEN, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
CITY OF HUNTINGBURG, Indiana, Defendant-Appellee.
No. 1-375A49.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, First District.
October 9, 1975.
Rehearing Denied November 12, 1975.
*240 Gerald R. Thom, Cox & Thom, Jasper, for plaintiff-appellant.
Norbert T. Schneider, William S. Lett, Schneider, Lett & Verkamp, Huntingburg, for defendant-appellee.
ROBERTSON, Chief Judge.
The plaintiff-appellant, Lueken, is appealing the trial court's decision affirming his dismissal from the police department of the defendant-appellee, City.
A summary of the several issues raised by Lueken shows that he complains of being suspended without proper statutory notice; that the trial court erred in finding his dismissal was not improper, illegal, unlawful, summary, arbitrary, or capricious, that the trial court erred in finding the transcript was full, true, and accurate; and the denial of his trial by jury.
Finding no reversible error, we affirm the trial court.
The pertinent facts show that the Chief of Police filed a petition with the City's Board of Public Works and Safety for the removal of Lueken as a patrolman of the City's Police Department on the 8th of February, 1974. The Board received the petition, directed that Lueken be given an opportunity to request a hearing, and suspended him with pay pending the ultimate disposition of the matter by the Board. The Board set the 12th of February, 1974, for the hearing and ordered notice served on Lueken, which the Chief did. At the Board's meeting on the 12th the Board and Lueken's counsel agreed to a hearing at 2:30 P.M., the 6th of March, 1974. That hearing was held with both sides presenting evidence and arguments. The Board took the matter under advisement until the 28th of March, 1974, when it issued findings and an order discharging Lueken from the police force.
On the 26th of April, 1974, Lueken appealed the decision to the Dubois Circuit Court and took a change of venue. Prior to the change of venue being perfected to the Daviess Circuit Court the City sought and was granted additional time to file the transcript of the Board of Works and Safety hearing. When the change of venue was perfected, Lueken sought a trial by jury which was ultimately denied. The *241 cause was heard by the trial court on 21 and 22 of August, 1974, with the decision being adverse to Lueken and this appeal resulting.
The suspension or dismissal of policemen in a 5th class city[1] is regulated by IC 1971, 19-1-3-2, Ind.Ann.State. § 48-6120c (Burns 1963) which reads in pertinent part:
"... policemen in cities of the fifth class shall be entitled to notice, hearing and right of review before either suspension or dismissal from the ... police department. Notice shall be given and an opportunity for hearing shall be provided for by the board of public works and safety or the city council. The notice, hearing and right of review provided for by this act shall, to the extent applicable and subject to the same conditions and limitations, comply with the notice, hearing and review provided for by [IC 1971, XX-X-XX-X (Burns Code Ed.)]. For the purposes of this act said act and all acts amendatory thereto or supplemental thereto are hereby incorporated in this act by reference.
Lueken first argues that his suspension without notice does not comply with the foregoing statute for the reason that he was suspended prior to any hearing. Neither party directs us to a case, nor are we able to discover one, which has specifically treated the question of suspensions without a hearing under IC 1971, 19-1-3-2, Ind. Ann. Stat. § 48-6120c (Burns 1963).
The City, relying upon Jenkins v. Hatcher (1975), Ind. App., 322 N.E.2d 117; State ex rel. Todd v. Hatcher (1973), Ind. App., 301 N.E.2d 766; and City of Evansville v. Nelson (1964), 245 Ind. 430, 199 N.E.2d 703, asserts that a suspension need not be preceded by a hearing. It is our view, however, that these cases do not interpret the statute under consideration here, and in any event, do not take into consideration the plain language of IC 1971, 19-1-3-2, Ind. Ann. Stat. § 48-6120c (Burns 1963) which provides for a hearing prior to suspension.
However, given the assumption that a hearing is required prior to suspending a policeman in a 5th class city, and given the totality of the circumstances surrounding Lueken's suspension, we cannot ascribe reversible error to the procedure utilized in this case. If we balance on the one hand those authorities relied upon by Lueken which require a strict adherence to statutory procedures and on the other hand that portion of T.R. 61 which says:
"The court at every stage of the proceeding must disregard any error or defect in the proceeding which does not affect the substantial rights of the parties",
we feel that the latter must prevail in this case for several reason.
The overriding considerations of both parties were illustrated in City of Evansville, supra, when our Supreme Court said:
"Under [IC 1971, XX-X-XX-X, Ind. Ann. Stat. § 48-6105 (Burns 1963)] it is obviously intended that police officers be protected in their offices, ... but it is of equal or greater import that the interest of the public be protected by a police department composed of able, dependable and well-disciplined police officers." 199 N.E.2d at 708.
The two major interests of Lueken, it would seem, may be reduced to his pay and his reputation. He was suspended with pay and the City moved with dispatch to resolve the issue of his job competency. On the other hand the City was protected by not having an officer on active duty whose ability was in question. While none of these standing alone are dispositive we do believe their collective effect is to protect *242 the relative rights of the parties to the degree contemplated by T.R. 61.
Lueken next asserts that the City's actions were improper, illegal, unlawful, summary, arbitrary or capricious for the reason that the Board of Public Works and Safety had prior knowledge of the evidence to be presented against Lueken.[2] Lueken primarily relies upon City of Mishawaka v. Stewart (1974), Ind., 310 N.E.2d 65, for the proposition that the fact finding process by an administrative board should be free of suspicion or appearance of impropriety. In City of Mishawaka, supra, the city attorney not only served as an advocate, he also served as a "judge" of his advocacy.
We have no such obvious display of impropriety in this case but rather a situation akin to that in Withrow v. Larkin (1975), 421 U.S. 35, 95 S.Ct. 1456, 43 L.Ed.2d 712, where a combination of the investigatory and adjudicative functions, without more, comport with due process.
Lueken further argues that the trial court erred in finding that a full and complete transcript of the proceedings before the Board of Public Works and Safety had been filed with the court as provided for by IC 1971, XX-X-XX-X (Burns Code Ed.).
However, an examination of the transcript that was filed reveals that while gaps and inaudible statements do exist they are not so numerous as to render the transcript incomplete within the contemplation of the statute. Several of the omissions occurred in the closing arguments of counsel and not in the evidence elicited from witnesses. Moreover, Lueken has not offered to this court any showing of what information was missing from the transcript such that the review of his case by the court below was prejudiced.
The trial court did not abuse its discretion in determining that the transcript as filed satisfied the statutory requirements.
Lueken lastly argues that trial court improperly denied him a jury trial.
The applicable statute, IC 1971, XX-X-XX-X (Burns Code Ed.), does provide for a trial by jury in the reviewing court upon timely request. However, it has been consistently held that this provision does not apply if the only matters before the court are issues of law for in that case a jury, as trier of fact, would serve no useful purpose. Lloyd v. City of Gary (1938), 214 Ind. 700, 17 N.E.2d 836; Durham v. City of Indianapolis (1952), 123 Ind. App. 74, 108 N.E.2d 205.
Since the issues of the present case were exclusively questions of law, the trial court did not err in denying Lueken's request for a jury trial.
Judgment affirmed.
LOWDERMILK and LYBROOK, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  There is no disagreement that Huntingburg is a city of the 5th class.
[2]  Lueken also reiterates other issues of this appeal under this issue. We feel that they have been adequately discussed elsewhere in this opinion.

=== CASE 2221038 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:02.904037+00 ===

137 Mich. App. 202 (1984)
357 N.W.2d 860
FASKE
v.
BONANNO
Docket No. 74210.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided September 5, 1984.
J. Robert Rock for plaintiff.
Margaret Barton for defendant.
*203 Before: V.J. BRENNAN, P.J., and ALLEN and GRIBBS, JJ.
PER CURIAM.
Defendant appeals as of right from an order of paternity entered September 20, 1983, following a bench trial held on plaintiff's action under the Michigan Paternity Act, MCL 722.711 et seq.; MSA 25.491 et seq. Blood tests admitted on stipulation of the parties showed a 99.8% probability that the defendant was the child's father.
Defendant does not seriously contest the finding of paternity but claims that it is unjust to order support when the plaintiff fraudulently represented that she was taking birth control pills, when she in fact was not taking them. Therefore, defendant argues, plaintiff should not be allowed to advance her fraud by placing the financial burden on the defendant.
No Michigan decision has ruled on this issue. However, other jurisdictions have resolved the issue against defendant. Stephen K v Roni L, 105 Cal App 3d 640; 164 Cal Rptr 618 (1980); Hughes v Hutt, 500 Pa 209; 455 A2d 623 (1983); L Pamela P v Frank S, 59 NY2d 1; 462 NYS2d 819; 449 NE2d 713 (1983). We see no reason why Michigan should rule differently.
Fraud or misrepresentation as to contraceptive protection by the mother should not be a defense under Michigan's Paternity Act. Parents have an obligation to support their children and the circumstances of a child's conception do not give rise to an exception to that rule. A parent cannot, merely by virtue of being the parent, waive, release, or compromise a child's claim in a paternity action. Tuer v Niedoliwka, 92 Mich. App. 694, 698-699; 285 NW2d 424 (1979). Since a child may not *204 suffer for a parent's release of the child's claim, neither should the child suffer from one of the parents' "fault" regarding the conception.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 2221048 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:03.127115+00 ===

35 Ill. App. 3d 957 (1976)
343 N.E.2d 57
In re ANNEXATION TO THE VILLAGE OF WADSWORTH.  (JUNE CERMAK et al., Petitioners-Appellees.
v.
EDWARD ROBERT HUMRICH et al., Objectors-Appellants.)
No. 75-167.
Illinois Appellate Court  Second District (1st Division).
Opinion filed February 20, 1976.
*958 Fuqua, Fuqua & Winter, of Waukegan, for appellants.
Frank M. Daly, of Waukegan, for appellees.
Judgment affirmed.
Mr. JUSTICE HALLETT delivered the opinion of the court:
This is a proceeding for the annexation of certain land to the Village of Wadsworth in Lake County. The trial court, after a hearing, ordered that the question of annexation be submitted to the corporate authorities of the Village and the objectors appeal, contending: (1) that notice was not given a successor trustee; (2) that the land involved is not contiguous; and (3) that the petition is defective because it does not include adjacent highways. We disagree and affirm.
On December 10, 1974, a petition was filed by certain landowners in the circuit court of Lake County requesting the court to submit to corporate authorities of the Village of Wadsworth the question of the annexation of certain land. The territory consists of a narrow string of lands approximately 4 miles in length and of various widths. At the point of connection with the village limit of Wadsworth the common dimension is slightly less than 400 feet.
Wherever the petition seeks to annex land only on one side of a highway, a 10-foot buffer zone between the land to be annexed and the adjacent highway was created. This buffer zone carefully follows every curve in the highway. Only where land on both sides of a highway is sought to be annexed has the petition included the buffer strips and the *959 highway in the legal description of the territory sought to be annexed.
On December 11, 1974, the court entered an order setting the petition for hearing on January 8, 1975. On December 13, 1974, notices of the January 8 hearing were mailed to the Fire Protection District and to two of its three trustees. Notice was not mailed to the third trustee, Mr. Goodwin, although he had been appointed on December 12, 1974, to replace trustee Bennett, who had died a month before, and although Mr. Goodwin had immediately qualified by filing a bond on the same day. The notice sent to the district was received and signed for by Ms. Shields who was both a trustee and the secretary-treasurer of the District. Ms. Shields and the other trustee, Mr. Hayden, both received the notices sent to them.
The objectors complain that (1) the notice sent to the trustees was defective since no notice was sent to Mr. Goodwin; (2) the territory sought to be annexed is not contiguous to the Village of Wadsworth; (3) the petition is defective for failing to include the highways adjacent to the land sought to be annexed but instead creating buffer strips.
 1 Section 7-1-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 24, par. 7-1-1) requires notice to be given to the trustees of the Fire Protection District of which the land sought to be annexed is a part. This requirement is mandatory (People ex rel. Hopf v. Village of Bensenville (1971), 132 Ill. App. 2d 907, 272 N.E.2d 50) and as provided by the statute, no annexation of such land is effective absent service of this notice. However, since notice was sent to the Fire Protection District as well as to two of the three trustees, the omission, and, at the time suit was filed and the order was entered setting the case for hearing, no successor trustee had yet been appointed, the omission, at most, was only a formal defect as this court held in In re Annexation to Village of Downers Grove (1974), 22 Ill. App. 3d 122, 316 N.E.2d 804. And the trustees do not object.
 2-4 The objector's second contention is that the property to be annexed is not "contiguous" as required by the statute. This court set forth the general principles relating to "contiguity" in the case of In re Annexation to Village of Buffalo Grove (1970), 128 Ill. App. 2d 261, 265-66, 261 N.E.2d 746.
"Certain general principles have been settled by the cases which have defined the term `contiguity' as used in the statute. `Contiguity' is satisfied by a touching or adjoining in a reasonably substantial physical sense; however, the line of demarcation between the reasonableness or unreasonableness of a contiguity must be drawn on the facts of each case. Western Nat. Bank of Cicero v. Vil. of Kildeer, 19 Ill. 2d 342, 352, 167 N.E.2d 169 (1960). The *960 finding of the trial court as to contiguity or lack of it will not be disturbed on appeal unless it is manifestly against the weight of the evidence. LaSalle Nat. Bank v. Village of Burr Ridge, 81 Ill. App. 2d 209, 217, 218, 225 N.E.2d 33 (1967). Irregularity of the resulting boundaries in itself is not a fatal defect in determining contiguity to a village. Western Nat. Bank v. Vil. of Kildeer, supra, at page 351. `Contiguity' is to be given a uniform liberal construction throughout the annexation statute. In re Petition of Flossmoor v. Mut. Nat. Bank, 23 Ill. App. 2d 440, 445, 163 N.E.2d 215 (1960); and In re Annexation to City of Loves Park, 89 Ill. App. 2d 284, 232 N.E.2d 144 (Abst, 1967); and contiguity has the same meaning under the disconnection statutes as under the annexation statutes. Wolbach v. Village of Flossmoor, 329 Ill. App. 528, 531, 69 N.E.2d 704 (1946); LaSalle Nat. Bank v. Village of Burr Ridge, supra, at pages 217, 218; LaSalle Nat. Bank v. Village of Willowbrook, 40 Ill. App. 2d 359, 360, 189 N.E.2d 690 (1963)."
The requirement of contiguity does not implicitly include the requirement of "campactness" as well. (Western National Bank v. Village of Kildeer (1960), 19 Ill. 2d 342, 167 N.E.2d 169; In re Annexation to the Village of Glen Carbon (1970), 130 Ill. App. 2d 821, 264 N.E.2d 283.) Thus in La Salle National Bank v. Village of Willowbrook (1963), 40 Ill. App. 2d 359, 189 N.E.2d 690, it was held that two "fingers" of land, one 50 feet wide by one-quarter of a mile in length, the other 33 feet wide by 660 feet in length were still contiguous (see In re Annexation to Village of Buffalo Grove (1970), 128 Ill. App. 2d 261, 268, 269, 261 N.E.2d 746), to the village following disconnection of intervening territory. Similarly in La Salle National Bank v. Village of Burr Ridge (1967). 81 Ill. App. 2d 209, 225 N.E.2d 33, we held that two areas of land, one 170 feet in width by 2,400 feet in length and the other 170 feet in width by 1,300 feet in length remained substantially contiguous to the municipality after the disconnection of the intervening territory.
 5 In the present case the width of the connection is approximately 400 feet. A common boundary of that length was held sufficient in People ex rel. Nash v. City of Loves Park (1965), 59 Ill. App. 2d 297, 207 N.E.2d 490 (abstract opinion), and we agree with the trial court that it is sufficient here. There are no areas which merely corner on another area nor are there mere strips of land used as a subterfuge to reach outlying areas of land to be annexed as were found in the cases relied upon by the objectors.
The objectors' third contention is that the petition must fail because it did not include the highway which is near the land to be annexed. As this *961 court held in In re Annexation to the Village of Green Oaks (1971), 1 Ill. App. 3d 773, 275 N.E.2d 462, the statutory requirement that the new boundary of any annexed territory "shall" extend to the far side of any adjacent highway is mandatory. (In accord: In re Annexation to the Village of Green Oaks (1973), 10 Ill. App. 3d 181, 293 N.E.2d 174; People ex rel. City of Des Plaines v. Village of Mount Prospect (1975), 29 Ill. App. 3d 807, 331 N.E.2d 373.) Nor does the statute merely have the effect of automatically extending the boundary to the far side of any adjacent boundary by operation of law. People ex rel. City of Des Plaines v. Village of Mount Prospect (1975), 29 Ill. App. 3d 807, 331 N.E.2d 373.
 6 The petitioners however contend that the highway is not "adjacent" because they deliberately left a 10-foot buffer strip between the land and the highway. The Illinois Municipal Code does not define "adjacent," and certain Illinois cases in the past have ruled that "objects are adjacent when they lie close to each other but not necessarily in actual contact." (City of Dixon v. Sinow & Weinman (1932), 350 Ill. 634, 640, 183 N.E. 570; Chicago & Northwestern Ry. Co. v. Chicago Mechanics' Institute (1909), 239 Ill. 197, 87 N.E. 933.) We agree with the appellee however, that construing "adjacent" to mean "close or nearby" would, in the present context, result in endless controversy concerning the meaning of close or nearby. (See City of St. Ann v. Spanos (Mo. App. 1973), 490 S.W.2d 653.) It would appear that the purpose of the statute was to require the annexation of the highway when the property touching it was annexed and it was not meant to require a city to annex land lying between a highway and the territory sought to be annexed.
Accordingly, the judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
Affirmed.
GUILD, P.J., and SEIDENFELD, J., concur.

=== CASE 2221049 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:03.150648+00 ===

136 Mich. App. 387 (1983)
357 N.W.2d 51
CRAMER
v.
METROPOLITAN SAVINGS ASSOCIATION
Docket No. 53149.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided May 17, 1983.
Amended opinion filed August 6, 1984.
Virginia Cramer, in propria persona.
Donovan, Hammond, Ziegelman, Roach & Sotiroff, P.C. (by William P. Thorpe), for all defendants except Counard.
Plunkett, Cooney, Rutt, Watters, Stanczyk & Pedersen, P.C. (by John P. Jacobs), for Allen Counard.
Before: M.F. CAVANAGH, P.J., and R.B. BURNS and CYNAR, JJ.
AMENDED OPINION
R.B. BURNS, J.
Defendants were granted accelerated judgment and codefendants were granted summary judgment on September 8, 1978. Codefendant *392 Allen Counard was granted accelerated judgment against plaintiff's claims on July 25, 1980. Plaintiff appeals and we affirm.
On July 14, 1978, plaintiff filed a 291-paragraph complaint against defendants, codefendants, and codefendant Counard in eight counts alleging, in the words of the complaint:
1) complaint for misconduct, fraud, or concealment and deception in wrongful foreclosure;
2) complaint for breach of covenant  conditions in covenant;
3) complaint for libel and slander and slander of title;
5) complaint for invasion of mortgagor's right to terminate payment of escrow in mortgage covenant and agreement;
6) complaint for intentional infliction of humiliation and emotional distress and suffering in wrongful foreclosure;
7) complaint for attorney malpractice and fraud, concealment, or deception  Allen Counard;
8) complaint for attorney malpractice and fraud, concealment, or deception  McClintock, Donovan, Carson & Roach, and James I. McClintock, Michael Doelle, and William P. Thorpe.
By written order dated July 25, 1980, the Wayne County Circuit Court granted accelerated judgment of no cause of action in favor of codefendant Counard. At least by count 7, plaintiff alleged attorney malpractice against Counard. The trial judge found that the two-year period of limitation expired because Counard last served plaintiff professionally in 1972 and suit was not commenced until July, 1978.
On September 8, 1978, plaintiff's claims against Metropolitan Savings and McClintock, Richards, and Denyer were dismissed with prejudice by an *393 order of accelerated judgment. The same order granted summary judgment with prejudice to codefendants McClintock, Donovan, Carson & Roach, McClintock, Doelle, and Thorpe. The order stated that counts 1-6 of the complaint are predicated on the same facts and the same parties and thus are barred by res judicata. In addition, the order stated that count 8, alleging malpractice, fails to state a cause of action because there was no privity between plaintiff and the codefendants because codefendants never represented plaintiff.
The history and facts of the case may be found in Cramer v Metropolitan Federal Savings & Loan Ass'n, 34 Mich. App. 638; 192 NW2d 50 (1971), and Cramer v Metropolitan Savings & Loan Ass'n, 401 Mich. 252; 258 NW2d 20 (1977), reh den 402 Mich. 954 (1977), cert den 436 U.S. 958; 98 S. Ct. 3072; 57 L. Ed. 2d 1123 (1978). The Supreme Court decision was the result of leave granted in the 1971 Court of Appeals decision along with two unpublished per curiam opinions of the Court of Appeals, No. 14149, decided May 29, 1973, and No. 18948, decided June 2, 1975. See order at 395 Mich. 751 (1975). In the instant appeal the defendants and codefendants filed motions to affirm, which this Court denied on August 13, 1982.
In her present appeal plaintiff essentially raises six issues. She first claims that the trial court erred in finding res judicata barred her action against defendant-mortgagee as an action between the same parties in a prior suit. This issue challenges the trial court's order of accelerated judgment, which was expressly granted only to those parties named as defendants: Metropolitan Savings, McClintock, Richards, and Denyer. Summary judgment was granted to the codefendants. The trial judge granted accelerated judgment to defendants *394 on the grounds of res judicata but not to the codefendants because they were not parties to the prior action. However, summary judgment was granted to the codefendants on the grounds that plaintiff lacked privity to sue them for their alleged malpractice in defending the defendants in a prior action. Thus, the present analysis discusses the res judicata issue only as it relates to those parties called defendants, and not the codefendants.
A majority of the Supreme Court hold that Michigan applies the broad rule of res judicata. Gose v Monroe Auto Equipment Co, 409 Mich. 147; 294 NW2d 165 (1980). See Curry v Detroit, 394 Mich. 327; 231 NW2d 57 (1975). Narrow application of the doctrine bars a second action only if the same question was actually litigated in the first proceeding, but broad application bars also those claims which could have been brought in the first action but which were not. Gose, supra, p 160.
The gist of plaintiff's argument to prevent application of res judicata is that fraud was perpetrated on the trial courts in prior proceedings. The fraud is said to consist of the absence of any evidence to support an order of the Wayne County Circuit Court on September 27, 1968, which dissolved a temporary order restraining foreclosure on plaintiff's house, the absence of any proof that plaintiff defaulted in the terms of a mortgage given to defendant, a statement by this Court that "Mrs. Cramer's evidence was not heard", in Cramer v Metropolitan Federal Savings & Loan Ass'n, 34 Mich. App. 638; 192 NW2d 50 (1971), and various allegations of collusion between her retained attorney and attorneys for the opposition and of misrepresentations made to the trial courts.
The doctrine of res judicata holds that an existing *395 final judgment or decree rendered upon the merits, without fraud or collusion, by a court of competent jurisdiction is conclusive upon the rights of the parties or their privies. Skinner v Argentine Twp Bd, 238 Mich. 533; 213 N.W. 680 (1927). Where a judgment on the merits is rendered in favor of a defendant, the plaintiff is precluded from maintaining the same cause of action on a new ground for relief except where the defendant's fraud or misrepresentation prevented the plaintiff from presenting the new ground for relief in the prior action. Prawdzik v Heidema Bros, Inc, 352 Mich. 102; 89 NW2d 523 (1958).
Before allegations of fraud will allow interference with a prior judgment, however, the fraud alleged must have actually prevented the losing party from having an adversary trial on a significant issue. Fawcett v Atherton, 298 Mich. 362; 299 N.W. 108 (1941); Rogoski v Muskegon, 107 Mich. App. 730; 309 NW2d 718 (1981).
Plaintiff's allegations of fraud are insufficient to lower the bar of res judicata. Plaintiff apparently has forgotten the period from 1968 until the present. She refers only to the proceedings in 1968 which dissolved her temporary restraining order. These are the proceedings which she claims are irregular and prevented her from presenting evidence. Besides seeking money damages, plaintiff seeks in the present complaint to set aside the 1968 foreclosure. Plaintiff admits redeeming the property in 1969. Then, in 1969, when plaintiff sought damages for wrongful foreclosure and the trial court dismissed the complaint, this Court reversed in Cramer v Metropolitan Federal Savings & Loan Ass'n, 34 Mich. App. 638; 192 NW2d 50 (1971). According to the Michigan Supreme Court's history of the case in Cramer v Metropolitan *396 Savings & Loan Ass'n, 401 Mich. 252; 258 NW2d 20, reh den 402 Mich. 954 (1977), cert den 436 U.S. 958; 98 S. Ct. 3072; 57 L. Ed. 2d 1123 (1978), plaintiff then filed an amended complaint alleging breach of contract, abuse of process, libel, breach of fiduciary duty, invasion of privacy, and intentional infliction of emotional distress. In an unpublished per curiam opinion (Docket No. 14149, decided May 29, 1973), the Court of Appeals affirmed a grant of summary judgment to defendants on all counts except the one alleging breach of fiduciary duty, which was remanded for trial. A jury found for defendants. The Supreme Court's opinion in Cramer ruled the foreclosure lawful and agreed with the Court of Appeals in affirming the trial court.
Whatever fraud plaintiff alleges has not prevented her from having a trial on the merits. A jury trial was held, from which two appeals were taken, and it was affirmed by the Supreme Court.
In addition, GCR 1963, 528.3 appears to set up a one-year period of limitation for seeking relief from a judgment, to the extent that is what plaintiff seeks. "If the application for relief is not supported by competent evidence of specific facts, general allegations of fraud will be of no avail." 3 Honigman & Hawkins, Michigan Court Rules Annotated (2d ed), p 185. General allegations of fraud which tend to call for nothing more than relitigation of issues and testimony previously presented and passed on are not the sort of extraordinary circumstances needed to seek relief from a prior judgment.
Because there are insufficient allegations of fraud to prevent application of res judicata, the doctrine applies and the trial court's grant of accelerated judgment to defendants Metropolitan *397 Savings, McClintock, Richards, and Denyer was correct.
Plaintiff next claims that the trial court erred when it granted summary judgment to codefendants on the ground that plaintiff has no cause of action against her adversary's attorneys.
Summary judgment was granted to those parties described as codefendants, except Counard, on the grounds that plaintiff lacked privity to sue them for malpractice in their prior representation of defendants.
The particular court rule underlying the order of summary judgment is not disclosed by the record or pleadings. The motion must have been grounded on failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted, GCR 1963, 117.2(1), however, because codefendants interposed a complete defense to the claims of plaintiff. Such a motion tests the legal sufficiency of the claim and is determined by reference to the pleadings alone. The test is whether the claims are so clearly unenforceable as a matter of law that no factual development can possibly justify a right to recovery. Pontious v E W Bliss Co, 102 Mich. App. 718; 302 NW2d 293, lv den 411 Mich. 1062 (1981).
To the extent count 8 of plaintiff's complaint states a claim of negligence, summary judgment was proper on the grounds that an attorney owes no actionable duty to an adverse party. Friedman v Dozorc, 412 Mich. 1; 312 NW2d 585 (1981). Friedman expressly foreclosed such suits. Although the Supreme Court noted that its decision was not based on privity of contract, Friedman, p 28, the Court said that Williams v Polgar, 391 Mich. 6; 215 NW2d 149 (1974), subjected an abstracter of title to liability in negligence to foreseeable third parties who rely on the abstracts, despite the absence *398 of privity of contract. But in the case of an adversary, said the Friedman Court, there can be no reliance because of the adversarial relationship.
Thus, while privity of contract was an erroneous basis on which to ground the order of summary judgment under Friedman, the order could properly have been grounded on the absence of a duty of due care under Friedman.
Moreover, plaintiff's count 8 falls short of pleading fraud. She does not allege false representations made to her which induced her to act on the supposedly false statements. Rather, she claims to have been astutely ahead of these codefendants.
Thus, we conclude that the trial judge properly granted summary judgment to codefendants. Although the stated ground of privity is not correct, the trial judge reached the right result because under Friedman one may not sue his adversary's attorney for negligence. In addition, the complaint fails to properly plead facts showing fraud.
Plaintiff next contends that a default judgment against codefendant Counard should not have been set aside because his affidavit failed to aver facts showing a meritorious defense and good cause.
A motion to set aside an entry of default shall be granted only if good cause is shown and an affidavit of facts showing a meritorious defense is filed. GCR 1963, 520.4. A trial judge's decision on both points is reviewed for abuse of discretion. Butler v Cann, 62 Mich. App. 663; 233 NW2d 827 (1975). The affidavit performs the function of informing the trial judge whether the defaulted defendant has a meritorious defense. Hartman v Roberts-Walby Enterprises, Inc, 17 Mich. App. 724; 170 NW2d 292 (1969), lv den 383 Mich. 774 (1970).
Plaintiff complains that the affidavit submitted by codefendant Counard fails to aver a meritorious *399 defense because a statute of limitations defense is a technical defense and not a meritorious defense. Although research disclosed no cases holding that a defense based on the expiration of the period of limitation is a meritorious defense, it doubtlessly is. Plaintiff's distinction is without meaning since the statute of limitations is the sort of defense contemplated by GCR 1963, 520.4.
Plaintiff next complains that the affidavit is deficient because Counard fails to show good cause. The rule does not suggest, however, that good cause must be shown by affidavit. Only a meritorious defense must be set out by affidavit. At the hearing in circuit court, counsel for Counard said that when Counard was served with the suit, the papers were forwarded to an underwriter who then sent them to Counard's present insurer, who then sent them to Counard's 1972 insurance company. Counsel said his office received the papers on August 9. It was within the trial judge's discretion to accept this excuse as a good cause, and an abuse of discretion does not appear.
Plaintiff also complains that the affidavit was not based on counsel's personal knowledge. Here it is not clear whether plaintiff believes the affidavit must be signed by counsel. However, plaintiff's own reproduction of the affidavit in her brief on appeal shows that the affidavit was signed by codefendant Counard. Since it was signed by Counard and appears to be based on personal knowledge, the affidavit is sufficient. Asmus v Barrett, 30 Mich. App. 570; 186 NW2d 819 (1971).
Plaintiff also contends that counsel for Counard falsely represented to the circuit court that he filed an answer on August 11 when it was actually filed August 15. Plaintiff correctly points out that a computer-printed schedule of docket entries *400 shows the answer was filed on August 15. However, the answer bears a filing stamp of August 11.
Plaintiff also contends that defendant's answer does not constitute a pleading or defense within the meaning of GCR 1963, 520.1, which provides for entry of default. An answer, however, is a pleading or defense contemplated by the rule. See GCR 1963, 110.1.
A trial judge's decision setting aside an entry of default is reviewed for abuse of discretion. Glasner v Griffin, 102 Mich. App. 445; 301 NW2d 889 (1980); Butler, supra. A review of the pleadings and transcripts does not reveal an abuse of discretion in setting aside the entry of default.
Plaintiff next claims that the Wayne County Circuit Court lost jurisdiction to grant a motion for accelerated judgment because a matter was pending in the Michigan Supreme Court and because plaintiff sought removal to federal jurisdiction.
We note initially that we may decline to consider this question because plaintiff has failed to cite any authority for it. A party may not leave it to the Court to search for authority to sustain or reject a position. Kucken v Hygrade Food Products Corp, 51 Mich. App. 471; 215 NW2d 772 (1974). Addressing this issue nevertheless, it is clear that plaintiff's contention is meritless. The right of removal is confined to defendants. Conner v Salzinger, 457 F2d 1241 (CA 3, 1972).
Because plaintiff is not a defendant in the present action, her claim is without merit because plaintiff was without power to remove the case to the federal court.
The next issue raised by plaintiff is whether the trial court erred in granting accelerated judgment *401 to codefendant Counard based upon the statute of limitations because of alleged procedural irregularities and because certain issues of fact were allegedly unresolved.
Counard first answered plaintiff's complaint on August 11, 1978, setting up the statute of limitations as an affirmative defense. By order of Wayne County Circuit Judge Roman S. Gribbs, plaintiff was allowed to amend her complaint to change the designation of Counard from third-party defendant to codefendant. The amended complaint was filed September 14, 1978. Counard again answered September 18, 1978, and again asserted the statute of limitations as an affirmative defense. Next appears a motion by Counard for accelerated and/or summary judgment on the grounds of the statute of limitations. There is no filing date on the motion but the affidavit shows a notarization date of September 18, 1978.
A hearing on Counard's motion was held October 12, 1978. Wayne County Circuit Court Judge John R. Kirwan denied Counard's motion by written opinion on October 24, 1978, noting that plaintiff had filed an appeal in the Michigan Court of Appeals which complained of Judge Gribbs' earlier decision setting aside the entry of default. Judge Kirwan wrote of his concern over granting a motion for accelerated judgment if the Court of Appeals overturned Judge Gribbs' decision to set aside the entry of default. Thus, Judge Kirwan denied Counard's motion without prejudice.
The Court of Appeals entered an order on October 13, 1978, which bears a county filing date of October 19, 1978, dismissing plaintiff's appeal.
On October 30, 1978, Counard moved for rehearing of his motion because the Court of Appeals had dismissed plaintiff's appeal. An entry in the record *402 notes that Counard's motion was adjourned on November 22, 1978.
Finally, the record shows an order from Judge Kirwan on March 18, 1980, granting Counard's motion for accelerated judgment on the grounds that the two-year period of limitation on plaintiff's claim had expired.
Plaintiff complains of several procedural irregularities. Plaintiff correctly notes that GCR 1963, 116.2 allows a party only one motion for accelerated judgment. She notes that many motions were filed.
It appears that plaintiff has in part counted the motions of defendants and codefendants along with that of codefendant Counard. In addition, she may be counting the adjournments and Judge Kirwan's denial without prejudice. In any event, the record discloses only one motion for accelerated and/or summary judgment filed by codefendant Counard. Thus, there is no error on this ground.
Plaintiff next complains that the motion was not filed in a timely manner. A motion for accelerated judgment must be filed in defendant's first responsive pleading or not later than his first responsive pleading. GCR 1963, 116.1. There is no error here, though, because codefendant Counard raised the affirmative defense in his first and second answer and filed the motion for accelerated and/or summary judgment apparently at the same time as his second answer. Thus, the defense was preserved with the first answer. GCR 1963, 116.3; Harris v Lapeer Public School System, 114 Mich. App. 107; 318 NW2d 621 (1982); Farmers Ins Group v Clear, 94 Mich. App. 655; 290 NW2d 51 (1980).
Substantively, plaintiff contends that there were unresolved issues of fact which prevented entry of accelerated judgment by reason of the statute of *403 limitations. By count 7 of her complaint, plaintiff charges malpractice, fraud, concealment, and deception. Plaintiff says she employed Counard from about April or May, 1970, until about March, April, or June, 1972. She claims Counard negligently failed to investigate facts and law and violated several disciplinary rules of the Canons of Professional Responsibility. Plaintiff claims her cause of action against Counard accrues by reason of the Michigan Supreme Court decision of October 6, 1977, reported at 401 Mich. 252; 258 NW2d 20 (1977). The fraudulent conduct alleged is that Counard told plaintiff he had removed the adjudication of default. Counard's misconduct is alleged to be a continuing affirmative act of fraud. Plaintiff also alleges she did not discover until after the Supreme Court's decision that nothing was sought to set aside the foreclosure and to allow plaintiff to be heard on the wrongful foreclosure and invalid sheriff's sale.
On review of a motion for accelerated judgment, as at the trial court level, the Court of Appeals must accept well-pleaded facts of the nonmoving party as true. Robards v Estate of Leopold J Kantzler, 98 Mich. App. 414; 296 NW2d 265 (1980).
In support of his contention that the period of limitation had expired, Counard relies on MCL 600.5805, 600.5838; MSA 27A.5805, 27A.5838.
The period of limitation for legal malpractice is two years. MCL 600.5805; MSA 27A.5805; Sam v Balardo, 411 Mich. 405; 308 NW2d 142 (1981). Similarly, the period of limitation for negligence is three years under MCL 600.5805; MSA 27A.5805, subparagraph (7) when plaintiff's complaint was filed, now subparagraph (8).
Thus, these periods of limitation could well have expired because plaintiff admits that codefendant *404 Counard last served as her lawyer in June, 1972, at the latest. But plaintiff argues that she did not discover her attorney's malpractice until the Supreme Court issued its opinion in Cramer v Metropolitan Savings & Loan Ass'n, 401 Mich. 252, on October 6, 1977.
The critical question concerns when plaintiff's claim accrued. Our inquiry is governed by the statute and case law in effect at the time the asserted malpractice occurred. Boyer v Vandenbrink, 98 Mich. App. 772, 774-775; 293 NW2d 687 (1980), lv den 410 Mich. 888 (1981). The former MCL 600.5838; MSA 27A.5838 was then controlling, and provided:
"A claim based on the malpractice of a person who is, or holds himself out to be, a member of a state licensed profession accrues at the time that person discontinues treating or otherwise serving the plaintiff in a professional or pseudo-professional capacity as to the matters out of which the claim for malpractice arose."
In Dyke v Richard, 390 Mich. 739; 213 NW2d 185 (1973), the Supreme Court interpreted the above statute to mean that an action based on malpractice by a state-licensed professional must be brought within two years of last treatment or within two years of the time the asserted malpractice is discovered or, in the exercise of reasonable diligence, should have been discovered. Boyer, supra.
If plaintiff did not discover defendant Counard's malpractice until the Supreme Court issued its opinion in Cramer v Metropolitan Savings & Loan Ass'n, supra, on October 6, 1977, her action would have been timely. However, it would defy logic to credit plaintiff's assertion concerning discovery. Part of plaintiff's claim against defendant Counard *405 was based on negligence; specifically, plaintiff charges that, after the Court of Appeals remanded her cause for further proceedings, Counard did not pursue the appropriate remedy, i.e., setting aside the foreclosure. However, plaintiff showed her dissatisfaction with her attorney's performance by firing him during the first half of 1972. We treat this part of her claim as having accrued then. Plaintiff's malpractice claim also sounded in deceit. According to plaintiff, Counard "had inferred" to her that the default had been removed and stricken. Plaintiff claims that the editor's syllabus in the Supreme Court's opinion informed her for the first time that this had not in fact happened. We find it difficult to believe that more than five years could pass without plaintiff's realizing that her mortgage default had not been corrected. At any rate, we find that plaintiff should have discovered the facts underlying this malpractice claim no later than the 1975 release date of this Court's per curiam opinion affirmed by the Supreme Court on October 6, 1977. Using this accrual date, plaintiff's claim is untimely.
We conclude that plaintiff's claim for malpractice against Counard is barred by the applicable statute of limitations, Sam v Balardo, supra. Accelerated judgment was thus properly granted on this ground.
Furthermore, plaintiff did not appear at the circuit court hearing where Counard's motion for accelerated judgment was granted. The trial judge stated on the record that plaintiff had written two letters to the court saying she would not appear. Thus, plaintiff's claims for fraudulent concealment were not argued before the trial judge. Because this defense was not presented to the trial judge, this Court need not consider it unless it is necessary *406 to a proper determination of the case or a manifest injustice would result. Szidik v Podsiadlo, 109 Mich. App. 446; 311 NW2d 386 (1981); Brown v Considine, 108 Mich. App. 504; 310 NW2d 441 (1981). Review of the proceedings suggests no special circumstances relieving plaintiff of her burden to raise all applicable issues in circuit court. Plaintiff is an experienced litigant and she was afforded an adequate opportunity to contest Counard's motion, but chose not to do so.
Plaintiff claims that her acceptance of costs does not bar her appeal. However, it is unnecessary to consider this question as no party in this Court has suggested that plaintiff's appeal should not be heard because she accepted an award of costs upon the setting aside of the default against codefendant Counard.
Finally, we note that defendants and codefendants request that $7,500 in costs be taxed against plaintiff for pursluing a vexatious appeal. GCR 1963, 816.5. Although we deny this prayer for relief in this instant appeal, any further action in this case by plaintiff will result in imposition of such damages by this Court upon its own motion pursluant to GCR 1963, 816.5(1).
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9739815 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:27.782447+00 ===

Beasley, J.
Defendant, Richard Keith Lawless, was convicted by a jury of armed robbery, MCL 750.529; MSA 28.797, and felony-firearm, MCL 750.227b; MSA 28.424(2). He was sentenced to serve not less than 4 nor more than 15 years in prison for armed robbery and the mandatory con*631secutive 2-year felony-firearm term. Defendant appeals as of right.
First, defendant argues that it was error for the prosecutor, in rebuttal argument, to misstate the disposition of a defendant found not guilty by reason of insanity. The issue of disposition was first raised by defense counsel in closing argument:
"It is a rare case. In this case, ladies and gentlemen, unlike other cases — it is not permissible to argue other cases, but what you will hear in this case and what you won’t hear in any other type of case and what makes it rare is, you will get an instruction by Judge Kaufman on disposition. What is the effect of a verdict of 'not guilty by reason of insanity’? What will happen? What will happen is, it is not going to be any getaway. When you have made the decision, and you will have to live with it, you will go home, go about your business. I will go about my business. The prosecution will go on to case after case. Richard Lawless will go to a mental hospital. I believe this case is about help. I also believe, ladies and gentlemen, if you have any doubt — and I believe reasonable doubt remains — that you should go for help. You will be given that opportunity by the instructions. * * *
"I am not going to ask for a compromise verdict on this case. I don’t think a compromise verdict is going to help Richard Lawless. I will ask for 'not guilty by reason of insanity’, and if you arrive at this decision, he will go to a hospital, where he belongs.”
The prosecutor, on rebuttal, made the following remarks:
"He brings up an interesting point, ladies and gentlemen, and I can speak with you, ladies and gentlemen, because he brought it up: The disposition. If you find the defendant not guilty by reason of insanity, the Court has jurisdiction only to hold him in a mental health facility for 60 days, and then they are free to let him go and walk the streets a free man, unless they *632find him a danger to people or society; but they are not claiming that. They are claiming temporary insanity at the time of the commission of the offense. * * *
"So, by law, if you find the defendant guilty by reason of insanity, the State can hold him only 60 days, and they have to let him go. He is a free man. This is not a case of help, demanding help. This is a case of justice. You swore you would be able to find the defendant guilty if you find he committed the crime, which the defendant said he did; and, secondly, on the issue of temporary insanity at the time the offense was committed, whether or not he was legally insane at the time of the commission of the offense or whether he was guilty but mentally ill at the time of the commission of the offense. So don’t think that if you find him not guilty by reason of insanity he is going to be locked up in an insane asylum for the rest of his life. Uh-uh. Sixty days, then he walks.”
In People v Cole,1 a majority of the Michigan Supreme Court held that, where the insanity defense has been raised, the jury must be instructed concerning the consequences of a not guilty by reason of insanity verdict if the defendant or the jury so requests. In the within case, the trial judge gave the following instruction:
"If you find that the defendant committed the act but was not criminally responsible at the time, then he is not guilty by reason of insanity. If you make such a decision, the defendant will be immediately committed to the custody of the Center for Forensic Psychiatry for evaluation of his present mental condition and such further medical and legal proceedings as are then deemed necessary.”
In People v Szczytko,2 the Court addressed the *633propriety of comments by counsel concerning the disposition of a defendant found not guilty by reason of insanity. Although the Court held that neither counsel may comment during argument concerning the disposition of the defendant, the defendant’s conviction was affirmed. In Justice Brennan’s opinion, he found the error in the prosecutor’s argument was rendered harmless because the trial judge restricted the prosecutor from further commenting, and properly instructed the jury concerning disposition of the defendant.3
Both attorneys in the within case violated the prohibition against commenting during argument concerning the disposition of a defendant found not guilty by reason of insanity and, not only did the prosecutor improperly comment on disposition, he misstated the law when he failed to mention that defendant could be held for more than 60 days if he was found to be dangerous to himself or to public safety. However, no objection was raised concerning the prosecutor’s comments on disposition, and his remarks were made only after defense counsel had opened the door by commenting on disposition. Furthermore, a curative instruction was given.
On appeal, while defendant argues that the instruction did not cure the error, he acknowledges that he had requested the short form instruction, CJI 7:8:07, which was given. He now argues that the trial court should have given the long form instruction, CJI 7:8:08, which more specifically describes disposition. We do not agree that only the long form instruction could have cured the error. We believe the curative instruction was adequate to render the error harmless._
*634It was also error for the prosecutor to tell the jury at the close of his argument that:
"I know you will do your civic duty and find the defendant guilty of armed robbery and guilty of possession of a firearm in the commission of a felony.”
However, the evidence of defendant’s guilt was considerable, and he did not object to the remark at trial. Accordingly, we do not find this brief remark to be grounds for reversal.4
Defendant also failed to object to the second error he contends occurred at trial, when the prosecutor on cross-examination made reference to an examination of defendant by another psychiatrist who had found him sane:
"Q. [Prosecutor]: Do you know whether or not any other psychiatrists were asked to interview this defendant?
"A. [Dr. Joel S. Dreyer]: I don’t know. I only saw a couple reports, from a Ph.D. and MSW.
”Q. Isn’t it a fact that Dr. Danto examined the defendant and found him sane?
"A. I haven’t seen that report, sir.
"Q. You haven’t?
"A. No, I haven’t.
”Q. Would that have any bearing on your opinion, the fact that Dr. Danto, a noted psychiatrist, would have found him legally sane?
"A. Well, Bruce and I work together — in fact, Bruce works for me at the clinic where I work — and we differ from time to time. He didn’t have the same training I did and will often come for extra training, and would admit that here, in court.”
It is improper for an attorney to argue or refer *635to facts not in the record that are from the attorney’s personal knowledge.5 The people concede that no evidence was presented that Dr. Danto had examined defendant. As the prosecutor notes, however, no reference to an examination made by Danto was brought up again. Where defendant did not object at trial to the questions and the trial judge instructed the jury that the questions which attorneys ask witnesses are not themselves evidence, we do not find reversible error.
Additionally, in this case, the prosecution offered expert testimony of a clinical, forensic psychologist that defendant was neither legally insane nor mentally ill. This testimony countered that of Dr. Dreyer who was called by the defense. Thus, the reference to Dr. Danto, albeit improper, was of minimal significance, if any, in the jury’s deliberations.
Defendant also asserts that the failure of his trial counsel to object to the questions constitutes ineffective assistance of counsel. We do not believe this to be the case. Defense counsel could properly have refrained from objecting to the brief questions where an objection could have emphasized the testimony in the minds of the jurors and where no further reference was made to the testimony.6
Third, defendant states that reversible error occurred on two occasions during the jury selection process when more than one peremptory challenge was exercised at the same time. GCR 1963, 511.6 provides:_
*636"After a challenge for cause is sustained or a peremptory challenge exercised, another juror shall be selected and examined before further challenges are made. Such jurors shall be subject to challenge as are other jurors.”
The Michigan Supreme Court disapproved of the "struck jury method” in People v Miller7 and held that a defendant is entitled to have a jury selected as provided by Rule 511.6. In Miller, the trial judge announced the procedure he would follow five weeks before trial, and the defendant objected before trial began. However, the "struck” method was used to select the jury. The Supreme Court held that where the selection process is challenged before it begins, a violation of the rule requires reversal even without a showing of prejudice.
Citing Miller, a majority of this Court held that reversal was required where a trial court used the "struck method” for the defendant’s last two peremptory challenges in People v Adkins.8 The Court, however, emphasized that the holding with respect to the failure to object during jury selection was a narrow one and noted that reversal based on the failure to comply with the court rule would only be proper "[w]here it is impossible or impractical to make an objection out of the presence of the jury”.9
In the within case, there was a violation of the court rule. However, unlike in Miller and Adkins, supra, defendant did not raise an objection to this practice at any point in the trial, but raised the issue for the first time on appeal. We, therefore, do not believe that reversal is required on this basis.
Finally, defendant contends that it was reversible error for the trial court to instruct the jury *637that, while they could convict on the. armed robbery count and acquit on the felony-firearm count, they could not convict only on felony-firearm. In fact, the jury was instructed as follows:
"With respect to count II, if you find that the defendant committed the crime of armed robbery, then you must further consider whether or not he was carrying a firearm or had one in his possession at that time. This is a second count or crime charged against the defendant. * * *
"Just to clarify possible verdicts, you can find the defendant not guilty of both counts I and II. If you do that, put 'Not Guilty’ there. You can find him guilty of count I but not guilty of count II. You cannot find him guilty of count II but not guilty of count I.”
As defendant made no objection to this portion of the jury charge, our review of the allegedly erroneous instruction is foreclosed unless manifest injustice would result.10
In People v Lewis,11 decided after the trial in the instant case, Justice Levin seemed to say that while a jury should be instructed that commission of a felony or an attempt to commit a felony is an element of felony-firearm, a jury should not be instructed that it must convict of the underlying felony in order to convict of felony-firearm. Justice Levin cites as authority for this proposition his dissent in the chief felony-firearm case of Wayne County Prosecutor v Recorder's Court Judge12 which dissent rested upon his insistence on apply*638ing the constitutional double jeopardy prohibition to felony-firearm. In Wayne County Prosecutor, the majority squarely faced that issue and, in upholding the constitutionality of the felony-firearm statute, concluded there was not any double jeopardy violation.
There is not any language in Lewis, supra, indicating an intention to reverse Wayne County Prosecutor. Actually, People v Lewis is the popular entitlement for three cases, People v Lewis, People v Johnson and People v Hunt, which were consolidated for argument and for opinion. Lewis and Johnson are distinguishable from the within case because in both Lewis and Johnson13 the jury found the defendant not guilty of the underlying felony, but guilty of felony-firearm. However, in Hunt, the jury found the defendant guilty of attempted breaking and entering and of felony-firearm. This Court affirmed the convictions. Although the convictions were affirmed, the prosecution was granted leave to appeal by the Supreme Court. With respect to Hunt, Justice Levin said:
"The people contend that the Court of Appeals erred in declaring in Hunt that the judge should have instructed, as requested by Hunt’s lawyer, 'that if they acquit the defendant of the underlying felony count, they cannot convict of felony-firearm’. The Court of Appeals nevertheless found the error to be harmless because Hunt had been convicted of both the felony charge and felony-firearm. We agree with the prosecutor.
"While the felony-firearm statute makes commission or the attempt to commit a felony an element of the offense of felony-firearm, it does not make conviction of *639a felony or of an attempt to comit a felony an element of the offense. The statute is set forth in the margin.
"The judge may and should instruct the jury that a person cannot be convicted of felony-firearm unless the jury finds that 'he committed] or attempted] to commit a felony’. Because conviction of a felony or of an attempt to commit a felony is not an element of the offense, the jury may not be instructed that it must convict of an underlying felony in order to convict of felony-firearm.”14 (Footnotes omitted.)
Based on this analysis, Justice Levin’s opinion affirmed Hunt’s conviction.
We recognize that it may be argued that the Hunt analysis would indicate an error in instruction here. However, under the circumstances of this case, we see no manifest injustice here. We point out that, in this case, defendant admitted that he held up the gas station attendant at gunpoint. At trial, the chief issue was with regard to his mental condition. No claim was made that defendant did not have the weapon required for a felony-firearm conviction.
Under these circumstances, it is hardly surprising that trial counsel did not choose to object to the jury instruction that was given. The Lewis (Hunt) decision did not come along until after the within jury instruction and jury verdict, which is another reason for not disturbing this conviction. Furthermore, the evidence here was overwhelming. Consequently, we do not find the instruction requires reversal.
Affirmed.
W. J. Caprathe, J., concurred.
382 Mich 695; 172 NW2d 354 (1969). Also, see People v Thomas, 96 Mich App 210, 223; 292 NW2d 523 (1980).
390 Mich 278; 212 NW2d 211 (1973).
See also People v Hall, 83 Mich App 632; 269 NW2d 476 (1978), Iv den 405 Mich 826 (1979); People v Staggs, 85 Mich App 304; 271 NW2d 211 (1978).
People v Boles, 127 Mich App 759; 339 NW2d 249 (1983).
People v Knolton, 86 Mich App 424; 272 NW2d 669 (1978), lv den 406 Mich 885 (1979); People v McCain, 84 Mich App 210; 269 NW2d 528 (1978), lv den 404 Mich 813 (1978).
People v Garcia, 398 Mich 250; 247 NW2d 547 (1976), reh den 399 Mich 1041 (1977); People v Joseph, 24 Mich App 313; 180 NW2d 291 (1970).
411 Mich 321; 307 NW2d 335 (1981).
117 Mich App 583; 324 NW2d 88 (1982).
117 Mich App 588.
People v Williams, 114 Mich App 186; 318 NW2d 671 (1982).
415 Mich 443, 454-455; 330 NW2d 16 (1982).
406 Mich 374, 418; 280 NW2d 793 (1979), app dis 444 US 948; 100 S Ct 418; 62 L Ed 2d 317 (1979). See Lewis, supra, 415 Mich 455-456, fn 17, citing the chief decision in Wayne County Prosecutor, supra. Although Justices Kavanagh and Moody joined in the Levin dissent in Wayne County Prosecutor, Justice Kavanagh dissented from Justice Levin’s decision in People v Lewis.
People v Mayes, 126 Mich App 668, 673; 337 NW2d 623 (1983), and People v Eady, 131 Mich App 627; 345 NW2d 653 (1983), are other cases where this Court has had difficulty with People v Lewis, supra.
People v Lewis, supra, 415 Mich 454.

=== CASE 9739816 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:27.786683+00 ===

Shepherd, P.J.
(dissenting). The majority opinion *640ably sets forth in detail the various errors that occurred in this trial and little elaboration is required. Nevertheless, the significance of these errors does deserve comment.
The prosecutor made a clear misstatement of law when he said that, if the defendant were acquitted by reason of insanity, defendant would spend 60 days in an insane asylum and "then he walks”. I do not believe that the curative instruction corrects this error since the instruction simply said that the defendant would be sent for evaluation of his present mental condition "and such further medical and legal proceedings as are then deemed necessary”. Given the high degree of credibility of the prosecutor, it is my belief that some jurors may have been misled by the instruction and that the court would have been well advised to specifically state to the jury that the prosecutor made a misstatement of law. If this were the only error, I would be prepared to say that it was harmless. However, there was much more.
The prosecutor erred by admonishing the jury to do its civic duty.
The prosecutor erred in referring to the alleged testimony of the absent Dr. Danto. Although there was actual testimony that defendant was sane, the jury, or some members thereof, might have been persuaded to go along with a theory of sanity based upon a reference in the trial to a Dr. Danto who is alleged to have found the defendant sane.
The jury selection process was improper.
The instruction to the jury on felony-firearm was incorrect, although I accept the analysis of the majority on this issue.
Each one of the above errors taken alone might very well be considered harmless. However, taken *641in their entirety, they paint the picture of a trial which got out of hand and was fundamentally unfair. The only substantial issue in this case related to the defendant’s sanity.. If all of the errors had been absent, it is my belief that the defendant’s chances of prevailing on that issue would have been considerably greater and I believe he should have had an opportunity to have a trial untainted by the mistakes which the majority acknowledges were errors of law. It is indeed difficult to draw the line at a point where an accumulation of harmless error results in substantial error. My view of this case is that we have crossed the line. See People v Spencer, 130 Mich App 527; 343 NW2d 607 (1983).
I would reverse and remand for new trial at which the errors referred to in the majority opinion would presumably not occur.

=== CASE 2221063 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:03.425259+00 ===

369 Mass. 770 (1976)
343 N.E.2d 402
COMMONWEALTH
vs.
FRANK A. BENJAMIN, JR.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Worcester.
February 2, 1976.
February 26, 1976.
Present: HENNESSEY, C.J., REARDON, QUIRICO, BRAUCHER, & WILKINS, JJ.
Daniel F. Toomey for the defendant.
John M. O'Connor, Assistant District Attorney, for the Commonwealth.
BRAUCHER, J.
The defendant, who was charged with the murder of his wife, appeals from a conviction of murder in the second degree. He claims error in three respects: (1) instructions to the jury as to discussion during trial, (2) failure to instruct the jury that evidence of a prior attack was admitted for a limited purpose, (3) withdrawal from the jury of the possibility of a manslaughter verdict. He also asks (4) that we direct the entry of a verdict of guilty of manslaughter under G.L.c. 278, § 33E. We hold that the first two contentions are not open on the record, although we disapprove the instruction to the jury on discussion. We also uphold the judge's ruling that there was no evidence of manslaughter, and we decline to grant relief under § 33E.
1. Jury discussions. At the close of the first day of evidence, the judge instructed the jury[1] that they were *772 free to discuss the case in the jury room among themselves and that a married juror could tell his or her spouse what the juror had heard. He also said, "Don't express any opinions." There was no objection or exception to these instructions, and any error with respect to them is waived. Since there is no showing of prejudice to the defendant, we do not consider them under § 33E. Commonwealth v. Coleman, 366 Mass. 705, 710-711, 711-712 (1975). Cf. Myres v. United States, 174 F.2d 329, 335 (8th Cir.), cert. denied, 338 U.S. 849 (1949); Wilson v. State, 4 Md. App. 192, 195-201, cert. denied, 251 Md. 753 (1968), cert. denied, 394 U.S. 975 (1969); Cook v. Atlantic Coast Line R.R., 196 S.C. 230, 249 (1941); Annot., 21 A.L.R. 2d 1088, 1110-1113 (1952).
We take this occasion, however, to disapprove the instruction given. An appropriate instruction for such occasions is found in 1 E. Devitt & C. Blackmar, Federal Jury Practice and Instructions § 10.01 (2d ed. 1970):[2] "Until this case is submitted to you, you must not discuss it with anyone, even with your fellow jurors. After it is submitted to you you must discuss it only in the jury room with your fellow jurors. It is important that you keep an open mind and not decide any issue in the case until the entire case has been submitted to you under instructions of the court." We recognize that it is hard for a juror to obey such instructions, particularly in talking to a spouse, and it can be argued that they are largely unenforceable. But they are sound; if followed, they avoid a variety of troubles. In particular, we do not think it is useful to ask lay jurors to distinguish in conversation between opinion and fact.
*773 2. Prior attack. Two witnesses testified to an attack by the defendant on his wife about two weeks before the homicide. No exception was taken to the testimony of the first witness, but an exception was taken after objection to the testimony of the second witness on the ground of materiality. The defendant now concedes, as the judge ruled, that the evidence might have some bearing on the defendant's feelings or motive. Commonwealth v. Bartolini, 299 Mass. 503, 510-511, cert. denied, 304 U.S. 565 (1938). But, he says, a limiting instruction was essential. This point was not made at the trial, and is not open here. Commonwealth v. Stout, 356 Mass. 237, 243 (1969).
3. Evidence of manslaughter. The defendant contends that the evidence warranted a finding that the defendant killed his wife in the heat of sudden passion generated by extreme provocation, and that the judge therefore erred in instructing the jury that manslaughter was not a possible verdict. There was evidence that the defendant had a deep emotional attachment to his wife and children, that he was extremely upset by his wife's desertion and infidelity and by denial of access to his children and discovery of their placement in a foster home, and that he attacked and threatened his wife and drank heavily. There was also evidence that about two hours before the homicide he had an argument with his wife and was told by a police officer to leave the area, that later he talked to his minister who also told him to leave the area, that he was waiting in an alleyway when his wife left a cafe about 1 A.M., and that as she left he grabbed her about the neck from behind, spoke a few words and stabbed her in the neck.
There is no suggestion of involuntary manslaughter. The argument is that there was voluntary manslaughter, "a slaying without malice in the heat of passion or anger." Commonwealth v. Lewinski, 367 Mass. 889, 896 (1975). A more complete statement is that voluntary manslaughter is "a killing from a sudden transport of *774 passion or heat of blood, upon a reasonable provocation and without malice, or upon sudden combat." Commonwealth v. Soaris, 275 Mass. 291, 299 (1931). Commonwealth v. Caine, 366 Mass. 366, 375 (1974), and cases cited. There was no "sudden combat," and the case turns on "reasonable provocation." The judge said that under our law "anger at one's wife for not remaining his wife, anger at one's wife for not allowing him to see his children, anger at one's wife because he suspects her of playing around, as opposed to actually catching her in the act, and acting in sudden rage of passion," is "not sufficient provocation to reduce a homicide, murder to manslaughter." We agree. Cf. Commonwealth v. Soaris, 275 Mass. 291, 299-300 (1931); Commonwealth v. Hartford, 346 Mass. 482, 491 (1963); Commonwealth v. Leate, 352 Mass. 452, 458 (1967); Commonwealth v. Rembiszewski, 363 Mass. 311, 321 (1973); W. LaFave & A. Scott, Criminal Law § 76 (1972); R. Perkins, Criminal Law 53-69 (2d ed. 1969).
4. Section 33E. The transcript has been read in the light of our power and duty under G.L.c. 278, § 33E. We do not find reason to disturb the conviction.
Judgment affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  "I just like to caution you  of course, while you are alone amongst yourselves in your jury room, you are free to discuss the case and the evidence that you've heard. I would prefer, however, that while at lunch, you are coming into the corridors or passing through the court house, you don't discuss it because somebody might overhear what you are saying or something. And also, I know it is hard for those of you that are married not to tell your spouse, you know, something about what you are hearing. And that is perfectly all right. Don't express any opinions. Tell him what you heard."
[2]  See also § 5.03; 2 E. Devitt & C. Blackmar, Federal Jury Practice and Instructions § 80.16. The latter provides a more elaborate charge for civil cases, which seems equally suitable for criminal cases.

=== CASE 2221068 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:03.53174+00 ===

357 N.W.2d 442 (1984)
218 Neb. 603
STATE of Nebraska ex rel. NEBRASKA STATE BAR ASSOCIATION, Relator,
v.
William R. THIERSTEIN, Respondent.
No. 44119.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
November 1, 1984.
KRIVOSHA, C.J., and BOSLAUGH, HASTINGS, CAPORALE, SHANAHAN, and GRANT, JJ.
*443 PER CURIAM.
This matter came on for hearing on a showing filed by Dennis G. Carlson, Counsel for Discipline of the Nebraska State Bar Association, showing that although William R. Thierstein had been indefinitely suspended from the practice of law in the State of Nebraska on January 19, 1982, he, nevertheless, continued to engage in the practice of law in the State of Nebraska. Following the filing of said showing, this court entered an order requiring respondent, William R. Thierstein, to show cause why he should not be barred from the practice of law. Thereafter, respondent did file a showing, and the matter was reviewed by a referee, who has now filed his report. The referee specifically finds that in fact respondent has engaged in the practice of law following his suspension, and the referee recommends to the court that the court enter an order of disbarment. No exceptions have been taken to the report of the referee by respondent, and Counsel for Discipline, pursuant to Rule 10(L) of the Disciplinary Rules of this court, has moved the court for a judgment on the pleadings.
In consideration of the report of the referee and the files and records in this case, the court finds that the motion of Counsel for Discipline should be sustained.
It is therefore ordered that the said William R. Thierstein be, and he hereby is, disbarred forthwith.
Dated this 1st day of November 1984.
JUDGMENT OF DISBARMENT.

=== CASE 9739817 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:33.396017+00 ===

PEDERSON, Justice.
This is an appeal from a judgment granting the parties a divorce from each other. Conchita Delorey (Conchita) argues that the trial court erred in awarding her support of $300.00 per month for twelve months and seeks an award of $400.00 per month permanent alimony. David Delorey (David) has moved to dismiss the appeal on the grounds that Conchita has accepted substantial benefits under the judgment. We do not find from the record that Con-chita has accepted substantial benefits and deny the motion to dismiss. We reverse the trial court’s award of spousal support and remand for reconsideration in accordance with this opinion.
Conchita, who is in her late thirties, is a citizen of the Republic of the Philippines and has no relatives in the United States. She married David, who is in his early forties, in 1971 at Clark Air Force Base in the Philippines, where he was stationed. The parties remained in the Philippines until 1973, when David was transferred to Virginia. They returned to the Philippines from 1975-1977. David transferred back to the United States after that time, but Conchita did not join him in Minot until 1979.
During the time the parties resided in the Philippines, Conchita did not work outside the home because of an agreement between the United States Air Force and the Republic of the Philippines. In the United States, Conchita obtained periodic employment as an unskilled laborer, working as a housekeeper, cook and kitchen helper. She has had no formal education and no formal job training and is not fluent in the English language.
David has a high school diploma, some college credits and an Air Force job that has provided him with skills that are transferable to civilian employment. He has received two promotions and regular pay raises since the marriage. David has accumulated some funds in an Individual Retirement Account and is eligible for military retirement. In addition to his salary, he receives dental and medical care through his military service and several non-taxable “allowances” for living off the military base.
Each of the parties brought little property into the marriage and they were unable to accumulate much property during the course of the marriage. The marriage was something less than idyllic and the parties had separated several times before the final separation in March 1983. There are no children from the marriage.
Conchita apparently has a gambling problem and became involved in the black market in the Philippines, presumably to *490help support her gambling habit. Although David disapproved of Conchita’s gambling, he gave her money when she asked for it and did nothing to encourage her to seek professional help for her problem. At the time of the trial, Conchita was sharing an apartment with a male Air Force employee and was unemployed.
The trial court, in its findings of fact, determined that Conchita had not given up any opportunities for the marriage and thus was not disadvantaged by the dissolution. The court noted that Conchita “needs some assistance until she can either find a decent job or remarry. Such support cannot be justified in terms of alimony. It could be justified in the form of partial property distribution.” (Finding of Fact VIII; emphasis added.) In its Conclusion of Law V, however, the court ordered David to pay Conchita “as support money”, $300.00 per month for a period of twelve months. The court also found that no retirement had vested in David because he was still on active duty and concluded, as a matter of law, that an unvested military pension could not be considered in property distribution.
It is perhaps unfortunate that the terms alimony and spousal support continue to be used interchangeably. Alimony in the traditional sense is viewed as a continuation of the right of one spouse to be supported by the other during marriage. This court has explicitly rejected that approach. See Carr v. Carr, 300 N.W.2d 40, 46 (N.D.1980). The purpose underlying alimony or spousal support today is rehabilitative, to allow the disadvantaged party time and resources to acquire new skills. It can be for a limited period of time or it can be permanent to provide the traditional maintenance for a party incapable of rehabilitation. See, e.g., Smith v. Smith, 326 N.W.2d 697, 700 (N.D.1982); Briese v. Briese, 325 N.W.2d 245, 248-49 (N.D.1982); Gooselaw v. Gooselaw, 320 N.W.2d 490, 493 (N.D.1982). How “alimony” payments are treated depends on the nature of the payments, i.e., whether they are actually a form of property division or spousal support. Spousal support is subject to modification upon proof of changed circumstances, while property division is a final determination. See generally, Seablom v. Seablom, 348 N.W.2d 920, 923-25 (N.D.1984). In this case, the trial court specifically stated that the payments were a form of property distribution and we will regard them as such on this appeal.1
Section 14-05-24, NDCC requires the court to distribute the parties’ real and personal property “as may seem just and proper.” The court’s distribution will not be disturbed unless it is clearly erroneous, either because it lacks substantial eviden-tiary support or because it was induced by an erroneous view of the law. Jondahl v. Jondahl, 344 N.W.2d 63, 70 (N.D.1984); Winter v. Winter, 338 N.W.2d 819, 822 (N.D.1983). The court’s distribution in this case was induced by an erroneous view of the law, that an unvested military pension cannot be considered in the distribution of the marital estate.
The availability of a military retirement pension as a divisible asset for purposes of a property division has undergone several changes within the past few years. The United States Supreme Court in McCarty v. McCarty, 453 U.S. 210, 101 S.Ct. 2728, 69 L.Ed.2d 589 (1981) held that federal law precluded a state court from dividing military nondisability retirement pay pursuant to state community property laws. Congress reacted to the Supreme Court decision by enacting the Uniformed Services Former Spouses’ Protection Act, Pub.L. *491No. 97-252, 96 Stat. 730 (1982), codified at 10 U.S.C. § 1408 (1982). We recently had occasion to consider the Act’s effect in Bullock v. Bullock, 354 N.W.2d 904, 906-08 (N.D.1984), and noted that many states have ruled that the Act’s effect is to allow each state to make the final decision concerning the divisibility of military nondisa-bility retirement pay.
This court, in Webber v. Webber, 308 N.W.2d 548 (N.D.1981), remanded a trial court’s decision that military retirement benefits were property rights constituting marital assets subject to distribution. The remand was based on the Supreme Court’s McCarty decision. In Rust v. Rust, 321 N.W.2d 504 (N.D.1982), we determined that military retirement pay is not a divisible asset for property division purposes. Rust, however, was based solely on the McCarty decision, which has effectively been overruled by Congress. As we stated in Bullock, supra, at 908, Rust can no longer be considered as controlling North Dakota law with respect to the divisibility of military retirement pay.
Although the trial court did not have the benefit of our opinion in Bullock, the record makes it clear that the court and counsel were aware that a federal statute might have altered the McCarty and Web-ber decisions and that consideration of the retirement pay would require a change in the property distribution. Nowhere in the record does it appear that the actual provisions of the federal statute were considered and applied to the facts of this case. Instead, the court concluded that because it did not have the present value of the retirement account and the pension might never vest, it was not able to consider the military retirement pay as a divisible asset.
This court has previously held that profit-sharing funds could be considered in the division of property. See, e.g., Keig v. Keig, 270 N.W.2d 558 (N.D.1978). We recently held that where present values of annuities cannot be agreed upon, it may be necessary to divide them according to a formula that requires both parties to share in the ultimate risks and benefits involved. Glass v. Glass, 344 N.W.2d 677, 678-79 (N.D.1984). We commented in Glass that although Minnesota has a statute that implies that only vested pension rights are marital property, the Minnesota Supreme Court has concluded that non-vested pensions are also marital property. The Minnesota Supreme Court offered appropriate guidelines for trial courts that have to divide retirement benefits. We summarized these in Lentz v. Lentz, 353 N.W.2d 742, 747 (N.D.1984). Finally, in Bullock, supra, at 910-11, we concluded that a non-vested military pension was properly considered an asset for purposes of property distribution and that the district court’s formula properly allocated the risks and benefits involved between the parties.
The trial court’s failure to consider the military retirement plan was induced by an erroneous view of the law and, consequently, the whole question of equitable property division in this case must be retried. The judgment is reversed to the extent that it involves property division and “spousal support” and the case is remanded for retrial of those issues.
ERICKSTAD, C.J., and SAND, J., concur.
. If we were to consider the payments in this case as spousal support instead of property division, our review would be disposed of by Rule 52(a), NDRCivP. We would have set aside the trial court's determination only if we were left with the firm conviction that a mistake had been made. See Mees v. Mees, 325 N.W.2d 207, 208-09 (N.D.1982).
Our disposition of this appeal makes it unnecessary for us to address the specific issue of whether or not the trial court's award of “spousal support” was clearly erroneous, but we note that under the facts presented on this record it would be difficult to conclude that the award adequately served a rehabilitative function.