=== CASE 2218626 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:51.528612+00 ===

596 N.E.2d 903 (1992)
Doris J. DWYER, Sharon L. Dwyer Buzard, Vernon L. Stratton, Gregory Stratton, Sheila Stratton Mack, Sherri Stratton Diaz, Edward Stratton, Janet Gayle London, Mark Allyn London and Karen Jeffers, Appellants-Plaintiffs,
v.
Ruth ALLYN, Allyn Simpson, Ronald Simpson, Kenneth J. Juncker, Mary Juncker, Emily A. Yount, Louis Allyn, David Allyn, Marilyn Thompson, the Unborn Children of Karen Jeffers, the Unborn Children of Sheila Stratton *904 Mack, the Unborn Children of Edward Stratton, the Unborn Children of Sherry Stratton Diaz, and the Unborn Descendants of Ida Stratton, Allyn Simpson and Ronald L. Simpson, As Co-Personal Representatives of the Estate of Wilma L. Simpson, Kenneth J. Juncker and Brenda J. Thompson, As Co-Personal Representatives of the Estate of Otis B. Allyn, Deceased Marilyn K. Thompson and Ronald L. Simpson, As Co Guardians of Ruth Allyn, an Incapacitated Person, Appellees-Defendants.
No. 65A01-9203-CV-67.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, First District.
July 20, 1992.
Edwin W. Johnson, Robert W. Rock, Johnson, Carroll and Griffith, Evansville, for appellants-plaintiffs.
Hawley, Hudson & Almon, Mt. Vernon, for appellees-defendants.
BAKER, Judge.
"Wills and the construction of them do more perplex a man than any other learning," mused the venerable Lord Coke in Roberts v. Roberts, 2 Bulstr. 124, 130, 80 Eng.Rep. 1002, 1008. Unfortunately, his observation still rings true today, as the pitched legal battle currently confronting us proves.
The sole issue raised in this appeal is whether the following sentence from the will of Ida W. Stratton is precatory or imperative: "It is my desire that said real estate [an undivided one-third interest in 210 acres] not be sold or divided among my children or grandchildren for so long as any one or more of my children shall live." Two of Ida's four children still live. Therefore, if Ida's words cast an imperative, the bequeathed real estate may not be sold or divided. If, on the other hand, Ida's words are suggestive only, meant merely to advise her heirs about her wishes, the language is precatory and, as explained below, the land may be sold or divided.
The heirs to Ida's real estate, plaintiff-appellant Doris Dwyer, her brother, and their eight nieces and nephews (collectively the descendants), want the land partitioned and argued to the trial court, unsuccessfully, the language Ida used was precatory. They now appeal the trial court's grant of *905 partial summary judgment in favor of defendant-appellee Ruth Allyn and her codefendant-appellees (collectively Allyn), who together own the remaining two-thirds interest in the 210 acres and who prefer the land not be sold or divided. We must reverse.
FACTS
Ida Stratton's will, prepared by Posey County attorney Otis Allyn and signed September 6, 1962, reads as follows:
LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT OF IDA W. STRATTON
I, Ida W. Stratton, a resident of Posey County, Indiana, being of sound mind and disposing memory do hereby make, declare and publish this to be my Last Will and Testament, hereby revoking all former wills made by me.
I. It is my will that all my just debts and expenses be first paid out of my estate.
II. I direct that my personal property in my home excluding cash be divided among my children in such manner as they shall voluntarily agree. In the event my children are unable to agree on an equitable division of such personal property, then such items as they shall be unable to agree upon and such items as no child shall select shall be sold at private sale by my executrix hereinafter named.
III. I direct that my home at 522 Locust Street, Mt. Vernon, Indiana, be sold at public or private sale as my executrix shall deem best, provided however that there shall be at least two (2) weeks['] notice in the Mt. Vernon Democrat prior to any such sale.
IV. At the present time I am the owner of an undivided one-third of the following described land lying and being in Black Township, Posey County, Indiana, to-wit:
[surveyor's description of the 210 acres property].
I hereby give an undivided one-twelfth of the above described real estate being one-fourth of my interest therein, to each of the following named persons for the terms of their respective natural lives: Marjorie J. London, Doris J. Dwyer, Vera L. Stern, and Vernon L. Stratton. I give the remainder interest in such real estate following the death of each of my above named children to the descendant or descendants of each such deceased child per stirpes and not per capita. In the event one or more of my said children shall die leaving no descendant or descendants, then I hereby give the remainder interest in such real estate following the death of such child to my grandchildren living at the time of my death per stirpes and not per capita. It is my desire that said real estate not be sold or divided among my children or grandchildren for so long as any one or more of my children shall live.
V. I hereby give, bequeath, and devise all the rest and residue of my property, real, personal, and mixed, to Marjorie J. London, Doris W. Dwyer, Vera L. Stern, and Vernon L. Stratton, share and share alike.
VI. I hereby constitute and appoint my daughter, Marjorie J. London, executrix of this my Last Will and Testament. I hereby request that said executrix shall not be required to execute and file any bond except such as will, in the Court's opinion, provide full protection to the rights of creditors and taxing authorities.
In Witness Whereof, I have hereunto subscribed my name this 6th day of September, 1962.
/s/ Ida W. Stratton
Ida W. Stratton
[Witnesses' attestation.]
Record at 88 (emphasis added). Two of Ida's four children are still alive, as are eight grandchildren, all offspring of the two children who predeceased Ida. Together, these descendants own the one-third interest bequeathed to them, and together they have sought to have the land partitioned. Opposing them is Allyn, the owner of the remaining two-thirds interest.
*906 DISCUSSION AND DECISION
Standard of Review
No material facts surrounding this case are disputed.[1] Accordingly, our task is limited to a determination of whether the trial court correctly applied the law to the undisputed facts. State, ex rel. Bd. of Dental Examiners v. Judd (1990), Ind. App., 554 N.E.2d 829.
Construction
The sole issue we have been asked to address is whether Ida's "it is my desire" language amounts to a command or a suggestion.
The purpose of a will, of course, is to allow the testator to finalize his or her earthly endeavors and concerns from beyond the grave. But as Lord Coke twigged long ago, testators and their attorneys are occasionally far from precise in recording the testator's final wishes. One problem, precatory language, haunts us still. Precatory words are those "whose ordinary significance imports entreaty, recommendation, or expectation rather than any mandatory direction." 80 Am.Jur.2d Wills § 1168 (1975). Examples have been held to include "wish," "want," "desire," "ask," "request," and "should." One thing is clear: a command must be, when possible, performed, but a suggestion need not be. Forth v. Forth (1980), Ind. App., 409 N.E.2d 1107; Osborn v. Osborn (1954), 124 Ind. App. 295, 116 N.E.2d 653; Lewis v. Atkins (1952), 122 Ind. App. 618, 105 N.E.2d 183.
As this court has remarked, "[c]ertain rules of construction exist." Forth, supra, at 1113. Foremost, perhaps, is the principle that "[w]hether words are precatory or mandatory depends upon the express intention of the testator and is determined by the context of the will." Id. (citing Osborn, supra). The Forth court continued:
Where the maker of the will repeatedly uses concise, legal, and technical terms to express his intention to vest an estate or interest in property, a change in phraseology to precatory expressions in connection with the disposition of other property indicates rather clearly that he did not intend such precatory words to create enforceable obligations; otherwise, he would not have abandoned language with which he was familiar and which was unmistakably suited for the purpose. Lewis v. Atkins (1952), 122 Ind. App. 618, 105 N.E.2d 183. Further, when a will is drafted by an experienced and skilled attorney, importance should be attached to the use of identical or different words. Fischer v. Kaylor (1969), 145 Ind. App. 148, 250 N.E.2d 19. Where identical words are used in the same context in the same paragraph of a will, they should be given identical meanings. Martin v. Raff (1944), 114 Ind. App. 507, 52 N.E.2d 839.
Forth, supra, at 1113. Finally, "[i]n determining the question of the testator's intention, ... it will be presumed [the testator] used precatory words in their ordinary and usual sense unless there is something to show that [the testator] intended that they be given a different meaning." Lewis, supra, 122 Ind. App. at 623, 105 N.E.2d at 185.
Turning to Ida's will, then, we are of the opinion Ida meant her "it is my desire" language to be merely an expression of her hope rather than a straightforward command. First and foremost, the greatest weight of authority holds that, absent a contrary showing, the word "desire" is precatory. 4 W. Bowe and D. Parker, Page on the Law of Wills § 30.22 (3rd ed. 1961); 95 C.J.S. Wills § 602 (1966); Hunt v. Hunt (1959), Tex.Civ.App., 329 S.W.2d 488.[2]
*907 After carefully examining Ida's will in its entirety, we cannot help but observe that the language used throughout the dispositive clauses is concise, legal, and specific, and was generally placed in the active tense: "I direct," "shall," "I direct," "I hereby give," "shall," "I give," "I hereby give," and "I hereby constitute." Record at 88-89. In contrast to these unequivocal commands is the single use of the phrase "[i]t is my desire." Given the generally precatory nature of the word "desire" and the fact that all other verbs clearly convey a sense of obligation, in stark contrast to the phrase "it is my desire" found in the passive tense, we fail to find any indication the word should be assigned any meaning other than that importing entreaty, recommendation, or expectation. The will was drafted, we note, by an attorney experienced in the practice. See Forth, supra. We hold the trial court erred in determining the language at issue was mandatory and prevented partition.
Alternatively, Allyn contends IND. CODE 32-4-5-5, which prohibits partition of any real estate contrary to the intention of a testator as expressed in the testator's will, applies in this case. We disagree, because Allyn is not affected by the will. "It is clear that this statute was not intended to govern the rights of parties not affected by the will. This statute is applicable only where the rights of all parties are fixed by the provisions of the will under which they claim title." Tom v. Tom (1940), 107 Ind. App. 599, 601-602, 26 N.E.2d 410, 411. Allyn, who is not named in the will and is not bound by its terms, is not affected by it. But even if she were affected, her argument still fails, because we have found Ida deliberately withheld a statement of intention on the issue of partition. She expressed only an opinion, not a command. A partition would not be contrary to her intent and hence would not violate IND. CODE 32-4-5-5.
We are sympathetic to Allyn's position. Although Ida Stratton clearly felt it was best the land not be partitioned as long as any of her children lived, and Allyn is attempting to abide by Ida's desire, our holding today allows partition. The rules of language construction require this result. Had Ida intended to insist on the policy of no partition, she could have continued to employ the forceful language found throughout the rest of the will. Instead, she chose simply to voice her concern and let it go at that. Her words did not establish an obligation  they were advisory only. Thus, while it was her desire the land not be partitioned, she also decided the final resolution of the partition issue should lie with her heirs. Our holding respects that decision.
The trial court erred in entering partial summary judgment against Dwyer. The *908 will does not prohibit partition. The cause is reversed and remanded with instructions to proceed in a manner consistent with this opinion.
ROBERTSON and GARRARD, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  The descendants claim the parties agreed no material facts were in dispute. Without explanation or elaboration, Allyn challenges this assertion. If some material fact is indeed disputed, we know nothing of it.
[2]  In the following cases the use of the word "desire" was found to be precatory: Lines v. Darden and Wife (1853), 5 Fla 51 ("I desire"); Edgar County Children's Home v. Beltranena (1949), 402 Ill. 385, 84 N.E.2d 363 ("it is my desire"); Mykola v. Skeltinska (1981), 93 Ill. App.3d 556, 49 Ill.Dec. 9, 417 N.E.2d 699 ("it is my wish and desire"); Forth, supra ("it is my desire"); Flynn v. Flynn (1971), Ky., 469 S.W.2d 886 ("with the expressed desire"); Rouse v. Kennedy (1963), 260 N.C. 152, 132 S.E.2d 308 ("it is my wish and desire"); Karl v. Thompson (1955), Ohio Prob., 78 Ohio L.Abs. 266, 152 N.E.2d 346, aff'd, (1956), Ohio App., 152 N.E.2d 353 ("desired"); In re Pittock's Will (1921), 102 Or. 159, 199 P. 633 ("it is my desire and I request"); Lux v. Lux (1972), 109 R.I. 592, 288 A.2d 701 ("it is my express desire"); Hunt, supra ("it is my desire"); and Langehenning v. Hohmann (1942), 139 Tex. 452, 163 S.W.2d 402 ("being desirous"). In this next group of case, however, the opposite decision was reached: In re Pforr's Estate (1904), 144 Cal. 121, 77 P. 825 ("I desire and direct"); Raines v. Duskin (1981), 247 Ga. 512, 277 S.E.2d 26 ("I will and desire"); Osborn, supra ("it is my will that my son ... may and if he so desires"); Mastellar v. Atkinson (1915), 94 Kan. 279, 146 P. 367 ("I will and desire"); In re Mauser's Estate (1956), N.Y.Sur., 151 N.Y.S.2d 993 ("it is my desire"); and Shevlin v. Colony Lutheran Church (1955), 227 S.C. 598, 88 S.E.2d 674 ("I desire"). Despite the seemingly inconsistent results, most of these cases are reconcilable. Most acknowledge the established rule that "desire" is precatory absent evidence of a contrary intent; the difference is that in the latter category of cases, the courts, after a careful reading of the whole document, did, in fact, find evidence the testator's diction was meant as a command rather than as a suggestion.
One case in particular dramatically illustrates the process. In Bishop v. Davis (1979), Tenn. App., 585 S.W.2d 640, 642, the testator wrote in one paragraph of his will "it is my wish, desire, and request" that a certain act be performed, and in a second paragraph, he wrote that "it is my desire and request" another act be performed. Based on the context, the court found the language in the first paragraph was precatory but the language in the latter paragraph was meant to command.
We cite these cases for two reasons. First, they support the position that "desire" is normally a precatory word to be given precatory effect until a contrary intent appears. Second, they illustrate the need for individualized evaluation.

=== CASE 9739062 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:03.268963+00 ===

MORGAN, Justice.
Vicki Owen (Vicki) appeals from an order dismissing her negligence cause of action against Ronald Owen (Ronald). We reverse and remand.
Ronald and Vicki Owen are husband and wife. On March 6, 1986, Ronald was driving a 1967 Ford van near Gas City, Grant County, Indiana. Vicki and her two children were passengers in the van. Ronald lost control of the van, skidded off the road, and hit a utility pole. Vicki suffered a broken hip and fractured left femur. As a result, she was hospitalized from March 6, 1986, until August 19, 1986, and continues to have ongoing medical treatment. At the time of the accident, the parties were South Dakota residents, temporarily residing in Indiana to complete Ronald’s higher education. Vicki is a life-long resident of South Dakota, and both parties lived in South Dakota for six years prior to returning to school. They owned a home in Sturgis, South Dakota, and, while in Indiana, continued to pay South Dakota property taxes. Both parties licensed their vehicles in South Dakota and held South Dakota drivers licenses. They voted in South Dakota by absentee ballot during the Presidential election and if there was a local election at the time they were in South Dakota during college vacations, they would vote. It was always the parties’ intent to return to their home and live in South Dakota after Ronald completed his education. Both parties have, in fact, returned to South Dakota and reside in their home in Sturgis.
Vicki filed a complaint in South Dakota alleging Ronald was negligent in operating the van. Ronald filed an answer admitting the accident, but denying any negligence *711on his part. Additionally, Ronald moved to dismiss the complaint for failure to state a cause of action upon which relief could be granted. A hearing was conducted where the court admitted, without objection, an offer of proof made by Vicki concerning the parties’ contacts to South Dakota. The trial court dismissed Vicki’s complaint, holding that the doctrine of lex loci delicti requires that Indiana law apply to this cause of action. Furthermore, it held that the Indiana guest statute requires Vicki to allege and prove willful or wanton misconduct. Since Vicki failed to properly plead, her complaint was dismissed. She appeals.
On appeal, Vicki contends that this court should abandon the lex loci delicti or “the place of the wrong” rule in multi-state tort actions or in the alternative, adopt a public policy exception to the rule. She argues further, that the application of the Indiana guest statute in South Dakota is unconstitutional.
We first define our standard of review. A motion to dismiss pursuant to SDCL 15-6-12(c) provides an expeditious remedy to test the legal sufficiency of pleadings. Akron Savings Bank v. Charlson, 83 S.D. 251, 253, 158 N.W.2d 523, 524 (S.D.1968). This court “must treat as true all facts properly pleaded in the complaint.” Id. We deal only with the questions of law arising thereon. Id.
South Dakota has consistently followed the lex loci delicti rule in multi-state tort actions. In Heidemann v. Rohl, 86 S.D. 250, 260, 194 N.W.2d 164, 169 (1972), plaintiff, the special administrator for the estate of the deceased who was a resident of South Dakota, sued the owner of an airplane in which deceased was killed when it crashed near Anselmo, Nebraska. The airplane was enroute, nonstop, from Colorado Springs, Colorado, to its destination of Sioux Falls, South Dakota, when it crashed in Nebraska. This court was faced with the question of whether South Dakota or Nebraska law applied to an imputed negligence claim against the owner. After reviewing the rules adopted in other jurisdictions in determining conflict or choice of law questions, this court adopted the lex loci delicti rule. Heidemann was allowed to maintain an imputed negligence action under the Nebraska law, whereas South Dakota law would not have permitted the cause of action.
This court has continued to apply the lex loci delicti rule to the substantive rights of parties in multi-state tort actions. See First Nat’l Bank of Minneapolis v. Kehn Ranch, 394 N.W.2d 709 (S.D.1986); and of special interest, Justice Sabers’ opinion in Schick v. Rodenburg, 397 N.W.2d 464 (S.D. 1986). Vicki urges this court to overrule these cases and adopt a “modern” or “most significant relationship” rule. In support of her position, she cites decisions from as many as thirty-two states that apply either the “modern” rule or the lex loci delicti public policy exception.
Many of the decisions Vicki cites, along with the seminal decision formulating the “modern” rule, Babcock v. Jackson, 12 N.Y.2d 473, 240 N.Y.S.2d 743, 191 N.E.2d 279 (1963), were available to this court when it reviewed the issues in Heidemann. After a careful review of the “modern” rule, this court adopted the lex loci delicti rule.
In adopting the lex loci delicti rule, this court noted the problems inherent in the “modern” rule.
Although there is dissatisfaction with the lex loci delicti rule there is also a reluctance on the part of many courts to adopt the modern fragmented approach to the settlement of multi-state conflict of laws problems because of the lack of discernible and suitable guidelines. For the most part the variants of the modern approach set forth theory and concepts rather than followable rules. As a result there is considerable confusion and inconsistency in its application.
86 S.D. at 259, 194 N.W.2d at 169. Because of these inherent problems, we preferred “to retain the traditional ‘place of wrong’ rule with its built-in virtues of certainty, simplicity, and ease of application.” Id.
Vicki contends that the age of Heide-mann requires this court to review the lex loci delicti rule and abandon it for the *712“modern” rule. We are not persuaded. The same concerns this court had in Heide-mann remain today. Application of the “modern” rule results in confusion and inconsistency. See Currie, Comments on Reich v. Purcell, 15 UCLA L.Rev. 511, 595-97 (1968), for a discussion of how post-Babcock decisions in New York have “hopped frenetically from theory to theory like an overheated jumping bean ... producing contradictory results in practically identical cases.”
Next, Vicki contends that if we do not abandon our lex loci delicti rule, we should adopt a public policy exception to the rule. She argues that application of Indiana’s guest statute, IND. CODE ANN § 9-3-3-1 (Burns 1988),1 which prevents an injured spouse from recovering compensation from a negligent host unk -.s she can demonstrate wanton or willful misconduct, violates South Dakota public policy and should not be enforced. Under the particular facts of this case, we agree and create a limited public policy exception to lex loci delicti.
First, we note that the lex loci delicti rule in the field of torts has long admitted two exceptions:
(1) The law of the forum, lex fori, was applied to procedural matters, and (2) the law of the forum was controlling whenever the law of the place of the wrong was contrary to an extraordinarily strong public policy of the forum state.
16 Am.Jur.2d Conflicts of Law § 101 (1979).
The reasons that a foreign jurisdiction’s law would be contrary to public policy were succinctly explained by the Supreme Court of Tennessee in Whitlow v. Nashville C. & St. L.R. Co., 114 Tenn. 344, 347, 84 S.W. 618, 621 (1904):
To justify a court in refusing to enforce a right of action which occurred under the law of another state, because it is against the policy of our laws, it must appear that it is against good morals or natural justice, or that, for some other such reason, the enforcement of it would be prejudicial to the general interest of our citizens.
Accord Winters v. Mazey, 481 S.W.2d 755, 756 (Tenn.1972).2 Several courts have used this standard to grant public policy exceptions to lex loci delicti. A review of these decisions is useful.
In Schmidt v. Driscoll Hotel, Inc., 249 Minn. 376, 82 N.W.2d 365 (1957), a Minnesota plaintiff brought suit against a Minnesota bar owner, who violated Minnesota’s dram-shop statute by selling liquor to an intoxicated Minnesota resident. This patron subsequently injured plaintiff in a car wreck in Wisconsin. There was no equivalent dram-shop statute in Wisconsin. Application of Wisconsin law under the lex loci delicti rule meant that plaintiff could not recover against the bar owner. In overturning the lower court’s dismissal for failure to state a cause of action, the Minnesota Supreme Court held that the parties significant contacts with Minnesota (all parties were Minnesota residents; defendant bar owner was licensed under Minnesota law) coupled with Wisconsin’s interest in preventing foreign violations of liquor laws, justified applying Minnesota law under the “principles of equity and justice.” Id. at 368.
*713Likewise, in Gordon v. Parker, 83 F.Supp. 40 (D.Mass.1949), aff'd, 178 F.2d 888 (1st Cir.1949), a Massachusetts court refused to follow the lex loci delicti rule in a suit for alienation of affection. Plaintiff and his wife were domiciled in Pennsylvania, arguably where the harm to marital domicile occurred, but the defendant’s wrongful acts with the wife occurred in Massachusetts. Pennsylvania no longer recognized alienation of affection as a cause of action, but Massachusetts did. Reasoning that Massachusetts had an interest in controlling conduct that lowered the standards of the community, the court refused, under a public policy exception to lex loci delicti, to enforce Pennsylvania law. Id. at 42.
Similarly, enforcing Indiana’s guest statute against citizens of this state runs contrary to the strong public policy established by our legislature, thereby lowering a standard of protection it intended for injured passengers.
To understand our reasoning, it is necessary to retrace the demise of the South Dakota guest statute. For many years, this court noted injured plaintiffs’ displeas-ures with the guest statute, SDCL 32-34-1 (repealed in 1978), but held that it was up to the legislature, not the court, to change the law. Behrns v. Burke, 89 S.D. 96, 229 N.W.2d 86, 90 (1975).
Reacting to our decisions, the legislature, in 1978, repealed the guest statute, subject to a public referendum of approval.3 The new standard of care owed injured passengers by a host became “want of ordinary care or skill.” SDCL 20-9-1.
And while Indiana is free to enforce its guest statute against its own citizens, South Dakota is certainly not obligated to follow a statute that runs so contrary to its public policy. The legislature intended that an injured passenger be allowed to recover against a host under a theory of simple negligence. To enforce Indiana’s guest statute in an action between two of our own citizens, who were only temporarily in Indiana, is against “natural justice” as well as “prejudicial to the general interest of our citizens.” Whitlow, 84 S.W. at 621.
Further, we believe the parties’ contacts with this state warrants applying South Dakota law. Other than the fortuitous event of the accident occurring in Indiana, the parties’ contacts are with South Dakota. Both parties are long-time residents of this state; they owned a home in South Dakota and paid property taxes in this state; they registered their vehicles in South Dakota and held South Dakota drivers licenses; they voted in South Dakota elections; they both intended to return to South Dakota to live and in fact have returned after the accident. All of these factors convince us that Vicki is not a plaintiff who is forum shopping, but, rather, a life-long resident entitled to the protection of this state’s law.
Indiana’s interests in this matter are minimal. This is not an issue of enforcing Indiana’s rules of the road. Instead, this court must decide whether Vicki, because she is a guest, is barred from seeking redress for a wrong committed. The accident may have occurred in Indiana, but it has no interest in seeing its guest statute applied to our citizens.
Allowing this limited public policy exception to lex loci delicti maintains the certainty, simplicity, and ease of application we discussed earlier, while providing a means to avoid applications that are repugnant to the public policy of our state.
Having ruled that Indiana’s guest statute violates our public policy and will not be enforced, it is not necessary to address Vicki’s constitutional objection.
We reverse and remand.
WUEST, C.J., concurs.
HENDERSON, SABERS and MILLER, JJ., concur specially.
. This court is aware that the Winters decision found that an Alabama guest statute did not violate Tennessee’s public policy. We, however, are not bound by that holding and do not agree with its reasoning.
. S.D.Sess.L. ch. 240, § 1. The referendum petition never received the number of valid signatures required, so the repealer became law on July 1, 1978. Nist v. Herseth, 270 N.W.2d 565 (S.D.1978).

=== CASE 9739063 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:03.274872+00 ===

*714MILLER, Justice
(concurring specially).
I am pleased to see an erosion of the lex loci delicti rule but strongly assert that the majority does not go far enough. By adopting the public policy exception, the majority brings South Dakota’s conflicts of law approach out of the middle ages. I believe we should now enter the twentieth century by joining the vast majority of states in abolishing lex loci completely and adopting an approach which best suits these modern times.1
Before proceeding further with this special writing, I will explain that I will give my “bottom-line” first and then state my reasons. This will hopefully make my rationale easier to follow. In my extensive research I was surprised to find the voluminous writing that has been done on this subject by countless judges, scholars, law students and other legal authors.2 I have attempted to give thoughtful, objective analysis to the subject and believe that the following solution is in the best interests of the citizens and law of our state.
SOLUTION
SOUTH DAKOTA SHOULD ADOPT THE “CHOICE-INFLUENCING CONSIDERATIONS” APPROACH WHEN FACING CHOICE-OF-LAW CONFLICTS.
RATIONALE
As I see it, we have three alternatives: (1) Remain with the few jurisdictions that retain lex loci; (2) Follow the majority’s approach and make a piecemeal, ad hoc erosion of lex loci; or (3) Join the vast *715majority of jurisdictions which abolish the archaic and rigid rule of lex loci in favor of an approach which gives flexibility and addresses conflicts of laws issues in a responsible and equitable manner.
WHY ABANDON LEX LOCI?
It is difficult to find a learned, thoughtful writing which defends lex loci. Perhaps the most common (if not only) defense of the rule is that it is simple and easy to apply. This, I suggest, lacks certain intellectual elegance..
It seems to be generally accepted that lex loci lacks analytical focus and has no objective standards. Sprague, Choice of Law: A Fond Farewell to Comity and Public Policy, 74 Cal.L.Rev. 1447 (1986). The underlying rationales for the rule, when put into practice, are simply not advanced, thus there is no reason to preserve it. Olmstead v. Anderson, 428 Mich. 1, 400 N.W.2d 292 (1987).
The more modern approaches to conflicts of law are considered “a necessary development to free the judicial system from the increasingly obvious inappropriateness of the old rules.” Sprague, supra, at 1476. As Professor Weintraub in “Commentary on the Conflict of Laws,” Second Edition, at § 6.19, said:
But in shaping legal rules to apply to the complexities of the human condition, a quest for absolute certainty and complete simplicity is a child’s dream. Rigid, simple rules produce irrational and dysfunctional solutions to variar ble, complex problems. Legal rules should be, perhaps inevitably must be, rules that produce socially desirable solutions to the problems to which those rules are addressed and that also are feasible for the members of a learned profession to administer. The place-of-wrong rule focuses on the one contact, injury, that, in unintentional tort cases, is most likely to be unrelated to the policy of any tort rule. The price paid for simplicity of that rule is, therefore, too high. (Emphasis added.)
See also Scoles and Hay, Conflict of Laws, Hornbook Series (L.Ed.1984); Leflar, The Law of Conflict of Laws (1959); Hancock, Studies in Modern Choice-of-Law: Torts, Insurance, Land Titles (1984).
As stated by Chief Justice Wuest’s special concurrence3 in Hofer v. Meyer, 295 N.W.2d 333, 337-38 (S.D.1980): “These ancient decisions have no place in modern society.” In Hofer, Chief Justice Wuest went on to state:
The common law is not a rigid and arbitrary code, erystalized and immutable. Rather, it is flexible and adapts itself to changing conditions. It is an accumulation of expressions of the various judicial tribunals in their efforts to ascertain what is right and just between individuals with respect to private disputes. What may be considered a just disposition of a dispute at one stage of history may not be at another stage, considering changing social, economic and other conditions of society. The principle of stare decisis was not meant to keep a stranglehold on developments which are responsive to new values, experiences and circumstances. (Emphasis added.)
WHY NOT ADOPT THE PUBLIC POLICY EXCEPTION ?4
Certainly this is preferred to blindly applying lex loci. We must remember, however, that it does not cure the weaknesses inherent in the rigid rule. Like the rule itself, it lacks analytical focus. It has been characterized as “an escape hatch to avoid absurd results.” Sprague, supra, at 1451. It is said to have arisen “not because of analytical accuracy, nor because it provided for principled decision, but as an alterna*716tive to the rigid and inappropriate requirements of vested rights.” Id. It has been criticized as “too easy to use without hard legal thinking,” Id. at 1452, “a substitute for the intellectual exertion necessary to find appropriate factors,” Id., and as “purely duplicative, and therefore obsolete, because the ‘public policies’ employed defensively in earlier times are already an integral part of the modem analysis.” Id. at 1458.
Along with the foregoing, there are other problems. The majority holds that Indiana’s guest statute (and presumably those in other states) violates our public policy. One does not have to do much thinking to identify many other statutory areas varying from ours which would arguably come within the same category. Such other areas of law include the dramshop cases,5 interspousal immunity,6 statutory damage limitations,7 workers’ compensation,8 insurance9 and criminal law.10 What do we do then? What predictability do we have? Does this serve our citizens, bench and bar in a reasonable manner? I suggest that it does not!
[TJhough the modern approaches have themselves been criticized, a return to the doctrine of comity and public policy would not resolve their weaknesses. Since the doctrines of comity and public policy can no longer serve a useful purpose, they should be abandoned by modern courts and relegated to background studies of the evolution of choice-of-law doctrine in the United States.
Id. at 1448.
WHAT ARE THE ALTERNATIVES?
Once we properly resolve to finally depart from the lex loci rule and its public policy exception, we must decide on the appropriate approach to follow. Note that I have said “approach” not a “rule.” As stated by Professor Reese at 57 Cornell L.Rev. 315 (1972),
By ‘rule’ is meant a phenomenon found in most areas of the law, namely a formula which once applied will lead the court to a conclusion. To be sure, there will inevitably be questions as to a rule’s proper scope of application, including questions of how the words that comprise the rule should be defined or interpreted. Once it has been decided what a rule means and how it should be applied, however, a conclusion will be reached through the rule’s application.
By ‘approach’ is meant a system which does no more than state what factor or factors should be considered in arriving at a conclusion.
There seem to be three generally accepted approaches in dealing with choice of law conflicts: (1) “dominant contacts”; (2) “governmental interest”; and (3) “choice-influencing considerations.” 16 Am.Jur.2d Conflict of Laws, §§ 103-105 (1979); 15A C.J.S. Conflict of Laws § 8(4) (1967); Restatement (Second) of Conflict of Laws 2d § 145 (1969); Annotation, Modern Status of Choice of Law in Application of Automobile Guest Statutes, 63 A.L.R.4th 167 (1988); Annotation, Choice of Law Considerations in Application of Aviation Guest Statutes, 62 A.L.R.3d 1076 (1975); Annotation, Modern Status of Rule that Substantive Rights of Parties to a Tort Action are Governed by the Law of the Place of the Wrong, 29 A.L.R.3d 603 (1970).
Much has been written on all of these approaches. Although I give citations to various writings on these alternatives, I will not make detailed comparisons. Suffice it to say that the dominant contacts approach was first adopted by New York in Babcock v. Jackson, 12 N.Y.2d 473, 191 *717N.E.2d 279, 240 N.Y.S.2d 743 (1963),11 and has since been generally adopted as the “most significant relationships” approach in the Restatement, supra. The “governmental interest” approach was adopted by California in Reich v. Purcell, 67 Cal.2d 551, 432 P.2d 727, 63 Cal.Rptr. 31 (1967). The “choice-influencing considerations” approach was refined by Professor Leflar and ultimately adopted by the State of Wisconsin in Heath v. Zellmer, 35 Wis.2d 578, 151 N.W.2d 664 (1967).12 Various other states, including Minnesota, Arkansas, Hawaii, New Hampshire and Massachusetts, have followed Wisconsin’s lead.
WHAT IS THE CHOICE-INFLUENCING CONSIDERATION APPROACH?
When faced with a choice-of-law decision, the court considers and grounds its conclusion on the following considerations:
Predictability of results;
Maintenance of interstate and international order;
Simplification of the judicial task; Advancement of the forum’s governmental interests;
Application of the better rule of law.
All of the elements of choice-influencing considerations were well analyzed and set forth in Heath, supra. As Leflar later stated: “The choice-influencing considerations approach agrees that state interests should always be taken into account in choice of law, but holds that this is not the only relevant choice-influencing consideration.” Currie, Comments on Reich v. Purcell, 15 UCLA L.Rev. 551, 638 (1968). Additionally, Professor Leflar in various writings has analyzed them further. “The plain fact is that the considerations have been present and operative all along, and have been motivating reasons behind every choice-of-law rule that was ever formulated and every case that was ever decided.” Leflar, Choice-Influencing Considerations in Conflicts Law, 41 N.Y. Univ.L.Rev. 267, 324-25 (1966). Professor Leflar’s proposal is not a rule but a method of analysis in which choice of law decisions are based upon these choice-influencing considerations because they are relevant to a reasonable choice of law. Clark v. Clark, 107 N.H. 351, 222 A.2d 205 (1968); Conklin v. Homer, 38 Wis.2d 468, 157 N.W.2d 579 (1968). By applying these considerations, courts can assess the pertinent interests and policy factors involved and achieve a desirable result in each situation. Peters v. Peters, 63 Haw. 653, 634 P.2d 586 (1981). In the attempt to obtain that result, we must recognize that one of the functions of the law of conflicts is to make sure that relations between the states and commerce between them is harmonious and equitable to the parties concerned while still preserving the integrity of the forum law. Heath, supra.
An application of lex loci which may result in an equitable decision is merely happenstance. Because of its mechanical nature equity is not a conscious factor. In its discussion of Leflar’s “governmental interest” consideration, the court in Wallis v. Mrs. Smith’s Pie Co., 261 Ark. 622, 550 S.W.2d 453 (1977) (citing Clark v. Clark, 107 N.H. 351, 222 A.2d 205 (1968)), noted that the truest interest of the forum is in the fair and efficient administration of justice. The choice should not be one of preferred parties but of preferred law. Heath, supra (citing Leflar, Conflicts of Law: More on Choice-Influencing Considerations (Book H), 54 Calif.L.Rev. 1584 (1966)).
SUMMARY
The subject warrants greater in-depth analysis than I have expressed herein. Were I to be writing a majority opinion, I would go to greater lengths to explain and articulate our reasons in adopting the proper approach to conflicts of law. In the interest of conserving further judicial manpower, I will simply conclude by stating that we must abandon the archaic, obsolete, irrational, rigid rule of lex loci and *718adopt an appropriate, modern approach to conflicts of laws. I would adopt the holding of Heath and other similar cases and hold that in conflicts-of-law disputes we must analyze and apply the appropriate choice-influencing considerations in determining the appropriate law to apply.
I am authorized to state that Justices HENDERSON and SABERS join in this special concurrence.
. As of 1989, thirty-three states, plus the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico, have displaced lex loci delicti in part or in whole.
. For example:
Hancock, Studies in Modern Choice-of-Law: Torts, Insurance, Land Titles (1984);
Leñar, Conflict of Laws (1959);
Martin, Perspectives on Conflict of Laws (1980);
Scoles and Hay, Conflicts of Law, Horn-book Series (L.Ed.1984);
Weintraub, Commentary on the Conflict of Laws (1980);
Carteau, Comments: Conflicts of Law and Successions: Comprehensive Interest Analysis as a Viable Alternative to the Traditional Approach, 59 Tul.L.Rev. 389 (1984);
Corr, Criminal Procedure and the Conflict of Laws, 73 Geo.L.J. 1217 (1985);
Cray, Comment: Choice of Law in Right of Publicity, 31 UCLA L.Rev. 640 (1984);
Currie, Comments on Reich v. Purcell, 15 UCLA L.Rev. 511 (1968);
Hill, The Judicial Function in Choice of Law, 85 Colum.L.Rev. 1585 (1985);
Juenger, Conflict of Laws: A Critique of Interest Analysis, 32 Am.J.Comp.L. 1 (1984);
Korn, The Choice-of-Law Revolution: A Critique, 83 Colum.L.Rev. 772 (1983);
Kozyris, Corporate Wars and Choice of Law, 1985 Duke L.J. 1 (1985);
Leflar, Choice-Influencing Considerations in Conflicts Law, 41 N.Y.Univ.L.Rev. 267 (1966);
Miller and Crump, Jurisdiction and Choice of Law in Multistate Class Actions after Phillips Petroleum Co. v. Shutts, 96 Yale L.J. 1 (1986);
Morrison, Death of Conflicts, 29 Vill.L.Rev. 313 (1983-84); Morse, Choice of Law in Tort: A Comparative Survey, 32 Am.J.Comp.L. 51 (1984);
Pielemeier, Constitutional Limitations on Choice of Law: The Special Case of Multistate Defamation, 133 U.Pa.L.Rev. 381 (1985);
Reese, Choice of Law: Rules or Approach, 57 Cornell L.Rev. 315 (1972);
Reese, The Law Governing Airplane Accidents, 39 Wash. & Lee L.Rev. 1303 (1982);
Richman, Diagramming Conflicts: A Graphic Understanding of Interest Analysis, 43 Ohio St.L.J. 317 (1982);
Sedler, Choice of Law in Michigan: Judicial Method and the Policy Centered Conflict of Laws, 29 Wayne L.Rev. 1194 (1983);
Sprague, Choice of Law: A Fond Farewell to Comity and Public Policy, 74 Cal.L.Rev. 1447 (1986);
16 Am.Jur.2d Conflict of Laws, §§ 103-105 (1979);
15A C.J.S. Conflict of Laws § 8(4) (1967);
Annotation, Modern Status of Rule that Substantive Rights of Parties to a Tort Action are Governed by the Law of the Place of the Wrong, 29 A.L.R.3d 603 (1970);
Annotation, Conflict of Laws as to Right of Action for Loss of Consortium, 46 A.L.R.3d 880 (1972);
Annotation, Choice of Law as to Applicable Statute of Limitations in Contract Actions, 78 A.L.R. 639 (1977);
Annotation, Choice of Law Considerations in Application of Aviation Guest Statute, 62 A.L.R.3d 1076 (1975);
Annotation, Choice of Law as to Liability of Liquor Seller for Injuries Caused by Intoxicated Persons, 2 A.L.R.4& 952 (1980);
Annotation, Modern Status of Choice of Law in Application of Automobile Guest Statutes, 63 A.L.R.4th 167 (1988).
. At that time, he was a circuit judge sitting for a disqualified justice.
. As of 1985, only three states recognized a public policy exception argument: Mississippi in Boardman v. United Services Automobile Ass’n, 470 So.2d 1024 (Miss.1985), cert, denied, 474 U.S. 980, 106 S.Ct. 384, 88 L.Ed.2d 337; New York in Schultz v. Boy Scouts of America, Inc., 65 N.Y.2d 189, 480 N.E.2d 679, 491 N.Y.S.2d 90 (1985); and California in Wong v. Tenneco, Inc., 39 Cal.3d 126, 702 P.2d 570, 216 Cal.Rptr. 412 (1985).
. See Schmidt v. Driscoll Hotel, 249 Minn. 376, 82 N.W.2d 365 (1957).
. See Scoles and Hay, Conflict of Laws, Hornbook Series 551 (L.Ed.1984).
. Id.
. See Leflar, Choice-Influencing Considerations in Conflicts Law, 41 N.Y. Univ.L.Rev. 267, 272 (1966).
. Id.
. See Commonwealth v. Ohle, 503 Pa. 566, 470 A.2d 61 (1983).
. Babcock is also noted as the seminal case which led the way in the declination of the lex loci delicti doctrine.
. Leflar, supra, note 5. Cheatham and Reese, Choice of the Applicable Law, 52 Colum.L.Rev. 959 (1952), was the first thorough effort to cat-alogue all the choice-influencing considerations.

=== CASE 2218629 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:51.586888+00 ===

413 Mass. 339 (1992)
596 N.E.2d 1383
ADOPTION OF CARLOS.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Essex.
March 2, 1992.
August 11, 1992.
Present: LIACOS, C.J., WILKINS, NOLAN, LYNCH, & O'CONNOR, JJ.
Alexander G. Gray, Jr., Special Assistant Attorney General, for Department of Social Services.
Elizabeth B. Dunn for the mother.
Kevin D. Cooper for the minor.
O'CONNOR J.
This is the appeal of the Department of Social Services (department) from the denial of its petition to dispense with consent to adoption pursuant to G.L.c. 210, § 3 (1990 ed.). After the petition was denied in the trial court, the Appeals Court reversed and ordered the entry of a *340 decree allowing the petition. 31 Mass. App. Ct. 233 (1991). We granted further appellate review. We now affirm the judgment entered in the trial court, denying the petition.
In May, 1986, the department filed a care and protection petition in the District Court pursuant to G.L.c. 119, § 24 (1990 ed.). A judge awarded temporary custody of Carlos (a fictitious name) to the department on May 7, 1986. In May, 1988, the department filed the petition to dispense with consent to adoption that is the subject ov this appeal. The petition for care and protection and the petition to dispense with consent to adoption were then consolidated for hearing. The hearing took place on nine days between November, 1988, and January, 1989, before a judge sitting in the Probate and Family Court. On June 19, 1989, the judge awarded custody of Carlos to the department "until further order of the court, if any." Although such an order is generally characterized as a "permanent" custody order, G.L.c. 119, § 26 (1990 ed.), provides that specified interested parties "may petition the court not more than once every six months for a review and redetermination of the current needs of such child whose case has come before the court." On June 19, 1989, the judge also ordered the following entry: "Sufficient facts have been found based on clear and convincing evidence to warrant entry of a decree ... pursuant to G.L.c. 210, § 3, as amended, dispensing with the need for consent or notice to the defendant [mother] in connection with any petition for adoption of [Carlos] subsequently to be sponsored by the [department]. However, entry of any such decree is stayed until December 19, 1989, or until the further order of the court, to afford the said defendant [mother] an opportunity to reconsider and modify her response to the allegations of the petitioner."
On July 21, 1989, the judge issued a lengthy and detailed memorandum of decision containing findings of fact and rulings of law in connection with the aforementioned June 19, 1989, order. We summarize the salient facts and rulings. Carlos was born out of wedlock in September, 1982. His father died without ever having shown interest in Carlos. In *341 April, 1984, Carlos's mother married another man (stepfather). Carlos knew and accepted that man as his father. Carlos lived with his mother and stepfather and with a half-brother who was born when Carlos was three years old. In the spring of 1986, Carlos stayed with his maternal grandparents while his mother was hospitalized. The grandparents informed Carlos's mother that Carlos had told them that his stepfather had sexually abused him. A maternal uncle and another person filed complaints of child abuse pursuant to G.L.c. 119, § 51A. Based on an evaluator's report contained in a hospital record and on expert testimony and other evidence, the judge found by clear and convincing evidence that there was at least one act of sexual abuse by the stepfather.
We continue our recitation of the judge's material findings. As a result of the temporary custody award on May 7, 1986, Carlos was placed in a foster home, where he "exhibited episodes of anxiety, swings of mood, incontinence of feces and urine, speech difficulties especially under stress and anxiety, and agitation during discussions of the sexual abuse." Carlos manifested anger, sometimes directed at his mother, sometimes directed at his stepfather and sometimes directed at himself. On March 30, 1987, the first foster parents "gave up" and Carlos was moved to a second foster home.
After describing Carlos's behavior, the judge said in his memorandum, "When all is said and done ... there is no way for this court to sort out how much of [Carlos's] negative behavior and internal conflict is due to the original assault and how much to the fact that the child has had to bear the burden of separation from his natural ties. [Carlos] has indicated he does not know why he is separated from his mother and brother, has expressed inconsistent attitudes to[ward] his father, and acceptance of his current circumstances. When he was given an opportunity, however, to make a choice he indicated to the court quite touchingly that he wanted to live with his mother.... [Carlos] needs ... to know that he is not disbelieved. He needs all possible protection *342 from further abuse. He needs to know that his present circumstances are not his fault. He needs help in processing and accepting his history without suffering unnecessary damage because of it. He needs to be free of any retribution for his disclosures.... Under the present circumstances, return to the custody of the mother carries a strong and unacceptable risk of permanent injury to [Carlos]. The court adopts the opinion of [two named individuals] that [Carlos's] return to his parents under the present situation is not in his interest."
The judge made extensive findings with respect to the mother's and stepfather's characteristics. He found that "[t]he mother loves her husband, is dependent on him, essentially passive in his presence, rarely interferes with his behavior, and is totally invested in him as her sole source of support and security. She sees the situation as one in which she has been served an ultimatum, in the words of the [guardian ad litem], either acknowledge that her husband has sexually abused her son and separate from him, or face the probability that she lose custody of [Carlos] forever. That is not, the court finds, a realistic picture of her options, but if it is, she seems to have made her choice: unyielding absolute loyalty to her husband no matter what the cost to [Carlos]."
The judge found that the "interactions of [the mother and stepfather with Carlos] have been the subject of many observations with many negative features noted," but he noted that "there are also many examples of positive, even loving, interrelationships. The court observed how eagerly and warmly [Carlos] crawled into his mother's lap when he came into a court session held in the lobby." The judge observed, "The obvious limitations in the general parenting skills of the parents would be insufficient, in and of themselves, to call for awarding custody to the [department] or terminating the mother's parental rights. This is essentially admitted by the decision of [the department] to leave the younger brother with his parents. But they shed some added light on the fundamental refusal to deal with the issue of sexual abuse. As the mother's expert testified, a mother who cannot face the *343 possibility that her child was sexually abused cannot prepare herself to protect the child in the future.... It is open to the mother (and for that matter the step-father) without admitting that any criminal act occurred to agree to behave as though those who think so may have a point and ask what is to be done under the circumstances. The mother should be ready to adopt a `what if it's true' strategy. She might then inquire of the child's present caretakers and of her own therapist, `What am I called upon to do? How do I make sure [Carlos] suffers no recurrence or future bad experiences? How can my marriage be saved?' Their, and more importantly her, refusal to entertain such alternatives prevent[s] restoration of her custody at the present juncture."
The judge continued: "The court is not calling upon the mother to engage in a ritual or recite a formula to appease the child's custodians but rather to undertake an exploration of what loving parents are called upon to do when they discover their child may have been abused. That includes learning about the effects of sexual abuse upon a child, how the child is to be protected and taught his right to say no and to make disclosures free of fear of hostile reaction. Also included is confronting the phenomenon of denial and how it works in general and may well be working in her. She will need to develop the autonomy and independence to demand of her husband that he undertake a course of action not unlike what is being now suggested to her. The court also called upon [the department] to seek alternatives to the Hobson's choice [either the stepfather would confess, and the mother would acknowledge, that the stepfather sexually abused Carlos, or the mother would lose Carlos] that it may have at times communicated. It will be late, but perhaps not too late, on December 19, 1989, to appraise the good faith efforts of the parties.... In fairness to the mother, she has tried to cooperate and even to benefit from services [offered by the department] so long as the words `sexual abuse' were not directly or indirectly implicated. That will have to change. There is no avoiding the issue.... What was and is needed is a simple openness to the assumption that the assault has occurred *344 and consideration of the steps necessary to be taken if that assumption were to be a premise for remedial action. [Carlos] is basically a healthy, if conflicted, child but not so damaged as to be beyond therapeutic help. [Carlos] is the victim of his mother's present blindness. Fortunately, the abuse was short-lived. Evidence of chronicity is weak." (Emphasis in original.) The judge also noted that "[t]he department has not offered in evidence a finally developed adoption plan."
The judge concluded that "[t]he mother's uncompromising, unyielding allegiance to her husband makes her presently [June 19, 1989] unfit to function as [Carlos's] parent.... So long as she is unable to accept even the hypothesis that [Carlos] may have been assaulted, even if she doesn't personally believe it, she is an unfit parent." The judge also concluded that the stepfather was "unfit to serve as a father because he sexually assaulted the child, will not take any steps, even short of admissions, to deal with his behavior, [and] invented false accounts to explain [Carlos's] disclosures."
After ruling that "[t]he evidence warrants the conclusion that the mother ... currently lacks the ability, capacity, fitness and readiness to assume parental responsibility because she is unable to recognize that her child was the victim of sexual abuse and because she has joined the abuser in an alliance of pathological denial which further victimizes the child," the judge announced that "[a] judgment terminating parental rights will not enter until December 19, 1989, to afford the mother a further opportunity to consider other courses of action than her present one." It will be remembered that, on June 19, 1989, approximately one month before the judge issued his memorandum of decision, the judge ordered: "Sufficient facts have been found based on clear and convincing evidence to warrant entry of a decree ... pursuant to G.L.c. 210, § 3, as amended, dispensing with the need for consent or notice to the defendant [mother] in connection with any petition for adoption of [Carlos] subsequently to be sponsored by the [department]. However, entry *345 of any such decree is stayed until December 19, 1989, or until the further order of the court, to afford the said defendant [mother] an opportunity to reconsider and modify her response to the allegations of the petitioner." The department did not appeal from the judge's interlocutory order.
In early 1990 the judge held a further evidentiary hearing, and on July 6, 1990, the judge issued a supplementary memorandum of decision. The memorandum made clear that approximately a year earlier the judge had made a final decision with respect to the care and protection petition, but that the judge's decision at that time with respect to the petition to dispense with consent to adoption was not final. The memorandum states, "While sufficient facts were found to support a judgment dispensing with the need for the mother's consent to an adoption, the court was not definitively satisfied that an alternative outcome looking toward re-unification of the mother and child was not attainable with more movement away from the hardened adversarial stance of the parties. December 19, 1989, was selected as the date to appraise the good faith of the parties in searching out new ways of dealing with the child's undeniable plight: victimized by sexual assault on at least one occasion by his step-father and further victimized by years of separation from his parents (the step-father was the only father he had known) and from his baby brother." (Footnote omitted.) The memorandum further states, "Each of the findings of fact and rulings of law embodied in the decision of July 21, 1989, [has] been re-examined in the light of evidence adduced during the 1990 hearings and further argument received. No sufficient reason appears to change any of them (except the continuance for entry of judgment). The entire decision is re-adopted and incorporated by reference herein.
"As the earlier decision suggested, the time did not then seem ripe, although the underlying facts warranted it, to order judgment terminating the mother's parental rights. Delay was provided `to afford the mother a further opportunity to consider other courses of action other than her present one.' ... Her course of action at the time was described as *346 one in which `... she is unable to accept even the hypothesis that [Carlos] may have been assaulted, even if she doesn't personally believe it.' ... That has changed. The change has not been dramatic enough to fully satisfy a fact-finder that the problem is over. On the other hand the court is satisfied that significant progress has been made and that new dynamics are at work. It follows that a decision in the mother's favor is to enter on the [c. 210, § 3] petition.
"The problem all along has been the irreconcilable standoff between the [department's] position that something akin to confession was called for and the `pathological denial' of the mother and her husband, the boy's step-father.
"The [department] has adhered rigidly, despite the court's determination embodied in ... the original decision that confession was the initial sine qua non of progress.... The mother was expected to sign a service plan for 1990 containing the entry `Changes Needed: The case can be closed when [Carlos] is placed in a permanent adoptive home.' The plan further asserts: `In order for consideration of changing the permanent plan for [Carlos] to return home, [the mother and stepfather] need to acknowledge that [Carlos] was sexually abused by his step-father.' Implicit in this fixed position is the clinical assumption apparently held by [department] social workers ... that treatment could not commence without acceptance by the parents of the [department's] (and the court's) version of history. In view of the finding of `pathological denial' on the part of the parents (that is a state of mind not open to simple reason or able to accept painful or upsetting reality), the [d]epartment's position was a formula for failure which the court rejects. The court finds ... that progress was possible in the absence of a `confession' or `acknowledgement' and that therapeutic options, including treatment groups, exist for `perpetrators' who are not able or willing to admit at the outset or expressly recognize their problem.
"The mother's position has evolved although not very far. She is now prepared to say that her child may have been abused and to consider action necessary to protect him from *347 future assault and to believe the consequences of past assault on the assumption it occurred." [Emphasis in original.]
"The [d]epartment has not been willing to weigh the considerations that admission by the step-father may be perceived by him to carry in its train the real risk of a substantial prison sentence, that acknowledgment by the mother in her view would pose an immediate threat to her custody of her other child and at the same time summarily terminate her marriage. These considerations arise in the context where there has been no evidence of chronic abuse and, as the court has already found, it is by no means clear whether the child has been more traumatized by the separation than by the abuse.
"The court agrees, however, with the guardian ad litem that until the parents participate in meaningful psychotherapy, with or without an advance admission, there is inadequate protection for the child to be found in an automatic return home. The parents need to be assured of the confidentiality of such treatment and be free to reveal their most personal secrets. Surely it should be possible to arrange for therapy with the therapist(s) allowed to give their ultimate opinions about parenting and custody without disclosing privileged communications. These are considerations that need to be explored in the future reviews mandated by statute.
"Given the fact that [the department] has found no reason to seek to disturb the custody of the younger sibling, and that the mother has been ready to surrender (even if only to a modest degree) her own previously fixed posture, it is time for the [department] to do likewise. If the diagnosis of `pathological denial' is sound as the [d]epartment believes (and the court agrees), that is an issue that needs to be addressed. It appears that it was not considered during the therapeutic intervention that has taken place.
"The court finds that progress in bringing the mother to fuller insight has been inhibited in part by the [d]epartment's unwillingness to consider all reasonable strategies for overcoming her denials. The [d]epartment has has understandably adhered to the clinical advice of the professionals *348 on which it relies. The court finds that other options, principally group or individual therapy not based on `confession' as a precondition, need to be tried.
"The child has been regularly visiting with his mother, and remains attached to her. He is eager to return home. If his present therapist declines to continue to treat him under such circumstances, another will need to be found.
"Upon the basis of the facts found, and in reliance on the arguments of the guardian ad litem, counsel for the child and counsel for the mother, the probate petition under G.L.c. 210, § 3, is denied.
"Judgment on the probate aspect of the case is to be entered dismissing the petition." The department appealed.
A parent's right to the custody of his or her child may not be terminated under the care and protection statute, G.L.c. 119, §§ 21-39 (1990 ed.), or the adoption statute, G.L.c. 210, § 3 (1990 ed.), without clear and convincing evidence that the parent is currently unfit to further the child's best interest. Care & Protection of Martha, 407 Mass. 319, 327 (1990). Furthermore, parental fitness and the best interests of the child are interrelated factors. Petition of the New England Home for Little Wanderers to Dispense with Consent to Adoption, 367 Mass. 631, 641 (1975). The judgment must analyze the parent's character, temperament, capacity and conduct in relation to the particular child's needs, age, affections and environment. Petition of the Dep't of Pub. Welfare to Dispense with Consent to Adoption, 383 Mass. 573, 589 (1981). The department argues that, in denying the department's petition, the judge not only failed to properly focus on Carlos's needs and best interests, but also he inappropriately applied a standard of future, rather than present, parental fitness. According to the department, "[i]n denying the Department's petition, the court apparently relied upon the possibility of future therapy to address [the mother's] present incapacities. The court was convinced that the statutory `future reviews' [under the provisions of c. 119, § 26, the care and protection statute] would provide [the mother] with the opportunity to demonstrate her progress" (footnote omitted). *349 "[T]he trial court concluded," the department says, "that because [the mother] may become a fit parent in the future, her parental rights should not be irrevocably terminated." Finally, the department contends that the judge's subsidiary findings not only do not support his decision to dismiss the petition, but indeed require its allowance.
The Appeals Court agreed with the department. Adoption of Carlos, 31 Mass. App. Ct. 233 (1991). The court noted that "[a]n award of permanent custody to the department in a care and protection case will not, by itself, dictate the outcome of an accompanying petition under G.L.c. 210, § 3." Id. at 238. The court also observed that "[f]or a court to take the extreme step of allowing a petition in a § 3 case, `it must be shown by clear and convincing evidence that the parent's unfitness to assume parental responsibility is such that it would be in the best interests of the child for all legal relations to be ended.'" Id. at 239, quoting Petition of the Dep't of Social Servs. to Dispense with Consent to Adoption, 391 Mass. 113, 119 (1984). See also Adoption of Gwendolyn, 29 Mass. App. Ct. 130, 134 (1990). We agree with those observations. We do not agree, however, with the Appeals Court's further statements that, in connection with petitions to terminate all parental rights, inquiry concerning future parental fitness is inappropriate. The Appeals Court states, id. at 239, "While what is at stake in a § 3 case differs in magnitude from what is at stake in a guardianship or care and protection case, the focus of the court's inquiry into parental fitness, in any of these cases, is limited to the present, that is, the time at which the parent is before the court." Again, the Appeals Court states, "We further read the judge's denial of the petition to dispense with consent to adoption as embodying the premise that the mother might improve at some future and unspecified time and, eventually, become a fit parent. To the extent that it relied on such a premise, the decision to deny the department's petition employed an impermissible standard, one of future parental fitness." Id. at 241. Based at least in part on that legal reasoning, the Appeals Court concluded, consistent with the *350 department's position, that "[r]ead as a whole, the judge's 1989 and 1990 findings lead inevitably to an ultimate finding that the mother is a currently unfit parent. Such a finding, taken together with the mother's persistent inability to address herself constructively to resolving the cause of her unfitness, does not support the judge's denial of the petition to dispense with consent to adoption." Id. at 240.
Differently from the Appeals Court, we think that, in weighing the question whether parental rights are to be irrevocably terminated, it is appropriate for a judge to consider whether, on the basis of credible evidence, there is a reasonable likelihood that the parent's unfitness at the time of trial may be only temporary. A judge may properly be guided by evidence demonstrating reason to believe that a parent will correct a condition or weakness that currently disables the parent from serving his or her child's best interests. In this regard, there is a significant difference in impact on both the parent and the child between an award of custody in a care and protection proceeding, which primarily addresses only current fitness and is reviewable every six months under c. 119, § 26, and the "extreme step" of terminating the parent and child's legal relationship. See Petition of the Dep't of Social Servs. to Dispense with Consent to Adoption, 391 Mass. 113, 119 (1984); Adoption of Frederick, 405 Mass. 1, 5 (1989). In determining whether that extreme step should be taken, consideration of the future is a necessity. The natural bond between parent and child should not be permanently severed unless the child's present or future welfare demands it. None of our cases, in which we have said that current parental unfitness is a prerequisite to the allowance of a petition to dispense with consent to adoption, should be construed as requiring such an extreme step whenever the parents are currently unfit, or as limiting the inquiry to parental fitness at the time of trial.
It is clear from the judge's comprehensive findings, rulings and orders that he fully appreciated the substantial difference between awarding custody under c. 119, § 24, subject to periodic review under § 26, and the irreversible termination *351 of the parent-child legal relationship under c. 210, § 3. It is also clear that the judge focused on the child's welfare. The judge's concern about Carlos's best interests is demonstrated not only by his discussion of the effect on Carlos of his having been sexually abused and of his mother's "pathological denial" of that fact, but also by his discussion of Carlos's "negative behavior and internal conflict" which, the judge noted, may to some degree have been due to "the fact that the child has had to bear the burden of separation from his natural ties." It is apparent that the judge was at no time satisfied by clear and convincing evidence that Carlos's best interests would be served by a termination of his mother's parental rights. Instead, and in the absence of any fully developed adoptive plan put forth by the department, the judge concluded on adequate evidence (the department does not challenge the judge's subsidiary findings) that between June, 1989, and early 1990 the mother had made "significant progress" with respect to her critical area of parental unfitness, namely her denial that her child had been sexually abused. We accept the Appeals Court's declaration that inquiry about parental fitness "may not involve speculation [in the sense of guesswork] about future improvement," Adoption of Carlos, supra at 239, but the judge's unchallenged findings about the mother's improvement, made after a three-day hearing, cannot be considered guesswork. We conclude that the judge's denial of the department's petition was not erroneous. The judgment is affirmed.
So ordered.

=== CASE 9739064 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:03.956626+00 ===

OPINION
FOLEY, Judge.
This appeal concerns a challenge by the personal representative of the estate of Rose Edhlund to the application of Minn. Stat. § 256B.15 as amended by 1987 Minn. Laws, ch. 403, art. 2, § 82 effective date August 1, 1987. Appellant contends respondent Blue Earth County Human Services’ claim for a medical assistance lien is an impermissible retroactive application of the statute. The trial court ruled that the claim for benefits was not a retroactive application of the statute and that the plain language of the statute required that the claim be allowed. We reverse and remand.
FACTS
Rose Edhlund died on May 11, 1988. An application for informal appointment of administrator was filed with the trial court and approved on July 1, 1988.
On August 2, 1988, respondent filed a medical assistance claim. Appellant filed a notice of disallowance of claim insofar as the claim was for services rendered to Ar*862thur Edhlund, the previously deceased spouse of Rose. A petition for allowance of claim was filed on September 1, 1988, by respondent.
The parties stipulated to the following facts:
1. Rose and Arthur Edhlund made joint application for medical assistance on April 29, 1982.
2. Rose received medical assistance from May 1, 1982 to June 1, 1986 in the amount of $1,488.11.
3. Arthur received medical assistance from May 1, 1982 until his death on May 13, 1986, in the amount of $64,741.31.
4. Arthur left no estate, as all property was held in joint tenancy with Rose.
5. At the time of Arthur’s death, the law in effect governing recovery was In re Estate of Messerschmidt, 352 N.W.2d 774 (Minn.Ct.App.1984).
6. Rose neither applied for nor received medical assistance benefits after June 1,
1986.
7. Chapter 403, Art. 2, sec. 82, Laws of 1987, which amended Minnesota Statutes 256B.15 to allow a claim against the estate of a surviving spouse, was effective August 1, 1987.
8. Rose died on May 11, 1988.
ISSUES
Did the trial court err in finding that the recent amendment to Minn.Stat. § 256B.15 was not a retroactive application of law as applied to appellant’s claim?
ANALYSIS
The statute in question is Minn.Stat. § 256B.15 (Supp.1987). Prior to August 1, 1987, the statute allowed a claim against the estate of a person who had received medical assistance at the death of the person, if single. However, if there was a surviving spouse, the claim could not be made against the estate of the recipient spouse. See Minn.Stat. § 256B.15 (1986).
In 1987, section 256B.15 itself was amended to allow claims against the estate of a person for medical assistance benefits received by that person or the person's predeceased spouse. 1987 Minn.Laws, ch. 403, art. 2, § 82. Appellant argues that the application of this amendment is a retroactive application because respondent’s claim was extinguished on Arthur’s death in May of 1986, one year prior to the new amendment.
Minnesota law is clear on the retroactivity of legislation. In this state, no statute shall be construed to be applied retroactively unless “clearly and manifestly so intended by the legislature.” Minn.Stat. § 645.21 (1986). In following that legislative mandate, the supreme court has held that before a statute will be afforded retroactive application, there must exist clear evidence that the legislature intended retroactive application “such as mention of the word ‘retroactive.’ ” Duluth Firemen’s Relief Association v. City of Duluth, 361 N.W.2d 381, 385 (Minn.1985). In attempting to ascertain whether the legislature intended that a statute be retroactively applied, the supreme court has stated that
it is immaterial in this state whether a law alters procedural or substantive rights; the legislature still must express its intention to make it [the statute in question] retroactive.
Estate of Murphy v. State, 293 Minn. 298, 308, 198 N.W.2d 570, 576 (1972). See also Cooper v. Watson, 290 Minn. 362, 369, 187 N.W.2d 689, 693 (1971); Chapman v. Davis, 233 Minn. 62, 65, 45 N.W.2d 822, 824 (1951).
A claim similar to the claim being made here by respondent was made in Messerschmidt. There, the deceased parties received medical assistance benefits from Kandiyohi County. Hazel Messerschmidt died in July 1982, leaving no estate. At the time of her death, both she and her husband were joint tenants to real property in LeSueur County., By operation of law, upon Hazel’s death her share of the property automatically passed to her surviving husband, Wesley. Wesley died several months later. LeSueur County filed a claim against the estate of Wesley for repayment of medical assistance received on *863behalf of himself and also by Hazel. The probate court allowed the claims against the estate of Wesley for medical assistance, but disallowed all other claims.
This court determined that the statute in effect at the time failed to specifically allow recovery against the estate of the surviving spouse. Messerschmidt, 352 N.W.2d at 777. More importantly, this court stated that “medical assistance is a creature of legislation and recovery of payments from an estate must depend upon express statutory authority.” Id. at 778 (emphasis added).
In the present case, Arthur died in 1986, leaving no estate. At the time of his death, the law in effect was as interpreted in Messerschmidt. Under that case, the ability to recover ended with his death. In addition, there remains a question on what, if any, property is available for respondent to attach. Here, Arthur’s property rights vested in Rose (the surviving joint tenant) upon Arthur’s death, one year before the amendment to the statute.
Respondent argues that this court’s decision in In re Estate of O’Keefe, 354 N.W.2d 531 (Minn.Ct.App.1984), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. Jan. 4, 1985), is controlling. In O’Keefe, this court affirmed an order allowing a claim by Hennepin County against the estate of O’Keefe for the value of medical assistance benefits paid to her and to be assessed against the decedent’s homestead. In 1982, Minn.Stat. § 525.145(3) was amended to remove the homestead exemption, thus allowing counties to file medical assistance estate claims under Minn.Stat. § 256B.15 against homesteads as well as other assets of an estate. Marie O’Keefe began receiving medical assistance in 1979 and continued receiving it until her death in 1983, one year after the homestead exemption was removed. This court rejected the estate’s argument that subjecting O’Keefe’s homestead to an estate claim would be a retroactive application of the law. This court stated:
At the time of Marie O’Keefe’s death on April 1, 1983, Hennepin County’s claim arose under § 256B.15. At the time of her death § 525.145(3), as amended, was in effect and had been since April 1, 1982. That amendment increased the pool of assets from which medical assistance could be recovered to include the homestead from and after April 1, 1982. There was nothing retroactive either in the claim or in the availability of the homestead asset.
Id. at 534. Respondent’s reliance on O’Keefe certainly would be determinative if the personal representative was attempting to deny a claim for assistance furnished to Rose Edhlund, but that is not the case.
O’Keefe makes clear that the determinative date for application of the retroactive standard is the date of death of the recipient of the aid. In this case, the recipient Arthur died prior to the passage of the amendment. No recovery could be made because at his death he left no estate. At his death, the state lost all right to recover for aid paid to him. Unlike the estate of O’Keefe, no potential claim existed against anyone after Arthur’s death. Had a statute allowing claims against the estate of a spouse been passed before his death, the state would have had a right to recovery from the spousal estate. There was no such law and the ability to collect for medical assistance paid to Arthur ceased at his death.
O’Keefe is also distinguishable from the situation here in that medical assistance continued after the passage of the change in the homestead exemption provisions, giving rise to an argument that O’Keefe accepted the new homestead provisions in order to continue the medical assistance. Here, no application for medical aid was made after Arthur’s death in 1986. Rose took possession of her survivorship property without any duty to pay the medical assistance of the deceased spouse. She did not seek any further assistance for herself. At the time of the passage of the 1987 amendment, she had no duty to pay from her estate any debt other than her own and the medical assistance recovery for herself.
Respondent intervenor State Attorney General argues that this court should consider the public interest rights of the taxpayer in regard to the amount of state *864money spent on welfare assistance. There is no question that this should be a concern. However, regardless of how harsh our result might seem, it is important to keep in perspective that this amendment is a creature of the legislature, and to construe the language in such a way to allow a different result from that reached here, would be improper, since such “a change is properly a matter for the legislature.” Molberg v. Marsden, 294 Minn. 493, 495, 200 N.W.2d 298, 300 (1972). It is not our practice to contradict by judicial construction the plain meaning of the statute.
Finally, appellant argues that the trial court’s retroactive application of the amendment is unconstitutional due to the fact that it impairs contractual obligations and takes property without due process. Because we find that the trial court improperly applied the amendment, we need not address this issue.
DECISION
Our examination of the 1987 amendment and its legislative history fails to indicate any legislative intent to apply the amendment retroactively. Accordingly, the trial court’s application of the amendment was error.
Reversed and remanded.

=== CASE 9739065 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:03.960935+00 ===

KALITOWSKI, Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent. I would affirm the trial court on the basis that the county’s claim against the estate of Rose Edh-lund is not a retroactive application of law where the statutory amendment allowing the claim was enacted more than nine months prior to Rose Edhlund’s death.
Under both the prior version of the statute (as interpreted in In re Estate of Messerschmidt, 352 N.W.2d 774 (Minn.Ct.App.1984)) and under the amended law, the county had no claim for Arthur Edhlund’s medical assistance at the time of Arthur’s death, where all of Arthur’s property was held in joint tenancy with Rose. Thus the event which the legislature affected by amending the law was the distribution of Rose Edhlund’s estate. Since Rose’s death and the creation of her estate occurred subsequent to the change in the law there is no retroactive application.
The county concedes that its claim depends on events which occurred prior to the statutory change (i.e. the payment of medical assistance and Arthur’s death). However, these events merely define the claim against Rose Edhlund’s estate, and “a statute is not retroactive merely because it relates to antecedent facts for its operation.” In re Estate of O’Keefe, 354 N.W.2d 531, 535 (Minn.Ct.App.1984) (citations omitted), ■pet. for rev. denied (Minn. Jan. 4, 1985).
Additionally, the presumption against - retroactive application derives from a presumed unfairness to a person deprived of the ability to alter circumstances and avoid application of a law. In the present case, it can hardly be said the amended law is unfair to Rose where the county’s claim for repayment cannot be made until after Rose’s death. Also, where the heirs of Rose Edhlund had a mere expectancy rather than a vested right in her estate there is no unfairness. Furthermore, it is highly unlikely that Arthur or Rose had either the inclination or the ability to arrange things differently to avoid having to repay the county for Arthur’s medical assistance after Rose’s death.
Finally, there are strong policy reasons for allowing medical assistance payments to be recovered from the estates of recipients. Estate collection statutes serve a very important purpose in allowing recovery of money paid to qualified individuals so that other similarly situated persons may be helped. In Re Estate of Turner, 391 N.W.2d 767, 770 (Minn.1986).

=== CASE 9739066 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:05.037304+00 ===

ERICKSTAD, Chief Justice.
This is a disciplinary proceeding brought against Thomas M. Disselhorst, an attorney practicing law in Bismarck. Following formal proceedings, a hearing panel of the Disciplinary Board of the Supreme Court made findings and recommended that Dis-selhorst be publicly reprimanded for his conduct.
We review disciplinary proceedings against attorneys de novo on the record with the standard of proof being clear and convincing. Matter of Ellis, 439 N.W.2d 808, 809 (N.D.1989). In reviewing the record, we accord due weight to the findings, conclusions, and recommendations of the hearing panel. Id. However, this Court does not act as a mere “rubber stamp” approving the findings and recommendations of the Disciplinary Board after a perfunctory review. Id. We decide each case on its own particular facts in determining what discipline is warranted. Id.
Disselhorst initially represented Kevin Brown in a divorce proceeding which was resolved in the summer of 1985. Kevin contacted Disselhorst in early September of 1985 regarding the possibility of filing a petition in bankruptcy. Later that month, Kevin decided to file a bankruptcy petition and paid Disselhorst $175.00, half of the total fee to be charged, apparently with the understanding that Disselhorst would begin working on the petition once he received the balance of the fee.
In January of 1986, Kevin moved to Abilene, Texas. One month later, Kevin’s ex-wife called him and requested that he take care of their son, Preston, for a month. At the time of the divorce, the parties had agreed that she would have custody of Preston. However, after Preston had been living with Kevin for a number of weeks, Kevin decided that he wanted to be the custodial parent. Sometime in March of 1986, Kevin contacted Disselhorst about making a change in the custody arrangement.
Because Kevin was living and working in Texas and found it financially difficult to make numerous long distance telephone calls to Bismarck, his parents, Doralyn and Bob Brown acted on his behalf with respect to the legal matters Disselhorst was handling for Kevin. After moving to Texas, Kevin did not meet with Disselhorst in person. Doralyn Brown testified that she attempted to call Disselhorst at his office March 20, April 2, and April 4, 1986, but was unable to reach him and so left messages on his answering machine. On April 25, 1986, Doralyn went to Disselhorst’s office and gave him a check for $200.00. She was given a receipt which indicated that $165.00 was a retainer for the child custody matter and $35.00 was to complete the payment on the bankruptcy matter.
During the month of May, Doralyn attempted to contact Disselhorst five times with no success, each time leaving a message on the answering machine. On June 9, 1986, after again trying to reach Dissel-horst by telephone, Doralyn sent him a certified letter, conveying her concern about being unable to contact him and at the lack of progress on the matters of bankruptcy and child custody. Disselhorst did not respond.
Doralyn and her husband, Bob, continued to try to contact Disselhorst by telephone. On July 8, 1986, Kevin retained another attorney in Abilene because he was dissatisfied with the service he had been receiving from Disselhorst. On September 5, 1986, Kevin sent Disselhorst a letter essentially asking him to discontinue all work on Kevin’s behalf and requesting that Dissel-horst sehd him all papers and documents in connection with Kevin’s cases.
On October 20, 1986, Bob left a message on the answering machine, which Dissel-horst returned. Bob indicated that he wanted Disselhorst to send him the documents from the divorce proceeding so that they could be sent to the attorney in Abilene to begin working on the child custody matter. The documents were not returned and on November 3, 1986, Doralyn sent Disselhorst another certified letter requesting the papers. On November 20, 1986, *336Doralyn sent a letter to the Disciplinary Board to complain about Disselhorst’s conduct.
In letters dated December 5, 1986, and January 27, 1987, Disselhorst sent the Browns the documents and promised to repay them the $600.00 they requested without deduction for any previous related expenses.1 On May 26, 1986, Doralyn wrote Disselhorst to remind him of his promise to repay the $600. On April 28, 1988, Disselhorst sent the Browns a check for $400.00, and on May 10, 1988, a traveler’s check for $200.00 and a promise to pay interest of $151.20.
On April 16,1987, the Inquiry Committee West met to consider the complaint and unanimously recommended a private reprimand. A Hearing Panel of the Disciplinary Board was convened on May 26, 1988, and July 28,1988, and after considering the evidence, made findings, including the following:
“VIII.
“That the above-stated conduct violates Canon 1, DR 1-102(A)(4) of the Code of Professional Responsibility, as follows:
“(A) A lawyer shall not:
“(4) Engage in conduct involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation.
“IX.
“That additionally the above-stated conduct violates Canon 6, DR 6-101(A)(3) of the Code of Professional Responsibility, as follows:
“(A) A lawyer shall not:
“(3) Neglect a legal matter entrusted to him.
“X.
“That additionally the above-stated conduct violates Canon 7, DR 7-101(A)(1), (2), and (3) of the Code of Professional Responsibility, as follows:
“(A) A lawyer shall not intentionally:
“(1) Fail to seek the lawful objectives of his client through reasonably available means permitted by law and the Disciplinary Rules, except as provided by DR 7-101(B). A lawyer does not violate this Disciplinary Rule, however, by acceding to reasonable requests of opposing counsel which do not prejudice the rights of his client, by being punctual in fulfilling all professional commitments, by avoiding offensive tactics, or by treating with courtesy and consideration all persons involved in the legal process.
“(2) Fail to carry out a contract of employment entered into with a client for professional services, but he may withdraw as permitted under DR 2-110, DR 5-102, and DR 5-105.
“(3) Prejudice or damage his client during the course of the professional relationship, except as required under DR 7-102(B).”
The Hearing Panel recommended that Disselhorst be publicly reprimanded.
Disselhorst admits that his conduct was negligent, but takes exception to findings VIII and X and also to the recommendation that he be publicly reprimanded. Dissel-*337horst asserts that, to some extent, his health problems mitigate his conduct.
In April of 1987, Disselhorst was hospitalized with kidney stones. During this hospitalization, he was diagnosed as suffering from hypothyroidism and was started on medication to alleviate the symptoms. A letter to Disselhorst from Dr. Ron Tello was submitted into evidence at the hearing. In this letter, Dr. Tello states:
“The clinical variations of hypothyroidism have a wide spectrum ranging from hardly any recognizable symptoms at all to overt life threatening conditions. The symptoms of hypothyroidism are usually very insidious in onset and are often times present five or more years prior to the diagnosis being established. The earliest complaints of hypothyroidism are often times fatigue, weakness, cold intolerance, and occasional muscle cramps. “As the disease progresses, physical weakness increases and mental slowness develops. Personality changes are often times present as are paresthesias and ataxia. Other symptoms that can develop include constipation, shortness of breath, headaches, decreased hearing, chest pain, and weight gain. Physical signs that can be present include dry scaly skin, puffy eyelids, hoarseness, a yellow skin texture, loss of scalp hair, and abdominal distention. Besides the impaired intellectual function that can develop with long standing untreated hypothyroidism, frank psychosis and even a coma can develop. If left untreated, patients can develop myxedema coma which is quite unusual but often times lethal. This myxedema coma is often times preceded by seizures and accompanied by hypotension and hypothermia.
“... As far as other symptoms and signs you have developed over a period of time prior to the diagnosis, I could not really comment on since I had seen you only in January of 1987 prior to that hospitalization. At that time, you had a bronchitis.” [Emphasis added.]
Disselhorst asserts that he had been suffering from hypothryoidism for an undetermined number of years prior to the malady being diagnosed in April of 1987.2 Since he has been taking medication designed to alleviate the symptoms of hypothyroidism, Disselhorst claims his health is much improved. Disselhorst called several witnesses who testified at the hearing regarding the noticeable change in his appearance and demeanor, generally stating that he appeared more healthy, alert, and energetic after beginning the medication.3 The Hearing Panel found that Disselhorst’s conduct was mitigated by his health problems.
Habitual failure to attend to matters entrusted to an attorney and failure to communicate with the client constitutes grounds for discipline. Disciplinary Bd. of Supreme Court v. O’Neil, 326 N.W.2d 879 (N.D.1982). We have previously found conduct involving a failure to communicate with clients or return a retainer to warrant a public reprimand. Matter of Britton, 406 N.W.2d 364 (N.D.1987). Although Dis-selhorst’s conduct can partly be attributed to health and other personal problems, personal problems do not justify failure to *338attend to matters entrusted to an attorney. See Matter of Ellis, supra; Disciplinary Bd. of Supreme Court v. O’Neil, supra. We conclude that Disselhorst’s conduct was negligent to the extent that it warrants a public reprimand.
The Hearing Panel also found that Disselhorst’s conduct violated Canon 7, DR 7-101(A)(l), (2), and (3) of the Code of Professional Responsibility, requiring a conclusion that Disselhorst’s misconduct was intentional. Our review of the record discloses misconduct that is negligent, not intentional. We therefore reverse this finding of the Hearing Panel.
The Hearing Panel further found that Disselhorst violated Canon 1, DR 1-102(A)(4) of the Code of Professional Responsibility which provides that a lawyer shall not engage in conduct involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation. We do not find evidence to support this conclusion. While Disselhorst was negligent in failing to communicate with the Browns and in his dilatory handling of their legal concerns, it does not appear that he intentionally misled or deceived them. Furthermore, the Hearing Panel merely found “[t]hat the above-stated conduct violates Canon 1, DR 1-102(A)(4) of the Code of Professional Responsibility, as follows: (A) A lawyer shall not: (4) Engage in conduct involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation” without indicating in which respects this violation occurred and without delineating which of the proscribed actions were committed. In the future it is hoped that the findings will be more specific when a violation of DR 1-102(A)(4), or an analogous current Rule is charged.
Consistent with this opinion, we hereby publicly reprimand Thomas Disselhorst for his negligent conduct with regard to his representation of Kevin Brown in conjunction with the matters of bankruptcy and child custody. Pursuant to Rule 21(d) of the North Dakota Rules of Disciplinary Procedure, Disselhorst is ordered to pay for the costs of the disciplinary proceedings in an amount to be determined by the Disciplinary Board.
Payments shall be made in installments over a four-year period as set forth in a payment schedule to be submitted to Dis-selhorst by the Disciplinary Board. Failure by Disselhorst to pay costs within the four-year period shall result in his automatic suspension from the practice of law, which suspension shall continue until Dissel-horst’s default on the payment costs has been remedied. See Matter of Ellis, supra.
GIERKE, MESCHKE and LEVINE, JJ., concur.
. Evidence of checks and receipts submitted to the Hearing Panel of the Disciplinary Board indicate the Browns paid Disselhorst the following:
11/27/84 $175.00 retainer for divorce ($350.00 total fee).
6/27/85 $275.00 ($100.00 retainer for grandparent rights matter and $175.00 balance on divorce).
9/26/85 $175.00 (Chapter 7 bankruptcy; $350.00 total).
3/10/86 $30.00 (no notation).
4/25/86 $200.00 ($165.00 retainer for child custody matter and $35.00 on the bankruptcy fee).
Total: $855.00
In a letter to the Browns dated December 5, 1986, Disselhorst states his records indicate fees in the amount of $515.00 for the bankruptcy and child custody matter plus an additional $60.00 filing fee.
. It is possible that Disselhorst may have suffered from hypothyroidism at the time he began to become neglectful in his representation of Kevin Brown. However, the statement he has provided from Dr. Tello does not assert that this doctor had an opinion based upon reasonable medical certainty that Disselhorst had suffered from hypothryoidism at that earlier time, likely due to the fact that Dr. Tello had not seen Disselhorst prior to January of 1987. See, for example, the degree of medical certainty required to prove causation in Kuntz v. North Dakota Workmen’s Compensation Bureau, 139 N.W.2d 525, 528-9 (N.D.1966). We note that section 65-01-11, N.D.C.C., places the burden upon the claimant to establish his right to participate in the Worker’s Compensation fund and, therefore, also the burden of proving causation. No similar statute is involved in the instant case. But if a respondent in a case such as this desires to have his or her neglectful conduct excused, a medical opinion justifying that excuse should be based upon reasonable medical certainty.
. The witnesses Disselhorst called on his behalf also testified that Disselhorst often represents clients who have little or no money, apparently taking some of the responsibility for providing legal assistance to those people who may not otherwise receive such assistance.

=== CASE 2218715 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:53.271856+00 ===

596 N.E.2d 205 (1992)
231 Ill. App. 3d 351
172 Ill. Dec. 926
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Rene R. PANTOJA, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 2-90-1340.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Second District.
July 9, 1992.
*206 G. Joseph Weller, Deputy Defender, Beth Katz, Office of State Appellate Defender, Elgin, for Rene Pantoja.
Gary V. Johnson, Kane County State's Atty., William L. Browers, Deputy Director, State's Atty. Appellate Prosecutor, John X. Breslin, Deputy Dir., State's Atty. Aplt. Prosecutor, Ottawa, Michael L. Shevick, Chicago, for the people.
Presiding Justice INGLIS delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant, Rene Pantoja, was convicted of criminal damage to property in violation of section 21-1(1)(a) of the Criminal Code of 1961 (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. 21-1(1)(a)). He was sentenced to six months' imprisonment in the Kane County jail and 30 months' probation and ordered to pay restitution. Defendant appeals, contending that the trial judge erred in denying his motion in limine to exclude testimony of his gang membership. We affirm.
On April 26, 1990, Elgin police officers Scott Davis and Dan Radmer were called to an area across from Gifford Park in Elgin, Illinois. They observed 15 to 20 people standing on the street and drinking beer. Defendant was one of the group. The officers dispersed the group and some of them, including defendant, went across the street to Gifford Park.
The officers left the area, but then drove around the block to watch the remaining group at the park. The officers observed some of the individuals throwing objects at the streetlights and breaking them. Officer Davis testified that defendant and two other people standing with him damaged four lights. Five other lights were broken by a second group of individuals at the opposite end of the park.
Defendant and the others were arrested and taken to the Elgin police station. Officer Davis testified that defendant stated that he was the head of the Latin Kings street gang, they had buried one of their own that day and he asked to be given a break. Defendant was subsequently charged with criminal damage to property (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. 21-1(1)(a)).
Before trial, defense counsel made a motion in limine to exclude defendant's statement made to Officer Davis concerning his gang affiliation. Defendant argued that evidence of gang involvement was irrelevant in the case and would be highly prejudicial. The trial judge denied the motion, finding that defendant made a voluntary statement, a spontaneous declaration. The trial judge stated that each part of the declaration was admissible, even if it contained elements that might be prejudicial.
At trial, after defendant's statement was revealed by Officer Davis, defense counsel elicited detailed testimony from both officers on cross-examination relating to defendant's *207 gang activities. Defense counsel asked both officers if they were patrolling the park because of fear of gang activity following the funeral of a gang member. The trial judge had ruled before trial that evidence as to why the police were watching the park was to be excluded pursuant to defendant's motion in limine.
The jury found defendant guilty of damaging the streetlights. Defendant's post-trial motions were denied, and he was sentenced to six months' imprisonment in the Kane County jail and 30 months' probation and ordered to pay restitution. Defendant thereafter filed a timely appeal.
Defendant contends that the trial court erred in denying his motion in limine. He argues that evidence of gang membership was irrelevant to the charge at hand. Also, the evidence was highly prejudicial because it put defendant in an unfavorable light in the jurors' minds. Defendant further argues that the error was exacerbated by the officers' testimony concerning their prior contact with defendant and his witnesses. Defendant requests that we vacate his conviction and remand the cause for a new trial.
The State argues that defendant's statement about gang membership was relevant to show his motive to commit the offense and consciousness of guilt. The State also argues that the officers' testimony concerning prior contact with the defendant was relevant for purposes of identification. Alternatively, the State argues that defense counsel was responsible for eliciting most of the detailed gang-related testimony.
Motions in limine are encouraged in criminal cases to exclude extraneous matters. (People v. Watkins (1991), 220 Ill.App.3d 201, 211, 163 Ill. Dec. 194, 581 N.E.2d 145.) A motion in limine is used in an attempt to protect the moving party from the prejudicial impact of inadmissible evidence being asked and objected to in the presence of the jury. (Reidelberger v. Highland Body Shop, Inc. (1981), 83 Ill. 2d 545, 549, 48 Ill. Dec. 237, 416 N.E.2d 268; Cunningham v. Millers General Insurance Co. (1992), 227 Ill.App.3d 201, 205, 169 Ill. Dec. 200, 591 N.E.2d 80.) A reviewing court will not reverse the trial court's ruling on a motion in limine absent an abuse of discretion. People v. Poole (1991), 222 Ill.App.3d 689, 701, 165 Ill. Dec. 189, 584 N.E.2d 368.
Once a motion in limine is granted, the movant must object when evidence is presented that violates the order. (Cunningham, 227 Ill.App.3d at 206, 169 Ill. Dec. 200, 591 N.E.2d 80.) Further, the denial of a motion in limine does not preserve an objection to disputed evidence presented later at trial. The moving party is obligated to object when the evidence is offered or the objection will be waived. Cunningham, 227 Ill.App.3d at 206, 169 Ill. Dec. 200, 591 N.E.2d 80; Romanek-Golub & Co. v. Anvan Hotel Corp. (1988), 168 Ill.App.3d 1031, 1040, 119 Ill. Dec. 482, 522 N.E.2d 1341.
We agree with the waiver rule discussed in both Cunningham, a fourth district case, and Romanek-Golub, a first district case. The movant whose motion in limine has been denied should object when that evidence is presented at trial so as to preserve the issue on appeal. We are aware that waiver does not apply when the defendant initiates testimony, which was the subject of the motion in limine, to reduce its prejudicial impact. (See People v. Spates (1979), 77 Ill. 2d 193, 198-200, 32 Ill. Dec. 333, 395 N.E.2d 563.) However, the policy promoted by that rule does not apply here. Here, the State elicited defendant's statement about gang membership from Officer Davis as part of its case in chief, and defendant did not object. Following the above rationale, we hold that defendant's failure to object to the evidence that was the subject of the motion in limine resulted in waiver.
Absent waiver, we hold that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying defendant's motion in limine. We agree with defendant that consciousness of guilt need not be proven by a statement that included portions detailing gang affiliation. Defendant's statement could have been edited to delete the gang references *208 and would have remained viable as a statement showing consciousness of guilt.
However, we agree with the State that defendant's statement is relevant to show motive for the crime. Evidence of gang membership is relevant to show motive. (People v. Buchanan (1991), 211 Ill.App.3d 305, 320, 155 Ill. Dec. 831, 570 N.E.2d 344.) Defendant had been to the funeral of a gang member earlier in the day. Defendant was with other gang members at the time of the offense. The gang members had been drinking in public and mourning their lost member. The surrounding circumstances demonstrate that defendant's motive for general lawlessness at the time of the incident was gang related.
Further, relevant evidence is admissible if it is more probative than prejudicial. (People v. Gonzalez (1991), 142 Ill. 2d 481, 487, 154 Ill. Dec. 643, 568 N.E.2d 864, citing People v. Hairston (1970), 46 Ill. 2d 348, 372, 263 N.E.2d 840.) Relevant evidence concerning gang membership will not be excluded simply because prejudice attaches to that revelation. (Gonzalez, 142 Ill.2d at 489, 154 Ill. Dec. 643, 568 N.E.2d 864.) It is the trial court's function to weigh the probative value and prejudicial effect of evidence to determine whether it should be admitted. Gonzalez, 142 Ill.2d at 489, 154 Ill. Dec. 643, 568 N.E.2d 864.
We find that the trial court did not err in finding the evidence more probative than prejudicial. The trial court acknowledged the prejudicial impact the statement might have to the jury. Such recognition demonstrates a balancing of factors by the trial court which we believe was not an abuse of discretion.
Finally, defendant argues that prejudice was exacerbated by both officers' testimony concerning prior contacts with defendant. Defendant claims in his post-trial motion that he objected to this testimony at trial, but our reading of the record reflects no such objection. To preserve an issue for review defendant must make a timely objection at trial and renew the objection in a written post-trial motion. (People v. Herrett (1990), 137 Ill. 2d 195, 209, 148 Ill. Dec. 695, 561 N.E.2d 1.) Because defendant failed to object to the officers' testimony relating to prior contact with defendant, we find this issue has been waived.
For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of Kane County is affirmed.
Affirmed.
McLAREN and GEIGER, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2218717 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:53.309702+00 ===

413 Mass. 167 (1992)
596 N.E.2d 1004
PURITAN MEDICAL CENTER, INC.
vs.
EDWARD L. CASHMAN, JR., & another.[1]
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Essex.
April 9, 1992.
July 20, 1992.
Present: WILKINS, ABRAMS, NOLAN, O'CONNOR, & GREANEY, JJ.
Mitchell J. Sikora, Jr. (Ann Ryan-Small with him) for the defendants.
Alan K. Posner (Mark W. Corner with him) for the plaintiff.
ABRAMS, J.
A Superior Court jury determined that the defendants, Edward L. Cashman, Jr., and Carol Patricia (Patricia) Cashman, his sister, charged excessive rent for office space which they leased to the plaintiff corporation, Puritan Medical Center, Inc. (Puritan). Further, the jury concluded that Edward, one of Puritan's directors, had misappropriated a corporate opportunity by refusing to renew Puritan's lease. The jury returned a verdict of $505,100 for Puritan.[2] In addition, the jury awarded the defendants $5,000 on their counterclaim alleging damages arising from Puritan's holdover after the expiration of its lease. However, the judge entered judgment notwithstanding the verdict on the counterclaim. The judge determined that the defendants' conduct in "locking-out" Puritan after the expiration of its lease term had been wilfully and knowingly unfair and deceptive within the meaning of G.L.c. 93A, § 11 (1990 ed.), and doubled Puritan's damages. He also allowed Puritan's motions for $12,000 in costs and $141,000 in attorneys' fees. Judgments were entered accordingly. The defendants appeal. We allowed *169 the defendants' application for direct appellate review. We reverse the judgment against Patricia on the excess rent claim. We affirm the verdict of $373,100 entered against Edward on the same claim. We reverse the judgment on misappropriation of a corporate opportunity. We also reverse the judgment entered pursuant to G.L.c. 93A (1990 ed.). We reinstate that portion of the jury's verdict entered on the defendants' counterclaim that represents recovery for rent owed. We affirm the judgment notwithstanding the verdict as to the remaining portion of that award.
Facts. Edward began his private medical practice in 1954, establishing his office in his parents' house at 96 Puritan Road, Swampscott. Shortly thereafter, he formed a partnership with another doctor, William Nash. During the 1960's, they hired two more physicians, and in 1970, the four formed the plaintiff corporation, Puritan. Each became a shareholder, director and officer of Puritan. Edward became and remained treasurer until he suffered a stroke in 1986. During the 1970's and 1980's, Puritan hired additional physicians, who also eventually became shareholders, directors and officers. By the time of this litigation, Puritan had eight principals, including Edward.
Puritan continued to operate out of the premises at 96 Puritan Road, owned by the defendants' parents, who also owned a building at 96A Puritan Road and several adjacent lots. In 1976, the defendants inherited all these properties. Shortly thereafter, Puritan expanded its office space to include a portion of the premises at 96A Puritan Road.
The minutes of a December 20, 1976, board of directors meeting state that "[i]t was agreed that a lease between Edward ... and... Puritan ... will be signed by the Corporation and/or its representative, William C. Nash, M.D., in the near future. The terms of the lease are to be unchanged for the next five years with a slight cost of living escalation for the following five years. When the lease is available, it will be signed." Thereafter, Nash, as Puritan's then-president, executed a lease on behalf of Puritan for the office and parking space then in use. Edward executed the lease on behalf of *170 himself and Patricia as owners. The term of the lease was ten years, from January 1, 1977, through December 31, 1986. The lease provided for an annual rent during the first five years of $24,408 for the office space and $6,000 for the parking space, assumption by Puritan of any real estate tax increases, and, beginning in the sixth year, annual rent increases tied to increases in the Federal consumer price index since the commencement of the lease. Edward, as treasurer of Puritan, wrote out the monthly rent checks payable to himself.
Puritan adduced evidence at trial that Edward had overcharged Puritan over the lease period by more than $450,000. Puritan claims that it discovered the rent overcharges for the first time in March, 1986, when, while Edward was recovering from a stroke, Doctors Casale and Calamita, Puritan's vice president and president, respectively, reviewed the lease and rent payment records. Puritan's principals claim that they were unaware of the existence and content of the lease until after Edward's stroke. Edward testified that he "forgot" about the lease, and had charged Puritan what he thought was "fair."
After discovering the overcharges, the other Puritan principals voted to remove Edward as treasurer and to relieve him of all his medical and business duties at Puritan. Although they notified Edward that they would be purchasing his shares in Puritan pursuant to their redemption agreement, they had not done so by the time of trial.
By letter dated November 12, 1986, Edward served Puritan with a notice of nonrenewal of the lease and notice to quit by December 31, 1986. Puritan commenced this action on December 19, 1986. On December 26, 1986, Puritan obtained a preliminary injunction enjoining Edward from exercising any managerial functions at Puritan and from interfering with Puritan's lawful use of the leased premises. On January 1, 1987, the date the lease expired, Puritan delivered a check to Edward in the amount of $7,500 for one *171 month's rent.[3] Without warning, during the early morning hours of January 14, purporting to act under a "reentry provision" in the lease, Edward retook physical possession of the premises. He moved out Puritan's records and property, changed the locks, and barricaded the entrance to the driveway. Puritan relocated temporarily to a hospital, and then to office space in Salem. The defendants' counsel rejected the $7,500 rent check under cover letter of January 15, 1987. Edward resumed his medical practice part-time at the 96 Puritan Road premises.
1. Patricia Cashman's liability. The defendants argue that the evidence was insufficient to permit the verdict that Patricia was jointly liable with Edward on the excessive rent claim. The defendants' counsel moved for a directed verdict on Patricia's behalf, and, after the jury returned its verdict, moved for a new trial or entry of judgment notwithstanding the verdict. See Martin v. Hall, 369 Mass. 882, 885 (1976). The judge denied the motions. The standard of review is whether "anywhere in the evidence, from whatever source derived, any combination of circumstances could be found from which a reasonable inference could be drawn in favor of the plaintiff." Dobos v. Driscoll, 404 Mass. 634, 656, cert. denied sub nom. Kehoe v. Dobos, 493 U.S. 850 (1989), quoting Poirier v. Plymouth, 374 Mass. 206, 212 (1978). We conclude that no such reasonable inference could be drawn in favor of the plaintiff.[4] Therefore, we reverse the denial of the motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict.[5]
*172 2. Excessive rent claim against Edward. A. Ratification of the rent charges. Edward argues the judge improperly refused to instruct the jury that Puritan's directors could have ratified the excessive rent payments by their protracted failure to supervise the corporation's financial matters. This argument is without merit. While it is true that officers and directors have a duty of reasonable supervision, see Perkins v. Rich, 11 Mass. App. Ct. 317, 322-323 (1981), and cases cited, this duty is for the benefit of the corporation, not the wrongdoer. The judge's instructions properly reflected the fact that there may be no ratification of self-dealing without full disclosure.[6] See Durfee v. Durfee & Canning, Inc., 323 Mass. 187, 203 (1948), quoting Earll v. Picken, 113 F.2d 150, 158 (D.C. Cir.1940) (Cestui que trust can ratify breach of trust only if apprised of all material facts as well as their legal effect. "No half-hearted disclosure or partial discovery is sufficient in either respect. The trustee's duty of disclosure is not discharged by leaving the cestui to draw doubtful inferences, conclusions and suspicions ..."); Winchell v. Plywood Corp., 324 Mass. 171, 176 (1949), and cases cited ("contracts between a corporation and one of its officers or directors are valid if, with full knowledge of all the facts, they are assented to by all the officers and the stockholders").
The cases in which courts imply ratification, unlike this case, involve third-party, arm's-length transactions from *173 which the corporation received a benefit, and directors who, at minimum, had "knowledge of such facts or circumstances as would put a reasonable person on inquiry and which would lead to full discovery." Ingalls Iron Works Co. v. Ingalls, 177 F. Supp. 151, 162 (N.D. Ala. 1959), aff'd, 280 F.2d 423 (5th Cir.1960) (directors held to have ratified settlement contract where they had constructive knowledge and their delay in approving contract benefited corporation). See, e.g., Irving Tanning Co. v. Shir, 295 Mass. 380, 384 (1936) (ratification of agent's unauthorized contracts will be inferred where, after knowledge, principal made no effort to repudiate them); Perkins, supra at 323 (where church committee knew of "radical physical and structural changes to the church and its surroundings," and had been informed of church projects "through annual reports and publications," ratification of mortgage transactions is inferred by its failure to disavow them); Torpey v. Interstate Equip. Leasing Co., 760 F.2d 364, 366 (1st Cir.1985) (jury could find that where defendant was put on notice of indemnity agreement, he manifested company's assent by his silence and acceptance of the rental slip on back of which indemnity agreement was printed); Baltimore & O.R. Co. v. Foar, 84 F.2d 67, 72 (7th Cir.1936) (directors found to have ratified contract where, if they did not have actual knowledge, ought to have known of lifetime contract offered to striking worker to induce him to return to work); Ingalls Iron Works Co. v. Ingalls, supra.
The facts of this case are more analogous to those in Kidder v. Greenman, 283 Mass. 601, 615-616 (1933), in which "[t]he [lessee] did not have actual knowledge of the contents of the completed lease and, though the means of information as to the contents thereof were within her possession and control, she did not wilfully or deliberately ignore the facts.... She had no reason to think that the [lessor's agent] had not completed the lease in the authorized manner and, therefore, no occasion to examine it ... to see if he had done so.... In these circumstances the doctrine that a person who accepts an instrument  or takes title thereunder *174  without reading it or otherwise informing himself of its contents is charged with knowledge of such contents ... is not applicable." (Citations omitted.) Further, the lessee "accepted no benefit from the unauthorized act of the [agent]." Id. at 616. Consequently, in Kidder, we held that the lessee's "acceptance of the completed lease ... did not amount to ratification of the unauthorized act of [the agent] in completing it." So, too, in this case, Puritan's directors' failure to supervise Puritan's business affairs in such a manner that they would have discovered the overcharges cannot amount to ratification. There was no error in the judge's instructions on this point.
Edward further argues that, even as instructed, the jurors could not have found that Edward "had accomplished a nine-year scheme of deception." We reject this argument as well. The evidence was sufficient to permit the jury to find that the other directors had not discovered, nor had Edward informed them of, the amount of rent which he was charging Puritan. Edward conceded that he did not discuss with the other directors what he thought would be a "fair" rent, did not inform them of the amount of "fair" rent being paid by Puritan, and did not distribute yearly financial reports. It was undisputed at trial that Edward was in charge of all the financial and administrative aspects of Puritan's operations. Other testimony which the jurors could have believed indicated that (1) Edward was the person who charged or collected the rent payments; (2) most of the critical information with regard to rent payments was kept under lock and key in Edward's office; (3) the accounting reviews were a mere compilation, which relied wholly on figures supplied to the accountants by Edward; (4) the accountants never provided lease or rent information to the other directors; (5) lease and rent issues were not discussed at directors' meetings; (6) the only financial data sent to the other doctors related to their own income, not to Puritan's expenses; and (7) the other directors viewed Edward as a trusted mentor to whom they deferred in business tasks while they focused their time and energy on the practice of medicine. The evidence, viewed in the *175 light most favorable to the plaintiff, supports the jury's verdict.
B. Statute of limitations on claim of excessive rent. The defendants argue that the judge wrongly refused to impose the six-year statute of limitations set out in G.L.c. 260, § 2 (1990 ed.),[7] on Puritan's claim of excessive rent. We conclude that the statute of limitations was tolled pursuant to G.L.c. 260, § 12 (1990 ed.), and therefore the judge did not err in refusing to impose a six-year statute of limitations.
There are two important exceptions to the general rule that "a cause of action in contract accrues at the time of the breach," Frank Cooke, Inc. v. Hurwitz, 10 Mass. App. Ct. 99, 106 (1980), and cases cited. First, if the action is based on an "inherently unknowable" wrong, it does not accrue until the injured party knows or in the exercise of reasonable diligence should know the factual basis for the cause of action. See Dinsky v. Framingham, 386 Mass. 801, 803 (1982); Friedman v. Jablonski, 371 Mass. 482, 485 (1976); Hendrickson v. Sears, 365 Mass. 83, 91 (1974); Frank Cooke, Inc., supra at 106. Second, the statute of limitations may be tolled under G.L.c. 260, § 12, if the wrongdoer either "concealed the existence of a cause of action through some affirmative act done with intent to deceive" or breached a fiduciary duty of full disclosure. Frank Cooke, Inc., supra at 108, citing Stetson v. French, 321 Mass. 195, 198 (1947).[8] In this case, the statute of limitations was tolled pursuant to the latter provision.
"[B]ecause of the trust and confidence reposed in them by the other stockholders," stockholders in a close corporation are held to a "standard of fiduciary duty more exacting than *176 the traditional good faith and inherent fairness standard." Donahue v. Rodd Electrotype Co. of New England, Inc., 367 Mass. 578, 595 (1975). Therefore, as a stockholder in Puritan, a close corporation, Edward owed his fellow shareholders a duty of the "utmost good faith and loyalty." Id. at 593, quoting Cardullo v. Landau, 329 Mass. 5, 8 (1952). Where, as in this case, "a fiduciary relationship exists between plaintiff and defendant ... mere failure to reveal information may be sufficient to constitute fraudulent conduct for the purposes of [G.L.c. 260, ] § 12." Maggio v. Gerard Freezer & Ice Co., 824 F.2d 123, 130 (1st Cir.1987), citing Jenkins v. Jenkins, 15 Mass. App. Ct. 934, 935 (1983), and Burns v. Massachusetts Inst. of Technology, 394 F.2d 416, 419 (1st Cir.1968). See Jamesbury Corp. v. Worcester Valve Co., 443 F.2d 205, 209 (1st Cir.1971) ("silence can be fraudulent concealment by a person, such as a fiduciary, who has a duty to disclose"); Samia v. Central Oil Co. of Worcester, 339 Mass. 101, 113 (1959) ("mere failure to reveal may be fraudulent where there is a duty to reveal"), quoting Stetson v. French, 321 Mass. 195, 199 (1947). Cf. Norwood Trust Co. v. Twenty-Four Fed. St. Corp., 295 Mass. 234, 237 (1936) (where no fiduciary duty exists, mere failure of a wrongdoer to disclose wrongdoing is not fraudulent concealment of action within meaning of G.L.c. 260, § 12), and cases cited.
The jury's verdict in favor of Puritan on the excess rent claim indicates that they found, at minimum, that Edward "fail[ed] to disclose or make available" information concerning the rent payments. See note 6, supra. Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the plaintiffs, we conclude that the jury could have found that the other shareholders had neither knowledge of the rent payments nor the means of acquiring such knowledge. In any event, for the statute of limitations to be tolled pursuant to G.L.c. 260, § 12, it is sufficient that Edward, in breach of his "strict good faith" fiduciary duty as a shareholder in a close corporation, *177 Donahue, supra at 593, did not disclose the amount of the rent payments to the other shareholders.[9]
3. Corporate opportunity. Edward argues that his nonrenewal of Puritan's lease did not constitute a misappropriation of a corporate opportunity because, among other things, the "opportunity" was a preexisting property interest of Edward. We agree, and reverse the judgment for Puritan on its misappropriation of a corporate opportunity claim.[10]
The determination whether a corporate officer has breached his fiduciary duty by acquiring or diverting a corporate business opportunity for his personal profit "rests fundamentally on the unfairness in the particular circumstances." Durfee v. Durfee & Canning, Inc., 323 Mass. 187, 199 (1948). One factor the court will look to is whether "the opportunity came in the first place only because of [the defendants'] connection with the corporation." Weismann v. Snyder, 338 Mass. 502, 506 (1959). Here, where Edward's property interest in the leased premises predated Puritan's incorporation, his "opportunity" to renew the lease for his own benefit was completely independent of his role as a director of the corporation. The cases cited by Puritan are *178 therefore inapposite. In none of these cases did the defendant's interest in the land predate his tenure with the corporation; rather, the "opportunity [was] brought to him as an incident of management." Meinhard v. Salmon, 249 N.Y. 458, 468 (1928). See, e.g., Lurie v. Pinanski, 215 Mass. 229 (1913); Leach v. Leach, 18 Pick. 68 (1836); Ferry v. McNeil, 214 Cal. App.2d 411 (1963); Ladas v. Psiharis, 241 Mich. 101 (1927).
Further, Edward is absolved of liability based on the principle that "[w]hen a corporation is unable to avail itself of an opportunity, its employee, officer or director is free to exploit it," Energy Resources Corp., Inc. v. Porter, 14 Mass. App. Ct. 296, 300 (1982), citing Miller v. Miller, 301 Minn. 207, 225 (1974). Common forms of this defense include assertions that the corporation was financially unable to exploit the opportunity, see, e.g., Durfee, supra at 202-203; that the party offering the opportunity refused to deal with the corporation, see, e.g., Energy Resources, supra at 300; and that "the corporation sought without success to obtain [the opportunity]." Northwestern Terra Cotta Corp. v. Wilson, 74 Ill. App.2d 38, 47 (1966). This case is analogous to the latter two examples. Here, ironically, the essence of Puritan's misappropriation claim  that Edward refused to renew the lease (or, put differently, that Puritan sought without success to renew the lease)  serves as Edward's defense to that very claim. In the circumstances of this case, where Edward was both the offeror and offeree, and where the opportunity came to him independently of any connection with Puritan, Edward was not obligated to prefer Puritan's interest to his own. Cf. Bauman v. Hayes, 379 So.2d 1251, 1254 (Ala. 1980) (refusal of directors in land development corporation to convey land to corporation does not constitute misappropriation of corporate opportunity where defendant-directors merely retained land which was always theirs and never contracted to convey unconditionally to corporation).
4. Liability under G.L.c. 93A. In a posttrial memorandum of decision, the judge ruled that the defendants had wilfully and knowingly committed unfair and deceptive acts *179 in violation of G.L.c. 93A in locking out Puritan employees without a court order. The judge based this conclusion on his finding that the defendants had (1) leased the premises to Puritan; (2) begun a legal action for possession; and (3) at the time of the lockout, neither returned nor cashed the rent check tendered by Puritan. As a result, Puritan was awarded twice the damages found by the jury against each of the defendants, as well as attorneys' fees and costs.
The defendants argue that they are not liable to Puritan under G.L.c. 93A, because, among other reasons, the parties were acting as fiduciary participants in a closely held corporation rather than as separate entities in a public market setting. We agree. Accordingly, we reverse the judgment for Puritan on its G.L.c. 93A claim as well as the costs and attorneys' fees also awarded pursuant to G.L.c. 93.[11]
"[T]he unfair or deceptive acts or practices prohibited [under G.L.c. 93A] are those that may arise in dealings between discrete, independent business entities, and not those that may occur within a single company." Manning v. Zuckerman, 388 Mass. 8, 12 (1983). See Riseman v. Orion Research, Inc., 394 Mass. 311, 313-314 (1985) (c. 93A not intended to redress wrongs asserted by stockholder against a corporation in the internal governance of the corporation); Newton v. Moffie, 13 Mass. App. Ct. 462, 467 (1982) (G.L.c. 93A intended to apply only to dealings between legally separate "persons" engaged in arm's-length transactions). "The transactions at issue here were principally private in nature and thus do not fall within the purview of G.L.c. 93A." Zimmerman v. Bogoff, 402 Mass. 650, 662, (1988). Further, "the aggrieved party has available an alternative avenue of relief in the form of a suit for breach of fiduciary *180 duty." Id. at 663, citing Riseman v. Orion Research, Inc., supra.
"[I]f [the defendants] committed any unfair or deceptive acts, they necessarily occurred in the context of the parties' [shareholder] relationship ... or arose out of that relationship ... and not in an arm's-length commercial transaction between distinct business entities," Manning, supra at 11; therefore, G.L.c. 93A, § 11, does not apply. Here, the commercial transaction was anything but arm's-length. The gravamen of Puritan's complaint is self-dealing: Edward as company treasurer paid excessive rent to himself as landlord. Although Puritan attempts to cast its G.L.c. 93A complaint solely as one against a commercial landlord, "for charging and accepting rent greatly in excess of that permitted both under its Lease, and at fair rental value rates," it is clear that, but for the fact that Edward was also the payor, the payee could not have charged and accepted excess rent, and none of the ensuing conflict, including the lockout, would have occurred.
5. The defendants' counterclaims. At the close of the evidence, Puritan moved for a directed verdict on the defendants' counterclaim for expenses caused by Puritan's holdover, on the ground that no evidence of damage from Puritan's continued occupancy had been presented. After the jury returned a $5,000 verdict in favor of the defendants on their counterclaim, the judge entered judgment notwithstanding the verdict on the counterclaim. The defendants argue that this was improper. We conclude that the evidence was sufficient to support only that portion of the jury's award that represented the defendants' claim for unpaid rent.
The jury had evidence that Puritan held over fourteen days into January, and that Puritan had tendered a rental check for $7,500 for that month. Using Puritan's proffered $7,500 January rental check as a yardstick, the jury could calculate Puritan's pro rata rent for the fourteen days.
The other evidence regarding expenses incurred by the defendants as a result of the eviction was insufficient to support the remaining portion of the jury's award. Patricia testified *181 that she and Edward paid to have damage to the premises repaired and professional movers move out Puritan's equipment. She never testified to her familiarity with the type of repairs or the reasonableness of the costs. Nor did she testify that the professional movers had been paid by the defendants. "When ... damages are sought they must be proved and not left, as here, to speculation." Snelling & Snelling of Mass., Inc. v. Wall, 345 Mass. 634, 636 (1963). Dalton v. Demos Bros. Gen. Contractors, Inc., 334 Mass. 377, 378 (1956) ("damages must be reasonably ascertainable from the evidence"), and cases cited.[12] Accordingly, we reinstate only that portion of the jury's verdict on the defendants' counterclaim which was "reasonably ascertainable from the evidence." Id.
In sum, we (1) reverse the judgment against Patricia; (2) affirm the judgment against Edward on the claim of excessive rent; (3) reverse the judgment on the misappropriation of a corporate opportunity and the c. 93A claims; (4) reinstate that portion of the jury's verdict that represents the defendants' counterclaim for unpaid rent; and (5) affirm the judgment notwithstanding the verdict as to the remaining portion of the defendants' counterclaim. We remand to the Superior Court for entry of a judgment consistent with this opinion.
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  Carol Patricia Cashman.
[2]  The sum of $132,000 was entered against Edward alone on the misappropriation of a corporate opportunity claim; $373,100 was entered against both Edward and Patricia on the excessive rent claim.
[3]  In March of 1986, two of the Puritan principals complained to Patricia that Edward had charged excessive rents. Patricia proposed that Puritan pay "whatever they felt was fair until such time as [Edward's] health returned." Puritan assented. The $7,500 tendered by Puritan thus represents their assessment of fair rental value at the time.
[4]  The lease, which was admitted in evidence, indicates that Patricia was not a signatory to the lease. There was no evidence to indicate that Patricia either charged or collected the rent throughout the life of the lease; the evidence indicated that only Edward performed these functions. There was no evidence that Patricia owed a fiduciary duty to the corporation.
[5]  Puritan claims that we cannot consider the fact that Patricia did not sign the lease, because the defendants did not state that fact as a basis for their motion for directed verdict. That argument is without merit. The issue is the sufficiency of the evidence against Patricia, and the fact she did not sign the lease is a factor to be considered in determining whether Puritan met its burden of establishing that Patricia should be held liable as a principal on the excessive rent claim.
[6]  The judge instructed the jury: "If you find that [Edward] failed and breached his fiduciary duty to the corporation by failing to disclose or make available the records of the corporation to the other shareholders, or to provide the other shareholders with relevant information relating to rent payments made by [Edward] on behalf of Puritan, then you cannot find that the other shareholders acquiesced in those corporate decisions made by [Edward], unless you find that the other shareholders had full knowledge of all the essential facts relating to such decisions."
[7]  General Laws c. 260, § 2 (1990 ed.), establishes a six-year statute of limitations for "[a]ctions of contract, other than those to recover for personal injuries, founded upon contracts or liabilities, express or implied...."
[8]  General Laws c. 260, § 12 (1990 ed.), reads: "If a person liable to a personal action fraudulently conceals the cause of such action from the knowledge of the person entitled to bring it, the period prior to the discovery of his cause of action by the person so entitled shall be excluded in determining the time limited for the commencement of the action."
[9]  In Frank Cooke, Inc. v. Hurwitz, 10 Mass. App. Ct. 99, 106 (1980), the Appeals Court wrote that "the statute of limitations may be tolled under G.L.c. 260, § 12, if the wrongdoer, either through actual fraud or in breach of a fiduciary duty of full disclosure, keeps from the person injured knowledge of the facts giving rise to a cause of action and the means of acquiring knowledge of such facts" (emphasis added). This is a correct statement of the law only insofar as it applies to cases of actual fraud. Three of the four cases cited by the Appeals Court in support of the language quoted above, Nudd v. Hamblin, 8 Allen 130, 133-134 (1864); Brackett v. Perry, 201 Mass. 502, 505 (1909); and Tracerlab, Inc. v. Industrial Nucleonics Corp., 313 F.2d 97, 101-102 (1st Cir.1963), involve actual fraud, as opposed to a violation of a fiduciary duty to disclose. In the fourth case, Stetson v. French, 321 Mass. 195, 199 (1947), the court tolled the statute of limitations without inquiring into whether the defendant had prevented the plaintiffs from discovering the facts, because, like this case, it involved a defendant who "occupied toward [the plaintiffs] a position of trust and confidence ... [and therefore] would ... be subject at all times to the duty of full disclosure." Id. at 199.
[10]  We therefore need not reach Edward's related contention that Puritan failed to introduce any evidence to support the jury award on this claim.
[11]  In view of our conclusion, we need not address the defendants' additional arguments that (1) their actions did not constitute an unfair or deceptive act or practice; (2) the judge's assessment of G.L.c. 93A damages is insupportable because Puritan failed to introduce any evidence of damages resulting from the eviction; and (3) the judge's award of G.L.c. 93A attorney's fees and costs was unsubstantiated and constituted an abuse of discretion.
[12]  Patricia attempted to testify to the various expenses for the work the defendants undertook in connection with Puritan's eviction. Puritan objected to this testimony and the judge sustained the objection. The defendants do not argue on appeal that the objection was erroneously sustained; therefore, we need not reach this issue. Rather, the defendants argue only that the evidence was sufficient to support the entire $5,000 verdict on their counterclaim.

=== CASE 9739093 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:40.866614+00 ===

OPINION
KALITOWSKI, Judge.
Appellant Maxine L. McEwen, as trustee for the heirs of Ruth Lysford, challenges the trial court’s decision that her claims against respondent State of Minnesota in this wrongful death action are barred by statutory and discretionary immunity pursuant to Minn.Stat. §§ 219.402 and 3.736, subd. 3(b) (Supp.1985).
FACTS
On the afternoon of July 5, 1986, an automobile driven by Hjalmer Lysford with *315Ruth Lysford as a passenger collided with a train at a grade crossing on Trunk Highway 32 in Dugdale. Mr. and Mrs. Lysford died as a result of injuries caused by the collision.
The Dugdale crossing was a single track, mainline crossing, protected by active flashing light signals and stop signs that rotated to face traffic when the signals were activated by an approaching train. Advance warning signs were also in place 866 feet south of the crossing.
In addition to the flashing light signals, the Dugdale crossing usually exhibited a pavement marking. However, ten days before the collision, that marking was obliterated during a spot pavement overlay project. The marking was not repainted until July 9, 1986, four days after the accident.
In support of its motion for summary judgment on a claim challenging the adequacy of the warning devices, the state submitted an affidavit by an official at the Minnesota Department of Transportation (DOT). According to the affiant, the flashing light signals were installed at the Dug-dale crossing in 1957 pursuant to order of the Railroad and Warehouse Commission. Since then, the crossing has not been identified as warranting evaluation for upgrading, no complaints have been filed regarding the crossing and no highway construction projects have involved the crossing. Further, the affiant asserted that in the ten years prior to this accident, there has been only one other automobile-train collision at the crossing, which resulted from the driver’s admitted inattention to the flashing signals.
The state also submitted evidence that the crossing has not merited review under the state’s hazard index rating (HIR) priority system. That system assigns each railroad crossing a priority number based on a formula which considers the amount of vehicular and train traffic, the number of accidents which have occurred at the crossing, and the type of warning devices already in place at the crossing. Due to the limited funds available for improving warning devices at railroad crossings, only those crossings that receive a high number under the HIR priority system are evaluated for upgrading. At no time has the Dugdale crossing’s priority number been high enough to merit review under this system.
In 1984, the DOT established a corridor review system to examine the need for railroad crossing improvements. A study of corridor 6, which includes the Dugdale crossing, determined that the flashing lights were adequate for the crossing and that gates and/or cantilevers were not necessary. In making this determination, the DOT weighed the need for gates and/or cantilevers at the crossing against the need to upgrade other crossings in this and other corridors. A 1987 review reaffirmed that gates and cantilevers were not necessary at the Dugdale crossing.
In support of its motion for summary judgment on the claim for failure to provide pavement markings in advance of the crossing, the state submitted an affidavit by a district traffic engineer for the DOT. According to the affiant, the district generally delays repainting of pavement markings obliterated during spot overlay projects “for at least a week and preferably two weeks” in order to allow the new pavement to cure. If pavement is not cured before repainting, the paint will soak into the pavement and obliterate the message, necessitating a second repainting. The af-fiant further states that immediate repainting of pavement markings “would double the amount of time involved in painting the messages and delay other priority painting needs along with a negative impact on already limited resources.”
While the spot overlay project at the Dugdále crossing was completed on June 25, 1986, the markings were not repainted until July 9, because the painting crew was on vacation and holiday leave over the July 4 weekend. The affiant stated that the policy of scheduling vacation over the July 4 weekend allows the painting crew to work continually through the rest of the summer. He further explained that undertaking painting projects over the holiday weekend, when traffic along the highway is at its highest, would result in a greater number of accidents, increased danger to *316the painting crew, and increased problems in traffic flow, and would require the hiring of extra personnel or the paying of overtime wages.
ISSUES
1. Did the district court err in concluding the claim of inadequate warning device is barred either by statute or by discretionary immunity?
2. Did the district court err in concluding the state’s decision to delay repainting the pavement marking is subject to discretionary immunity?
ANALYSIS
Summary judgment is properly granted
if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that either party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law.
Minn.R.Civ.P. 56.03. A governmental entity may be entitled to summary judgment if its actions are entitled to immunity. See Ostendorf v. Kenyon, 347 N.W.2d 834, 836 (Minn.App.1984). However, where factual disputes exist as to whether a governmental decision is entitled to immunity, summary judgment may not be appropriate. See Schaeffer v. State, 444 N.W.2d 876, 880 (Minn.App.1989) (denial of summary judgment affirmed when governmental entity failed to produce evidence that its decisions regarding the design, installation, and maintenance of freeway guardrail were immune).
In deciding whether immunity applies, this court must identify the precise governmental conduct or decision being challenged. See Nusbaum v. County of Blue Earth, 422 N.W.2d 713, 722 (Minn.1988). Thus, each governmental decision or act will be examined separately to determine whether immunity applies.
I.
The acts appellant challenges in her warning device claim are: (1) the maintenance of inadequate devices at the Dugdale crossing; and (2) the failure to upgrade and install crossing gates or cantilever lights at the crossing.
The first challenged act is within the plain language of Minn.Stat. § 219.402 (Supp.1985):
Crossing safety devices or improvements installed or maintained under this chapter as approved by the board, whether by order or otherwise, are adequate and appropriate protection for the crossing.
The state established that the Dugdale crossing signals were installed in 1957 pursuant to order of the Railroad and Warehouse Commission, a predecessor to the DOT, and that subsequent reviews of the signals have determined that the signals remain adequate. Thus, under Minn.Stat. § 219.402, the Dugdale signals “are adequate and appropriate protection for the crossing.”
Appellant nevertheless argues that Minn. Stat. § 219.402 does not apply here because the state violated its own standard. In support of this argument, appellant cites a 1984 corridor study which states that gates should be installed at all crossings where train speeds exceed 40 m.p.h. We do not find appellant’s argument persuasive. The study merely sets out “standards” and “guidelines” to be used in selecting railroad crossings to be upgraded. It does not establish a duty to install such devices, and cannot be read to impose liability on the state for failing to immediately upgrade every crossing that falls within the description of crossings to be upgraded.
Appellant also challenges the state’s decision not to upgrade the warning devices. The state argues this is a governmental act protected by discretionary immunity under Minn.Stat. § 3.736, subd. 3(b) (Supp.1985) (state not liable for “[a]ny loss caused by the performance or failure to perform a discretionary duty, whether or not the discretion is abused”).
While almost every governmental act involves some measure of discretion, courts *317have distinguished between “conduct at a planning level (protected) and conduct at an operational level (unprotected).” Nusbaum, 422 N.W.2d at 719. Protection does not extend toL professional or scientific judgment that does not involve a balancing of policy objectives. Id. at 722. To establish immunity, the governmental entity must produce "evidence that the conduct was of a policy-making nature involving social, political, or economical considerations.” Id. In this case, the state established that its decision not to upgrade the Dugdale crossing was in accordance with a priority rating system that balances financial constraints, limited funding, and safety considerations. Since the state’s decision not to upgrade the Dugdale crossing involved a balancing of policy objectives, it is protected by discretionary immunity. See Wornson v. Chrysler Corp., 436 N.W.2d 472, 474-75 (Minn.App.1989) (governmental decisions regarding highway traffic signals based upon prioritization system are discretionary), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. Apr. 26, 1989).
II.
Appellant claims the state was negligent in failing to repaint a pavement marking at the Dugdale crossing prior to the accident. Such pavement markings are required by law. See Minnesota Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices 8B-4 (Dec. 1983) (adopted pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 169.06, subd. 1 (Supp.1985). Appellant essentially challenges two acts: (1) the failure to repaint the marking immediately after the spot overlay project was completed; and (2) the failure to repaint the marking on the tenth day after completion of the project.
With respect to the first alleged omission, the state established that the decision whether or not to repaint the pavement marking immediately was not left to the discretion of the individual crew. Rather, as found by the trial court, the district had a policy of delaying repainting to avoid the need for a second repainting. Thus, the decision was based upon financial considerations and is therefore protected.
Regarding the second alleged omission, appellant argues the state’s decision to delay the repainting until after the July 4 weekend involved either implementation of a policy or the exercise of professional judgment, which are not protected activities. We disagree. The state has met its burden of showing the act was discretionary by presenting evidence that the district’s policy of scheduling vacation for its painting crews over the July 4 weekend was based upon limited resources and safety concerns. Thus we conclude the decision to delay repainting of the pavement markings until after the July 4 weekend involved a balancing of policy objectives and is therefore immune from liability. See Hennes v. Patterson, 443 N.W.2d 198, 203-04 (Minn.App.1989) (immunity protected decision not to immediately remove snow bank along bridge guardrail which was made pursuant to prioritization policy, weighing such factors as limited resources, budget, and safety of workers and driving public), pet. for rev. denied (Minn.Sept. 15, 1989).
DECISION
The trial court properly granted summary judgment to the State of Minnesota. Appellant’s claims concerning the adequacy of railroad crossing warning devices were barred by Minn.Stat. § 219.402 (Supp.1985). The state was immune from liability for appellant’s claims concerning upgrading the crossing and repainting pavement markings under Minn.Stat. § 3.736, subd. 3 (Supp.1985).
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9739067 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:05.041984+00 ===

VANDE WALLE, Justice,
concurring specially.
I concur in the majority opinion. I write separately to express my concern over the issue of Disselhorst’s health problems which was a significant portion of his argument to this court. The findings of the Hearing Panel indicate that “health problems ... were mitigating circumstances in the misconduct.” Rule 1.3(C) of the Procedural Rules of Lawyer Disability and Discipline (NDPRLDD) which were effective September 1, 1988, provides: “Mitigating or aggravating circumstances which affect the nature or degree of discipline to be imposed in a matter shall be fully set forth in the opinion disposing of the matter.” If this court, in its written opinions, is to “fully set forth” the effect of mitigating circumstances on the discipline imposed it would be helpful if the recommendations of the Hearing Panel would also explain the extent to which the health problems were “mitigating circumstances in the misconduct.”
We know that health problems ordinarily do not entirely excuse the conduct of the attorney or shield the attorney from his or her professional responsibilities. Disciplinary Bd. of Supreme Court v. Amundson, 297 N.W.2d 433 (N.D.1980). But mitigating circumstances may be considered in determining the nature or degree of discipline. Rule 1.3(C), NDPRLDD; In re Peterson, 175 N.W.2d 132 (N.D.1970). If we are to abide by the Rule and explain, in our opinions, how the mitigating circumstances affect the nature or degree of discipline vis *339a vis the recommendations of the Disciplinary Panel, then I believe the Panel must also explain in its recommendations to us how those circumstances affected its recommendation. It is perhaps impossible to measure precisely the effect those circumstances have on the recommendation. However, a statement that “health problems were ... mitigating circumstances in the misconduct” does not provide me with an acceptable explanation of the recommendation of the Panel. We should at least be informed whether or not the Panel would have recommended more severe discipline but for the illness, and, if so, to what extent, or whether or not it would have recommended the same discipline notwithstanding the illness and, if so, why.
Were the illness in this instance the major issue to be decided by this court, I would remand for further findings and recommendations by the Panel. But the majority opinion does no more nor no less than the Panel recommended insofar as the nature or degree of discipline to be imposed, i.e., the Panel recommended a public reprimand and the majority opinion imposes a public reprimand, although our reprimand is for negligent, not intentional, conduct, and we do not find conduct involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation. Furthermore, as the majority opinion observes in a footnote, the record is somewhat vague, at least from the standpoint of expert medical testimony, as to the time of the onset of the illness and its actual effect on Disselhorst at the time of the misconduct. I therefore concur in the result reached by the majority opinion.
MESCHKE, J., concurs.

=== CASE 2218645 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:51.873538+00 ===

178 Mich. App. 464 (1989)
444 N.W.2d 194
PEOPLE
v.
LEWIS
Docket No. 105760.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided July 17, 1989.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Louis J. Caruso, Solicitor General, John D. O'Hair, Prosecuting Attorney, Timothy A. Baughman, Chief of the Criminal Division, and Larry L. Roberts, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
State Appellate Defender (by James Krogsrud), for defendant on appeal.
Before: MacKENZIE, P.J., and HOOD and BRENNAN, JJ.
BRENNAN, J.
Following a bench trial, defendant was convicted of one count of delivery of less than fifty grams of cocaine, MCL 333.7401(1) and (2)(a)(iv); MSA 14.15(7401)(1) and (2)(a)(iv), one count of possession of less than fifty grams of cocaine with intent to deliver, MCL 333.7401(1) and (2)(a)(iv); MSA 14.15(7401)(1) and (2)(a)(iv), and one count of possession of a firearm during the commission of a felony (the possession of cocaine), *466 MCL 750.227b; MSA 28.424(2). Defendant was sentenced to concurrent prison terms of eighteen months to twenty years for the delivery and the possession with intent to deliver convictions, and to the mandatory two-year prison term for the felony-firearm conviction. Defendant appeals only the possession and felony-firearm convictions. We reverse.
The facts of this case are as follows:
In the early evening on August 19, 1986, Fred Watkins, a Detroit Police Officer acting as part of an undercover narcotics team, went to a house on Monica Street in the City of Detroit to purchase cocaine. When he arrived at the home, Watkins observed three men, including defendant, seated on the front porch. Watkins approached the men and asked for "Hank." None of the men responded; however, defendant stood up and walked down off of the porch towards the rear of the house. Watkins followed.
When they reached the rear of the house, defendant told Watkins that, in the future, Watkins was to just walk to the rear of the house and someone would help him. Defendant told Watkins to remain in the backyard. Defendant walked toward the front of the house. Watkins then observed defendant inside the house opening the back door. A metal grate covered the door. Defendant opened the grate with a key he had around his neck.
Defendant asked Watkins what he wanted. Watkins responded that he wanted "two twenty," meaning two $20 rocks of cocaine. Watkins gave defendant $40 in marked bills. Defendant reentered the house through the back door. He returned with two heat-sealed plastic packets containing rock cocaine. Watkins took the cocaine and left the house to rejoin the other members of the *467 narcotics team positioned approximately one-half mile away.
After a short briefing, the narcotics team went back to the house and raided it. Watkins observed defendant and two other men standing on the sidewalk outside of the house. Another man was standing inside the doorway of the house. Defendant and the other two men were placed under arrest. Watkins and other officers then entered the house and apprehended the man seen standing in the doorway. Defendant was later taken inside the house and searched. Defendant had a pistol tucked in the waistband of his pants. The key defendant used to open the grate was removed from around his neck.
The officers found two plastic packets containing cocaine and $57 on the dining room table, and the $40 Watkins gave defendant. The $40 was not recovered from defendant.
The delivery conviction arose out of the sale to Officer Watkins. Defendant was convicted of possession with intent to deliver the cocaine seized inside the house during the raid. As noted earlier, the felony-firearm conviction is based upon the possession conviction.
Defendant argues that his conviction for possession of cocaine with intent to deliver must be reversed because the prosecution failed to present sufficient evidence that he possessed the cocaine found inside the house. We agree.
In reviewing the sufficiency of the evidence in an appeal from a bench trial, this Court must determine whether, when viewing the evidence in a light most favorable to the prosecution, a rational trier of fact could find the essential elements of the crime proven beyond a reasonable doubt. People v Petrella, 424 Mich. 221, 268-270; 380 NW2d 11 (1985). The trier of fact may draw *468 reasonable inferences from facts of record; however, it may not indulge in inferences completely unsupported by any evidence, either direct or circumstantial. Id. at 275.
The crime of possession with intent to deliver less than fifty grams of a mixture containing cocaine requires proof of four elements: (1) the substance in question must be shown to be cocaine; (2) the cocaine must be in a mixture of less than fifty grams weight; (3) it must be shown that defendant was not authorized to possess the substance; and (4) it must be shown that defendant knowingly possessed the cocaine with intent to deliver. People v Acosta, 153 Mich. App. 504, 511-512; 396 NW2d 463 (1986), lv den 428 Mich. 865 (1987); CJI 12:2:00. Defendant challenges only the sufficiency of the evidence regarding the fourth element.
Based upon the evidence presented at trial, viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution, we do not believe that a rational trier of fact could have found that the element of possession was proved beyond a reasonable doubt. There is no direct evidence connecting defendant to the cocaine found inside the house. Defendant was in police custody outside of the house when the officers seized the cocaine. Defendant's fingerprints were not on the bags. Also lacking is direct testimony that the cocaine in fact belonged to defendant.
Furthermore, the circumstantial evidence relied on by the prosecution is insufficient to support the conviction. The prosecution points to the following: (1) defendant told Officer Watkins that the next time he came to the house to buy cocaine, he should just walk to the rear of the house and someone would take care of him; (2) defendant *469 possessed and used a key to open the metal grate on the back entrance to the house; and (3) defendant sold two packets of cocaine to Watkins approximately five to ten minutes before the raid. The prosecution argues that, based upon this evidence, a rational trier of fact could find beyond a reasonable doubt that defendant possessed the cocaine found inside the house with intent to deliver it. We disagree. The most that we believe can be said about this evidence is that it shows that defendant had access to the inside of the house from which he and possibly others sold cocaine.
The evidence shows that defendant was not the only person who had access to the inside of the house. A defense witness testified that defendant did not live there. Defendant was arrested outside the house, a different man was arrested inside. Anyone could have been inside the house during the short time that transpired between the sale to Watkins and the raid and placed the cocaine on the dining room table.
We conclude that the evidence was not sufficient for a rational trier of fact to find defendant guilty of possession with intent to deliver the cocaine found inside the house. Therefore, we reverse defendant's conviction of possession with intent to deliver less than fifty grams of cocaine. Because we find that the evidence does not support that conviction, we must also reverse the felony-firearm conviction.
Reversed.

=== CASE 2218652 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:52.016695+00 ===

596 N.E.2d 263 (1992)
Larry MUEX and Clara Muex, Appellant-Plaintiff,
v.
HINDEL BOWLING LANES, INC., Appellee-Defendant.
No. 49A02-9111-CV-511.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Second District.
July 22, 1992.
*264 Andrew W. Swain, Nathaniel Lee, Watkins & Lee, Indianapolis, for appellant-plaintiff.
Karl L. Mulvaney, David O. Tittle, Phil L. Isenbarger, Nana Quay-Smith, Bingham Summers Welsh & Spilman, Indianapolis, for appellee-defendant.
SHIELDS, Judge.
Larry and Clara Muex appeal the trial court's grant of summary judgment in favor of Hindel Bowling Lanes, Inc.
We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
ISSUES
1. Whether the trial court erred in determining a disputed issue of material fact does not exist as to whether the Hindel bartender had actual knowledge any patron was intoxicated when she furnished the patron with alcoholic beverages.
*265 2. Whether the trial court erred in determining a disputed issue of material fact does not exist whether Larry's injury was proximately caused by Hindel's negligence.
FACTS
On Thanksgiving evening, November 24, 1988, Larry and Clara Muex went to Hindel Bowling Lanes at 6833 Massachusetts Avenue in Indianapolis with a large group of family and friends. A Hindel employee assigned lanes three, four, and five to them. Four couples in their mid-twenties to early thirties occupied the two neighboring lanes. Larry noticed three pitchers of beer sitting on the couples' tables, and their loud and obnoxious behavior led him to believe they were intoxicated. Although the level of beer in the pitchers changed throughout the evening, he did not witness any Hindel employee deliver beer to them, nor did he see any member of the young group purchase the beer. The Muexes did not report or complain of the couples' behavior to Hindel.
At some point after the Muex group had bowled their third game, a member of the second group threw a cigarette in the vicinity of lane four. As another member approached the Muex group to apologize, the individual who had thrown his cigarette told his companion not to apologize and threw his beer, splattering those persons standing nearby. A fight ensued during which Larry fell backwards and fractured his hand on the side of a bowling ball rack. Larry could not identify the person who started the fracas, who participated in it, or who pushed him into the rack.
Jeanna Austin was the sole bartender at Hindel that evening. She sold alcoholic beverages to the bowling alley patrons from a window station. In her affidavit, she stated she had no actual knowledge that any person she served that evening was visibly intoxicated, and that she did not see anyone in the bowling alley that evening who appeared intoxicated.
The Muexes filed a complaint for negligence against Hindel. Larry sought damages for lost wages and medical expenses, and Clara sought compensation for loss of consortium. Hindel filed a motion for summary judgment which the trial court granted.
The Muexes appeal.
DISCUSSION
On review of the trial court's grant of summary judgment, this court must use the same standard as the trial court and consider the pleadings, depositions, affidavits, and admissions in a light most favorable to the non-moving party. Gordon v. Chrysler Motor Corp. (1992), Ind. App., 585 N.E.2d 1362, 1363. Summary judgment is appropriate only if no genuine issue of material fact exists, and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Id.; Ind.Trial Rule 56(C). If the moving party establishes the lack of any genuine issue of material fact, the burden shifts to the non-movant to show otherwise. Stephenson v. Ledbetter (1991), Ind. App., 575 N.E.2d 1035, 1036. A disputed fact is material if the trial court would have to resolve the disputed fact in order to enter judgment. Id.
Although generally inappropriate in negligence actions, the defendant may obtain summary judgment by showing "the undisputed material facts negate at least one element of the plaintiff's claim." Rubin v. Johnson (1990), Ind. App., 550 N.E.2d 324, 328. When the parties do not disagree about the material facts to the claim, we must determine whether the trial court properly applied the law to those undisputed facts. Board of Dental Examiners v. Judd (1990), Ind. App., 554 N.E.2d 829, 830. We will affirm the summary judgment if it is sustainable on any legal theory consistent with the record. Stephenson, 575 N.E.2d at 1036.
I.
The Muexes argue a genuine issue of material fact exists because the bartender's affidavit, in which she claimed no knowledge of inebriated patrons on the night in question, directly conflicts with Larry's deposition testimony that he witnessed the couples' rambunctious behavior and noticed *266 a continual change in the level of beer in their pitchers throughout the evening.[1]
It is unlawful for an individual to furnish an alcoholic beverage to another who is intoxicated if the provider knows of that intoxication. See IC 7.X-X-XX-XX(a) (1988). However, the provider of alcoholic beverages is not liable in a civil action for damages caused by the impairment or inebriation of the person who received that beverage unless: (1) the provider of the alcoholic beverage had actual knowledge that the individual to whom he or she served the beverage was visibly intoxicated at the time of service; and (2) that intoxication was a proximate cause of the alleged death, injury, or damage. IC 7.X-X-XX-XX.5(b)(1), (2) (1988). The provider's knowledge is judged by a subjective standard, and the trier of fact may make reasonable inferences based on the facts and surrounding circumstances, Gariup Constr. Co., Inc. v. Foster (1988), Ind. App., 519 N.E.2d 1224, 1229-30, such as the recipient's behavior at the time, the amount and type of alcoholic beverage served, and the recipient's condition shortly after leaving the provider's establishment. Ashlock v. Norris (1985), Ind. App., 475 N.E.2d 1167, 1170.
In this case, the Muexes rely upon Larry's deposition testimony to support their claim that "sufficient evidence of probative value existed from which a jury would infer that the bowling lane's bartender knew of the patrons' drunkenness." Appellant's Brief at 12. According to the Muexes, construing the facts in their favor, as the non-moving party, the trier of fact could reasonably infer that members of the second group obtained their beer from Austin at the window station and that their behavior manifested their intoxication.
It is undisputed that all bowling alley patrons had to obtain beverages at the window station, that no complaints against the second group were brought to the attention of any Hindel employee, and that the only evidence concerning the amount served and consumed by any of the second group's members is Larry's statement that "[he] seen [sic] the beer empty, and then there was some more beer added[,]" Record at 92, and that during the evening, the pitchers were empty "several times." Record at 111. Further, there is no evidence that all members of the second group, or, in the alternative the member or members who acquired the beer at the window, were intoxicated. This undisputed evidence and lack of evidence is insufficient, as a matter of law, reasonably to support the inference Hindel knew that members of the second group were intoxicated.
The trial court properly granted summary judgment on the Muexes' statutory claim.
II.
The Muexes argue a genuine issue of fact exists as to whether Hindel breached its duty of care by failing to employ adequate security measures to protect its patrons considering the manner in which it dispensed beer. Hindel responds there is no evidence to show Hindel was on notice of the likelihood of harm and thus no evidence it breached its duty of care by not providing security. Hindel further claims there is no evidence Larry's injuries were proximately caused by its negligence.
Whether a duty exists is a question of law; breach of that duty is reserved for the trier of fact. Rubin v. Johnson (1990), Ind. App., 550 N.E.2d 324, 329-30. Proprietors owe a duty to their business invitees to use reasonable care to protect them from injury caused by other patrons and guests on their premises, including providing adequate staff to police and control disorderly conduct. Ember v. B.F.D., Inc. (1986), Ind. App., 490 N.E.2d 764, 769.
*267 This duty is not absolute; the proprietor is not the insurer of the patrons' safety, nor is the proprietor bound to anticipate and take steps to prevent acts of another unless the facts of a particular case make it reasonably foreseeable that those acts may occur. Welch v. Railroad Crossing, Inc. (1986), Ind. App., 488 N.E.2d 383, 388. However, if a proprietor has, or should have, reason to know that a patron may become intoxicated and pose a general threat to the safety of other patrons, the proprietor's failure to take reasonable precautions to protect other patrons from harm may constitute a breach of duty. Bearman v. Univ. of Notre Dame (1983), Ind. App., 453 N.E.2d 1196 (Whether university, which was aware of consumption of alcoholic beverages during "tailgate" parties held in stadium parking areas before and during football games, breached its duty to person attending game who broke her leg when intoxicated football spectator pushed her to the ground in stadium parking lot, is a question of fact for the jury.). As we stated in Bearman:
Generally, the operator of a place of public entertainment owes a duty to keep the premises safe for its invitees. This duty includes a duty ... to exercise ordinary and reasonable care to protect a patron from injury caused by third persons... . Before liability may be imposed on the invitor (sic), it must have actual or constructive knowledge of the danger.
The Restatement of Torts (Second) § 344 (1965) sets forth the applicable rule:
"A possessor of land who holds it open to the public for entry for his business purposes is subject to liability to members of the public while they are upon the land for such a purpose, for physical harm caused by the accidental, negligent, or intentionally harmful acts of third persons or animals, and by the failure of the possessor to exercise reasonable care to
"(a) discover that such acts are being done or are likely to be done, or
"(b) give a warning adequate to enable the visitors to avoid the harm, or otherwise to protect them against it.
.....
f. Duty to police premises. Since the possessor is not an insurer of the visitor's safety, he is ordinarily under no duty to exercise any care until he knows or has reason to know that the acts of the third person are occurring, or are about to occur . .. If the place or character of his business ... is such that he should reasonably anticipate careless or criminal conduct on the part of third persons, either generally or at some particularly time, he may be under a duty to take precautions against it, and to provide a reasonably sufficient number of servants to afford a reasonable protection."
Id. at 1198.
In Bearman, we determined that a university "is aware that alcoholic beverages are consumed on the premises before and during football games." Id. Here, too, Hindel must be aware that alcoholic beverages are consumed in its bowling alley because it sells such beverages. In Bearman we stated that "even though there was no showing that the University had reason to know of the particular danger posed by the drunk who injured Mrs. Bearman, it had reason to know that some people will become intoxicated and pose a general threat to the safety of other patrons." Id. Hindel, too, as the operator of a bowling alley where alcohol beverages are dispensed in a window operation, without means of determining the ultimate consumer or the amount any particular consumer ingests, also has reason to know that some patrons will become intoxicated and pose a general threat to other patrons. See Picadilly, Inc. v. Colvin (1988), Ind., 519 N.E.2d 1217, 1220-22 (purveyors of alcoholic beverages have duty to exercise ordinary and reasonable care for safety of others whose injuries should reasonably be foreseen or anticipated; circumstances under which alcoholic beverages dispensed support reasonable inference purveyor aware that its customers become intoxicated *268 and subject others to danger and probable injury.). Thus, Hindel has the duty to take reasonable precautions to protect those who frequent its establishment from injury caused by the acts of intoxicated third persons.
Whether Hindel took adequate measures is a question for the jury as is the determination whether, assuming Hindel did not take adequate measures, that failure proximately caused Larry's injury. Hindel's arguments notwithstanding, a question of disputed fact exists whether there is a reasonable connection between Hindel's act or omission and the injury Larry suffered. The trier of fact must determine whether there is a sufficiently close connection between Hindel's conduct and the harm which it originally threatened and the injury that Larry suffered to justify imposing liability, i.e., whether Larry's injury is within the scope of the foreseeable risks of Hindel's negligent conduct.
Finally, Hindel argues the grant of judgment on Clara's claim is appropriate because she stated in her answer to Hindel's interrogatory number 3 that she was not claiming she suffered any injury as a result of the incident described in the complaint. We agree negligence without proximately caused injury is not actionable. However, here, Clara does not seek damages for injury to her person but rather damages for loss of Larry's "societalship, companionship, and economic deprivation." Record at 3. Thus, Clara's cause of action is a derivative action for loss of consortium. This derivative claim is not barred as a matter of law by Clara's answer to interrogatory number 3; the word "injury" as used in interrogatory number 3, in the context of the particular interrogatory and other interrogatories, reasonably could be understood to refer to a physical injury to one's own person as opposed to injury in the sense of any damage. For example, interrogatory number 3 asked Clara to "state in detail the nature of any injury you have suffered as a result of the incident," Record at 48, while interrogatory number 4 asked Clara to provide specifics concerning medical treatment she received or was receiving as a result of the alleged injuries, interrogatory number 5 asked Clara whether she had suffered any permanent impairment of any of her bodily functions as a result of her alleged injuries, and interrogatory number 9 asked Clara whether she claimed any wage loss, including diminution in earning capacity or future earnings, on a permanent or temporary basis, as a result of injuries received in the incident in question.
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed as to the Muexes' statutory action; the judgment is reversed as to the Muexes claim for common law negligence and that cause is remanded to the trial court for further proceedings.
SULLIVAN and GARRARD, JJ., concurs.
NOTES
[1]  Hindel presents arguments based upon its assertion the trial court granted its motion to strike the Muex's response to Hindel's summary judgment motion in its entirety. In fact, the trial court granted the motion only as to Clara Muex's affidavit. See Record at 138.
Hindel also argues the Muexes failed to designate the existence of a genuine issue of material fact relevant to their claim that Hindel maintained inadequate security as required by Ind.Trial Rule 56(H). In fact, a material issue was so designated. See Record at 129.

=== CASE 9739068 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:20.845601+00 ===

OPINION
EDWARD D. MULALLY, Judge.
Respondent’s driver’s license was revoked for a violation of the implied consent *592law. He petitioned for judicial review in Hennepin County. The trial court rescinded the revocation on the grounds that the action was properly venued in Anoka County and that the notice of revocation was in error. We reverse.
FACTS
On November 24, 1988, at approximately 2:04 a.m., State Trooper Mark Peterson was dispatched to a personal injury accident on “eastbound 694 at East River Road,” in the City of Fridley, County of Anoka. He arrived at 2:12 a.m. and found two vehicles which had been involved in the accident. Respondent was one of the drivers. The trooper observed signs of intoxication and arrested respondent for DWI. He was then taken to the Brooklyn Center Police Department, where Peterson read him the implied consent advisory. Respondent agreed to take an Intoxilyzer breath test. The test gave a reported alcohol concentration of .11.
The trooper gave respondent a notice of revocation which indicated “Henn” in the blank space next to “Court.” Respondent petitioned for judicial review in Hennepin County. When respondent cross-examined the trooper at the implied consent hearing, it became apparent that the accident occurred on the Anoka County side of the county line, although the trooper was not certain of it at the time of the arrest.
Respondent argued that he was given improper notification because the notice of revocation stated the proper court was Hennepin, and that was not proper jurisdiction. He contended that the revocation should be rescinded as a result. The Commissioner contended that the petition for judicial review did not raise the issue, and that in any event the proper remedy would not be rescission, but a new trial.
The trial court concluded that no stop occurred, the trooper had probable cause to believe respondent had been driving while under the influence, the arrest was lawful, respondent was properly advised of his rights, the test results indicated an alcohol concentration of .10 or more, the testing method was valid and reliable, the test results were accurately evaluated, and the trooper properly transported respondent to Hennepin County for testing. It also concluded that the action was properly venued in Anoka County, not Hennepin County, and the notice of revocation was in error. It held that respondent’s only remedy was rescission of the revocation. The Commissioner of Public Safety appeals.
ISSUE
Did the trial court properly rescind the revocation for improper venue?
ANALYSIS
The trial court rescinded the revocation because it concluded the action was properly venued in Anoka County, the notice of revocation was in error, and respondent’s only remedy was rescission of the revocation.
Venue is governed by statute. Claseman v. Feeney, 211 Minn. 266, 268, 300 N.W. 818, 819 (1941). The implied consent law provides that the petition for judicial review shall be filed in the county where the alleged offense occurred, Minn.Stat. § 169.123, subd. 5c (1988), and the hearing shall be in any county in the judicial district where the alleged offense occurred. Minn. Stat. § 169.123, subd. 6 (1988).
Venue in civil actions is not jurisdictional. Claseman, 211 Minn, at 268, 300 N.W. at 819. The implied consent law, Minn.Stat. § 169.123, which gives the Commissioner of Public Safety statewide authority to revoke driver’s licenses for violation of the implied consent law, contains no language which makes venue jurisdictional.
The remedy for improper venue is a change of venue. Minn.Stat. § 542.10 (1988). The objection may be waived. Id.; Albrecht v. Sell, 260 Minn. 566, 568, 110 N.W.2d 895, 896 (1961). Waiver may occur if a party seeks affirmative relief or acquiesces in the improper venue. Minn.Stat. § 542.10; Albrecht, 260 Minn, at 570, 110 N.W.2d at 899; In re Guardianship of Kowalke, 232 Minn. 292, 306-07, 46 N.W.2d 275, 284 (1950).
*593Even if respondent was entitled to rely upon the trooper’s incorrect designation of the county in filing his petition, respondent’s remedy was a change of venue. If the hearing in Anoka County would have occurred more than 60 days after the filing of the petition, the trial court could have stayed the balance of the revocation. Minn.Stat. § 169.123, subd. 5c. The trial court, which determined the issues on the merits in favor of the Commissioner, improperly rescinded the revocation.
DECISION
The order of the trial court rescinding the revocation is reversed.
Reversed.

=== CASE 9739069 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:20.850043+00 ===

RANDALL, Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent. It is undisputed that the accident, the facts, and the trooper’s observations happened in Anoka County. The trooper gave respondent a notice of revocation which indicated that the court of jurisdiction was Hennepin County. Respondent, pursuant to the requirement that a driver wishing to contest a revocation must file a notice of judicial review, filed it in Hennepin County. No onus can be placed on a driver, as appellant’s brief suggests, to do independent investigation and attempt to verify the proper county before filing the required judicial notice of review.
Although implied consent is civil, not criminal, the burden still remains on the state to show all facts necessary for a proper revocation by a preponderance of the evidence. The Commissioner attempts to turn that burden on its head and argues that Minn.Stat. § 169.123, subd. 5c (1988) imposed on the driver the duty to file his petition for judicial review in the appropriate county, and since the driver, respondent here, filed his notice of review in Hennepin County where the state trooper had noted the matter for hearing, respondent is now somehow “precluded” from claiming that the matter was being heard in the wrong county. I simply reject the Commissioner’s argument. There is absolutely no showing in the record that respondent affirmatively shared in the state trooper’s mistake as to where the incident occurred.
The majority concedes that implied consent petitions for judicial review shall be filed in the county where the alleged offense occurred, and the hearing shall be in any county in the judicial district where the alleged offense occurred. See Minn.Stat. § 169.123, subd. 5(c) and subd. 6. But, the majority then goes on to state:
The implied consent law, Minn.Stat. § 169.123, which gives the Commissioner of Public Safety statewide authority to revoke driver’s licenses for violation of the implied consent law, contains no language which makes venue jurisdictional.
I do not agree with the majority’s reasoning. It is true that Minn.Stat. § 169.123 does not contain the specific language which the majority states is not there, but, it is also true that the controlling statute does not give the Commissioner the power to set the matter for a hearing in any county in the State of Minnesota. The majority’s reasoning is close to an implied grant of power for the Commissioner to so do.
From a common sense standpoint, respondent is not the party that chose Henne-pin County for the hearing even though that is where he filed his petition for review. The initiating actor in an implied consent hearing is the law enforcement officer who hands the driver a notice of revocation with the county wherein it is to be heard marked thereon. • At trial the trooper conceded that the incident occurred in Ano-ka County, but that his notice of revocation to respondent said Hennepin.
The law is clear that a petition for judicial review must be filed in the county where the alleged offense occurred, and the hearing must be in any county in the judicial district where the alleged offense occurred. I cannot find any authority which permits the Commissioner to conduct a hearing in an improper county. The situs of the accident was Anoka County, and Anoka (10th) is not in the same judicial district as Hennepin County (4th). I find no waiver in the record of respondent’s *594right to have his hearing in the proper county.
The trial court stated at the hearing that, although he agreed the trooper could arrest in Anoka and take the driver to Henne-pin County for testing, that did not answer the question “of whether he could then note the matter for court in Hennepin County.” The trial court then went on to say:
And I’m unaware, frankly, of any case law directly to that point, at least in this area of the law. And I don’t think that jurisdiction is technical, I think it’s crucial.
After taking the matter under advisement, the trial court rescinded the revocation. I cannot find that the trial court was clearly erroneous in its decision, nor can I find any authority for the majority’s proposition that the burden of proof shifted to respondent driver to ascertain, on his own, what the proper county and judicial district were, and to make a motion for a change of venue to that county and judicial district.
I would affirm the trial court’s rescission of revocation.

=== CASE 2218663 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:52.225182+00 ===

178 Mich. App. 612 (1989)
444 N.W.2d 146
LANGELAND
v.
BRONSON METHODIST HOSPITAL
Docket No. 105964.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided April 11, 1989.
Walsh, Langeland, Walsh & Bradshaw (by Richard C. Walsh and Lucianne Conklin), for plaintiff.
Miller, Johnson, Snell & Cummiskey (by Craig H. Luben), for defendant.
Before: MAHER, P.J., and HOLBROOK, JR., and R.E. NOBLE,[*] JJ.
PER CURIAM.
Plaintiff appeals as of right from a circuit court order granting summary disposition in favor of defendant on plaintiff's complaint for breach of an express or implied employment contract pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(10). We reverse.
Plaintiff was hired to work in defendant's business office in 1967. In 1971 or 1972, he was promoted to the position of business office director. In 1978, the Michigan Hospital Association conducted a review of defendant's business office and found that certain of defendant's accounts receivable were at an excessively high level.
In January, 1979, Bill Johnson, plaintiff's new supervisor, told plaintiff that his performance was not up to hospital standards and must be improved. According to Johnson, plaintiff's performance and the accounts receivable problem continued to worsen thereafter. As a result, in June, 1979, plaintiff was demoted from director of the business office to a new position of "special projects analyst." Robert Graber replaced plaintiff as director of the business office. Graber gave plaintiff two projects on which to work. Plaintiff completed the first project within a reasonable time. However, by January 30, 1980, plaintiff still had not completed the second project. Consequently, Graber gave plaintiff the option of being fired or resigning on that day.
*615 Plaintiff filed a complaint on January 29, 1986, alleging that his employment was terminated in violation of an express or implied agreement set forth in defendant's written personnel policies and employee handbook. Specifically, plaintiff alleged that defendant breached the terms of an employment contract allowing termination only for cause and requiring progressive disciplinary action before termination except in cases of severe misconduct. The trial court granted defendant's motion for summary disposition, finding that plaintiff's employment was terminable at will.
On appeal, plaintiff argues that summary disposition was improper because a jury question existed as to whether plaintiff's employment contract provided for continued employment in the absence of just cause for dismissal. We agree.
While employment contracts for an indefinite term are generally terminable at will, an employee's legitimate expectations grounded in his or her employer's policy statements may create enforceable contract rights to be terminated only for just cause and in accordance with established termination procedures. Toussaint v Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Michigan, 408 Mich. 579, 598, 618-619; 292 NW2d 880 (1980), reh den 409 Mich. 1101 (1980). Absent an express retention of the right to terminate employment at will, the existence of a just-cause contract is a question of fact for the jury. Renny v Port Huron Hospital, 427 Mich. 415, 417; 398 NW2d 327 (1986), reh den 428 Mich. 1206 (1987). Similarly, a jury question exists when an employer's stated termination policies contain expressions of both at-will and just-cause employment. Dalton v Herbruck Egg Sales Corp, 164 Mich. App. 543, 547; 417 NW2d 496 (1987). When ruling on a summary disposition motion under MCR 2.116(C)(10), courts are liberal in finding that *616 a genuine issue exists, drawing all inferences in favor of the nonmovant, and granting the motion only when the court is satisfied that it is impossible for the claim to be supported at trial because of some deficiency that cannot be overcome. Rizzo v Kretschmer, 389 Mich. 363, 371; 207 NW2d 316 (1973).
Resolving all reasonable doubt in plaintiff's favor, we find that reasonable minds might differ as to whether plaintiff could have reasonably concluded from defendant's policy statements that he would be terminated only for cause, following a series of graduated disciplinary measures. Defendant's written policies do not unambiguously retain in defendant the right to terminate its employees at will. Rather, defendant's definition of the term "discharge" as "termination ... at the will of the employer" is qualified by the phrase "because of some fault on the part of the worker." Defendant's policies enumerate twenty offenses which may lead to employee discipline and outline the normal disciplinary procedures which precede termination. Although the policies state that the execution of such procedures is a matter of "management prerogative," other language suggests that immediate dismissal is an extraordinary penalty to be used only for the most serious infractions, such as theft or falsification of company records. The fact that unsatisfactory job performance was listed as a ground for discipline does not establish that plaintiff was employed pursuant to an at-will, "satisfaction" contract where just-cause employment is otherwise shown. Toussaint, supra, pp 620-621.
We also agree with plaintiff's argument that his deposition testimony was sufficient to create a jury question on the issue of his subjective expectation that his employment could be terminated only for *617 just cause. We are unpersuaded by defendant's argument that certain portions of plaintiff's testimony amount to an admission that his employment contract was terminable at will. While plaintiff conceded that it was for defendant's administrators to determine whether certain conduct warranted dismissal, plaintiff did not say he believed that defendant could terminate his employment in violation of defendant's stated policies or bypass the disciplinary procedures set forth therein. Whether plaintiff's beliefs were reasonable and whether defendant did indeed violate its disciplinary policies were questions of fact to be decided by the jury. Struble v Lacks Industries, Inc, 157 Mich. App. 169, 175; 403 NW2d 71 (1986).
Finally, we do not believe the fact that plaintiff failed to use an existing grievance procedure supports the grant of summary disposition. The internal procedure was optional. Plaintiff claims he declined to exercise this option, not because of any doubts concerning the merits of his objection, but, rather, because the procedure required him to approach the very supervisors responsible for the termination of his employment.
Reversed.
NOTES
[*]  Circuit judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.

=== CASE 9739070 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:22.011436+00 ===

SHARPNACK, Judge.
Transportation - Insurance - Company ("CNA") appeals from the grant of summary judgment in favor of Frank A. Vel-lueci, Midland Engineering Company, Margaret M. Saunders and Aladean M. Derose (the latter two as administratrices of the Estate of Richard Saunders) (collectively "'the Estate") in a declaratory judgment action filed by CNA. We dismiss the appeal for want of jurisdiction.
The following is a brief procedural history. On January 17, 1986, Richard Saunders was killed while riding as a passenger in a truck owned by Midland and driven by Vellueei. The truck was insured under a policy issued by CNA. Saunders' estate filed a wrongful death action against Vel-lueci in St. Joseph Superior Court and, on *927February 17, 1988, Saunders' estate received a judgment against Vellucei in the amount of $1,750,000. Approximately one month before the wrongful death trial, CNA filed a declaratory judgment action against the Estate seeking a declaration that the insurance policy did not cover the accident. The Estate filed an answer, affirmative defenses, and counterclaims.
On January 29, 1990, the Estate filed a motion for summary judgment alleging that CNA was collaterally estopped by the wrongful death proceeding from asserting that the accident fell within the policy's "fellow-servant" exclusion. The trial court granted the Estate's motion for summary judgment on July 27 with an order accompanied by findings of fact. The findings of fact included the following relevant statement:
"The Court further concludes that there is no just reason for delay and concludes that a judgment should be entered at this time as to the Complaint for Declaratory Judgment, but reserves as an issue for trial the Counterclaims filed by the Defendant Estate and Defendant Vellucei against CNA."
{Record, p. 1268.) In addition, the "Judgment" portion of the order included the following language:
"IT IS FURTHER ORDERED AND ADJUDGED BY THE COURT that there is no just reason for delay and a Declaratory Judgment should be entered at this time.
L IT IS FURTHER ORDERED AND ADJUDGED BY THE COURT that Declaratory judgment be, and hereby is, entered for the Defendant Estate...."
(Record, p. 1269.)
On August 20, CNA filed a motion requesting the trial court to enter a final judgment pursuant to Trial Rules 54(B) and 56(C). The trial court granted that motion on August 24. CNA filed a motion to correct error on September 24, and the Estate responded with a motion to strike on the basis that CNA had not timely filed its motion to correct error. On November 26, following a hearing, the trial court denied both the motion to correct error and the Estate's motion to strike. CNA filed its praecipe on December 21. On March 18, 1991, the Estate filed with this court a motion to dismiss the appeal based upon a lack of jurisdiction, arguing that CNA had not timely filed its praecipe. We denied that motion by order dated July 25, 1991. The Estate again raised the issue of our jurisdiction in a cross-appeal.
Upon reconsideration, we hold that we do not have jurisdiction to entertain CNA's appeal. CNA disputes our ability to reconsider the question of our jurisdiction, contending that we are bound by our July 25, 1991, order under the doctrine of the law of the case. However, that doctrine does not prohibit an appellate court from reconsidering its ruling on a motion when raised again in the same appeal. Even the cases cited by CNA, Matter of Guardianship of Posey (1986), Ind.App., 513 N.E.2d 674 cert. denied, (1988), 485 U.S. 988, 108 S.Ct. 1292, 99 L.Ed.2d 502 and Galloway v. State (1985), Ind. App., 485 N.E.2d 637, describe the doctrine in terms of matters once decided on appeal being binding on the appellate court in a subsequent appeal. Furthermore, because we could change our decision pursuant to a petition for rehearing, it would make no sense to refuse to do so at an earlier stage before we have expended further resources.
Turning to the substance of the jurisdictional question, the timing requirements contained in Ind. Appellate Rule 2(A) and Ind. Trial Rule 59(C) control this case. Ind. Appellate Rule 2(A) states, in relevant part:
"[The praecipe ... shall be filed within thirty (80) days after the entry of a final judgment or an appealable final order or, if a motion to correct error is filed, within thirty days after the court's ruling on such motion.. Unless the praecipe is filed within such time period, the right to appeal will be forfeited."
The relevant portion of T.R. 59 prov1des:
"(C) Time for Filing: Service on Judge. The motion to correct error, if any, shall be filed not later than thirty [80] days after the entry of a final judgment or an appealable final order."
*928CNA did not file its appeal within thirty days of the trial court's order of summary judgment, regardless of whether we look to the July 27 order or the August 24 order. However, CNA did file its praccipe within thirty days of the trial court's ruling on the motion to correct error. Therefore, we must decide whether CNA timely filed its motion to correct error, because, if it did not, the trial court's ruling on that motion was a nullity and cannot be used to extend the time for filing a praecipe. Swain v. Swain (1991), Ind.App., 565 N.E.2d 1134, 1135; Kratkoczki v. Regan (1978), 178 Ind.App. 184, 381 N.E.2d 1077, 1079.
We conclude that, because the trial court entered an appealable order on July 27, 1990, CNA's motion to correct error was not timely filed. Such a conclusion is mandated by the clear language of our trial rules. Trial Rule 56(C) provides, in relevant part:
"[A] summary judgment upon less than all the issues involved in a claim or with respect to less than all the claims or parties shall be interlocutory unless the court in writing expressly determines that there is not just reason for delay and in writing expressly directs entry of judgment as to less thon all the issues, claims or parties' (emphasis added)
Rule 54(B), in relevant part, provides:
"When more than one [1] claim for relief is presented in an action, whether as a claim, counterclaim, cross-claim, or third-party claim, or when multiple parties are involved, the court may direct the entry of a final judgment as to one or more but fewer than all of the claims or parties only upon an express determination that there is no just reason for delay and upon an express direction for the entry of judgment.... A judgment as to one or more but fewer than all of the claims or parties is final when the court in writing expressly determines that there is no just reason for delay, and in writing expressly directs entry of judgment, and an appeal may be taken upon this or other issues resolved by the judgment; but in other cases a judgment, decision or order as to less than all the claims and parties is not final." (emphasis added)
The time for filing either a motion to correct error or a praecipe begins with the entry of an appealable order under T.R. 54(B) or T.R. 56(C). See Lawson v. Howmet Aluminum Corp. (1983), Ind.App., 449 N.E.2d 1172, 1176-1177.
Here, both the "Findings of Fact" and "Judgment" sections of the July 27 order find no just reason for delay and order entry of judgment upon less than all of the issues. The order unambiguously complied with T.R. 56(C) and TR. 54(B) and therefore triggered the thirty day time limit to file either a praecipe or a motion to correct error.
CNA contends that, even if its motion to correct error was not timely filed under the rules, we have discretion to consider the merits of its appeal due to its reliance on the trial court's August 24 order. However, the relevant law indicates that, except in a narrow range of extraordinary circumstances, the mandatory language of TR. 59(C) and App.R. 2(A) leaves us with no discretion to mitigate potentially harsh applications of the rules. There is a distinction between jurisdictional and non-jurisdictional requirements under the appellate rules. The court has discretion to proceed to the merits in the latter case, but no discretion in the former, except in certain extreme circumstances. Timely filing of a praecipe is a jurisdictional prerequisite, and, therefore, noncompliance with applicable time limits results in forfeiture of the appeal. Dixon v. State (1991), Ind.App., 566 N.E.2d 594; Hughes v. Morgan County (1983), Ind.App., 452 N.E.2d 447; Bailey v. Sullivan (1982), Ind. App., 432 N.E.2d 75.
We find the case of In re Estate of Moore (1973), 155 Ind.App. 92, 291 N.E.2d 566 (per curiam) to be particularly germane to the situation before us. In Moore, the appellant did not file its praecipe until more than thirty days after the trial court overruled the motion to correct error. The trial court entered a nunc pro tunc order directing the record to be corrected to show the praecipe filed on an earlier date, the date *929appellant had orally requested preparation of the transcript and praccipe. Id. at 568. The trial court explained that its staff customarily undertook the preparation of material for appeals, including the praecipe. Id. The court of appeals, however, applied the strict language of App.R. 2(A) and found that the rule provided for no exceptions. Id. at 569. The court held that the appellant had forfeited its right to appeal and that the trial court's nune pro tune order could not reinstate that right. Id. The circumstances in this case are no more compelling than were the circumstances in Moore. Reliance on the trial court's custom in Moore did not excuse the failure to timely file a praecipe. Likewise, CNA's alleged reliance on the trial court's August 24 order does not excuse its failure to timely file a praecipe in this case.
As noted above, there are certain narrowly defined exceptions to the strict application of our jurisdictional timing requirements. A doctrine exists which holds that the supreme court and the court of appeals have the inherent power to entertain an appeal after the time allowed for appeal has expired. Lugar v. State ex. rel. Lee (1978), 270 Ind. 45, 46, 383 N.E.2d 287, 289. White v. Livengood (1979), 181 Ind.App. 56, 60, 390 N.E.2d 696, 699. However, we will only exercise such power "in rare and exceptional cases, such as in matters of great public interest, or where extraordinary circumstances exist." Lugar, 383 N.E.2d at 289. The circumstances in this case do not approach the extremes which have invoked - the doctrine in prior cases. See Lugar, 383 N.E.2d at 289 (case involving millions of public dollars and the police pension fund as well as counsel who was serving as legislator while preparing appellant's brief)}; Frum v. Little Calumet River Basin Development Commission (1987), Ind.App., 506 N.E.2d 492, 494 (appeal from order overruling objections in an eminent domain proceeding where court found that, although landowners followed improper procedure resulting in failure to timely file their praecipe, prior case law had obfuscated procedure to be followed in such cases).
In addition, the court in White v. Livengood (1979), 181 Ind.App. 56, 390 N.E.2d 696 stated that the court of appeals will not exercise its inherent power to entertain untimely appeals in order to relieve a party of its own negligence, such as the failure to properly calculate time limits. 181 Ind.App., at 59, 390 N.E.2d at 699. Similarly, CNA's praecipe was untimely due to the failure of its attorneys to comprehend the clear import of the July 27 order under Trial Rules 54(B) and 56(C).
We are not persuaded by CNA's reliance upon Eady v. Foerder (Tth Cir.1967), 381 F.2d 980. In that case, the appellate court affirmed a district court's grant of a motion for new trial which the petitioner filed 18 days after the time allowed by FED.R.CIV.P. 59(B). Despite the mandatory language of the federal rules, which set a ten-day time limit and prohibited any extension of time, the Eady court held that the petitioner's reliance upon the trial court's order granting him additional time constituted a unique circumstance such that the trial court had jurisdiction to address the motion for new trial. Id. at 981. Here, the trial court did not purport to extend the time limitations, it merely entered a repetitive order at CNA's request. Furthermore, this court did not find improper reliance upon a trial court's customary practice to be sufficient to alleviate the operation of App.R. 2(A). Moore, supra 155 Ind.App. at 97, 291 N.E.2d at 569. To the extent Moore and Eady conflict, we follow Moore. Finally, the continued vitality of Hady has been called into question. Varhol v. National R.R. Passenger Corp. (7th Cir.1990), 909 F.2d 1557 (per curiam).
For the reasons herein contained, we dismiss CNA's appeal.
APPEAL DISMISSED.
BARTEAU, J., concurs.
RUCKER, J., dissents with opinion.

=== CASE 9739071 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:22.016507+00 ===

RUCKER, Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent. In my view, two significant procedural events occurred after the trial court's judgment of July 27, 1990, which require us to hear the merits *930of this appeal. First, on August 20, 1990, seven days before the thirty-day time limit to file a praecipe or motion to correct errors had run, CNA filed with the trial court a Motion for Final Judgment. Second, on August 24, 1990, the trial court entered an order dictating in pertinent part:
The court having examined said Motion and being duly advised now finds that there is no just reason to delay in making the summary judgment of date of July 27, 1990 final and does now direct the entry of final judgment upon the summary judgment in favor of Margaret M. Saunders and Aladean M. DeRose, Co-Administratices of the Estate of Richard Saunders, deceased, and against CNA Insurance Companies of date of July 27, 1990. So Ordered, Adjudged and Decreed this 24th day of August, 1990. Judgment.
Record at 1,280 (emphasis added). CNA filed its Motion To Correet Error thirty days thereafter on September 24, 1990. CNA then filed its praecipe within thirty days after the trial court denied CNA's Motion To Correct Error.
The majority essentially disregards the trial court's order of August 24, finding instead that pursuant to Ind.Trial Rule 54(B) and 56(C), the trial court's Special Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law and Judgment entered on July 27, 1990, was a final order and as such, the order from which the time limits in this case should be calculated. The majority reasons that because the July 27 order expressly determined there was no just reason for delay and directed entry of judgment, CNA's Motion to Correct Error was untimely filed and that this court has no jurisdiction over this appeal. I cannot agree.
Although the July 27 order appears to comply with the provisions of TR. 54(B) and 56(C), the August 24 order is much more explicit as to finality and removes any doubt the entry is one of final judgment. The trial court's August 24 order determined there was "no just reason for delay" and expressly directed entry of "final judgment." Record at 1280. In contrast, the July 27 order does not include the terms "final" or "final judgment" in the portions of the order entering judgment. Record at 1268-69.
Apparently the trial court concluded that its order of July 27 was not final and therefore upon motion by CNA, the trial court entered an unambiguous final judgment on August 24. In my opinion, CNA's Motion To Correct Error was timely filed and this appeal should not be dismissed for want of jurisdiction.
IL.
Even if the August 24 order is a nullity and thus CNA's Motion to Correct Error and praecipe were untimely filed, this court should nonetheless exercise its discretionary authority and proceed to the merits of this appeal.
The majority contends that In re Estate of Moore (1973), 155 Ind.App. 92, 291 N.E.2d 566, is "particularly germane to the situation before us." Op. at 928. However, a closer look at Moore reveals it is easily distinguishable from the facts in the case before us. Moore addressed a situation where the appellant had filed a written praecipe after the thirty-day time limit had run under App.R. 2(A). Because the untimely praecipe forfeited appellant's right to appeal, the trial court changed the record to reflect that the appellant had filed a praecipe twenty-seven days earlier than actually filed. The practical effect of the trial court's rune pro tune entry was to reinstate the appellant's right to appeal notwithstanding appellant's untimely filing of the praecipe. The Second District of this court dismissed the appeal for failure to timely file a praecipe. Moore, 291 N.E.2d at 569 (Sullivan, J., dissenting).
Here, CNA's Motion For Final Judgment was filed seven days before the 30-day time limit had run under App.R. 2(A) or 56(C). Thus, the trial court in this case, unlike the trial court in Moore was not reinstating appellant's right to appeal. To the contrary, CNA had not forfeited its right to appeal when it presented its motion to the trial court. Nor, had CNA forfeited its right to appeal when the trial court *931entered its order of August 24. If, on August 24, the trial court had simply denied CNA's request for final judgment, then CNA would have had until August 27 to file its praecipe or motion to correct errors. In addition, I think it important to note that CNA's praecipe consists of one short paragraph requesting the pleadings and transcript. Record at 1-2. Absent the trial court's August 24 ruling it would not be unreasonable to assume CNA would have filed the praecipe in a timely manner with respect to the July 27 order.
Further, in Moore the trial court, through a nunc pro tune entry, changed the record in order to rectify a procedural error. The effect of the trial court's action was to enlarge the appellant's time for filing a timely praecipe. In the case before us, the trial court did not change the record in an attempt to rectify a procedural error. Rather, in response to CNA's Motion for Final Judgment, the trial court entered an order expressly declaring final judgment be entered. The record before us does not suggest the trial court was attempting to enlarge CNA's time to file an appeal.
In essence, Moore does not control the outcome of the case before us. Rather, as the majority acknowledges, Indiana courts have consistently recognized equitable restraints to the strict adherence of jurisdictional time requirements. See Lugar v. State (1978), 270 Ind. 45, 383 N.E.2d 287 (reviewing court granted appellant's procedurally deficient motion for extension of time to file brief; Soft Water Utilities, Inc. v. Le Fevre (1973), 261 Ind. 260, 301 N.E.2d 745 (reviewing court treated appeal on the merits despite appellant's failure to file praecipe within 30 days as mandated by Ind.App. Rule 2(B)); Frum v. Little Calumet River Basin Dev. Comm'n (1987), Ind.App., 506 N.E.2d 492, reh. denied, (reviewing court invoked its discretionary power to entertain appeal on the merits in view of understandable confusion as to appropriate appellate procedure and landowners' attempt to comply with proper procedure); First Nat. Bank v. Coling (1981), Ind.App., 419 N.E.2d 1326 (no error when trial court, after overruling plaintiff's motion to correct error, granted plaintiff's T.R. 60(B)(1) motion for relief from judgment, thus enlarging plaintiff's time to file appeal); Costanzi v. Ryan (1977), 174 Ind. App. 454, 368 N.E.2d 12 (reviewing court invoked its inherent power to grant time to perfect an appeal and denied motion to dismiss despite appellant's failure to timely file record).
The majority concludes that this appeal does not constitute one of the "rare and exceptional cases" which would permit us to proceed on the merits despite an untimely filing. Op. at 929, I disagree.
In Soft Water, supra, our supreme court indicated:
Certainly, the orderly procedure of our judicial system calls for adherence to the rules designed to achieve that goal. But we should never ignore the plain fact that the consequence of strict adherence to the rules may occasionally defeat rather than promote the ends of justice.... Such is not the desired effect of our flexible rules of procedure.
Soft Water, 261 Ind. at 269, 301 N.E.2d at 750. In my opinion, the case before us presents more compelling reasons to address the merits of this appeal than many of the cases which have traditionally prompted our courts to deviate from strict adherence to the rules.
For example, in Lugar, supra, our supreme court held that because the matter before it was of great public importance, involved millions of public dollars and pension benefits, and because the appellants' attorney was serving on the legislature at the same time he was writing the brief, provided reason enough to "not so strictly adhere to procedural rules...." Lugar, 383 N.E.2d at 289. Notwithstanding an untimely filing, our supreme court proceeded to the merits of the appeal.
The case before us involves substantial issues of law concerning the propriety of a declaratory judgment order which binds CNA to a judgment in an amount of at least $500,000.00. The record of proceedings consists of seven volumes and is over one thousand seven hundred pages in length. This court heard persuasive oral arguments on the merits of this appeal and *932the parties to this action have filed extensive briefs which also address the merits of this action. These facts, combined with CNA's reliance on the trial court's August 24 order of final judgment, qualify as extraordinary circumstances which justify this court exercising its inherent power to entertain this appeal even after the time for appeal has expired. See Lugar, supra.
Soft Water, supra, represents another example of this court's exercise of its discretionary authority to hear an appeal on its merits despite the appellant's failure to comply with jurisdictional time constraints. In Soft Water, the trial court clerk advised an appellant's counsel that his motion to correct errors had not been received by the court when, in fact, the trial judge had already ruled on the motion. By the time counsel had discovered that the motion had been overruled, the applicable time for prosecuting an appeal had expired. The trial court in Soft Water changed his ruling on the appellant's motion to correct errors from July 10, 1972 to August 14, 1972, thus enlarging appellant's time to file its prae-cipe. Our supreme court treated the appeal on its merits.
Here, CNA's reliance on the trial court's order of August 24 is analogous to the appellant in Soft Water relying on the misinformation from the court clerk. Moreover, in this case CNA's reliance was based on the trial court's entry of a final judgment rather than erroneous information from the court's administrative staff. Like the appellant in Soft Water, CNA should not be penalized for its good faith reliance on the trial court.
In Frum, supra, this court held that the "understandable confusion" resulting from different procedural requisites found under the statute addressing eminent domain proceedings and the rules of appellate procedure justified discretionary enforcement of the procedural rules. This court entertained the merits of the appeal notwithstanding appellant's failure to timely file an assignment of errors in an appeal from an appropriation order in eminent domain proceedings. In the case before us there was also understandable confusion, namely: the trial court's entry of judgment on July 27, which is arguably a final judgment, and the entry of judgment on August 24, which is clearly a final judgment.
1 am mindful of the majority's concern that flexibility in trial rules should not be invoked to relieve a party of its attorney's negligence. White v. Livengood (1979), 181 Ind.App. 56, 390 N.E.2d 696. However, nothing in the case before us persuades me that CNA's counsel was negligent. We are not presented here with a situation involving a party missing a filing deadline and then attempting to reinitiate an appeal or seeking additional time to file an appeal. To the contrary, CNA approached the trial court with a Motion For Final Judgment a full seven days before a motion to correct errors would be due under T.R. 59(C) or the praecipe would be due under App.R. 2(A). CNA could just as easily have filed its one paragraph prac-cipe. Even after the trial court's entry of final judgment on August 24, CNA had three days to file a praecipe or a motion to correct error. Instead, CNA acted reasonably and understandably when it filed its Motion to Correct Error within 80 days of the August 24 order of judgment. In my opinion the case before is a proper one for this court to invoke the flexibility of the rules.
The majority's dismissal of CNA's appeal unduly narrows the scope of this court's power to exercise its discretionary authority. To disregard the substantive legal arguments before this court defeats rather than promotes the ends of justice.
For the above reasons, I dissent.

=== CASE 9739072 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:22.264181+00 ===

HABHAB, Judge.
Defendant-appellant James Callender appeals from his jury conviction of assault with intent to commit sexual abuse causing bodily injury in violation of Iowa Code section 709.11 (1987).
Defendant was charged with first-degree kidnapping in violation of Iowa Code section 710.1(3) and two counts of third-degree sexual abuse in violation of Iowa Code section 709.4(1) based upon the victim’s contention that on December 11, 1986, defendant confined her in his car and forced her to have sexual intercourse on two occasions. As stated, he was convicted of assault with intent to commit sexual abuse causing bodily injury.
Defendant filed a pretrial motion to remove the Woodbury County Attorney’s office as prosecutor and a motion to dismiss the trial information. Both motions were grounded upon contentions that J. Keith Rigg, the Assistant Woodbury County Attorney who filed the trial information, had a conflict of interest due to his employment at the public defender’s office when defendant sought its counsel in December 1986.
The trial court appointed a special prosecutor from the Attorney General’s office but denied the motion to dismiss. The court stated no actual attorney/client relationship existed between Mr. Rigg and the defendant and no information providing the basis for the trial information was obtained by Mr. Rigg while employed by the public defender’s office. The rulings were affirmed at a second hearing during which defendant produced a letter sent to him from the Iowa Committee on Professional Ethics and Conduct indicating it was improper for Mr. Rigg to participate in defendant’s prosecution given his earlier staff position at the public defender’s office. The court again stated defendant failed to show any prejudice resulting from the “improper” conduct.
On appeal, defendant contends the trial court erred by (1) denying his motion to dismiss the trial information, (2) denying his motion for mistrial following the victim’s emotional outburst while testifying, (3) charging the jury with a legally erroneous third-degree kidnapping instruction, and (4) failing to instruct the jury on a lesser-included offense of assault with intent to commit sexual abuse causing no bodily injury. In addition, defendant claims he was unconstitutionally subjected to double jeopardy and denied effective assistance of counsel.
Our review of issues dealing with constitutional rights violations consists of an independent evaluation of the totality of the circumstances which is equivalent to a de novo review. State v. Schubert, 346 N.W.2d 30, 32 (Iowa 1984). On the other issues, our review is limited to the correction of legal errors. Iowa R.App.P. 4.
I. Generally, an attorney may not participate in the prosecution of a criminal case if, by reason of personal relations with an accused, he has acquired knowledge of facts on which the prosecution is based. State v. Orozco, 202 N.W.2d 344, 345-46 (Iowa 1972). Defendant argues the trial court should not only have appointed a special prosecutor to his case, but should have dismissed the trial information filed by Mr. Rigg to correct the improper conduct.
We find defendant has failed to prove any prejudice to the substance of his case *770or that the trial information was based on testimony or facts improperly obtained by Mr. Rigg while employed with the Wood-bury public defender’s office. Id. at 346. Defendant does not direct us to any portion of the information which is not a product of proper police investigation stemming from the victim’s version of the facts or the defendant’s own version voluntarily given to the police. Defendant testified at the hearing he told the public defender the same version of the facts he relayed to the police. The trial court’s substitution of a special prosecutor cures any appearance of impropriety. There has been no further showing of a defect in the information which prejudiced the defendant.
Defendant suggests the failure to convict him on the original kidnapping or sexual abuse charges indicates if the trial information had been dismissed, another untainted prosecution would not have been refiled on those charges. The special prosecutor was free to request amendments to or dismissal of charges in the trial information. No such requests were made. At trial, the prosecutor presented witnesses and their testimony relating to events of December 10 and 11, 1986, substantially in accordance with the trial information. The motion to dismiss was properly denied absent a showing the trial information was tainted or defective due to Mr. Rigg’s improper conduct in filing the document.
II. The trial court has considerable discretion in determining whether a motion for mistrial should be granted or denied. State v. Hamilton, 335 N.W.2d 154, 160 (Iowa 1983). The trial court denied defendant’s motion for a mistrial after the victim made the following emotional outburst on cross-examination:
JONES [defense counsel]: From that time on through the first — the first of the sex acts you talked about, did you ever pass out?
M.M.: No, sir. I blanked out.
JONES: You blanked out?
M.M.: It’s a hard thing to remember. JONES: I understand that. But—
M.M.: I have to live with it every day, every single day. It interferes in every part of my life.
The court is found to have abused its discretion only when defendant shows prejudice which prevents him from having a fair trial. State v. Trudo, 253 N.W.2d 101, 106 (Iowa 1977). Generally, an admonition to the jury to disregard inadmissible testimony is sufficient to cure any prejudice, and the trial court made such an admonition to the jury in this case. See Hamilton, 335 N.W.2d at 160. The trial court was in a better position to observe the matter complained of and its effect on the jury. Based on the record, we find the trial court’s denial of the motion for mistrial did not constitute an abuse of discretion.
III. Defendant next contends the following jury instruction for kidnapping in the third degree was legally erroneous because it could be interpreted to require an actual occurrence of sexual abuse which both parties agree is not an element of the offense under Iowa Code section 710.4 (1987):
You must find the defendant not guilty of kidnapping in the third degree, unless you find the State has proved by evidence beyond a reasonable doubt, each of the following elements:
1. That on or about the 11th day of December 1986, the defendant confined or removed [M.M.] from one place to another with the intent to subject her to sexual abuse.
2. That the defendant did so, knowing he did not have consent of [M.M.] to do so.
If you find the State has proved beyond a reasonable doubt each and all of the elements, then you will find the defendant guilty; but if you find the State has failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt one or more of the elements, then you shall proceed to determine whether the defendant is guilty of false imprisonment.
We find no merit in defendant’s argument on several grounds. First, defendant did not preserve error for appeal as he failed to object to the instruction when it *771was submitted. See State v. LeCompte, 327 N.W.2d 221 (Iowa 1982). However, we will address the merits as this failure to preserve error provides one basis for defendant’s ineffective assistance of counsel claim.
Second, having compared this instruction with the proper code section, case law, and the uniform jury instruction it was patterned after, we conclude this contention of the defendant is without merit. The instruction specifically states the “intent to subject [the victim] to sexual abuse” while the first-degree kidnapping instruction required proof of sexual abuse actually occurring. See Iowa Code § 710.4 (1987); State v. Morrison, 368 N.W.2d 173, 175 (Iowa 1985); Uniform Jury Instr. (Crim.) No. 1006 (1983); Dunahoo, The New Iowa Criminal Code: Part II, 29 Drake L.Rev. 491, 555-56 (1979-80).
Third, even if the instruction was erroneous, defendant cannot prove he was prejudiced by this error. Kidnapping in the third degree is a class “C” felony, and defendant was convicted of assault with intent to commit sexual abuse resulting in bodily injury, also a class “C” felony. Iowa Code § 710.4 and 709.11 (1987). Consent of the victim rather than whether or not a sex act occurred was the issue in this trial. Clearly, the jury’s failure to convict on the lesser kidnapping charge cannot be attributed to what defendant contends was a legally erroneous instruction, but was due to a lack of evidence on the confinement element on the kidnapping charge.
IV. We similarly find defendant failed to preserve error on the trial court’s failure to instruct the jury on the lesser-included offense of assault with intent to commit sexual abuse causing no bodily injury. The record reveals the following dialogue occurred between the trial court and defense counsel prior to submission of the instructions to the jury:
... the Court now does provide counsel with the final draft of the instructions in this case and will inquire of the State whether it has objections to or modifications or amendments to the final draft of the instructions.
MR. THOMAN: Your Honor, the State has no objections to the final draft and takes no exceptions to the instructions.
THE COURT: Does the defense have objections to take or wish to amend or modify the instructions in the final draft?
MR. JONES: No, Your Honor. We have no objections or exceptions to the final instructions.
Defendant does not contend he requested or was denied submission of the lesser-in-eluded offense instruction. Defendant cannot now raise an objection to the absence of this instruction. State v. Burkett, 357 N.W.2d 632, 634 (Iowa 1984); State v. Goff, 342 N.W.2d 830, 837 (Iowa 1983); State v. Rouse, 290 N.W.2d 911, 914 (Iowa 1980).
V. We now address defendant’s contention he was unconstitutionally subjected to double jeopardy or double punishment due to the filing of the trial information charging him with first-degree kidnapping and two counts of sexual abuse in the third degree. He contends the sexual abuse charges are lesser-included offenses stemming from the same incident which provided the basis for the kidnapping charge and therefore he could not be charged with all three offenses.
If the defendant had been convicted and sentenced on the kidnapping and sexual abuse charges, this argument would have some merit. See State v. Davis, 328 N.W.2d 301, 307 (Iowa 1982) (defendant could not be convicted of first-degree kidnapping based upon sexual abuse and also second-degree sexual abuse stemming from the same incident as such conviction would violate Iowa Code section 701.9 (1987)). In this case, defendant was convicted of a single different offense and he can point to no separate prosecution arising out of the same incident which might provide a basis for a double jeopardy claim. See and compare Lamphere v. State, 348 N.W.2d 212, 218 (Iowa 1984); State v. Kaufman, 265 N.W.2d 610, 618 (Iowa 1978); State v. Birkestrand, 239 N.W.2d 353, 363-64 (Iowa 1976); State v. Gilroy, 199 N.W.2d 63 (Iowa 1972). Because we find no merit to defendant’s claim of error, any conten*772tion of ineffective assistance of counsel based on this issue is also without merit.
VI. Defendant’s claim of ineffective assistance of trial counsel is based on counsel’s failure to preserve error regarding the prosecutorial misconduct, double jeopardy, third-degree kidnapping jury instruction, and lack of an instruction on assault with intent to commit sexual abuse with no bodily injury issues. We have found the first three alleged errors to be without merit. However, as to the last ground, we find the present record insufficient to determine a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel based on failure to preserve error. State v. Davis, 328 N.W.2d 301, 308 (Iowa 1982). Defendant’s conviction is upheld without prejudice to a postconviction claim of ineffective assistance of counsel based on the lesser-included jury instruction issue.
AFFIRMED.
SCHLEGEL, P.J., concurs.
SACKETT, J., specially concurs.

=== CASE 9739074 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:22.874974+00 ===

SABERS, Justice.
Debra Miller (Debra) appeals a decree of divorce granting custody of Doyle James Miller (D.J.) to Delwyn Miller (Delwyn) and dividing the marital property.
Facts
Delwyn and Debra were married on September 21, 1979. They had one child during the marriage, D.J., who was seven at the time of divorce. Debra also had a fourteen-year-old daughter, Tina, from a previous marriage and an infant son, Cody. Her boyfriend, James Plueger (Plueger) was Cody’s father.
Delwyn was thirty-seven years of age and employed by Hicks Enterprises in Brookings, South Dakota, at the time of divorce. His weekly net income was $286.71. Debra was thirty-three and unemployed at the time of divorce. She was residing with Plueger who farmed near Verdi, Minnesota.
The marriage of the parties was unstable and there was little communication. Delwyn testified that he had been unfaithful on only one occasion during the marriage, but Debra was unaware of his affair. As the marriage continued to deteriorate, Debra began having an affair with Plueger. In June of 1987, Debra believed she was pregnant with Plueger’s child. She left Delwyn and D.J. because of this belief and the poor condition of the marriage. Debra was one and one-half months pregnant at the time she left.
D.J. remained with Delwyn until the time of divorce in June of 1988. The testimony showed that Delwyn had a good relationship with D.J. and provided for D.J.’s needs after Debra left. There was also evidence that D.J. was doing well in school and that Delwyn took an interest in D.J.’s schooling and helped him in his studies.
Delwyn testified that he began having an intimate relationship with another woman, Kathy Lee (Kathy), following his separation from Debra. He admitted to having sexual intercourse with her at his home, but claimed that D.J. was unaware of this relationship. Further, he indicated that Kathy had stayed over an entire night once, because of bad weather, and that she had slept on the couch. Delwyn admitted that he went out socially two to three nights a week and often became intoxicated. On those evenings, he testified that he would leave D.J. overnight with his uncle and aunt, with whom D.J. enjoyed staying.
Debra was DJ.’s primary caretaker prior to the separation and believed that Delwyn was often too hard on D.J. and inflexible with the child. She testified: that D.J. enjoyed visiting her and often cried when he had to leave and return home to his father; and that D.J. and his half sister Tina had a good relationship and often confided in one another. Delwyn believed Tina and D.J. had a normal brother/sister relationship. Debra also testified that D.J. liked Cody and enjoyed holding and feeding him.
Delwyn brought an action for divorce after Debra left in June of 1987.1 Trial was held on May 18, 1988. On June 21, 1988, the court entered its judgment and decree of divorce. The decree granted a divorce to Delwyn on the grounds of irreconcilable differences. Delwyn was given custody of D.J. subject to reasonable and liberal visitation rights to Debra. The decree also divided the property between the parties and ordered Debra to pay $50 per month child support. Debra appeals the custody determination and property division. We reverse and remand custody and affirm the property division.
1. Compelling reasons to separate the siblings.
Debra argues that the best interests of the child require compelling reasons to sep*47arate siblings. She argues that the trial court failed to set out compelling reasons to separate D.J. and his half sister Tina, and that no such reasons exist. Delwyn claims that the trial court properly found that it was in DJ.’s best interests to grant custody to him.
We have held that the best interests of the child require compelling reasons to separate siblings. Adam v. Adam, 436 N.W.2d 266 (S.D.1989); Mayer v. Mayer, 397 N.W.2d 638 (S.D.1986). Compelling reasons are necessary to separate even half-siblings. Adam, supra; Mayer, supra. In Mayer, we stated:
The evidence shows that the trial court gave no consideration to the profound effects of ending Jennifer’s valuable relationship with her sister. Nor did it provide any persuasive rationale for splitting them up. Justice requires that society exercise its moral duty to insure that children in a family enjoy the right to remain together, to share each others lives, and to grow up together, until such time as necessity and the welfare of the children, itself, requires their separation. ... For the trial court to conclude that it was in Jennifer’s best interest to award custody to Frederick without adequate findings regarding such a crucial consequence of the custody arrangement, “requires reversal.” (citations omitted).
Id. at 644.
In this case the trial court made a single reference to D.J.’s relationship with Tina, stating that there was testimony the two got along. There are no other references to either Tina or Cody in the findings of fact, conclusions of law or in the memorandum opinion which was incorporated by reference. The court failed to make any findings whether compelling reasons existed to separate the children.
Delwyn distinguishes the present case from Mayer in that the separated sisters in Mayer were only two years apart in age and had grown up together in a close relationship. He argues that while D.J. grew up with Tina, there are seven years separating the children, as Tina is fourteen and D.J. only seven. He claims that under these circumstances compelling reasons are unnecessary to separate the children. Mayer is a bright line rule which requires compelling reasons to separate siblings, regardless of their ages and relationships. However, the ages and relationships of the siblings are factors in determining whether compelling reasons exist to separate them. Adam, supra; Andersen v. Andersen, 399 N.W.2d 363 (S.D.1987). The failure to consider whether compelling reasons exist to separate the siblings as part of the best interests of the child requires reversal and remand of the custody issue. The trial court should reconsider the best interests of D.J. in light of whether compelling reasons exist to separate D.J. from his half sister, Tina, and his half brother, Cody.2
2. Property Division.
Delwyn received the home valued at $35,000,3 some personal property, and assumed the marital debts which exceeded $40,000. Debra did not request the home, but set out a list of personal property she wished to receive. She was awarded the requested property with the exception of $100 to replace a damaged water bed mattress and $3,000 to replace her car which had been wrecked in an accident prior to trial. The trial court also denied her request for D.J.’s bedroom set and basketball hoop because she was not granted custody. Debra claims that the trial court erred in not awarding her money to replace the damaged mattress and automobile. The trial court must consider equity and the circumstances of the parties in dividing marital property. Henrichs v. Henrichs, 426 N.W.2d 569 (S.D.1988); Cole v. Cole, 384 N.W.2d 312 (S.D.1986). In this case, the total real and personal property received by Delwyn was only slightly more *48than the marital debts he assumed.4 Debra received all the property she requested. The only exceptions were the cash payments. She received this property, valued at more than $3,000, debt free. The division of property was equitable and the trial court did not clearly abuse its discretion. Hilbrands v. Hilbrands, 429 N.W.2d 750 (S.D.1988), Goehry v. Goekry, 354 N.W.2d 192 (S.D.1984).
Reversed and remanded in part and affirmed in part.
WUEST, C.J., and MORGAN and MILLER, JJ., concur.
HENDERSON, J., specially concurs.
. The parties originally entered into a custody, support, and property settlement agreement. However, after Debra hired an attorney, she made a motion to set aside the agreement, which motion was granted.
. Since we are not deciding the merits or the questions raised in Justice Henderson’s special writing, it is better to attempt neutrality and express no opinion thereon.
. Delwyn testified that the valuation of $35,000 was based on his attempt to sell the home for $38,000 and receipt of one offer of $32,000. The trial court apparently found this valuation reasonable.
. Delwyn received approximately $42,000 in property, including the home, subject to debts exceeding $40,000.

=== CASE 9739075 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:22.879481+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(specially concurring).
Notwithstanding the facts, as portrayed by the majority opinion, the factual showing in this case reflected the father’s ability to provide for his son’s spiritual, moral, physical and economic welfare.* Father and son have an extremely close relationship and this was testified to by three witnesses. Since the mother left the family home, in June of 1987, father and son have experienced a general uplifting in their pursuit of happiness. The record is replete with the son’s prospering in school and social relationships.
It is true that the trial judge did not set forth the “compelling reasons” in express language, nor use any magical words to delineate “compelling reasons”. However, the trial judge weighed his decision carefully on the custody matter which is exemplified by expressions of the excellent relationship between the father and the son as well as a healthy environment.
Reference is made to footnote 2 in the majority opinion. Appellant and Appellee both assiduously briefed the issue of the trial court’s award of D.J. to the father under the "best interests of the child” rule. SDCL 30-27-19; Flint v. Flint, 334 N.W.2d 680, 681-2 (S.D.1983). This statutory authority and hallowed precedent requires the trial judge, in awarding custody of minors, to consider the best interests of the child's temporal, mental, and moral welfare. At the time the trial judge decided this, said issue was foursquare before the trial court.

=== CASE 2218668 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:52.311151+00 ===

596 N.E.2d 908 (1992)
James E. MAXEY, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 49A02-9008-PC-454[1].
Court of Appeals of Indiana, First District.
July 20, 1992.
*909 James E. Maxey, pro se.
Linley E. Pearson, Atty. Gen., Julie Zandstra Frazee, Deputy Atty. Gen., Office of Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for State.
BAKER, Judge.
Veteran pro se petitioner-appellant and political activist James E. Maxey appeals the denial of his fifth petition for post-conviction relief. We gather Mr. Maxey takes issue with the legal concepts of waiver and res judicata, among other things. Succinctly stated, we affirm.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
On September 16, 1974, after an argument, James Maxey asked his wife Ellen whether she would return home with him. When she refused, he drew a pistol and shot her in the stomach. He then took careful aim and shot her in the head, killing her. After two court-appointed psychiatrists found him competent to stand trial, and after the trial itself, a jury rejected his claim of self-defense and convicted Maxey of first degree murder. He was sentenced to life imprisonment.[2]
Maxey's conviction was affirmed by our supreme court on direct appeal. Maxey v. State (1976), 265 Ind. 244, 353 N.E.2d 457 (Maxey I). He then began his sixteen year quest for post-conviction relief because "he wanted his issues reviewed in his first appeal and using the unalienable rights the architects of our republic wrote in the magnificant words of the Constitution and the Declaration of Independance and the First Amendance that reads, in parts, `To petition the Government for a redress of grienances'." Brief of Appellant at 12.[3] At the outset, we note Maxey "wishes to make it very clear that he does not intend to raise, or argue the issue of his guilt or innocence but argue his constitutional right to a fair trial." Record at 158.
Maxey's first post-conviction relief petition, filed pro se, challenged the trial court's determination that he was competent to assist in his defense and asserted the discovery of new evidence: previously forgotten matrimonial strife which may have contributed to his mental instability. In this petition, Maxey swore under penalty of perjury that his petition contained "every ground known to [him] for vacating, setting aside or correcting the conviction and sentence attacked in this motion...." Record at 117. The first post-conviction court denied his petition and our supreme court affirmed the denial in Maxey v. State (1978), 269 Ind. 224, 379 N.E.2d 465 (Maxey II).
Maxey's second petition, again filed pro se, alleged an incomplete psychiatric evaluation, the wrongful suppression of evidence, the wrongful introduction of irrelevant evidence, prosecutorial misconduct, the ineffective assistance of trial and appellate *910 counsel, the denial of his right to a public trial because of exclusion of his family and political associates, and the sentencing court's lack of jurisdiction. He also listed as bases for relief "Groundless arguments causing inference from the established facts," and "Using coarse rhetoric to infamy defendant's political views." Record at 153, 166. After a hearing, the second post-conviction court found all claims were waived for failure to raise them in either his direct appeal or first petition for post-conviction relief. Record at 167-71. He took no appeal.
Maxey's third petition again claimed the ineffective assistance of counsel, prosecutorial misconduct, the denial of a public trial, and the wrongful introduction of irrelevant evidence. He insisted his psychiatric evaluation was incomplete and he was generally denied a fair trial. After a hearing, the third post-conviction court found all claims were waived for failure to raise them in either his direct appeal or first petition for post-conviction relief. Record at 235-40. Six months later, our supreme court denied Maxey's motion to undertake a belated appeal. Record at 207-08.
Maxey's fourth petition, which is not included in our record of proceedings, apparently claimed the ineffective assistance of trial and post-conviction counsel, constitutional violations, and newly discovered evidence. Record at 270. The fourth post-conviction court summarily denied the petition, and again, Maxey took no appeal.
On May 1, 1989, Maxey filed his fifth petition. He argued 1) he waived nothing in his earlier petitions because of his incompetence, 2) he found newly discovered evidence, 3) he received ineffective assistance of counsel, and 4) he uncovered a jury conflict of interest. After a hearing, the fifth post-conviction court rejected the first three claims but allowed Maxey 90 days to present evidence on the jury conflict of interest issue. Record at 415-18. After Maxey failed to present any evidence on the subject after 90 days, the fifth post-conviction court denied his petition. Maxey now appeals.
DISCUSSION
Waiver and Res Judicata
Much to Maxey's considerable ire, the fifth post-conviction court relied heavily on the doctrines of waiver and res judicata in denying Maxey's fifth post-conviction relief petition. Before turning to Maxey's appellate arguments, we deem it appropriate to review briefly waiver and res judicata in the post-conviction relief context.
"The purpose of the post-conviction relief process is to raise issues not known at the time of the original trial and appeal or for some reason not available to the defendant at that time." Schiro v. State (1989), Ind., 533 N.E.2d 1201, 1204, cert. denied, 493 U.S. 910, 110 S. Ct. 268, 107 L. Ed. 2d 218. Our rules of post-conviction procedure require all grounds for relief available to a petitioner be raised in the original petition. The rationales underlying the rule are apparent: controversies must eventually cease (the principle of finality), and judicial resources, being scarce, must not be squandered. From these two requirements arise the legal concepts of waiver and res judicata. See Mickens v. State (1991), Ind. App., 579 N.E.2d 615.
In the seminal opinion of Langley v. State (1971), 256 Ind. 199, 203, 267 N.E.2d 538, 540, Justice Hunter observed the rules of post-conviction relief were "not ... inten[ded] ... to provide a means whereby one convicted could repeatedly re-litigate claims of improper conviction, or could unqualifiedly, upon a legitimate waiver of the right to appeal... raise an untimely challenge directed at some aspect of the proceedings against him." (Original emphasis.) Accordingly, our supreme court established the modern rule that waiver is an affirmative defense to a petition for post-conviction relief. Acknowledging that "in the name of justice and fair play ... each defendant [should] have an avenue available by which he may challenge on appeal the correctness of his conviction," id., the court also noted it "ha[d] a vested interest in guarding against prostitution of the spirit of criminal justice through sanctioned `multi-appeals'... ." Id. Thus, the *911 court adopted the mechanism of waiver: issues available for review on direct appeal, if not pursued, are waived for post-conviction review. Mickens, supra.
Similar considerations drive the policy of res judicata, the defense of prior adjudication. Issues previously decided adversely to a petitioner's position are res judicata and not subject to further examination. Id. at 618. It is imperative to an orderly judicial system that, at some point, controversies end. Additionally, in a normal civil action, the claim preclusion branch of res judicata bars the relitigation of both those issues raised and those which should have been raised. Id. Post-conviction actions, of course, are not normal civil actions, but nevertheless "a petitioner for post-conviction relief cannot escape the effect of claim preclusion merely by using different language to phrase an issue and define an alleged error." Id. at 619.[4] Keeping these policies in mind, we turn to the arguments Maxey raises on appeal.
Maxey's Arguments
Maxey begins his discussion as follows:
Succinctly states, the issues presented for review by this appeal are as follows:
Whether the court erred by denying the defendant in his Petition for Post Conviction Relief on the argument of waiver when the record speaks for itself, of which the state and the court has gone on record saying they did not have because part of the transcript had not been typed up, and when this waiver that the defendant must overcome in order to get his issue reviewed came about, starting when he was represented by the Public Defender Office of Indiana, being held in Marion County Jail on a Court Order by the trial court, and under Indiana Trial Rule (11), bar anyone but the attorney of record from fileing an appeal which the Indiana Supreme Court who, on April 18, 1980, because the Court was without this evidence denied the Defendant to appeal Belated as petitioned for, charging that defendant should have filed on time, and this is so the Public Defender should be charged with a or the defendant should be allowed to show by the record that supports him to overcome the waiver sinse the record speaks for itself.
Brief of Appellant at 2. Rather than report Maxey's other "succinctly" stated summaries of his appellate arguments verbatim, we will instead summarize them.
First, Maxey argues he has been denied the due process of law because, until now, no court reviewing his case has seen a complete record of the proceedings. He contends those portions of the record missing from his previous appeals and post-conviction petitions (specifically, the opening and closing arguments used at his trial) constitute "newly discovered evidence" and are relevant because they prove his incompetence.
Although he abandoned his ineffective assistance claim, Maxey continues to take issue with the trial court's admission of evidence of his political and social views and with the fifth post-conviction court's denial of his jury conflict of interest claim. Finally, his argument is imbued with contempt for the concept of waiver: "Move deeper into the Quagmire of injustice," he instructs us, "where due process is on the scaffold and waiver is on the throne." Appellant's Reply Brief at 11.
A
We are compelled to agree with some of Maxey's musings: "The record show the Petitioner dipped his pen in the bitter ink in resentment of injustice. His language was often caustic and charged with accusation; He was never willing to soft peddle in order to win favor in the court of the oppressor. He flung his darts without fear... ." Appellant's Reply Brief at 14. Unfortunately, however, Maxey has also flung his darts without legal accuracy. His arguments are utterly meritless.
*912 Although it is not always necessary that a complete transcript be transmitted, the burden of providing a record adequate for review is the appellant's. Moore v. State (1981), Ind. App., 426 N.E.2d 86. If the record is inadequate, however, it is incumbent upon the person claiming inadequacy to seek certiorari under Ind.Appellate Rule 7.2(A)(3)(c) (statement of the evidence) and (C) (correction or modification of the record) to correct it; the failure to correct the inadequacy precludes the assertion of errors relating to the missing portions on appeal. Stewart v. State (1976), 170 Ind. App. 696, 354 N.E.2d 749. Maxey failed to utilize App.R. 7.2, and cannot now claim he was deprived due process of law. See Ruetz v. State (1978), 268 Ind. 42, 373 N.E.2d 152, cert. denied, 439 U.S. 897, 99 S. Ct. 261, 58 L. Ed. 2d 245 (no denial of due process to require statement of the evidence where transcript of the evidence is unavailable).
To the extent Maxey argues he failed to utilize App.R. 7.2 because of his incompetence, we observe both the jury and our supreme court have addressed Maxey's sanity and both decided the matter adversely to him. Maxey I, supra, 265 Ind. at 247-50, 353 N.E.2d at 458-60; Maxey II, supra, 269 Ind. at 225-27, 379 N.E.2d at 466-67. The matter is therefore res judicata. See Langley, supra.
Neither is Maxey entitled to relief based on his claim that evidence concerning his political and social views was wrongly admitted. He has not shown why this issue could not have been raised in his original appeals, and has therefore waived the issue for present review. Mosley v. State (1985), Ind., 477 N.E.2d 867. Further, we observe the issue of the admission of this evidence was challenged and rejected during Maxey's second and third post-conviction petitions, when evidence was presented that Maxey asked his attorneys to inform the jury of his political bent. In this sense, the matter is also res judicata, see Langley, supra, and might well be invited error. See Lacy v. State (1982), Ind., 438 N.E.2d 968. The fifth post-conviction court did not err in denying relief on this issue.
Finally, Maxey is not entitled to relief based on his unsubstantiated claim regarding a "jury conflict of interest." He presented nothing of substance to the fifth post-conviction court and nothing to us. Although given the opportunity, Maxey failed to argue his jury conflict of interest claim within the reasonable time limits set by the fifth post-conviction court and therefore failed to meet his burden of proof. Courts cannot act on the assumption that a state of facts exists which has not been proved. Muncie Building Trades Council v. Umbarger (1938), 215 Ind. 13, 17 N.E.2d 828.
With the exception of his jury conflict of interest claim, Maxey raises no issues he has not or could not have raised previously. If waiver and res judicata are on the throne, it is Maxey's behavior that empowered them.
The waiver of Maxey's current arguments notwithstanding, Maxey has not raised a colorable claim for relief in any of his five post-conviction relief petitions. We have reviewed both his trial transcript and the petitions in the record with great care, including each of the dozens of accompanying motions, and find not even the slightest indication Maxey was not afforded all process of law due him. Contrary to his protestations, Maxey's trial was fundamentally fair.[5]
*913 CONCLUSION
The denial of post-conviction relief is affirmed.
RATLIFF, C.J., and SULLIVAN, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  This case diverted by direction of the Chief Judge on 5/19/92.
[2]  IND. CODE 35-13-4-1 (repealed 1976 Ind. Acts Pub.L. No. 148, Sec. 24); now IND. CODE 35-42-1-1.
[3]  For the sake of expediency, when we record the phrasing of Maxey's arguments verbatim, we shall omit the notation "sic" we would otherwise have included. The reader may be sure the quoted language appears in Maxey's briefs exactly as reported.
[4]  Res judicata, like waiver, must be pled affirmatively. Id. at 618. Here, the question of res judicata is available for our review because the State raised the issue in its answer to Maxey's fifth petition and because the fifth post-conviction court relied, in part, on the defense in denying the petition. See id. at 617-18.
[5]  Given Maxey's practice of repeatedly filing frivolous and vexatious actions, it is tempting to enjoin him from filing further petitions except under narrowly tailored circumstances. He would not be the first abusively litigious prisoner to meet such a fate. See, e.g., Procup v. Strickland (11th Cir.1986), 792 F.2d 1069, 1072-73; Matter of Green (8th Cir.1978), 586 F.2d 1247, 1252; Peoples v. State (1988), Ala. Crim. App., 531 So. 2d 323, 327.
Nonetheless, we deem it preferable to take this opportunity to remind Maxey and all other participants in the post-conviction system of Ind. Post-Conviction Rule 1 § 12. Under P-C.R. 1 § 12, successive petitions for post-conviction relief are subject to dismissal without hearing if they are frivolous or are barred by res judicata or waiver. P-C.R. 1 § 12(b), (g), (h). See also Cornelius v. State (1991), Ind. App., 575 N.E.2d 20, trans. denied. If Maxey wants full hearings on his inevitable future petitions, he would be well advised to draft those petitions with clarity and to include factual and legal arguments sufficient to withstand the rigors of P-C.R. 1 § 12.

=== CASE 9739076 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:25.779276+00 ===

SHEPARD, Chief Justice.
The estate of David Miller seeks compensation from Gary Ledbetter, who was driving his friends home from a night of drinking and entertainment when Miller fell out of the back of the truck and died. We grant transfer to explore the nature of the duty which a driver owes to an intoxicated passenger.
The trial court granted summary judgment for the driver, appellee Ledbetter. The Court of Appeals reversed and remanded for a trial. Stephenson v. Ledbetter (1991), Ind.App., 575 N.E.2d 1035. We affirm the trial court.
I Facts and Case History
Many of the facts are undisputed. David Miller died after a night at the Marion County Fairgrounds, where he spent the evening drinking and watching a demolition derby with four friends. The five men had been drinking beer, each drinking somewhere in the range of four to eight beers in four to five hours. Miller drank as much as or more than Ledbetter. The estate cites evidence that describes Miller as "consuming two beers for every one the rest of them had." Appellant's Brief at 5.
Ledbetter drove the group to and from the Fairgrounds that evening. Two passengers rode in the cab of his pickup truck, and two passengers, including Miller, rode in the back of the truck. On the way home, Miller was sitting on the side rail of the truck, at times leaning toward the driver's window to talk to Ledbetter. Without any warning, Miller fell from the truck and suffered fatal head injuries. Ledbetter and all three other passengers, including the one riding in the back of the truck, said that in the moments preceding Miller's fall Ledbetter was driving thirty-five to forty-five miles per hour in a forty m.p.h. zone and did not do anything that would have caused Miller to fall. Ledbetter was given a breathalyzer test at the scene of the *1371accident; it revealed a blood alcohol content of .01%.
Appellant Jamise (Miller) Stephenson, Miller's wife, brought this negligence action against Ledbetter seeking actual and punitive damages. In granting Ledbetter's motion for summary judgment, the trial court held that Ledbetter had no legal duty to protect Miller from hurting himself as he rode in the back of Ledbetter's truck. The Court of Appeals reversed and remanded for trial, concluding Ledbetter had a duty to use reasonable care for Miller's safety and that whether he exercised such care under the circumstances was a question of fact in genuine dispute.
IL Summary Judgment
Summary judgment is appropriate only when there is no genuine issue of material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Ind.Trial Rule 56(C). The burden is on the moving party to prove there are no genuine issues of material fact and he is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Once the movant has sustained this burden, the opponent must respond by setting forth specific facts showing a genuine issue for trial; he may not simply rest on the allegations of his pleadings. T.R. 56(E).
The trial court's decision on a motion for summary judgment enters the process of appellate review clothed with a presumption of validity. The party appealing from the grant of summary judgment must persuade the appellate tribunal that the judgment was erroneous. The reviewing court faces the same issues that were before the trial court and follows the same process. Department of Revenue v. Caylor-Nickel Clinic (1992), Ind., 587 N.E.2d 1311. The trial court determination must be "carefully serutinized on appeal" to assure that the non-prevailing party is not improperly prevented from having his day in court. Id. at 1313; Ayres v. Indian Heights Vol. Fire Dept. (1986), Ind., 493 N.E.2d 1229. We are not limited to reviewing the trial court's reasons for granting summary judgment, but will affirm a grant of summary judgment if it is sustainable on any theory or basis found in the record. Havert v. Caldwell (1983), Ind., 452 N.E.2d 154. Summary judgment is rarely a proper method of disposition in actions based upon negligence claims. Stapinski v. Walsh Const. Co. (1979), 272 Ind. 6, 395 N.E.2d 1251.
Stephenson's action against Ledbetter is a negligence claim. To recover on a theory of negligence, the plaintiff must establish: 1) a duty on the part of the defendant to conform his conduct to a standard of care arising from his relationship with the plaintiff; 2) a failure of the defendant to conform his conduct to the requisite standard of care; and 3) an injury to the plaintiff proximately caused by the breach. Miller v. Griesel (1974), 261 Ind. 604, 308 N.E.2d 701. Absent a duty, there can be no breach and no recovery under a negligence theory. Thus, whether a duty exists is the first question which must be, answered. See, e.g., Clyde E. Williams & Assoc. v. Boatman (1978), 176 Ind.App. 430, 375 N.E.2d 1138.
IIL Is There a Duty?
Whether a defendant owes a duty of care to a plaintiff is a question of law for the court to decide. See, e.g., Webb v. Jarvis (1991), Ind., 575 N.E.2d 992, 995 ("Whether the law recognizes any obligation on the part of a particular defendant to conform his conduct to a certain standard for the benefit of the plaintiff is a question of law."); Gariup Const. Co. v. Foster (1988), Ind., 519 N.E.2d 1224, 1228 ("It is the exelusive province of the court to determine whether the relation existing between the parties gives rise to a duty to exercise care.").
The estate argues that an automobile driver owes his passenger a duty of reasonable care under the circumstances, and that whether Ledbetter breached his duty by continuing to drive while Miller was sitting in a dangerous position in the truck is a question of fact for the jury to decide. Ledbetter maintains the driver of a motor vehicle who commits no act of malfeasance owes no duty to protect or rescue a compe*1372tent adult passenger who has placed himself in a position of peril.
Like the Court of Appeals, we conclude that Ledbetter owed a duty of reasonable care to his passengers. In Indiana courts, the common law view has been that the operator of an automobile owes to a passenger the duty of exercising reasonable care in its operation. Munson v. Rupker (1925), 96 Ind.App. 15, 148 N.E. 169. This rule has generally prevailed in the rest of the country. See 5 Blashfleld Automobile Law and Practice § 211.1 (Frederick D. Lewis ed., 3 ed., 1966). In 1929, the Indiana General Assembly altered our common law rule by enacting a guest statute which prohibited motor vehicle guests from recovering for injuries from the owner or operator unless the owner acted intentionally or with reckless disregard of the rights of others.1 In 1984, the legislature amended the guest statute. It now prohibits recovery by immediate family or hitchhikers, absent wanton or willful misconduct.2 The statute is silent as to other guests. Thus we think that the common law rule recited in Munson, the rule which prevailed until 1929, is applicable to guests once again.3
IV. Duty Not Breached
Concluding Ledbetter owed a duty of reasonable care to Miller does not end our inquiry. To defeat a motion for summary judgment, there must be some evidence that Ledbetter failed to conform his conduct to the required standard of care, i.e., that he breached his duty to Miller. Whether a particular act or omission is a breach of a duty is generally a question of fact. It can be a question of law, however, when the facts are undisputed and only a single inference can be drawn from the facts. See, eg., Gamble v. Lewis (1949), 227 Ind. 455, 85 N.E.2d 629.
The estate contends that Ledbetter's duty to operate the truck in a reasonable manner also includes an obligation to prevent a competent adult passenger from sitting in a precarious position in the auto. The Court of Appeals concluded that whether Ledbetter exercised reasonable care for Miller's safety in these circumstances was a question of fact. We disagree, and hold that the failure of Ledbet-ter to prevent Miller from sitting on the side rail of the truck was not a breach of his duty to Miller.
There is no evidence that Ledbetter was driving in an unsafe manner with respect to Miller or the other passengers. There is no allegation that Ledbetter was driving too fast for the road or weather conditions, that he was swerving, that he stopped suddenly, or any other allegation of unreasonable operation of his truck. The estate offers no evidence to demonstrate Ledbet-ter gratuitously assumed any extra duties to Miller. The only wrong he is alleged to have committed was his failure to stop or glow the truck and compel Miller, a competent adult passenger, to sit in a safer position in the truck. We cannot conclude that his failure to do so was a breach of his duty to operate the truck with reasonable care.
Passengers in automobiles are, after all, under the duty to use reasonable care to avoid injuring themselves. Lindley v. Sink (1940), 218 Ind. 1, 30 N.E.2d 456. Simply because a person is a passenger does not mean he is absolved from all personal responsibility for his own safety. Similarly, a passenger's intoxication generally does not place on the driver a special duty of care to that passenger in addition to what would be owed to sober passengers. "Intoxication of a passenger is no excuse for failure to exercise that degree of care for his own safety that a reasonable, prudent man would have exercised under the same or like circumstances. He *1373is held to use the same degree of care as a sober person." Colaw v. Nicholson (1983), Ind.App., 450 N.E.2d 1023, 1026. Cf. Forrest v. Gilley (1991), Ind.App., 570 N.E.2d 934, 937, trans. denied (1992) ("[A] plaintiff's voluntary intoxication [does] not place a special duty of care towards that plaintiff on another party who does not furnish alcohol to the plaintiff.").
Thus, although drivers owe a duty of care to their passengers, the duty does not make the driver solely responsible for the passengers' safety and does not excuse passengers from exercising care for their own safety. A driver cannot be an insurer of his passenger's safety simply because the passenger is not using reasonable care to avoid injuring himself. This is especially true when viewed in the light of the social policy of encouraging "designated drivers" to drive intoxicated passengers.4 While Ledbetter may not have been a "designated driver" in the strict sense of the term because he had been drinking, he stated he limited his drinking that evening because he was driving. To hold a driver liable for the irresponsible actions of an intoxicated passenger would cut against this important social policy of encouraging the use of designated drivers. The material facts are undisputed, and the only inference to be drawn from these facts is that Ledbetter did nothing in the operation of his truck which would be a breach of his duty to Miller. Ledbetter is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.
We grant transfer, vacate the opinion of the Court of Appeals, and affirm the trial court's grant of summary judgment in Led-better's favor.
GIVAN, DICKSON, and KRAHULIK, JJ., concur.
DeBRULER, J., dissents with separate opinion.
. Indiana Acts 1929, ch. 201, § 1. This statute was amended in 1937 to provide the owner or operator would be liable for loss or damage arising only from the wanton or wilful misconduct of the operator. Indiana Acts 1937, ch. 259, § 1.
. P.L. 68-1984, § 2. The guest statute is now found at Ind.Code §§ 34-4-39-1 to -4 (West.Supp.1991).
. - Miller was not a member of Ledbetter's immediate family or a hitchhiker; thus, the guest statute does not apply to him.
. See Duran v. City of Douglas, 904 F.2d 1372, 1377 n. 3 (9th Cir.1990) ("[I]t is a widely-accepted safety technique to have one person in the group remain sober as the 'designated driver' precisely so that others can drink without having to worry about driving home safely.") Alcohol-related accidents have been estimated to account for one-half of all highway deaths, and - drunken driving has been called "a grave national problem." See Hilary Ray Weinert, Social Hosts and Drunken Drivers: A Duty to Intervene?, 133 U.Pa.L.Rev. 867, 870 nn. 15-16.

=== CASE 9739077 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:25.783346+00 ===

DeBRULER, Justice,
dissenting.
This was a 1978 Chevrolet half-ton pickup truck with an open bed. It was owned by defendant Ledbetter who was an auto mechanic by trade. All had been drinking beer during this evening out. Ledbetter knew that plaintiff's decedent Miller drank two beers for his one. Ledbetter was driving, and Reiva and Kysar were seated next to him in the cab. Miller was in the bed of the truck with Harsh. Miller sat on the rail along the left side of the bed, leaning so far out and around that his head and shoulder could be seen through the driver's side window of the cab by Kysar as Miller carried on a conversation with Ledbetter. Ledbetter did not warn Miller about leaning out in this manner, believing that he had a good enough grip to hang on and could handle himself. Travelling 45 miles per hour, the truck reached a small rise in the road, where Miller fell out and sustained fatal injuries.
The relationship between the parties here is one of truck driver and live human cargo. A truck is a tool. The cab of a truck is for the driver and passengers. The bed of a truck is for transporting cargo. The rear suspension and tires are very firm. The jarring effect from passing over bumps in the road is transferred perfectly to the rigid floor and sides of the bed and to the cargo. The ability of the driver to communicate with persons in the bed is severely restricted. Persons occupying an open bed while moving down the street are in a hazardous position. The driver of a truck knows all this; a guest choosing to sit in the bed, particularly a child or intoxicated person, may know very little.
It is unlawful to carry a load which extends out beyond the fender line on the driver's side. I.C. 9-20-8-5. It is unlawful to transport a child under four years of age where there are no seat restraints I.C. 9-19-11-38. The operator of vehicle must exercise proper caution upon observing an *1374intoxicated person. I.C. 9-21-8-87. It is unlawful to drive faster than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions, having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. I.C. 9-21-5-1. These expressions of public policy lend support to the process of understanding this appeal.
It is the relationship existing between parties which may give rise to the duty of one to exercise care for the safety of another. Neal v. Home Builders, Inc. (1953), 232 Ind. 160, 111 N.E.2d 280. The open bed of a pickup truck is not designed for passengers and is a dangerous place for them, even where the truck is operated below the maximum speed limit and in accord with the special rules of the road. When the driver of a truck permits any untended child or intoxicated person to ride there, he should be legally responsible for placing such person in a position of peril. See Senese v. Peoples, 626 F.Supp. 465 (M.D.Pa.1985). When such driver permits a normal adult to ride there without making the peril known to such adult, he should likewise be legally responsible. Johnson v. Pedicord (1937), 105 Ind.App. 71, 10 N.E.2d 295. I agree with the Fourth District in this case that it was a jury question whether Ledbetter breached his duty to use reasonable care for the safety of Miller when, after learning Miller was sitting on the side of the truck, Ledbetter simply rolled on down the road, taking no action to diminish the danger to Miller.

=== CASE 9739078 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:26.011685+00 ===

C.O. Grathwohl, J.
Defendant appeals from his jury conviction of first-degree criminal sexual conduct, MCL 750.520b(l)(f); MSA 28.788(2)(l)(f). Defendant was sentenced to a prison term of three to ten years. We affirm.
The instant case is presented as an appeal from defendant’s fourth trial on this charge. Defendant was originally charged by information filed in circuit court on January 15, 1980, for the instant offense, which occurred on December 22, 1979. The first trial resulted in a conviction for first-degree criminal sexual conduct, which was reversed by this Court on two grounds: (1) prosecutorial mis*745conduct in eliciting testimony from the arresting officer of defendant’s silence, contrary to People v Bobo, 390 Mich 355; 212 NW2d 190 (1973); and (2) the erroneous admission of defendant’s postarrest statements elicited contrary to his Miranda right to a cessation of police interrogation once an accused has chosen to remain silent. People v Peeples, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, decided November 10, 1981 (Docket No. 55765). The first ground was deemed "so blatant a violation of Bobo as to constitute an affront to the integrity of the trial process.” Defendant’s second trial concluded with the court’s grant of defendant’s request for a mistrial after a police witness made an indirect reference to defendant’s first trial and sentence during prosecutorial direct examination. Immediately prior to the court’s ruling, the prosecutor represented that he had advised the witness not to make reference to defendant’s previous imprisonment and that he had not intended that the objectionable testimony be given. Defendant’s third trial in November of 1982 resulted in a conviction of first-degree criminal sexual conduct. This conviction was also reversed on appeal for two stated reasons: (1) the testimony given by one of the arresting officers was contrary to defendant’s Miranda rights as determined in the first appeal; consequently, the trial court’s decision to allow the testimony was contrary to the law of the case; and (2) the trial court should have given an instruction on the lesser included offense of second-degree criminal sexual conduct. People v Peeples, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, decided October 10, 1985 (Docket No. 70405). The fourth trial resulted in his third conviction of first-degree criminal sexual conduct in February and March of 1986. This conviction is the basis for the instant appeal.
*746The four trials did not violate defendant’s right to due process of law. There is no evidence of blatant or inexcusable misconduct on the part of the police or prosecutor during the second, third or fourth trials. People v Walls, 117 Mich App 691; 324 NW2d 136 (1982). Nor was there evidence that the successive prosecutions were brought to harass defendant or in an attempt to "judge shop.”
In People v Thompson, 424 Mich 118; 379 NW2d 49 (1985), our Supreme Court upheld the defendant’s conviction following a third trial. The Thompson Court held that retrial following a mistrial due to a deadlocked jury does not violate a defendant’s right to due process or a fair trial. The Court stated that subsequent retrials are continuations of the same case assuming a sufficiency of the evidence. I find no authority that a fourth trial violates defendant’s right to due process.
In three of the four separate trials, a jury found defendant guilty of first-degree criminal sexual conduct. It can be argued that defendant was subjected each time to expense, ordeal and anxiety. However, my sympathies lie with the victim who not only was forced against her will to perform oral sex twice and have intercourse twice with defendant, but also had to relive those agonizing moments many times prior to and during the four trials.
I reject defendant’s claim that the evidence was insufficient to support the personal injury element serving to elevate defendant’s conviction from criminal sexual conduct in the third degree to the first degree. See People v Hollis, 96 Mich App 333, 336-338; 292 NW2d 538 (1980); People v Kraai, 92 Mich App 398, 402-403; 285 NW2d 309 (1979), Iv den 407 Mich 954 (1980).
Affirmed.
Murphy, J., concurred in the result only.

=== CASE 9739079 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:26.015938+00 ===

*747Holbrook, Jr., P.J.,
(dissenting). I would reverse. I would also reject defendant’s claim that the evidence was insufficient to support the personal injury element serving to elevate defendant’s conviction from criminal sexual conduct in the third degree to the first degree. See People v Hollis, 96 Mich App 333, 336-338; 292 NW2d 538 (1980); People v Kraai, 92 Mich App 398, 402-403; 285 NW2d 309 (1979), lv den 407 Mich 954 (1980). Additionally, I would reject defendant’s double jeopardy claim. See People v McPherson, 38 Mich App 534; 197 NW2d 173 (1972).
Where I disagree with Judge Grathwohl is with respect to defendant’s argument that by subjecting him to repeated retrial due process was violated. I agree with defendant and premise my opinion for reversal on the conclusion that the course these proceedings took at some point amounted to a denial of due process. Due process is violated by a failure to accord the defendant fundamental fairness. People v Thompson, 424 Mich 118, 133; 379 NW2d 49 (1985). A corollary of this basic principle is that prosecutorial misconduct depriving the defendant of a fair proceeding can amount to a denial of due process. See People v Walls, 117 Mich App 691; 324 NW2d 136 (1982).
In Thompson, supra, the defendant contended that his retrial after a mistrial declared due to jury deadlock in the second of three trials violated both Michigan and federal due process guarantees. Although the Court rejected the claim on its facts, which did not rise to the level of fundamental unfairness, the Court explicitly refused to foreclose the possibility that repeated retrials could violate due process. Taking prompting from the intimation by our Supreme Court in Thompson that due process does act to constrain repeated retrials at *748some point,1 I would conclude that each case must be examined on its own facts and turn to the controlling considerations in the case at bar. Unlike a double jeopardy evaluation, which is limited in focus to the trial in which jeopardy is claimed to bar any subsequent retrial, consideration of a possible due process violation extends to an overview of the entire history of the prosecution against defendant.
Defendant was subjected to the expense, ordeal, and state of anxiety attendant to four trials. Although I do not believe that four trials for one offense necessarily amount to a due process deprivation in most instances, I note the predominant role that prosecutorial and police misconduct and neglect played in withholding a final determination of guilt or innocence in the course of a single trial. Some instances of misconduct appear to be blatant and inexcusable. Although this case factually presents a close question, at some point enough becomes enough. I would conclude that a fourth trial in this case surpassed that point and thereby denied defendant a fair trial. Accordingly, I would reverse with the direction that the charges against defendant be dismissed._
See also People v Pribble, 72 Mich App 219; 249 NW2d 363 (1976), lv den 409 Mich 902 (1980); Harris v State, 312 Md 225; 539 A2d 637 (1988).

=== CASE 9739080 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:27.232639+00 ===

LaROCQUE, J.
The state appeals an order suppressing as evidence the business records and patient files of Woodrow A. DeSmidt, Jr., a Green Bay dentist, seized pursuant to a search warrant. DeSmidt is charged with nine counts of medical assistance fraud and four counts of insurance fraud.
The principal appeal is authorized by sec. 974.05(l)(d)2, Stats., permitting review of a final order *327adverse to the state that suppresses evidence. The circuit court agreed with DeSmidt that the warrant failed to adequately particularize the things subject to seizure, thus delegating a constitutionally unacceptable discretion to the police. DeSmidt argues, alternatively, that if this court concludes that the warrant authorized a seizure of all of his records, then it constitutes a "general warrant" and fails because the affidavit in support lacked probable cause to justify so broad a search. We hold that although the warrant was directed to all of DeSmidt's records and files and delegated no discretion, the supporting affidavit failed to establish a sufficiently pervasive fraudulent scheme so as to justify a comprehensive seizure of all records and files. We therefore affirm the suppression order.
DeSmidt cross-appeals an order allowing the state to substitute a copy of the lost original affidavit and complaint supporting the search warrant. Because the copies were properly authenticated and therefore reconstructed rather than supplemented the original records, we affirm the trial court's ruling on this issue.
We first address DeSmidt's cross-appeal challenging the state's substitution of copies of the lost documents because, if the trial court erred, there is no record on which the state can seek review. After conducting an evidentiary hearing on the issue, the trial court made the following findings:
This Court is satisfied by evidence beyond a reasonable doubt that the copies of the complaint and affidavit are exact copies . . . and were the basis upon which the warrant was issued. Attorney [General] McConnell testified that the affidavit was prepared by him, and executed... by Investigator Isely in his presence . . . that the affidavit itself. . . was Xeroxed. . . that Judge Grant signed a warrant after *328reviewing an affidavit, that he notarized Mr. Isely's signature on a complaint, and that those documents were then taken to the Brown County District Attorney's office for Xeroxing. This Court finds it particularly relevant that the copies ... are not blank copies, but are photocopies of executed documents, including the signatures of Mr. Isely and Judge Grant on the complaint, and Mr. Isely and Mr. McConnell on the affidavit. . . . While this Court will acknowledge that the possibility does exist that the State had the opportunity to substitute the original affidavit with another document subsequent to its review by Judge Grant, this Court is satisfied by evidence beyond a reasonable doubt that that did not occur in this case. That possibility would also exist as it concerns the complaint, although with the caveat that Judge Grant's signature does appear on the proffered copy. This Court is aware of the ability to alter documents by the use of a word processor. However, this Court is again satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that that was not done . . ..
The defense presented no evidence that would contradict these findings. The trial court's findings of fact will not be upset unless they are against the great weight and clear preponderance of the evidence. State v. Bembenek, 111 Wis. 2d 617, 631, 331 N.W.2d 616, 623 (Ct. App. 1983). Section 968.22, Stats., provides: "Effect of technical irregularities. No evidence seized under a search warrant shall be suppressed because of technical irregularities not affecting the substantial rights of the defendant." The trial court's order permitting the use of copies is affirmed.
Turning to the state's appeal of the suppression order, we address first whether the warrant delegated *329discretion to the police to decide which records it should seize. The warrant provides in relevant part:
WHEREAS, John P. Isely, Jr., has this day complained . . . that. . ..
there are now located and concealed certain things, to wit:
Patient charts and dental records, recording among other things, services performed, dates of service; X-ray negatives in envelopes attached to the individual patient dental records; business records including but not limited to, appointment book or books, copies of patient statements, receipt book or books, fee schedule, ledgers, daily business summaries, remittance forms; Medicaid provider handbooks.
which things . . ..
[ . . . may constitute evidence of a crime, to wit: medical assistance fraud committed in violation of Section 49.49(1) (a) . . . and fraudulent insurance claims in violation of sec. 943.395 . . ..]
NOW, THEREFORE, . . . you are commanded forthwith to search ... for said things, and if . . . found,
[to bring the same. . . before the Circuit Court. . ..]
The subordinate clause "which things may constitute evidence of a crime, to wit: medical assistance fraud . . . and fraudulent insurance claims ..." merely expresses the purpose of the search. It is part of the "WHEREAS" clause that precedes the actual order for the search. Contrary to the trial court's holding, the *330clause is not a directive to the officer to conduct an on-the-premises quasi-judicial examination of the records to determine their evidentiary value. It is merely part of the formal recitation of the magistrate's findings based upon the complaint and affidavit.
We recognize that almost any directive to seize documents will necessitate a limited discrimination by the police. Obviously records must be summarily reviewed to assure that they fall within the recited description. This is a ministerial task, however, not a discretionary one. That the records "may constitute evidence of a crime" was the decision of the magistrate when he issued the warrant and not a judgment of the officer when he executed it. We therefore conclude that the warrant stated authorization for the seizure of all of DeSmidt's records and did not unlawfully delegate discretion to the police.
The more difficult issue is whether the government's affidavit established probable cause to seize all of the business and patient files or whether the magistrate issued a forbidden "general warrant." Because this issue is especially fact-sensitive, we set out the affidavit verbatim in the appendix. DeSmidt does not challenge the reliability of the named informant, Harriet Helene Berger, an employee in his office for ten or eleven weeks during the summer of 1985. Rather, he challenges the sufficiency of her information to support so broad a search. Berger stated that "in her judgment DeSmidt was engaged in a series of illegal activities," and then detailed a description of six specific patients by name or identifying number, date, and fraudulent treatment history. She described those incidents as "common practice," done "routinely," and as "examples," i.e., ones that serve as a pattern. Berger also claimed that comparison of business records of DeSmidt and his partner "would *331disclose other instances" of Medicaid and private insurance fraud. She describes a statement by DeSmidt's associate, Dr. McClain, that led Berger to conclude that McClain "was being trained to conduct her business" in a similar fashion. She also reported that DeSmidt "adjusted his fees" when billing some insurance carriers so as to receive his full customary fees even though the insurance covered only a percentage of the billed fees. This allegation thus implicates the files of uninsured patients in order to establish proof of "customary fees."
As the result of the all-encompassing seizure authorized, four agents of the Wisconsin Department of Justice removed twenty-two boxes of materials — over 2,000 patient files, financial records, including all business and accounting files and ledgers, bank statements, appointment books, and payroll check stubs. Agent Isely decided not to seize one file cabinet of "old records" from the 1970's, although he interpreted the warrant to authorize seizure of all records and files. An overbroad warrant is not saved by the exercise of executive discretion in its execution. United States v. District Court, 407 U.S. 297, 317 (1972).
The fourth amendment does not deny law enforcement officers the support of the usual inferences that reasonable people draw from evidence, although it requires that such inferences be drawn by a neutral and detached magistrate. State v. Starke, 81 Wis. 2d 399, 409, 260 N.W.2d 739, 745 (1978). "Affidavits for search warrants need not be drafted with elaborate specificity, [n]or should a policeman's affidavit 'be judged as an entry in an essay contest.' " Id. at 410, 260 N.W.2d at 745 (quoting United States v. Harris, 403 U.S. 573, 579 (1971) (citation omitted)). "Recital of some of the underlying circumstances in the affidavit is essential if *332the magistrate is to perform his detached function and not serve merely as a rubber stamp for the police." Starke, 81 Wis. 2d at 410, 260 N.W.2d at 746 (quoting United States v. Ventresca, 380 U.S. 102, 108 (1965)). "Because the informed and deliberate determinations of a neutral magistrate are to be preferred over the hurried decisions of arresting officers, 'the resolution of doubtful or marginal cases in this area should be largely determined by the preference to be accorded to warrants . . ..' " Starke, 81 Wis. 2d at 411, 260 N.W.2d at 746 (quoting Ventresca, 380 U.S. at 109).
"Deference to the magistrate, however, is not boundless." United States v. Leon, 468 U.S. 897, 914 (1984). Reviewing courts will not defer to a warrant that does not provide the magistrate with a substantial basis for determining the existence of probable cause. Id. at 915.
The presence of criminal practices during the summer of 1985 does not give rise to the reasonable inference that DeSmidt was engaged in a lifetime of wrongful conduct. The fourth amendment violation here is not that certain "innocent records" were ordered seized along with those that showed deceit; the violation is the open-ended directive to go backward infinitely based upon three months' activities.
We are not unmindful of the problems presented to law enforcement in this area. The development of copy machines, the growth of white-collar crime, and the accompanying explosion of paper, coupled with the expansion of court authority to seize mere evidence (as distinct from the fruits and instrumentalities of crime) all contribute. United States v. Abrams, 615 F.2d 541, *333549 (1st Cir. 1980) (Campbell, J., concurring). Nevertheless, the reasonableness requirements of the fourth amendment dictate a less intrusive invasion than was ordered here. Without attempting to set the outside limits of a search warrant under these facts, we conclude that the authority was too broad. The informant in this case made no claim to know the contents of files outside her employment period. Abrams, under similar facts, suggests that the search is restricted to the time span of the informant's employment. Even if the fraud is reasonably inferred to precede Berger's employment, there is nothing in the affidavit to suggest it went on for many years.
Finally, the attorney general alternatively urges us to apply the good faith exception to the exclusionary rule created by the United States Supreme Court in Leon. We decline the state's invitation. The exclusionary rule in Wisconsin is based upon the Wisconsin Constitution, art. I, sec. 11, as interpreted in Hoyer v. State, 180 Wis. 407, 193 N.W. 89 (1923). If the exclusionary rule stated in Hoyer is to be overruled, that is a function of our supreme court. See State v. Grawien, 123 Wis. 2d 428, 432, 367 N.W.2d 816, 818 (Ct. App. 1985). That court has declined to do so at least once since Leon was written. State v. Brady, 130 Wis. 2d 443, 453-54, 388 N.W.2d 151, 156 (1986).1
By the Court. — Order affirmed.
*334APPENDIX
AFFIDAVIT
State of Wisconsin ^ County of Dane /
John P. Isely, Jr., being duly sworn, states as follows:
1. Affiant is an investigator for the Wisconsin Department of Justice, Medicaid Fraud Control Unit, and in that capacity knows the following. Affiant was assigned to investigate a complaint filed by one Harriet Berger.
2. Harriet Helene Berger was personally interviewed by your affiant on August 26,1985, in Green Bay, Wisconsin, and by telephone on August 20, 1985, and again on August 28, 1985.
3. Berger stated that she was employed by a Woodrow A. DeSmidt, DDS, at his offices located at 1515 Sixth Street, Green Bay, Wisconsin, for ten or eleven weeks. Her employment was terminated by DeSmidt on or about August 15,1985.
4. Berger stated that during her employment by DeSmidt, she was responsible for preparing third party payor claim forms including Wisconsin Medicaid claims on behalf of Dr. DeSmidt and his associate, Kelleen McClain, DDS, and had access to the files and records of their patients and to the business records involved with their patient care in the regular course of her duties.
5. Berger stated that in her judgment DeSmidt was engaged in a series of illegal activities. She stated that this belief resulted from a comparison of various *335records in DeSmidt's office that disclosed claims had been filed with E.D.S.-Federal for services performed on one date when in fact patient records and other documents disclosed that in fact the claimed services had been performed on another date when the Medicaid recipient was not eligible to receive medical assistance.
6. As an example of this kind of false claiming, she cited a claim for services filed with E.D.S.-Federal for payment under Wisconsin's Medical Assistance Program for services allegedly performed for medical assistance recipient, P0398-42-1992A01, of Green Bay, Wisconsin, on June 10, 1985 and June 18, 1985, when the patient's records and the appointment book disclosed that the services were in fact performed on April 10, 1985 and April 25, 1985. The billing of these services as having been done on the later dates was for the reason that the patient was not an eligible recipient on the dates service was actually provided.
7. Your affiant examined the E.D.S.-Federal computer information, which showed that Medicaid recipient P0398-42-1992A01, was not eligible for medical assistance until May 29,1985.
8. Berger stated that the correct dates for the claimed services would be disclosed by the patient account card and the patient's dental records as being April 10,1985 and April 25,1985. She further stated that a remittance and status report for these services would disclose the dates of services as falsely claimed to E.D.S.Federal, to be June 10, 1985 and June 18, 1985, respectively.
9. Berger further stated that DeSmidt routinely took bitewing x-rays of his patients' teeth. Such x-rays were also routinely billed to E.D.S.-Federal as being per-iapical x-rays when performed for medical assistance recipients because bitewing x-rays are not covered ser*336vices under the Medical Assistance Program without prior authorization.
10. As an example of this common practice of billing bitewing x-rays as being periapical x-rays, Berger cited the April 10, 1985, x-rays billed for P0398-42-1992A01 as having been taken on June 10, 1985. Berger stated the x-rays in the dental file of P0398-42-1992A01 would be seen to be bitewing x-rays, and the envelope in which they are kept in the patient's dental record would identify them as bitewing x-rays as would the entry in this patient's chart. Berger further stated that she had no doubt that DeSmidt knew that bitewing x-rays are services not routinely covered by the Wisconsin Medical Assistance Program because a list of uncovered services was posted at the reception desk in DeSmidt's office.
11. Berger stated that in another case DeSmidt had received prior authorization to perform root canal therapy for patient S0393-82-5322C01. This prior authorization stated in the approval that the authorization expired on April 15,1984. The dental records of this MA patient will show that the root canal services were in fact performed on May 30, 1984, according to Berger. Affiant examined the corresponding MA claim which stated the service was performed on April 11,1984.
12. Berger stated other examples of Wisconsin medical assistance claims filed with E.D.S.-Federal which she claimed DeSmidt's business and medical records would disclose as containing false information in order to obtain payment for services which would not be reimbursed by E.D.S.-Federal if the claims were wholly accurate.
13. Your affiant has examined Medical Assistance Program records as to information received from Berger and found that her information concerning MA patients *337was correct as to claims filed with E.D.S.-Federal for services allegedly performed by DeSmidt. He further believes that she is correct in stating such claims contain information which is not true.
14. Berger stated that when she confronted DeSmidt with the fact that he was engaging in activities which were illegal he smiled and said that it was his office. Shortly after this confrontation DeSmidt terminated Berger's services.
15. Berger stated that similar practices are being utilized in filing claims with private insurance carriers. She gave several examples of cases where claims were filed with private insurance companies which contained false information as to dates of service. She specifically referred to a patient named Nancy Landin. Berger said that false information was entered on a claim filed with Fireman's Fund Insurance Companies because coverage under the involved policy had ceased at the time the services were in fact provided. Berger stated that examination of DeSmidt's dental records of Nancy Landin as well as the appointment book would in fact disclose that the services claimed to have been provided on May 23, 1985, were in fact provided on June 3, 1985. A similar falsehood was made to this same carrier for services rendered to Jeff Landin on June 13, 1985, under this same policy by claiming such services were performed on May 13,1985, when the insurance policy was in force. A similarly false claim was filed by DeSmidt on behalf of David Landin.
16. Berger cited as another example of Dr. DeSmidt's willingness to file fraudulent claims, an incident involving a patient by the name of Mike Udell. Udell received certain services on January 29, 1985. On August 6, 1985, Berger received a call from Udell. Udell asked if the services could be billed to his insurance *338company under a policy that became effective in March of 1985. Berger stated she communicated the substance of this phone conversation to DeSmidt. She stated DeSmidt instructed her to bill as requested by Udell. Berger stated she told DeSmidt she could not do that.
17. Berger also stated that DeSmidt adjusted his fees for services billed to some insurance carriers so as to receive his full customary fees even though such carriers paid only a percentage of his fees that were billed.
18. Affiant was informed from records maintained by the Wisconsin Department of Health and Social Services of the following information. Woodrow A. DeSmidt, DDS, has been a certified provider in the Wisconsin Medical Assistance Program, otherwise known as Medicaid, since July 1,1975, and has been assigned MA provider number W78718008 and maintains his offices at 1515 Sixth Street, Green Bay, Wisconsin, 54304, and that Kelleen Y. McClain, DDS, has been a certified provider in the Wisconsin Medical Assistance Program since June 11,1985, and has been assigned MA provider number E27013700.
19. Berger stated that an examination and comparison of the business records of DeSmidt and McClain would disclose other instances in which DeSmidt and/or McClain have caused claims to be filed with the Wisconsin Medicaid Program and private insurance companies containing false information for the puipose of obtaining monies from that program and those companies to which DeSmidt and/or McClain are not entitled were the truth known.
20. Berger stated that she believed that Dr. McClain was being trained to conduct her business in a fashion similar to that in which Dr. DeSmidt was conducting his and Dr. McClain had stated to her (Berger) that MA patient eligibility dates presented no problem *339inasmuch as the service could be backdated on the claim forms to fall within the eligibility period.
21. Berger also stated that active patient files are kept in one of two types of manila folders which are color coded to indicate the source of payment (orange-MA, yellow-personal payment, and blue-other third party payment). These patient files can be found in bookshelf type files in the rear of the reception area and in racks outside of the three operatories within DeSmidt's offices. Records can also be found in the operatories themselves and in the doctor's office on occasion.
22. Berger stated the appointment book is maintained on a calendar basis, has a brown vinyl cover and contains appointments for the hygienist and each of the dentists. It is maintained by the office manager in the reception desk area.
23. Berger stated that other records are maintained in other file cabinets, in closets, in racks on a small table, in DeSmidt's desk and other areas within the suite of offices occupied by Drs. DeSmidt and McClain.
24. Berger stated that DeSmidt is knowledgeable about the Medicaid provider rules concerning dentistry and maintains two copies of provider manuals, one for the use of DeSmidt and one for the use of McClain, which are located on top of a file cabinet in the business office and that a list of uncovered services is located at the receptionist's desk. The provider manual sets out in detail covered dental services and procedures and limitations as to frequency, prior authorization and other requirements.
25. Berger identified the location of old records, ledger cards, patient files and records, the office used by Drs. McClain and DeSmidt for office work, and other *340locations by oral description and by drawing a rough sketch of Dr. DeSmidt's suite of offices.
26. Affiant has visited and seen the building located at 1515 Sixth Street, Green Bay, Wisconsin, and noted that it is of brown wood and stone construction located on the south side of Sixth Street. A large wooden sign located on the northwest corner of the building contains the words "Dr. W.A. DeSmidt, Dentist; Dr. K.Y. McClain, Dentist; Bay Area Denture Lab, Towns Dental Studio; Excel Optics." Another sign observable from the parking area in the rear of the building located on the south side of the building reads "Dr. W.A. DeSmidt, lower level," and contains an arrow indicating DeSmidt's offices are to the left or west side of the building.
27. Affiant knows the following based upon six years of experience investigating suspected Medicaid fraud for both the Wisconsin Department of Health and Social Services and the Wisconsin Department of Justice. Medicaid is a program intended to provide free, or nearly free, health care to impoverished residents of the State of Wisconsin. It is administered by the State of Wisconsin and financed jointly by the state and federal government. Persons who wish to receive such health care must be certified as eligible. Health care providers who wish to supply the services must be certified. A certified provider who renders services to a recipient receives payment for those services by submitting a claim form to the Medicaid fiscal agent, E.D.S.-Federal Corporation, located at 6406 Bridge Road, Madison, Wisconsin. These claim forms must correctly identify the recipient, the provider, the service provided by description and code number, the date of service, and the fee charged. Payment is then made to the provider by E.D.S.-Federal from State of Wisconsin general revenue funds based upon reliance on the information in the *341claim form. The payment made to providers for each individual service listed is identified on a document called a Remittance and Status Report.
Dated this 24th day of September, 1985.
(s) John P. Isely, Jr.
JOHN P. ISELY, Jr.
Investigator Wisconsin Department of Justice
Subscribed and sworn to before me this 24th day of September, 1985.
(s) Robert B. McConnell
Notary Public, State of Wisconsin
My Commission: is permanent
We do not reach DeSmidt's allegations that the state's misconduct in the execution of the warrant and in its post-seizure conduct also requires suppression of the evidence. DeSmidt claims the seizure of his personal checkbook and bank statements, his home and car payment books, notes pinned on a bulletin board and more. He also claims that almost all records were kept for nearly a year until he got a court order for their return; *334that the court order was violated; and that hundreds of X-rays and records were never returned.

=== CASE 9739094 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:40.870799+00 ===

RANDALL, Judge
(concurring in part, dissenting in part).
I concur with the majority on issue one, namely appellant’s claim that certain railroad crossing devices were inadequate. I agree with the majority that Minn.Stat. § 219.402 (Supp.1985) supports the trial court’s dismissal.
The second issue, the question of statutory immunity, based on a claim that the state negligently delayed the repainting of pavement markings, is closer. I agree the *318arguments by the state as to why they waited a certain number of days before repainting a railroad crossing warning sign which had been obliterated by freshly laid tar appear reasonable and are premised on a sensible balancing of considerations such as availability of work crews in isolated areas of the state.
However, when all is said and done, the real policy decision-making process and the conduct at the protected planning level had all been done in the past. At some point long ago in time, the decision was made to paint a pavement marking on the road leading up to the Dugdale crossing. The initial decision to paint or not paint a warning would be a type of discretionary function protected by the statute. As mentioned, however, it had been decided a long time ago to put down a warning painting, and maintain and resurface it as needed. There was no engineering report stating the pavement crossing warning should be removed. The record reflects no dispute that it had to be repainted after the road was blacktopped. The record is clear that for previously decided safety reasons, respondent was intent on replacing the destroyed markings with new paint.
The state knew that the paint had disappeared when they resurfaced the road, and knew that it should be and was to be repainted. The reason given for the time interval before repainting is that the asphalt repair project needs to weather a week to two weeks in order for the freshly laid pavement to cure. If not properly cured, the paint may soak into the pavement and obliterate the words, thus necessitating another painting.
The road had been resurfaced on June 25, 1986. The markings were not repainted until July 9th. The pavement may have been ready to repaint as soon as July 4th (10 days). Appellant argues it was negligence for the state to wait another five days before putting down an important warning. The fatal accident happened on July 5th, and thus, appellant claims there is a causal relationship between the accident and the lack of the warning.
The state argues the painting crew was on vacation and holiday leave over the July 4th weekend and July 9th was its highest and best use of limited resources, citing the fact of having to hire extra personnel or pay overtime wages to have done the painting on a holiday weekend.
Although it could be argued either way, protected planning level policy making or unprotected, ministerial operational level work, I suggest it is closer to unprotected operational level conduct. There is a generally recognized distinction between planning level decisions, which are protected, and operational level decisions, which are unprotected. Schaeffer v. State, 444 N.W.2d 876, 879 (Minn.App.1989).
Protection does not extend to professional or scientific judgment which does not involve a balancing of policy objectives. See Nusbaum v. County of Blue Earth, 422 N.W.2d 713, 719 (Minn.1988). To establish immunity, the governmental entity must produce “evidence that the conduct was of a policy-making nature involving social, political, or economical considerations.” Id.
The decision to wait so many days 1 before repainting fresh asphalt so that it has cured properly and will accept fresh paint seems to be nothing more than the professional or scientific judgment of someone who is familiar with the chemical makeup and physical characteristics of asphalt and of fresh paint. Elected or appointed officials discuss policy and then make protected discretionary decisions as to which road or crossing gets signals. Once those decisions are made, I suggest an engineer or foreman on the job makes the on-the-spot professional judgment as to such operational decisions as whether you use oil based paint or water based paint, or how many crew members to send, and when to send them.
*319As the courts have stressed, the determination of what is protected discretionary governmental policy-making decisions versus unprotected decisions at the operational level is often difficult to make because so many decisions at both levels have characteristics of each type of conduct. When stripped to its essence, I suggest the decision of the painting crew as to when to repaint a warning they had been told to repaint was operational. Therefore, this claim should survive the motion for summary judgment based on the doctrine of discretionary immunity. This is not meant to cast strength on appellant’s claim of negligence. Although the record before us is limited, it could well be that the decision to wait an extra three or four days was within the bounds of professional judgment. Further, the question of causation is not firm for appellant and has yet to be settled. The state’s conduct will rise or fall on the factfinder’s determination of negligence.
If the evidence at trial does not change, respondent may well prevail on a motion for a directed verdict on negligence and/or causation at the close of evidence. The trial court will decide that at that time. I simply suggest the label “policy” does not logically extend all the way from the top down to the most mechanical decision made by the person on the job required to do the actual work. As stated in Nusbaum, discretionary protection does not cover professional judgment where it does not involve the balancing of policy objectives.
I dissent on issue two and would find that appellant at least survives the motion on summary judgment on his negligence claim where summary judgment was based on the assertion of discretionary immunity. The issues of negligence and causation should move on to determination by the factfinder.
. See Hansen v. City of Saint Paul, 298 Minn. 205, 214 N.W.2d 346 (1974) (where city officials had knowledge that two dangerous dogs were loose, the decision of the dogcatchers not to capture the dogs until after lunch was at an operational level and therefore, was not protected conduct).

=== CASE 9739095 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:41.544165+00 ===

OPINION
WILLIAM J. FLEMING, Judge.*
Louis and Rosemary Masonick sued appellant City of Lino Lakes, respondent J.P. Homes, Inc., and respondent Fireside Corner, Inc. seeking recovery for fire damage to their newly-constructed home. The City of Lino Lakes moved for summary judgment on two theories: (1) discretionary act immunity pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 466.03, subd. 6; and (2) no private duty. The trial court denied the City’s motion, and it appealed. We reverse on the issue of discretionary immunity.
FACTS
In July 1989, respondents Louis and Rosemary Masonick hired J.P. Homes, Inc. to build a custom-designed house for them in Lino Lakes. On January 30, 1990, subcontractor Fireside Corner, Inc. installed the fireplace. Because the final siding material had not yet been applied to the house, the subcontractor was unable to complete the installation of the chimney flue. As of January 30, the metal flue pipe ended about three feet below the top of the wooden chase.
On January 31, 1990, the Lino Lakes building inspector inspected the house to determine if it met the building code and other applicable ordinances. Despite the lack of siding and the incomplete chimney flue, the inspector issued a certificate of occupancy for the house on February 9, 1990.
Shortly after the certificate of occupancy was issued, the Masonicks moved into the house. Believing that the fireplace was complete and safe to use, the Masonicks used it on three occasions during the month of February. On the evening of February 26, 1990, embers from a fire in the fireplace ignited the wooden chase above the metal flue pipe. The fire spread to the attic of the house. Although the initial fire was extinguished by the local fire department, at some point during the night the embers rekindled. The second fire resulted in damage to the home in excess of $200,-000.
The Masonicks commenced a negligence action against appellant City of Lino Lakes (“City”), among others, seeking to recover damages for the loss caused by the fire. The Masonicks alleged that the builder, J.P. Homes, Inc., and the fireplace subcontractor, Fireside Corner, Inc., were negligent in their construction of the house and that they failed to warn of the dangers posed by the incomplete chimney. The Ma-sonicks also alleged that the City’s building inspector was negligent in his post-construction inspection of the house and that he negligently issued a certificate of occupancy.
The City moved for summary judgment on two theories. First, the City argued that the issuance of a certificate of occupancy is a discretionary act for which it is immune from liability pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 466.03, subd. 6. Second, the City argued that it could not be held liable under a negligence theory because its duty to the Masonicks was public, not private.
The trial court denied the City’s motion, holding that the issuance of a certificate of occupancy was not a discretionary act entitled to immunity under Minn.Stat. § 466.03, subd. 6. The trial court also held that there was a material fact issue which precluded summary judgment on the public/private duty issue. This appeal followed.
*912ISSUES
1. Did the trial court err in denying the City’s motion for summary judgment on the grounds that the issuance of a certificate of occupancy is not a discretionary act entitled to immunity under Minn.Stat. § 466.03, subd. 6?
2. Did the trial court err in determining a genuine issue of fact exists as to whether the duty owed to the Masonicks by the City was public or private in nature?
ANALYSIS
1. Discretionary Immunity.
“Whether the acts of [a city’s] employees are a discretionary function is a legal question.” Snyder v. City of Minneapolis, 441 N.W.2d 781, 786 (Minn.1989). This court is not bound by the trial court’s determination of a purely legal question. Frost-Benco Elec. Ass’n v. Minnesota Pub. Utils. Comm’n, 358 N.W.2d 639, 642 (Minn.1984). On review, this court shall “conduct an independent review of the record in light of the relevant law” in order to ascertain whether the trial court reached the proper legal conclusion. Jadwin v. Minneapolis Star & Tribune Co., 367 N.W.2d 476, 483 (Minn.1985).
Under Minn.Stat. § 466.03, subd. 6 (1990), a municipality cannot be held liable for
[a]ny claim based upon the performance or the failure to exercise or perform a discretionary function or duty, whether or not the discretion is abused.
Discretionary immunity is based upon the doctrine of separation of powers. Abo El Ela v. State, 468 N.W.2d 580, 582 (Minn.App.1991). Its purpose is to “assure that the courts do not pass judgment on policy decisions entrusted to coordinate branches of government.” Holmquist v. State, 425 N.W.2d 230, 231 (Minn.1988).
Although almost every government act involves the exercise of some discretion, not every act is entitled to discretionary immunity. See id. In determining whether particular conduct is protected, the courts have recognized a distinction between planning level or discretionary decisions, which are protected, and operational level decisions, which are not protected. Pletan v. Gaines, 494 N.W.2d 38, 40 (Minn.1992). A planning level decision is one which involves
questions of public policy, that is, the evaluation of factors such as the financial, political, economic, and social effects of a given plan or policy.
Holmquist, 425 N.W.2d at 232. In contrast, an operational level decision involves “conduct which merely puts into effect a predetermined plan.” Gonzales v. Hollins, 386 N.W.2d 842, 845 (Minn.App.1986).
In Anderson v. City of Minneapolis, 287 Minn. 287, 178 N.W.2d 215 (1970), the supreme court held that the issuance of a building permit was a protected discretionary function.
The act * 4 * involved an exercise of discretion in the sense that the city’s employee had to make a judgment as to whether plans submitted in support of the application for the permit constituted a permissible use of the property in the area involved.
Id. at 288, 178 N.W.2d at 217. The court further noted that, even if the proposed use of the land had been so clearly illegal as to eliminate any exercise of discretion on the part of the city’s employee, the landowner still would be precluded from recovering damages from the city. Id. at 289, 178 N.W.2d at 217.
[The landowner] and those who act for him are charged with the knowledge of the laws regulating the granting of the permit and any expense incurred is at the owner’s risk, at least in so far as the city is concerned.
Id.
Fourteen years later, in Wilson v. Ramacher, 352 N.W.2d 389, 393 (Minn.1984), the supreme court applied Anderson in a case involving the issuance of a permit authorizing landowners to put fill on their property and held that issuance of the permit was a protected discretionary function.
And, in Snyder, 441 N.W.2d at 787, the supreme court reaffirmed its position that, as a general rule, the issuance of a building *913permit is a protected discretionary function.
[W]e note that more than eighteen years have passed since our decision in Anderson, ample time for the legislature to have corrected any misapprehension this court may have entertained in Anderson regarding legislative intent to protect municipalities from liability in the issuance of building permits.
Id.
In the present case, appellant contends that the decisionmaking process involved in the issuance of a certificate of occupancy is similar to that involved in the issuance of a building permit and therefore the issuance of a certificate of occupancy should also be a protected discretionary function. We agree.
In reaching this decision, we are mindful of the effects that an opposite ruling would have. If we were to hold that the issuance of a certificate of occupancy was not a protected discretionary function, we would essentially be mandating that municipalities become insurers of construction. This is contrary to the purpose underlying the enactment and enforcement of building codes and ordinances.
Building codes, the issuance of building permits, and building inspections are devices used by municipalities to make sure that construction within the corporate limits of the municipality meets the standards established. As such, they are designed to protect the public and are not meant to be an insurance policy by which the municipality guarantees that each building is in compliance with the building codes and zoning ordinances. The charge for building permits is to offset expenses incurred by the city in promoting the public interest and is in no way an insurance premium which makes the city liable for each item of defective construction in the premises.
Hoffert v. Owatonna Inn Towne Motel, Inc., 293 Minn. 220, 223, 199 N.W.2d 158, 160 (1972).
2. Existence of a Private Duty.
Appellant’s second issue does not involve immunity from suit, rather it involves a defense to liability. Accordingly, interlocutory review is not appropriate. See Minn.R.Civ.App.P. 103.03; Erickson v. County of Clay, 451 N.W.2d 666, 669 (Minn.App.1990) (order denying summary judgment generally not appealable). But see McGovern v. City of Minneapolis, 475 N.W.2d 71, 72 (Minn.1991) (order denying summary judgment on grounds of immunity is immediately appealable). Although this court “may review any other matter as justice may require,” Minn.R.Civ.App.P. 103.04, we conclude that the interests of justice would not be served, and would in fact be harmed, by extending interlocutory review to this issue. See Johnson v. Northside Res. Redev. Council, 467 N.W.2d 826, 829 n. 1 (Minn.App.1991).
DECISION
The trial court erred in denying appellant’s motion for summary judgment on the grounds of discretionary immunity.
Reversed.
FORSBERG, J., dissents.
Retired judge of the district court, serving as judge of the Court of Appeals by appointment pursuant to Minn. Const, art. VI, § 2.

=== CASE 9739096 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:41.548164+00 ===

FORSBERG, Judge
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent from the majority’s opinion on the issue of discretionary immunity. I would find that, based upon the supreme court’s holding in Andrade v. Ellefson, 391 N.W.2d 836, 839 (Minn.1986), the issuance of a certificate of occupancy is not a protected planning level decision entitled to discretionary immunity under Minn. Stat. § 466.03, subd. 6 (1990).
In Andrade, plaintiffs alleged that Ano-ka County was negligent in its inspection and licensing of a day-care home in which several children were injured. Id., 391 N.W.2d at 837. The trial court dismissed the action on the grounds of discretionary immunity. Id. at 838. In reversing, the supreme court stated: “The license inspections conducted by the county were not at the planning or policy level where discretionary immunity usually applies.” Id. at 839.
*914The actions of the City in this case are analogous to those of the county in An-drade. The City’s building inspector conducted an inspection of the Masonicks’ home and subsequently issued a certificate of occupancy. The certificate of occupancy essentially operated as a “license” which allowed the Masonicks to move into their new home. Because the actions of the City’s employee occurred at the operational level, as opposed to the planning level, I would hold that under Andrade, the defense of discretionary immunity is not applicable.
A denial of immunity in this case would also be consistent with the rule that the discretionary function exception is to be narrowly construed. In Holmquist v. State, 425 N.W.2d 230, 231 (Minn.1988), the supreme court cautioned:
Read literally, the discretionary function exception would preserve immunity for almost all government acts because almost everything a government employee does * * * involves the exercise of some discretion. We have recognized, however, that the legislature did not intend the discretionary function exception to swallow the general rule of allowing recovery for those injuries negligently inflicted in the performance of government operations.
Finally, a decision holding that the City is not immune from liability for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy would not, as feared by the majority, make the City a de facto insurer of construction. In order to prevail on a claim against the City for negligence, plaintiffs would still have to overcome the public/private duty hurdle. Whether or not plaintiffs would be able to overcome that hurdle is dependent upon the outcome of certain factual disputes, the resolution of which is best left to the fact finder. By declining to allow the City to hide behind the cloak of immunity, all that this court would be doing is giving plaintiffs the opportunity to have their day in court.
For the above reasons, I would affirm the trial court’s denial of appellant’s motion for summary judgment on the issue of discretionary immunity. Accordingly, I dissent.

=== CASE 2218723 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:53.441477+00 ===

413 Mass. 275 (1992)
596 N.E.2d 346
COMMONWEALTH
vs.
MARVIN SMITH.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
May 6, 1992.
July 27, 1992.
Present: LIACOS, C.J., WILKINS, ABRAMS, LYNCH, & GREANEY, JJ.
Daniel Patrick Leonard (Terence K. Ankner with him) for the defendant.
Jane A. Sullivan, Assistant District Attorney, for the Commonwealth.
GREANEY, J.
A jury in the Superior Court convicted the defendant, Marvin Smith, of murder in the first degree. The Commonwealth proceeded against the defendant on a joint venture theory, asserting that the defendant participated with Jessie Lewis in the murder of the victim, Lee E. Taylor. Lewis and Smith were tried together.[1] The defendant makes several arguments on appeal. We need not discuss all of the arguments because we agree with the defendant that the evidence *276 presented by the Commonwealth was insufficient to warrant his conviction, and, consequently, his motion for a required finding of not guilty must be allowed.
The evidence in the Commonwealth's case-in-chief viewed in the light most favorable to the Commonwealth, Commonwealth v. Anderson, 396 Mass. 306, 311 (1985), permitted the jury to find the following facts. Sometime during the morning or early afternoon of February 18, 1988, the day of the murder, the defendant came into Lawson's Barbershop in the Roxbury section of Boston, the scene of the murder. The defendant was a regular customer of Lawson's. At that time, the shopowner, Robert Lawson, the defendant's regular barber, was too busy to cut the defendant's hair, so the defendant left.
At 3 P.M. on the same day the defendant and the codefendant Jessie Lewis, who was his cousin, went to Boch Motors in Norwood to obtain an inspection sticker for the defendant's automobile, a maroon 1986 Toyota Cressida, which the defendant had purchased from Boch Motors on February 15, 1988, three days earlier. The computer printout of the results of the emissions inspection of the defendant's automobile, which was introduced in evidence at trial, listed the registration number as 369NHL.
Later that day, at some time between 3 and 3:30 P.M., the defendant returned to the barbershop, and parked his automobile in front of the shop. Robert Lawson was still busy, but told the defendant that he could cut his hair if the defendant waited. The victim was in the barbershop at 4 P.M., standing next to the barber's chair of another barber, Jamerilla Lawson, the shopowner's nephew. There were anywhere from eight to twenty people in the shop at this time. Lewis came into the shop, drew a handgun from inside his belt, and walked toward the victim. There was conflicting testimony as to whether Lewis was wearing eyeglasses at the scene of the murder. On seeing Lewis, the victim attempted to grab Jamerilla Lawson, who pulled away. The victim then ran to the back of the shop and grabbed Robert Lawson. Others fled when they saw or heard that Lewis had a handgun. *277 Lewis walked toward the back of the shop, pursuing the victim. Robert Lawson struggled to get free of the victim's grasp, and both men fell to the floor. Lewis then shot the victim in the head several times.
Just prior to the murder, a customer of the barbershop pulled up to the shop in a taxicab. He heard three or four gun shots coming from inside the shop and saw people walking and running out of the shop. He also saw a small red or burgundy automobile which he called a "Toyota" or "Maxima" parked in front of the shop. He saw Lewis and a younger man leave the shop. The younger man entered the driver's side of the automobile, pushed open the passenger side door, and said to Lewis, "Hurry up. Get in the car."[2] The witness saw this automobile drive off "fast." Another customer, who had fled outside after he saw Lewis draw the handgun, saw someone walk out of the shop "casually," after the shooting had stopped, and get into an automobile parked in front of the shop. This witness stated that the automobile was new, brown or maroon, and "might have been foreign."
On February 19, 1988, Boston police Sergeant Detective Charles H. Horsley interviewed the defendant in the presence of an attorney at Horsley's office in South Boston. The defendant appeared at the interview voluntarily, and gave an account of his whereabouts the day of the murder. The defendant stated that he had gone to his mother's home that morning to retrieve some documents pertaining to his automobile, and that he had arrived alone at Boch Motors at approximately 2 P.M. The defendant also told Horsley that he arrived at the barbershop sometime between 3 and 3:30 P.M., and that he parked his automobile directly in front of the shop. Horsley testified that the defendant gave him a motor vehicle registration, which Horsley photocopied and returned.[3] Horsley then administered Miranda warnings, and *278 the defendant told him that his previous account had not been completely truthful in that he had not been alone the entire day. Smith did not admit that he had been with Lewis. Counsel for the defendant then terminated the interview. When the defendant attempted to leave, Horsley placed him under arrest.
Horsley also testified that on February 25, 1988, he saw the defendant's automobile parked on the street. The vehicle was a maroon Toyota Cressida, with registration number 369NHM, and its dealership label indicated that it had been purchased at Boch Motors.
At the conclusion of the Commonwealth's evidence, the defendant rested and moved for a required finding of not guilty on the ground that the Commonwealth had not introduced sufficient evidence to warrant the jury in finding beyond a reasonable doubt that he had participated as a joint venturer with Lewis in the murder. See Mass. R. Crim. P. 25 (a), 378 Mass. 896 (1979). The judge denied this motion, and the jury found the defendant guilty of murder in the first degree by reason of deliberately premeditated malice aforethought. The defendant renewed his motion for a required finding after the jury's verdict was returned. The renewed motion was also denied.
"The essential question in evaluating the denial of a motion for a required finding of not guilty is whether the evidence received, viewed in a light most favorable to the Commonwealth, is sufficient so that the jury `might properly draw inferences, not too remote in the ordinary course of events, or forbidden by any rule of law, and conclude upon all the established circumstances and warranted inferences that the guilt of the defendant was proved beyond a reasonable doubt.' Commonwealth v. Vellucci, 284 Mass. 443, 445 (1933)." Commonwealth v. Stewart, 411 Mass. 345, 349-350 (1991), quoting Commonwealth v. Clary, 388 Mass. 583, *279 588-589 (1983). "[I]t is not enough for the appellate court to find that there was some record evidence, however slight, to support each essential element of the offense." Commonwealth v. Latimore, 378 Mass. 671, 677 (1979). "A joint venturer, is `one who aids, commands, counsels, or encourages commission of a crime while sharing with the principal the mental state required for the crime." Commonwealth v. Stewart, supra at 350, quoting Commonwealth v. Soares, 377 Mass. 461, 470, cert. denied, 444 U.S. 881 (1979). In this case, the requisite mental state is that for murder in the first degree, deliberately premeditated malice aforethought. Commonwealth v. Soares, supra. See Commonwealth v. Fickett, 403 Mass. 194, 198 (1988); Commonwealth v. Mandile, 403 Mass. 93, 99 (1988). Thus, the evidence viewed in a light most favorable to the Commonwealth must be sufficient to warrant a jury's finding beyond a reasonable doubt that the "defendant was (1) present at the scene of the crime, (2) with knowledge that [Lewis] intend[ed] to commit the crime or with intent to commit [the] crime, and (3) by agreement [was] willing and available to help [Lewis] if necessary." Commonwealth v. Mandile, supra at 99-100, quoting Commonwealth v. Bianco, 388 Mass. 358, 366, S.C., 390 Mass. 254 (1983).
The Commonwealth argues that the defendant knowingly and intentionally participated with Lewis in the murder either by going to the barbershop to find and point out the victim to Lewis or by driving the get-away car (or by doing both).
There is no support for the theory that the defendant played a role in the murder by identifying the victim for Lewis. No witness identified the defendant as the man the victim ran to and grabbed in an effort to avoid Lewis. That man was identified by all the witnesses except one as the owner of the barbershop, Robert Lawson.[4] Several witnesses *280 testified that the defendant had entered the barbershop at some time during the hour before the murder took place, and the defendant's regular barber testified that he told the defendant to wait for a haircut. Two of the prosecution's witnesses testified that the defendant left the shop prior to the murder, and others testified that they were not sure whether the defendant was in the shop at the time of the murder. There was no testimony that the defendant and Lewis arrived at the barbershop together, that Lewis arrived in the defendant's automobile, or in any automobile, or that Lewis and the defendant were ever present in the shop simultaneously. The only time the defendant and Lewis were seen together was at Boch Toyota, approximately one hour before the murder.
The contention that the defendant was the driver of the get-away car is of questionable probative force. While there was evidence that the defendant and Lewis had been together at Boch Motors in the defendant's car about one hour before the murder, there was no evidence clearly identifying the defendant's car as the one Lewis entered after the murder, and no identification of the defendant as the driver. The only witnesses who testified to Lewis's departure after the murder did not know the registration number of the automobile he entered and were uncertain as to the make and precise color of the automobile they saw. Moreover, while one of these witnesses positively identified Lewis as the passenger, he stated only that the driver of the get-away car was a "younger" man. The other witness to Lewis's departure was *281 uncertain even as to the gender of the driver of the automobile. This evidence may not rise above the level of suspicion.
We need not decide, however, whether there is enough evidence to warrant a conclusion beyond a reasonable doubt that Lewis left in the defendant's car because there is a more fundamental problem with the Commonwealth's case. There is nothing to show that the defendant knew before the murder that Lewis was armed, and that he shared Lewis's goal of murdering the victim with deliberately premeditated malice aforethought. On this point, the Commonwealth directs attention to Commonwealth v. Stewart, 411 Mass. 345 (1991), as the governing decision. In Stewart, a close case from a rule 25 (a) standpoint, we concluded that there was enough evidence presented by the Commonwealth to warrant the defendant's conviction of murder in the second degree on a theory of joint venture as the person who drove the murderer to and from the scene of the homicide. Specifically, we concluded that the knowledge and intent necessary for the defendant's conviction in Stewart of murder on a joint venture theory was furnished by evidence that the defendant had been with the murderer when he used his handgun shortly before the homicide to shoot a cat, and, therefore, knew the murderer was armed. As a result, the defendant could be permissibly found to have shared with the murderer an intent to find and to shoot the victim. Id. There was also evidence in Stewart which positively identified the defendant's automobile as the one the shooter ran to and entered immediately after the murder, and evidence clearly identifying the registration number on the license plate of the defendant's car. Id. at 348.
In this case, as has been discussed above, there is little evidence that Lewis fled from the barbershop in the defendant's automobile, and there is insufficient evidence to warrant an inference beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant was actually aware before the murder that Lewis was armed and bent on murder, and, consequently, that he consciously joined with Lewis to complete that plan. Thus, on the critical elements of knowledge and the shared intent necessary to *282 support a conviction on a joint venture theory of murder in the first degree, the Commonwealth's proof was deficient.[5] See and compare Commonwealth v. Walsh, 407 Mass. 740, 745 (1990) (defendant and coventurer attacked different individuals; evidence insufficient to convict defendant of battery on coventurer's victim in the absence of any evidence that defendant knew coventurer was armed), with Commonwealth v. Longo, 402 Mass. 482, 488 (1988) (evidence sufficient to convict defendant of murder where coventurer, who stabbed victim to death, displayed knife in defendant's presence).
In the last analysis, the Commonwealth's evidence in this case was sufficient to: (a) place the defendant with his cousin, Lewis, about one hour before the murder; (b) indicate that the defendant had been in the barbershop (where he was a regular customer) at various times during the day of the crime; and (c) suggest that a small, dark colored foreign automobile, either a Toyota or Maxima, was driven by an unidentified black man to transport Lewis away from the crime. Apart from the problems created by this vague picture, we are left with the conclusion that, even if the jury could have warrantably found that the defendant drove the get-away car, they could only have speculated on whether the defendant knew that Lewis was armed and planned to murder the victim and whether the defendant shared with Lewis the necessary intent to commit a premeditated murder.[6]
*283 The judgment is reversed, the verdict is set aside, and judgment is to enter for the defendant.
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  Lewis was also convicted by the jury of murder in the first degree and since has died. Lewis's conviction was vacated and the indictment against him dismissed on December 12, 1991.
[2]  A number of witnesses identified Lewis as the shooter, whom all described as an older black man. This witness described the driver as "younger" than Lewis. The defendant is black also.
[3]  A photocopy admitted in evidence indicated that the defendant owned a 1986 Toyota Camry with license plate number 369NHM. The color of the automobile was not listed; the license plate number and model name are different from those on the computer printout of the vehicle which passed the emission test.
[4]  This witness was unable to identify the person who was struggling with the victim just before Lewis shot him. The Commonwealth relies on the testimony of this witness to suggest that two struggles might have taken place  one between the victim and Lawson and one between the victim and the defendant. The evidence will not support such an inference.
The Commonwealth also suggests (as it did at the trial) that Lewis had poor eyesight and was not wearing his glasses at the time of the murder, and that the defendant had acted in effect as a "seeing eye" for Lewis in pointing out the victim. The evidence that Lewis had poor eyesight was provided by Lewis's optometrist. This witness, however, was called out-of-order during the Commonwealth's case-in-chief by Lewis's trial counsel in order to accommodate the optometrist's practice. The evidence about Lewis's eyesight, therefore, cannot be relied upon by the Commonwealth as part of its case and, in its absence, the "seeing eye" theory evaporates.
[5]  There was some evidence of consciousness of guilt to the effect that the defendant lied to Sergeant Horsley in saying that he had been at Boch Motors alone. We do not think this evidence, which did not reflect consciousness of guilt for having committed the crime charged, is sufficient to overcome the defects in the Commonwealth's case outlined above. See Commonwealth v. Mandile, 403 Mass. 93, 102 (1988); Commonwealth v. Stewart, 398 Mass. 535, 549 (1986).
[6]  Although it is not necessary to the conclusion we reach, it is worth mentioning that the jury may have been persuaded to convict the defendant by a number of improper remarks made by the prosecutor in his closing argument.
For example, the prosecutor made an emotional appeal to the jury, suggesting that, as the "conscience of the community," they had a duty to convict. The prosecutor twice improperly stated the law, telling the jury that the evidence against the defendant and Lewis was "interchangeable." This was a serious misstep because, as the summary of the evidence indicates, there was substantial eyewitness testimony identifying Lewis in a deliberately premeditated murder and scant evidence connecting the defendant to Lewis. Further, other remarks of the prosecutor were "reasonably susceptible of being interpreted as a comment on [the defendant's] failure to take the stand," Commonwealth v. Domanski, 332 Mass. 66, 69 (1954), such as his comment that the defendant and Lewis were the only people (aside from the victim) that knew why the crime had been committed, but "we can't present him and I can't get inside of his brain nor his brain [the defendants]." The prosecutor also arguably misstated the evidence, and asked the jury to engage in improper speculation, when he argued that the defendant had "tussle[d]" with the victim, despite the fact, as has been pointed out above, that there was no testimony that the defendant and the victim had grappled at all.

=== CASE 9739097 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:44.124254+00 ===

GIVAN, Justice.
Appellant and a codefendant, Edward John Niksich, were tried by jury and both were convicted of two counts of murder and two counts of felony murder. Another defendant, Charles Edward Roche, Sr., was tried separately. The jury was discharged after failing to reach a recommendation regarding the death penalty as to appellant, and reaching a recommendation against the death penalty as to Niksich. The trial court subsequently sentenced appellant to death.
The facts are: Sometime before February of 1990, Niksich used Patricia Andras-eo's car to give Ernest Graves, who also was known as "Pee Wee," a ride. The next day, Andrasco, who lived with Nik-sich, noticed that $120 worth of food stamps was missing from her car.
The State introduced in evidence the deposition of Nanetta Blaski, a baby-sitter for Niksich and Andraseo, in which she stated that sometime in April of 1990, appellant and Niksich arrived at Andraseo's residence, and there was a discussion about two people, Ernest Graves and Daniel Brown, also known as "Danny Boy," who were going to be killed or who had been killed. Niksich stated that he wanted to put Graves and Brown in the trunk of Andrasco's car.
Delores Duszynski, who lived with appellant, testified that on the evening of May 10, 1990, appellant, Roche, Sr., and Niksich left the house driving her car. When appellant arrived home, he entered through the basement, told Duszynski to stay where she was, and told her that there were some guys in the basement he was *898going to shoot because they owed someone $120.
Duszynski testified that after approximately five minutes appellant went downstairs and Duszynski heard about nine or ten gunshots. She heard someone plead for his life, and then she heard two or three more gunshots. Appellant, Roche, Sr., and Niksich then came upstairs and told Dus-zynski that the victims possessed only $19 and a dime bag of cocaine.
After appellant, Duszynski, and Niksich each consumed some of the cocaine, appellant asked permission to use Duszynski's car to transport the bodies. The three men went downstairs, and after approximately fifteen or twenty minutes Duszynski heard the car leave.
On the evening of May 10, 1990, Jose Sanchez saw appellant, Roche, Sr., and Nik-sich in a car. Appellant was driving the car, and the men offered Sanchez a ride. Upon arriving at Sanchez' house, appellant opened the trunk of the car. When Sanchez saw the bodies, Niksich told Sanchez that he had shot one of the men while they were in the basement of appellant's house. Niksich stated that he had told one of the victims that he was going to die and that he was with the wrong guy at the wrong time and the wrong place. Appellant stated that he had shot the other victim while the victim begged for his life. Appellant told Sanchez that he had used both a .38 caliber derringer and a .22 caliber rifle. At one point, he went upstairs to get the rifle, and upon returning, repeatedly shot the victim in the head.
James Superits testified that appellant sold him a two-shot derringer on May 13, 1990. Later that same day appellant showed Superits a clipping from a newspaper, claimed that he did it, and described the killings. Three days later Superits gave the gun to the police.
On May 14, 1990, Andraseo gave a statement to the police. She told the officers that on the evening of May 10, 1990, Nik-sich left the house and then returned later in the night. Niksich told Andrasco that he finally had gotten even with Pee Wee for stealing the food stamps.
On June 10, 1990, appellant described to Virginia Ratazezak, a correctional officer for the Lake County Sheriff's Department, how the two victims had been murdered. Appellant told Ratazezak that while he and Niksich were at the Spot Bar in Calumet City, Niksich pointed out the two victims and stated that one of them owed him $120. Appellant and Niksich then set up a phony drug deal with the two victims, took them to the basement of appellant's home, where appellant then went upstairs to get a gun.
Nine bullets were recovered from the victims' bodies. The State introduced in evidence State's Exhibit 26, a two-shot .38 caliber Excam Derringer. Tests on the bullets showed that four of the bullets were fired from the lower barrel of State's Exhibit 26; therefore, the derringer had to be reloaded at least three times during the perpetration of the crimes.
Appellant testified that he shot both victims, but claimed that he did so in self-defense. He testified that he owned the .38 caliber derringer, and admitted that he told two deputy wardens that he volunteered to kill the victim who owed Nik-sich money.
The cause of death of Ernest Graves was multiple gunshot wounds. The cause of death of Daniel Brown was a skull fracture and lacerations caused by gunshot wounds. Factors contributing to Brown's death were a perforation of the stomach and small intestine and hemorrhaging caused by gunshot wounds.
Appellant's first argument is that the sentence of death imposed upon him violates the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution and art. 1, §§ 16 and 18 of the Indiana Constitution. Appellant urges us to examine the degree of culpability of each of the defendants in the present case. Appellant contends that since Niksich's culpability was as great as his own, appellant's sentence is disproportionate to the two consecutive forty (40) year terms Niksich received for his part in the crimes.
*899Upon review of the imposition of a death sentence, we must determine if that penalty is appropriate to the offender and his crime. Martinez Chavez v. State (1989), Ind., 584 N.E.2d 731. We also recognize that while an accomplice may be found guilty of a crime which was largely executed by his principal, imposition of the same penalty for principal and accomplice may not be appropriate. Id. The State presented evidence that appellant had volunteered to kill Graves and in fact had shot both Graves and Brown after taking from them $19 and some cocaine. The trial court and the jury were in the best position to weigh the evidence and assess the degree of culpability of the codefendants for purposes of sentencing. We will not make a new determination as to the degree of culpability of the defendants. Brewer v. State (1981), 275 Ind. 338, 417 N.E.2d 889, cert. denied, 458 U.S. 1122, 102 S.Ct. 3510, 73 L.Ed.2d 1384. There is ample evidence in the record to support the penalty imposed.
Appellant next argues that the sentence was inappropriate under the circumstances of the case. The jury was unable to reach a determination regarding whether to impose the death penalty. Therefore, the trial court acted properly when it discharged the jury and proceeded as if the hearing had been conducted to the trial court alone. Ind.Code § 385-50-2-9(F).
Appellant argues that the trial court failed to consider as a mitigating circumstance Niksich's role as a catalyst in the events surrounding the murders. Appellant restates his contention that, in his view, Niksich was at least as culpable as appellant, and that because Niksich received a lesser sentence that appellant should receive a similar sentence.
The record indicates that the trial court in fact did consider appellant's argument that Niksich acted as a catalyst in the commission of the crimes. However, the trial court did not find that to be a mitigating factor nor was it required to do so. See Graham v. State (1989), Ind., 535 N.E.2d 1152.
Appellant next argues that the trial court erred by failing to consider as a mitigator the fact that the jury was unable to reach a recommendation regarding the death penalty. As previously stated, the effect of a jury's inability to reach a recommendation is that the jury will be discharged and the trial judge shall conduct the sentencing as if it had been tried to the trial court alone. Ind.Code § 85-50-2-9(f). Therefore, no meaning should be interpreted from the jury's failure to reach a recommendation. Likewise, the failure to reach a recommendation should not be considered as a mitigating factor during the penalty phase.
Appellant argues the trial court found that appellant's case "cried out for the death penalty," but failed to factually support this conclusion. We disagree. The trial court did consider all factors relevant to sentencing appellant. The trial court found that the State had proven the two aggravating circumstances charged and that two mitigating circumstances existed; however, the aggravating circumstances outweighed the mitigating circumstances. The trial court further stated, among other things, that this case was a double homicide committed during a robbery while one victim pled for his life, and that it was triggered by a dispute concerning $120. Review of the record indicates that the conclusion reached by the trial court during sentencing was factually supported.
Appellant argues that the sentence imposed was disproportionate to sentences imposed in other cases. We note that many of the cases cited by appellant in support of his argument are cases in which the sentence was a term of years and the death penalty was not sought by the State. The prosecutor in his discretion may seek the death penalty against a particular defendant. Fleenor v. State (1987), Ind., 514 N.E.2d 80, cert. denied, (1988), 488 U.S. 872, 109 S.Ct. 189, 102 L.Ed.2d 158. However, this discretion is controlled by our system of review which prevents the arbitrary and capricious infliction of the death penalty. Id.
*900The gist of appellant's argument here is that because the death penalty was not sought in cases involving arguably similar facts, imposition of that sentence in the case at bar is both arbitrary and capricious. This issue already has been decided against appellant. The United States Supreme Court held in Pulley v. Harris (1984), 465 U.S. 37, 104 S.Ct. 871, 79 L.Ed.2d 29, that this type of proportionality review is not constitutionally required. The Court further stated that a death penalty statute will be upheld against a constitutional challenge so long as it provides adequate guidance to the sentencer regarding performance of the sentencing function, prompt judicial review to promote consistency, and evenhandedness in the imposition of the sentence. Id.
Therefore, appellant's focus on the State's decision to seek the death penalty in certain cases and not others involving similar facts is misplaced. The issue with which we are concerned, upon review of the sentence, is the fairness in the imposition of the sentence, in light of other cases where the death penalty was sought. Games v. State (1989), Ind., 535 N.E.2d 530, cert. denied, 493 U.S. 874, 110 S.Ct. 205, 107 L.Ed.2d 158. This case is factual ly similar to other cases where the death penalty was sought and imposed. See e.g., Benirschke v. State (1991), Ind., 577 N.E.2d 576; Brewer, supra. Imposition of the death penalty in the present case is not disproportionate to sentences imposed in other cases.
Next, appellant challenges the degree of specificity with which the trial court supported its sentencing findings. Appellant cites Evans v. State (1990), Ind., 563 N.E.2d 1251, for the proposition that the trial court must provide a statement of reasons for the imposition of a sentence. The reasons must include identification of all significant mitigating and aggravating circumstances, specific reasons to support why each circumstance is mitigating or aggravating, and an indication that the miti-gators and aggravators have been weighed to determine if the aggravators offset the mitigators. - Id.
Appellant claims the trial court failed to factually support its conclusions: 1.) that appellant's degree of culpability was an aggravating circumstance; 2.) that although appellant did not act alone, which is considered to be a mitigating factor, appellant was a major participant; and 3.) that the case cried out for the death penalty.
The trial court's statement of findings in this case are quite similar to the trial court's statement of findings in Benirschke, supra, which we found to be adequate. We note that the trial court fully assessed the existence or non-existence of the aggravating and mitigating circumstances in this case in those written findings. While the trial court did not enumerate in its findings the factors considered in concluding that appellant was more culpable than Niksich, those reasons were stated by the trial court during the sentencing hearing. The findings and the record made during the sentencing hearing provided adequate factual support of the trial court's conclusions for purposes of review. We see no error here.
Appellant contends that reversible error occurred when a victim impact statement was introduced during the sentencing phase of appellant's trial. Attached to the presentence report which was considered by the trial court during sentencing was a letter from the mother of one of the vie-tims. Appellant claims that introduction of this letter violated the Eighth Amendment of the United States Constitution and art. 1, § 16 of the Indiana Constitution, and relies on South Carolina v. Gathers (1989), 490 U.S. 805, 109 S.Ct. 2207, 104 L.Ed.2d 876 and Booth v. Maryland (1987), 482 U.S. 496, 107 S.Ct. 2529, 96 L.Ed.2d 440, to support that argument.
We noted in Benirschke, supra, that the United States Supreme Court overruled both Gathers, supra and Booth, supra, in Payne v. Tennessee (1991), - U.S. --, 111 S.Ct. 2597, 115 L.Ed.2d 720, regarding the admissibility of victim impact statements. The United States Supreme Court held that consideration of victim impact statements during the sentencing phase of capital cases was not prohibited by the *901Eighth Amendment of the United States Constitution. - No reversible error is presented on this issue.
Next, appellant challenges the constitutionality of Ind.Code § 85-50-2-9(f). Appellant claims that the statute violates his right to a jury determination of the existence of aggravating circumstances pursuant to the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution and art. 1, § 13 of the Indiana Constitution by allowing the trial court to discharge the jury and proceed on its own during the sentencing phase in a capital case when the jury is unable to agree on a sentencing recommendation. - Appellant contends that determination of the existence of an aggravating cireumstance is an element of capital murder, and as such must be determined by a jury rather than by the trial court. Appellant relies on Adamson v. Ricketts (9th Cir.1988), 865 F.2d 1011, cert. denied, - U.S. --, 110 S.Ct. 3287, 111 L.Ed.2d 795, to support his position.
However, the United States Supreme Court recently has held that the Sixth Amendment does not require that the specific findings authorizing the imposition of the death penalty be made by a jury. Walton v. Arizona (1990), 497 U.S. 639, 110 S.Ct. 3047, 111 L.Ed.2d 511. Aggravating circumstances are standards to be used during the sentencing phase of the capital murder case to assist in the choice of sentencing a defendant to death or to life imprisonment and as such are not separate elements of the crime. Id. Therefore, the United States Constitution does not require that only a jury can make the determination of the existence of those circumstances. Therefore, in light of the Walton decision we find that Ind.Code § 35-50-2-9(f) is constitutional.
Appellant's final argument is that the trial court committed reversible error on two occasions when reference to appellant's prior criminal history was made during the guilt phase of the trial. On the first occasion, the trial court admitted in evidence over objection a fingerprint card bearing appellant's fingerprints. The card also listed appellant's prior burglary conviction. Appellant contends the trial court erred a second time when appellant's motion for mistrial was denied after a witness referred to an exhibit as a "repeat offender" sheet.
Appellant objected to admission of the fingerprint card on the grounds that an inadequate foundation had been laid, but also that an improper reference to an unrelated past offense would be made. The trial court admitted the exhibit as a business record exception to the hearsay rule. No ruling was requested or made regarding the prior offense objection to the exhibit.
We have held that when an objection is made and appellant does not request a ruling on the objection, appellant waives his objection. Turczi v. State (1973), 261 Ind. 273, 301 N.E.2d 752. An error not properly preserved during trial and by the motion to correct error is not available on appeal. Ward v. State (1988), Ind., 519 N.E.2d 561. The trial court did not commit reversible error.
However, assuming that appellant did properly preserve this issue for appeal, we find no reversible error. Appellant correctly states that as a general rule evidence of a defendant's prior crimes is highly prejudicial and should not be admitted. Lewis v. State (1987), Ind., 511 N.E.2d 1054. But in the instant case, as discussed above, the evidence of appellant's guilt was overwhelming. Where the jury's verdict is supported by independent evidence of guilt such that upon review we are satisfied that there was no substantial likelihood that the evidence in question played a part in appellant's conviction, any error in its admission is harmless. Jaske v. State (1989), Ind., 539 N.E.2d 14.
Appellant's argument regarding the second instance of alleged error likewise fails. Appellant moved for a mistrial after a witness for the State referred to an exhibit as a "repeat offender" sheet. The trial court denied appellant's motion and admonished the jury to disregard the remark. Appellant contends the trial court *902committed reversible error by denying his motion for mistrial.
Mistrial is an extreme remedy warranted when no other curative measure will rectify the situation and is a matter which lies within the discretion of the trial court. Szpyrka v. State (1990), Ind., 550 N.E.2d 316. The standard used to determine if a mistrial is warranted is a consideration of whether the defendant was placed in a position of grave peril to which he should not have been subjected. Jackson v. State (1988), Ind., 518 N.E.2d 787. The gravity of the peril is determined by the probable persuasive effect on the jury's decision. Id. A trial judge is in the best position to gauge the surrounding cireum-stances and potential impact on the jury. Szpyrka, supra. The evidence in the present case was not so close that this remark influenced the jury, thereby placing appellant in a position of grave peril. Jackson, supra. Further, an admonition is presumed to cure any error in the admission of evidence. English v. State, (1985), Ind., 485 N.E.2d 93.
The trial court is affirmed.
SHEPARD, C.J., and DICKSON, J., concur.
DeBRULER, J., concurs with separate opinion in which KRAHULIK, J., concurs.
KRAHULIK, J., concurs in result.

=== CASE 2222265 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:34.231779+00 ===

667 N.W.2d 452 (2003)
John H. BREKKE, Respondent,
v.
THM BIOMEDICAL, INC., Appellant.
No. C8-03-119.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
August 19, 2003.
*453 Gerald J. Brown, Aaron R. Bransky, Brown, Andrew & Signorelli, P.A., Duluth, MN, for appellant.
John G. Fillenworth, Juhl S. Halvorson, Fillenworth Law Office, PLLC, Duluth, MN, for respondent.
*454 Considered and decided by HARTEN, Presiding Judge, ANDERSON, Judge, and WRIGHT, Judge.
OPINION
HARTEN, Judge.
Respondent employee brought an action against appellant employer under Minn. Stat. § 181.79 (2000) after appellant, without respondent's consent, deducted the amount necessary to repay a loan from respondent's accrued salary. Appellant counterclaimed for interest on the loan. The district court denied appellant's counterclaim and awarded respondent twice the amount of the deduction as provided by law. Because we conclude that the district court did not err by determining that respondent violated Minn.Stat. § 181.79, we affirm.
FACTS
In November 1990, respondent John Brekke and three other individuals formed appellant THM Biomedical, Inc. (THM) for the purpose of commercializing biomedical devices developed and patented by Brekke. Under the investment agreement, Brekke was issued THM common stock in exchange for "services previously performed and to be performed pursuant to * * * an Employment Agreement attached hereto." Brekke and THM entered into the employment agreement; Brekke served as an officer and as one of the three members of THM's board of directors in addition to being a full-time employee.
In 1991, THM made two loans to Brekke totaling $65,000. Brekke signed a promissory note for each loan, agreeing to repay the principal "along with 8% interest." In 1993, Brekke paid $5,000 on the loans.
THM had cash flow problems and often could not pay Brekke's salary when due. A June 2000 corporate balance sheet listed Brekke's "accrued wages" as $188,873.
In July 2000, THM received $950,000 in settlement funds after resolving a long-running licensing dispute with a third party. THM's board met to discuss the use of the funds. At the meeting, Brekke was told that he would net about $20,000 of his accrued salary after deductions for payroll taxes, $60,000 in loan principal, and accrued interest. Brekke requested that THM forgive the loans, but THM denied his request. THM issued Brekke a check for $59,700, the amount that remained after payroll taxes and $60,000 were deducted from his accrued salary. The $60,000 deduction was labeled "Other." Brekke cashed the check on the following day.
THM sold its assets to Kensey Nash Corporation on 1 September 2000. Brekke, who owned 18.6% of THM's shares, received more than $2 million from the sale.
Brekke sued THM in October 2000, claiming that it had violated Minn.Stat. § 181.79 (2000) by deducting the loan payment from his salary without his consent. THM counterclaimed for $42,506 in unpaid interest.[1] The district court denied THM's counterclaim and awarded Brekke $120,000 under the penalty provision of section 181.79. Both parties moved for amended findings and/or a new trial, and Brekke moved for attorney fees. The district court denied all post-trial motions. This appeal followed.
ISSUE
Did the district court err by determining that Brekke was entitled to recover under Minn.Stat. § 181.79 (2000)?
*455 ANALYSIS
Application of a statute to the undisputed facts of a case involves a question of law, and the district court's decision is not binding on this court. O'Malley v. Ulland Bros., 549 N.W.2d 889, 892 (Minn. 1996). If a statute is unambiguous when construed according to the ordinary rules of grammar, a court may engage in no further statutory construction and must apply its plain meaning. State by Beaulieu v. RSJ, Inc., 552 N.W.2d 695, 701 (Minn.1996). Penalty provisions must be strictly construed. Chatfield v. Henderson, 252 Minn. 404, 410, 90 N.W.2d 227, 232 (1958).
Minn.Stat. § 181.79, subd. 1 (2000), provides:
No employer shall make any deduction, directly or indirectly, from the wages due or earned by any employee, who is not an independent contractor, for lost or stolen property, damage to property, or to recover any other claimed indebtedness running from employee to employer, unless the employee, after the loss has occurred or the claimed indebtedness has arisen, voluntarily authorizes the employer in writing to make the deduction or unless the employee is held liable in a court of competent jurisdiction for the loss or indebtedness.
Employers who violate the statute "shall be liable in a civil action brought by the employee for twice the amount of the deduction or credit taken." Minn.Stat. § 181.79, subd. 2 (2000). The statute does not apply in certain cases involving collective bargaining agreements, commissioned salespersons, and prior written authorization by the employee. Id., subd. 1.
It is undisputed that Brekke was an employee of THM, that THM deducted a $60,000 loan payment from Brekke's accrued salary, and that Brekke did not authorize the deduction in writing. Moreover, none of the statute's exceptions applies: Brekke was not an independent contractor or a commissioned salesperson, and he was not working under a collective bargaining agreement. Although THM argues that Brekke's accrued salary was not "wages," the statute makes no exception for salaried employees, and THM's own balance sheet listed the amount due as "Accrued wagesJohn Brekke." Under the plain language of the statute, THM was liable to Brekke for twice the amount of the deduction.
THM argues that section 181.79 should not apply to employees who are also shareholders, officers, and directors of closely held corporations. But THM offers no legal support for its argument, and the statute makes no exception for employees who hold such positions. Brekke's status did not alter his position as an employee: his employment agreement required him to serve at the direction of THM's president, outlined his duties and compensation, and limited his actions following termination. The fact that THM deducted the loan payment despite Brekke's explicit objection demonstrates that Brekke had limited control over THM's actions. We conclude that the district court did not err by determining that Brekke was entitled to recover under Minn.Stat. § 181.79.[2]
*456 THM also raises two equitable arguments: accord and satisfaction and estoppel. Whether an accord and satisfaction occurs is a fact question. Webb Bus. Promotions, Inc. v. Am. Elec. & Entm't Corp., 617 N.W.2d 67, 73 (Minn.2000).
The critical issue is the intent of the parties. If the parties objectively intended the new promise to constitute full settlement of the original claim, the defense of accord and satisfaction is established.
Ladwig & Ladwig, Inc. v. Orlin Ladwig, Inc., 372 N.W.2d 408, 411 (Minn.App.1985) (citation omitted); see also Webb, 617 N.W.2d at 69 (mutual agreement is required for an accord and satisfaction to be enforceable under Minn.Stat. § 336.3-311). Accord and satisfaction may be achieved through the use of a check or other negotiable instrument. Weed v. Comm'r of Revenue, 550 N.W.2d 285, 288 (Minn.1996). But the instrument or an accompanying written communication must contain "a conspicuous statement to the effect that the instrument was tendered as full satisfaction of the claim." Id. (quotation and citation omitted). Brekke's payroll check contained no statement that it was tendered as full satisfaction of any claim, and the paycheck stub merely referred to the deduction as "Other." The record also demonstrates that neither party intended to enter into an accord and satisfaction. Brekke testified and THM concedes that he objected to the deduction, and THM later attempted to collect the interest on the loans. The district court's finding that there was no accord and satisfaction was not clearly erroneous.
THM argues that Brekke should be estopped from recovery because he breached his fiduciary duty to the company by failing to disclose material information. Granting equitable relief is within the district court's discretion, and this court will not reverse absent a clear abuse of that discretion. Nadeau v. County of Ramsey, 277 N.W.2d 520, 524 (Minn. 1979). Although Brekke testified that his attorney informed him about the penalty provision in Minn.Stat. § 181.79 the night before he cashed the check, he also testified that he did not intend to pursue the claim and that he filed the claim only after THM demanded the interest on the loans. The record corroborates Brekke's testimony: THM sent a letter to Brekke demanding the interest on 24 September 2000, and Brekke filed his claim on 27 October 2000. The district court's decision not to grant equitable relief based on the alleged breach of fiduciary duty was not a clear abuse of discretion.[3]
DECISION
Under Minn.Stat. § 181.79 (2000), THM was lawfully penalized twice the amount of its unauthorized deduction from Brekke's salary.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  THM also attempted to force arbitration, but the district court determined that the arbitration agreement did not apply. This court affirmed the district court in Brekke v. THM Biomedical, Inc., No. C5-01-574, 2001 WL 1187098 (Minn.App. 9 Oct. 2001).
[2]  THM also argues that, because Kensey Nash assumed some of its liabilities, successor liability absolved it of any liability to Brekke. Successor corporations are not liable for the actions of transferor corporations unless certain exceptions apply. Niccum v. Hydra Tool Corp., 438 N.W.2d 96, 98 (Minn. 1989). THM cites no authority for the implication that successor liability precludes Brekke from bringing a claim against it for violating Minn. Stat. § 181.79.
[3]  Brekke argues that the district court erred in denying his motion for attorney fees because his employment agreement provided that the unsuccessful party would pay attorney fees in any action "filed in relation to this Agreement." Brekke sued under Minn.Stat. § 181.79; he did not pursue remedies for breach of the employment agreement. Accordingly, the district court did not err in denying him attorney fees.

=== CASE 9740117 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:28:31.062524+00 ===

LUNDSTEN, J.
¶ 1. SSM Health Care System successfully exercised its dissenters' rights under Wis. Stat. ch. 180 against HMO-W. SSM appeals a judgment awarding it money damages plus interest under Wis. Stat. § 180.1301(5) (1991-92).1 SSM contends that the circuit court should have applied, post-decision, the 12% interest rate specified in Wis. Stat. § 814.04(4), rather than interest as defined in § 180.1301(5). We disagree, and affirm the circuit court. On cross-appeal, HMO-W contends that the circuit court correctly looked *74to the "fair and equitable" interest rate language found in § 180.1301(5), but erroneously applied that language by failing to consider and use an interest rate based on rates paid by HMO-W's subsidiary. We agree with part of HMO-W's argument. We conclude that the circuit court misused its discretion when applying § 180.1301(5), and remand for a new interest determination under that statute.
Background
¶ 2. HMO-W is a holding corporation created to own the stock of Unity Health Plans Insurance Corporation.2 Prior to and on October 31, 1994, SSM was a minority shareholder of HMO-W. On October 31, 1994, HMO-W merged with UWS Acquisition Corporation, which is owned by Cobalt Corporation. HMO-W was the surviving entity after the merger, and continues as a holding corporation for Unity. HMO-W is now owned by Cobalt.
¶ 3. SSM voted against HMO-W's merger with UWS Acquisition and successfully asserted its dissenters' rights under Wis. Stat. ch. 180. Accordingly, SSM was entitled to compensation based on the value of SSM's shares at the time of the merger, October 31, 1994. On January 26, 1995, HMO-W paid SSM $1,456,348.48 ($1,427,760.00 as fair value, plus $28,588.48 in interest), an amount HMO-W contended *75included the fair value of SSM's stock on October 31, 1994, plus interest to January 26, 1995. SSM disputed the amount, and HMO-W initiated a "special proceeding" pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 180.1330., The dispute over the fair value of the stock has been resolved. It has been determined that HMO-W's January 26, 1995, payment was insufficient, and the parties agree that HMO-W owes SSM $601,232.94, plus interest from October 31, 1994.3
¶ 4. On remand, the circuit court addressed the interest component of the amount owed by HMO-W The court applied the "fair and equitable" language from Wis. Stat. § 180.1301(5) and concluded that HMO-W should pay interest based on the prime rate.4 The circuit court found that the prime rate "is well accepted as an index figure in many commercial situations" and "reflects the cost of money to corporate borrowers." The circuit court ordered HMO-W to pay interest at a rate calculated by determining the average prime rate from the valuation date, October 31,1994, to the "date of final payment." Both SSM's appeal and *76HMO-W's cross-appeal concern the circuit court's application of the interest language in § 180.1301(5) to the fair value underpayment of $601,232.94.
Standard of Review
¶ 5. The resolution of both the appeal and the cross-appeal requires interpretation of Wis. Stat. § 180.1301(5). The construction of a statute is a question of law which we review without deference to the circuit court. DeMars v. LaPour, 123 Wis. 2d 366, 370, 366 N.W.2d 891 (1985). We first look to the language of the statute and attempt to interpret it based on "the plain meaning of its terms." State v. Williquette, 129 Wis. 2d 239, 248, 385 N.W.2d 145 (1986). Only when statutory language is ambiguous may we examine other construction aids such as legislative history, context, and subject matter. State v. Waalen, 130 Wis. 2d 18, 24, 386 N.W.2d 47 (1986). A statute is ambiguous if reasonable persons could disagree as to its meaning. Williquette, 129 Wis. 2d at 248. "When construing statutes we are to give them their common-sense meaning to avoid unreasonable and absurd results." Janssen v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 2002 WI App 72, ¶ 16, 251 Wis. 2d 660, 643 N.W.2d 857.
SSMs Appeal
The Interest Rate Provision Applied to Payments Made Pursuant to a Special Proceeding
¶ 6. We begin with a brief summary of the applicable provisions of the dissenters' rights statutes. When, as here, a dissenting shareholder successfully exercises dissenters rights under Wis. Stat. ch. 180, *77including a demand for payment that meets the criteria in Wis. Stat. § 180.1323, the corporation must make a payment to the dissenting shareholder equal to "the amount that the corporation estimates to be the fair value of his or her shares, plus accrued interest," calculated from the date the challenged "corporate action is effectuated" or from the date of "receipt of a payment demand," whichever is later. Wis. Stat. § 180.1325(1). If, as here, the dissenting shareholder disagrees with the amount of the corporation's payment, the dissenter may notify the corporation of the dissenter's estimate of the fair value of the shares and demand payment under Wis. Stat. § 180.1328. If that demand remains unsettled, the corporation must "bring a special proceeding" in the circuit court within a specified time limit and petition the court "to determine the fair value of the shares and accrued interest." Wis. Stat. § 180.1330(1). In the case before us, HMO-W opted to bring a special proceeding in the circuit court.
- ¶ 7. If a circuit court finds that a corporation has underpaid, the dissenter is entitled to a judgment in the "amount... by which the court finds the fair value of his or her shares, plus interest, exceeds the amount paid by the corporation." Wis. Stat. § 180.1330(5)(a). As noted above, it was judicially determined that HMO-W underpaid SSM and that HMO-W should pay SSM $601,232.94, plus interest on that amount from October 31, 1994, the corporate action effectuation date.
¶ 8. The parties disagree on the application of statutory provisions governing interest and our attention is directed to the following statutory provisions. Wisconsin Stat. § 180.1301 provides definitions for terms' used in §§ 180.1301 to 180.1331. Section 180.1301(5) defines "interest":
"Interest" means interest from the effectuation *78date of the corporate action until the date of payment, at the average rate currently paid by the corporation on its principal bank loans or, if none, at a rate that is fair and equitable under all of the circumstances.
Section 180.1331, entitled "Court costs and counsel fees," provides:
(l)(a) Notwithstanding ss. 814.01 to 814.04, the court in a special proceeding brought under s. 180.1330 shall determine all costs of the proceeding, including the reasonable compensation and expenses of appraisers appointed by the court and shall assess the costs against the corporation, except as provided in par. (b).
Wisconsin Stat. §§ 814.01 to 814.04 contain various provisions relating to costs. Of particular note here is § 814.04(4), which applies to the time period between a decision and the entry of judgment:
Except as provided in s. 807.01(4), if the judgment is for the recovery of money, interest at the rate of 12% per year from the time of verdict, decision or report until judgment is entered shall be computed by the clerk and added to the costs.
In addition, though not mentioned by either party, Wis. Stat. § 815.05(8) contains the generally applicable post-judgment interest rate on unpaid money judgments. It provides:
Except as provided in s. 807.01(4), every execution upon a judgment for the recovery of money shall direct the collection of interest at the rate of 12% per year on the amount recovered from the date of the entry thereof until paid.
*79¶ 9. The parties agree that the interest provision in Wis. Stat. § 180.1301(5) applies to the time between the corporate action effectuation date and the date the circuit court makes a decision regarding the fair value of the shares in a special proceeding under Wis. Stat. § 180.1330.5 We are asked to resolve whether the interest language in § 180.1301(5) or the 12% rate contained in Wis. Stat. § 814.04(4) applies to the time between the circuit court's decision regarding fair value and the date the corporation actually tenders payment.
¶ 10. SSM's reasoning is as follows:
(1) Under § 180.1330(1), a circuit court in a special proceeding is required to determine "the fair value of the shares and accrued interest." Pursuant to this language, a circuit court must determine both the fair value of the shares and the dollar value of the accrued interest, if any, as of the date the fair value is determined.
(2) If the circuit court, in applying § 180.1330, determines that the corporation underpaid, § 180.1330(5) directs that the dissenter is en*80titled to a judgment in that amount. That is, the subsequent judgment should equal the underpayment determined on the decision date, which includes the dollar value of the accrued interest as of that date.
(3) Once the circuit court has determined the "fair value of the shares and accrued interest," the definition of interest in § 180.1301(5), including the words "date of payment," no longer applies. Instead, the general statutory interest provisions apply, namely § 814.04(4), requiring 12% interest on a money judgment from the date of the circuit court's decision until final payment.
¶ 11. We begin by rejecting SSM's assertion that, pursuant to § 180.1330(1),6 a circuit court must determine the dollar value of the accrued interest, if any, as of the date the fair value is determined. Section 180.1330(1) does not say that a court must determine the specific amount of interest owing as of the date the court decides the fair value of the stock. It may be that the circuit court must address interest owing on the decision date, something we need not decide, but determining "accrued interest" can be done in terms of selecting an interest rate and applying it to a time period, even if the end date for the time period is not known. Thus, the circuit court's order that HMO-W pay interest at a specified rate from October 31,1994, to the "date of final payment" does not run afoul of § 180.1330(1).
*81¶ 12. We now turn our attention to § 180.1301(5), which states that interest, as defined in that statute, applies "from the effectuation date of the corporate action until the date of payment" (emphasis added). We agree with HMO-W that the only reasonable reading of this language is that it unambiguously refers to any date a corporation, pursuant to §§ 180.1301 to 180.1331, makes a payment for the purpose of compensating a successful dissenter for the value of the dissenter's stock.
¶ 13. Similar language was considéred in Weiland v. Department of Transportation, 62 Wis. 2d 456, 215 N.W2d 455 (1974). The Weiland court was asked to determine which interest rate applied from verdict to actual payment:
(1) the statutory interest rate applicable from verdict to judgment, Wis. Stat. § 271.04(4) (1971) (the predecessor statute to § 814.04(4)),7 or
(2) the interest rate contained in Wis. Stat. § 32.06(11)0») (1969).
Weiland, 62 Wis. 2d at 460-62. Section 32.05(ll)(b) (1969) provided: "If the jury verdict as approved by the court exceeds the basic award, the appellant shall have judgment for the amount of such excess plus legal interest thereon to date of payment in full from that *82date which is 14 days after the date of taking . . . The Weiland court concluded that the phrase "to date of payment in full" in § 32.05(ll)(b) "applies until the judgment is paid in full." Weiland, 62 Wis. 2d at 462. We find no relevant distinction between the statutory phrase "to date of payment in full," at issue in Weiland, and the statutory phrase at issue here, "until the date of payment." Both are used to apply an interest rate to a specific situation, and both plainly speak in terms of actual payment.
¶ 14. At paragraph 58, Judge Roggensack's dissent contends that our reliance on Weiland is misplaced. Her dissent apparently reasons that § 32.05(ll)(b)'s reference to the "jury verdict" as a starting point for the application of interest (something not present in § 180.1301) removes any ambiguity that § 32.05(ll)(b)'s interest rate applies after a judicial determination. However, the "jury verdict" language does not explain why the specified interest rate applies after entry of judgment. The language "to date of payment in full" is no clearer with respect to the time period after entry of judgment than is § 180.1301(5)'s "date of payment" language with respect to time periods post-decision. In both cases, the legislature has unambiguously directed interest to run until payment, even if the date of payment follows a decision or judgment.
¶ 15. As noted, the parties do not discuss the postjudgment interest rate statute, § 815.05(8), but Weiland also disposes of any claim that § 815.05(8) overrides the § 180.1301(5) interest provision. To repeat, the court in Weiland concluded that the phrase "to date of payment in full" "[b]y its terms . . . applies until the judgment is paid in full." Weiland, 62 Wis. 2d at 462. Thus, although Weiland does not mention the postjudgment interest rate statute, it unambiguously holds that *83the postjudgment interest rate statute does not apply in the face of a more specific interest rate statute that applies "to date of payment in full."
¶ 16. We observe that in Burlington Northern Railroad Co. v. City of Superior, 159 Wis. 2d 434, 464 N.W.2d 643 (1991), the supreme court concluded that "sec. 815.05(8) establishes the postjudgment interest rate for every judgment for which the legislature has not explicitly provided a different postjudgment interest rate." Id. at 442. Burlington Northern is arguably inconsistent with Weiland because it can be said that former § 32.05(ll)(b) does not "explicitly" say it takes precedence over the postjudgment interest rate statute. But Burlington Northern does not say the more specific statute must expressly reference and override the post-judgment interest rate statute. Rather, the decision says "sec. 815.05(8) establishes the postjudgment interest rate for every judgment for which the legislature has not explicitly provided a different postjudgment interest rate." Burlington Northern, 159 Wis. 2d at 442 (emphasis added). The Weiland court effectively concluded that the legislature had provided a different postjudgment interest rate by using the language "to date of payment in full." See Weiland, 62 Wis. 2d at 462.8
¶ 17. Our conclusion that § 180.1301(5) interest applies is supported by the Maine Supreme Judicial Court's interpretation of its version of § 180.1301(5) in its dissenters' rights statutes. In In re Valuation of Common Stock of McLoon Oil Co., 565 A.2d 997 (Me. *841989), the Maine court construed the same phrase as contained in our dissenters' rights statute, "to the date of payment," and concluded it "means precisely what it says. The word 'payment' cannot be read [as] 'judgment.' " Id. at 1008.9
¶ 18. Judge Roggensack's dissent characterizes the question presented as follows: "whether the § 180.1301(5) definition of interest [applicable to the judicial proceedings in this case under § 180.1330(5)] applies only to prejudgment interest or whether it also applies after a judicial determination of fair value." Roggensack Dissent at ¶ 48. However, her dissent does not go on to conclude that the definition of interest in § 180.1301(5) applies to prejudgment interest, or even that it applies up to the time there is a "judicial determination of fair value." Rather, her dissent concludes that the phrase "date of payment" in § 180.1301(5) has the same meaning as "date of payment" in § 180.1325(2)(a), that is, the date on which a corporation makes a payment of principal and interest in an effort to avoid a dispute or the involvement of the courts. Roggensack Dissent at ¶ 54. Notably, Judge Roggensack's dissent makes no attempt to construe "date of payment" in § 180.1301(5)'s definition of interest as including the date of a judicial determination of *85fair value, the position advanced by SSM. Thus, her analysis leaves a gap: the time between the "date of payment" under § 180.1325 and a judicial determination of fair value. In this case, HMO-W made a payment under § 180.1325 on January 26, 1995, and the circuit court reached its initial decision on fair value on October 16, 1997. Under Judge Roggensack's construction, there is no apparent reason why HMO-W is required to pay interest at all for this thirty-three-month period. It would be incongruous for the legislature to have set an interest rate reflecting the time value of money for the initial period between the corporate action and the § 180.1325 payment date, typically a short time period, and not compensate a dissenter for the time value of money during potentially protracted judicial proceedings. In fact, a gap without interest accruing would encourage litigation because it would provide an incentive for corporations to tender an insufficient payment as quickly as possible, and then have access to dissenting shareholders' money interest-free during litigation.10
¶ 19. Furthermore, we do not attribute a different meaning to the phrase "date of payment" in § 180.1301(5) than to the same phrase in § 180.1325. Both refer to dates payment is actually made, the latter being one of the possible payment dates encompassed in the former.
*86¶ 20. In her dissent, Judge Roggensack examines legislative history. Because we find no ambiguity, we do not resort to legislative history. See Waalen, 130 Wis. 2d at 24. However, even considering the legislative history recounted in her dissent, we fail to understand how it undercuts our construction of "date of payment." We agree that this history indicates the legislature prescribed an interest rate to aid parties in calculating the fair value and interest due to dissenting shareholders. But the legislature also devised a special proceeding to settle disputes between the parties, and plainly applied the § 180.1301(5) definition of interest to judgments entered under § 180.1330. If § 180.1301(5) is an appropriate interest rate up to the date of payment under § 180.1325, why is it not an appropriate interest rate after that date? How is the application of that interest rate contrary to the legislative scheme if it is applied until the corporation actually makes final payment following a judicial proceeding? Just because the legislature specified the interest rate applicable to voluntary settlements under § 180.1325 does not indicate that the same interest rate should not be used during all proceedings to calculate the interest due dissenting shareholders.
¶ 21. Judge Roggensack's dissent says we "en-graft[] the interest definition of Wis. Stat. § 180.1301(5) onto Wis. Stat. § 814.04(4) and Wis. Stat. § 815.05(8)," even though "§ 180.1301 explicitly states that the definitions of § 180.1301 apply only to Wis. Stat. §§ 180.1301 to 180.1331." See Roggensack Dissent at ¶ 53. This criticism misses the mark. We do not engraft any definition on to §§ 814.04(4) or 815.05(8). Moreover, we do apply the interest definition in § 180.1301(5) to § 180.1330.
*87¶ 22. Before leaving this topic, we will respond directly to the statutory arguments made by SSM. SSM approaches the topic from a different direction. SSM defines "date of payment" in § 180.1301(5) as referring to two dates: first, a payment date under § 180.1325(1), and, second, the day a circuit court determines the fair value of stock, pursuant to a special proceeding under § 180.1330. The second part of that definition is not a plausible reading of "date of payment" because, as SSM's own discussion of the mechanics of §§ 180.1301 to 180.1331 shows, there is seldom, if ever, a payment on the day a court decides fair value. And, more to the point, nothing in the statutes requires that a decision on fair value and a resulting payment occur on the same day.
¶ 23. In a closely related argument, SSM ásserts that § 180.1331(l)(a) leads to § 814.04(4)'s 12% interest rate. Section 180.1331(l)(a) provides: "Notwithstanding §§. 814.01 to 814.04, the court in a special proceeding brought under s. 180.1330 shall determine all costs of the proceeding, including. . .." According to SSM, the term "notwithstanding" means all costs under §§ 814.01 to 814.04 are assessed against the corporation, plus, in SSM's words, "two additional requirements: (1) the compensation and expense of court-appointed appraisers are to be included as part of 'all costs' even though Chapter 814 does not so provide; and (2) 'all costs' are normally to be assessed against the corporation, not just to the prevailing party." It follows, according to SSM, that "all costs" in § 180.1331(l)(a) necessarily includes 12% post-decision interest under § 814.04(4). We disagree.
¶ 24. The general reference to §§ 814.01 to 814.04 contained in § 180.1331(l)(a) does not override the *88specific definition of interest in § 180.1301(5). We agree with HMO-W that a more specific provision is present here, namely the interest provision in § 180.1301(5). Furthermore, the term "[notwithstanding" in § 180.1331(l)(a) means that, despite any contrary provision in §§ 814.01 to 814.04, certain costs are available in a special proceeding. See Kohler Co. v. Sogen Int'l Fund, Inc., 2000 WI App 60, ¶ 14, 233 Wis. 2d 592, 608 N.W2d 746 ("The procedures and practices explained in Wis. Stat. chs. 801 to 847 govern special proceedings as well as civil actions unless the special procedure statute indicates to the contrary.").
¶ 25. We conclude that there is no statutory support for SSM's assertion that the interest language contained in § 180.1301(5) should be applied up to, but not after, the date the circuit court determines the fair value of stock in a special proceeding.
¶ 26. Finally, SSM argues that the legislature could not have intended to apply the interest definition of § 180.1301(5) to the uncertain time period following a decision under § 180.1330. When faced with plain language, as we are here, we apply that language unless such application would lead to absurd or unreasonable results. See Gasper v. Parbs, 2001 WI App 259, ¶ 8, 249 Wis. 2d 106, 637 N.W2d 399. Thus, we will consider this argument, but only in the context of determining whether SSM has identified an absurd result. SSM points out that judgments are often entered long after circuit courts render decisions. According to SSM, this means courts will unreasonably be called upon to predict an equitable interest rate for an unknown time period. SSM, however, has not explained why predicting *89an equitable interest rate is inherently inferior to applying the fixed 12% statutory rate found in § 814.04(4).
¶ 27. For all of the reasons above, we conclude that "date of payment" in § 180.1301(5) refers to the actual payment date by a corporation following a special proceeding, even if such payment occurs after a "verdict, decision or report," within the meaning of § 814.04(4), or after "judgment," within the meaning of § 815.05(8). Consequently, the circuit court correctly applied the definition of interest contained in § 180.1301(5) to the time period following its decision on fair value and until final payment is made by HMO-W.
HMO-Ws Cross-Appeal
¶ 28. On cross-appeal, HMO-W contends that the circuit court misused its discretion when it rejected use of a low interest rate available to HMO-W's major asset, Unity, and instead used the higher prime rate. HMO-W argues that the circuit court misused its discretion because the court erroneously assumed there was something wrong with using an interest rate that is only available by virtue of a parent corporation's borrowing power. We agree this was an erroneous assumption and remand for a redetermination of the interest rate to be applied.
¶ 29. The starting point for this discussion is the definition of interest in § 180.1301(5), which reads, in pertinent part:
"Interest" means interest... at the average rate currently paid by the corporation on its principal bank *90loans or, if none, at a rate that is fair and equitable under all of the circumstances.
(Emphasis added.) The "corporation" here, HMO-W, had no bank loans during the relevant period and, consequently, the circuit court needed to determine a rate that was "fair and equitable under all of the circumstances."11 At the same time, it is undisputed that, because of the borrowing power of a corporate parent, HMO-W's major asset, Unity, first could have and later did borrow at a lower interest rate than the prime rate during the relevant time period. This lower interest rate is called the LIBO Rate.12
¶ 30. HMO-W argues that the "under all of the circumstances" language of § 180.1301(5) means the circuit court was required to look at the particular circumstances of this case, which include the rate at which Unity could and did borrow money. HMO-W contends it effectively had the power to borrow money at the LIBO Rate because its primary asset, Unity, had *91that power and, therefore, the circuit court should have considered this fact as favoring use of the LIBO Rate for purposes of § 180.1301(5).
¶ 31. The circuit court rejected HMO-W's argument. It reasoned:
The fact that HMO-W could have borrowed under its parent corporation is not controlling. If there are no loans, the court must look to fairness and equity. Transactions between related parties may not be indicative of market factors. Consequently, the court believes that the most acceptable rate for consideration would be the prime rate. This rate is well accepted as an index figure in many commercial situations. It reflects the cost of money to corporate borrowers. It is appropriate to apply it here. Its use removes any questions raised by the relationship between HMO-W and its parent.
(Emphasis added.)
¶ 32. SSM contends that the circuit court used sound reasoning and that the approach suggested by HMO-W would open "a pandora's box of issues." SSM asks: If a court could look to Unity's borrowing rate in this case, what would happen if a holding corporation like HMO-W had five or ten subsidiaries? In that event, SSM queries, "which one [of the subsidiaries] counts?" For that matter, SSM points out that in this very case HMO-W has one other asset, a relatively small insurance agency called Hometown Insurance Services, Inc. SSM asks: Why not factor in the borrowing power of that asset?13 SSM concludes: "The statutory definition *92[of interest] does not authorize the court to look beyond HMO-W to its parent corporation or to its subsidiary corporation."
¶ 33. Accordingly, we are asked to review a discretionary decision of the circuit court. We review discretionary decisions under the erroneous exercise of discretion standard. "Discretionary acts are sustained if the trial court 'examined the relevant facts, applied a proper standard of law, and, using a demonstrated rational process, reached a conclusion that a reasonable judge could reach.' "Richards v. Land Star Group, Inc., 224 Wis. 2d 829, 848, 593 N.W2d 103 (Ct. App. 1999) (quoting Loy v. Bunderson, 107 Wis. 2d 400, 415, 320 N.W.2d 175 (1982)). "We will generally look for reasons to sustain a trial court's discretionary decision." Murray v. Murray, 231 Wis. 2d 71, 78, 604 N.W.2d 912 (Ct. App. 1999) (citation omitted). "Where the trial court fails to adequately explain the reasons for its decision, we will independently review the record to determine whether it provides a reasonable basis for the trial court's discretionary ruling." State v. Clark, 179 Wis. 2d 484, 490, 507 N.W2d 172 (Ct. App. 1993). Still, we generally remand cases to the trial court when the court has exercised its discretion based on a misunderstanding of law or undisputed fact. See State v. Anderson, 230 Wis. 2d 121, 144, 600 N.W2d 913 (Ct. App. 1999).
¶ 34. We agree with HMO-W that the circuit court misused its discretion. If viewed in isolation, the phrase "fair and equitable" in § 180.1301(5) certainly supports the circuit court's use of the prime rate, which all parties agree is a generally used rate among creditworthy business borrowers in the marketplace. "However, when examining a particular phrase in a statute, *93we must look at it in light of the entire statute" and we must "construe [the] statute in a manner which gives effect to the legislative intent." Elliott v. Employers Mut. Cas. Co., 176 Wis. 2d 410, 414, 500 N.W.2d 397 (Ct. App. 1993). Therefore, we must consider what the legislature intended by the phrase "fair and equitable under all of the circumstances."
¶ 35. We agree with HMO-W that the phrase "under all of the circumstances" directs the circuit court to consider the circumstances of the particular case. The circumstances here include the fact that HMO-W itself did not borrow funds, but its main asset, Unity, could and did borrow at the LIBO Rate. Rather than consider this a circumstance favoring HMO-W, the circuit court dismissed the LIBO Rate as unreliable because " [transactions between related parties may not be indicative of market factors," and use of the higher prime rate "removes any questions raised by the relationship between HMO-W and its parent." The circuit court was plainly saying that there is something suspect about a low interest rate that is the product of the borrowing power of a parent corporation. This reasoning was erroneous because, under some circumstances, our legislature directs that favorable rates of exactly this type be used.
¶ 36. For example, what if Unity, rather than HMO-W, had been the surviving corporation of the challenged corporate action? In that event, § 180.1301(5) would have unambiguously directed that Unity's borrowing rate, the LIBO Rate, be used. This would be true even if the favorable LIBO Rate was only available to Unity because of a parent corporation's borrowing power. SSM does not argue otherwise. If use of a low rate, available only by virtue of a surviving corporation's relationship with other entities, is re*94quired by the legislature to be used under some circumstances, it does not follow that the circuit court in this case could logically deem the LIBO Rate to be unreliable or questionable because it flows from the borrowing power of HMO-W's related entities. Simply stated, the circuit court's skepticism of an interest rate influenced by a parent company is not shared by the legislature.
¶ 37. We emphasize the limited nature of the dispute and, correspondingly, the limited nature of our holding. Our attention is directed at a particular circumstance and we hold that the circuit court misused its discretion by failing to consider that particular circumstance as a factor favorable to HMO-W. At the same time, we reject HMO-W's contention that the circuit court was required to use the LIBO Rate as the "fair and equitable" rate under § 180.1301(5). On remand, the circuit court might determine that HMO-W effectively had access to the LIBO Rate because of Unity's access to that rate and that this circumstance favors use of the LIBO Rate. On the other hand, the circuit court might give weight to competing considerations, such as SSM's argument that Unity was not HMO-W's only asset, and determine that a different rate is appropriate. Indeed, we see nothing inherently unfair about the application of the prime rate in this case. However, the imposition of the prime rate or any other interest rate is a matter of discretion delegated to the circuit court, not this court. Our direction to the circuit court is only that it once more consider the matter in light of all the relevant circumstances, giving the weight it deems appropriate to the borrowing *95interest rates available to and borrowing history of HMO-W's major asset, Unity.14
Conclusion
¶ 38. For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the circuit court's application of the definition of interest contained in § 180.1301(5) to the time period ending when final payment is made by HMO-W following entry of judgment. We reverse and remand on the issue of the "fair and equitable" interest rate. On remand, the circuit court must consider "all of the circumstances," including the LIBO Rate available to Unity, in setting a "fair and equitable" interest rate.
By the Court. — Judgment affirmed in part; reversed in part and cause remanded with directions.
All references to the Wisconsin Statutes are to the 1991-92 version unless otherwise noted.
At the time of its creation, HMO-W owned HMO of Wisconsin Insurance Corporation which later came to be known as Unity Health Plans Insurance Corporation. Although the parties dispute whether Unity is a successor entity to HMO of Wisconsin Insurance Corporation, they have failed to persuade us that this dispute is relevant to the issues before us. Accordingly, there will be no further reference to HMO of Wisconsin Insurance Corporation in this opinion.
When HMO-W and SSM disputed the value of the SSM shares as of October 31, 1994, the circuit court determined a value. At that point in the case, Neillsville Clinic was also a dissenting shareholder. SSM, but not Neillsville Clinic, appealed and the supreme court eventually resolved the value issue and the matter was returned to the circuit court. HMO-W, Inc. v. SSM Health Care Sys., 2000 WI 46, 234 Wis. 2d 707, 611 N.W2d 250, aff'g 228 Wis. 2d 815, 598 N.W2d 577 (Ct. App. 1999). After remand, HMO-W made an $829,167.51 payment to SSM, and the circuit court judgment gives HMO-W credit for that payment.
The circuit court's order provides an exception for time periods during which HMO-W had outstanding bank loans, but this exception is a nullity because the parties agree that HMO-W did not borrow money during the relevant time period.
Section 180.1330(1) provides:
If a demand for payment under s. 180.1328 remains unsettled, the corporation shall bring a special proceeding within 60 days after receiving the payment demand under s. 180.1328 and petition the court to determine the fair value of the shares and accrued interest. If the corporation does not bring the special proceeding within the 60-day period, it shall pay each dissenter whose demand remains unsettled the amount demanded.
Section 180.1330(5) provides, in part:
Each dissenter made a party to the special proceeding is entitled to judgment for any of the following:
(a) The amount, if any, by which the court finds the fair value of his or her shares, plus interest, exceeds the amount paid by the corporation.
Due to the volume of statutory references in this opinion, in the remainder of this opinion we dispense with this court's usual practice of adding "Wis. Stat." each time a statute is cited in a new paragraph.
Wisconsin Stat. § 271.04(4) (1971) was at issue in Weiland. It read: "INTEREST ON VERDICT. When the judgment is for the recovery of money, interest at the rate of 7% per annum from the time of verdict, decision or report until judgment is entered shall be computed by the clerk and added to the costs." Chapter 271 was renumbered chapter 814. See In re Rules of Civil Procedure, 67 Wis. 2d 585, 761 (1975).
Notably, a -post-Burlington Northern case, Calaway v. Brown County, 202 Wis. 2d 736, 553 N.W2d 809 (Ct. App. 1996), confirms that § 32.05(ll)(b) is a statute that "explicitly" addresses postjudgment interest within the meaning of the Burlington Northern test. See Calaway, 202 Wis. 2d at 758.
We note that when the issue is whether contract language trumps statutory postjudgment interest, the analysis may be different. That is, a contract may need to be more explicit to override statutory postjudgment interest. See Production Credit Ass'n v. Laufenberg, 143 Wis. 2d 200, 204, 420 N.W2d 778 (Ct. App. 1988) (when the question is whether statutory postjudgment interest overrides contract interest, the "merger doctrine" provides that statutory interest controls over contract interest in "the absence of an express agreement otherwise"). We do not, however, weigh in on that topic.
It may be that under Judge Roggensack's reading of the statute, a dissenting shareholder would be eligible for common law pre-verdict interest following a § 180.1325 payment and until a judicial decision is rendered. See Loehrke v. Wanta Builders, Inc., 151 Wis. 2d 695, 706-07, 445 N.W2d 717 (Ct. App. 1989). But neither the parties nor the dissent discusses this possibility.
The definition of "corporation" is found in § 180.1301(2):
"Corporation" means the issuer corporation or, if the corporate action giving rise to dissenters' rights under s. 180.1302 is a merger or share exchange that has been effectuated, the surviving domestic corporation or foreign corporation of the merger or the acquiring domestic corporation or foreign corporation of the share exchange.
It is undisputed that HMO-W is a corporate entity distinct from Unity, and HMO-W makes no argument that Unity fits any of the definitions found in § 180.1301(2).
We will refer to this favorable rate as the LIBO Rate, but acknowledge that the record indicates the rate is an adjusted LIBO Rate.
HMO-W owns 80% of the stock in Hometown Insurance Services, Inc. Apart from SSM's characterization of this asset as "relatively small," the parties do not tell us the size of Hometown relative to Unity.
Judge Dykman's dissent asserts that, under the majority's analysis, Wis. Stat. § 180.1301(5) "reads something like: '[I]f none, at a rate that the corporation's parent or subsidiary corporation pays.'" Dykman Dissent at ¶ 43. This mischaracterizes our decision. We do not suggest that if the circuit court had considered the LIBO Rate as a favorable factor for HMO-W, yet still decided in its broad discretion to use the prime rate, such a decision would have been an erroneous exercise of discretion.
Similarly, the remainder of Judge Dykman's dissent is based on mischaracterizations of the majority opinion or the record. To take one more example, Judge Dykman disputes our conclusion that the circuit court considered the LIBO Rate as a negative. Dykman Dissent at ¶ 39. However, the circuit court language he quotes clearly demonstrates that the court disregarded the LIBO Rate because it believed the rate was unreliable. Dykman Dissent at ¶ 40. Since we disagree with Judge Dykman's assertions about the circuit court's comments, it follows that we disagree with his criticism of our decision in that regard.

=== CASE 9740118 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:28:31.067844+00 ===

DYKMAN, J.
¶ 39. (dissenting in part). I disagree *96with the majority's conclusion in the cross-appeal that the trial court erroneously exercised its discretion by adopting the prime rate as a rate that was "fair and equitable under all of the circumstances." Wis. Stat. § 180.1301(5) (2001-02).1 One can hardly think of a more discretionary standard than "fair and equitable." But the majority looks, not for reasons to affirm the trial court, but for reasons to reverse, though it recognizes that it is to do the opposite. Murray v. Murray, 231 Wis. 2d 71, 78, 604 N.W2d 912 (Ct. App. 1999). It does this by interpreting the trial court's opinion as "plainly saying that there is something suspect about a low interest rate that is the product of the borrowing power of a parent corporation." Majority at ¶ 35. That is not what the trial court said.
¶ 40. The trial court's opinion reads:
Transactions between related parties may not be indicative of market factors. Consequently, the court believes that the most acceptable rate for consideration would be the prime rate. This rate is well accepted as an index figure in many commercial situations. It reflects the cost of money to corporate borrowers. It is appropriate to apply it here. Its use removes any questions raised by the relationship between HMO-W and its parent.
¶ 41. The trial court was looking to market factors to determine what rate would be fair and equitable. It decided not to use a rate influenced by the relationship between a parent and a subsidiary corporation, and not by market factors. It found that the prime rate was used in many commercial transactions and that the *97prime rate reflects corporate borrowing reality. I find nothing unreasonable or irrational about this reasoning.
¶ 42. What the majority has done is to amend the statute. Wisconsin Stat. § 180.1301(5) requires that the court first determine whether the corporation pays interest on its bank loans. If it does, no inquiry, is made into whether the rate of interest paid is "fair and equitable." The rate paid is the rate to be paid. But if the corporation does not pay interest, the rate it might have paid, or the rate its parent corporation, sibling corporation, subsidiary or office-sharing corporation pays or might pay or once paid is not relevant. The only question then is what rate is "fair and equitable under the circumstances."
¶ 43. What the majority has done is to somehow link the rate a parent corporation pays with a fair and equitable rate. While I can see a trial court doing that to determine the fair and equitable rate, the statute does not require the trial court to do so. Under the majority's analysis, Wis. Stat. § 180.1301(5) reads something like: "[I]f none, at a rate that the corporation's parent or subsidiary corporation pays." The result is that discretion has been squeezed out of the statute and replaced by a rule of law.
¶ 44. Would the majority have reached the same result if Unity borrowed money at prime plus two percent? Would it have reversed the trial court's discretionary decision to use the prime rate then? That result seems preordained under Wis. Stat. § 180.1301(5), which, under the majority's decision, now effectively requires adoption of related corporations' borrowing rates. Could the trial court consider that most corporate borrowing is done at the prime rate making that a fair and equitable rate, omitting the reason the majority has *98found objectionable? The majority doesn't tell us, but it is evident that the LIBO rate plays a significant part in the majority's analysis of the issue here.
¶ 45. These questions are obviated by interpreting Wis. Stat. § 180.1301(5) as it was written, resulting in an affirmance of this cross-appeal. Because that is not the-result the majority reaches, I respectfully dissent.
All references to the Wisconsin Statutes are to the 2001-02 version unless otherwise noted.

=== CASE 9740119 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:28:31.071668+00 ===

ROGGENSACK, J.
¶ 46. (dissenting in part). Because I conclude that the majority opinion erroneously interprets the dissenters' rights subchapter of Wis. Stat. ch. 180 (2001-02)1 in regard to postjudgment interest, I respectfully dissent from that part of the decision. However, I do agree with the majority opinion in regard to the cross-appeal.
Standard of Review.
¶ 47. The resolution of the appeal turns on questions of statutory interpretation that we resolve de novo. Thielman v. Leean, 2003 WI App 33, ¶ 6, 260 Wis. 2d 253, 659 N.W2d 73. Additionally, whether a statute is ambiguous is a question of law that we review without deference to the circuit court. Id.
Dissenters' Rights Statutes.
¶ 48. At issue in the appeal are the interpretations of several sections of ch. 180 that relate to a shareholder, SSM, exercising statutory dissenters' rights in its shares of HMO-W because of a merger between HMO-W and UWS Acquisition. The interpre*99tations of all sections at issue are driven by the definition of "interest" found in Wis. Stat. § 180.1301(5). The question presented in the appeal is whether the § 180.1301(5) definition of interest applies only to prejudgment interest or whether it also applies after a judicial determination of fair value.
¶ 49. When we are asked to apply a statute whose meaning is in dispute our goal is to give effect to the intent of the legislature. Truttschel v. Martin, 208 Wis. 2d 361, 365, 560 N.W.2d 315, 317 (Ct. App. 1997). We begin with the plain meaning of the language used in the statute. Id. If that language is capable of being understood by two well informed persons in two or more ways, it is ambiguous. D.S. v. Racine County, 142 Wis. 2d 129, 134, 416 N.W.2d 292, 294 (1987). We also consider the interaction of the statute under consideration with other statutory provisions and case law interpreting those provisions because a statute that appears unambiguous on its face may become ambiguous as it interacts with other statutes. See State v. White, 97 Wis. 2d 193, 198, 295 N.W.2d 346, 348 (1980).
¶ 50. Even though I disagree with the majority opinion, for the reasons set forth below, I conclude that Wis. Stat. § 180.1301(5) is not ambiguous. However, in order to understand why that is so, it is helpful to understand the extensive changes in corporate law that were made to ch. 180 in 1990 and the model upon which those changes were based. In 1990, Wisconsin enacted 1989 Wis. Act 303, Wis. Stat. §§ 180.1301-180.1331, as part of a complete revision of Wisconsin's Business Corporation Law. The statutory reorganization of sub-chapter XIII addressing dissenters' rights that is at issue here was taken in large part from the Revised Model Business Corporation Act (Revised Model Act). See Clay R. Williams & Christopher S. Berry, *100Wisconsin's Business Corporation Law, 63 Wisconsin Lawyer 10, 10 (June 1990).
. ¶ 51. The dissenters' rights subchapter of the Revised Model Act attempted to address the tension between corporate management's efforts to move a corporation into new enterprises that at times could rearrange investors' rights and the desire of investors to continue in the corporate form and enterprise style of the company in which they initially invested. Revised Model Business Corporation Act ch. 13, introductory cmt. (1984). The Revised Model Act resolved this tension by giving management of corporations, who have the support of the majority of the shareholders, an almost unlimited power to change the shape of the corporate enterprise, while also giving those shareholders who dissented from the changes the right to withdraw their investments at a fair value. Id. The Revised Model Act sought to motivate corporate management and dissenting shareholders to settle their disputes in private negotiations by a voluntary payment, encompassing fair value and accrued interest, accompanied by documentation sufficient to evaluate the corporation's determination of fair value, as well as how interest was calculated. Judicial resolution of the payment due for the dissenters' shares was to be used only as a last resort. Henry F. Johnson & Paul Bartlett, Jr., Is a Fistful of Dollars the Answer? A Critical Look at Dissenters' Rights Under the Revised Model Business Corporation Act, 12 J.L. & Com. 211, 220 (Spring 1993).
¶ 52. Like the Revised Model Act, Wisconsin's subchapter on dissenters' rights was devised to operate without a judicial determination of fair value, in most cases. As part of that scheme, it contains definitions that are applicable only to that subchapter of ch. 180. Wis. Stat. § 180.1301. The terms defined, and the *101definitions used, are almost identical to those used in § 13.01 of the Revised Model Act. The definition for "interest," found in § 180.1301(5), is at the heart of this appeal. It states in relevant part:
"Interest" means interest from the effectuation date of the corporate action until the date of payment, at the average rate currently paid by the corporation on its principal bank loans or, if none, at a rate that is fair and equitable under all of the circumstances.
Section 180.1301(5).
¶ 53. The majority focuses on the terms, "date of payment," and concludes that the phrase means payment before and after judgment. In so doing, it engrafts the interest definition of Wis. Stat. § 180.1301(5) onto Wis. Stat. § 814.04(4) and Wis. Stat. § 815.05(8), which establish rates of interest after a judicial determination of the principal amount due. However, § 180.1301 explicitly states that the definitions of § 180.1301 apply only to Wis. Stat. §§ 180.1301 to 180.1331. The majority opinion also overlooks the importance of Wis. Stat. § 180.1325, entitled "Payment" which is a major component of the anticipated extra-judicial operation of revised subchapter XIII of ch. 180, as well as the numerous other sections that address "payment" for a dissenter's interest. See Wis. Stat. §§ 180.1321, 180.1323, 180.1328 and 180.1330.
¶ 54. Wisconsin Stat. § 180.1325 speaks solely to voluntary payment by a corporation to those dissenting shareholders or beneficial shareholders who held shares before the effective date specified in the dissenters' notice. Wis. Stat. § 180.1323(1). Section 180.1325 requires current financial information sufficient to permit the shareholders to evaluate the payment of fair value and the calculation of the interest included in the *102payment the corporation has made. For example, § 180.1325 requires that the balance sheet provided be from the "fiscal year ending not more than 16 months before the date of payment . . . Section 180.1325(2)(a) (emphasis added). In my view, the "date of payment" used in Wis. Stat. § 180.1301(5)'s definition of interest is the same "date of payment" spoken to in § 180.1325(2)(a) and referred to as "amount paid" in § 180.1330(5)(a).
¶ 55. Many subsequent dissenters' rights procedures are triggered by the Wis. Stat. § 180.1325 "payment." For example, a dissenter who does not agree with the "payment made" must notify the corporation in a timely fashion of what she/he believes are the fair value and correct calculation of interest, Wis. Stat. § 180.1328(1), or she/he waives the right to contest the payment made. Section 180.1328(2). Furthermore, throughout subchapter XIII the term, "payment," always includes both fair value and interest, whether it is the payment made to a shareholder under § 180.1325, or notice given under Wis. Stat. § 180.1322, or duty to demand payment under Wis. Stat. § 180.1323, or the withholding of payment under Wis. Stat. § 180.1327, or the procedure to follow if dissatisfied with payment under § 180.1328 or the payment a court is to order under Wis. Stat. § 180.1330. However, a statute directing that a court is to impose judgment for an amount by which the fair value plus interest exceeds what the corporation has paid or offered, as is done in § 180.1330(5), does not explicitly provide that the resultant judgment will run at a rate of interest different from that already set in Wis. Stat. § 814.04(4) and Wis. Stat. § 815.05(8).
¶ 56. Additionally, although we have not directly addressed the question presented by this appeal, we *103have previously held that the "payment date" for a payment of fair value and interest made under Wis. Stat. § 180.1325 is the date the shareholder receives the check, even when the shareholder objects to the amount of the payment and seeks additional remuneration. Kohler Co. v. Sogen Int'l Fund, Inc., 2000 WI App 60, ¶ 20, 233 Wis. 2d 592, 608 N.W2d 746. Our decision in Kohler is consistent with my view that the terms, "date of payment" and "payment," used in the dissenters' rights subchapter refer to the same payment of fair value and interest described in the many other sections of that subchapter that address dissenters' rights. It does not refer to payments made after judicial decision.
¶ 57. Furthermore, I read Burlington Northern Railroad Co. v. City of Superior, 159 Wis. 2d 434, 464 N.W2d 643 (1991), as consistent with the premise that the interest provisions in Wis. Stat. § 815.05(8) control every judgment, unless a statute or a contractual provision explicitly states that another rate of interest is to be used after a judicial determination. As the supreme court explained:
[W]e conclude that sec. 815.05(8) establishes the post-judgment interest rate for every judgment for which the legislature has not explicitly provided a different postjudgment interest rate.
Burlington Northern, 159 Wis. 2d at 442, 464 N.W2d at 646 (emphasis added). Wisconsin Stat. § 180.1301(5) does not "explicitly" provide for postjudgment or post verdict interest. Rather, it provides for interest to the "date of payment," a term repeated in subchapter XIII to which we accorded a specific meaning in Koehler. That § 815.05(8) controls interest after judgment is also consistent with the doctrine of merger, which provides that when a litigant obtains a judgment, his original *104claim is extinguished and the rights flowing from the judgment are substituted for the claim. See Production Credit Ass'n v. Laufenberg, 143 Wis. 2d 200, 204-05, 420 N.W.2d 778, 779 (Ct. App. 1988).
¶ 58. There is also a difference in regard to when an explicit legislative directive is set out in ch. 180's terms and Weiland v. DOT, 62 Wis. 2d 456, 215 N.W2d 455 (1974), on which the majority relies for most of its reasoning. Weiland arises out of a Wis. Stat. ch. 32 condemnation proceeding, and it turns on the meaning of Wis. Stat. § 32.05(ll)(b) (1969), that states in relevant part:
If the jury verdict as approved by the court exceeds the basic award, the appellant shall have judgment for the amount of such excess plus legal interest thereon to date of payment in full....
Weiland, 62 Wis. 2d at 461, 215 N.W.2d at 457 (emphasis added). By its very terms, § 32.05(ll)(b) applies to interest after a judicial determination until payment. Therefore, § 32.05(ll)(b) took the interest provisions of Wis. Stat. §§ 814.04(4) and 815.05(8) out of play. Stated another way, § 32.05(ll)(b) "explicitly provided a different postjudgment interest rate," just as Burlington Northern explains. See Burlington Northern, 159 Wis. 2d at 442, 464 N.W.2d at 646. Additionally, Calaway v. Brown County, 202 Wis. 2d 736, 553 N.W.2d 809 (Ct. App. 1996), a later case that also interpreted § 32.05, but under subsec. 10(b), confirms that § 32.05(ll)(b) is a statute that explicitly provides for postjudgment interest.
¶ 59. In Calaway, we were asked to decide whether postjudgment interest of twelve percent was due for a condemnation judgment under Wis. Stat. § 32.05(10)(b) that states in relevant part:
*105The court shall enter judgment for the amount found to be due after giving effect to any amount paid by reason of a prior award. The judgment shall include legal interest on the amount so found due from the date of taking if judgment is for the condemnor, and from 14 days after the date of taking if judgment is for the condemnee.
Calaway, 202 Wis. 2d at 755, 553 N.W.2d at 817. We interpreted this provision as an entitlement to prejudgment interest, but not having any bearing on the rate of postjudgment interest. Id. at 755-56, 553 N.W.2d at 817. We cited Burlington Northern and concluded that Wis. Stat. § 815.05(8) continued to control postjudgment interest. Id. Therefore, the judgment ran at twelve percent interest until paid. We concluded that it was only under § 32.05(ll)(b) that the legislature had explicitly stated that the legal rate of interest found in Wis. Stat. § 138.04 applied after judgment. Id.
¶ 60. Just as in our analysis in Calaway, I conclude that because Wis. Stat. § 180.1301(5) does not explicitly provide that its definition of "interest" applies after judgment, it does not so apply and Wis. Stat. § 814.04(4) and Wis. Stat. § 815.05(8) continue to control where applicable.2 Accordingly, for the reasons set *106out above, I would reverse the decision of the circuit court on the appeal and I respectfully dissent from the majority opinion.
All further references to the Wisconsin Statutes are to the 2001-02 version unless otherwise noted.
1 also disagree with the majority's conclusion that the interest spoken to in Wis. Stat. § 180.1330(1) can be expressed as a rate of interest rather than as the amount of accrued interest that is due. Majority at ¶ 11. To me, such an interpretation is contrary to what the legislature hoped would be a self-help statute for corporations and shareholders where a dollar amount payment would be made to those dissenters who have complied with their obligations under the statutes and they could take it or respond with a dollar amount for fair value and accrued interest the shareholder believed was appropriate. See Wis. Stat. §§ 180.1325 and 180.1328.

=== CASE 9740402 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:34:39.010212+00 ===

Boyles, J.
(dissenting). I concur in reversal but do not agree with Mr. Justice Bushnbll’s construction of the applicable statute. Section 8 of part 7 of the workmen’s compensation law* provides that where an occupational disease is aggravated by any other disease or infirmity not itself compensable, or where disability from any other cause which is not itself compensable is aggravated, accelerated or in anywise contributed to by an occupational disease, the compensation payable shall be such proportion only of the compensation that would be payable if the occupational disease were the sole cause of the disability as such occupational disease as a causative factor bears to all the causes of such disability, such reduction in compensation to be effected by reducing the number of weekly payments or the amount of *175such payments. In the instant' case the testimony supports the finding of the commission that plaintiff’s disablement arose from silicosis complicated by tuberculosis; the testimony establishes that plaintiff has tuberculosis, caused by silicosis resulting from his many years’ employment in the foundry. The commission properly concluded that there was a direct causal relationship between the silicosis and the tuberculosis. Under those circumstances, I am not in accord with the conclusion of Mr. JusticeBtjshnell that said section 8 of part 7 of the act does not apply.
Plaintiff’s occupational disease (silicosis) is aggravated by or contributes to another disease (tuberculosis) which is not in itself compensable, and this, brings plaintiff’s disability within the purview of' said section. Furthermore, the record is undisputed that plaintiff was hospitalized in September, 1947, at which time he had silicosis and active pulmonary tuberculosis. Plaintiff’s medical testimony was:
“Q. Then it is your opinion when he was admitted here September 4, 1947, he was disabled because of both TB and silicosis?
“A. That is right. .
“Q. Would you say that that disability from the-TB was aggravated, prolonged, accelerated, or in. any way contributed to by the silicosis ? •
“A. Yes, I would say that.”
This brings plaintiff’s compensation within the purview of said section 8, wherein it provides that where any disability from any cause not itself compensable (tuberculosis) is aggravated, accelerated or in anywise contributed to by an occupational disease (silicosis), compensation is payable under the provisions of said section. This question was raised in a brief filed by appellant with the commission and returned here as a part of the certified record and *176it is the only question of law raised here on the appeal.
In Kail v. Field Pontiac-Cadillac Co., 296 Mich 658, a like situation came before us where the commission had failed to apportion the compensation as required by said section and we remanded the ease for the commission to make such determination. We said:
“Under the finding made by the department it was the duty of the department to determine the proportion which the said occupational disease, as a causative factor, bore to all the causes of Herbert Kail’s death and, hence, proportion the compensation as provided by the statute. •
“The finding of the department that monoxide poisoning contributed toward Mr. Kail’s death from pulmonary edema, caused by cardiac failure, brought the necessity of determining the proportion which the occupational disease, as a causative factor, bore to all the causes of Mr. Kail’s death and to proportion the compensation as provided in section 8, part 7, of the act. This was not done, and the case is remanded to the department in order to comply with the mentioned provision of the occupational disease act.
“Defendants were not required to offer proofs on that subject for the burden was,, and is, upon plaintiff to show the measure of the award to be made. It may be difficult to proportion the compensation but the law to do so is on the statute book and must be obeyed.”
See, also, Coombs v. Kirsch Co., 301 Mich 1 (11 NCCA NS 510).
There was proof that the plaintiff was able to earn wages at other work which did not subject him to the hazards of silicosis. While the aforesaid section 8 of part 7 of the act defines the circumstances and lays the foundation on which the commission is required to apportion the compensation in the case *177.at bar, section 3 of part 7* provides the yardstick ■which the commission must nse in snch apportionment. It provides:
“Provided, however, That if it shall be determined that snch employee is able to earn wages at another ■occupation which shall be neither unhealthful nor injurious and such wages do not equal his full wages prior to the date of his disablement, the compensation payable shall be a percentage of full compensation proportionate to the reduction in his earning capacity.”
Under the finding of the commission that silicosis was a causative factor of the tuberculosis, this case should be remanded to the commission to determine the proportion which said occupational disease (silicosis), as a causative factor, bears to the other cause of plaintiff’s disablement (tuberculosis), and to apportion the compensation accordingly. Appellant, having prevailed on the only question involved, should be entitled to costs.
Sharpe, J., concurred with Boyles, J.
CL 1948, § 417.8 (Stat Ana 1950 Eev § 17.227).
CL 1948, § 417.3 (Stat Ann 1950 Rev § 17.222).

=== CASE 9739081 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:27.23767+00 ===

MYSE, J.
(dissenting). I dissent from that portion of the majority opinion holding the search warrant to be fatally defective because of overbreadth. The majority properly notes the deferential standard of review applicable to search warrants. They also have properly noted that the affidavit is not an essay contest for the affiant and is to be interpreted in a common sense way.
In spite of these standards of review, however, the majority concludes that the affidavit does not sufficiently establish a pattern of fraudulent practice starting at some unknown date prior to Berger's employment. The affidavit in support of the warrant refers to Berger's statements that DeSmidt was "engaged in a series of illegal activities," and that DeSmidt routinely took bite-wing X-rays that were billed as periapical X-rays because only charges for the former were normally covered under the Wisconsin Medical Assistance Program. The affidavit refers to specific instances of such conduct, *342which were described as "common practice," "examples" and "done routinely."
These allegations clearly indicate that a pattern of fraudulent practice existed in the office at the time Berger started her employment. It was necessary for the state to obtain sufficient records to demonstrate the difference between the amounts billed depending on the method of payment and the way claims were processed in order to prove the alleged fraudulent practice. Because no accurate starting date of this practice was available to the state, they were unable to limit the seizure of records to a specific time period. Ultimately, they seized all of the records available in the current files for the previous six years.
The majority has failed to identify how the warrant should or could have been limited in time while at the same time be reasonably calculated to obtain all of the relevant records. In fact, the warrant was as limited as reasonably could be required under the circumstances of this case. The majority's opinion leaves the state without any way of obtaining records created prior to Berger's employment, even though she alleged that a fraudulent scheme existed prior to her employment. Because of the nature of Berger's statements, the state's need to obtain sufficient records to demonstrate the facts alleged, and a commonsense reading of the affidavit, I conclude that the warrant is not overbroad.

=== CASE 2218684 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:52.648925+00 ===

596 N.E.2d 1308 (1992)
231 Ill. App. 3d 460
173 Ill. Dec. 429
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Servando GARCIA, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 2-89-0915.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Second District.
July 21, 1992.
*1311 G. Joseph Weller, Deputy Defender, Thomas A. Lilien, Asst. Defender, Michael J. Pelletier, Deputy Defender, Anne E. Meyer (argued), Office of the State Appellate Defender, Chicago, for Servando Garcia.
Gary V. Johnson, Kane County State's Atty., Geneva, William L. Browers, Deputy Director, Lawrence M. Bauer (argued), State's Attys. Appellate Prosecutors, Elgin, for the People. *1309
*1310 Justice DUNN delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant, Servando Garcia, was convicted of murder (Ill.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 38, par. 9-1) and was sentenced to a 45-year term of imprisonment. On appeal, defendant contends that he is entitled to a new trial for the following reasons: (1) the prosecutor made misstatements during closing argument about the law of accountability; (2) the prosecutor made improper remarks during trial and closing argument in which he vouched for the credibility of the State's key witness; (3) the trial judge failed to admonish most of the jurors that they were not to discuss the case with one another prior to their deliberations; (4) the trial judge failed to admonish the jurors that they were not to form an opinion regarding the defendant's guilt or innocence prior to the conclusion of the trial; (5) the trial judge failed to make an adequate inquiry after discovering that several jurors had discussed the case with one another during the trial; and (6) defendant received ineffective assistance of counsel. Defendant also contends that his sentence was excessive when compared with the sentences imposed upon the other two alleged perpetrators.
The State's primary witness, Artemio Garcilazo, testified as follows. On the morning of January 7, 1989, he saw defendant and a man named Pedro Reyes standing by the railroad tracks near an abandoned building formerly used as a switch house by a railroad. The three men went inside the switch house and saw Juan Hernandez and Teodoro Ovideo inside. The victim, Robert Snow, arrived at the switch house a little later, after which Hernandez and Ovideo left.
Garcilazo, Reyes, Snow, and defendant began to share some vodka and beer. An argument ensued between defendant and Snow. Garcilazo did not understand what Snow and defendant were saying because they were arguing in English. Defendant and Snow then began to fight. Garcilazo did not see who struck the first blow although he did see defendant hit Snow in the chest two or three times. Defendant then told Garcilazo that it was his turn, and Garcilazo hit Snow in the chest a few times. Reyes did likewise after defendant stated that it was his turn.
Defendant then attempted to strangle Snow with a cord. He also attempted to put Snow's face into some burning coals that were inside the switch house. Snow was able to prevent him from doing so, however.
Snow then got up. Defendant pushed him into an electric motor that was inside the switch house. Snow fell backwards and hit his head against a wall. When he got up, defendant hit him in the head with a board. Snow fell to the ground and did not get up again.
Defendant then asked Garcilazo for a knife. Garcilazo said that he did not have a knife but did have a screwdriver. Defendant told Garcilazo to give him the screwdriver, and Garcilazo complied. Defendant then stabbed Snow in the chest two or three times with the screwdriver. He then gave the screwdriver to Reyes and told him to stab Snow. Reyes did so several times. Garcilazo then left the switch house. Garcilazo testified that, at the time of the above events, defendant and he were both "halfway" drunk.
Garcilazo was arrested for murder on January 11, 1989. On the day of his arrest, he spoke to two Aurora police officers. At *1312 first he told the officers that he was at work at the time of the killing. The officers told him that they would check his story. Garcilazo then told the officers that he had gotten into a fight with Snow because Snow had broken a bottle of vodka, and Garcilazo had contributed some of the money that had been used to purchase the vodka. Garcilazo hit Snow, and Snow fell to the ground. Defendant then grabbed a screwdriver from one of Garcilazo's pockets and began stabbing Snow. Garcilazo went outside to urinate. When he returned inside the switch house, Snow was bleeding. Garcilazo also told the officers that he got blood on his clothing by falling on Snow.
Garcilazo also testified that he spoke to Gary Johnson, the Kane County State's Attorney, on April 17, 1989, and that the version of the killing that he gave to Johnson differed from his trial testimony in several respects. Garcilazo told Johnson that the argument between defendant and Snow started over a broken bottle of vodka. Garcilazo also told Johnson that defendant had put Snow's face into a coal fire and had briefly held it in the fire.
As a result of the above meeting, Garcilazo entered into a plea agreement with the State. Under the terms of this agreement, Garcilazo would plead guilty to second-degree murder and receive a four-year sentence if he testified truthfully against defendant and Reyes. If Garcilazo lied during his testimony, the sentence would be 20 years.
Garcilazo admitted during his testimony that he had been convicted of attempted burglary and arrested for felony theft. He further admitted that he had given a false name to law enforcement officials when arrested on the latter charge so that he would be released on bond and would not have problems relating to his probation. Garcilazo acknowledged that he had lied in the past in order to stay out of prison, including his conversations with the police on January 11, 1989, about the instant case. Garcilazo stated that his trial testimony was true, however.
Dr. Larry Blum, a forensic pathologist, testified that he conducted an autopsy upon Robert Snow's corpse. The cause of Snow's death was internal hemorrhaging from multiple stab wounds to Snow's heart and lungs, with blunt trauma to Snow's head as a contributing factor. Dr. Blum did not see any evidence of attempted ligature strangulation or any evidence that Snow had suffered burns to his face or head. Snow's blood-alcohol content was 0.404%, an extremely high level.
Acting pursuant to search warrants, the Aurora police found clothing with bloodstains in the residences of defendant, Garcilazo and Reyes. A pair of sweat pants found in defendant's apartment contained bloodstains whose composition was consistent with Snow's blood. The same was true of pants found at the residences of Garcilazo and Reyes.
Victor Ovideo, a neighbor who lived in the same apartment building as defendant, testified as follows. Defendant went to the Ovideo apartment on the afternoon of January 7, 1989. Defendant's clothes were spotted, and it appeared that he had been beaten. Defendant seemed to be intoxicated at the time. He told Ovideo that he had been involved in a fight and had been defending Ovideo's brother. Ovideo's wife, Guadalupe, was in another room at the time, but she testified that she overheard defendant saying that he had been in a fight. Victor Ovideo stated during his testimony that he saw his brother, Teodoro, on January 9, 1989, and Teodoro had a black eye. Victor Ovideo's sister was married to Pedro Reyes' son.
Defendant testified as follows. He spent most of the evening of January 6, 1989, at the abandoned switch house in Aurora where he was drinking with a man named Juan Hernandez. Defendant's wife did not want him to return home because he had been drinking, so he spent the night at a shelter for homeless people in Aurora. He woke up at about 7 o'clock in the morning on January 7 and still felt drunk.
Defendant then went to the switch house, where he saw Juan Hernandez. The two began drinking beer and vodka. *1313 Reyes, Garcilazo, and Snow went into the switch house later that morning. Hernandez left the switch house in order to try to sell a tape recorder. Hernandez told defendant to wait for him.
After Hernandez left, a fight broke out. Defendant was lying down on the ground at the time and remained there. He believed that the fight was started because Snow had broken a bottle of vodka. Garcilazo and Reyes were hitting Snow and Garcilazo was stomping on him. Garcilazo also had a screwdriver in his hand and was stabbing Snow in the chest with it.
At one point, Garcilazo hit Snow and knocked him over on top of defendant. Defendant hit Snow with an open hand in order to push him away. In so doing, he did not intend to assist Garcilazo or Reyes; he merely intended to push Snow off him. As a result, defendant ended up with a good deal of blood on his person and clothing. After defendant pushed Snow away, Snow remained on the ground, and Garcilazo and Reyes continued hitting him. Defendant got up and stood in the doorway. Reyes then touched Snow and stated that he was not dead yet. Garcilazo handed Reyes the screwdriver and told Reyes to hit Snow in the heart. Reyes took the screwdriver and stabbed Snow several times in the area of his heart.
Defendant did not try to stop Reyes and Garcilazo because he was afraid of them, and he did not have much strength because he was drunk. After Reyes stabbed Snow in the heart, defendant left the switch house. He saw Juan Hernandez, Teodoro Ovideo, and another man standing by the railroad tracks. After a few minutes, defendant and Hernandez went to a bar. Garcilazo and Reyes followed them. Defendant left after a short time and went to Victor Ovideo's apartment. He denied telling Ovideo that he had been in a fight. He stated instead that he told Ovideo that he had just seen two men kill a white man. Defendant did not go to the police because he feared reprisals from Reyes and Garcilazo.
The two Aurora police officers who interrogated defendant early in the morning on January 11, 1989, testified that he was generally cooperative in responding to their questions. They testified that defendant originally told them that he did not know why the fight started and that Snow was alive though unconscious when defendant left the switch house to find Hernandez. Defendant also originally told them that Reyes and Garcilazo left the switch house 10 or 15 minutes later and told the others that Snow was dead. After the officers asked about the blood found on defendant's clothing, defendant stated that he had seen Garcilazo and Reyes stab Snow with a screwdriver after Snow had been knocked unconscious. Defendant also told them that the fight had started because Snow had refused to contribute any money toward the purchase of beer. The version of events which defendant gave to the officers was generally consistent with his trial testimony in other respects.
The judge who presided over the remainder of the trial was ill on the day that jury selection was conducted, and the parties agreed that a different judge could preside over the jury selection. That judge admonished the initial panel of four jurors that they should not discuss the case with anyone including the other jurors. He repeated this admonition to the other jurors but did not tell them that it applied to discussions with one another. He also failed to admonish the jurors that they were not to form any opinion as to defendant's guilt or innocence until the trial was over.
After all the evidence was presented, but before closing arguments, the State's Attorney received a phone call from two women who had overheard three jurors discussing the case at a restaurant near the courthouse that morning. The State's Attorney reported the matter to the trial judge, who met with the women and counsel for both sides in chambers.
One of the women, Charlene Chatham, a Florida attorney, stated that she was eating with a friend named Carol Wather that morning at a restaurant near the courthouse. Three men who were wearing juror identification tags on the front of their *1314 shirts came into the restaurant and sat near Chatham and Wather. Chatham said that she heard one of the jurors say that the prosecutor had blown a first-degree murder conviction. The men were also saying that the public defender was doing some aggressive things. Chatham decided that she should contact someone because she felt the jurors' conversation was improper. She stated that Wather had heard more of the conversation than she had.
The trial judge conducted an in camera interview with Carol Wather. Wather stated that, after the three men sat down, she heard one of them mention a Spanish name. She then heard one of them mention first-degree murder. She told Chatham that the men were talking about a murder trial. Chatham then stated that they were jurors. Wather told Chatham that she did not think the conversation that the men were engaged in was appropriate.
Wather told the trial judge that there was a good deal of conversation among the men about how Johnson was angry and Johnson had blown the case. Wather did not know if Johnson was the prosecuting attorney or the defense attorney. She stated that two of the men seemed to have their minds made up about the verdict while one seemed open-minded. She was not sure whether the two men were planning to vote guilty or not guilty. The trial judge informed counsel that, according to Wather, two of the jurors had picked sides and that they were inclined favorably toward the defense.
Between the interviews with Chatham and Wather, the trial judge stated that he would advise the jurors that some of them had been overheard discussing the case and ask if they were still able to listen to closing arguments with an open mind. If any indicated that they were unable to do so, a mistrial would be declared. After listening to Wather, the trial judge stated that he would question only the three jurors who had engaged in the conversation at the restaurant. Defense counsel objected on the basis that such a procedure might cause these jurors to feel that they were being scrutinized and cause them to vote guilty. She suggested that the trial judge stay with the procedure he had previously intended to employ. The trial judge agreed to do so.
The trial judge then admonished the jurors. He mentioned that several had been overheard discussing the case. He stated that the jurors should not form or express any opinion about the case until they begin their deliberations and, until that point, should not discuss the case with anyone, including one another. The trial judge also stated that the jurors should listen to the closing arguments and the instructions. He asked if any of the jurors would be unable to listen to the arguments or to otherwise discharge their duties as jurors and asked them to raise their hands if they were. No one raised his or her hand.
The jury found defendant guilty. The trial judge subsequently denied defendant's post-trial motion. At defendant's sentencing hearing, Valerie Gerhardt, the director of PADS, an organization which provides shelter to the needy, testified that she had known defendant for about three years. She stated that defendant was quiet, well-mannered, patient, and cooperative. Defendant often volunteered to help others at the shelter and always conducted himself in accordance with its rules.
Helen Flores, defendant's stepdaughter from his first marriage, testified that defendant and her mother were happily married for about seven years, until her mother died as a result of an illness. She stated that defendant cared for her mother during this illness and described defendant as a kind, compassionate man. Flores testified that she and her mother's other children maintained contact with defendant after their mother's death because of their affection for him. She further testified that defendant began to drink more frequently after her mother's death and continued to do so after meeting his present wife.
The trial judge, relying largely upon the brutal nature of the killing, imposed a 45-year sentence. Later, in separate proceedings, Pedro Reyes entered a plea of guilty to first-degree murder, and Artemio Garcilazo pleaded guilty to second-degree murder. *1315 Pursuant to separate plea agreements, Reyes received a 25-year sentence, and Garcilazo was sentenced to a four-year term of imprisonment.
Defendant's initial contention on appeal is that he should receive a new trial because of alleged misstatements by the prosecutor during closing argument about the law of accountability and its applicability. Prosecutors are generally given a great degree of latitude in closing arguments, and improper remarks will not result in reversal unless they cause substantial prejudice to the defendant, considering the context of the language employed, its relationship to the evidence, and its effect upon the defendant's right to a fair trial. (People v. Thompkins (1988), 121 Ill. 2d 401, 445, 117 Ill. Dec. 927, 521 N.E.2d 38.) Stated another way, improper remarks will not justify a reversal unless they were a material factor in defendant's conviction without which the jury might have reached a different result. (Thompkins, 121 Ill.2d at 445, 117 Ill. Dec. 927, 521 N.E.2d 38; People v. Lyles (1985), 106 Ill. 2d 373, 391, 87 Ill. Dec. 934, 478 N.E.2d 291.) Furthermore, an instruction that closing arguments are not evidence and that any statement during arguments that is not based on the evidence should be disregarded tends to cure any prejudice from improper remarks. People v. Hrobowski (1991), 216 Ill.App.3d 711, 727, 159 Ill. Dec. 246, 575 N.E.2d 1306; People v. Thomas (1990), 200 Ill.App.3d 268, 275, 146 Ill. Dec. 693, 558 N.E.2d 656.
Under the portion of the accountability statute at issue here, a party can be held legally accountable for the conduct of another only if "before or during the commission of an offense, and with the intent to promote or facilitate such commission, he solicits, aids, abets, agrees or attempts to aid, such other person in the planning or commission of the offense." (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1991, ch. 38, par. 5-2(c).) It is not enough to show that the defendant's conduct facilitated the commission of the offense; the prosecution must also show that the defendant acted with the intent to facilitate the commission of the offense. People v. Lashmett (1984), 126 Ill.App.3d 340, 347, 81 Ill. Dec. 656, 467 N.E.2d 356.
Bearing the above principles in mind, we will examine the comments challenged by defendant. The first comment is as follows:
"And what we do know in this case is that the Defendant by his own admission did absolutely nothing to help the victim, Bobby Snow. So that leads you to the almost, almost anyhow, inalterable conclusion, inescapable conclusion that he had to have done something simply by being there because."
Defendant's attorney then objected on the basis that the prosecutor was misstating the law of accountability. The trial judge overruled the objection.
The prosecutor then continued, stating as follows:
"Let me repeat myself. You must come to the inescapable or at least almost inescapable conclusion that because the Defendant by his own admission did not help Bobby Snow, he must have done something to help in his demise. Nobody could just sit there. Nobody could just lay there as the Defendant stated."
Shortly before making the above comments, the prosecutor made mention of the brutal nature of the killing and the fact that it took place in a small room.
The above-quoted remarks contain no misstatements of the law of accountability. We do not interpret the comments as indicating that defendant's mere presence at the scene of the offense would render him accountable for the crime, which would have been a misstatement of the law. (See People v. Evans (1981), 87 Ill. 2d 77, 83, 57 Ill. Dec. 622, 429 N.E.2d 520.) Instead, the prosecutor was arguing that defendant's version of events was not credible because it was contrary to human experience that a person in a small room observing a brutal beating would merely lay there and do nothing. In closing argument, the prosecutor is entitled to comment upon the evidence and to draw any legitimate inferences from it. (People v. Nevitt (1990), 135 Ill. 2d 423, 451, 142 Ill. Dec. 854, 553 N.E.2d 368.) This is all the prosecutor *1316 was doing with respect to the above comments. We therefore find that they were proper.
Much later during his closing argument, the prosecutor quoted the accountability instruction that the trial court later gave to the jury. That instruction states:
"A person is legally accountable for the conduct of another person when, either before or during the commission of an offense, and with the intent to promote or facilitate the commission of that offense, he knowingly solicits, aids, abets, agrees to aid, or attempts to aid the other person in the planning or commission of an offense.
The word `conduct' includes any criminal act done in furtherance of the planned and intended act."
The prosecutor then stated as follows:
"Read that instruction over, ladies and gentleman of the jury. Read that instruction over because that instruction fits this case even if you were to believe the Defendant's own theory of the case.
According to the law, if you believe the Defendant's own theory of the case, he is guilty because he's legally responsible because he aided and abetted according to the accountability theory."
Defendant's attorney objected and contended that the above statement was inaccurate because defendant testified that he did not intend to help Garcilazo and Reyes. The trial judge then admonished the jurors that the attorneys would sometimes disagree about the content of the testimony, and it was up to the jurors to determine what the facts were and apply the law to them. The prosecutor later stated as follows:
"Did he do anything to help the victim? No. Was he in the room during the entire time * * * during the murder of the victim? Yes, he was. Did he try to do anything to stop those other two from killing the victim? No, he didn't. Did he hit the victim? According to the statement that he made to the police, he might have hit the victim. According to what he said today, he hit the victim. And when he hit the victim, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, I submit to you he became accountable eveneven if you believe everything that he told you and reject everything that the State's witnesses have told you."
Defendant's attorney objected on the basis that the prosecutor had left out the element of intent to promote the offense and join in with the others. The trial judge sustained this objection. The prosecutor then said:
"Read the accountability instruction. With that instruction in mind, under the Defendant's theory, he is guilty on the theory of accountability by that instruction."
We agree with defendant that the prosecutor's statements that defendant was guilty under an accountability theory even if his testimony was true were inaccurate. Defendant testified that he did push or hit the victim but only did so because Snow was on top of him. According to defendant's testimony, he was not trying to assist Reyes and Garcilazo; he was only attempting to push Snow off him. If defendant's testimony was true, he was not guilty under an accountability theory because he lacked the intent to promote or facilitate the commission of the offense.
We do not believe, however, that a new trial is warranted because of the improper remarks. First of all, with respect to the lengthiest and most emphatic of these remarks, the trial judge sustained a defense objection. Sustaining a defense objection to improper remarks during argument tends to cure any possible resulting prejudice. (People v. Hrobowski (1991), 216 Ill.App.3d 711, 727, 159 Ill. Dec. 246, 575 N.E.2d 1306.) While there were other similar misstatements which were not cured by the sustaining of a defense objection, there were other factors to limit the prejudice from these remarks.
The trial judge gave the jury an accountability instruction which accurately stated the applicable law, and the prosecutor read the same instruction to the jury and encouraged the jurors to read it. Thus, the jurors were made aware of the *1317 proper legal principles to be applied. The trial judge also instructed the jurors that opening and closing arguments are not evidence and that any comment during arguments that is not based upon the evidence should be disregarded. This instruction tends to cure any prejudice from misstatements about the evidence during arguments. (Hrobowski, 216 Ill.App.3d at 727, 159 Ill. Dec. 246, 575 N.E.2d 1306.) Therefore, the trial court also made the jurors aware that the prosecutor's improper remarks should be disregarded if the defendant's own testimony would not have rendered him guilty under an accountability theory. Finally, during her closing argument, defendant's attorney summarized defendant's testimony and argued that, if the jury believed it, the jury could not find him guilty under an accountability theory because defendant lacked the requisite intent. These factors, taken together, were sufficient to cure any prejudice from the improper remarks.
Defendant also argued that the prosecutor improperly vouched for Garcilazo's testimony by bringing out, while Garcilazo testified, the fact that his plea agreement required Garcilazo to present truthful testimony or face a 20-year sentence instead of a four-year sentence. For the same reason, defendant argues that it was improper for the prosecutor to state several times during voir dire that the State would call a witness who had participated in the crime and had entered into a plea agreement which required him to testify truthfully.
Defendant raised no objection at trial or in his post-trial motion regarding the above matters. Ordinarily, this would result in a waiver of the issue on appeal. (People v. Enoch (1988), 122 Ill. 2d 176, 186, 119 Ill. Dec. 265, 522 N.E.2d 1124.) Defendant, however, contends that this issue should be reviewed under the plain-error exception to the waiver rule (134 Ill.2d R. 615(a)). Under the plain-error doctrine, alleged trial errors which were otherwise waived will be reviewed if the evidence was closely balanced or the alleged error was so serious that it deprived the defendant of a fair trial. People v. Priola (1990), 203 Ill. App. 3d 401, 417, 148 Ill. Dec. 776, 561 N.E.2d 82.
We agree with defendant that the evidence was closely balanced. The only two witnesses who saw the killing, defendant and Garcilazo, gave conflicting versions of what happened. Although at trial the State placed great weight on the amount of Snow's blood found on defendant's pants, defendant's explanation as to how this occurred was plausible. The State also placed great emphasis on the Ovideos' testimony that defendant admitted on the afternoon of January 7, 1989, that he had been in a fight earlier that day. Defendant denied saying this, however, and the Ovideos, as relatives by marriage of Pedro Reyes, may have had some incentive to testify against defendant. Thus, the State's case hinged largely on Garcilazo's testimony, and there was reason to question his credibility in light of his prior felony conviction, his admitted prior lying in order to stay out of jail, and the conflicting versions of the killing that he gave to the police, the State's Attorney, and at trial. For these reasons, we conclude that the trial evidence was closely balanced, and we will apply the plain-error doctrine.
It is improper for a prosecutor to vouch for the credibility of a witness. (People v. Emerson (1987), 122 Ill. 2d 411, 434, 119 Ill. Dec. 250, 522 N.E.2d 1109.) This is primarily because allowing such a practice would give the State an unfair advantage by allowing it to place the integrity of the State's Attorney's office behind the credibility of its witnesses. People v. Valdery (1978), 65 Ill.App.3d 375, 378, 21 Ill. Dec. 673, 381 N.E.2d 1217.
There are no reported Illinois cases concerning whether a prosecutor has improperly vouched for the credibility of a witness by causing to be revealed the fact that a plea agreement requires the witness to provide truthful testimony. The United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit has concluded that this does not constitute improper vouching for the credibility of a witness unless the prosecution suggests that it possesses information that the jury does not have with regard to the *1318 veracity of the witness. (United States v. Mealy (7th Cir.1988), 851 F.2d 890, 900; United States v. Craig (7th Cir.1978), 573 F.2d 513, 519.) The court stated in Craig that allowing all evidence concerning the terms of a plea agreement to be presented aids the jury in its task of evaluating the credibility of witnesses. Craig, 573 F.2d at 519.
We agree with the seventh circuit's conclusion. A prosecutor who causes the promise of a witness to provide truthful testimony pursuant to a plea agreement to be revealed has only revealed that the witness agreed to tell the truth; the prosecutor has not expressed a personal opinion as to whether the witness has actually complied with the agreement by telling the truth. Therefore, we conclude that bringing forth such an agreement does not constitute improper vouching for the credibility of the witness.
Defendant further contends, however, that, while questioning Garcilazo, the prosecutor suggested that he had information that the jury lacked that Garcilazo was telling the truth. Defendant complains of the following exchange between the prosecutor and Garcilazo:
"Q. Did I tell you prior to your testifying today what would happen if I caught you lying?
A. Yes.
* * * * * *
Q. [to translator] Whatask him if he recalls what I told him would happen to our agreement if I caught him lying today.
MR. GARCILAZO: Yes.
Q. What did I tell you would happen?
A. That if I lied, you would give me 20 years."
Defendant argues that the above passage insinuated that the State's Attorney knew the true version of the killing and that Garcilazo had testified to that version. We disagree. The above passage states only that, under the agreement, Garcilazo would receive a 20-year sentence if the State's Attorney caught him lying. It provides no indication that the State's Attorney had information unknown to the jurors indicating that Garcilazo had been truthful. We therefore reject defendant's contention.
Defendant also contends that he was denied his sixth amendment right to an impartial jury because: (1) the trial judge only admonished four of the jurors not to discuss the case with one another until their deliberations began; (2) the trial judge did not admonish the jurors to refrain from forming opinions until their deliberations commenced; and (3) the trial judge failed to make adequate inquiries of the jurors after discovering that three jurors had discussed the case with one another and two of them seemed to have made up their minds. Once again, defendant raised no objection to these matters at trial. However, in light of our prior finding that the evidence was closely balanced, we will review this issue under the plain-error doctrine.
In support of the above contention, defendant relies largely upon two Federal cases, Winebrenner v. United States (8th Cir.1945), 147 F.2d 322, and United States v. Williams (8th Cir.1980), 635 F.2d 744. In Winebrenner, the trial judge admonished the jurors during the first day of a seven-week trial that, while they were not allowed to discuss the case with others, they could discuss it among themselves. Defense counsel objected to this admonishment. The next day, the trial judge told the jurors that they could discuss the case with one another as long as they did not formulate fixed opinions about the defendant's guilt. (Winebrenner, 147 F.2d at 326-27.) In reversing the defendant's conviction and ordering a new trial, the court noted that the defendant had a right to be heard by an impartial jury and stated that a danger existed that some of the jurors would have closed minds by the time defendant's evidence was presented. 147 F.2d at 328-29.
The case at bar is distinguishable from Winebrenner, in which the trial judge informed the jurors that they could discuss the case with one another prior to deliberations. The instant case, by contrast, involves a failure to admonish adequately *1319 rather than an erroneous admonition. In two prior Illinois cases involving contentions that alleged failures to admonish jurors adequately about certain matters deprived the defendants of trials before fair and impartial juries, the courts concluded that a showing of actual prejudice was required in order to justify a new trial. (People v. Bean (1990), 137 Ill. 2d 65, 113, 147 Ill. Dec. 891, 560 N.E.2d 258; People v. Diaz (1988), 169 Ill.App.3d 66, 69, 119 Ill. Dec. 527, 522 N.E.2d 1386.) In Diaz, defendant alleged a failure of the trial court to admonish the jurors not to discuss the case with anyone and to avoid exposure to media reports. (Diaz, 169 Ill.App.3d at 66, 119 Ill. Dec. 527, 522 N.E.2d 1386.) The defendant in Bean argued that the trial court had erred by failing to admonish the jurors to avoid media reports about the case at the end of one of the days of a lengthy trial during which the jury did receive this admonition a number of times. Bean, 137 Ill.2d at 113, 147 Ill. Dec. 891, 560 N.E.2d 258.
In cases from other jurisdictions involving a failure to admonish jurors to avoid discussing the case among themselves or with others, courts have generally likewise required a showing of prejudice. (See, e.g., United States v. Carter (10th Cir.1970), 430 F.2d 1278, 1279; People v. Campbell (1976), 63 Cal. App. 3d 599, 609, 133 Cal. Rptr. 815, 820; People v. McIntosh (1967), 6 Mich.App. 62, 70-71, 148 N.W.2d 220, 223.) The only contrary case we have found is United States v. Williams (8th Cir.1980), 635 F.2d 744, cited by defendant. In Williams, the case was submitted to the jury following a one-day trial. The trial court failed to admonish the jurors to avoid discussing the case with anyone and to avoid exposure to media reports about the case. The court reversed defendant's conviction and ordered a new trial, concluding that no showing of prejudice was necessary. 635 F.2d at 746.
The courts in Bean and Diaz rejected the above holding from Williams. (Bean, 137 Ill.2d at 114, 147 Ill. Dec. 891, 560 N.E.2d 258; Diaz, 169 Ill.App.3d at 69, 119 Ill. Dec. 527, 522 N.E.2d 1386.) In light of these authorities, we conclude that a new trial is warranted only if defendant establishes that actual prejudice resulted form the trial court's failure to admonish the jurors properly.
The record, of course, reveals that several jurors did engage in a discussion about the case prior to their deliberations and that two seemed to have made up their minds about the case. According to Carol Wather, the other juror seemed open-minded. Wather did not know whether the two jurors had decided to vote guilty or not guilty, but she did state that the men kept saying that Johnson had blown the case. The prosecutor's name was Gary Johnson. Furthermore, the other witness who overheard the conversation, Charlene Chatham, overheard one of the men saying that the prosecutor had blown a first-degree murder conviction. Thus, the evidence tends to show that the men were going to vote not guilty. Defendant is therefore unable to establish any prejudice from the trial court's failure to admonish the jurors adequately to avoid discussing the case with one another and to avoid reaching any opinion as to defendant's guilt or innocence prior to deliberations.
Defendant further argues that the trial court's inquiry of the jurors concerning the alleged conversation and its possible prejudicial effect was inadequate. In People v. Miller (1983), 120 Ill.App.3d 495, 75 Ill. Dec. 814, 457 N.E.2d 1373, a newspaper article about the case was found in the possession of one of the jurors. The trial court, at the request of defense counsel, conducted no inquiry into the matter at the time. Defense counsel never raised the issue again. On appeal, this court agreed to review the issue under the plain-error doctrine, but rejected the contention on the basis that a defendant "may not ask the court to proceed in a given manner and then assign as error in a court of review the ruling or action which he procured." Miller, 120 Ill.App.3d at 501, 75 Ill. Dec. 814, 457 N.E.2d 1373.
In the case at bar, when the trial judge suggested questioning the three jurors who had engaged in the conversation, defendant's *1320 attorney asked him to refrain from doing this and instead requested the procedure that the trial court subsequently undertook. Although, as in Miller, we are reviewing this issue under the plain-error doctrine, we conclude that defendant cannot challenge the trial court's inquiry when he requested this type of inquiry.
Defendant argues that this result is unfair because the trial court erroneously informed counsel, after interviewing Carol Wather, that Wather had stated that the jurors were inclined to vote for acquittal when Wather stated that she did not know how the two jurors who had made up their minds were inclined to vote. Since, as we have indicated, Wather stated that the jurors were saying that Johnson had blown the case, it would appear that they were, in fact, inclined to vote for an acquittal.
Defendant next contends that his trial attorney provided ineffective assistance of counsel in several respects. The first of these, according to defendant, occurred when the prosecutor filed a motion in limine requesting that the defense be barred from inquiring about the fact that he had previously represented Artemio Garcilazo at a bond hearing on a theft charge. The prosecutor advised the court that he had just realized that Garcilazo had previously been a client.
In order to establish a claim for the ineffective assistance of counsel, the defendant must show that his or her attorney's performance "fell below an objective standard of reasonableness" (Strickland v. Washington (1984), 466 U.S. 668, 688, 104 S. Ct. 2052, 2064, 80 L. Ed. 2d 674, 693) and a reasonable probability exists that the result would have been different were it not for the attorney's errors (Strickland, 466 U.S. at 694, 104 S. Ct. at 2068, 80 L.Ed.2d at 698). A reasonable probability is "a probability sufficient to undermine confidence in the outcome." (466 U.S. at 694, 104 S. Ct. at 2068, 80 L.Ed.2d at 698.) It is not sufficient to show that a strategic decision of counsel may have been erroneous or unsuccessful. (People v. Kubat (1983), 94 Ill. 2d 437, 486, 69 Ill. Dec. 30, 447 N.E.2d 247.) An ineffective assistance claim may be resolved solely on the basis that the defendant suffered no prejudice as a result of counsel's alleged errors. People v. Johnson (1989), 128 Ill. 2d 253, 271, 131 Ill. Dec. 562, 538 N.E.2d 1118.
With regard to his initial ineffective assistance contention, defendant points out that a sister jurisdiction has determined that, if the prosecuting attorney previously represented a State witness who participated in the offense, that relationship is relevant for impeachment purposes. (Walker v. State (Ind.App.1980), 401 N.E.2d 795, 796.) Even if we assume that this information was relevant for the purpose of impeaching Garcilazo, we do not believe that defense counsel's failure to challenge the motion in limine constituted ineffective assistance. There were far more significant factors reflecting adversely upon Garcilazo's credibility including his prior conviction for attempted burglary, his use of a false name when arrested for theft, and the conflicting versions of the killing that he gave to the police, the State's Attorney, and at trial. It would have been reasonable for defense counsel to decide that presenting the jury with information about Johnson's prior representation of Garcilazo would have drawn the jury's attention away from the above factors and toward a much less significant one. Further, it is highly unlikely that presenting this information would have changed the result at trial. We therefore reject this ineffective assistance claim.
Defendant also contends that his attorney's failure to object to the trial court's failure to admonish the jurors to avoid discussing the case with one another and to refrain from reaching an opinion concerning his guilt or innocence prior to deliberations constituted ineffective assistance, as did counsel's request that the trial court limit its inquiry into the jurors' improper conversation. We have already concluded that defendant did not establish prejudice from the former of these alleged errors; therefore, this claim must be rejected. With respect to the latter claim, counsel had information that the jurors were inclined to vote for acquittal. From a strategic *1321 viewpoint, it makes sense that counsel would have sought to limit the inquiry into the improper conversation because it would have appeared that a mistrial would benefit the prosecution. Counsel's actions in this regard did not constitute ineffective assistance.
Defendant also contends that his attorney's failure to object to the prosecutor's comments and questions which brought out the fact that Garcilazo's plea agreement required him to provide truthful testimony. Because we have concluded that it was proper to bring-this fact to the jury's attention, defendant was not prejudiced by this alleged error. We reject each of defendant's claims of ineffective assistance of counsel.
According to defendant, even if no single error in this case justifies reversal of his conviction and a new trial, the cumulative effect of the errors does. (See, e.g., People v. Escobar (1979), 77 Ill.App.3d 169, 177, 32 Ill. Dec. 647, 395 N.E.2d 1028.) According to our prior analysis, the only errors in this case were the prosecutor's misstatements during closing argument and the trial judge's failure to admonish jurors in certain respects. We concluded, however, that any potential prejudice from the former problem was cured by certain instructions which were given to the jury and as a result of other factors. We also concluded that defendant made no showing of prejudice as a result of the latter problem and that the evidence tends to show that the two jurors who expressed opinions about the case prior to deliberations were favorably inclined toward defense. In light of the above, defendant was not prejudiced by the cumulative effect of these errors, and his argument must be rejected.
Defendant's final contention is that his 45-year sentence was disproportionate when compared to the 25-year sentence imposed upon Pedro Reyes and the four-year sentence imposed upon Garcilazo. A trial court's sentencing decisions are entitled to great deference and weight. (People v. Streit (1991), 142 Ill. 2d 13, 18, 153 Ill. Dec. 245, 566 N.E.2d 1351.) A sentence will be altered upon review only if the trial court abused its discretion in imposing it. Streit, 142 Ill.2d at 19, 153 Ill. Dec. 245, 566 N.E.2d 1351.
Reyes and Garcilazo both entered pleas of guilty in exchange for the sentences that were imposed. A sentence entered after a guilty plea does not provide a valid basis of comparison to a sentence imposed after a trial. (People v. Katsigiannis (1988), 171 Ill.App.3d 1090, 1103, 122 Ill. Dec. 249, 526 N.E.2d 508; People v. Centanni (1987), 164 Ill.App.3d 480, 494, 115 Ill. Dec. 521, 517 N.E.2d 1207; People v. Abrego (1986), 142 Ill.App.3d 973, 985, 97 Ill. Dec. 200, 492 N.E.2d 636.) The trial court may properly grant leniency to a defendant who, through his plea, has ensured prompt application of correctional measures to him or her, acknowledged his or her guilt, demonstrated a willingness to accept responsibility for his or her conduct, and cooperated in the successful prosecution of others. People v. Milton (1989), 182 Ill.App.3d 1082, 1095, 131 Ill. Dec. 671, 538 N.E.2d 1227.
In Milton, the defendant received the maximum sentence of 30 years for armed robbery following his trial while a similarly situated codefendant who pleaded guilty received a sentence of 8½ years. This court held that, under the circumstances of that case, the 21½-year disparity was too great, and we reduced the sentence to 12 years. (Milton, 182 Ill.App.3d at 1095-96, 131 Ill. Dec. 671, 538 N.E.2d 1227. Among those circumstances were defendant's youthful age of 20, his lack of a prior record, the fact that the victim was not injured, and the trial court's reliance upon dubious factors. 182 Ill.App.3d at 1095-96, 131 Ill. Dec. 671, 538 N.E.2d 1227.
In light of the above, the imposition of a maximum sentence in Milton appears to have been excessive regardless of any comparison with the codefendant's sentence. The same is not true in the case at bar in light of the exceedingly brutal nature of the murder of Robert Snow. We do not believe that Milton modifies the general rule that a sentence imposed after a guilty plea does not form a valid basis of comparison with respect to a sentence imposed *1322 after a trial. We adhere to that rule and conclude that the 45-year sentence imposed by the trial court was not an abuse of discretion.
For these reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of Kane County is affirmed.
Affirmed.
INGLIS, P.J., and BOWMAN, J., concur.

=== CASE 9739082 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:31.12448+00 ===

SULLIVAN, Judge.
We are compelled to dismiss the purported appeal before us. There is no final appealable judgment in the matter.
The case was tried on April 9 and 10, 1990, before Mr. Jay B. Haggerty as Master Commissioner. Record at 168. The final instructions to the jury were *937signed by Jay B. Haggerty as "Judge." Record at 148. The Abstract of Judgment was signed May 10, 1990, by Jay B. Hag-gerty as "committing judge." Record at 163.2 That the certification of the record signed by Jay B. Haggerty purports to reflect that he did so as "Special Judge" (Record at 556) cannot alter the fact that he was not Special Judge at the time of the trial, judgment or sentence.
It is clear that Rule 183 of the Indiana Rules of Criminal Procedure is the exclusive method by which a special judge may be appointed and qualified to preside over a case in litigation. Skipper v. State (1988) Ind., 525 N.E.2d 334. It is equally clear that there was no special judge appointment or qualification made in this case. Our case, therefore, does not involve a merely irregular or defective appointment as was the situation in Skipper, which held that the defect may be waived.
It is also clear that a special judge "is appointed to act in a particular case, and his authority continues until the case is finally disposed of, unless the venue is changed." Kimball v. State (1985) Ind., 474 N.E.2d 982, 986. If Mr. Haggerty were the duly appointed and qualified special judge in this matter, Judge Tranberg would have had no authority to enter orders or make rulings in the case. It cannot be presumed that Judge Tranberg, the regular judge, was either unaware of the applicable law, or chose to ignore it when, for example, he signed an order on April 27, 1990, authorizing a psychological evaluation of Schwindt. This order was entered after trial and verdict, but before sentencing. It is apparant, therefore, that Mr. Haggerty was not a special judge in this matter.
It is apparent, also, that Mr. Haggerty did not act as judge pro tem on the dates of trial, judgment, sentencing and upon the numerous other occasions when he made rulings and orders. No suggestion is made to the contrary.
Finally, it is without question that Jay B. Haggerty was, at no time during the course of this case, the regular judge of the court.
The posture of the case before us, ie., that Mr. Haggerty acted only in the capacity of a Master Commissioner, requires that we honor the clear and unmistakable dictate of our Supreme Court in State ex rel. Smith v. Starke Circuit Court (1981) 275 Ind. 483, 417 N.E.2d 1115. In Landers v. State (1991) 2d Dist.Ind.App., 577 N.E.2d 990, we held that under the Starke Circuit Court decision, there had been no judgment entered in the case and that the purported appeal was therefore premature.
Recently, in Woodfork v. State (1992) 2d Dist.Ind.App., 594 N.E.2d 468, this court permitted a deviation from the dismissal requirement inherent in the Starke Circuit Court holding. The case before us, however, is to be distinguished from Woodfork, supra.
In Woodfork, an order was improvidently entered and signed by the Chief Judge which authorized the regular judge of the court to "cure" the absence of an appealable judgment by subsequent validation of the Master Commissioner's findings or recommendations. Such an ex post facto act could not suffice in the case before us as a valid nune pro tune order because there is, and was, no written mem-oranda, note or other memorial of record which demonstrates that Jay B. Haggerty *938served in a capacity other than as Master Commissioner. See Hutchinson v. State (1983) Ind., 452 N.E.2d 955. Here, a nune pro tune entry could not validate the acts of the Master Commissioner because a nunc pro tune entry may be made only so that the record will reflect that which was "actually previously done," Stowers v. State (1977) 266 Ind. 403, 363 N.E.2d 978 (quoting Perkins v. Hayward (1892) 132 Ind. 95, 31 N.E. 670, or "when a simple correction of a clerical error in the record is sought." Stowers, supra, 363 N.E.2d at 983.
The "curative" entry in Woodfork cere-ated an anomalous circumstance. - The "judgment" of the trial court in Woodfork was entered on March 19, 1992. There was no praecipe filed subsequent to that entry. The record of proceedings was not filed subsequent to that entry and the briefs were not filed after that entry.
If it be considered that the sequential chronology of judgment, praecipe, record and briefing is no more than an inconsequential procedural nicety, such determination must come from our Supreme Court and must be accompanied by substantial modification of the Indiana Rules of Appellate Procedure, Rules 2(A), 3(B), and 8.1(A).
At a minimum, in situations in which the regular judge seeks to salvage a purported appeal before it has been dismissed by the Court of Appeals or the Supreme Court, there should be a request by the parties to refile the praecipe, record and briefs subsequent to entry of the salvaging order by the trial court but within the appropriate time periods set forth in the Rules of Appellate Procedure.
This purported appeal is dismissed and appellant Schwindt is ordered released from the custody of the Department of Correction and returned to the custody of the Marion County Sheriff.
SHIELDS, J., concurs.
BUCHANAN, J., dissents with opinion.
. It would appear that although Judge Tranberg may have conducted the sentencing hearing the Abstract of Judgment, signed only by Jay B. Haggerty does not comport with I.C. 33-4-7-8 (West Supp.1991) which states that:
"The court shall enter the final order. In a criminal case, the court shall conduct the sentencing hearing."
The word "court" does not include a magistrate or commissioner. See Breaziel v. State (1991) 1st Dist.Ind.App., 568 N.E.2d 1072. The statute permits only the regular judge, a judge pro tem or a special judge to enter a final appealable order or judgment. I.C. 33-4-7-7. The statutory scheme therefore indicates that although the commissioner may conduct an evidentiary trial, the sentencing hearing, the imposition of sentence and the execution of the Abstract of Judgment must be done only by the regular judge or by a duly appointed judge pro tem or a special judge.

=== CASE 9739083 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:31.128378+00 ===

BUCHANAN, Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent to the dismissal of this appeal.
The record reflects that Jay Haggerty heard this case as Master Commissioner, but at different parts of the record he appears as "Judge," "Committing Judge," and "Special Judge." So it is uncertain whether the judgment was entered by a duly authorized judicial officer. Record at 149, 163, 168.
This court has, on numerous occasions, suspended consideration of an appeal taken from a Master Commissioner's ruling and ordered the judge of the trial court to enter final judgment on the case. See Woodfork v. State (1992), Ind.App., 594 N.E.2d 468; Green v. State (1989), Ind.App., 540 N.E.2d 130; Eakins v. State (1985), Ind.App., 482 N.E.2d 1157; Ingmire v. Butts (1974), 160 Ind.App. 575, 312 N.E.2d 885.
In the interest of judicial economy and the avoidance of unnecessary expense, this case should be remanded to the trial court with instructions that an appealable final judgment be entered so that this appeal may proceed without having to be commenced over again.

=== CASE 9739084 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:31.411782+00 ===

JUSTICE CHAPMAN delivered the opinion of the court: Defendant, National Super Markets, Inc., appeals from a judgment of the circuit court of Madison County in favor of plaintiff, Olga Koenig, in the amount of $60,000 for injuries she sustained in a fall in defendant’s store located in Granite City. Defendant raises the following issues: (1) whether the trial court erred in denying defendant’s motion for directed verdict at the close of plaintiff’s evidence and at the close of all the evidence during the first trial of this case, and (2) whether the trial court abused its discretion in granting plaintiff a new trial on the issue of damages due to what the trial court considered an error in plaintiff’s verdict form (Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Civil, No. A45.06 (2d ed. 1986) (hereinafter IPI Civil 2d No. A45.06)). We reverse. Plaintiff, a 75-year-old woman, fell in defendant’s store on October 6, 1984. Plaintiff had been in defendant’s store grocery shopping between 9 and 10 a.m. that day, and she returned sometime after 12 p.m. to drop off some film to be developed. It had been raining hard on and off all morning. When plaintiff entered the store for the second time, there was a big puddle of water in the middle of the entrance which covered the doorway. Plaintiff could not step either around or over the water; she had to walk through it in order to enter the store. There were some mats to the left of the puddle on which plaintiff attempted to dry her feet, but they were saturated with water. Plaintiff started toward the pharmacy to drop off her film. About 50 feet inside the store, plaintiff’s legs slipped from under her, and she fell flat on her back. The manager came over to assist plaintiff. He checked to see if there were any foreign substances on the floor which caused plaintiff to fall. He found none. Plaintiff did not examine the floor after her fall and does not know what caused her to fall. Plaintiff was taken to a hospital, and it was determined that she had broken her hip. Surgery was performed. Plaintiff recovered, but she sustained permanent injuries as a result of the fall. A jury awarded plaintiff $100,000, but she was found 85% contributorily negligent, and her award was reduced to $15,000. Plaintiff filed a motion for a new trial and claimed the court erred in giving plaintiff’s instruction No. 25 (IPI Civil 2d No. A45.06). Plaintiff tendered IPI Civil 2d No. A45.06, did not object to any of its language, and did not tender a substitute for it. In her motion for a new trial, plaintiff argued that the instruction as given “assumed contributory negligence on the part of plaintiff.” The trial court granted plaintiff’s motion for a new trial on the issue of damages only. Defendant had also filed post-trial motions seeking a judgment notwithstanding the verdict or, in the alternative, seeking a new trial on the issue of liability and damages. The trial court denied defendant's motions. Defendant then filed a petition for leave to appeal pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 306 (134 Ill. 2d R. 306). On June 27, 1989, this court denied defendant’s petition for leave to appeal. A second trial on damages only was conducted in February 1990, and the second jury also rendered a verdict for plaintiff. The second jury assessed plaintiff’s damages at $90,000 and found plaintiff to be 33V3% contributorily negligent. The trial court entered judgment for the plaintiff in the amount of $60,000. Before we address the issues raised by defendant in this appeal, we must address plaintiff’s contention that since we denied defendant’s petition for leave to appeal after the first trial, defendant is foreclosed from raising any issues concerning the first trial, on the theory that these issues were previously presented to us and determined to be without merit. Plaintiff argues that our order dated June 27, 1989, denying defendant leave to appeal is the law of the case for purposes of this appeal. We disagree.  In cases involving leave to appeal from the appellate court to the supreme court under Supreme Court Rule 315 (134 Ill. 2d R. 315), denial of leave does not suggest that the supreme court has approved of the result in the lower court. “Our denials of leave to appeal, of course, carry no connotation of approval or disapproval of the appellate court action, and signify only that four members of this court, for reasons satisfactory to them, have not voted to grant leave.” (People v. Vance (1979), 76 Ill. 2d 171, 183, 390 N.E.2d 867, 872.) We believe this logic is applicable in cases involving petitions for leave to appeal to the appellate court filed from an order of the circuit court granting new trials. (See 134 Ill. 2d R. 306.) Our previous order issued on June 27, 1989, means only that at least two members of a three-member panel voted not to grant leave “for reasons satisfactory to them.” The court did not address the merits of the case. Plaintiff cites Robbins v. Professional Construction Co. (1978), 72 Ill. 2d 215, 380 N.E.2d 786, to support her position that by our order denying defendant’s petition for leave to appeal, we decided all issues raised in this appeal and are bound by our order issued in the first appeal. We find Robbins to be distinguishable. In Robbins, a jury returned a verdict awarding plaintiff $25,000 in damages in a wrongful death action arising out of an automobile accident. The trial court set aside the verdict and ordered a new trial on the issue of damages only and conditionally granted plaintiffs motion for a new trial on all issues in the event that the order granting a new trial limited to damages was reversed, set aside, or vacated by the reviewing court. The defendants sought to appeal the trial court’s actions, but they failed to file a record or move for an extension of time, and consequently, the appeal was dismissed by the appellate court. On retrial on the issue of damages only, the second jury returned a verdict for the plaintiff in the amount of $120,000. The defendants then filed a post-trial motion requesting a new trial on all issues, including liability. The trial court’s denial of the defendants’ motion was affirmed. The appellate court’s holdings were as follows: “(1) The earlier ‘denial’ of defendants’ ‘petition for leave to appeal’ authorized the appellate court to refuse to address the merits of the order granting plaintiff a new trial on the question of damages. Alternatively, the court would uphold that order on the merits. (2) Defendants waived their right to request a new trial on the question of liability by failing to request such relief either after the first trial or within 30 days of the trial court’s order granting plaintiff a new trial on the question of damages. Alternatively, even if the defendants had not waived the issue, they were not entitled to a new trial on the question of liability. (3) Defendants were not entitled to judgment notwithstanding the verdict. (Defendants apparently do not contest this holding.)” Robbins, 72 Ill. 2d at 220, 380 N.E.2d at 788. The supreme court affirmed the appellate court. The Robbins court determined that “the appellate court’s reliance upon its previous summary dismissal of defendants’ petition was more than adequate to dispose of defendants’ right to review in this case.” (72 Ill. 2d at 223, 380 N.E.2d at 789.) The Robbins court also emphasized that the defendants were foreclosed from appellate review due to the defendants’ failure to request a new trial on the question of liability following the jury’s general verdict for plaintiff. (72 Ill. 2d at 223, 380 N.E.2d at 789.) The defendants in Robbins had further erred in the first appeal by failing to file a record or move for an extension of time. Defendant in the instant case has committed no such errors. After the first trial, defendant filed a post-trial motion seeking a judgment notwithstanding the verdict or, in the alternative, seeking a new trial on the issues of liability and damages. Defendant also timely filed the record on appeal. Our previous order issued on June 27, 1989, did not address the merits of this case. It merely denied leave to appeal. We feel obliged to consider defendant’s arguments herein and issue an opinion dealing with the merits of this case. Defendant’s first issue is whether the trial court erred in denying its motion for a directed verdict at the close of plaintiff’s evidence or at the close of all the evidence in the first trial. In this regard, defendant raises a number of arguments. First, defendant contends that plaintiff’s evidence was insufficient as a matter of law to prove the existence of a dangerous condition on the store premises. Second, defendant contends, assuming arguendo that plaintiff’s evidence demonstrated the existence of a dangerous condition on defendant’s floor, that plaintiff failed to make a submissible case to the jury because she failed to show defendant had notice of that condition. Third, defendant contends, assuming arguendo that plaintiff established the existence of a dangerous condition on the floor, that plaintiff’s case was insufficient as a matter of law because plaintiff failed to prove that the condition which caused plaintiff to fall was a result of defendant’s negligence. Finally, defendant contends that even if plaintiff’s evidence established the existence of a dangerous condition for which defendant was responsible, plaintiff failed to show that the dangerous condition was the proximate cause of her fall. Plaintiff responds that the trial court properly denied defendant’s motions for directed verdict because plaintiff did make a prima facie case on both the issues of negligence and proximate cause, and it was up to the jury to decide these issues. We agree.  This issue presents us with the familiar question of the circumstances under which a trial court may determine that the proof presents no factual question for the jury’s determination and that a verdict should be directed for defendant. The propriety of a directed verdict must be judged according to the standards set forth by the supreme court in Pedrick v. Peoria & Eastern R.R. Co. (1967), 37 Ill. 2d 494, 229 N.E.2d 504: “[V]er diets ought to be directed and judgments n.o.v. entered only in those cases in which all of the evidence, when viewed in its aspect most favorable to the opponent, so overwhelmingly favors movant that no contrary verdict based on the evidence could ever stand.” (37 Ill. 2d at 510, 229 N.E.2d at 513-14.) In a situation such as the one presented here, the general rule is that liability will be imposed where a business invitee, such as plaintiff herein, is injured by slipping on a substance on the premises if (1) the substance was placed there by the negligence of the proprietor, or (2) the defendant knew of its presence, or (3) the substance was there a sufficient length of time so the proprietor had constructive notice of it. (Blake v. Dickinson (1975), 31 Ill. App. 3d 379, 383, 332 N.E.2d 575, 578.) In reviewing the evidence, a trial court cannot ignore circumstantial evidence or reasonable inferences of negligence logically drawn from the circumstantial evidence. (Staten v. Pamida, Inc. (1989), 189 Ill. App. 3d 125, 128, 544 N.E.2d 1325, 1326.) In our judgment, the evidence in this case is such that the trial court correctly denied defendant’s motions for a directed verdict.  Most witnesses testified that it had been raining on and off all morning on the date in question. A few witnesses could not remember the weather on that date, but no one said that the weather was dry. Two of defendant’s employees, a cashier and the store manager, testified that mats were placed near the entrance on the floor for patrons to wipe their feet when it rained and these mats were changed if they became wet. Plaintiff testified to a large puddle which had accumulated in the entrance of the store. According to plaintiff, the puddle was so large that she could neither step over it nor around it. No evidence was presented to the contrary about the existence or the size of this puddle. Plaintiff also testified that while there were mats to the left of the entrance, it was useless to attempt to dry her feet because the mats were saturated with water. If the jury believed plaintiff’s testimony concerning the size of the puddle, it could logically conclude that such a large amount of water must have taken an extended period of time to accumulate. Two of defendant’s employees testified that mats were placed at the entrance of the store to allow customers the opportunity to wipe their feet in the event of rain. Once again, if the jury believed plaintiff’s testimony that the mats were saturated with water, it could logically conclude that these mats had not been changed for an extended period of time. The jury could reasonably conclude that the puddle, along with the saturated mats, was the proximate cause of plaintiff’s fall. The jury could conclude that plaintiff’s shoes became saturated with water from having to step in the puddle in order to enter the store and that plaintiff was unable to dry her shoes because the mats at the front of the store had become saturated from previous use. We believe plaintiff’s proof supports the probability that the large amount of water that accumulated at the front of the store was the proximate cause of plaintiff’s fall. (See Johnson v. Burlington Northern, Inc. (1982), 107 Ill. App. 3d 130, 135, 437 N.E.2d 334, 338.) We further conclude the record supports the jury’s verdict and that the trial court was correct to deny defendant’s motion for directed verdict. The final issue defendant raises is whether the trial court abused its discretion in granting plaintiff a new trial on the issue of damages due to an error in plaintiff’s verdict form, IPI Civil 2d No. A45.06. Defendant contends that the verdict form submitted to the jury at the first trial properly advised the jury of the law. In addition, defendant argues that plaintiff effectively waived any argument concerning IPI Civil 2d No. A45.06 by failing to object to the verdict form at trial and by failing to tender an alternative verdict form. Plaintiff responds that it did not waive this argument by failing to object at trial or by failing to tender an alternate verdict form since the instruction is clearly erroneous. Plaintiff contends that the trial court was within its discretion to order a new trial. We disagree. The general rule is that a party may not assert error on the basis of instructions which he caused to be given to the jury. The rationale of this rule is that it would be manifestly unfair to allow one party a second trial on the basis of error which he injected into the proceedings. Ervin v. Sears, Roebuck & Co. (1976), 65 Ill. 2d 140, 144, 357 N.E.2d 500, 502; People v. Riley (1964), 31 Ill. 2d 490, 202 N.E.2d 531. While the supreme court approved a relaxation of the general rule in Junker v. Ziegler (1986), 113 Ill. 2d 332, 498 N.E.2d 1135, the exception was allowed because the plaintiff had first tendered an instruction calling for the jury to consider only the negligence of the defendants. It was after the trial court refused the plaintiff’s originally tendered instruction in Junker that he tendered an instruction incorporating comparative negligence. Under the circumstances the supreme court held that plaintiff was not estopped from raising the instructional error.  In this case, the plaintiff tendered no instruction other than the one given. If there was error in the instruction it was created by the plaintiff. The plaintiff cannot later ask for relief from the error she created. Ervin, 65 Ill. 2d at 144, 357 N.E.2d at 502. Therefore, the trial court erred in granting the plaintiffs motion for a new trial on damages only. Under our power (134 Ill. 2d R. 366), we reverse the trial court’s order and enter judgment for the plaintiff in the amount of $15,000 plus interest since October 22,1987, and costs of suit. Reversed; judgment entered. H. LEWIS, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739085 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:31.416906+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE GOLDENHERSH, concurring in part and dissenting in part: I concur with most of the majority’s opinion in this cause. With respect to the majority’s conclusion on the granting of a new trial due to error in the verdict form, I respectfully dissent. Our supreme court in Ervin v. Sears, Roebuck & Co. (1976), 65 Ill. 2d 140, 357 N.E.2d 500, stated that “we do not foreclose the possibility that there might be unusual circumstances under which the interests of justice require a relaxation of this rule.” 65 Ill. 2d at 145, 357 N.E.2d at 502. In the instant case, I do not believe plaintiff is estopped from raising her argument concerning the verdict form even though it was plaintiff who tendered the verdict form about which she later complained. The verdict form complained of by plaintiff read as follows: “We, the jury, find for the plaintiff and against the defendant and further find the following: First: Without taking into consideration the question of reduction of damages due to the negligence of the plaintiff, if any, we find that the total amount of damages suffered by the plaintiff as a proximate result of the occurrence in question is $__ Second: Assuming that 100% represents the total combined negligence of the plaintiff and of the defendant we find that the percentage of negligence that was a proximate cause of plaintiff’s injury attributable solely to the plaintiff is _percent (%). Third: After reducing the total damages sustained by the plaintiff by the percentage of negligence attributable to the plaintiff, we assess plaintiff’s recoverable damages in the sum of$__” The third paragraph essentially instructs the jury to find some negligence on the part of plaintiff. It does not provide the cautionary language, “if any,” which is found in the verdict form used at the second trial. The verdict form used in the first trial is so misleading that it constitutes error. This situation is exactly what the Ervin court envisioned when it stated that “there might be unusual circumstances under which the interests of justice require a relaxation of this rule.” 65 Ill. 2d at 145, 357 N.E.2d at 502. The decision to grant a new trial is an exercise of judicial discretion which should not be disturbed unless there is a showing of a clear abuse of discretion. (McCracken v. Westinghouse Air Brake Co. (1981), 103 Ill. App. 3d 26, 430 N.E.2d 539.) After a review of the verdict form of which plaintiff complains and a review of the instructions as a whole, I cannot conclude that the trial court abused its discretion in granting plaintiff a new trial. Therefore, the verdict delivered by the second jury should be allowed to stand. For the foregoing reasons, I would affirm the judgment of the circuit court of Madison County.

=== CASE 9739086 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:36.634329+00 ===

MILLER, Justice
(on reassignment).
In this intermediate appeal we reverse the trial court, reiterating our prior holdings that field sobriety tests are not protected by the constitutional privilege against self-incrimination.
FACTS
In the early morning hours of March 5, 1988, Highway Patrolman Randy Hofeldt observed Delmas Meek’s vehicle weaving between the lanes of U.S. Highway 14 in Hyde County, South Dakota. Officer Ho-feldt stopped Meek’s vehicle. He approached the vehicle and observed that Meek had blood-shot and glassy eyes, a flushed face and slurred speech. Hofeldt also detected a strong odor of alcohol and observed that Meek was unsteady on his feet and had difficulty walking.
In the patrol car, Hofeldt requested Meek to perform certain field sobriety tests. A recorded cassette of the conversation reveals that Meek initially refused to perform the tests, asserting his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination.
Hofeldt: OK. It does appear that you’ve been drinking quite a little tonight. I’m going to ask you to do some sobriety tests. The first thing I would like you to do is just to recite the alphabet start with A and go through Z. Can you do that for me?
Meek: I’ll tell you what. Are you charging me?
Hofeldt: Charging you with what? Meek: What?
Hofeldt: No. I’m not charging with anything. I’m just asking you to do some sobriety tests for me.
Meek: I’ll be very honest with you. I won’t do anything.
Hofeldt: You won’t do nothing?
Meek: No. I plead the Fifth Amendment.
Hofeldt: Well, Sir. You know, I think it would probably be to your advantage to try to do some tests for me. Uh. You know? Would you try to recite the alphabet for me?
Following Officer Hofeldt’s statement, Meek attempted three different sobriety tests which Hofeldt asked him to perform. Each test required verbal responses by Meek. He had difficulty with each. Ho-feldt also attempted to administer a fourth test, a gaze nystagmus test. However, a dispute arose whether Meek’s eyes were following the pen held by Hofeldt. Hofeldt then asked Meek to take a breathalyzer test. Meek refused.
Meek: I won’t. Already said I pled the Fifth Amendment.
Hofeldt: Well, you know we’ve got along pretty good so far and I think we can continue to get along can’t we?
Meek: Yah but I won’t.
Hofeldt: Just blow a breath through there for me and we’ll be done.
Meek: No we won’t.
Hofeldt: You won’t blow through the breath tester?
Meek: No.
Hofeldt: It’s just a preliminary — just a pass or fail test like we did, just like the ones we’ve already done. Will you blow through it for me?
Meek: No I won’t.
Hofeldt: OK. Well I am placing you under arrest for DWI as a result of your driving and your other sobriety tests that you did. That — it appears that you are very much under the influence of alcohol.
Meek was charged with driving while under the influence of alcohol under SDCL 32-23-1. He filed a motion to suppress the cassette tape of the conversation between Meek and Hofeldt, all of Meek’s statements after he asserted his privilege against self-incrimination, and all testimony concerning field sobriety tests or other statements made by Meek after he had asserted his right against self-incrimination. Following a hearing, the trial court suppressed all *50testimony concerning Meek’s assertion of his privilege against self-incrimination and all statements made by him thereafter, including the verbal responses to the sobriety tests administered to him. The court specifically found that the responses to the verbal sobriety tests were testimonial and protected by the privilege against self-incrimination. The court did not suppress testimony concerning the gaze nystagmus test or the officer’s observations concerning Meek’s physical characteristics.1 We accepted intermediate appeal and reverse and remand.
ISSUE
WHETHER FIELD SOBRIETY TESTS ARE PROTECTED BY THE PRIVILEGE AGAINST SELF-INCRIMINATION.
DECISION
The privilege against self-incrimination is granted by both the state and federal constitutions. Article VI, Section 9 of the South Dakota Constitution provides: “No person shall be compelled in any criminal case to give evidence against himself....” (Emphasis added.) The Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides: “No person ... shall be compelled, in any criminal case, to be a witness against him-self_” (Emphasis added.)
Meek, a layman, presumably did not realize and the trial court failed to recognize or fully appreciate that field sobriety tests are not protected by the constitutional privilege against self incrimination. State v. Hoenscheid, 374 N.W.2d 128 (S.D.1985) and State v. Roadifer, 346 N.W.2d 438 (S.D.1984). As Justice Morgan, writing for the majority in Roadifer, so clearly stated:
Dexterity tests are real physical evidence and are not protected by the constitutional privilege against self-incrimination. (Citation omitted.) These tests are based on the loss of coordination, balance and dexterity that results from intoxication, they do not force the subject to betray his subjective knowledge of the crime through communication or testimony. These tests merely compel the suspect to demonstrate his physical characteristics and condition at that time as a source of real or physical evidence to which observers may testify. (Emphasis added.)
346 N.W.2d at 440.
Additionally, in Roadifer, this court clearly stated that audio tapes that merely show the manner of the defendant’s attempt to count backwards or recite the alphabet as requested are admissible. Id. at 441; see also Hoenscheid, 374 N.W.2d at 130.
Therefore, under the settled law of this state, the trial court erred in suppressing the results of any dexterity or verbal sobriety tests,2 but could and should suppress any evidence relating to any conversations or statements made by Meek after he asserted his Fifth Amendment right. The trial court further erred in suppressing those parts of the tape specifically relating to the field sobriety tests.3
Lastly, much is made of Hofeldt’s claimed coercion or deceit in obtaining the sobriety tests. From reading the transcript and listening to the tape, we cannot blindly accept the bad faith assertion. The claimed coercion or deceit flows from Ho-feldt’s statement that “it would probably be to (Meek’s) advantage to try to do some of the tests_” Although we do not condone that statement, it is truthful because: (1) Meek could perhaps pass some or all of the tests or (2) his refusal to perform them is admissible and could be viewed negative*51ly by a fact-finder at trial. Hoenscheid, supra.
Reversed and remanded to the trial court with directions that it proceed as herein provided.
WUEST, C.J., and MORGAN, J., concur.
HENDERSON and SABERS, JJ., dissent.
. Meek has not appealed this ruling by the trial court.
. The trial court specifically suppressed an alphabet test, a test by which Meek was to count backwards, and a test for digital control in which Meek was to touch various fingers with his thumb while audibly counting.
.We appreciate that editing the tape may be a most difficult and impractical task; however, that problem is best left to those who need to do the editing.