=== CASE 2214086 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:42.16375+00 ===

236 Cal.App.2d 813 (1965)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
LEE REX LUDLUM, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 10533.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Four.
Aug. 25, 1965.
A. James Ayers for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and Robert A. Feldman, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
KINGSLEY, J.
Defendant was charged by information with a violation of section 11530 of the Health and Safety Code (possession of marijuana). A motion to dismiss under section 995 of the Penal Code was made and denied. He pled not guilty and after trial by a jury, he was found guilty. A motion for new trial was made and denied, and defendant was sentenced to one year in the county jail, which sentence was suspended and probation was granted. He has appealed from the judgment (order granting probation). (Pen. Code,  1237, subd. 1.)
The testimony for the People was as follows: *814
About 3 a.m., Officer Davis, who was in plain clothes and acting as an undercover officer, observed defendant leave a pizza restaurant on the Venice Beach, cross the boardwalk and approach his auto in a parking lot. After defendant entered his car, and while the officer was about 5 feet away on the driver's side, the officer observed defendant take a paper napkin from his pocket. In the officer's words:
"He took a napkin and opened it up and appeared to look at the contents."
"I observed two handrolled cigarettes within the napkin. At this time he opened the left door with his left hand, and threw the articles out on the ground."
The articles lit about 3 feet from the left side of the car. Keeping the napkin under constant observation, the officer walked in back of defendant's car for a short distance and gave a prearranged signal to officers in a police car which had arrived at the parking lot. Officer Bach, from the police car, approached Officer Davis, pretended to shake him down for weapons and to interrogate him. Officer Davis told Officer Bach what he had seen and, while Officer Davis observed him, Officer Bach walked to the napkin, picked it up and returned to Officer Davis. The two officers examined the contents and concluded that they were handrolled marijuana cigarettes.  [fn. 1]
Again, in Officer Davis' words:
"At this time I suggested that I be placed under a feigned arrest situation."
"I was handcuffed and placed in the rear of the unmarked police vehicle. After that I believe Officers Tudor and Bach stopped Mr. Ludlum when his vehicle was adjacent to the police vehicle."
"They had a conversation with him, which I did not overhear, and he subsequently was handcuffed and placed in the rear of the police vehicle next to me."
Officer Davis' account of the events thereafter was as follows:
"When the defendant was placed in the vehicle to my left, a conversation took place."
"I stated to him, 'What do they have you on, Man?'"
"And he stated, 'Oh, they found a bottle of wine in my car. I am worried about getting back to the base.'"
"I then stated, 'Did they get you dirty?'"
"And he said, in a low voice, 'There was a stick in the *815 napkin, but they did not see me throw it from the vehicle. I am going to clam up.'"
"I stated, 'Where did you get the weed?'"
"And he stated, 'I have been carrying it for some time.'"
"That was the extent of the conversation pertaining to the arrest."  [fn. 2]
Officer Bach, after corroborating the testimony of Officer Davis to the preliminary conversation between them, testified that he first asked defendant for identification, and why he was in that area at that time of the morning. He then testified:
"Then I asked him about the napkin containing marijuana, and he said he didn't know what I was talking about, and I asked him, did he come out of Angelo's Pizza House, and he said he did, and he said the only napkin he had was one that had a tea bag in it, and that is what he had thrown away."
Defendant's testimony at the trial was to the same effect as his story to Officer Bach; he denied the conversation to which Officer Davis had testified.
The jury, and the trial court, believed the testimony of the two police officers and rejected defendant's version. We are bound by the factual findings of the trial court.
[1] By objections at the trial, and by motion for new trial, defendant properly and promptly objected to the admission into evidence of the conversation with Officer Davis in the police car. We conclude that this evidence was improperly admitted and (since it amounted to a confession of every element of a violation of section 11530) that its admission compels a reversal. (People v. Dorado (1965) 62 Cal.2d 338 [42 Cal.Rptr. 169, 398 P.2d 361].)
Admittedly, defendant was under arrest for the crime herein involved; clearly, suspicion had "focused" on him, not only because he had been arrested but because, accepting (as here we must) the testimony of the officers, they knew, of their own knowledge, that defendant had been in possession of the cigarettes and their experience had convinced them of their narcotic character. There is no claim, nor could there be, that any warning of constitutional rights had been given. And, finally, we think it clear that the questions asked of defendant by Officer Davis were not asked as part of any *816 preliminary investigation but were asked in order to obtain the very kind of incriminating statement that resulted.
The only element of the crime as to which further investigation could have been directed was the fact of defendant's knowledge of the narcotic nature of the objects thrown away. As to this, there was evidence that, as defendant was walking to his car, the vehicle driven by Officer Bach and his partner was seen, by others in the area, and recognized as a police car, that someone called out "Here come the cops," and that defendant was observed by Officer Davis to watch the approach of the police car. From these facts, some suspicion could have arisen that defendant, knowing that he possessed marijuana, had gotten rid of the cigarettes in fear of a police search. The facts of this case indicate the distinction between proper and improper questioning of an investigatory nature as to this (and possibly the other) elements of the crime. Officer Bach disclosed his official status and then asked the questions above quoted in what we regard as an entirely proper inquiry of defendant; they were questions which "lent themselves" to statements by defendant which could have exculpated him and have explained away the suspicion theretofore directed to him. But the activities of the officers in using the services of Officer Davis were quite another matter. They had secured, and obviously had rejected, defendant's exculpation. They then proceeded to utilize the "feigned arrest" of Officer Davis, carefully holding him out as being a suspected criminal, and Officer Davis, in turn, utilized this ruse as an opportunity to question defendant. Under these circumstances, Officer Davis was no longer investigating; he was in the accusatory stage and the response secured was inadmissible. (People v. Stewart (1965) 62 Cal.2d 571 [43 Cal.Rptr. 201, 400 P.2d 97].)
Except for the immaterial difference between an interrogation by a feigned fellow prisoner in a police car and a similar interrogation in a jail cell, the conduct here is the same as that involved in People v. Flores, ante, p. 807 [46 Cal.Rptr. 412] today decided by this court. For reasons set forth at length in that opinion, we conclude that there is no legal difference between these cases and the conduct condemned in Spano v. New York (1959) 360 U.S. 315 [79 S.Ct. 1202, 3 L.Ed.2d 1265] and in Massiah v. United States (1964) 377 U.S. 201 [84 S.Ct. 1199, 12 L.Ed.2d 246].
The judgment (order granting probation) is reversed.
Files, P. J., and Jefferson, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. The napkin and contents thus secured by Officer Bach were introduced as evidence at the trial, and, by appropriate testimony, the contents were shown to be marijuana.
[fn. 2]  2. It was testified that, in the vernacular of narcotic traffic, "weed" means marijuana, "stick" means a marijuana cigarette, and "dirty" means that a person has some form of narcotic on his person.

=== CASE 2214091 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:42.246749+00 ===

236 Cal.App.2d 753 (1965)
GLEN J. GILL et al., Plaintiffs and Appellants,
v.
MISSION SAVINGS & LOAN ASSOCIATION, Defendant and Respondent.
Civ. No. 7536.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Dist.
Aug. 23, 1965.
Mize, Larsh, Mize & Hubbard, Mize, Larsh, Mize, Hubbard & Baxter and Royal E. Hubbard for Plaintiffs and Appellants.
Arthur M. Bradley for Defendant and Respondent.
COUGHLIN, J.
This is an appeal from a judgment of dismissal upon an order sustaining a general demurrer to a first amended complaint. Leave to amend was granted, but no amendment was filed.
As appears from the first amended complaint, plaintiffs were the owners of four promissory notes executed by Darnell Development Company, a limited partnership; and secured by deeds of trust upon real property each of which contained the following provision: "This deed of trust, shall, ... be subject to a deed of trust to be hereafter executed *755 by the trustors or their successors in interest covering said land and securing a loan, not exceeding $28,000.00"; in consideration of the foregoing subordination provision the loan referred to therein was "to be used solely for the construction of improvements upon" the realty described in the deed of trust; the defendant, a savings and loan association, made a "construction" loan of $20,000 "upon" the real property described in each deed of trust evidenced by a promissory note secured by a "separate" deed of trust upon that property; the defendant, at all times, "had full and complete knowledge and well knew and ... acted upon the premises, that the loans referred to in the subordination" provision, "were to be loans solely for the construction of improvements upon" the real property respectively described in the deeds of trust; the defendant, "so carelessly and negligently managed and supervised the distribution of said funds, (i.e. those obtained from the "construction" loans made by defendant) that when the same were completely expended the construction had not been completed in accordance with the plans and specifications therefor"; that "as a direct and proximate result of the carelessness and negligence of said defendant, as aforesaid, said properties were not in a condition to be sold and the payments on said notes evidencing said construction loans became delinquent and notice of default was declared"; and "as a direct and proximate result of defendant's carelessness and negligence, as aforesaid, plaintiffs were damaged" in designated amounts on account of specifically described expenditures they were required to make.
Inferentially, it also appears from the first amended complaint that the borrowers from the defendant were the trustors in the original deeds of trust, or their successors in interest.
[1a] The issue for determination is whether defendant owed plaintiffs a duty to exercise ordinary care in managing and supervising the distribution of the funds defendant had loaned, to the end that these funds would be used only for construction purposes.
[2] "It is an elementary principle that an indispensable factor to liability founded upon negligence is the existence of a duty of care owed by the alleged wrongdoer to the person injured, or to a class of which he is a member." (Routh v. Quinn, 20 Cal.2d 488, 491 [127 P.2d 1, 149 A.L.R.].) *756
[1b] In their opening brief, plaintiffs assert that the subordination provision in the original deeds of trust "was made upon an understanding between plaintiffs and defendant herein that said loans were to be used solely for the construction of improvements upon the designated lots." The allegations of the first amended complaint do not support the conclusion that defendant expressly or impliedly agreed with plaintiffs that the loaned funds should be used solely for construction purposes. At most, the amended complaint supports an inference that plaintiffs and the trustors under plaintiffs' deeds of trust agreed that the loaned funds would be used only for such purposes, and that defendant had knowledge of this agreement. Based on this interpretation of their first amended complaint, the plaintiffs contend that defendant made the construction loans with knowledge that unless the proceeds therefrom were used for the purposes intended the security of plaintiffs' subordinated deeds of trust would be impaired, and in doing so assumed and was charged with the duty to see that the proceeds from the loans were devoted to the intended purposes. In support of this contention plaintiffs rely upon the decisions in Merrill v. Buck, 58 Cal.2d 552 [25 Cal.Rptr. 456, 375 P.2d 304]; Burke v. Zanes, 193 Cal.App.2d 773 [14 Cal.Rptr. 619] and Valdez v. Taylor Automobile Co., 129 Cal.App.2d 810 [278 P.2d 91]. The principles applied in these decisions are not applicable to the case at bench. This is not a case of the negligent performance of a contractually imposed obligation where public policy in light of existent factors extends the duty to exercise due care in the performance of that obligation to a person not in privity with the obligor, and such a person sustains injury resulting from the negligent performance thereof, either because of omission or commission (Biakanja v. Irving, 49 Cal.2d 647, 650 [320 P.2d 16, 65 A.L.R.2d 1358]); nor a case of the negligent performance of an obligation, or act, arising out of a voluntarily assumed relationship (Merrill v. Buck, supra, 58 Cal.2d 552, 561); nor a case of the negligent performance of a service actually and voluntarily undertaken (Burke v. Zanes, supra, 193 Cal.App.2d 773, 777-778; Valdez v. Taylor Automobile Co., supra, 129 Cal.App.2d 810, 817); nor a case of the negligent performance of an obligation imposed by statutory law or regulation. (See 35 Cal.Jur.2d 502.)
Nowhere in the first amended complaint does it appear that the defendant agreed with anyone to manage or supervise *757 distribution of the loaned funds, assumed to do so, actually undertook such, or was required by statutory law or regulation to so manage or supervise. Nor is there any showing of a voluntarily assumed relationship between defendant and plaintiffs from which such an obligation might arise.
If defendant had no obligation to manage and supervise distribution of the construction funds, obviously, it had no duty to exercise ordinary care in the performance of such an obligation. (Generally see 38 Am.Jur. 654, fn. 18.)
[3] Furthermore, the circumstances in this case do not invoke public policy imposition upon defendant of a duty to exercise due care not to injure plaintiffs, with an attendant obligation to supervise and manage the proceeds of loans made by defendant to another. Defendant was not a participant in the transaction culminating in the subordination agreement, and the provisions respecting such in the original deeds of trust, which enabled the trustors therein to obtain loans upon the subject properties. The plaintiffs easily could have protected themselves against any alleged misuse of the proceeds of such loans by appropriate limitations upon the subordination provision in their deeds of trust. The fact defendant had knowledge of an agreement between plaintiffs and the Development Company that the loans from defendant would be used for construction purposes, and that this was the reason plaintiffs agreed to subordinate their deeds of trust to those executed in favor of defendant is not a circumstance motivating public policy imposition upon defendant of a duty to exercise care to effect the agreement between plaintiffs and the Development Company. (See Security T. & S. Bank v. Fidelity & Deposit Co., 184 Cal. 173, 178 [193 P. 102].)
[4] In Biakanja v. Irving, supra, 49 Cal.2d 647, 650 the court said: "The determination whether in a specific case the defendant will be held liable to a third person not in privity is a matter of policy and involves the balancing of various factors, among which are the extent to which the transaction was intended to affect the plaintiff, the foreseeability of harm to him, the degree of certainty that the plaintiff suffered injury, the closeness of the connection between the defendant's conduct and the injury suffered, the moral blame attached to the defendant's conduct, and the policy of preventing future harm."
No moral blame attached to defendant's conduct here. Nor is there need of intervention by law to prevent harm in the *758 future where the more effective means of prevention lies with the party who might be harmed.
The judgment is affirmed.
Brown (Gerald), P. J., and Whelan, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2214094 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:42.292848+00 ===

891 N.E.2d 994 (2008)
Todd MONTGOMERY, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
NOSTALGIA LANE, INC., Defendant-Appellee (Roger Merrill, Individually and as Chairman of the Board and Treasurer, and Mike Furth, Individually and as General Manager, Defendants).
No. 2-07-0661.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Second District.
June 30, 2008.
*995 Norman H. Lehrer, William G. Hutul, Norman H. Lehrer, P.C., Wheaton, for Todd Montgomery.
Amy L. Silvestri, Silvestri Law Office, Rockford, for Roger Merrill and Nostalgia Lane, Inc.
Justice BYRNE delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiff, Todd Montgomery, contacted defendant, Nostalgia Lane, Inc., to restore his 1970 Plymouth Roadrunner. Defendant inspected the vehicle and provided plaintiff a written estimate that the project was expected to cost $35,000 but that the final bill would reflect the actual cost of parts and labor. Plaintiff agreed to the project and paid installments amounting to $33,500, but defendant deviated from the estimated cost. Plaintiff paid defendant the outstanding balance of $5,899 to retrieve the vehicle, and this dispute ensued. Plaintiff filed a six-count, third-amended complaint, and the parties filed opposing motions for summary judgment. The trial court ruled for defendant on all of the counts, and plaintiff appeals.
On appeal, plaintiff argues that the trial court committed reversible error in granting defendant summary judgment on count I of the third-amended complaint. However, count I is unfocused in that it alleges several statutory claims. Count I alleges that defendant violated several provisions of the Automotive Repair Act (815 ILCS 306/1 et seq. (West 2006)) and that those violations are actionable under section 2Z of the Illinois Consumer Fraud and Deceptive Business Practices Act (Consumer Fraud Act) (815 ILCS 505/2Z (West 2006)). Count I also alleges a more general claim of fraud under section 2 of the Consumer Fraud Act in that defendant prepared a "low-ball" estimate to lure plaintiff into the transaction, intending to extract more money from plaintiff after the car was disassembled. 815 ILCS 505/2 (West 2006). Plaintiff abandons his remaining claims.
We agree with plaintiff that the trial court committed reversible error in entering summary judgment for defendant on count I. We reverse the judgment and remand the cause for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
FACTS
Some facts are undisputed. When plaintiff purchased the car in 1989, it could not *996 be driven. Plaintiff initially contacted defendant in May 1998 to inquire about fixing it. In the spring of 1999, Roger Merrill and Mike Furth, defendant's chairman and general manager, respectively, viewed the car. Plaintiff told Merrill and Furth that he wanted the car to be "mechanically perfect" and "wouldn't mind if it looked nice, too," but plaintiff also said that his budget was limited to $20,000 to $25,000.
On May 12, 1999, defendant gave plaintiff a written estimate for the restoration project. Defendant estimated the cost of parts and labor to be $35,000, with a notation that "all jobs [will be] ultimately billed as time, materials, labor + parts[;] estimates may change + or -." Plaintiff was to make progress payments of $3,500 every two weeks. At his deposition, plaintiff testified that Furth privately assured him that the project would not cost more than $35,000. However, plaintiff admitted that he was informed "right up front" that defendant would charge labor costs at $42 per hour.
In September 1999, defendant took possession of the car. Plaintiff periodically went to the shop to observe the progress, and he never objected to the quality of the workmanship. Plaintiff made progress payments amounting to $33,500, but cost overruns caused the total bill to surpass the $35,000 estimate.
On August 3, 2000, defendant sent plaintiff a letter demanding a progress payment of $3,500 to be applied to the outstanding balance of $5,899. Defendant's letter stated that the work would resume as soon as plaintiff made the progress payment but that plaintiff could take possession of the car only if he paid the outstanding balance in full. Defendant wrote that "a worst case scenario for completion of your vehicle would be in the $20,000 to $25,000 range." Defendant reported that 643 hours of labor charges had accrued and that "[t]he average for a total restoration is 900-1,000" hours.
In early December 2000, plaintiff paid the outstanding balance of $5,899 and took possession of the car. Plaintiff stored the car for several months before towing it to another shop, where the project was completed. The new shop did not provide an estimate for finishing the project, but plaintiff initially agreed to pay $26,500 for labor. Using a parts list provided by defendant, plaintiff purchased all of the remaining parts himself for about $12,000. Plaintiff eventually paid the new shop $31,416 for the labor, which meant that plaintiff spent an additional $43,416 to complete the project after he reclaimed the car from defendant.
On January 7, 2004, plaintiff filed his third-amended complaint, in which he alleged that defendant knowingly gave him a "grossly inadequate, `low-ball' estimate" to induce plaintiff to hire defendant for the restoration project. Plaintiff alleged that Merrill and Furth knew, before starting the project, that the $35,000 estimate would not cover even the $42-per-hour labor costs, considering the car's "rough" condition. Merrill and Further gave the "unrealistic" estimate to lure plaintiff into the transaction, intending to extract more money once the car was disassembled. Plaintiff alleged that he relied on defendant's expertise in the field as well as Furth's oral assurances that the amount billed would not exceed the estimate.
Based on the factual allegations, plaintiff claimed several violations of the Automotive Repair Act and the Consumer Fraud Act. Section 2Z of the Consumer Fraud Act provides that "[a]ny person who knowingly violates the Automotive Repair Act * * * commits an unlawful practice within the meaning of this Act." 815 ILCS 505/2Z (West 2006).
*997 If an automotive project falls within the scope of the Automotive Repair Act, the motor vehicle repair facility must give the consumer a written estimated price for labor and parts for a specific repair and shall not charge for work done or parts supplied in an amount that exceeds the estimate by more than 10% without oral or written consent of the consumer. 815 ILCS 306/15(b), 20 (West 2006). Plaintiff alleges that the Automotive Repair Act applies in this case and that defendant violated sections 15(b) and 20, among others.
Section 10 of the Automotive Repair Act prescribes the types of repairs and repair facilities that are governed by the statute's regulatory provisions. Section 10 defines various terms and provides as follows:
"`Automotive repair' includes, but is not limited to:
(1) All repairs to motor vehicles that are commonly performed in a motor vehicle repair facility by a motor vehicle technician, including the diagnosis, installation, exchange, or repair of mechanical or electrical parts or units for any vehicle, the performance of any electrical or mechanical adjustment to any vehicle, or the performance of any service work required for routine maintenance or repair of any vehicle. The term does not include commercial fleet repair or maintenance transactions involving 2 or more vehicles or ongoing service or maintenance contracts involving vehicles used primarily for business purposes.
(2) All repair work in motor vehicle repair facilities that perform one or more specialties within the automotive repair service industry, including, but not limited to, refinishing, brake, electrical, exhaust repair or installation, front-end, radiators, tires, transmission, tune-up, and windshield. However, transactions involving the retail purchase of merchandise when a facility installs the merchandise as part of the transaction at the discretion of the customer for a firm price are not included. These transactions shall include but not be limited to tires, batteries, oil, and lube jobs.
`Automotive repair facility' or `motor vehicle repair facility' means any person, firm, association, or corporation that for compensation engages in the business of automotive repair or diagnosis, or both, of malfunctions of motor vehicles." 815 ILCS 306/10 (West 2006).
The parties debated in the trial court, as they do on appeal, whether the Plymouth Roadrunner project was an "automotive repair" and whether defendant qualifies as an "automotive repair facility" or a "motor vehicle repair facility" under section 10 of the Automotive Repair Act. Plaintiff's position is that the project was an "automotive repair" and that defendant qualifies as an "automotive repair facility" or "motor vehicle repair facility," and, therefore, defendant's alleged noncompliance with the regulatory provisions of the Automotive Repair Act entitles plaintiff to summary judgment. Defendant, predictably, takes the opposite view.
Several of plaintiff's claims were dismissed or withdrawn before the trial court entered the May 30, 2007, order from which this appeal is taken. In the May 30, 2007, order, the court granted defendant summary judgment on count I. The court agreed with defendant's position that "the business of completely dismantling and restoring collector cars is not the type of `automotive repairs' that are covered by the [Automotive Repair] Act and that the defendant's business facility is not the type of `motor vehicle repair facility' or `automotive *998 repair facility' that is defined under the [Automotive Repair] Act."
The court held that "[t]here is a commonsense, qualitative distinction between a facility that specializes in the restoration of unique, vintage automobiles and an automobile repair shop that does everyday repairs on various makes and models of vehicles on a volume basis." The court also emphasized evidence that the availability and prices of parts for vintage cars fluctuate, thereby affecting the cost of a restoration project. The court opined that the Automotive Repair Act applies only to "malfunctioning" vehicles and not to "non-functional" vehicles, like plaintiff's car.
The court dismissed count I in its entirety, but the written ruling did not address plaintiff's claim that defendant committed consumer fraud under section 2 of the Consumer Fraud Act. However, the court found that defendant was entitled to summary judgment on count II, which alleged common-law fraud. As to count II, the court did "not believe that there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether there was any deception involved in the preparation of the original estimate or the estimate of what the remaining restoration charges would be." The court noted that the estimate that was on file showed that defendant would bill the actual cost of time and materials rather than a set charge. Plaintiff's timely appeal followed.
ANALYSIS
On appeal, plaintiff argues that the trial court committed reversible error in granting defendant summary judgment on count I of the third-amended complaint, which actually contains two claims. First, plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in granting defendant summary judgment on the claim filed under the Automotive Repair Act and section 2Z of the Consumer Fraud Act. In his brief, plaintiff argued that he is entitled to summary judgment or, alternatively, to a trial on that claim. However, during oral argument, plaintiff requested only that he be granted a trial on the claim filed under the Automotive Repair Act.
Second, plaintiff argues that a genuine issue of material fact precludes the entry of summary judgment on his claim of consumer fraud under section 2 of the Consumer Fraud Act. Thus, plaintiff argues that he is entitled to a trial on that claim as well. Plaintiff abandons his remaining claims by failing to argue them here. See 210 Ill.2d R. 341(h)(7) ("Points not argued [in the appellant's opening brief] are waived and shall not be raised in the reply brief, in oral argument, or on petition for rehearing").
A. Standard of Review
The purpose of a summary judgment proceeding is not to try an issue of fact but, rather, to determine whether one exists. Mydlach v. DaimlerChrysler Corp., 226 Ill.2d 307, 311, 314 Ill.Dec. 760, 875 N.E.2d 1047 (2007); Ferguson v. McKenzie, 202 Ill.2d 304, 307-08, 269 Ill.Dec. 188, 780 N.E.2d 660 (2001). Summary judgment is proper when "[t]he pleadings, depositions, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." 735 ILCS 5/2-1005(c) (West 2006); Outboard Marine Corp. v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Co., 154 Ill.2d 90, 102, 180 Ill.Dec. 691, 607 N.E.2d 1204 (1992). Because summary judgment is a drastic measure, it should be allowed only "`when the right of the moving party is clear and free from doubt.'" Mydlach, 226 Ill.2d at 311, 314 Ill.Dec. 760, 875 N.E.2d 1047, quoting Purtill v. Hess, 111 Ill.2d 229, 240, 95 Ill.Dec. 305, 489 N.E.2d 867 (1986).
*999 A trial court's entry of summary judgment is subject to de novo review. General Agents Insurance Co. of America, Inc. v. Midwest Sporting Goods Co., 215 Ill.2d 146, 153, 293 Ill.Dec. 594, 828 N.E.2d 1092 (2005). When reviewing the disposition of a summary judgment motion, this court construes all evidence strictly against the movant and liberally in favor of the nonmoving party. Forsythe v. Clark USA, Inc., 224 Ill.2d 274, 280, 309 Ill.Dec. 361, 864 N.E.2d 227 (2007). "If the undisputed material facts could lead reasonable observers to divergent inferences, or where there is a dispute as to a material fact, summary judgment should be denied and the issue decided by the trier of fact." Forsythe, 224 Ill.2d at 280, 309 Ill.Dec. 361, 864 N.E.2d 227.
B. Automotive Repair Act
Plaintiff challenges the trial court's conclusion that the business of completely dismantling and restoring collector automobiles, like the 1970 Plymouth Roadrunner, is not the type of "automotive repair" that is covered by section 10 of the Automotive Repair Act. Plaintiff's brief asserts that (1) the Automotive Repair Act applies to his restoration project; (2) there is no genuine issue of material fact that defendant failed to comply with the Automotive Repair Act; and (3) if a factual question regarding compliance exists, summary judgment for defendant is inappropriate. The trial court granted defendant summary judgment based on its belief that the Automotive Repair Act does not apply, and, therefore, the court did not reach the second or third issue.
To address plaintiff's argument, we must construe the Automotive Repair Act. Our review is de novo. Illinois Department of Healthcare & Family Services v. Warner, 227 Ill.2d 223, 229, 317 Ill.Dec. 677, 882 N.E.2d 557 (2008). The primary objective in interpreting a statute is to give effect to the intent of the legislature. Harshman v. DePhillips, 218 Ill.2d 482, 493, 300 Ill.Dec. 498, 844 N.E.2d 941 (2006). The most reliable indicator of the legislature's intent is the language of the statute, which is given its plain, ordinary, and popularly understood meaning. In re Detention of Lieberman, 201 Ill.2d 300, 308, 267 Ill.Dec. 81, 776 N.E.2d 218 (2002). "We read the statute as a whole, considering all relevant parts." Harshman, 218 Ill.2d at 493, 300 Ill.Dec. 498, 844 N.E.2d 941.
Defendant argues that its business is not regulated by the Automotive Repair Act, because it is not an "automotive repair facility" or "motor vehicle repair facility" as defined by section 10. Section 10 uses the terms "automotive repair facility" and "motor vehicle repair facility" interchangeably. The section provides, in relevant part, as follows:
"`Automotive repair facility' or `motor vehicle repair facility' means any person, firm, association, or corporation that for compensation engages in the business of automotive repair or diagnosis, or both, of malfunctions of motor vehicles." 815 ILCS 306/10 (West 2006).
Defendant does not dispute that it is a "firm, association, or corporation" that services cars for compensation. However, defendant argues that it engages in "the complete dismantling and ultimate restoration of vintage motor vehicles," and, therefore, it is not in the business of "automotive repair or diagnosis, or both, of malfunctions of motor vehicles." 815 ILCS 306/10 (West 2006). We disagree.
1. "Automotive Repair"
We conclude that the term "automotive repair" encompasses the restoration of a vintage car to or near its original state. Section 10 of the Automotive Repair Act defines "automotive repair" as follows:
*1000 "`Automotive repair' includes, but is not limited to:
(1) All repairs to motor vehicles that are commonly performed in a motor vehicle repair facility by a motor vehicle technician, including the diagnosis, installation, exchange, or repair of mechanical or electrical parts or units for any vehicle, the performance of any electrical or mechanical adjustment to any vehicle, or the performance of any service work required for routine maintenance or repair of any vehicle. The term does not include commercial fleet repair or maintenance transactions involving 2 or more vehicles or ongoing service or maintenance contracts involving vehicles used primarily for business purposes.
(2) All repair work in motor vehicle repair facilities that perform one or more specialties within the automotive repair service industry, including, but not limited to, refinishing, brake, electrical, exhaust repair or installation, front-end, radiators, tires, transmission, tune-up, and windshield. However, transactions involving the retail purchase of merchandise when a facility installs the merchandise as part of the transaction at the discretion of the customer for a firm price are not included. These transactions shall include but not be limited to tires, batteries, oil, and lube jobs." 815 ILCS 306/10 (West 2006).
The General Assembly's use of the broad phrases "all repairs" and "all repair work" in defining "automotive repairs" leads us to conclude that vintage car restoration projects are included in the definition in section 10. Our conclusion is supported by several guides of statutory interpretation.
When determining the plain and ordinary meaning of words, a court may look to the dictionary (Madison Mutual Insurance Co. v. Kessler, 376 Ill.App.3d 1121, 1128, 315 Ill.Dec. 616, 877 N.E.2d 103 (2007)), and so we compare the meanings of "repair" and "restore." Webster's dictionary defines "repair" as "to restore by replacing a part or putting together what is torn or broken" and "to restore to a sound or healthy state." (Emphasis added.) Webster's Third New International Dictionary 1923 (1986). Webster's dictionary similarly defines "restore" as "to bring back to or put back into a former or original state" and "to repair and alter (a building) with the aim of putting back into the original form." (Emphasis added.) Webster's Third New International Dictionary 1936 (1986). Thus, the plain, ordinary, and popularly understood meanings of "repair" and "restore" show that the terms are essentially synonymous.
Defendant points out that the examples of "automotive repairs" in section 10 include "the diagnosis, installation, exchange, or repair of mechanical or electrical parts or units for any vehicle, the performance of any electrical or mechanical adjustment to any vehicle, or the performance of any service work required for routine maintenance or repair of any vehicle." 815 ILCS 306/10 (West 2006). Defendant argues that these services differ from its practice of "the complete dismantling and restoration of an entire vehicle." We view the distinction as strained, at best.
For instance, the Automotive Repair Act specifically contemplates the complete dismantling of a vehicle, regardless of its age or state of disrepair. Section 15, which prescribes mandatory disclosures to the consumer, provides that, "[i]f it is necessary to disassemble, or partially disassemble, a vehicle or vehicle component in order *1001 to provide the consumer with a written estimate for required repair or maintenance, the estimate shall show the cost of any disassembly or reassembly, or both, if the consumer elects not to proceed with the repair or maintenance of the vehicle." 815 ILCS 306/15(b)(4) (West 2006). Thus, section 15 requires an estimate to disclose disassembly costs when the diagnosis requires that the entire car be taken apart, which is precisely what defendant does in performing its service. Furthermore, defendant's written estimate stated that defendant would address the "engine, trans[mission], drive train, interior, body," and would "detail and color all items correctly, replace + restore all trim." One can hardly imagine how these tasks do not amount to "automotive repair."
Our interpretation is further supported by the exclusion of various types of repairs from the definition of "automotive repair." First, section 10(1) provides that "[t]he term does not include commercial fleet repair or maintenance transactions involving 2 or more vehicles or ongoing service or maintenance contracts involving vehicles used primarily for business purposes." 815 ILCS 306/10(1) (West 2006). Second, section 10(2) excludes "transactions involving the retail purchase of merchandise when a facility installs the merchandise as part of the transaction at the discretion of the customer for a firm price," such as transactions involving tires, batteries, oil, and lube jobs. 815 ILCS 306/10(2) (West 2006). Third, section 83 provides that the Automotive Repair Act "does not apply to automotive collision and body repair facilities as defined in the Automotive Collision Repair Act [(815 ILCS 308/1 et seq. (West 2006))]." 815 ILCS 306/83 (West 2006).
These provisions show that the General Assembly considered different types of repair projects and intended that the Automotive Repair Act would not apply to fleets, business vehicles, the installation of certain small merchandise, and statutorily defined collision repairs. The General Assembly had the opportunity to exclude vintage car restoration projects and declined to do so.
Defendant next argues that, because it provides a type of "one-stop-shopping" for an entire vehicle restoration, it is not a "specialist" in the automotive repair service industry as that term is used in section 10. However, section 10 specifically states that "automotive repair" includes "all repair work in motor vehicle repair facilities that perform one or more specialities." (Emphasis added.) 815 ILCS 306/10 (West 2006). The "one or more specialties" provision of section 10 shows that the General Assembly intended that the Automotive Repair Act should apply to facilities even if their breadth of services is quantitatively different. Defendant's position that its business should be excluded as qualitatively unique is undermined by the absence of any provision suggesting that meticulously performed services are not "automotive repairs." Defendant does not escape the application of the Automotive Repair Act simply because it performs more than one specialty within the field and performs these services meticulously.
In fact, a review of section 5 shows why an automotive repair facility like defendant, which provides a broad spectrum of services, should be governed by the Automotive Repair Act. Section 5 provides as follows:
"The automotive repair industry supports good communication between motor vehicle repair facilities and their customers. The General Assembly recognizes that improved communications and accurate representations between automotive repair facilities and their customers will increase consumer confidence, reduce the likelihood of disputes *1002 arising, and promote fair and nondeceptive practices, thereby enhancing the safety and reliability of motor vehicles serviced by motor vehicle repair facilities in the State of Illinois." 815 ILCS 306/5 (West 2006).
A complete vehicle restoration project is generally much more complex and expensive than a garden-variety car repair. Often, a consumer seeking a restoration insists on meticulous attention to detail and is willing to pay handsomely for it. The increased complexity and expense inherent in these projects creates an even greater need for good communication and accurate representations between automotive repair facilities and their customers. In other words, the bigger the project, the greater the interest in reducing the likelihood of disputes and in promoting fair and nondeceptive practices.
The General Assembly recognized that smaller transactions do not compel regulation. As mentioned, section 10 excludes "transactions involving the retail purchase of merchandise when a facility installs the merchandise as part of the transaction at the discretion of the customer for a firm price," such as those involving tires, batteries, oil, and lube jobs. 815 ILCS 306/10 (West 2006). Adopting defendant's position would lead to an absurd result: a consumer seeking a new muffler would be protected by the statute, while a consumer like plaintiff seeking the complete restoration of a rare vehicle would be left unprotected.
Defendant also takes the unseemly tack of trivializing plaintiff's interest in his car. Noting that plaintiff had "the goal of driving [the Plymouth Roadrunner] as a second car, for fun," defendant argues that "the ordinary consumer relies upon his or her car to assist in meeting basic needs" and that "[i]t is not necessary for an ordinary consumer to have a suped-up vintage hot rod to meet the needs of his or her family." Defendant implies that a consumer like plaintiff who uses his vehicle for recreation is somehow less worthy of consumer protection than a person who uses his vehicle for basic transportation. The General Assembly never intended value judgments when it enacted the Automotive Repair Act, and we will not create an artificial distinction here. See In re Marriage of Beyer, 324 Ill.App.3d 305, 309-10, 257 Ill.Dec. 406, 753 N.E.2d 1032 (2001) (a court may not supply omissions, remedy defects, substitute different provisions, add exceptions, limitations, or conditions, or otherwise change the law so as to depart from the plain meaning of the statutory language).
Defendant advocates the trial court's opinion that the availability and prices of parts for vintage cars can fluctuate, thereby affecting the cost of a restoration project and making it difficult to estimate the cost. According to defendant, the difficulty in estimating these uncertain costs makes it unfair to apply the Automotive Repair Act to the restoration of vintage cars. However, the General Assembly contemplated this contingency in section 25, which provides that, "[i]f it is determined that the estimated price is insufficient because of unforeseen circumstances, the consumer's consent must be obtained before the work estimated is done or parts estimated are supplied." 815 ILCS 306/25 (West 2006). The unavailability of parts or special tools is precisely the type of "unforeseen circumstance" that would require an automotive repair facility to consult with the consumer before increasing the bill.
2. "Malfunctions of Motor Vehicles"
Next, we disagree with defendant's position that the services it performed did not address "malfunctions" of plaintiff's motor vehicle. Emphasizing that the car *1003 could not be driven when the project began, defendant echoes the trial court's distinction between "malfunctioning" vehicles and "non-functioning" vehicles. Defendant suggests that only malfunctioning vehicles are governed by the Automotive Repair Act because section 10 declares that an "[a]utomotive repair facility" and a "motor vehicle repair facility" engage in the business of "automotive repair or diagnosis, or both, of malfunctions of motor vehicles." (Emphasis added.) 815 ILCS 306/10 (West 2006).
A review of the plain, ordinary, popularly understood meanings of "malfunction" and "nonfunctional" shows that the terms are indistinguishable for purposes of section 10. Webster's dictionary defines the term "malfunction" as "to function badly or imperfectly" or "fail to operate in the normal or usual manner." Webster's Third New International Dictionary 1367 (1986). Webster's dictionary similarly defines "nonfunctional" as "not performing or able to perform its regular function." Webster's Third New International Dictionary 1537 (1986).
Plaintiff persuasively argues that any distinction between "malfunctioning" and "nonfunctional" vehicles would lead to an absurd and arbitrary result. If nonfunctional vehicles were excluded from the types governed by the Automotive Repair Act, any carregardless of year, make, or modelwould not be covered if it had to be towed to the repair shop. Conversely, any car that could be driven would be covered. Certainly the General Assembly did not intend such an arbitrary distinction.
Defendant argues that its business activities are to "take old collector cars and completely rebuild and reconstruct them to their originalor better than original ('suped-up')form." Defendant hints at an interesting issue: whether an automotive project that improves a carrather than simply repairs or restores it to its original conditionis an "automotive repair" under section 10. One could conceive of a project that replaces functioning equipment with aftermarket merchandise to transform a car into something that the vehicle's manufacturer did not intend. Depending on the project, one could argue that such a transformation does not qualify as an "automotive repair" under section 10. However, other than a vague reference to making plaintiff's car "better than new," there is no evidence that the Plymouth Roadrunner project involved "suping up" the car to anything beyond its original state. Thus, we need not comment on the issue of improvements here.
3. Factual Issue Precluding Summary Judgment
The trial court's decision that the Automotive Repair Act does not apply to plaintiff's vintage car restoration project obviated the need for the court to address plaintiff's argument that defendant failed to comply with the disclosure provision of section 15, the notice provision of section 20, the authorization provision of section 30, and the lien provision of section 75 of the Automotive Repair Act. Section 80(10) of the Automotive Repair Act provides that noncompliance with these sections is unlawful, and section 2Z of the Consumer Fraud Act provides that "[a]ny person who knowingly violates the Automotive Repair Act * * * commits an unlawful practice within the meaning of this Act." 815 ILCS 505/2Z (West 2006).
In his brief, plaintiff does not take a firm position on whether he should receive summary judgment or a trial on the merits. Plaintiff argues that "the trial court committed reversible error in granting defendant's motion for summary judgment and denying plaintiff's motion for partial summary judgment." This statement is *1004 construed most accurately as a request for a remand for the entry of summary judgment for plaintiff. Such an interpretation is consistent with the conclusion section of plaintiff's reply brief, which argues that the trial court erred "in denying [plaintiff's] Motion for Summary Judgment." However, during oral argument, plaintiff argued that a trial on the merits is the proper remedy for the erroneous summary judgment entered for defendant, and therefore, we need not consider whether plaintiff is entitled to summary judgment.
C. Consumer Fraud Act
Plaintiff also argues that the existence of a factual issue precludes the entry of summary judgment on the second part of count I, in which he alleged a violation of section 2 of the Consumer Fraud Act. Section 2 provides as follows:
"[U]nfair or deceptive acts or practices, including but not limited to the use or employment of any deception, fraud, false pretense, false promise, misrepresentation or the concealment, suppression or omission of any material fact, with intent that others rely upon the concealment, suppression or omission of such material fact * * * are hereby declared unlawful whether any person has in fact been misled, deceived or damaged thereby." 815 ILCS 505/2 (West 2006).
To establish a violation of the Consumer Fraud Act, a plaintiff must prove "(1) a deceptive act or practice, (2) intent on the defendant['s] part that plaintiff rely on the deception, and (3) that the deception occurred in the course of conduct involving trade or commerce." Siegel v. Levy Organization Development Co., 153 Ill.2d 534, 542, 180 Ill.Dec. 300, 607 N.E.2d 194 (1992). Plaintiff alleges that defendant's "low-ball" estimate of the project's cost was a deceptive act occurring in the course of business, which was intended to lure plaintiff into the transaction. Plaintiff alleges that defendant used a "bait-and-switch" tactic whereby defendant would disassemble the car, complete some repairs, and then extract more money from plaintiff when it would be very inconvenient and expensive to discontinue the project.
In granting defendant summary judgment on count I, the trial court did not comment on the claim filed under section 2 of the Consumer Fraud Act. However, the trial court granted defendant summary judgment on plaintiff's common-law fraud claim, opining that it did "not believe that there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether there was any deception involved in the preparation of the original estimate or the estimate of what the remaining restoration charges would be."
Plaintiff stated in his affidavit that he would have objected to the estimate if he had known the project would require 900 to 1,000 hours of labor billed at $42 per hour, which would cost at least $37,800, without accounting for the parts. Plaintiff also asserted that Furth made multiple oral assurances that the project would stay below the estimated cost.
The court's conclusion that there was no deception is faulty because it is essentially a credibility determination that disregards the evidence favorable to plaintiff. See SBC Holdings, Inc. v. Travelers Casualty & Surety Co., 374 Ill.App.3d 1, 8, 313 Ill.Dec. 250, 872 N.E.2d 10 (2007) ("`Summary judgment is appropriate where the pleadings, depositions, admissions, and affidavits on file, when taken together in the light most favorable to the nonmovant, show that there is no genuine issue of material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law' [Citation]"). While defendant might ultimately prevail on the claim under section 2 *1005 of the Consumer Fraud Act, plaintiff's claim should not be decided in summary judgment proceedings.
CONCLUSION
First, we hold that the Automotive Repair Act governs plaintiff's project to restore his vintage collector car. The plain, ordinary, popularly understood meaning of the statutory language indicates the General Assembly's intent to protect consumers obtaining "automobile repairs," regardless of the complexity or expense of the project. Second, we hold that a genuine issue of material fact regarding the parties' dealings also precludes summary judgment on the claim under section 2 of the Consumer Fraud Act.
At oral argument, plaintiff took the position that the proper remedy is a trial on the merits of count I. Defendant argues that, if the Automotive Repair Act applies, any violation was de minimis, and therefore not actionable. On remand, the trial court will have the opportunity to sort out these issues and parse the multiple claims contained in count I.
For the preceding reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of Winnebago County is reversed, and the cause is remanded for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.
McLAREN and BOWMAN, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2214097 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:42.332777+00 ===

236 Cal.App.2d 795 (1965)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
FRANK J. HAMPTON et al., Defendants and Appellants.
Crim. No. 11108.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Two.
Aug. 25, 1965.
Sherman Doctrow for Defendants and Appellants.
Roger Arnebergh, City Attorney, Philip E. Grey, Assistant City Attorney, and Michael T. Sauer, Deputy City Attorney, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
HERNDON, J.
This case comes to us by certification from the Appellate Department of the Los Angeles County Superior Court following its decision affirming a judgment of the Municipal Court of the Los Angeles Judicial District *798 which found appellants guilty on four counts of a complaint charging violations of section 212, subdivision (a) of the Labor Code. This section provides:
"No person, or agent or officer thereof, shall issue in payment of wages due, or to become due, or as an advance on wages to be earned: (a) Any order, check, draft, note, memorandum, or other acknowledgment of indebtedness, unless it is negotiable and payable in cash, on demand, without discount, at some established place of business in the State, the name and address of which must appear on the instrument, and at the time of its issuance and for a reasonable time thereafter, which must be at least 30 days, the maker or drawer has sufficient funds in, or credit, arrangement, or understanding with the drawee for its payment. ... Where an instrument mentioned in subdivision (a) is protested or dishonored, the notice or memorandum of protest or dishonor is admissible as proof of presentation, nonpayment and protest and is presumptive evidence of knowledge of insufficiency of funds or credit with the drawee."
The order of certification states that the issue presented for our decision in this cause is the following:
"Whether in a criminal prosecution under Labor Code, Sec. 212(a) where a check in payment of wages is dishonored for insufficiency of funds, 'knowledge of insufficiency of funds or credit with the drawee' is a necessary element of the offense, which must be proved by the prosecution? Or is the lack of such knowledge only an affirmative defense? Or is this offense a welfare offense dispensing entirely with the normal criminal intent requirement?"
Appellants Hampton and Hammonds stipulated that on the relevant dates they were the president and secretary, respectively, of Industrial Fasteners, Incorporated; that on November 22, 1963, November 25, 1963, and December 3, 1963, they signed and issued four checks to the employees of Industrial Fasterners, Incorporated, in payment of wages; that these checks were presented for payment and were dishonored for the reason that there were not sufficient funds in the bank account upon which they were drawn and no arrangement for credit had been made with the bank.
Upon the court's acceptance of this stipulation, the prosecution rested. By way of defense, appellants testified that in October of 1963, the corporation had entered into an agreement with a group of private investors represented by a Mr. Gershony whereby this group would supply capital to the *799 corporation in consideration for certain stock and debenture arrangements which would give them control of the corporation. A copy of this quite terse and ambiguous document,  [fn. 1]*800 initialed by appellants as president, vice president and secretary of the corporation, but unsigned by Gershony, was received into evidence.
On the subject of knowledge, each appellant was asked only this one question: "At the time these checks were signed by you, did you have any knowledge of the insufficiency of the bank account to cover them?" Each appellant answered in the negative denying any such knowledge. Neither of the appellants gave any testimony as to what efforts, if any, he had made to inform himself on the subject. Although appellant Hammonds testified that Mr. Gershony "was making the deposits at the time," no evidence was offered tending to prove that any such deposits actually were made, or if they were, when they were made and the amounts thereof. No evidence whatsoever was offered to show that appellants had ever discussed these payroll checks with Mr. Gershony or the bank or in any fashion had attempted to learn whether or not sufficient funds were in fact available to honor them upon presentation.
When approaching the task of interpreting any statute, it is well to have in mind certain fundamental rules of statutory construction. [1] "Statutes are to be so construed, if their language permits, as to render them valid and constitutional rather than invalid and unconstitutional. [Citations.] ... [2] The proper construction to be given to this statute is to be found by construing it as a whole and harmonizing its various parts. [Citations.]" (Erlich v. Municipal Court, 55 Cal.2d 553, 558 [11 Cal.Rptr. 758, 360 P.2d 334].)
[3] "Moreover, the rule is established that when language which is reasonably susceptible of two constructions is *801 used in a penal law ordinarily that construction which is more favorable to the offender will be adopted. [4] The defendant is entitled to the benefit of every reasonable doubt, whether it arise out of a question of fact, or as to the true interpretation of words or the construction of language used in a statute. [Citations.]" (In re Tartar, 52 Cal.2d 250, 256-257 [339 P.2d 553].)
[5] "Equally elementary is the uniformly recognized canon of statutory construction that effect must be given, if possible, to every word, clause and sentence of the statute defining the offense, and that no part or word can be ignored, discarded, treated as meaningless, or denied purpose and effect, unless there be irreconcilable contradiction and repugnance." (People v. Burns, 75 Cal.App. 84, 88 [241 P. 935].)
[6] In addition, we believe that the language and terms of section 212 of the Labor Code, particularly when considered in context with the other regulations enacted relating to the payment of wages (Lab. Code, ch. 1, pt. 1, div. 2), make clear that it was not the intent of the Legislature to impose an absolute criminal liability in this instance.
Initially, it may be noted that section 212 does not directly purport to deal with the problem of nonpayment of wages. Among others, sections 201, 202, 204 and 216 contain express provisions regulating the payment of wages and sections 203, 210, 215 and 216 provide that in appropriate instances wilful failure to comply with these regulations shall subject the employer to criminal prosecution, actions may be brought by the injured employee to collect up to 30 days penalty wages, and proceedings may be taken by the Division of Labor Law Enforcement to collect forfeitures to the state to be credited to the general fund.
In analyzing the predecessor statute to the present section 212, the court in In re Ballestra, 173 Cal. 657, 658-659 [161 P. 120], stated: "In considering this statute we may presume, in support of the legislative enactment, that some employers in this state had adopted and followed the custom of paying the daily, weekly, or monthly wages of their employees, when due, by giving orders for the amount thereof payable only in goods, or orders of an indefinite nature not payable on demand, but at some future time. The purpose of the statute evidently is to prevent the evils which the legislature believed had arisen from such practices. *802"
"The right to make contracts, like other personal and property rights, is subject to reasonable regulation designed and calculated to promote the general convenience, prosperity, and welfare. [Citation.] Laws having a reasonable tendency to accomplish these results, and not imposing unreasonable burdens upon individuals, are valid. The provisions of the statute in question do not transgress this rule. As applied to ordinary transactions between employers and employees, of the kind embraced within its terms, the statute is, in our opinion, valid and constitutional."
The various subsequent amendments and additions to the statute construed in Ballestra have not manifested any intent to change the basic legislative purpose underlying the section in its present form. The Legislature has indicated its intention to prescribe criminal punishments for complete failures to pay wages earned only when such failures are wilful. It would be anomalous, therefore, to hold that it intended to inflict such punishment upon one who in complete good faith, and without fault or neglect, has made payment by way of a check which, by reason of some subsequent and unforeseen event totally beyond his control, has been dishonored upon presentation. So to construe section 212, subdivision (a), especially in the application of the provision that the maker or drawer must have sufficient funds or credit with the drawee for 30 days after issuance, would indeed create doubts regarding its constitutionality.
On the basis of traditional standards, it would be difficult to justify a law which would operate to make criminally punishable human conduct which in no way has been infected with any wrongful intent or culpable negligence. Certainly a statute that would demand of an employer an attribute of superhuman prescience could not fairly be described as a law "not imposing unreasonable burdens upon individuals" as was the earlier version of section 212, subdivision (a) construed in In re Ballestra, supra, 173 Cal. 657, 659. In addition, it is to be noted that the affidavit upon which petitioner in Ballestra was held in custody charged that he " 'did willfully and unlawfully issue in payment of and as evidence of indebtedness for wages due an employee ... a certain note. ...' " (Italics added.)
That the Legislature had no such unreasonable design in mind is further illustrated by the enactment in 1963 of section 203.1 of the Labor Code. This section provides that employers in the building and construction industry shall be *803 liable to their employees for penalty wages in the event that they issue checks in payment of wages upon accounts in which there are insufficient funds to honor such checks upon presentation made within 30 days after receipt by the employees. It specifically provides, however, "that the said penalty shall not apply if the employer can establish to the satisfaction of the Labor Commissioner or an appropriate court of law that the said violation of this section was unintentional." We regard it as most improbable that the Legislature intended employers in the building and construction industry to be spared the payment of penalty wages in instances of innocent and excusable error and at the same time intended that they, and all other employers, be absolutely liable to imprisonment for the selfsame acts.
A further indication that the Legislature did not intend section 212, subdivision (a) of the Labor Code to impose an absolute criminal liability, without regard to fault, is found in the following concluding sentence of the section: "Where an instrument mentioned in subdivision (a) is protested or dishonored, the notice or memorandum of protest or dishonor is admissible as proof of presentation, nonpayment and protest and is presumptive evidence of knowledge of insufficiency of funds or credit with the drawee." (Italics added.)
Surely the Legislature would not have promulgated this quoted rule of evidence, which obviously is designed to facilitate the prosecution's proof of the maker's presumptive knowledge regarding the condition of his bank account, if it had not regarded the question of such knowledge as being at least a potentially triable issue in a prosecution under this particular penal statute. In other words, it seems quite evident that the Legislature did not regard the fact as to knowledge, or the lack of it, as irrelevant.
An essentially identical provision is contained in section 476a, subdivision (c) of the Penal Code relating to the general issuance of checks without sufficient funds. It is difficult to envision that the Legislature intended to promulgate a necessary and meaningful rule of evidence in one instance but had performed a meaningless and nugatory act in the other. Of course, it is equally apparent that section 212, subdivision (a) of the Labor Code is not a mere reiteration of section 476a of the Penal Code directed toward a limited class of persons. Not only does section 212, subdivision (a) apply to instruments, such as promissory notes payable on *804 demand, to which section 476a would not be applicable, but, more importantly, it does not require proof of an intent to defraud, one of the essential elements of section 476a. (People v. Davis, 176 Cal.App.2d 80, 84 [1 Cal.Rptr. 103]; People v. Reichenau, 173 Cal.App.2d 584, 586 [343 P.2d 603].)
[7] We conclude, therefore, that while section 212, subdivision (a) does not impose an absolute criminal liability which completely precludes all possible defenses after it has been established that the proscribed act has been committed, it does validly establish the quantum of proof sufficient to sustain a conviction unless and until it is overcome by proof that the conduct of the defendant was neither wilfully wrong nor culpably negligent. A somewhat analogous situation arises in the application of section 270 of the Penal Code which provides:
"Proof of abandonment or desertion of a child by such father, or the omission by such father to furnish necessary food, clothing, shelter or medical attendance or other remedial care for his child is prima facie evidence that such abandonment or desertion or omission to furnish necessary food, clothing, shelter or medical attendance or other remedial care is wilful and without lawful excuse." (Cf. In re Bryant, 94 Cal.App. 791, 794 [271 P. 926].)
[8] To this extent, therefore, we agree with the determination made by the appellate department of the superior court in People v. Turner, 154 Cal.App.2d Supp. 883, 886 [316 P.2d 781], that no allegation of knowledge is required in a complaint charging a violation of section 212, subdivision (a) since proof of actual knowledge on the part of the accused or proof that he actually intended to violate the statute is not demanded by its terms. We would, however, modify the expression of the court in Turner relating to matters of defense, by inserting the indicated words in the following expression appearing therein on page 887:
[9] "Nor do we entertain any doubt that even though [actual] knowledge of insufficient funds in the hands of the 'drawee' is not required, the section is constitutional. It is to be noted that it does not purport to inflict punishment for failure to pay wages, but for undertaking to pay them by the issuance of some instrument. One who chooses to make use of an instrument instead of cash, may constitutionally be charged with first knowing [or using all reasonable efforts to acquire knowledge] that the instrument he issues conforms to the requirements of the code, and his [unjustifiable] ignorance *805 of the fact that if funds are needed, they are insufficient, is not made an excuse by the section nor required by any constitutional principle."
We believe that such construction fairly conforms to the commendable intendment of the Legislature in enacting section 212, subdivision (a) without making every employer and his agent subject to imprisonment for misadventures resulting from events or circumstances beyond the ability of ordinary human agencies to foresee or to control. It leaves available to them the fundamental defense to criminal prosecutions set forth in Penal Code, section 26, subdivision Six:
"All persons are capable of committing crimes except ... persons who committed the act or made the omission charged through misfortune or by accident, when it appears that there was no evil design, intention, or culpable negligence." (Italics added.)
[10] Once the prosecution has established the facts giving rise to the presumption expressed in section 212, subdivision (a), there will then devolve upon the defendant the burden of presenting evidence in justification and such burden will not be met by his merely testifying to an actual lack of knowledge of present insufficiency of funds, or probable future insufficiency within the prescribed 30-day period, without a further and adequate showing as to what steps he had taken to determine the amount of funds that were in fact available at the time the instrument was issued and which reasonably could be expected to remain available for payment of the instrument upon its presentation during the following 30 days.
To demand less of the defendant would be to read into the section a requirement that the prosecution introduce evidence at least sufficient to permit an inference of actual knowledge of insufficiency of the funds. Such proof ordinarily would also suffice to compel an inference that since the checks had been issued with knowledge of their insufficiency, they also had been issued with intent to defraud. In such cases a defendant could, and should, be convicted of violating Penal Code, section 476a, a felony, rather than Labor Code, section 212, subdivision (a), a misdemeanor.
[11] Applying these tests to the instant case, it is clear that appellants' convictions must be sustained. After it was stipulated that the prosecution had presented the quantum of proof adequate to convict, absent a showing of justification *806 or lawful excuse, appellants testified only that they did not actually know the funds available to honor the several checks were insufficient. No evidence was offered as to the condition of the account prior to, at the time of, or following the issuance of the checks. No testimony was presented to show that appellants had even inquired or otherwise attempted to inform themselves of the condition of the account.
In fact, such little evidence as they presented tended to defeat the defense of justification or excusable mistake. The very agreement with the Gershony group offered into evidence by appellants made clear that the corporation of which they were officers and directors was in need of outside capital and that it was anticipated that third parties would "advance cash to IFI for the net payroll." In the face of such actual knowledge of the financial condition of the corporation, appellants' failure to introduce evidence as to what monies, if any, had been advanced by these third parties, and as to what efforts, if any, appellants themselves had made to insure that sufficient funds were in fact available to honor the checks which they personally signed and issued, was tantamount to presenting no defense at all.
At the very least, one who has chosen to pay his employees by checks instead of cash, which are subsequently dishonored, should be prepared to present affirmative evidence that his ignorance of the true state of his bank account was justifiable rather than conscious, negligent or purposeful. He will be chargeable under section 212, subdivision (a) with knowledge of all that he reasonably should have known as well as that which he actually knew. To raise the issue of justification or excuse in a prosecution under this section, he must make some showing that the nonpayment of the checks was the result of circumstances neither foreseeable nor preventable by reasonably prudent investigation or action. No such showing was made in the present case.
The judgment is affirmed.
Fleming, J., concurred.
Roth, P. J., concurred in the judgment.
This agreement is between I F I Industries, Inc., a California Corporation located in Sun Valley, California formerly known as Industrial Fasteners, Inc., hereinafter referred to as I F I and the Gershony Group, a group of private investors represented by Josh Gershony, a management consultant located in Woodland Hills, California, hereinafter referred to as Gershony.
Whereas IFI is desirous of obtaining additional capital to its operators and whereas Gershony is desirous of providing the required capital, this agreement is drawn up as follows:
1. IFI will take immediate steps to obtain the approval of the California Corporation Commissioner to issue a debenture to Gershony of $100,000 at 7% interest due three years after date of issue and convertible at anytime prior to the due date to common stock at the current market price of 12 1/2 per share for a total of 800,000 shares.
2. Upon approval of the Corporation Commissioner, Gershony will make cash available to IFI in a series of $10,000 notes which will come due on dates determined by a mutually agreeable cash flow schedule. This cash flow schedule will be based on certain shipment projections and variations up or down in such shipment projections will be reflected by up or down variations in the cash flow schedule.
3. Pending approval by the Corporation Commissioner, Gershony will advance cash to IFI on a secured basis by one or more of the following methods or by other methods to be determined later:
A Advance cash to IFI for the net payroll and secure such cash by the endorsed payroll checks.
B Advance cash to IFI by the purchase of certain pieces of equipment which will then be leased back to IFI for their use.
C Advance cash to IFI by joint venture certain purchase orders received by IFI which require more than normal cash requirements.
4. The cash requirements estimated by IFI are $10,000 immediately and $40,000 within 30 days. The cash may be replaced by mutual agreement by satisfactory credit arrangement for IFI by Gershony.
5. IFI will attempt, on a best effort basis, to purchase a minimum of 30,000 shares of stock now held by the public for 15 a share total cost including brokerage fees through Dempsey-Tegeler or other authorized broker. This stock will be purchased in the name of Josh Gershony thru IFI and will be paid for by Gershony.
6. Gershony will attempt on a best effort basis to purchase 20,000 shares of stock now held in escrow by Kelly for an amount to be determined by Gershony.
7. Hampton, President of IFI will place the 50,000 shares of stock he holds in escrow in a voters trust to be voted by Gershony.
8. The present IFI board of directors will be replaced by a board consisting of Hampton and Hammonds of IFI, Gershony, and two others to be selected by Gershony.
9. In the event that this agreement is not approved or if it is modified by the Corporation Commissioner, Gershony has the option of voiding this agreement or of submitting a new proposal to be submitted to the Corporation Commissioner.
10. In the event that this agreement is voided for any reason, Gershony will remain in control of the Board of Directors and will have voting rights of Hampton stock until such time as all moneys due Gershony are repaid by IFI.
11. Any promotion stock authorized by the Corporation Commissioner will be issued to Gershony for his disposal. This is estimated at 19,000 shares of IFI.
12. In the event that the balance sheet year audit is materially changed from the represented balance sheet or if the performance of IFI does not follow the reflected sales or profit represented, Gershony has the option to discontinue supplying money and to terminate the agreement at Gershony's option.
The above has been reviewed and approved by the Board of Directors of I. F. I.
FJH
President
DCH
V.Pres. & Secy""
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. "Agreement

=== CASE 2214100 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:42.379019+00 ===

236 Cal.App.2d 683 (1965)
THE PEOPLE ex rel. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
C. TRAVIS ANDERSON et al., Defendants and Respondents.
Civ. No. 11022.
California Court of Appeals. Third Dist.
Aug. 19, 1965.
Harry S. Fenton, Holloway Jones, Jack M. Howard, John P. Horgan and Norval Fairman for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Carr, Kennedy & Asbill, Daniel S. Carlton and Richard J. Asbill for Defendants and Respondents.
PIERCE, P. J.
In this proceeding in eminent domain the state, condemning for a freeway, almost bisected diagonally the Andersons' approximately 150-acre ranch, taking approximately 22 1/2 acres and severing a 72-acre portion (the easterly remainder) from a 54-acre portion (the westerly remainder). The state appeals from an award of $33,630 for the part taken and $37,800 severance damages. Its contentions are (1) that a letter of October 19, 1962, written by a state official, Burton J. Caldwell, was an offer of compromise and not an admission of value and was therefore improperly admitted; and (2) that the trial court inadequately instructed on the subject of "special benefits." We hold, under the evidence, that the court properly admitted the letter into evidence under the rule of People ex rel. Dept. of Public Works v. Forster, 58 Cal.2d 257 [23 Cal.Rptr. 582, 373 P.2d 630], and that any inadequacy of instruction on "special benefits" was not prejudicial. The judgment, therefore, will be affirmed.
The Anderson property in its "before" condition was an irregular (roughly pie-shaped) parcel of land with a 4,000-foot frontage on the east bank of the Sacramento River, lying 1 mile northerly of the City of Anderson and approximately 9 to 10 miles south of Redding. (See sketch.  [fn. *]) The area of its location is known as "Churn Creek Bottom". Its buildings are located in the northeasterly portion of the property. That part of the ranch also has a 700-foot frontage on Churn Creek Road which is a county highway, the main *685 road through the "Bottom" area. Ingress and egress to and from that public road was available to all parts of the ranch through a system of farm roads. The property is within, and gets its water from, Anderson-Cottonwood Irrigation District and before the taking had approximately 70 acres irrigated by a system of gravity flow ditches. It was susceptible to development, however, so that 100 acres could have been utilized to grow irrigated crops.
The ranch was used as a stock ranch and farm and in its "before" stage of development was carrying 100 "animal units" (i.e., one mature cow per acre per year). According
Graphic Material Omitted
*686 to defendants' appraiser, Thomas Linville, the ranch fully developed would support double that number. That witness' overall description of the ranch was: "I think you would class it all as bottom land. There is some river wash. A small amount of gravel and sand in parts of it, but I think generally it is all about as good a bottom land as there is in this part of the country."
The portion of the land lying along the river is subject to periodic overflow when the water reaches flood stage from a release of water over Shasta Dam. Fertility was thereby enhanced through the depositing of silt and this was a benefit to the ranch.
As to the value of the property, the state's appraisal staff had, in 1962, given it the highest "before" valuation which appears in evidence, $240,000; the second highest opinion of value, $210,000, was also that of one of the state's appraisers, Charles Bailey. Defendants' appraiser, Linville, fixed the "before" value at $205,000. The lowest evaluation, $152,000 was stated by Bernard Frese, the other state appraiser.
The 22 1/2 acres being taken by the state for freeway purposes (a part of Interstate 5) runs through the property diagonally from the southeast corner of the property where the freeway crosses the Sacramento River and thence in a straight line northwesterly approximately three-fifths of a mile across the property. (See sketch, supra.) The part taken includes the highway, part of which was being built on an 11-foot fill. It also includes a drainage ditch running along the westerly side of the highway. The ditch is from 30 to 50 feet in width, from 3 to 10 feet in depth. Its function is to intercept drainage water along a length of the freeway and frontage road (to be discussed below) and to discharge these waters into the Sacramento River at the southeast corner of the Anderson property where the freeway crosses the river. Reenforced concrete pipes are being built through the freeway fill to preserve the Andersons' presently unused riparian rights. This basic plan for the freeway "taking" has not changed from its inception.
The condemnation action was filed by the state in January 1963. Various changes, however, designed to mitigate the Anersons' severance damages, occurred both before and after the filing of the complaint. As originally conceived, the plan involved no frontage road extending to the westerly portion of the Anderson place (hereinafter "the westerly remainder") *687 and no underpass or overpass was provided to give ingress and egress between the westerly and easterly remainders. Therefore the state planned to purchase the entire westerly remainder of 54 acres. As stated above, the state's appraisal staff had appraised the Anderson property at $240,000. Under this appraisal an offer was made of $120,000 for the part to be taken plus the western remainder, roughly half the ranch. The Andersons requested a change, stating they wished to continue to operate the property as a ranch and as a unit. They asked the state to leave the westerly remainder and build overpasses across the freeway giving them access to that parcel.
Unwilling to provide an overpass, the state made an alternative proposal which was expressed in Caldwell's letter of October 19, 1962. That letter, admitted into evidence over the state's objection, and the circumstances of its offer and receipt in evidence will be discussed below. It provided, inter alia, for the construction of an underpass so that the Andersons could continue to farm their property as a unit. Although the condemnation action was filed by the state in January 1963, negotiations, according to Anderson, continued until May 1963 for the purchase of the part taken plus the construction by the state of the underpass and other works. In September 1963 the state decided to extend a macadamized frontage road from the northerly boundary of the adjoining Bell property (where, under the original plan, it had ended) to the northerly boundary of the westerly remainder. The frontage road would connect that parcel with a "Knighton Road Interchange" to the north. It was the state's theory at the trial that this extension would preserve substantially the entire value of the westerly remainder and that the construction of an underpass would be unnecessary.
The Andersons and their appraiser did not agree with this theory. Linville testified that the highest and best use of the westerly remainder still would be agricultural but that after the taking it would be economically impossible to farm the property as a unit. To reach the westerly remainder from the easterly remainder when the freeway was built would require travel northerly along the Churn Creek Road to and across Knighton Road Interchange then southerly along the frontage road back to the westerly remainder, a trip of 5 1/2 miles, or a round trip of 11 miles.
Linville appraised the part taken at $33,570 and the severance *688 damage at $44,160, a total of $77,730. He found no special benefits. He divided the severance damages as follows: $29,730 to the westerly remainder and $14,430 to the easterly remainder. (This was at the rate of $550 per acre to the former and $200 per acre to the latter.)
His reasoning was that the westerly remainder in the "after" condition had no value then or in the foreseeable future for any purpose other than farming; that it had no value for residential purposes because: "It is unusual type of property, and it is at the end of a dead-end road, jammed up against a freeway, with a drainage ditch on one side, and about half of it is overflow land, which is going to be awfully hard to develop to anything, and I just don't know of another property like that in the country. I don't think there is one." He also testified that an industrial plant immediately across the river from the westerly remainder would make the use of the property for residential purposes unattractive. The diminution of the value of both the easterly and westerly remainders was attributed (1) to the separation of the properties making it impossible to operate them as a unit, (2) to the increased operating costs due to the irregularly shaped parcels left by the freeway and drainage channel traversing the property diagonally. (See sketch, supra.)
The state produced two appraisers, Bernard Frese of Santa Rosa and Charles Bailey, a former right-of-way agent. These witnesses appraised the value of the "take" at $20,500 and $29,133, respectively. (In 1962 the state's staff appraisers had valued the part taken at the rate of $1,500 per acre, or a total of $33,495, slightly lower than Linville's appraisal.)
The state's appraisers at the trial, for reasons which were widely disparate, agreed that the cutting in two of the Anderson ranch by the freeway and drainage ditch would cause little or no damage. As damage to the easterly remainder, Frese allowed $750 so that Anderson "could rearrange a few of the fences that were left open at the ends. ..." Bailey allowed no damage to that portion of the ranch, his opinion being that it "can be farmed in the after condition just as readily ... as it was before." Regarding the westerly remainder, Frese gave it a value of $45,900 (54 acres at $850 per acre) in the "before" condition, and a value of $43,650 in the "after" condition with the frontage road, a diminution in value of $2,250. The witness did not make clear what the highest and best use of the westerly remainder would be *689 in the "after" condition nor did he explain why it would then be worth $43,650. He testified: "... I did not think that this particular portion attributes [sic] anything in the way of income, from an agricultural standpoint." His statement of uses other than agricultural were hedged in terms of "possibly" and "perhaps," e.g., "I say you could possibly sell gravel from it" or "gravel deposits will some day be in demand, perhaps." "You have heard mention of, oh, well, I suppose recreational use," "or if someone wanted to develop it to some other use," "or maybe a homesite, or something of that nature ... remembering the fact this is subject to inundation, and that is a big hazard, and that is the problem the property suffered." This witness saw special benefits from the construction of a frontage road but stated he would not want to place any dollar benefit on it.
State witness Charles Bailey, on the other hand, took a much more optimistic view of the future of the severed westerly remainder. Bailey did not agree with Frese that it contributed nothing to the value of the ranch from an agricultural standpoint. He testified: "In the before condition this part of the property was in part good agricultural land. In part it was marginal agricultural land." He did not attempt any segregation of values between the several parcels of the ranch, however, but averaged the entire property at $1,300 per acre, including the westerly remainder. With the frontage road constructed, Bailey considered the highest and best use of the land to be residential. The flooding potential he met by finding that the portions subject to flood would be complementary to the lands at higher elevations where the homes could be built. He visualized a boat harbor in conjunction with the residential use. The building of a trailer court he also deemed to be feasible. Bailey stated the westerly remainder to have a market value of $1,300 per acre in the "before" condition and of $1,400 per acre after the taking. He therefore found no severance damage and $5,400 special benefits (54 acres at $100 per acre).
We have deemed this detailed  [fn. 1] delineation of the battle of the experts to be necessary in a proper consideration of both contentions of appellant. We first consider the contention that the Caldwell-to-Carlton letter of October 19, 1962, was improperly admitted into evidence. *690
The letter reads as follows:
"October 19, 1962"
II-Sha-3-A
Right of Way
Parcel 4373
"Mr. Daniel S. Carlton"
Attorney at Law
1415 Court Street
Redding, California
Dear Mr. Carlton:
"As we discussed briefly in your office the first part of this week, I am forwarding to you the State's alternate proposal on the C. Travis Anderson property in Churn Creek Bottom."
"I am enclosing a sketch that will give you a birds-eye view of this proposal. The area to be acquired consists of 22.33 acres which will leave an excess between the proposed highway and the river of 57.54 acres and a remainder on the other side of 72 acres. The State's offer for the strip is $64,095.00."
"To facilitate the property owner's ranch operation after acquisition of this strip, the State, at no expense to the property owner, shall perpetuate the irrigation facilities in the vicinity of Engineer's Station 610+ 00, construct a 10'X12' equipment pass (which would have to be maintained by the property owner after installation) and construct a gravel road from the end of the frontage road to the property owner's existing road in the vicinity of Engineer's Station 607+ 00."
"If you find, after presenting this to the property owner, you would like to discuss it with me further, I will be most happy to do so at your convenience."
Sincerely,
BURTON J. CALDWELL
Associate Right of Way Agent
BJC-fsm
Encl.""
On the first day of the trial and before the letter had been referred to by defendants, the state's attorneys, anticipating its offer, called and examined Eugene Wahl, a civil engineer employed by the Division of Highways, outside the presence of the jury. It was brought out through Mr. Wahl that, as stated above, the state had originally not proposed to construct *691 a frontage road to the northerly boundary of the westerly remainder of the Anderson property but had planned its terminus at the northerly boundary of the Bell property and had planned to buy the westerly remainder.
On cross-examination of Wahl it was developed that when the letter was written in October 1962 the state planned as an "alternate" to leave the westerly remainder and to provide, among other works, the 10'X12' equipment underpass. The estimate of its cost was $21,700.
In a foundation-laying cross-examination of Caldwell (under Code Civ. Proc.,  2055) later in the trial the following further facts were developed: The letter had been preceded by statements theretofore made by Caldwell to defendants' attorney, Daniel Carlton (in connection with negotiations in previous condemnation litigation) that the state could pay no more than its staff's opinion of fair market value for property.  [fn. 2] Caldwell also testified that the letter had been written based upon the appraisal made by the state's staff of appraisers referred to above: he stated that he had "complete" authority to write the letter. The appraisal was not confidential. "The appraisal was there, and it was my duty to get the appraisal, once it was approved, to the property owner." It had been approved by the main right-of-way office in Sacramento. Caldwell affirmed on cross-examination that the letter was written not as an effort to negotiate but as a matter of putting the state's position as to value in the hands of defendants' attorney.
Caldwell testified he had made several mistakes in writing the letter. We will refer to these below.
Both parties rely upon People ex rel. Dept. of Public Works v. Forster, supra, 58 Cal.2d 257. In that condemnation action a letter from a state right-of-way agent to defendants' attorney had stated (p. 260): "The State hereby offers you the sum of $218,000.00 for land and damages. This amount is a compromise figure based on the market value of the parcel as set out in the above mentioned suit." A termination date for the offer was expressed. The introduction of the letter into evidence was objected to upon the ground it was an offer of compromise and, as such, inadmissible. Before ruling, the trial court had heard testimony and argument outside the jury's presence. From the extrinsic evidence so taken the trial court concluded that the letter was not simply an offer *692 of compromise but an independent admission as to the market value of the property. Our Supreme Court (per Justice Schauer) affirmed the judgment. The extrinsic evidence which in the Forster case was held to justify admission of the letter included evidence that previous to the writing of the letter the state right-of-way agent had advised defendants' attorney that the state could only pay what its appraisers had determined the property to be worth. The court in Forster sets forth (on pp. 263- 264) the following rules: (1) That offers of compromise are inadmissible, the reason being that "a person is entitled to endeavor to 'buy his peace' without fear that his offers of compromise for such purpose will be used against him if not accepted. [Citations.] Further, the law favors compromises. [Citations.]" (2) Declarations of fact, however, which are not merely concessions in an offer "... 'but are statements of independent facts, are admissible. ...' [Citations.]" (3) That the question whether a declaration amounts to a mere offer or an admission is to be tested by the rule that " 'a concession which is hypothetical or conditional only can never be interpreted as an assertion representing the party's actual belief, and therefore cannot be an admission; and, conversely, an unconditional assertion is receivable, without any regard to the circumstances which accompany it. ...' "
The trial court in the case at bench applied the test stated in Forster to the facts before it (as recited above) and concluded that the letter was admissible.
In Forster it was held that it was proper for the court to determine in the first instance the preliminary question of the admissibility of the letter by hearing extrinsic evidence outside the presence of the jury. (People ex rel. Dept. of Public Works v. Forster, supra, 58 Cal.2d at p. 260; Code Civ. Proc.,  2102.) That determination having been made and the evidence having been admitted, it then becomes the jury's exclusive province to assess the effect and value of the evidence. (Witkin, Cal. Evidence (1958) p. 620; Code Civ. Proc.,  2061; People v. MacDonald, 24 Cal.App.2d 702, 705 [76 P.2d 121].) In the case at bench part of the extrinsic evidence, as stated above, was heard by the court outside the presence of the jury but that part was thereafter repeated in the jury's presence. The taking of extrinsic evidence in the presence of the jury (after the court had made its preliminary determination of the admissibility of the letter) occurred because parts of the letter were ambiguous. The letter *693 states that the state is making an "alternate proposal." Alternate to what? It states: "The State's offer for the strip is $64,095.00" What strip? These statements being ambiguous, extrinsic evidence to explain their meaning was, of course, proper. It was explained by Caldwell that the proposal was an "alternate" to a plan which would have left the westerly remainder landlocked and valueless and which would have required the state to purchase it. The offered sum ($64,095) for the "strip" was explained to be intended to include both the price for the part taken and for severance damages to both the easterly and westerly remainders under the alternate plan.
The trial court was most liberal in permitting Caldwell to explain--really to contradict--other statements of the letter which would seem to be unambiguous. The declaration that the state would undertake to "perpetuate the irrigation facilities" was permitted to be interpreted as not having been intended to mean that it would perpetuate the Andersons' existing facilities--a gravity flow irrigation ditch system using Anderson-Cottonwood Irrigation District water--but that it would perpetuate the Andersons' riparian rights. Caldwell was also permitted to explain that in speaking of the state's undertaking to "construct a gravel road from the end of the frontage road to the property owner's existing road" (italics supplied) he did not intend to refer to a frontage road at all but only to a "farm service road" on the Anderson property under the underpass then proposed to be built.
The jury was not required to believe Caldwell's asserted "mistakes" or his explanations. It could have believed that the letter meant what the letter said.
[1] When the trier of fact, whether it be the trial court or jury, makes a finding of fact on substantial evidence, it is not the function of an appellate court to review that determination nor do we have the power to do so. (People ex rel. Dept. of Public Works v. Glen Arms Estates, Inc., 230 Cal.App.2d 841, 863-865 [41 Cal.Rptr. 303]; People ex rel. Dept. of Public Works v. Graziadio, 231 Cal.App.2d 525, 532-533 [42 Cal.Rptr. 29].) [2] In the case at bench substantial evidence recited above does support the trial court's determination and the implied finding of the jury. Both the letter itself and the extrinsic evidence which explained it are reasonably susceptible to the interpretation that the state in October 1962 was making not a mere tentative or hypothetical *694 offer to compromise but an independent declaration representing the state's actual belief regarding the market values involved and the "just compensation" properly payable to the Andersons.
[3] Other contentions of the state regarding the admissibility of the letter may be summarily disposed of. It contends the letter had no relevancy because the plan was thereafter changed, abandoning the underpass and providing in lieu thereof a paved frontage road. If, as the state later contended, the building of the frontage road had concededly wiped out all severance damages, then the letter would have been irrelevant. As the state viewed the matter from September 1963 on the provision of a paved frontage road had not only wiped out all severance damages, it had actually benefited the westerly remainder by converting it into prime residential property with a boat harbor potential. But the property owners and their witness did not see it that way. Both Mr. Anderson and Linville testified that the condemned property, a 150-acre ranch operated as a unit and still in the process of development, was a valuable agricultural property suitable for no other use; and that when it was cut in two by the freeway it had been badly damaged. A vital issue between the state and the condemnee had thus been raised, and it was indeed relevant to that issue that the latter could show that until May 1963 the state's appraisal staff had shared the view that this was agricultural property, the integrity of which as such should be preserved and that to achieve that end the state had agreed that an underpass would be built and the existing irrigation system would be perpetuated.
[4] Appellant cites, among other cases, Sacramento etc. Drainage Dist. ex rel. State Reclamation Board v. Reed, 215 Cal.App.2d 60 [29 Cal.Rptr. 847], holding that speculative evidence couched in appraisers' opinions of diminished values occasioned by assumed "prospective purchaser" reactions to damages caused by possible future plans or projects is inadmissible. The rule stated has no applicability here. The rule is based upon reasoning that if such evidence were to be admitted a jury would be permitted to fix severance damages not upon works built under the plan then at issue but upon conjectural future damage caused by other works. That was not the purpose of this evidence and that could not have been its effect upon the jury.
[5] The state also contends that the Caldwell letter was inadmissible because it was based upon the state appraisers' *695 report and that the report was confidential under the attorney-client privilege. Cited is People ex rel. Dept. of Public Works v. Glen Arms Estate Co., supra, 230 Cal.App.2d 841. In that case an appraiser's report had been prepared for and had been communicated to the state's attorneys for their purposes in the litigation and was considered confidential. There also the report was offered in evidence. Here the report was not admitted and was not sought to be admitted. Moreover, the report was not deemed confidential. It was prepared for the purpose of having its contents submitted to the Andersons, and Caldwell testified he was instructed to relate all of the matters to which he testified to the Andersons through their attorney.
[6] A page and a half of the state's opening brief is devoted to its argument that the trial court inadequately instructed on special benefits. Summarized, that argument is: A jury under Code of Civil Procedure section 1248 is required to make three major determinations in an eminent domain proceeding, special benefits being one of them; state witness Bailey testified the frontage road was a $5,400 special benefit; each party is entitled to have the jury instructed on all pleaded "vital" theories supported by evidence (Phillips v. G. L. Truman Excavation Co., 55 Cal.2d 801, 806 [13 Cal.Rptr. 401, 362 P.2d 33]); nine proper instructions were submitted to the trial court in this case; the judge "refused" to give even one of them.
The record shows that the trial judge did instruct on special benefits, although he had mislaid and overlooked the formal instructions submitted by both parties thereon; the judge's informal instruction, somewhat vaguely stated, was given after the oversight was discovered and just before the case was given to the jury.
We hold that if, under the rather peculiar circumstances of this case, more explicit instructions on special benefits should have been given, which is doubtful, the error was harmless because the jury was not misled.
By Code of Civil Procedure section 1248, subdivision 1, the jury must ascertain and assess the value of the property taken. By subdivision 2 of that section, if the property condemned is part of a larger parcel, the jury must also determine and assess "the damages which will accrue to the portion not sought to be condemned, by reason of its severance from the portion sought to be condemned, and the construction of the improvement in the manner proposed by the *696 plaintiff." (Italics supplied.) By subdivision 3 the jury must also ascertain and assess "Separately, how much the portion not sought to be condemned ... will be benefited, if at all, by the construction of the improvement proposed by the plaintiffs." (Italics supplied.) This section further provides that a process of subtraction shall then take place, i.e., special benefits are subtracted from severance damage; the remainder is the amount to be awarded for severance unless the remainder is zero or a minus figure, in which case no severance damages are paid. (Under California law payment for the full market value for the part taken is unaffected by special benefits.)
No case has been cited to us which holds that where something has been inserted into a highway plan solely for the purpose of mitigating severance damages that feature of the plan is to be regarded also as a special benefit. We are not compelled to, and we do not, decide that question here. But we do note that when the only special benefit claimed is some part of the plan of construction which lessens the severance damage, an analysis of the wording of section 1248 will show that literal compliance therewith is difficult, and when, in addition thereto, the appraisers' method of arriving at severance damages has been by ascertaining the "before" and "after" market values of the severed portions to determine the diminution of value due to "the construction of the improvement in the manner proposed by the plaintiff" the arithmetical problem to be performed becomes an impossible one. (Italics supplied.)
Here, the only special benefit claimed was a factor of "the construction of the improvement in the manner proposed" by plaintiff, to wit: the extension frontage road. That extension was designed solely for the purpose of lessening (or, according to the state's theory, obliterating) severance damages to the westerly remainder. Here also every appraiser who testified used the "before" and "after" method of determining severance damages. In their "after" valuation they considered the value of the westerly remainder NOT in a landlocked condition which would have been its situation but for the frontage road; instead they considered its market value WITH the frontage road. Had they considered the value of landlocked land, the "after" value necessarily would have been zero, or nearly so, since the only access thereto would be by boat or helicopter.
Thus in the arithmetical problem of subtraction to be performed *697 by the jury, the minuend included the effect of frontage road as a factor and, in the case of Bailey's testimony, so also did the subtrahend. How then could an accurate remainder, i.e., the sum representing the net severance damage, be obtained? A jury could only have done the arithmetic contemplated by section 1248 accurately by having been first presented with a sum representing the value of the westerly remainder without the frontage road, i.e., in a landlocked situation.
However, we need not struggle herein in the morass thus created and the dilemma thus presented.
During, and towards the close of, the court's instruction of the jury, the record shows the following:
The court said: "The only other thing I wondered if I skipped one on benefits, but I guess not. I told the jury if they felt there was any special benefit as shown by the evidence they could add that to it [that statement was correct], but in reading them over I just had the impression in the back of my mind that I must have skipped one of those instructions, but if I did the Court Reporter will know it, and I am sure it will not be harmful on that matter, because the rule of law can be expressed in one line, and has been expressed, that the jury is to find the value of the property taken, also, if they find damages, the amount of it. If they find benefits, special benefits, the amount of that."
Mr. Horgan, one of the state's attorneys, was the next to speak. The court's quoted statement, although not framed in the form of a question, seems to us to call for an answer if disagreement with the statement was felt. Mr. Horgan did not disagree, neither did he agree. He changed the subject.
The law in California is settled by statute--we think unfortunately--that the giving or refusal of an instruction is deemed excepted to even though no objection to such instruction is made when the instruction is given. (Code Civ. Proc.,  647; Hensley v. Harris, 151 Cal.App.2d 821, 826-827 [312 P.2d 414].) Justice Duniway, in Valentine v. Kaiser Foundation Hospitals, 194 Cal.App.2d 282 [15 Cal.Rptr. 26], quoting Presiding Justice Shinn (in the Hensley case) says (on p. 290): " 'Perhaps it would be better practice to require specific objections to the instructions proposed by one's adversary, but that is not our law nor is it a matter for judicial legislation.' " As pointed out in the Valentine case (on p. 291) in 1957 the Legislature amended Code of Civil Procedure section 607a giving counsel the right, before the *698 commencement of argument, to demand from the court the instructions which are to be given. We are not advised that this information was sought in the case at bench. The court in Valentine further states (on p. 291): "Counsel ought not to sit by while the court is led into giving an erroneous instruction, without in any way calling the error to the attention of the court, and then obtain a reversal and a new trial with all of the delay, possible loss of essential testimony, inevitable fading of memory, and additional expense that attend such a procedure."
"We are told that, in 1955, there were 309 appeals in jury cases in California, and that 44 were reversed for error in instructions. (See 32 State Bar J., p. 129.) We agree with Judge Cunningham, that when a lawyer recognizes an erroneous instruction offered by opposing counsel, it ought to be his duty to call it to the court's attention. (32 State Bar J., pp. 134- 135.) ... ' "A party should not be permitted to remain quiet and take the chance of a favorable verdict, and then, if the verdict is unfavorable, raise the objection on appeal." ' [Citations.]" The quoted statement seems all the more applicable where the court, doubtful of whether he has given an offered instruction, tries to improvise one and falls into error.
The court in Valentine did not hold that the failure to object, when under the circumstances objection seemed called for, constituted a waiver. Its holding was that the error was not prejudicial. We rest our holding upon the same conclusion. There was no harm done here. The jury was not really misled as to the functions it must perform to arrive at a true determination of just compensation.
The state scoffs at the court's informal instruction regarding special benefits as lacking meaning. It certainly did lack definition. But in the context of this case if the jury was not accurately instructed as to how to perform the arithmetic of reaching a sum representing just compensation on the verdict form, then neither had any of the appraisers been informed as to how to present dollar-and-cents evidence which would have permitted the jury to express the arithmetical problem. Nevertheless, the appraisers' methods were understandable, we think the jury understood them, and the judge's instruction was meaningful to the jury in establishing this understanding.
As the case was tried it was obvious that the only possible "special benefit" which was or could be claimed was the inclusion of the frontage road in the state's plan, and it was *699 around the existence of this road that all testimony regarding the "after" value of the westerly remainder revolved. Each of the experts, although apparently experiencing the same difficulty as we do as to how one can subtract "x" from "x" and still get "x," nevertheless knew the value he was giving to the frontage road as a factor in the determination of severance damages, and each was quite clear in expressing his own special theory to the jury. The jury was told by the court how to express its finding in this regard in its verdict. The form of verdict included the following on special benefits:
" 'Three, the special benefits, if any, which will accrue to the remainder of the property ... by reason of the construction of the public improvements, is the sum of,' dollar sign, blank."
The trial court further instructed the jury: "The Foreman will sign the verdict, whatever it is. May I suggest, of course, there must be some value for the [part taken]. Conceivably you might find no damages or no benefits. If you do, put in the word 'none.' Don't just leave it blank. We want the verdict to be full, so where it says 'in the sum of,' dollar sign, 'for damages and benefits,' why, the word 'none' or the figure '0' would be better than just disregarding it entirely in that case."
The jury, heeding that advice inserted the sum $37,800 for severance damages and "None" for special benefits. That meant it had considered the "before" and "after" values of the severed portions with the frontage road and had fixed the severance damages accordingly. The state was not entitled to have the value of the frontage road deducted twice.
The jury clearly had itself appraised the value of the frontage road as a mitigating factor, it had accepted none of the severance damages with-the- road figures stated by the appraisers, it had set its own figure, $37,800. There is no reason to doubt that its deliberation had included a sampling of Mr. Bailey's $5,400 residential-boat-harbor figure. The jury had tasted, but could not swallow it. Our careful analysis of the entire record makes it understandable why it could not--the theory was visionary and speculative.
The judgment is affirmed.
Friedman, J., and Regan, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. See sketch on next page.
[fn. 1]  1. Detailed though our statement of facts has been, we have omitted all reference to "comparable sales" generously used by the appraisers on both sides to buttress their appraisals given.
[fn. 2]  2. Appellant in its brief admits this to be a "well known rule" adopted by the state in acquiring property in eminent domain.

=== CASE 2214102 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:42.41383+00 ===

236 Cal.App.2d 555 (1965)
46 Cal. Rptr. 164
DANIEL BOVE et al., Plaintiffs and Respondents,
v.
RONALD LEE BECKMAN et al., Defendants and Appellants.
Docket No. 27853.
Court of Appeals of California, Second District, Division Three.
August 16, 1965.
*557 Gilbert, Thompson & Kelly and Jean Wunderlich for Defendants and Appellants.
Magana & Olney, Robert M. Kaufman, Daniel C. Cathcart and Ellis J. Horvitz for Plaintiffs and Respondents.
ASHBURN, J.[*]
Daniel Bove brought this action for wrongful death of his wife Maureen. At pretrial it appeared that Mr. and Mrs. Carlson were surviving parents of decedent and the court ordered that they be added as plaintiffs. *558 Judgment was rendered after a nonjury trial in favor of the three plaintiffs in the sum of $9,937.45 against Ronald Lee Beckman, the driver of the automobile which struck and killed Mrs. Bove, and against the owner Earl Beckman in the sum of $5,000. Defendants have appealed.
In this court their counsel rely principally upon the argument that decedent was contributorily negligent and that the presumption of exercise of due care on her part was overthrown by evidence of plaintiffs' own witnesses which established as matter of law such negligence on decedent's part.
[1] Concededly the fact that Mrs. Bove was killed in the accident raises a disputable presumption that she was exercising due care at the moment of the accident and immediately preceding the same. "The conduct of one who is killed in an accident involved in a lawsuit is clothed with the presumption of the exercise of due care. Whatever acts should be done or omitted in the exercise of ordinary care are presumed to have been done or omitted by the decedent. [2] This presumption is evidence which of itself is enough to carry plaintiff's case past a nonsuit unless it is dispelled by evidence produced in plaintiff's behalf. (Citations.) [3] The presumption cannot be overcome by evidence of the adverse party elicited under section 2055, Code of Civil Procedure. (Citations.)" (Orbach v. Zern, 138 Cal. App.2d 178, 181 [291 P.2d 120]. See also 7 Cal.Jur.2d section 402, at pages 324-325.)
[4] This presumption is not dispelled by evidence produced by the opposing party standing alone or by that of plaintiffs' witnesses unless their testimony is wholly irreconcilable with the presumption and not the product of mistake or inadvertence. Gigliotti v. Nunes, 45 Cal.2d 85, 92-93 [286 P.2d 809]: "As expressed in Scott v. Burke (1952) 39 Cal.2d 388, 394 [247 P.2d 313], it is settled law that where alleged negligent acts and conduct of a decedent are at issue before the court and the `testimony respecting such acts and conduct necessarily must be produced by witnesses other than the deceased, ... an instruction that the deceased is presumed to have exercised ordinary care for his own concerns is ... proper' except that if the fact proved by uncontradicted testimony produced by the party seeking to invoke the presumption, `under circumstances which afford no indication that the testimony is the product of mistake or inadvertence ... is wholly irreconcilable with the presumption ... the latter is dispelled and disappears from the case.' *559 ... [T]he rule is established that if such person be deceased or unable to testify by reason of loss of memory, the fact that other witnesses for the parties testify fully as to the acts and conduct of the allegedly negligent person does not deprive the party relying on the presumption of the benefit thereof unless the testimony which he himself produces `under circumstances which afford no indication that the testimony is the product of mistake or inadvertence ... is wholly irreconcilable with the presumption sought to be invoked.'"
On July 9, 1960, a party of four young people consisting of plaintiff Dan Bove (20 years of age), his wife Maureen, Terry Webb and Sharon Dascenzi (who had become Mrs. Sharon Beamer before the trial) were bent upon watching or participating in a run of grunion which was expected in the Huntington Beach area. In a car owned and driven by Terry Webb (then 17 years old) they arrived at Huntington Beach from the north[1] (Buena Park) and turned right or west on Pacific Coast Highway, drove about one to one and a half miles toward Long Beach and parked on the shoulder on the north side of the highway which was in that vicinity straight, level and dry. The night was dark but clear; the time about 10:15 p.m. Many cars were parked on the south side of the highway and some on the north. There was no artificial illumination in the area. The highway was divided into four lanes, with double white line in the middle and broken white line between northerly or west bound lanes, the one adjoining the double line being designated on diagram used at the trial as W-1 or No. 1, and the one immediately adjoining it on the north as W-2 or No. 2; north of this last mentioned lane was a shoulder (width of lane and shoulder being 28 feet); there was no white line separating the lane from the shoulder but the division was plainly apparent to the eye.
There were many people on the beach. Terry Webb parked on the north shoulder and all four occupants alighted on its north side, walked behind the car and started to cross the highway to the beach, not in a crosswalk. As they did so they were in a sort of line parallel to the highway; on the left was Dan Bove, then came Terry Webb, but the women were a *560 little behind the men and to their right with Sharon next to Webb and Mrs. Bove to the right of Sharon. As they came to lane W-2 Bove looked to the right and could barely make out the lights of an east bound car, about a fourth to half a mile away; he then looked left and saw only one car, which was in lane 1 and two or three blocks away. The party stepped a few feet into lane W-2, then moved backward when Bove saw a west bound car which was making an abrupt lane change from lane 1 to lane 2 about two and a half blocks away; another west bound car, the one first seen by Bove, was ahead of the one changing lanes. When Bove saw this he told Terry to stop and put his hand in front of him, whereupon all four persons stepped backward 2 or 3 feet placing them again at the shoulder. In about two or three seconds the auto which had turned into lane 2 passed them travelling at about 65 to 70 miles an hour. It had passed the other car. While the Bove party stood there the women who were still behind and to the east of the men, could be heard talking. As the car in lane 2 (which proved to be defendant's) passed them Bove heard a sound like a tire blowing out. That car pulled over and stopped at the north curb. Sharon said "Where is Maureen at?" The husband then suspected she had been struck and ran toward the car; he could not immediately see her lying in the street some 200 feet away; the auto was a little ahead of her. Mr. Bove said at the trial that his wife was lying entirely in lane W-2. From the time they alighted from the Webb auto until he saw his wife lying in the street he had not seen her though he had heard her voice.
Defendant Ronald Lee Beckman testified that he was driving at "speed limit," 65 miles an hour with his headlights on "low beam." Vehicle Code section 24407 (formerly section 648), dealing with headlight equipment says in subdivision (a) that the uppermost distribution of light shall be such as to reveal persons and vehicles at least 350 feet ahead, and in subdivision (b): "There shall be a lowermost distribution of light, or composite beam so aimed and of sufficient intensity to reveal a person or vehicle at a distance of at least 100 feet ahead. On a straight level road under any condition of loading none of the high intensity portion of the beam shall be directed to strike the eyes of an approaching driver." Accordingly defendant's lights were so designed as to reveal persons at least 100 feet ahead and so adjusted that none of the high intensity portion of the beam should be directed to strike the eyes of an approaching driver. This last *561 clause refers to the approximate height of the eyes of a normal person standing on the ground.
It appears from the testimony of Terry Webb that he saw no west bound car except the one in lane W-1. Mrs. Beamer said that before she started the second time to cross the highway she looked to her left and saw no cars coming until she saw a car in lane 2 "maybe four feet" from her; it passed quite close to her, about 2 or 3 feet away: "I stepped back, and then I felt kind of relieved that I just missed it...." So far as appears none of that party except Bove saw the defendant's car approaching and the low beam suggests the reason.
[5] It is a fair assumption (in aid of the presumption of due care) that Maureen Bove looked first to her left, the direction from which danger was to be apprehended and, being partially behind the two men and probably of shorter stature, and because of the low beam of the approaching car's lights, saw no vehicle coming, looked then to the right and, seeing no danger approaching, stepped into lane W-2 and was immediately struck by defendant's car travelling at high speed in that lane and with lights on low beam. It cannot be inferred that those lights would disclose decedent at a distance of more than 100 feet or that she necessarily should have seen the car at a greater distance. Traveling 95 feet per second (when going 65 miles an hour) the defendant's car approached and passed so close and fast that Mr. Bove, standing 2 or 3 feet away from it, heard a sound like the blowout of a tire as the car passed. Mrs. Beamer said substantially the same thing. Terry Webb said that before the accident he saw no car in any lane other than lane 1; that he heard the sound like a tire blowout, did not see the car but felt its breeze as it passed him. The presumption is that decedent did whatever a careful person would have done in her situation and the acts above suggested are embraced within the presumption. (Orbach v. Zern, supra, 138 Cal. App.2d 178, 181-182; Wiswell v. Shinners, 47 Cal. App.2d 156, 160 [117 P.2d 677].)
In the group of plaintiffs' witnesses there was no one who saw Mrs. Bove from the time they started across the highway the second time and the moment when they saw her lying on the ground unconscious. Defendant Beckman testified that he did not see decedent until a face appeared in the windshield; that he heard a thump simultaneously; she seemed to ride on *562 his car; "a slight riding," not "very long"; "it may have been just an instant or it may have been longer"; the face disappeared and he thought he was running over decedent. None of this is inconsistent with the presumption of decedent's due care.
[6] The defense relied upon two theories of indisputable negligence on Mrs. Bove's part. It is said that this accident occurred between intersections in a 65 mile speed zone and that decedent as a pedestrian was obliged to yield the right of way to the automobile, relying upon section 21954 Vehicle Code (formerly section 562) which says: "(a) Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. (b) The provisions of this section shall not relieve the driver of a vehicle from the duty to exercise due care for the safety of any pedestrian upon a roadway." The argument seems to overlook the provisions of subdivision (b) just quoted. It also disregards such decisions as Jacoby v. Johnson, 84 Cal. App.2d 271, 274-275 [190 P.2d 243], wherein it is said: "Subdivision (a) of section 562 of the Vehicle Code requires that every pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point other than that marked with a crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, shall yield the right of way to vehicles. This provision is qualified, however, by subdivision (b) of the same section, to the effect that the requirement of subdivision (a) `shall not relieve the driver of a vehicle from the duty to exercise due care for the safety of any pedestrian upon a roadway.' [7] ... Although a pedestrian in crossing a roadway at a point other than a crosswalk is required to yield the right of way to an oncoming vehicle, he nevertheless may recover damages if injured while the vehicle is being operated at an excessive speed. (Genola v. Barnett, 14 Cal.2d 217, 223 [93 P.2d 109].)" To same effect see Douglas v. Hoff, 82 Cal. App.2d 82, 87 [185 P.2d 607]; Genola v. Barnett, 14 Cal.2d 217, 223 [93 P.2d 109]; Biggar v. Carney, 181 Cal. App.2d 22, 28 [5 Cal. Rptr. 94].
[8] When it is recalled that defendant was traveling 65 miles an hour, the statutory limit (according to his own testimony), or 70 miles as Mr. Bove saw it, add that his lights were on low beam all the way and afforded a forward vision of only about 100 feet, which would be covered in one second, there seems to be no escape from the conclusion that he was *563 driving at a negligent and excessive speed which was inconsistent with any right of way that he might otherwise have had.
[9] Wooldridge v. Mounts, 199 Cal. App.2d 620, 624-625 [18 Cal. Rptr. 806]: "The applicable section of the Vehicle Code, section 21954 (formerly Veh. Code, § 562), requires `Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk ... shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.' It does not follow from this section, however, that every pedestrian who gets hit by a vehicle while failing to yield the right-of-way is guilty of contributory negligence as a matter of law.... [10] In Francis v. City & County of San Francisco, 44 Cal.2d 335 [282 P.2d 496], wherein a judgment for the defendant was reversed, it is said, at pages 339-340: "`It is usually a question for the jury and not for the court whether a pedestrian has used due care in crossing the street and in making the decision that he can cross with safety. There is no rule of law that irrespective of existing circumstances a pedestrian must look `continuously' or be arbitrarily adjudged guilty of contributory negligence. [Citing cases.] [11] Neither the pedestrian nor the driver of an automobile has a superior right to the use of the street. (Burgesser v. Bullocks, 190 Cal. 673, 675 [214 P. 649].) Each must exercise the care required of a reasonable and prudent person under the existing circumstances. [12] Even where a right of way is given by statute, if conditions so require it to avoid injury to others, the right of way must be yielded. No general rule may be laid down which will fit all circumstances as to the duty of care required of a pedestrian in crossing a street.'" (See also Francis v. City & County of San Francisco, 44 Cal.2d 335, 339 [282 P.2d 496]; Jones v. Wray, 169 Cal. App.2d 372, 378-382 [337 P.2d 226].) We do not consider authorities cited by appellants to be to the contrary of the view we have just expressed; mainly they are distinguishable upon their facts.
[13] A mere mistake of a pedestrian who looks as required and makes an error in appraising the situation does not convict him or her of negligence. "Whether a mistake in judgment by a pedestrian when crossing a street, as to the speed and danger of an approaching vehicle constitutes contributory negligence is a question for the jury. (Kirk v. Los Angeles Ry. Corp., 26 Cal.2d 833, 839 [161 P.2d 673, 164 A.L.R. 1].)" (Rios v. Bennett, 88 Cal. App.2d 919, 922-923 [200 P.2d 73].)
*564 Appellants' other major contention is that the accident occurred in lane W-1, not in W-2; that defendant left Huntington Beach in lane W-2 but soon switched to W-1 to pass another car that was travelling in W-2; that he did pass it on his right, and struck decedent when she was in lane W-1. [14] This merely raises a conflict in the evidence and renders applicable the rule that "The acceptance or refusal to accept an inference reasonably deducible from the evidence, or the acceptance of one of several conflicting inferences reasonably deducible therefrom, is a function committed to the discretion of the trier of fact and may not be determined as a matter of law." (Hixson v. International Harvester Co., 219 Cal. App.2d 88, 93 [32 Cal. Rptr. 905].) [15] In other words, evidence conflicting with the presumption of due care is to be weighed with the presumption (itself evidence) and all other proofs supporting it (Scott v. Burke, 39 Cal.2d 388, 399 [247 P.2d 313]; Laird v. T.W. Mather, Inc., 51 Cal.2d 210, 221 [331 P.2d 617]; Kastner v. Los Angeles Metropolitan Transit Authority, (63 Cal.2d 52, 59 [45 Cal. Rptr. 129, 403 P.2d 385]), and the presumption is not dispelled by testimony produced by the opposing party. 7 Cal.Jur.2d section 402, at pages 325, 326: "But the defendant's contradictory evidence of itself, without evidence introduced by the plaintiff, is not sufficient to overcome the presumption as a matter of law so as to entitle him to a directed verdict. Notwithstanding such contradictory evidence, the disputed fact as to the decedent's contributory negligence remains for determination as a question of fact upon all the evidence, including the presumption." (See also Smellie v. Southern Pac. Co., 212 Cal. 540, 553 [299 P. 529]; Bradner v. Vasquez, 43 Cal.2d 147, 153 [272 P.2d 11]; Berger v. Limon, 214 Cal. App.2d 149, 151 [29 Cal. Rptr. 483].)
The judgment is affirmed.
Shinn, P.J., and Ford, J., concurred.
A petition for a rehearing was denied September 3, 1965, and appellants' petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied October 13, 1965.
NOTES
[*]   Retired Justice of the District Court of Appeal sitting under assignment by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.
[1]  In that area the coastline runs from southeast to northwest and the highway roughly parallels it. For convenience counsel at the trial treated the highway as running east and west, with the ocean on the south and the oil wells on the north. We follow this expedient of convenience.

=== CASE 2214105 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:42.452862+00 ===

236 Cal.App.2d 106 (1965)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
CARLOS ALVAREZ, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 2232.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Dist.
July 26, 1965.
John Stanton, under appointment by the District Court of Appeal, for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and Leslie F. Bell, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
CONLEY, J.  [fn. *]
The defendant, Carlos Alvarez, was convicted of burglary. He was granted probation subject to certain conditions, but has nevertheless appealed.
[1] There is ample evidence to warrant his conviction. The burglarized place of business is a television and appliance repair shop in Oceanside conducted by Myron T. Coleman, Jr.; the building is a converted warehouse with a conventional front door and a rear overhead door. In his business, Mr. Coleman uses a white truck with the words "Coleman's Service" stenciled on it. On Saturday, September 19, 1964, he closed the shop at 12:15 p.m. and personally locked all the doors, leaving the truck parked in front of the store with the keys in a desk inside the building.
When Mr. Coleman and his son returned to the repair shop the next day between 11 and 11:30 a.m., they noticed that the security patrol card was not in its usual position in the door *108 jamb but had fallen to the ground; this was indicative of the fact that someone had opened the door after the store had been closed. Mr. Coleman had given no one permission to enter the building between the closing time on Saturday and when it was opened on Sunday. The proprietor found that there were some articles missing, including four rings, a radio and 3 television sets, consisting of a charcoal grey Westinghouse, a brown set, and a new bright gold Magnavox with a handle on the top. The rings had been left in their boxes in a larger cardboard box when the shop was closed. The missing radio was a G.E. "Cross-Country" transistor model which he had received for repair on the previous day. Further investigation by Mr. Coleman revealed that a pair of greasy khaki-colored Marine-type overalls, which had been worn by one of the workmen in the shop, was missing.
The truck which had been left at the front of the store was gone also, and its keys were not where Coleman had left them when he closed the place of business on Saturday.
A neighbor called Mr. Coleman's attention to the fact that there were several cartons propped up against the side of the building within about 5 feet of a window which opened outward and which was wide enough to permit a man to crawl through it. Mr. Coleman did not see his truck again until September 21st when he visited the junk yard where it was impounded. It had been discovered by the police up a dirt road in a deserted part of the town.
One Elidia Najera, who lives in Oceanside with her brother-in-law and sister, the Fred Felans, testified that on the morning of September 20, 1964, at about 6 a.m., the defendant, Carlos Alvarez, knocked at the door of the residence. He was wearing Marine-style khaki coveralls which were greasy and dirty; he said he wanted to speak with Fred Felan and appellant was taken into their bedroom.
Enedina Felan, Fred's wife, testified that early that Sunday morning appellant came to her house and entered the bedroom shared by her and her husband. She recognized his voice but did not actually see him, as she was "half-asleep." He asked if he might leave some articles in the garage, and she said, "Yes." The Felans were well-acquainted with Alvarez and they had been with him and his wife on the night before, having driven into town in appellant's Cadillac car; they had stayed awhile in a bar and the Felans then returned in a taxi to their residence.
Later that Sunday morning, Mrs. Felan looked into her *109 garage before her husband had a chance to do so, and she then noticed some television sets covered by a blanket, which had not been in the garage the day before. Later, Mrs. Felan also discovered a transistor radio which was People's Exhibit 4, in a corner of the garage under a sea bag. She took it into the kitchen and telephoned the police. They took it from her and it was introduced into evidence at the trial. She also found a blue book under the sea bag which she gave to the police.
Her husband, Fred Felan, testified that Carlos Alvarez talked with him on Sunday, September 20th, around noon at his home. Before that time on that morning, Felan had been in his garage and he then noticed a transistor radio under a blanket, together with three television sets, and a TV repair book that had not been there before that date. Mr. Felan said he did not know how the television sets got there, but he recognized People's Exhibits 1 and 3 being similar to the sets he had seen in his garage on September 20th. He talked with appellant on the Sunday in question about the television sets, and the appellant stated that he got them from his boss and was going to repair them to be sold at a low price. On that same day in the evening, while Felan watched, appellant removed the television sets from the garage.
A police officer, Richard Green, talked with Mr. Coleman regarding the details set forth in the police crime report and spoke also with John Pike, a used car dealer, to whom he had been referred. Pike stated that a man had been in his lot on business on the 21st of September and had told him that a friend of his had left several television sets in his garage. The man had a black eye and worked at Camp Pendleton. Green contacted the Criminal Investigation Section at Camp Pendleton, which located Fred Felan as the man in question. Officer Green talked with Felan and learned that Carlos Alvarez had left the television units in Felan's garage and had removed them in his Cadillac on Sunday, September 20th. Green also spoke to Mrs. Felan and Elidia Najera at their home, and they told him what they knew about the television sets.
The police officer then found the address of appellant at the Oceanside post office, and went to his home at about 2 p.m. on the 23rd of September, intending to talk with him concerning the burglary. Upon arrival he went to the front door of the residence where he entered into conversation with *110 Mrs. Alvarez. He identified himself as a policeman and asked if her husband was at home. She answered that he was not there but was at his place of employment. Mrs. Alvarez asked Officer Green the reason he wished to see her husband, and he stated that it was with regard to the burglary of some television sets. She then said that her husband had given her one on the 21st of September. Green saw an operating television set from the doorway and asked if it was the one. When she said, "Yes," he noted that the machine fitted the description of one of the articles that had been stolen from Coleman's Service. With the consent and permission of Mrs. Alvarez, Green entered the home and while he was there he asked if he could take the set to headquarters for identification. Mrs. Alvarez gave an affirmative response, with the consequence that Green put the set in the patrol car. He then mentioned to Mrs. Alvarez that two television sets were still missing. She said that her husband had hidden the keys to their car, but she had found them and would check the car. She opened the trunk, and the missing Magnavox was there. Mr. Green asked Mrs. Alvarez' permission to take the Magnavox to police headquarters and Mrs. Alvarez agreed, without objection or argument. Officer Green took the two television units to the police department where they remained until they were used at the preliminary hearing and at the trial.
On September 23, 1964, Green talked with the appellant at the police station. He first informed him of his constitutional rights, that he did not have to make any statement, that he was entitled to the services of a lawyer, and that anything he said might be used against him. No threats were made or promises of reward. He asked the defendant whether there was anyone else who should be charged and the appellant said, "I'll take this myself. I have in the past."
On September 24th, appellant made a free and voluntary written statement in Green's presence. Although this writing had been lost at the time of the trial, the substance of the statement, as related by Green on the witness stand, was that on the Saturday evening in question the defendant was at the Felan residence, and that a Marine, who was also there, asked him if he could sell some television sets for him; appellant said that he told the Marine that he was a handyman, that he had had some prior experience in handling secondhand goods and that the sets would have to be repaired before being sold. He also stated that he had seen the sets at the Felan residence on that Saturday evening. It is clear that *111 the statement made by him was freely and voluntarily given after he had been informed of his constitutional rights.
Basing his contention upon the principles set forth in cases such as People v. Haven, 59 Cal.2d 713 [31 Cal.Rptr. 47, 381 P.2d 927] and People v. Shelton, 60 Cal.2d 740 [36 Cal.Rptr. 433, 388 P.2d 665], the appellant contends that the court erred in receiving evidence concerning the television sets which were removed from the defendant's home; in this connection he claims that Officer Green's entry was an unreasonable search and seizure, that there was no justification for his entry into the home in the absence of a search warrant and that the People did not meet the burden of proving a valid consent to enter the house. The contention is without merit.
It cannot be doubted that at the time he went to the defendant's house Officer Green had sufficient information to constitute reasonable and probable cause for believing that appellant had committed a felony; he had seen the burglary report which listed the television sets and the Marine-type coveralls; he knew of appellant's appearance at the Felan home, that he was dressed in the coveralls, and that he there requested permission to leave the television sets; he knew of the storage of the property by the defendant and the removal of the sets in the defendant's car by the appellant himself.
It was held in the case of People v. Michael, 45 Cal.2d 751, 754 [290 P.2d 852], that it is proper for a police officer to seek interviews with suspects or prime witnesses in a criminal investigation.
"Thus, it is not unreasonable for officers to seek interviews with suspects or witnesses or to call upon them at their homes for such purposes. Such inquiries, although courteously made and not accompanied with any assertion of a right to enter or search or secure answers, would permit the criminal to defeat his prosecution by voluntarily revealing all of the evidence against him and then contending that he acted only in response to an implied assertion of unlawful authority."
When Officer Green arrived at the home and went to the front door he was met by the defendant's wife, who talked freely and voluntarily. She said that her husband was at work and then wanted to know why Officer Green wished to see him. When she was told that he wanted to ask about a burglary involving television sets, she volunteered that her *112 husband had given her a set within the last few days. This set was clearly visible through the doorway.
Officer Green had every right to talk to Mrs. Alvarez. [2] As is said in People v. Carter, 48 Cal.2d 737, 746 [312 P.2d 665]: "When the husband is absent from the home, it is the wife who controls the premises, the ordinary household property, the family automobile, and with her husband's tacit consent determines who shall and who shall not enter the house on business or pleasure and what property they may take away with them. [Citation.] When the usual amicable relations exist between husband and wife [citations], and the property seized is of a kind over which the wife normally exercises as much control as the husband, it is reasonable to conclude that she is in a position to consent to a search and seizure of property in their home. If Mrs. Carter freely consented to the removal of defendant's property, there was no unreasonable search or seizure. [Citations.]"
And in People v. Dominguez, 144 Cal.App.2d 63, 65 [300 P.2d 194], it is said: "It is usual for the wife in the home, while the husband is away, to determine whether visitors may enter the home. Here the wife gave her express permission. This eliminates all questions of fraud, force or trespass. [Citations.]"
Furthermore, it can scarcely be contended that a search was necessary or that the television set was in any sense hidden. People v. West, 144 Cal.App.2d 214, 219-220 [300 P.2d 729], holds that things that are open to view do not require a search. [3] A search implies a prying into hidden places for something that is concealed, something that has been intentionally put out of the way. (See also People v. Holloway, 230 Cal.App.2d 834, 839 [41 Cal.Rptr. 325]; People v. Martin, 45 Cal.2d 755, 762 [290 P.2d 855]; Mardis v. Superior Court, 218 Cal.App.2d 70, 74 [32 Cal.Rptr. 263]; People v. Norton, 209 Cal.App.2d 173, 176- 177 [25 Cal.Rptr. 676].)
[4] The officer did not conduct a search when he observed from outside the appellant's house through the open door one of the stolen television sets, nor did he "seize" the television set, which would presuppose a forceful dispossession. There was here a voluntary surrender and not a seizure (People v. West, supra, 144 Cal.App.2d 214, 220; People v. Reed, 188 Cal.App.2d 395, 410 [10 Cal.Rptr. 536].) [5] Inasmuch as the officer was justifiably at appellant's home, observed from outside of the home one of the stolen television *113 sets, and was invited into the house by appellant's wife where she freely consented to his removal of the set, there was no violative angle to what was done by the officer, and the mere fact that he did not have a search warrant is not an answer to the problem of the admission of the evidence. (People v. Winston, 46 Cal.2d 151, 163 [293 P.2d 40].)
As the taking of the television sets to police headquarters was accomplished under the factual conditions above described, there was no infringement of the defendant's constitutional rights.
[6] It is pointed out by appellant that the officer, in part of his testimony at least, was not specific and certain with respect to the exact language used by Mrs. Alvarez in inviting him to enter the house. The trial court, however, took over the questioning of the officer with respect to this matter and it appears that there was sufficient evidence to justify the conclusion of the trier of fact that she gave permission to him to enter the home and to take the television sets to the police station. These were questions of fact, and we believe that the evidence supports the conclusion that the officer was not only asked into the house but was given express approval for the removal of the stolen television sets by Mrs. Alvarez.
[7] The appellant further suggests that because the alleged search and seizure was not, as he contends, constitutionally justified, appellant's statement made on the 24th day of September was "a fruit of the poisonous tree" and, therefore, inadmissible. (Silverthorne Lumber Co., Inc. v. United States, 251 U.S. 385 [40 S.Ct. 182, 64 L.Ed. 319, 24 A.L.R. 1426]; People v. Gale, 46 Cal.2d 253 [294 P.2d 13].) This contention does not find support in the record. The statement made by the appellant was properly received in evidence as he had been previously advised of his constitutional rights. It was made by him voluntarily and without improper inducement or promise of reward. The removal of the television sets was with the consent and approval of Mrs. Alvarez and was entirely proper. There can be no valid objection to the receipt in evidence of the statement made by appellant.
The judgment is affirmed.
Brown (Gerald), P. J., and Coughlin, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Assigned by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.

=== CASE 2214116 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:42.651044+00 ===

236 Cal.App.2d 578 (1965)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
VERNIE MONROE HUDGINS, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 9527.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Three.
Aug. 17, 1965.
Luke McKissack, under appointment by the District Court of Appeal, for Defendant and Appellant
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and Paul N. Wenger, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent. *580
SHINN, P. J.
In a trial by jury appellant Hudgins was convicted of second degree murder of Edward Simmons and of violation of section 12021 of the Dangerous Weapons' Control Law ( 12000 et seq. Pen. Code); he was acquitted of a charge of burglary, consisting of entering the house of his wife, Betty, with intent to commit murder, and of a charge of assault with a deadly weapon upon Betty. Appellant was accused of having suffered four prior convictions of felony, which he admitted; he was sentenced for the two offenses of which he was convicted, and appealed from the judgment. We appointed counsel.
The grounds of appeal are (1) the court erred in failing to instruct as requested by appellant upon self-defense and manslaughter (2) the court instructed erroneously in the law of murder of the second degree (3) the court instructed and the prosecutor commented improperly upon the failure of appellant to testify and (4) appellant was improperly sentenced for both offenses of which he was convicted.
On or about April 19, 1962, appellant's wife, Betty, was severely beaten by appellant and was hospitalized from Friday until Monday. In the following week, with appellant in court, Betty obtained an order of the superior court by which appellant was restrained from molesting her and from going into the home. Thereafter appellant phoned his wife several times a day, threatening bodily harm to her and to anyone she had any connection with and saying "I have a tool that will fix you." Appellant was also seen prowling around his wife's house, which she operated as a nursing home for elderly people. Mrs. Hudgins spent the evening of May 12 with Edward Simmons, returning to her home with Simmons about 1:45 a.m. May 13th. They were let into the house by Mrs. Turner, an attendant, who then returned to her bedroom, next to the kitchen. Mrs. Hudgins and Simmons went to the kitchen where Mrs. Hudgins put water on the stove for coffee; she went upstairs to attend to a patient, leaving Simmons reading a magazine. Soon thereafter appellant crashed through a plate glass window into the living room. Mrs. Turner ran into the hallway and observed that appellant had some object in his hand. Mrs. Hudgins came to a stairway landing and saw Mrs. Turner and appellant standing at the foot of the stairs; appellant asked "Where is that man?", and charged through Mrs. Turner's room into the kitchen. No voices from the kitchen were heard, but there came a rumbling noise like furniture being overturned, followed *581 by three shots. Appellant returned to the hallway and demanded that Mrs. Turner tell him where his wife was; Mrs. Turner indicated the upstairs, and left the scene. Appellant ran upstairs and broke into several rooms of patients seeking his wife, and in entering the rooms he injured several of the door jambs. Mrs. Hudgins endeavored to call the police and then locked herself in a bathroom. She came out of the bathroom and met appellant, who waved a small pistol at her and forced her to go with him down into the kitchen. Furniture in the kitchen had been overturned; the body of Simmons lay in the adjoining service porch. Appellant threatened his wife with the gun, pointing it directly at her throat, and said: "See what I did to your boyfriend; that is what I am going to do to you." Mrs. Hudgins persuaded appellant not to kill her and appellant left the house with the gun. Police officers came and took Simmons to a hospital, where he soon expired. When the officers came they found Simmons lying on his side; he had been shot through the head above the ear; directly beneath his head a bullet was lodged in the woodwork; two other bullet holes were found in the wall of the service porch; on the top of Simmons' head was a laceration some four inches in length which went clear through the scalp.
In the morning of May 13th appellant surrendered to the police. He was interviewed by Officers Childers and Collins on the street and in a police car. He made statements to one or the other of the officers in substance as follows: asked where the gun was he said he dropped it in the struggle and it would be found somewhere around the house; scratches on his face and hands were received in the struggle; he said "I guess I really messed up this time"; he asked "Is Eddie going to be all right" and when told Eddie was dead he said "I am sorry. I didn't intend to do anything like that" and when asked whether he intended to kill Betty, he said "Of course not." To the question whether Eddie and his wife had been having affairs appellant gave no answer; when asked whether there was any possible explanation of what he did, he said he could not possibly answer that on the ground it might incriminate him. Appellant was not informed of his right to remain silent and to have the assistance of counsel.
[1] Appellant's counsel, a deputy public defender, requested instructions on self-defense and voluntary manslaughter, which were refused. Contending it was error to refuse the instructions, appellant refers to People v. Carmen, *582 36 Cal.2d 768 [228 P.2d 281]; People v. Modesto, 59 Cal.2d 722 [31 Cal.Rptr. 225, 382 P.2d 33] and People v. Lewis, 186 Cal.App.2d 585 [9 Cal.Rptr. 263] for the proposition that a defendant is entitled to instructions upon any theory of defense having support in the evidence, however weak that evidence may be. This, of course, is a familiar rule, but it does not aid appellant.
To have instructed on self-defense would have suggested to the jury that in the court's opinion it would be reasonable for the jury to find that Simmons attacked appellant and that appellant used only such force as reasonably appeared to be necessary to repel the attack. The reasonable inferences from the physical facts were that appellant attacked Simmons, there was a struggle, appellant fired two shots at Simmons which missed, hit him on the head with the gun, knocked him to the floor, and as he lay on the floor on his side, shot him through the head.
The right of the accused to have the jury instructed upon every theory of his innocence of the crime charged does not extend to a claim of self-defense based upon purely imagined facts or upon inferences that could not be drawn by rational minds. And jurors should not be encouraged to draw unreasonable inferences. The right of the accused is not superior to the right of the People to have the jury properly instructed. The evidence of the prosecution, and there was none other as to the circumstances of the killing, was such as to preclude an inference, or even a faint suspicion that appellant acted in self-defense. The requested instruction on that unavailable defense was properly refused.
[2] Equally untenable is the contention that the jury should have been instructed in the law of manslaughter. The argument of appellant is stated in the brief as follows: "It is clear from the evidence that the events culminating in the death of Mr. Simmons were the outgrowth of a saturating jealousy infused in the defendant by his wife of over five years' standing, and were brought to a head when her male companion brought Mrs. Hudgins home to a sleeping boarding house in the wee hours of the morning of May 13th, 1962. The defendant could contain his jealousy no longer and broke into the house in pursuit of the person he reasonably felt was his wife's paramour. This was a tale as old as life itself."
Some additional facts should be stated. Mrs. Hudgins testified that when she and appellant married she was operating a *583 boarding house for elderly people. She and appellant had numerous battles. They were separated a short time in April when appellant was away from the home; soon after he returned he assaulted her, knocked her down three times and caused injuries which sent her to the hospital. Appellant was violently jealous of everyone with whom she was associated. In his threats he named Floyd Eddisen, with whom his wife had not gone out, and other persons. A Mrs. Payne, who had worked for Mrs. Hudgins testified for the defense that she had heard Mrs. Hudgins tell appellant that she had had affairs with one Floyd Eddisen and "two or three other different names," that Mrs. Hudgins told her that she had told appellant she had driven down the street picking up men for her entertainment, and that she said she had told her husband these things because he threatened her. Mrs. Hudgins denied having made any of these statements.
Murder is the unlawful killing of a human being with malice aforethought. (Pen. Code,  187.) Under the facts of the present case, it would be the killing of a human being with malice if done without considerable provocation, or where the circumstances of the killing showed an abandoned and malignant heart. In either situation malice is implied (Pen. Code,  188.). Manslaughter is the unlawful killing of a human being without malice. (Pen. Code,  192.) Therefore, in order to avoid an implication of malice and make the killing of Simmons manslaughter, rather than murder, it was necessary that facts be shown which would, at least, constitute considerable provocation for the crime.
The provocation urged in the trial, and now asserted, is jealousy--not of anyone in particular, but of all persons with whom appellant's wife was associated. This jealousy led appellant to a violent assault upon his wife, to arming himself, and making threats several times a day, while living away from home, of bodily injury to his wife and to other persons. No reason for this jealousy is found in the record, other than the taunts to which Mrs. Payne testified, which Mrs. Hudgins denied. There was no evidence of misconduct on the part of Mrs. Hudgins. The restraining order did not prevent appellant from threatening his wife. While he did not enter the house until the night of the murder he lurked about and spied upon his wife. On the occasion of the killing he was watching the house after midnight, armed with an automatic pistol, knowing, no doubt, that his wife was away, and prepared to break into the house upon her return. As stated in *584 appellant's brief (supra) "The defendant could contain his jealousy no longer and broke into the house in pursuit of the person he reasonably felt was his wife's paramour." It is contended that the killing under these circumstances could reasonably have been determined to be voluntary manslaughter, or a killing "upon a sudden quarrel or heat of passion." (Pen. Code,  188).
An instruction on manslaughter would have effectually informed the jury that, in the opinion of the court, there was evidence upon which they could find that the killing was upon a sudden quarrel or heat of passion. There was no evidence of a sudden quarrel, but only proof of a violent attack by an armed man upon one who was unarmed and who made a futile attempt to save his own life. There was no sudden heat of passion, but only evidence of a persistent, brooding jealousy which spurred appellant to a decision to arm himself and lie in wait for a victim. All the evidence indicated it was not a sudden, impetuous decision, acted upon without time and opportunity for reflection and the cooling off of suddenly aroused emotion. It was a decision reached after long deliberation and meditation, and careful preparation to carry into execution the threats appellant had repeatedly uttered. Upon these facts the killing was not manslaughter; it was, at the least, murder of the second degree (Pen. Code,  188).
The request for an instruction in manslaughter was properly refused. (People v. Sutic, 41 Cal.2d 483 [261 P.2d 241]; People v. Farrington, 213 Cal. 459 [2 P.2d 814]; People v. Ashland, 20 Cal.App. 168 [128 P. 798].)
[3] The court instructed in the law of murder of the first degree and also gave the instruction on second degree murder set out in the margin.  [fn. 1]*585
The instruction is criticized as an incorrect definition of murder of the second degree since the reference to other felonies would have permitted the jury to find that appellant entered the house with intent to commit a felonious assault upon Simmons, and to determine from that fact that the killing was murder of the second degree. It is argued that the instruction, as thus understood, would have permitted the jury to disregard the circumstances of the homicide, and any evidence of great provocation, or sudden quarrel or heat of passion which might reduce the homicide to manslaughter. It is a plausible argument, as clearly shown by Professor Perkins. (Perkins on Criminal Law (1957) p. 36.)
Although to be technically correct any instruction on the felony-murder rule should have made it clear that an assault upon Simmons contemporaneous with the shooting would not be a felony which would make the killing murder of the second degree, we believe it highly improbable that the lack of clarification would have influenced the thinking of the jury in the slightest. When the actions of appellant are reviewed, his breaking into the house, rushing to the kitchen, striking the blow which knocked Simmons to the floor, firing the shot which killed him, we find all the elements of murder of the first degree established with certainty. The jury treated appellant with leniency in acquitting him of first degree murder. (People v. Gingell, 211 Cal. 532 [296 P. 70]; People v. Smith, 229 Cal.App.2d 511 [40 Cal.Rptr. 399].)
[4] In the discussion which follows we do not assume that any instruction on the felony-murder rule should have been given, but we find it proper to comment on the one that was given. The portion of the instruction which preceded the words "in any of the following cases," followed by the paragraphs numbered 1, 2 and 3, was a good instruction, suitable to be given in any case in which an instruction on second degree murder is required. But the addition of the numbered paragraphs spoiled what would otherwise have been a good instruction by the qualification placed upon the earlier statements and by the errors in the added material.
Paragraph 1 is a correct statement of the law but it was out of place in the present case. If there had been a question whether the actions of appellant were "dangerous to life" and were known by him to be dangerous, the instruction would have served a purpose, but submitting that question to the jury when the uncontradicted evidence was that appellant knocked Simmons to the floor and shot him through the *586 head, was a violation of the fundamental rule that instructions should be limited to factual questions presented by the evidence.
[5] Paragraph 2 purports to instruct on malice. It was not even a good instruction on malice. It states, in a backhanded way, that a killing is with malice if the circumstances show an abandoned and malignant heart. It fails to state that malice is implied, also, when no considerable provocation for a killing is shown. Paragraph 2 was unnecessary and invited confusion.
[6] Paragraph 3 is the most unfortunate of all. It tells the jury that a killing is murder of the second degree (absent deliberation and premeditation) if committed in the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate a felony other than arson, rape, robbery, burglary or mayhem. This is good law, as stated in People v. Ford, 60 Cal.2d 772 [36 Cal.Rptr. 620, 388 P.2d 892] and numerous other cases. But lifting such general statements from the opinions of reviewing courts at random and using them as instructions, regardless of their suitability for that purpose, evidences the common fault of assuming that every sound, abstract statement of law found in the books is good for an instruction. The error of paragraph 3 is conspicuous. The jury was asked to determine, among other things, whether the killing of Simmons was in the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate a felony, other than those named. What is a felony? What felony did the court have in mind? Does the jury know that a crime is a felony if it is punishable by death or imprisonment in a state prison, and does it know what crimes are punishable in this manner? So much for the inherent error in the instruction.
What possible application could the jury have made of the reference to other felonies? Only confusion would have resulted. Entry of the house with intent to commit murder or an assault upon Mrs. Hudgins would have been burglary, and this was excluded. Another felony would have been the assault upon Mrs. Hudgins with a deadly weapon, but the killing could not have been found to have been committed in the course of the assault upon Mrs. Hudgins, since, when the shooting occurred, Mrs. Hudgins was upstairs and had not been contacted by appellant. Another felony was the blow administered to the head of Simmons, but as previously shown, this could not have been properly regarded as a felony which would invoke the felony-murder doctrine. In another case, under different facts, the instruction could be *587 seriously prejudicial, but there is no reason to believe that the error resulted in harm to appellant.
[7] The court gave the standard instruction respecting the significance of the failure of the defendant to testify, and the matter was commented upon by the district attorney. This was error (Griffin v. California, 380 U.S. 609 [85 S.Ct. 1229, 14 L.Ed.2d 106]; People v. Bostick, 62 Cal.2d 820 [44 Cal.Rptr. 649, 402 P.2d 529]), although it was correct procedure at the time of the trial. The error, however, does not call for an automatic reversal of the judgment, according to the holding in Bostick that section 4 1/2 of article VI of the California Constitution is applicable, and that a judgment should not be reversed in the absence of a clear showing that it works a miscarriage of justice. This question finds a ready answer in the foregoing statement of the evidence. As previously stated, the error in the instruction, quoted above, could not have had any influence upon the verdict. The evidence of the circumstances of the shooting established appellant's guilt of murder to the point of demonstration.
[8] There was no error in the admission of the testimony of Officers Childers and Collins respecting the statements of appellant. With appellant in custody, as a result of his voluntary surrender, the officers had no occasion to look further for the slayer of Simmons. There was no course of interrogation which lent itself to eliciting damaging statements, but only a casual conversation between officers and their prisoner on the way to police headquarters. Appellant denied that he intended to kill Simmons, and when asked whether there was an explanation of what he did appellant refused to answer. It is clear that the statements were not inadmissible under the rules declared in People v. Dorado, 62 Cal.2d 338 [42 Cal.Rptr. 169, 398 P.2d 361].
[9] As previously stated, appellant was sentenced for second degree murder and for violation of the Dangerous Weapons' Control Law, and it is contended that the two sentences were in violation of section 654 of the Penal Code, and the law as declared in People v. McFarland, 58 Cal.2d 748 [26 Cal.Rptr. 473, 376 P.2d 449]. This would be true if the two offenses were committed by one act or in a series of acts having but a single purpose, but such was not the case. The acts constituting the offenses were separable. Possession of the gun constituted one offense, and this was an act separate and apart from any use that was made of the gun, and *588 would have been a completed offense even if no use had been made of it. Appellant was properly sentenced for both offenses.
The judgment is affirmed.
Ford, J., and McMurray, J. pro tem.,  [fn. *] concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. "305 Murder of the Second Degree. If the unlawful killing of a human being is done with malice aforethought, but without deliberation and premeditation, that is, without the wilful, deliberate and premeditated intent to take life which is an essential element of first degree murder, and is not committed in the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate burglary, then the offense is murder in the second degree. In practical application this means that the unlawful killing of a human being with malice aforethought, but without a deliberately formed and premeditated intent to kill, is murder of the second degree in any of the following cases: (1) When the killing results from an unlawful act, the natural consequences of which are dangerous to life, which act is deliberately performed by a person who knows that his conduct endangers the life of another, or (2) When the circumstances attending the killing show an abandoned or malignant heart, or (3) When the killing is done in the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate a felony other than arson, rape, robbery, burglary or mayhem."
[fn. *]  *. Assigned by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.

=== CASE 2214119 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:42.694448+00 ===

236 Cal.App.2d 501 (1965)
HIROKO McCARY, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
JOHN HANCOCK MUTUAL LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY, Defendant and Respondent.
Civ. No. 21876.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. Two.
Aug. 16, 1965.
Garry, Dreyfus & McTernan, Charles R. Garry and Donald L. A. Kerson for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Harold C. Nachtrieb, Allan, Miller, Groezinger, Keesling & Martin for Defendant and Respondent.
AGEE, J.
On August 27, 1958, defendant-respondent, referred to herein as the "Company," issued its insurance policy on the life of Robert L. McCary, hereafter referred to as the "Insured." Attached to the policy and made a separate part thereof is a "Supplementary Provision For Family Income." The beneficiary under each is the Insured's wife, who is the plaintiff-appellant herein. A combined *503 monthly premium of $19.50 became due on the 27th day of each month.
The Insured died of cancer on January 13, 1961. The Company contends that the policy and attached supplementary provision had lapsed for nonpayment of the premium due on July 27, 1960.  [fn. 1]
However, nonforfeiture provisions contained in the basic policy continued it in force as term insurance for a period which had not expired by the date of the Insured's death. As further provided therein such "Extended term insurance shall be automatically binding upon the Company. ..."
On this basis the Company admits its liability for the "sum insured" under the policy, which is $5,000. Thus the litigation, as a practical matter, is confined to the question of the Company's liability under the supplementary provision, which expressly provides that "the provisions in the policy entitled ... 'Nonforfeiture Provisions' ... shall not be applicable to this supplementary provision nor shall they be affected hereby."
The supplementary provision provided term insurance for the 20-year period commencing with the issue date of the policy. If the Insured died within such period the beneficiary was to be paid a monthly amount during the remainder of the period. If the supplementary provision had been in effect at the time of the Insured's death, appellant would have become entitled to a lump sum payment of $17,903.50.
The trial herein was by jury and the sole issue presented to it to decide was whether, assuming that the supplementary provision had lapsed for nonpayment of premium, the Insured had made a material misrepresentation of fact in his application for the reinstatement thereof which vitiated the Company's approval of such application. The jury decided this issue adversely to appellant and therefore limited the amount of her recovery to the $5,000 admittedly due under the basic policy.
Appellant does not on appeal attempt to attack the correctness of the jury's implied finding as to material misrepresentation, *504 apparently recognizing that such finding is supported by substantial evidence.  [fn. 2]
Appellant's chief contention on appeal is that the Company had waived, or was estopped to assert, a forfeiture based upon the failure of the Insured to pay the July 27, 1960 premium until October 1, 1960. Both issues were timely raised and are included in the pretrial order. Appellant points to the Company's previous conduct in accepting late premium payments without declaring a forfeiture and asserts that this conduct had "led the insured to the reasonable belief that strict compliance with the provisions of the policy was not required to avoid a forfeiture."
Appellant's proposed instructions on waiver and estoppel were refused by the trial court on the ground that the evidence was insufficient as a matter of law to support a finding in favor of appellant on either issue.
Respondent Company states that it "does not quarrel with the law as stated in the requested instruction[s]" (on waiver and estoppel) and that "it becomes only necessary to examine the evidence. ..."
[1] It is well settled that "a party has a right to instructions on his theory of the case, if it is reasonable and finds support in the pleadings and evidence or any inference which may be properly drawn from the evidence." (2 Witkin, Cal. Procedure, p. 1780.)
[2] It is not necessary that such evidentiary support be clear and convincing. "Even a reasonable inference from the evidence may suffice to serve as a basis for the instruction." (48 Cal.Jur.2d, Trial  190, p. 218; Cooke v. Stevens, 191 Cal.App.2d 457, 460 [12 Cal.Rptr. 828].)
The evidence relating to waiver and estoppel is largely without dispute. Although the policy provided that it automatically lapsed at the end of the grace period for nonpayment of premiums, the Company consistently accepted payments after that time had elapsed. *505
During the one-year period immediately prior to July 27, 1960 six of the twelve premiums due during such period were paid and accepted by the Company after the expiration of the 31-day grace period. In each of these instances a "late payment offer" was sent to the Insured. In none of such instances had the Company sought to avail itself of the right to forfeit the policy or to require the Insured to make an application for reinstatement.
The Company states: "Respondent admits that it voluntarily waived evidence of insurability during the fifteen day period following the expiration of grace in every case in which a 'late payment offer' was sent." The Company further admits that none of its policyholders knew that it limited this extension to 15 days.
In this case the longest period between the due date of any prior premium and the payment thereof was 48 days, whereas the period involved herein is 65 days, i.e., between July 27 and October 1, 1960.
The printed form of "late payment offer" reads as follows: "The grace period of thirty-one days allowed for payment of the premium on this policy has expired and the policy is no longer in full force. Under these conditions, the Company usually requires satisfactory evidence of insurability to reinstate the policy." (Italics ours.)
Then follows a "special offer" to "reinstate the policy Without evidence of insurability" provided payment is made on or before a date which is inserted in a space on the form. The Company's practice was to calculate this date by adding 15 days to the date upon which the 31-day grace period expired.
The Company's records indicate that a "late payment offer" with respect to the premium due on July 27, 1960 was mailed to the Insured at his San Francisco home address following the expiration of the 31-day period. If the Company followed its usual practice, the expiration date inserted in the notice would be September 11, 1960, which is 46 days after said due date.
The Insured was on the editorial staff of the San Francisco Chronicle. He had accepted a Nieman fellowship at Harvard University. Unknown to the Company, he and his family left San Francisco in mid-August and drove leisurely cross-country to Arlington, Massachusetts, arriving there in mid- September. A friend living in their San Francisco home had *506 been instructed to hold all mail until their arrival at Arlington.
The mail thus accumulated was apparently forwarded to the Insured in the latter half of September. Included in it was a "late payment offer" and a notice of premium due on September 27, 1960. The Company usually mailed out this type of notice four weeks in advance of the due date. It was therefore probably delivered to the Insured's San Francisco home on or about August 27.
The Insured wrote to the Company from Arlington, enclosing his check dated September 28, 1960, for $19.50, together with the September 27 premium notice and the "late payment offer." This letter was received by the Company at its San Francisco office on October 1, 1960. It reads as follows: "I am sorry that this payment is late. However, we again did not get a bill. We just got the enclosed 'late payment offer.' If we got bills on time, we would pay the premiums on time. I do not want my life insurance to lapse, and prompt billing would insure prompt payment."
On October 5, 1960 the Company replied to the Insured as follows: "This is to acknowledge receipt of your payment of $19.50 for your policy. Your September notice was submitted with your payment; however, our records show that payment is due for July 27, 1960, and accordingly we are enclosing a reinstatement application form which has to be completed and signed where indicated and returned to this office. We are enclosing a self- addressed envelope. We would also urge that in order to being [sic] your insurance up to date an additional $39.00 should be submitted. This will pay your premiums due for August and September 27." (Italics ours.)
It is evident that the Insured was confused as to which premium he was paying with his check of September 28. The "late payment offer" which accompanied the check was probably the one relating to the premium due on July 27. Yet the Insured noted on his copy of the September 27 premium notice that he had paid it on "9/28/60." The Company introduced this copy in evidence.
The Company's office supervisor testified that it was obvious to him that the Insured was acting under a mistake as to which premiums were due and that "That was why I wrote him the letter [of October 5]."
Despite its awareness of the probability that the Insured believed that his check was in payment of the premium notice *507 which he enclosed with his letter, the Company deposited the check in its bank account in the same manner as it had deposited the Insured's previous checks.
While the supervisor testified that "We cashed the check, deposited the money, held the money in suspense," the Company never advised the Insured that his money was being so held. So far as the Insured was concerned, all he knew was that the check cleared through his bank and was charged against his account in the same manner as his previous checks to the Company had been.
On October 10, 1960, the Insured replied to the Company's letter of October 5, as follows: "I enclose your letter, on which I am commenting, and I enclose the $39 payment which you requested. However, I am completely puzzled by your billing system. ... My family's system for paying bills is simple: We pay them when we get them, if we can. If not, we let them slide until we get a second notice. Usually we make it on the first try. ... When we left San Francisco I had paid the last bill that I received from you. My records show that I sent you checks on June 20 and on July 19. When we arrived at the above address, we paid the first bill that was forwarded to us. This strikes me as fairly prompt payment. Your letter arrived this morning; I enclose the payment you requested. ... In addition, I enclose the humiliating request for reinstatement that you sent, but I am bitterly opposed to this sort of thing. Why should I have to beg for reinstatement of my life insurance when I have missed only one payment--a payment for which I have not got a bill?" (Italics ours.)
The foregoing letter was admitted in evidence without objection, the Company's counsel stating that, "You can put the letter in evidence if you would like." He had objected previously that the letter contained self- serving statements.
The Company replied to this letter on October 17, 1960, stating: "We are sorry for the apparent confusion that is being caused by our billing system. ..."
As we have seen, the Insured acquiesced in the Company's application of his check to the payment of the July 27 premium. However, he did protest the Company's right to require that he apply for "reinstatement" of his insurance. He had not been required to do so on any previous occasion.
The Company points to the following provision in the *508 "late payment offer": "By accepting the premium now overdue, the Company does not waive its rights in the event any future premium is not paid when due." (Italics ours.)
However, the implication inherent in this provision is that, if the Company does accept payment of a certain premium, it thereby waives its right to forfeiture based upon nonpayment of that particular premium.
The fact is that the Company did accept payment of the July 27 premium before it advised the Insured that the Company would nevertheless require him to execute an application for reinstatement.
We turn now to the law applicable herein. [3] As stated in Page v. Washington Mut. Life Assn., 20 Cal.2d 234, 239- 240 [125 P.2d 20]: "Forfeitures, particularly in insurance contracts, are not favored. [Citation.] And if reasonably possible in light of the circumstances, the courts will determine that a forfeiture has not occurred or that a waiver or estoppel exists. [Citations.] ... [4, 5] It is clear that a past course of conduct of acceptance by the insurer of payments of premiums after the grace period may establish a waiver by the insurer of the right to declare a forfeiture for failure to pay premiums exactly at the stipulated time, or the insurer may be said to be estopped to assert the forfeiture where the insured may be said to have been reasonably led to believe that payments made within a reasonable time after the grace period would be acceptable." (See also: Lincke v. Mutual Benefit etc. Assn., 76 Cal.App.2d 222, 226 [172 P.2d 912]; Turner v. Redwood Mutual Life Assn., 13 Cal.App.2d 573, 579 [57 P.2d 222]; Vinther v. Sunset Mut. Life Ins. Co., 11 Cal.App.2d 118, 121-122 [53 P.2d 182]; Nelson v. National Guaranty Life Co., 131 Cal.App. 669, 671-672 [21 P.2d 1022].)
In Scott v. Federal Life Ins. Co., 200 Cal.App.2d 384, 391-392 [19 Cal.Rptr. 258], the court said: "Waiver and estoppel, however, are frequently applied in insurance law in favor of the insured or the beneficiary under a policy. The courts have generally applied the liberal rule in favor of the insured. ... Whether a waiver has occurred is usually a question of fact the determination of which, if supported by substantial evidence, will not be disturbed on appeal [citations], unless the only inference which can be drawn from the evidence is to the contrary. [Citations.] The rule is the same for estoppel. [Citations.]" (See also Posner v. Grunwald- Marx, *509 Inc., 56 Cal.2d 169, 189 [49 Cal.Rptr. 297, 363 P.2d 313].)
[6] In our opinion the evidence is sufficient to support a finding that the Company waived and is estopped to assert the right to declare a lapse or forfeiture based upon the lateness of the payment of the July 27, 1960 premium.
If the trier of fact makes such a finding, then the Company had no right to require the Insured to execute the application for reinstatement which it sent to him on October 5, 1960.
In Turner v. Redwood Mutual Life Assn., 13 Cal.App.2d 573 [57 P.2d 222], the insurance company allowed the insured's son to make out and sign an application for reinstatement of the policy after it had lapsed for nonpayment of premiums. A false statement was made therein that the insured was in good health and had not consulted any physicians. The company had in the past accepted late premium payments on many occasions. The court held that under the facts it "had waived the right to forfeit the policy because the death payments [premiums] were made after the dates upon which they were due and the application for reinstatement by the son was not necessary to continue the policy in force." (Italics ours.)
Appellant's second contention is that the two-year limitation period in the "incontestability clause" contained in the supplementary provision bars the Company, after the expiration of such period, from contesting the truthfulness of the representations made by the Insured in the application for reinstatement which he executed on October 10, 1960.
This contention assumes, for the purpose of presenting it, that the policy and supplementary provision had lapsed and that a reinstatement application was required in order to revive them.
The clause referred to provides that "This supplementary provision ... shall be incontestable after it has been in force during the lifetime of the Insured for two years from its date of issue [August 27, 1958], except for nonpayment of premium."
In New York Life Ins. Co. v. Waterman, 104 F.2d 990, 992, the court stated: "We hold ... that under  1668 of the Civil Code of California a rescission of a reinstatement procured by fraud is not here prevented by the incontestable clause of the policy" and that to hold otherwise " 'would altogether relieve ... [the insured] of the consequences of his own fraud.' " *510
Appellant states that it "must be conceded that the weight of authority in the country is 'to the effect that the incontestable clause runs anew from the date of reinstatement where the insurer's defense is fraud on the part of the insured in the procurement of the reinstatement,' " quoting from the annotation in 134 American Law Reports, at page 1525.
[7] Appellant attempts to draw a distinction between fraud and material misrepresentation of fact. We see no reason to make any such distinction in this case. We therefore hold that the Company was not barred by the incontestable clause from defending against the reinstatement which it allowed in reliance upon the Insured's representations which he made in his application therefor.
The appellant's final contention is that the "Supplementary Provision For Family Income" should have provided for a nonforfeiture benefit as required by section 10160 of the Insurance Code and that she is therefore entitled under section 10167 of that code to the benefit prescribed by subdivision (a) of said section 10160.
Section 10160 of the California Insurance Code reads, in part, as follows: "Except as provided in Section 10165, no policy of life insurance shall be issued or delivered in this State unless it shall contain in substance the following provisions, or corresponding provisions which are at least as favorable to the defaulting or surrendering policyholder;"
"(a) [Nonforfeiture benefit.] ... That, in the event of default in any premium payment after premiums have been paid for at least one full year the insurer will grant, upon proper request not later than 60 days after the due date of the premium in default, a paid-up nonforfeiture benefit on a plan stipulated in the policy, effective as of such due date, of such value as may be hereinafter specified. ..." (Italics added.)
Section 10167 of the Insurance Code provides as follows: "Any policy to which this article is applicable which does not contain a paid-up nonforfeiture benefit shall be construed as granting non-participating paid- up term insurance as a nonforfeiture benefit under subdivision (a) Section 10160."
The Company asserts that the basic policy and the supplementary provision are but "two separate portions of the same insurance policy" within the meaning of section 10160 and that, inasmuch as the basic policy contained a nonforfeiture *511 benefit provision, the supplementary provision must therefore be deemed to have complied with said section.
The difficulty with this proposition is that the nonforfeiture benefit provision contained in the policy is expressly excluded from the supplementary provision. We quote from the latter as follows: "The provisions of the policy are hereby referred to and made a part of this supplementary provision except as specifically modified herein and except that the provisions in the policy entitled 'Incontestability,' 'Suicide,' 'Nonforfeiture Provision,' and 'Additional Benefit for Death by Accidental Means' if contained therein, shall not be applicable to this supplementary provision nor shall they be affected hereby." (Italics ours.)
Section 10165 of the Insurance Code, at the time of the issuance of the policy, provided in part that section 10160 "shall not apply to ... any term policy of decreasing amount on which each adjusted premium, calculated as specified in Section 10163, is less than the adjusted premium so calculated on such 15-year term policy issued at the same age and for the same initial amount of insurance. ..."
The record before us does not contain sufficient information to enable this court to make such a calculation. The parties and the trial court were in apparent agreement that the jury phase of the trial should be completed and that this issue could thereafter be decided by the court.
While the court said, "We can meet that issue later" and counsel for the Company admitted that it "is a very complicated calculation," the record is silent as to what transpired thereafter. It does not appear that any action was taken or ruling made. It is suggested that, on the retrial of the case, the record be completed and the issue be determined.
The judgment is reversed and the order denying appellant's motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict is affirmed. Appellant to recover costs on appeal.
Shoemaker, P. J., and Taylor, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. The policy provides that, "Except as herein expressly provided, the payment of any premium shall not maintain this policy in force beyond the date when the next succeeding premium becomes payable." The supplementary provision provides that it shall terminate upon "the expiration of the grace period allowed for the payment of any premium in default under this policy or this supplementary provision ...." The policy provides for a grace period of 31 days.
[fn. 2]  2. This application was filled out and signed by the Insured on October 10, 1960. It contains a false representation that he had not had any ailment, disease or symptom thereof and had not consulted a physician since "the due date of the first premium now unpaid." In fact, the Insured had consulted a physician on September 15, 1960 about nervousness, slight headaches and a lump on the left side of his head. The Insured next saw the physician on October 11, 1960 and was told that X-rays taken the previous day showed a defect in the bone of the skull. There is no evidence as to when, if ever, the Insured was told that the lump was cancerous but his wife, appellant herein, was so advised between Thanksgiving and Christmas.

=== CASE 9738229 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:46:10.57863+00 ===

FLEMING, J.
In a non jury trial Sheridan was convicted of unlawful possession of heroin (Health & Saf. Code, § 11500). A prior conviction for the same offense was charged but no finding made in support of this charge.
At 3 :30 in the afternoon Sergeants Walker and Flynn of the narcotics division of the Los Angeles Police Department drove past Sheridan and one Jay Hill, both known narcotic users, seated in a parked ear at a street intersection. Hill, the driver, recognized the officers, reversed his car, and drove off in the opposite direction at a high rate of speed. The two officers gave chase, and as they caught up with the auto Sergeant Walker saw Sheridan turn and extend his arm to a little girl in the back seat, his daughter.
The officers asked Hill why he was fleeing, and Hill replied he didn’t want to be shaken down by the police. The officers obtained permission to search Hill and Sheridan and the vehicle. While searching, Sergeant Walker noticed a red balloon fragment sticking out of the inner side of the girl’s right sock (a white bobby sock). When he reached down and removed the balloon from the girl’s sock, Sheridan said, “That’s mine, I gave it to her just before you, just as we saw you coming and told her to put it in her sock.” Inside the balloon fragment were three smaller balloons containing in all 1.5 grams of heroin.
*669At the Police Administration Building about 5 p.m. Sheridan told Sergeants Walker and Flynn that he had bought a spoonful of heroin a few days before the arrest, he had used all but three balloons, and was going to sell the three to get his money back.
Sheridan contends that the heroin was obtained as a result of an illegal search and seizure, and also that he was not advised of his right to counsel and to remain silent, as outlined in People v. Dorado, 62 Cal.2d 338 [42 Cal.Rptr. 169, 398 P.2d 361].
(1) Search and Seizure
It is not unreasonable for officers to seek interviews with suspects or call on them for such purposes. (People v. Martin, 45 Cal.2d 755 [290 P.2d 855]; People v. Shelton, 60 Cal.2d 740, 747 [36 Cal.Rptr. 433, 388 P.2d 665].)  Sheridan was a known user of narcotics in the company of another known user, he had tried to avoid the police, and had made furtive gestures toward the back seat. (See People v. Blodgett, 46 Cal.2d 144 [293 P.2d 57].) Under such circumstances it was proper for the officers to investigate and question the suspects.  As part of this investigation the officers sought permission to search the suspects, and, according to the testimony of Sergeant Walker, permission was voluntarily granted. On cross-examination Sheridan conceded: “I don’t remember whether he got permission to search the car or not. I know he had permission to search me and Mr. Hill. ...” Since the testimony of a searching officer provides substantial evidence to support a finding of consent (People v. Sullivan, 214 Cal.App.2d 404, 409 [29 Cal.Rptr. 515]; People v. Chavez, 208 Cal.App.2d 248, 255 [24 Cal.Rptr. 895]), we conclude that the search of defendant was lawful. (People v. Michael, 45 Cal.2d 751 [290 P.2d 852].)
In the process of searching defendant and Hill the officers observed the balloon in plain sight sticking out of the daughter’s sock.  As said in People v. Spicer, 163 Cal.App.2d 678, 683 [329 P.2d 917], “While it has been said that ordinarily searching is a function of sight, it is generally held that the mere looking at that which is open to view is not a ‘search’. ...” (People v. Quinn, 194 Cal.App.2d 172, 175 [14 Cal.Rptr. 814]; People v. Terry, 62 Cal.2d 137, 152 [37 Cal.Rptr. 605, 390 P.2d 381].)  On seeing the balloon in the daughter’s sock, the officers had reasonable and probable cause to believe a felony was being committed. (People v. Ingle, 53 Cal.2d 407 [2 Cal.Rptr. 14, 348 P.2d *670577].) At that time the officers knew or could infer the following : (1) Hill and Sheridan were narcotics users (cf. People v. Taylor, 176 Cal.App.2d 46, 51 [1 Cal.Rptr. 86], past character of suspect is a factor in determining probable cause); (2) Hill had driven off at high speed to avoid confrontation ; (3) Sheridan had made furtive gestures in the direction of the back seat (People v. Blodgett, supra); (4) heroin is commonly packaged in balloons. (See People v. Rodriquez, 222 Cal.App.2d 502 [25 Cal.Rptr. 435]; People v. Harris, 62 Cal.2d 681, 683 [43 Cal.Rptr. 833, 401 P.2d 225].) Since probable cause to believe a felony is being committed is sufficient grounds for an arrest and a search incident thereto (People v. Ingle, 53 Cal.2d 407 [2 Cal.Rptr. 14, 348 P.2d 577]), we conclude the heroin was obtained by means of a valid search and seizure.
(2) Right to Counsel and Right to Remain Silent
People v. Dorado, 62 Cal.2d 338, at page 354 [42 Cal.Rptr. 169, 398 P.2d 361] held that “when the investigatory stage has become an accusatory one, that is, when it has begun to focus on a particular suspect, the suspect has been taken into police custody, and the police have carried out a process of interrogations that lends itself to eliciting incriminating statements ’ ’ then the suspect must be advised of his right to counsel and of his right to remain silent.
In the present case the specific crime for which defendant was charged and convicted was unlawful possession of narcotics, and proof of that crime was complete at the time of his arrest, not only by discovery of the narcotic itself but by defendant’s admission of ownership—which amounted to a complete confession of every element of the crime. Approximately an hour and a half after his arrest defendant was questioned at the police station, undoubtedly as part of a further investigation to trace the narcotics to their origin. The objective purpose of the police in interrogating defendant at the station appears to have been a commendable desire to follow up their completed case against defendant by uncovering, if possible, his source of supply. At that time defendant’s crime, possession of narcotics, had been solved, and no further interrogation, investigatorial or accusatorial, was required to prove that crime. However, any statements by defendant as to how and where he got the narcotics would necessarily produce a further acknowledgment of his unlawful possession of narcotics, which would in substance amount to a second confession. We assume the use in evi*671deuce of the second confession obtained without advising defendant of his right to counsel was improper. (People v. Dorado, 62 Cal.2d 338 [42 Cal.Rptr. 169, 398 P.2d 361]; People v. Stewart, 62 Cal.2d 571, 580 [43 Cal.Rptr. 201, 400 P.2d 97].)
Ordinarily, improper admission in evidence of a confession automatically requires reversal of a conviction because its effect is presumed to be prejudicial. However, such a result does not logically follow when a later confession merely duplicates a lawfully-obtained earlier confession covering all elements of the crime with which defendant has been charged in a case in which other evidence is ample to support a conviction apart from any confession. (People v. Ford, 234 Cal.App.2d 480, 494-496 [44 Cal.Rptr. 556]; People v. Parham, 60 Cal.2d 378, 385 [33 Cal.Rptr. 497, 384 P.2d 1001]; People v. Garner, 57 Cal.2d 135, 144 [18 Cal.Rptr. 40, 367 P.2d 680]; People v. Moya, 53 Cal.2d 819, 822 [3 Cal.Rptr. 360, 350 P.2d 112]; People v. Atchley, 53 Cal.2d 160, 170-171 [346 P.2d 764]; United States v. Bayer, 331 U.S. 532, 540 [67 S.Ct. 1394, 91 L.Ed. 1654].)  Under some circumstances a second illegal confession following a legal confession may require a reversal, but where, as here, the later statements were substantially identical in incriminating effect with the earlier statements and where the evidence was heard by an experienced judge rather than by a jury, we conclude the error in the admission of evidence did not result in a miscarriage of justice, and that a different result on retrial is not probable. (Cal. Const., art. VI, § 4½; People v. Watson, 46 Cal.2d 818, 834-837 [299 P.2d 243]; People v. Modesto, 62 Cal.2d 436, 460-464 [42 Cal.Rptr. 417, 398 P.2d 753], Peters, J., concurring and dissenting.)
The judgment is affirmed.
Herndon, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9738263 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:47:12.485958+00 ===

*540KINGSLEY, J.
I dissent.
Looking at all of the facets of the transaction between the parties, including the substantial down payment made by the original tenant ($300,000), and the broad permission to assign the lease, in an indefinite number of assignments and reassignments, to potentially insolvent assignees, I can see no reason not to read the disputed language in section 7.01 as meaning exactly what it says—namely, that neither the original tenant nor any assignee nor reassignee should be required to devote to the building operations any additional personal funds. The parties, by a document obviously drawn with great care by counsel, and executed by experienced businessmen, expresses a clear intent that the tenants and assignees were not to be liable to pay, out of their own pockets, any funds beyond the original down payment.
However, as my colleagues point out, a tenant is obligated under two theories, one contractual under the lease and the other arising out of the estate which he holds. The exculpatory clause herein involved released defendants completely from what would otherwise have been a contractual obligation to continue to pay rent; it did not totally release them from their liability as tenants in possession although, since they were not required to dip into their “personal” funds, it did so in part.
Basic considerations of fair dealing require that defendants, although relieved of personal loss by the clause in question, not be permitted to utilize their own default to make a profit at plaintiff’s expense. Defendants are therefore liable to plaintiff for any net income received by them from their operation of the building during the five-month period of default, but not to exceed their contractual liability. How much that may be we do not know on this record. We know that they received some rent from two tenants; they may have received more. We know nothing as to the out-of-pocket costs which they incurred in operating the building during that default period. I would reverse the judgment with directions to take the necessary accounting for the period in question and to give judgment in accordance with the sum so found.

=== CASE 9738230 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:46:10.583208+00 ===

ROTH, P. J.
I dissent.
I dissent solely because I believe Dorado requires reversal.
Concurrently with his arrest, appellant spontaneously confessed the crime. As the majority recite, when the balloon was removed from the little girl’s sock, appellant stated: “That’s mine, I gave it to her just before you, just as we saw you coming and told her to put it in her sock.”
*672The investigatory period had therefore passed and the accusatory stage had begun.
One and one-half hours after the arrest and the confession above recited, appellant was again interrogated at the police station. He was not advised of his right to counsel or his right to remain silent and there was no waiver, effective or otherwise, of either. On this occasion, pursuant to interrogation, appellant stated "... that he had bought a spoon of heroin a few days before the arrest. That he has used all but the three balloons. That he was going to sell the three balloons and get his money back. ’ ’
This second confession, in my opinion previously expressed in People v. Ford, 234 Cal.App.2d 480 [44 Cal.Rptr. 556], was clearly within Dorado, and should not have been introduced in evidence. Whether or not the second confession had any effect on the court (the ease was tried without a jury) as I understand Dorado, is immaterial. I would therefore reverse the judgment.
Appellant’s petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied October 13, 1965.

=== CASE 9738231 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:46:10.865201+00 ===

FLEMING, J.
On rehearing, pursuant to order of the Supreme Court for further consideration in the light of Escobedo v. Illinois, 378 U.S. 478 [84 S.Ct. 1758, 12 L.Ed.2d 977], and Massiah v. United States, 377 U.S. 201 [84 S.Ct. 1199, 12 L.Ed.2d 246].
The police, in searching for an unidentified burglary suspect whom they believed to have been wounded the previous night while fleeing the scene of the crime, the Beau Jest Bar, came upon Cully the next afternoon in a private house near the area of the shooting in what appeared to be a wounded condition. Officer Najera, who had not witnessed the attempted burglary and shooting at the Beau Jest Bar and who was investigating the case on information furnished by other members of the police department, arrested and handcuffed Cully and called for an ambulance. Prior to the arrival of the ambulance the conversation between the parties consisted of the officer’s question, “Are you hurt?”, and the suspect’s answer, ‘ ‘ I have a sore throat. ’ ’
After the suspect had been placed in the ambulance about 1 p.m. Officer Najera rode with him to the hospital, and during the ride Cully made a complete confession of the attempted burglary. He said he was not a good burglar and had got caught, that he was a better robber than burglar. He had been in back of the bar of the cafe and been surprised by the police, one of whom had shot at him. He had thrown his screwdriver at another, and started to run, and been hit while running across the street or jumping the fence. This was the first time he had burglarized any place, and he had gotten the idea from his roommates, Bruce, Steve, and Mike, who had burglarized numerous bars in Highland Park.
As a consequence of this information, Cully’s roommates were investigated and arrested for other burglaries.
Cully was tried by a court without a jury and convicted of attempted burglary with a record of two prior robbery felonies. In addition to his confession, the evidence against him included his direct identification by Officer Holubiczko *772as the burglar who had been surprised at the Beau Jest Bar and shot while making good his escape.
The principal question is whether the use as evidence of the confession by Cully in the ambulance on his way to the hospital was a violation of his right to the assistance of counsel and to remain silent guaranteed by the Sixth and Fifth Amendments to the Constitution. (Escobedo v. Illinois, 378 U.S. 478 [84 S.Ct. 1758, 12 L.Ed.2d 977]; Massiah v. United States, 377 U.S. 201 [84 S.Ct. 1199, 12 L.Ed.2d 246]; People v. Dorado, 62 Cal.2d 338 [42 Cal.Rptr. 169, 398 P.2d 361].) No claim of coercion is involved. The issue turns on whether at the time of the confession the accusatory stage had been reached so that the right to benefit of counsel attached. A subsidiary question is whether the use in evidence of a second confession duplicating the first, which Cully gave the police at 7:30 that evening in the hospital, requires a reversal of the judgment. Other contentions of Cully, lack of probable cause for his arrest, use of evidence obtained by illegal search and seizure, insufficiency of the evidence to support a conviction for attempted burglary, are without merit and have been fully covered in the prior unpublished opinion in this case by Mr. Justice Fox, whose statements on these points we adopt.
Under the guarantee of the right to counsel articulated in Escobedo and Dorado, whenever a criminal inquiry has ceased to be investigatory and become accusatory, the suspect has become for all practical purposes one accused of
*773crime, he must be advised of his right to counsel and his right to remain silent. (Sixth and Fifth Amendments to the United States Constitution.)  Absent proof of such advice, statements obtained from him in the accusatory stage may not be received in evidence over his objection. (People v. Stewart, 62 Cal.2d 571, 581 [43 Cal.Rptr. 201, 400 P.2d 97].)  The accusatory stage is reached when two conditions have been met: (1) the suspect has been placed under arrest, and (2) the police have undertaken a process of interrogations whose objective purpose is to elicit a confession of guilt. (People v. Stewart, p. 577.)  The question at bench is whether the accusatory stage had been reached at the time Cully was placed in the ambulance; for if it had, the admission in evidence of a confession obtained as a result of questioning would have been reversible error; but if it had not, his confession could have been received in evidence against him, for as Escobedo has said, only when an investigation has shifted to the accosatory stage, and the suspect has become an accused, and the questioning has become designed to elicit a confession, does the adversary system begin to operate. (378 U.S. 478,492.)
In our view the inquiry at the time of the conversation in the ambulance between Cully and Officer Najera was still investigatory and had not reached the accusatory or critical stage, and therefore the confession was properly obtained. Officer Najera in making his arrest was proceeding on inference derived from circumstantial evidence, which, although strong enough to justify an arrest, by no means foreclosed the possibility that Cully was not the man involved in the Beau Jest burglary. It was quite possible that the suspect’s difficulties had arisen from unrelated activities. Cully might have been up to other mischief which he did not wish known to the police, or he might have been engaged in some private venture which a point of honor forbade him to disclose. If such had been the case, his initial reluctance to *774disclose other activities, even of a discreditable nature, might have heen quickly dispelled by his need to solve his current difficulty. Officer Najera had never seen the suspect before, he had not been at the scene o£ the crime, and at that point had heard neither admissions nor denials from the suspect in relation to the Beau Jest Bar caper. Conversation between the two at that stage served two purposes: it provided the suspect with an opportunity to clear himself of matters with which he was not involved, and it gave the police an opportunity to hear the suspect’s explanation of his predicament.
This case falls squarely within the Konigsberg rule adopted in California in People v. Stewart, 62 Cal.2d 571 [43 Cal.Rptr. 201, 400 P.2d 97]. The Supreme Court in Stewart rejected the argument that the accusatory stage necessarily begins at the time of arrest, stating that although in most cases the process of interrogations following an arrest is accusatory, it is not necessarily so. The court cited with approval United States v. Konigsberg, 336 F.2d 844, cert. den., 379 U.S. 933, and commented as follows (pp. 578-579) : “In the Konigsberg case, supra, Federal Bureau of Investigation agents apprehended the defendants in a garage containing stolen goods, arrested them and took them to the bureau’s office. At that office, prior to an arraignment, the agents asked Konigsberg, 1 “why he was in this garage and just what had taken place . . . and ... if he wished to cleanse himself or explain . . . what his reasons for being there were, why the other individuals were there.” ’ (Id. at p. 852.) Konigsberg then made some incriminating statements. Among other reasons for not applying Escobedo, the court said that the purpose of the investigation, even though it took place after the arrest, was not to elicit a confession. The court stated, ‘The uncontradicted purpose of the discussion was to give Konigsberg a chance to explain his presence in the garage if he could; to hear Konigsberg’s side of the story. ... If Konigsberg or any of the other people caught in the garage could account for their presence this was their opportunity.' ”
In adopting the Konigsberg rule that a suspect may be asked for his explanation a reasonable time after his arrest, we believe the Supreme Court sought to maintain free communication between suspect and officer for reasons beneficial to both suspect and society—beneficial to the suspect by encouraging early communication which could lead to his speedy release, and beneficial to society by continuing to use *775to advantage the tendency of guilty persons to confess all on first being caught. These considerations have been well described by Professor Wigmore: “(1) In the first place, an innocent person is always helped by an early opportunity to tell his whole story ; hundreds of suspected persons every day are set free because their story thus told bears the marks of truth. Moreover, and more important, every guilty person is almost always ready and desirous to confess, as soon as he is detected and arrested. . . . The nervous pressure of guilt is enormous; the load of the deed done is heavy; the fear of detection fills the consciousness; and when detection comes, the pressure is relieved; and the deep sense of relief makes confession a satisfaction. At that moment, he will tell all, and tell it truly. To forbid soliciting him, to seek to prevent this relief, is to fly in the face of human nature. It is natural, and should be lawful, to take his confession at that moment—the best one. ...” (Wigmore on Evidence (3d ed.) § 851, p. 319, quoted by Traynor, J., concurring in People v. Garner, 57 Cal.2d 135, 163 [18 Cal.Rptr. 40, 367 P.2d 680].)
The problem of the courts is to keep in balance the social interest in the general security and the social interest in individual free will, to preserve the protection to society derived from the tendency of guilty persons to confess on first being caught and at the same time protect the individual from abusive questioning and the threat of compulsion. The usefulness of properly-secured confessions has long been recognized and approved. (People v. Garner, 57 Cal.2d 135, 164 [18 Cal.Rptr. 40, 367 P.2d 680]; Culombe v. Connecticut, 367 U.S. 568, 571 [81 S.Ct. 1860, 6 L.Ed.2d 1037].) No court has suggested that the use of confessions be outlawed; rather the recent rules are designed to assure that confessions received in evidence are reliable and voluntary and have been secured in conformity with due process.
The main thrust of recent restrictions on the questioning of individuals under arrest clearly appears from the language of In re Lopez, 62 Cal.2d 368 [42 Cal.Rptr. 188, 398 P.2d 380], which tells us that the Escobedo and Dorado rules are aimed at the use of oppressive police practices to dissolve and overbear the vdll of the individual. Again and again the Lopez opinion articulates the objective of the restrictions:
“to eliminate conditions which invited coerced confessions” (p. 372);
“to prevent police tactics which, in the past, have spawned involuntary confessions” (p. 372-373);
*7761 ‘prevention of coercive practices” (p. 373);
‘‘compulsory self-disclosure as a source of proof” (p. 373) ; “a readiness to resort to bullying and to physical force and torture” (p. 373);
“confessions have often been extorted” (p. 373);
“the prevention of practices that might lead to coerced confessions” (p. 373);
“the possibility of extorted confessions” (p. 373); “effective antidote to abusive police tactics and extorted confessions” (p. 373);
“the third degree” (p. 374);
“coerced confession” (p. 374);
“to sterilize the police antechamber from the use of coercive tactics” (p. 374);
“inadequacy of present methods of dealing with involuntary confessions” (p. 374);
“coercion that might occur during police interrogation” (pp. 374-375) ;
“the correction of the conditions which invited the coerced confessions and the attendant evils” (p. 375);
“the evil fruit of the coerced confession” (p. 375);
“secret interrogation was the source of coercion” (p. 377) ; “to discourage oppressive practices” (p. 377);
“by drying up the sources of coercion” (p. 382).
Clearly, coercion is the enemy with which we wrestle, not the use of free confessions. Where the possibility of coercion is minimal, questioning of a suspect under investigation serves the public interest. A suspect, even one under arrest, may be questioned at a time when the inquiry is still investigatory and has not reached the accusatory stage. (People v. Stewart, 62 Cal.2d 571, 578-579 [43 Cal.Rptr. 201, 400 P.2d 97].) Only after an investigation has reached the accusatory stage does the possibility of pressure on the accused become a significant factor so as to require the protection of counsel and advice as to his rights.
To determine whether questioning of a suspect under arrest has been properly investigatory or improperly accusatory, the Supreme Court in Stewart suggested the use of a five-point test to evaluate the circumstances of the questioning. Factors specified are: (1) time of interrogation; (2) place of interrogation; (3) length of interrogation; (4) nature of the questions; (5) conduct of the police. These and other relevant circumstances make up “the total situation which envelops the questioning”, from whose examination *777the court will determine whether or not the inquiry had reached the accusatory phase during the course of which the police carried out a process of interrogations which lent itself to eliciting incriminating statements. (Escobedo v. Illinois, 378 U.S. 478, 491 [74 S.Ct. 1758, 12 L.Ed.2d 977].)  In the present case the evidence shows these factors answerable somewhat as follows:
Time of interrogation—about 1 p.m. immediately following arrest;
Place of interrogation—in the ambulance on the way to the hospital;
Length of interrogation—while riding to the county hospital;
Nature of questions—whether the suspect was the man involved in the Beau Jest attempted burglary; the conversation was in large part a narrative statement by the suspect;
Conduct of police—there is no evidence of threats, promises, over-reaching, accusation, or cross-examination.
Clearly, here, the suspect was being offered an opportunity to explain if he were a victim of mistaken identity. What resulted was not only the suspect’s confession but the furnishing of valuable information to the police about other crimes which led to other arrests for other burglaries.
Appellant argues that any conversation with a suspect after an arrest on probable cause is improper. Yet this is not what our Supreme Court said in Stewart. It specifically rejected such a mechanical rule and formulated the pragmatic test previously referred to. (Pp. 578-579.) The inquiries in the ambulance appear to us to have been part of a normal investigatory process which a conscientious officer would be duty-bound to make in order to assure himself he had arrested the right man and not been led astray by suspicious circumstances. In the course of performing this duty Officer Najera not only solved the Beau Jest Bar burglary but secured information which led directly to the solution of other burglaries and the arrest of other burglary suspects. Were we to hold this questioning to have been in violation of the Constitution, logically, we might be required at some future time to suppress all evidence of the crimes of Bruce, Steve, and Mike, which had been uncovered by means of Cully’s disclosures in the ambulance, as tainted fruit from a poisoned tree. (People v. Reeves, 61 Cal.2d 268 [38 Cal.Rptr. 1, 391 P.2d 393]; People v. Ditson, 57 Cal.2d 415, 439-440 [20 Cal.*778Rptr. 165, 369 P.2d 714]; Wong Sun v. United States, 371 U.S. 471, 487-488 [83 S.Ct. 407, 9 L.Ed.2d 441].)
In our view the confession of the suspect in the ambulance on the way to the hospital was properly obtained, properly introduced in evidence, and properly used to make other arrests of other suspects for other crimes. (People v. Ford, 234 Cal.App.2d 480, 486-494 [44 Cal.Rptr. 556]; People v. Beverly, 233 Cal.App.2d 702, 715-716 [43 Cal.Rptr. 743]; People v. Fork, 233 Cal.App.2d 725, 735-737 [43 Cal.Rptr. 804].)
The remaining point in this ease involves the admission in evidence of a second confession given by Cully to Officer Combs in the hospital about 7:30 p.m. on the evening of his arrest. Officer Combs asked what had happened that morning. Cully told him he had been at the Beau Jest Bar trying to get in the back way when the cops drove by with their lights off. He took off and a cop started after him, but he didn’t stop because he didn’t want to go back to the joint. When a cop almost got him he threw his screwdriver and took off again. Bruce and Steve and Mike had been hitting all the bars in Highland Park, and Bruce was the one who had gone through the roof at the 58 Club on Figueroa.
The apparent purpose of this further interview was to secure a written statement—which Cully declined to give—and obtain more information about the activities of Cully’s roommates. At that point the police already had the benefit of Cully’s first confession, the accusatory stage had been reached, and therefore Cully, the accused, should have been advised of his right to counsel and his right to remain silent. Absent such advice, the use in evidence of his second confession was improper. However, the second confession given to Officer Combs at the hospital almost repeated word for word the first confession to Officer Najera in the ambulance, and added nothing to the case except reiteration. (People v. Robinson, 62 Cal.2d 889, 897 [44 Cal.Rptr. 762, 402 P.2d 834].) Since the first confession was properly admitted in evidence, we see no prejudice to the defendant from the improper admission of a second confession covering the same ground, especially since the case was tried by the court without a jury. (People v. Ford, 234 Cal.App.2d 480, 494-495 [44 Cal.Rptr. 556].) In our opinion the impropriety of this admission did not result in a miscarriage of justice, and a different result on retrial is not probable. (People v. Atchley, 53 Cal.2d 160, 170-171 [346 P.2d 764]; People v. Moya, 53 *779Cal.2d 819, 822 [3 Cal.Rptr. 360, 350 P.2d 112]; People v. Garner, 57 Cal.2d 135, 144 [18 Cal.Rptr. 40, 367 P.2d 680]; United States v. Bayer, 331 U.S. 532, 540 [67 S.Ct. 1394, 91 L.Ed. 1654].) The constitutional provision with respect to harmless error applies. (Cal. Const., art. VI, § 4½; People v. Watson, 46 Cal.2d 818, 834-837 [299 P.2d 243]; People v. Modesto, 62 Cal.2d 436, 462-464 [42 Cal.Rptr. 417, 398 P.2d 753], Peters, J., concurring and dissenting.)
Appellant’s purported appeal from the order denying his motion for a new trial is dismissed. (Pen. Code, § 1237, subd. 1.)
The judgment of conviction is affirmed.
Herndon, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9738232 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:46:10.870685+00 ===

ROTH, P. J.
I dissent.
Appellant was convicted of the crime of attempted burglary in the second degree in violation of sections 459 and 664, Penal Code, in that on January 13, 1963, he attempted to enter the building occupied by the Beau Jest Bar, with intent to commit theft therein. He admitted two prior felony convictions of robbery.
There were two doors through which the beer tavern could be entered from the rear. One was nailed shut while the other was operating. During the early morning of January 13, 1963, two Los Angeles police officers were patrolling the Highland Park area of Los Angeles in the vicinity of the tavern. At about 5 o’clock in the morning, while it was still dark, the officers passed through an alley approximately 50 feet from the rear of the tavern. The lights of their police car were off. One of the officers observed someone at the rear door. The person turned and ran through a parking lot. The officers gave chase on foot. The officers yelled, “Police” and commanded him to stop. A number of shots were fired. After an extended chase, one of the officers observed the person duck in back of a bush. The officer approached the other side of the bush, reached over it and found himself directly opposite the other person. The officer pointed his gun at this person and told him to stop right there. He had the person in view at that time and later identified him as appellant.
As the officer started to go around the bush, appellant began walking toward the officer who noticed that appellant was holding an object in his right hand. The officer pointed his gun at appellant and ordered him to drop the object. *780Appellant continued to edge closer to the officer who maintained a distance of about 15 feet between himself and appellant. The officer again ordered appellant to drop the object but, instead, appellant made a throwing motion at the officer, who then fired at appellant and hit appellant in a nonvital spot. The object which appellant threw at the officer was a screwdriver. Appellant escaped by running into the driveway of a private residence, and the officer lost sight of him among the various houses.
Officer Najera, together with Officer Siler and Sergeant Chinis of the Los Angeles Police Department were sent to the area later in the morning to investigate the above detailed events. None of said officers took part in the chase heretofore detailed. Officer Najera observed fresh blood stains on the ground near a bush in that area. He followed the spots of blood over fences and through back yards for some distance. He talked to a lady in an apartment house located in the neighborhood. This lady told Najera that she had seen a stout lady buying a big bunch of bandages, more than one would ordinarily use in a year's time. Najera then went to the store where the lady said the bandages had been purchased. He was told that the lady who bought the bandages lived in the vicinity. Najera then started going from house to house looking for a lady who answered the above description. He observed a lady coming up the street from the drugstore with another package of bandages. He stopped her and explained to her that he was looking for a man who had been shot. This lady took the officer to her home, telling him that the man was there. She said that he had come in early that morning and that she had been putting bandages on his wound. She led the officer to her home and let him in. He found appellant lying on a mattress in the rear bedroom of the house.
Officer Najera described appellant’s condition as follows: “The defendant had his neck bandaged and his leg, his upper leg almost to his buttocks, that was bandaged, and blood was coming out of the bandages. . . . [Referring to the leg bandages] ... It was almost in the middle of his buttocks, the bandage was clear around the trunk of his body. ’ ’
Officer Najera asked appellant “Are you hurt?” Appellant replied “I have a sore throat.” Najera further testified “When he told me he had a sore throat he had a large bandage on his neck, and it was all bloody and he was bleeding from that area—it would be the left side of his neck. ’ ’
*781Najera further testified as follows:
“Q. As soon as you saw him then you told him he was under arrest? A. Either Officer Siler or Sergeant Chinis or myself told him he was under arrest. I believe they used the handcuffs on him immediately. ’ ’
On cross-examination, Officer Najera stated that he and Officer Siler and Sergeant Chinis, who were with him in the home in which appellant was found, picked up and recovered all articles of appellant’s clothing that could be found in the bedroom or on the premises.
He also testified as follows:
“Q. At the time of your recovery of the clothing, in your mind did you feel that this was the man that had committed the burglary that you had been notified about ? A. Yes. ”
Najera further testified he called an ambulance. He then testified “. . . I . . . stood by until the ambulance crew put him in the ambulance. I rode with him in the ambulance. During the course of the trip to the hospital we had other conversations. Q. Were the statements made by the defendant freely and voluntarily given to you? A. Yes, they were. Q. Did you make some threats or any promises of reward or immunity ... ? A. No, I did not. Q. Did you use any force on him for his statements ? A. No, I did not. ’ ’
Najera related the conversation as follows: “Most of this conversation is probably—not exactly the way he told it to me, but in essence it was that he was not a good burglar . . . that he was a better robber than a burglar. He got caught. That the only reason he went to burglarize this bar . . . was because—and he named the people, . . . they were people we arrested right after we arrested him. He said they had been burglarizing numerous bars in Highland Park so he got the idea to do the same thing; but he wasn’t too good at it and he got caught.
i C
“Q. Did he make any statement to the effect as to whether or not he was burglarizing the premises when the police arrived, that you recall? A. Yes, he said that was the first time he had burglarized that place or any place; that he had got the idea to burglarize it from his roommates, and he named these people, ...”
Later that day Officer Combs of the Police Department interviewed appellant at the hospital. He testified that at that time he asked appellant to tell him what happened the previous night at the Beau Jest Bar, and that he would write *782down what he was told. “He [appellant] said, ‘Yeah, I’ll tell you what happened. This morning I was behind the Beau Jest Bar and trying to get in the back way. I saw the cops driving by with their lights off. I took off and then one cop started after me. . . .
“When he did almost get me I threw this screwdriver I had at him and took off again. Sure, he told me to stop, but like I said I didn’t want to go back to jail.
“ This is the first time I hit that place. ...”
In seeking a reversal, appellant contends that: there was no probable cause for his arrest; that there was an illegal search and seizure; that the corpus delicti of burglary was not established; that the evidence was insufficient to support the judgment, and that his confession was inadmissible. I agree with the majority that the evidence as outlined disposes of the first four of these contentions. I disagree that the ambulance conversation on the facts of this record occurred during the investigatory stage.
When appellant told Officer Najera that he had “a sore throat” he was handcuffed and placed under arrest. Suspicion for the commission of the crime had admittedly focused directly on appellant. Officer Najera not only stated that he thought appellant was the man who committed the crime, admittedly a subjective test, but all the facts and circumstances surrounding the handcuffing and arrest of appellant were ample evidence of probable cause to justify the arrest and to justify Officer Najera’s statement that he thought he had his man. In People v. Stewart, 62 Cal.2d 571, 577-578 [43 Cal.Rptr. 201, 400 P.2d 97], the court said: “An arrest fulfills the first requirement that the investigation has begun to focus on a particular suspect. The Penal Code itself conditions the arrest upon the presence of reasonable ground for the belief that the individual committed the offense; section 813 predicates the issuance of a warrant upon ‘reasonable ground to believe that the defendant has committed’ the offense; section 836 requires that the arrest must rest upon the officer’s reasonable cause for believing the person committed the offense.
“ ‘Probable cause for an arrest,’ we have said, ‘is shown if a man of ordinary caution or prudence would be led to believe and conscientiously entertain a strong suspicion of the guilt of the accused. . . . Probable cause may exist even though there may be some room for doubt. . . . The test in such case is not whether the evidence upon which the officer *783made the arrest is sufficient to convict hut only whether the prisoner should stand trial.’ (People v. Fischer (1957 ) 49 Cal.2d 442, 446 [317 P.2d 967]; see generally, Witkin, Cal. Criminal Procedure (1963) pp. 102-104; Fricke, Cal. Criminal Procedure (6th ed. 1962) pp. 19-20.) ”
Nothing in the record indicates whether or not appellant was informed prior to any conversations with any of the officers of his rights to counsel and to remain silent, or whether he otherwise knowingly and intelligently waived those rights. And specifically there is nothing in the record to show he was advised of or effectively waived such rights prior to his statements to Officer Najera in the ambulance.
The statements in the ambulance amounted to a complete confession of the crime.
As stated in Stewart, supra, p. 579 “. . . Whatever may be the subjective intent of the interrogators, we must, in order to determine if the police are carrying out ‘a process of interrogations that lends itself to eliciting incriminating statements’ . . . analyze the total situation which envelops the questioning by considering such factors as the length of the interrogation, the place and time of the interrogation, the nature of the questions, the conduct of the police and all other relevant circumstances.”
As some writers have suggested, “An objective test is . . . likely for the new American rule, for it is noteworthy that the question of ‘purpose to elicit a confession’ may be more readily determined from the objective evidence—such as the nature of the questions and accusations put to defendant and the length of the interrogation-—-than the question whether the police had decided to charge the defendant.” (Enker and Elsen, Counsel for the Suspects: Massiah v. United States and Escobedo v. Illinois (1964) 49 Minn. L.Rev. 47, 71.)
The record in the instant case of the conversations, particularly that in the ambulance, does not indicate a question and answer approach. In fact Officer Najera testified: “Most of this conversation was from Mr. Cully to me. I did very little questioning. ...”
I feel that the record shows that “The weight of the circumstantial evidence recited . . . and available to [Najera] ... at the point of interrogation provided reasonable grounds for focusing upon defendant as the particular suspect.” (People v. Dorado, supra, p. 347.)
The negative pregnant in the officer’s testimony suggests *784that although little, he did engage in some questioning and that few or little as the questions might have been, they were designed to elicit answers which would incriminate.
It is clear to me that when appellant was placed in the ambulance, the accusatory stage had been reached. He confessed in the ambulance to Officer Najera in response to “. . . very little questioning”; the “very little questioning” succeeded in obtaining incriminating statements amounting to a confession. Appellant was not advised of his right to counsel or of his right to remain silent and there is nothing to indicate that he effectively waived either. We can make no presumption that such rights were waived (People v. Stewart, supra, p. 580). In these circumstances the statements of appellant made in the ambulance and certainly those in the hospital later in the day which were taken down, were illegally admitted into evidence. Such error requires reversal. (People v. Dorado, 62 Cal.2d 338 [42 Cal.Rptr. 169, 398 P.2d 361]; People v. Stewart, 62 Cal.2d 571 [43 Cal.Rptr. 201, 400 P.2d 97]; People v. Modesto, 62 Cal.2d 436, 447 [42 Cal.Rptr. 417, 398 P.2d 753]; In re Schlette, 232 Cal.App.2d 407 [42 Cal.Rptr. 708]; People v. Ahmed, 232 Cal.App.2d 314 [42 Cal.Rptr. 854].)
I would reverse the judgment.
Appellant’s petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied October 20, 1965. Peters, J., was of the opinion that the petition should be granted.

=== CASE 2214143 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:43.044606+00 ===

236 Cal.App.2d 758 (1965)
MIKE TUREM et al., Plaintiffs and Appellants,
v.
TEXACO, INC., et al., Defendants and Respondents.
Civ. No. 28254.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Two.
Aug. 24, 1965.
Joseph W. Fairfield and Ethelyn F. Black for Plaintiffs and Appellants.
Beardsley, Hufstedler & Kemble, John Sobieski, Charles E. Beardsley and Seth M. Hufstedler for Defendants and Respondents. *760
ROTH, P. J.
A motion for summary judgment was made and granted in favor of respondent. The motion was predicated upon a record consisting of the complaint of Mike Turem and Sarah Turem,  [fn. 1] appellants, (Turem), the amended and supplemental answer of Texaco, Inc., (Texaco), William Howard and Clyde Reisdorf,  [fn. 2] respondents, the record of proceeding in the municipal court and the judgment entered therein hereafter referred to, and the declarations of Mike Turem in opposition and those of Clyde Reisdorf and William Howard, in support of the motion. The motion was granted. Judgment was entered thereon in favor of Texaco and against Turem. The appeal is from the judgment.
The matter is before us with a background of prolonged litigation.
The complaint in the case at bench was filed on August 13, 1962. Succinctly summarized, it alleged in pertinent part that Turem as lessee, pursuant to written lease with Texaco as lessor, did on July 27, 1950, enter into possession of the premises therein described, which premises were equipped for and operated as a gas station. The lease was for a specific term of one year but provided for its renewal from year to year, and it was so renewed from year to year for the year which expired on July 26, 1962.
Paragraph (8) of the lease provided in pertinent part "If, at the expiration or termination of this lease or any extension thereof, lessees should hold over with the consent of lessor, express or implied, the tenancy of the lessee thereafter shall be from month to month only and be subject to all of the other terms and conditions of this lease, ..." Turem was in possession on July 30 and 31, 1962. He alleges that on the latter date Texaco forcibly entered the premises without his consent and forcibly evicted him by removing his locks from the gas pumps and building substituting new locks of its own. Turem's action sounds in forcible entry and conversion.
Texaco answered on August 27, 1962. In pertinent part the answer denied the allegations of the complaint, (admitting the execution of the lease described), denied that the lease was *761 in effect after July 26, 1962, and alleged that the lease had been automatically terminated on July 26, 1962, under the specific provisions of paragraph (6)b thereof, "... by written notice ... to ... Turem on July 13, 1962, which notice was effective July 26, 1962. ... [And] ... said lease was terminated by written notice served in the manner required ... on July 13, 1962, and that such termination was effective on July 26, 1962." Texaco further alleged "... that on July 31, 1962, pursuant to the request of ... Turem, representatives of ... Texaco ... met with ... Turem at the ... premises for the purpose of taking ... inventory and receiving the surrender of possession of the station .... On that date, with the consent of ... Turem, the taking of inventory and changing of locks on the station was commenced. ... [T]hereafter, on the same date, ... Turem changed his position and demanded that ... Texaco, ... leave the premises, and refused to surrender possession of said premises. That thereafter on said date the locks of Mike Turem on said premises were restored to the station and it remained in the same condition as to locks and possession in which it had been theretofore, and [Texaco is] ... informed ... that ... Turem has retained possession of said station and the keys to all locks thereon continuously from and after said 31st day of July 1962."
On October 4, 1962, Texaco commenced an unlawful detainer action against Turem in the Municipal Court of Los Angeles County, No. 930 662, charging defendant Turem with unlawful possession of the premises.
On October 8, 1962, Turem answered this unlawful detainer complaint. Turem denied he was in possession of the premises and set forth three affirmative defenses, the substance of which is that by virtue of a previous forceful eviction by Texaco, Turem was no longer in possession of the premises. In a fourth affirmative defense, Turem alleged that there was another action pending, to wit: the action in the superior court (from the summary judgment in which this appeal is before us) which had been filed on August 13, 1962.
On October 9, 1962, Turem filed a cross-complaint in the unlawful detainer action, in which he set forth the forcible entry and eviction described in the superior court action and prayed for $10,000 compensatory damages and $10,000 punitive damages.
On October 15, 1962, pursuant to notice of motion therefor, a motion to strike the cross-complaint was made by Texaco on *762 the ground that there could be no cross-complaint in an unlawful detainer action, since such an action is a summary proceeding for possession. Turem opposed the motion on the ground that possession was not an issue and that the cross-complaint on its face showed that the relief sought was in excess of the municipal court's jurisdiction, and that the case should be transferred and heard in the superior court. On the same day, the court granted the motion of Texaco and struck the cross-complaint.
Appellant complains that the motion to strike the cross-complaint was erroneously granted; that the municipal court lacked jurisdiction to do so, and that it should have transferred the action to the superior court.
[1] The law is clear that when possession is an issue, the municipal court has jurisdiction to strike a cross-complaint in an unlawful detainer proceeding. Keenan v. Dean, 134 Cal.App.2d 189 [285 P.2d 300], cited by appellant, is not in point. In that case the proceeding, although in unlawful detainer, was transferred to the superior court upon the filing of a cross-complaint because the facts in that action showed that possession was not an issue. Thus, at page 193, the court said: "Of course, a cause of action for libel cannot be set up in an unlawful detainer action, and the parties are agreed that this is so. But it is equally clear, under the allegations of the answer, that since the premises were surrendered prior to the filing of the action, the issue of possession was removed from the case and the action became one for money damages." (Italics added.)
[2] In the case at bench, possession was directly an issue. Texaco alleged Turem was in possession. In his answer he denied that he was. There is however nothing in the answer indicating that he had surrendered possession prior to the commencement of the action, except the affirmative matter set up in the separate defenses in the answer. These affirmative defenses are deemed to have been denied. (Code Civ. Proc.,  462.) The allegations of the affirmative defenses are ambiguous as to which party had physical possession of the premises as well as legal possession. The issue framed includes both, but nowhere in the record does it appear that Turem gave up physical possession of the premises at any time before judgment was had in the municipal court proceeding.
Since possession was an issue, there is no question of the power of the municipal court to strike the cross-complaint.
[3] Section 1170 of the Code of Civil Procedure specifically *763 provides: "On or before the day fixed for his appearance, the defendant may appear and answer or demur." In Schubert v. Lowe, 193 Cal. 291, at page 295 [223 P. 550], the court quoting the above excerpt, says: "... The section limits the defendant to an answer or demurrer. Obviously, therefore, a cross-complaint is inadmissible in an action in unlawful detainer."
[4] Moreover, Code of Civil Procedure, section 442, which authorizes the filing of a cross-complaint, applies only to "actions," not special proceedings; therefore, entirely apart from Code of Civil Procedure, section 1170, no cross-complaint would be authorized in unlawful detainer. (Tide Water Associated Oil Co. v. Superior Court, 43 Cal.2d 815, 824 [279 P.2d 35].)
[5] In Knowles v. Robinson, 60 Cal.2d 620, the court said at page 625 [36 Cal.Rptr. 33, 387 P.2d 833]: "... where an objection is interposed in an action for unlawful detainer, no cross-complaint or counterclaim may survive. The remedy of unlawful detainer is designed to provide means by which the timely possession of premises which are wrongfully withheld may be secured to the person entitled thereto. The summary character of the action would be defeated if, by cross-complaint or counter-claim, issues irrelevant to the right of immediate possession could be introduced." (Lakeside Park Assn. of Kelseyville v. Keithly, 43 Cal.App.2d 418, 422 [110 P.2d 1055]; Rydell v. Beverly Hills Printing & Publishing Co., 88 Cal.App. 216, 219 [262 P. 818].)
[6] The foregoing rule does not apply when a special proceeding in unlawful detainer has been transformed into an action for damages. In such a situation there is no need for a summary remedy. When it clearly appears that a defendant has surrendered possession before trial, cross-complaints are permitted. (D'Amico v. Riedel, 95 Cal.App.2d 6, 8, 9 [212 P.2d 52]; Servais v. Klein, 112 Cal.App. 26, 35-36 [296 P. 123].)
The state of the pleadings is not such as to bring Turem within the exception.
On October 22, 1962, a trial was had in the municipal court. Turem did not appear at the trial, the court gave judgment that Texaco "... be restored to the possession of said premises; that the lease or agreement under which property is held be, and the same is hereby forfeited; ... and recover ... the sum of $630.59 together with ... costs ...." This judgment was entered in favor of Texaco on *764 October 24, 1962. Turem filed his notice of appeal from said judgment on October 30, 1962.
On December 7, 1962, at the request of Texaco, the trial judge of the municipal court entered a nunc pro tunc order which recited in pertinent part: "... It is the opinion of the court ... that the signing and entry of findings of fact ... be deemed to have been made on October 23, 1962. ... [I]t is ... ordered that ... findings of fact ... be deemed to havs been signed and entered on October 23, 1962." Paragraph VIII of the findings referred to, bearing the filing mark of October 23, 1962, recites: "On July 31, 1962, pursuant to the consent. ... Texaco peaceably entered said premises and placed locks on the gas tanks and pumps on said premises and began placing a new lock upon the door to the gas station on said premises, but before this new lock was completely installed, [Turem] withdrew his said consent. Texaco thereupon restored [Turem's] lock to the door of the gas station and left the premises. Texaco thereafter removed the locks placed upon the gas tanks and pumps. Texaco's locks remained upon the gas tanks and pumps approximately one and one-half hours. None of the said locks interferred with ... [Turem's] operation of the gas station or his use of the premises in any way; ... [Turem] had voluntarily closed his gas station on said day. Texaco has not entered upon the said premises forcibly or without ... [Turem's] consent at any time."
Paragraph IX provides further: "Texaco has not, either on July 31, 1962, or any other date, evicted ... [Turem] from said premises."
Upon appeal, the municipal court judgment was affirmed on January 29, 1963.
Turem's petition for rehearing or petition for certification to the District Court of Appeal was denied on February 2, 1963.
Petition for writ of mandate filed with the District Court of Appeal on February 20, 1963, was denied on March 1, 1963, without opinion and a petition for hearing in the Supreme Court was denied on March 27, 1963.
[7] On June 12, 1963, Texaco filed an amended and supplemental answer in the case at bench. The amended and supplemental answer in pertinent part alleges in paragraph VI thereof that Texaco went into possession of the premises pursuant to the request of Turem, that it came to the premises to take an inventory and receive surrender of possession, *765 and that on July 31, 1962, "... with the consent of ... Turem, the taking of inventory and changing of locks on the station was commenced. That thereafter, on the same date, ... Turem changed his position and demanded that ... Texaco, ... leave the premises, and refused to surrender possession of said premises. ... [O]n said date the locks ... were restored to the station and it remained in the same condition as to locks and possession in which it had been theretofore, and ... [Texaco is] ... informed ... that ... Turem has retained possession of said station and the keys to all locks thereon continuously from and after said 31st day of July 1962, to on or about November 5, 1962."
In a separate defense, Texaco alleged the entire history of the unlawful detainer litigation, as outlined above, specifically reciting therein paragraphs VIII and IX of the findings, made by the municipal court, already set out above. Texaco then asserted in paragraph IX of its separate defense that all of the issues in the case at bench were res judicata.
On June 25, 1963, Texaco gave notice of motion for summary judgment, supported by the declarations of Clyde Reisdorf and William Howard, which were concurrently filed. The declarations of Reisdorf and Howard are substantially identical.  [fn. 3] On July 10, 1963, Turem filed his declaration  [fn. 4] in opposition to the motion for summary judgment. *766
The motion  [fn. 5] was heard on July 11, 1963, and submitted. On September 17, 1963, the motion was granted with a notation: "(Issues res judicata under case No. 930 662, Los Angeles Municipal Court)." Judgment for Texaco that plaintiff take nothing and Texaco have its costs was entered November 13, 1963.
The motion before the trial court undoubtedly presented a clear issue of fact.
The single question before us is whether the judgment in the municipal court adjudicated that issue of fact.
The issue thus presented is clearly res judicata unless on the admitted facts in the record and specifically the allegations made in the amended and supplemental answer of Texaco, it appears there was no jurisdiction in the municipal court. The record on facts found by the municipal court shows that Turem did give permission to Texaco to reenter the demised premises and that Texaco did go into possession peaceably and commenced assumption of complete possession. In the process of assuming complete possession, Turem withdrew his permission. Texaco respected Turem's withdrawal of permission and left. These facts are specifically found to have been the status of the matter on July 31, 1962, by the findings of fact and the judgment of the municipal court.
On the facts thus recited, the question posed is what were the legal consequences of Texaco's act in returning possession of the premises to Turem, having previously made entry upon and accepted possession of its premises pursuant to its written request therefor. Turem contends that when Texaco acceded to his change of mind and permitted him to withdraw his consent, it made a new agreement with him, the terms of which were in no way defined, except for the fact that Texaco returned possession of the premises to Turem.
To make a determination whether the partial possession *767 effected by Texaco was actually such as to vest it with possession so complete that when it gave up that possession in accordance with Turem's wishes, Texaco did in effect create a new tenancy with Turem, is a question of law. If Texaco were charged with complete possession by its mere entry pursuant to permission, the litigation at bench would, of course, assume a different complexion.
We have been cited to no authorities and have found none which holds that Texaco having commenced to take possession pursuant to permission, was charged with complete possession in face of the withdrawal of that permission.
If Texaco were charged with possession by reason of its entry pursuant to permission, its subsequent departure from the premises, with Turem in possession, could raise questions of whether the original written lease had been renewed for another year, or whether Turem was holding over under the original written lease on a month to month tenancy, and if neither of these two eventualities had occurred, if a new tenancy at will had been created. If the first eventuality had resulted, there could be no proceeding in unlawful detainer unless a default were shown in the renewed lease and a notice to cure given to Turem in accordance with the terms of the renewed lease. If either a month to month tenancy or a tenancy at will had been created, there could be no proceeding in the lawful detainer until a 30-day notice to terminate such a month to month tenancy or tenancy at will had been given.
The municipal court in its findings and judgment specifically resolved the facts and held that Turem was holding over despite the fact that the original written lease had been effectively terminated by a two-week notice. It specifically found that Texaco had entered into possession pursuant to permission, but before completing such possession, withdrew from possession, because Turem had withdrawn his consent to Texaco to enter and on the evidence before that court, it found that Turem was in possession continuously from the 27th of July to and including the date of judgment and gave judgment to Texaco against Turem for the rental value of the premises for that period. We see no escape from that determination.
[8] It has been noted that in ruling on the motion for summary judgment, the trial court took judicial notice of the pleadings and judgment in the municipal court action. Turem *768 contends that Texaco should have proved these documents by oral and documentary evidence. The law is to the contrary. In Flores v. Arroyo, 56 Cal.2d 492, the court said at pages 496 and 497 [15 Cal.Rptr. 87, 364 P.2d 263]:
"Second. In ruling on a demurrer essentially founded on res judicata, may a court take judicial notice of a prior judgment in a different case even though such judgment or its content is not pleaded in the complaint, provided (a) the judgment is appropriately drawn to the court's attention and (b) the plaintiff has adequate notice and opportunity to be heard on the question of the effect of such judgment?"
"Yes. Courts take judicial notice of the public and private official acts of the judicial departments of this state and of the United States and the laws of the several states of the United States and the interpretation thereof by the highest courts of appellate jurisdiction of such states. (Code Civ. Proc.,  1875, subd. 3; Hammell v. Britton, 19 Cal.2d 72, 75 [1] [119 P.2d 333]; Stafford v. Ware, 187 Cal.App.2d 227, 228 [2] et seq. [9 Cal.Rptr. 706]; Christiana v. Rose, 100 Cal.App.2d 46, 52 [4] [222 P.2d 891]; Estate of Monks, 48 Cal.App.2d 603, 618 [11] [120 P.2d 167] [hearing denied by the Supreme Court]; cf. City of Los Angeles v. Abbott, 217 Cal. 184, 192 et seq. [17 P.2d 993]; Sewell v. Johnson, 165 Cal. 762, 770 [134 P. 704, Ann.Cas. 1915B 645]; Taliaferro v. Taliaferro, 178 Cal.App.2d 140, 141 [1] [2 Cal.Rptr. 716].)"
"Any statements in prior cases decided by this court contrary to the rule we now approve are overruled, ... [Citations.]."
"Any statements in decisions of the District Courts of Appeal contrary to the rule announced in this decision are disapproved, ... [Citations.]."
"In the present case the prior judgment which was not pleaded in the complaint, but of which the trial court took judicial notice, was appropriately drawn to the attention of that court, and plaintiff had adequate notice and opportunity to be heard on the question of the effect of such judgment. It was therefore proper for the court to give it judicial notice."
The last paragraph of the quoted excerpt is peculiarly applicable to the record at bench.
[9] The appellants argue that judicial notice of court decisions is limited to actions between the same parties tried in the same court. There is no such limitation in the rule *769 stated above, or in Code of Civil Procedure, section 1875, subdivision 3, on which the rule is based.
Three of the four cases relied on by the appellants were expressly disapproved in Flores v. Arroyo, at page 497. These cases are Popcorn Equipment Co. v. Page, 92 Cal.App.2d 448 [207 P.2d 647], Olds v. Peebler, 66 Cal.App.2d 76 [151 P.2d 901], and Johnson v. Ota, 43 Cal.App.2d 94 [110 P.2d 507].)
The fourth decision cited by appellants, People ex rel. Carrillo v. De La Guerra, 24 Cal. 73, was decided exactly 100 years ago, and comes within the rule that: "Any statements in prior cases decided by this court contrary to the rule we now approve are overruled." (Flores v. Arroyo, supra, at p. 497.)
The judgment is affirmed.
Herndon, J., and Fleming, J., concurred.
"That while all this was going on I did telephone Mr. Reisdorf and he stated to me that since the lease had expired I had no business being on the premises and that they had a right to remove me in any manner whatsoever; and that what was being done to me at that particular time was being done pursuant to his orders. That although technically speaking Mr. Reisdorf personally did not enter upon my premises and place the locks on the pumps and evict me from the premises, nevertheless it was being done by others under his directions and specific orders."
"That as far as Mr. Howard is concerned, he also did not personally place the locks on my pumps, but he did retain a locksmith to do that work and appeared on the premises with the locksmith and gave him orders what to do."
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. The lease which is the subject matter of this litigation is actually between the Texas Company as lessor and Mike Turem alone as lessee. The reason for the joinder of Sarah Turem as a party plaintiff is not apparent.
[fn. 2]  2. It is clear from the record and conceded by Texaco, Inc., that defendants William Howard and Clyde Reisdorf were representatives and agents for Texaco, Inc. in all respects in connection with the subject matter of this litigation.
[fn. 3]  3. Reisdorf, District Sales Manager of Texaco, declared: "I did not, either on July 30 or 31, 1962, enter upon the premises of the plaintiffs located at 7950 Santa Monica Boulevard, Los Angeles, California, nor did I evict plaintiffs therefrom on said date or at any other time. At no time have I ever entered the said premises without the plaintiffs' permission and consent. At no time have I removed the plaintiffs' locks from the gasoline pumps thereon, or placed defendant Texaco's locks thereon, nor have I ever prevented plaintiffs from selling gasoline thereby. At no time have I removed plaintiffs' locks from the buildings located at 7950 Santa Monica Boulevard or placed defendant Texaco's locks thereon, nor have I ever denied plaintiffs access to the buildings on said premises thereby. I have never prevented plaintiffs from selling automobile accessories stored on the premises, or from using their business records or personal property, nor have I prevented them from selling any gasoline or gasoline products or automobile accessories."
[fn. 4]  4. Turem declared: "Regardless of what Mr. William Howard or Mr. Clyde Reisdorf may contend, the point is that representatives, agents and employees of Texaco, Inc. did enter upon my premises at 7950 Santa Monica Boulevard, Los Angeles, California, on July 30th and 31st 1962, and did remove the locks from my pumps and place their own locks thereon, thereby preventing me from dispensing my gasoline, and they further against my will and desire took possession of the premises.
[fn. 5]  5. The notice of motion was based, among other things, upon "... the pleadings, findings of fact, conclusions of law, judgment, and other records and documents in the case of Texaco v. Turem, Los Angeles Municipal Court 930,662, of which this court will be asked to take judicial notice."

=== CASE 2214174 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:43.460573+00 ===

32 Cal.App.2d 671 (1939)
In the Matter of the Application of JAMES SOMMERVILLE for a Writ of Habeas Corpus.
Crim. No. 3218.
California Court of Appeals. Second Appellate District, Division One.
May 17, 1939.
John S. Cooper for Petitioner.
Buron Fitts, District Attorney, and Jere J. Sullivan, Deputy District Attorney, for Respondent.
White, J.
This is a proceeding under a writ of habeas corpus for the release of petitioner on the ground that he has been confined in the county jail for more than one year and that his further confinement is illegal under section 19a of the Penal Code, which in part provides: "In no case shall any person sentenced to confinement in a county or city jail on conviction of misdemeanor, or as a condition of probation, or for any reason, be committed for a period in excess of one year."
At the hearing of this writ it was disclosed that in an information filed by the district attorney of Los Angeles County petitioner was charged in two counts with separate and distinct violations of the State Narcotic Act; that on July 29, 1937, he entered pleas of guilty to both counts, pursuant to which guilty pleas he was, on August 13, 1937, sentenced to serve one year in the county jail on each count, the court directing that the sentences run consecutively.
[1] The contention of petitioner is that the purpose of section 19a of the Penal Code is to prevent any single period of confinement in the county jail for longer than one year; that in enacting this section the legislature sought to prohibit protracted terms of imprisonment in a county jail and intended that any period of penal servitude longer than one year should be served in the penitentiary.
Both in principle and directly, this point, in a case involving judgments pronounced on separate counts of a single information, has been ruled upon, and is clearly established contrary to petitioner's suggestion in that regard. (People v. Carr, 6 Cal.2d 227 [57 PaCal.2d 489].)
As petitioner is now legally detained under the sentence pronounced upon his plea of guilty to the second count of the information, the writ is discharged and the petitioner *673 is remanded to the custody of the sheriff of the county of Los Angeles.
York, P. J., and Doran, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9738233 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:46:19.654764+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE GILLERAN JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the court: The plaintiff, Winnebago County Citizens for Controlled Growth (WCCCG), filed suit following the passage of an ordinance by the defendant, the County of Winnebago, which granted the defendant Dyn Cannell, LLC, a special use permit to construct a planned community development (PCD) in Rockton, Illinois. The defendants moved to dismiss the complaint, arguing that WCCCG lacked standing to bring the suit. The trial court denied the motion to dismiss as to counts III and IV of the complaint, but granted the motion as to counts I and II and dismissed those counts, finding that there was no just reason to delay enforcement or appeal of its order. WCCCG appealed. We reverse and remand. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND On Januaiy 31, 2006, Dyn Cannell filed an application for a special use permit allowing it to build a PCD on approximately 123 acres of land in Winnebago County (the subject property). The majority of the lots in the PCD were to be 27,000 square feet, and the average lot size was to be approximately 33,000 square feet. In addition to single-family homes, the PCD was to include a sports recreation area, a playground, and additional open space or recreational areas. According to WCCCG, the subject property is located approximately one-half mile north of the Nygren Wetlands, a nature preserve. The subject property is at a higher location than the wetlands, allowing runoff to flow into the wetlands from the subject property. The Winnebago County Soil and Conservation District determined that 87.7% of the soil within the subject property is suitable for a conventional septic absorption system, but the sandy nature of the soil requires a “restricted” rating mandating a minimum lot size of 43,650 square feet. The remaining soils within the subject property cannot support septic systems. On April 18, 2006, the Winnebago County Zoning Board of Appeals held a hearing on the application. An attorney for Dyn Cannell spoke in support of the PCD application. An attorney for some of the objectors (the same attorney that currently represents WCCCG) questioned Dyn Cannell’s attorney regarding certain aspects of the proposal and made a closing statement. In addition, 15 private citizens appeared and spoke against the PCD application. Following these comments, the zoning board deliberated publicly. Board members expressed concern that the proposed PCD could be detrimental to or endanger the public welfare because septic systems were proposed for lots of less than 43,650 square feet. Other negative comments related to the lot size (less than one acre) as being out of character for the largely rural surrounding area and to the lack of information regarding the PCD’s likely impact on utilities, access roads, other necessary facilities, and traffic. The zoning board voted unanimously to deny the PCD application. On June 8, 2006, the PCD application came before the Winnebago County Board. The minutes of the meeting do not reflect any discussion or findings related to the PCD. The county board voted 19 to 4 to approve the PCD, and the board issued a special use permit to Dyn Cannell for the PCD. On July 5, 2006, WCCCG was incorporated as an Illinois not-for-profit corporation. Its members include 68 persons, 14 of whom own property adjacent to the subject property. Ten of the persons who spoke at the hearing before the zoning board are members. On July 12, 2006, WCCCG filed suit in the circuit court of Winnebago County. It filed an amended complaint on November 13, 2006. Count I of the amended complaint sought review under the Administrative Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3 — 101 et seq. (West 2006)) of the County’s decision to grant the special use permit. Count II (the La Salle claim) alleged that the County’s grant of the special use permit violated substantive due process, as set forth in La Salle National Bank of Chicago v. County of Cook, 12 Ill. 2d 40 (1957). Counts III and IV sought a declaratory judgment that section 90 — 57 of the Winnebago County Code (Winnebago County Code §90 — 57 (eff. July 27, 2000)), which permits PCDs and sets out requirements for their approval, was unconstitutional in various ways. The defendants Winnebago County and Dyn Cannell moved to dismiss the amended complaint pursuant to sections 2 — 619 and 2 — 615 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Code) (735 ILCS 5/2 — 619, 2 — 615 (West 2006)). Their section 2 — 619 argument was that, under the General Not For Profit Corporation Act of 1986 (Act) (805 ILCS 105/101.01 et seq. (West 2006)), WCCCG lacked standing to bring the suit, because the Act provides that a not-for-profit corporation such as WCCCG may sue in its own name only if “neither the claim asserted nor the relief requested requires the participation of individual members in the lawsuit.” 805 ILCS 105/103.10(b) (West 2006). The defendants argued that proving the elements of a La Salle claim would require the participation of individual members who owned property adjacent to the subject property about matters such as a threatened decrease in their property values. The defendants also argued that counts II through IV of the amended complaint should be dismissed pursuant to section 2 — 615 because they were too vague to make out a claim. Finally, Dyn Cannell argued that count III should be dismissed because the challenged ordinance was not unconstitutionally vague. The trial court denied the motion to dismiss as to counts III and iy but granted the motion as to counts I and II. In a memorandum of decision issued on March 7, 2007, the trial court stated that, under the doctrine of associational standing adopted in International Union of Operating Engineers, Local 148 v. Department of Employment Security, 215 Ill. 2d 37 (2005), WCCCG did not have standing to bring suit on behalf of its members, because a majority of the members did not have standing to sue individually. The trial court further found that the La Salle claim in count II must be dismissed because an analysis of this claim would not involve pure questions of law and thus would require the participation of individual members in the suit. As to count I, the trial court stated that it was following the special concurrence of Justices Thomas and Garman in International Union, and it therefore found that WCCCG did not have standing to bring suit under the Administrative Review Law, because it had not been a party to the administrative proceedings being challenged. On March 12, 2007, the trial court entered an order dismissing counts I and II, denying the motion to dismiss as to counts III and IV and finding pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 304(a) (210 Ill. 2d R. 304(a)) that there was no just reason to delay enforcement or appeal. ANALYSIS WCCCG appealed, arguing that: (1) the possibility that some of its members may ultimately participate in the trial of the La Salle claim does not bar associational standing for count II; and (2) it has associational standing to bring an action under the Administrative Review Law despite the fact that it was not formed until after the administrative proceedings, because some of its members participated in those proceedings and could sue in their own right. WCCCG also argues that the trial court erred in holding that the limited number of its members who had individual standing prevented it from having associational standing.  Lack of standing is an affirmative matter that may be asserted in a motion pursuant to section 2 — 619(a)(9) of the Code. 735 ILCS 5/2 — 619(a)(9) (West 2006); International Union, 215 Ill. 2d at 45. In a motion to dismiss brought under section 2 — 619, the movant may go beyond the allegations of the complaint and assert affirmative matters that would defeat the plaintiff’s claim. 735 ILCS 5/2 — 619 (West 2004); Illinois Graphics Co. v. Nickum, 159 Ill. 2d 469, 485 (1994). “Under Illinois law, a plaintiff need not allege facts establishing standing. [Citations.] Rather, it is the defendant’s burden to plead and prove lack of standing. [Citations.] Where standing is challenged by way of a motion to dismiss, a court must accept as true all well-pleaded facts in the plaintiffs complaint and all inferences that can reasonably be drawn in the plaintiffs favor.” International Union, 215 Ill. 2d at 45. We review de novo the dismissal of a complaint for lack of standing. International Union, 215 Ill. 2d at 45. A. Participation of Individual Members in the La Salle Claim The trial court dismissed count II, the La Salle claim, because it believed that WCCCG lacked standing under the judicially recognized doctrine of associational standing, as enunciated in International Union. However, the defendants also raise a separate source of standing, section 103.10(b) of the Act (805 ILCS 105/103.10(b) (West 2006)), and argue that that statute imposes even more stringent limits on the standing of not-for-profit corporations such as WCCCG that seek to bring suit on behalf of their members. We examine each argument in turn. 1. The Doctrine of Associational Standing  In International Union, the Illinois Supreme Court discussed the doctrine of associational standing, through which an organization may assert the legal rights of its members in certain circumstances. The court noted that the doctrine was firmly established in federal law and had been the subject of several United States Supreme Court cases, which identified three requirements for associational standing: “ ‘(a) [the organization’s] members would otherwise have standing to sue in their own right; (b) the interests it seeks to protect are germane to the organization’s purpose; and (c) neither the claim asserted nor the relief requested requires the participation of individual members in the lawsuit.’ ” International Union, 215 Ill. 2d at 47, quoting Hunt v. Washington State Apple Advertising Comm’n, 432 U.S. 333, 343, 53 L. Ed. 2d 383, 394, 97 S. Ct 2434, 2441 (1977). The court then adopted the doctrine of associational standing and the Hunt test for whether such an organization has such standing. International Union, 215 Ill. 2d at 51. Here, the trial court dismissed count II (the La Salle claim) under the third prong of the Hunt test, the need for participation by individual members in the lawsuit. The defendants argued that the third prong of the Hunt test barred associational standing for WCCCG as to the La Salle claim because some of the factors that a court must consider in deciding such a claim would require evidence regarding the situation of each individual homeowner.  In La Salle, 12 Ill. 2d at 46-47, the supreme court identified several factors for courts to use in determining the validity of a zoning ordinance. These factors include: “(1) the existing uses and zoning of nearby property; (2) the extent to which a particular zoning restriction diminishes property values; (3) the extent to which diminishing the plaintiffs property values promotes the health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the public; (4) the relative gain to the public as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner; (5) the suitability of the subject property for the zoned purpose; (6) the length of time the subject property has been vacant as zoned in the context of land development in the vicinity; (7) the community’s need for the proposed use; and (8) the care with which the community has undertaken to plan its land use development.” 1350 Lake Shore Associates v. Casalino, 352 Ill. App. 3d 1027, 1035 (2004) (summarizing La Salle factors). The defendants argue that establishing the first four factors of WCCCG’s La Salle claim will require the participation of the individual members of WCCCG. They argue that these individual members are not all similarly situated: while some members are neighbors whose land is zoned for agricultural uses, some members live farther away, in residential areas of Rockton. Thus, no one member can speak for all. The participation of individual members in the suit would, they argue, run afoul of the third prong of the Hunt test, which states that an organization does not have standing to bring suit on behalf of its members if either the claim asserted or the relief requested requires the participation of individual members of the organization. WCCCG responds with several arguments. First, it argues that the third prong of the Hunt test bars standing only when the amount of individual participation needed clearly outweighs the other evidence to be presented in the case. It argues that, in this case, very little individual testimony will be needed. It asserts that the La Salle factors require an analysis of the impact of the proposed PCD on the nearby property in general, not on any one landowner’s property, and WCCCG plans to present much of its evidence on these factors through expert testimony rather than testimony by the neighboring properly owners. In addition, as the suit seeks prospective relief rather than damages, no individualized proof of damages will be needed. International Union is a recent case, and thus there are few Illinois cases applying the doctrine of associational standing. Following the methodology of International Union itself, which drew on federal law in deciding to adopt the doctrine of associational standing and delineating the scope of that doctrine, we look to the relatively well-developed body of federal case law on associational standing in determining how to apply the third prong of the Hunt test. Unlike the first two prongs of the Hunt test, the third prong is judicially created and based on prudential considerations. United Food & Commercial Workers Union Local 751 v. Brown Group, Inc., 517 U.S. 544, 558, 134 L. Ed. 2d 758, 770-71, 116 S. Ct. 1529, 1537 (1996). It “is best seen as focusing on matters of administrative convenience and efficiency, not on elements of a case or controversy within the meaning of the Constitution.” Brown Group, Inc., 517 U.S. at 557, 134 L. Ed. 2d at 770,116 S. Ct. at 1536. The third prong was first discussed in Warth v. Seldin, 422 U.S. 490, 511, 45 L. Ed. 2d 343, 362, 95 S. Ct. 2197, 2212 (1975), where the Supreme Court stated that, “so long as the nature of the claim and the relief sought does not make the individual participation of each injured party indispensable to proper resolution of the cause, the association may be an appropriate representative of its members, entitled to invoke the court’s jurisdiction.” (Emphasis added.) In Hospital Council of Western Pennsylvania v. City of Pittsburgh, 949 F.2d 83 (3d Cir. 1991), the Third Circuit examined the issue of whether the likely participation in the suit by some individual members of the plaintiff association deprived the plaintiff of standing under the third prong of the Hunt test. The court found that Hunt’s enunciation of the third prong derived from the passage from Warth quoted above, and thus permitted an association to assert a claim requiring participation by some, but not all, of its members. Hospital Council, 949 F.2d at 89. Turning to the facts of the case before it, the court found that individual members of the plaintiff association were likely to have to provide discovery and that some might have to provide testimony at the trial. Nevertheless, the court concluded that such participation by individual members did not provide a basis for denying associational standing under Hunt. Hospital Council, 949 F.2d at 90. The third prong of the Hunt test also was at issue in Retired Chicago Police Ass’n v. City of Chicago, 7 F.3d 584 (7th Cir. 1993) (RCPA). In that case, as in Hospital Council and the case before us now, the trial court had dismissed the plaintiff association’s complaint, finding that the necessity for participation by individual members of the plaintiff precluded standing under Hunt. The Seventh Circuit followed Hospital Council and reversed the trial court, stating: “We believe that the approach of the Third Circuit is a sound one. We can discern no indication in Warth, Hunt, or [International Union, United Automobile, Aerospace & Agricultural Implement Workers of America v. Brock, 477 U.S. 274, 91 L. Ed. 2d 228, 106 S. Ct. 2523 (1986),] that the Supreme Court intended to limit representational standing to cases in which it would not be necessary to take any evidence from individual members of an association. Such a stringent limitation on representational standing cannot be squared with the Court’s assessment in Brock of the efficiencies for both the litigant and the judicial system from the use of representational standing. Rather, the third prong of Hunt is more plausibly read as dealing with situations in which it is necessary to establish ‘individualized proof,’ [citation] for litigants not before the court in order to support the cause of action.” RCPA, 7 F.3d at 601-02. The court found that the evidence supporting recoveiy for the plaintiff “might be supplied by the evidentiary submissions of some of the members,” but the presence of each individual member as a party would not be required, and thus there was no bar to associational standing. RCPA, 7 F.3d at 603. The interplay between the requirements for associational standing and the procedural posture of a motion to dismiss was recently discussed in Pennsylvania Psychiatric Society v. Green Spring Health Services, Inc., 280 F.3d 278 (3d Cir. 2002). There, the trial court dismissed the complaint for lack of associational standing, finding that the allegations of the complaint would require significant participation by the individual members of the association. The association argued that the individual members’ participation would not be substantial because the suit involved challenges to the methods by which the defendant reached its decisions rather than to the actual decisions. The appellate court reversed the trial court’s dismissal of the plaintiff association’s complaint, stating: “If the Pennsylvania Psychiatric Society can establish these claims with limited individual participation, it would satisfy the requirements for associational standing. While we question whether the Society can accomplish this, at this stage of the proceedings on a motion to dismiss for lack of standing, we review the sufficiency of the pleadings and ‘must accept as true all material allegations of the complaint and must construe the complaint in favor of the plaintiff.’ Trump Hotels & Casino Resorts, Inc. v. Mirage Resorts, Inc., 140 F.3d 478, 483 (3d Cir. 1998) (citing Warth, [422 U.S. at 501, 45 L. Ed. 2d at 356, 95 S. Ct. at 2206]). For this reason, we believe the Society’s suit should not be dismissed before it is given the opportunity to establish the alleged violations without significant individual participation ***.” Green Spring Health Services, 280 F.3d at 286. Similarly, in this case we must view the complaint in the fight most favorable to WCCCG and draw all reasonable inferences in WCCCG’s favor. International Union, 215 Ill. 2d at 45. The defendants point to cases in which courts upheld dismissals for lack of standing when the plaintiff organizations could not establish their right to recovery without significant involvement by the organizations’ individual members. However, the analysis of whether significant participation by individual members is required necessarily must be made on a case-by-case basis, as it will differ depending on the facts of each case and the nature of the relief being sought. The defendants have not identified any cases in which the factual particulars and the relief sought were similar to this case. Accordingly, the cited cases do not govern our determination here. We turn to the specifics of the case before us. In deciding that the third prong of the Hunt test had not been met, the trial court emphasized that the La Salle factors “focus on the impact on individual homeowners” and do not present a pure question of law, as did the claim that was at issue in International Union. While the trial court is correct that a La Salle claim presents a factual inquiry, we disagree that associational standing is proper only when the case involves a pure question of law. Instead, the focus under the Hunt test is whether significant participation by the individual members of the plaintiff association will be necessary to establish the plaintiffs right to relief. Certainly, when a case presents only purely legal issues, it is unlikely to require such individualized proof. See Brock, 477 U.S. at 287, 91 L. Ed. 2d at 241, 106 S. Ct. at 2531; International Union, 215 Ill. 2d at 52. The converse is not necessarily true, however; a case involving a factual inquiry may nevertheless be provable without the participation of the individual members of an organization. The heart of a La Salle claim is an argument that the enactment of a land use ordinance was arbitrary, capricious, and unrelated to the public health, safety, and morals. La Salle, 12 Ill. 2d at 46. Thus, the focus of the inquiry in such a claim is the reasonableness of the government’s decision under the particular circumstances at issue. WCCCG contends that, in this case, establishing its right to the relief it seeks will not require substantial participation by its members. It correctly points out that the first La Salle factor requires proof of only the zoning and uses of the property “nearby” the proposed development, not the zoning and use of each WCCCG member’s property. La Salle, 12 Ill. 2d at 46; 1350 Lake Shore Associates, 352 Ill. App. 3d at 1035. There is no obvious reason why such evidence would have to be submitted by the individual members themselves, rather than by a realtor, local official, or other competent witness. Evidence regarding the second factor, the diminution of property values caused by the proposed development, may require the participation of some of WCCCG’s members, although it is certainly possible that an experienced realtor could testify to such diminution as well. The third and fourth factors are the extent to which diminishing the plaintiff’s property values promotes the health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the public, and the relative gain to the public as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner. Again, while establishing these factors may require the involvement of some individual members, the focus is equally on the likely benefit to, and the health and safety of, the general public if the proposed development proceeds. WCCCG asserts that evidence regarding the development’s effect on drainage and sanitation is particularly likely to involve expert testimony rather than the testimony of individual members. Finally, as WCCCG points out, the fact that it is seeking prospective relief rather than damages on behalf of its members means that there will be no need for individualized proof of damages. While we agree with the defendants that this factor is not dispositive (see Bano v. Union Carbide Corp., 361 F.3d 696, 714 (2d Cir. 2004) (an association does not automatically satisfy the third prong of Hunt simply by requesting equitable relief rather than damages); see also RCPA, 7 F.3d at 603 (third prong of Hunt test was met although the association sought damages on behalf of its members, where the damages could be easily calculated by use of a simple formula and would not require the involvement of individual members in the suit, and the association primarily sought to establish its members’ right to receive damages)), it is a relevant factor that may be considered in evaluating the need for individual members’ participation (see Warth, 422 U.S. at 515, 45 L. Ed. 2d at 364, 95 S. Ct. at 2213 (an association’s standing to sue on behalf of its members “depends in substantial measure on the nature of the relief sought”)). There is nothing inherently implausible about WCCCG’s arguments that only limited participation by its members will be necessary in the trial of its La Salle claim. As noted above, in determining whether count II should be dismissed for lack of standing, we must view the complaint in the light most favorable to WCCCG and draw all reasonable inferences in WCCCG’s favor. International Union, 215 Ill. 2d at 45; see also Green Spring Health Services, 280 F.3d at 286. Thus, unless it is clear that it would be impossible for WCCCG to prevail without significant participation by its members, a motion to dismiss based on the third prong of Hunt must be denied. At this point in the proceedings, we cannot say that establishing WCCCG’s right to relief on its La Salle claim will necessarily require significant participation by the individual members of WCCCG. 2. Section 103.10(b)  The defendants argue that, even if WCCCG has associational standing under the Hunt test, section 103.10(b) of the Act (805 ILCS 105/103.10(b) (West 2006)) imposes separate and more stringent requirements for standing. That section provides that a not-for-profit corporation has standing to sue when, inter alia, “neither the claim asserted nor the relief requested requires the participation of individual members in the lawsuit.” 805 ILCS 105/103.10(b) (West 2006). The defendants contend that this provision must be read more restrictively than the third prong of Hunt, to bar an association’s ability to bring suit on behalf of its members if even one individual member would be required to participate in the suit. We look to the intent of section 103.10(b) of the Act to determine whether it imposes more stringent requirements than the Hunt test. “The primary rule of statutory construction is to give effect to the true intent of the legislature.” Advincula v. United Blood Services, 176 Ill. 2d 1, 16 (1996). “ ‘[W]here a statute applies to an area formerly covered by the common law, we interpret the statute as adopting the common law unless the General Assembly clearly and specifically expressed an intention to change the common law.’ ” Nickels v. Burnett, 343 Ill. App. 3d 654, 659 (2003), quoting Morris v. Ameritech Illinois, 337 Ill. App. 3d 40, 49 (2003). Section 103.10(b) was amended in 1997 via the enactment of Public Act 90 — 203 (Pub. Act 90 — 203, §5, eff. July 24, 1997). Prior to that time, that section of the Act provided only that a not-for-profit corporation had the power “[t]o sue and be sued, complain and defend, in its corporate name.” 805 ILCS 105/103.10(b) (West 1996). Public Act 90 — 203 inserted into this sentence language almost identical to the Hunt test for associational standing: “and shall have standing to sue when one or more of its members would otherwise have standing to sue in his or her own right, providing the interests it seeks to protect are germane to the corporation’s purposes, and neither the claim asserted nor the relief requested requires the participation of individual members in the lawsuit.” Pub. Act 90 — 203, §5, eff. July 24, 1997. The comments of Senator Dillard, the sponsor of the bill that became Public Act 90— 203, confirm that the amendment was designed to extend the associational standing doctrine that had been developed in the federal courts and adopted by other states to Illinois not-for-profit corporations: “This bill came out of the Judiciary Committee on the Agreed Bill List and provides that an association which is incorporated pursuant to the General Not For Profit Corporation Act shall have standing to sue when one or more of its members would otherwise have standing to sue in his or her own right provided that the interest it seeks to protect are [sic] germane to the association’s corporate purposes. This would bring Illinois in line with most other states and also proceedings in federal court.” 90th Ill. Gen. Assem., Senate Proceedings, March 17, 1997, at 139-40 (statements of Senator Dillard). Inasmuch as the intent of the legislature in this instance was to codify the common law of associational standing, we find no basis for interpreting the language of section 103.10(b) as imposing a more stringent standard than that imposed by the case law of associational standing. We therefore reject the defendants’ argument that the requirements of section 103.10(b) are distinct from the requirements of the Hunt test. In light of our earlier conclusion that count II should not have been dismissed at the pleading stage pursuant to the doctrine of associational standing, we reverse the trial court’s dismissal of count II. If later developments make it clear that significant individual participation will be required to establish WCCCG’s right to the relief it seeks, the trial court is free to revisit this issue. B. The Claim for Administrative Review  The defendants next argue that, regardless of whether WCCCG can meet the three-part Hunt test for associational standing, WCCCG cannot bring the claim for administrative review contained in count I, for the simple reason that WCCCG was not a party to the earlier administrative proceedings. They point to section 3 — 101 of the Administrative Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3 — 101 (West 2006)), which defines the administrative decisions that may be appealed under that law as: “any decision, order or determination of any administrative agency rendered in a particular case, which affects the legal rights, duties or privileges of parties and which terminates the proceedings before the administrative agency.” (Emphasis added.) The defendants argue that, because WCCCG was not a party to the proceedings before the zoning board or the county board, and indeed did not even come into existence until after the County had issued its final decision regarding the proposed PCD, WCCCG has no legal right to appeal the decision. The flaw in the defendants’ argument is that it ignores the express holding of International Union as well as the nature of derivative types of standing such as associational standing. This very argument was raised by the defendants in International Union, who argued that the union could not appeal the administrative decisions at issue there (regarding individual union members’ eligibility for unemployment benefits) because the union had not been a party to the administrative proceedings and was not “aggrieved” by the administrative decisions. International Union, 215 Ill. 2d at 56-57. The court squarely rejected this argument, explaining that what mattered was whether the individual union members had been parties to the administrative action, not whether the union had been a party: “As noted above the members of Engineers’ Union were proper parties to the administrative proceedings. Further, the members of Engineers’ Union were aggrieved by the Director’s decision denying their claims for unemployment insurance benefits, and they could appeal the Director’s decision. 820 ILCS 405/1100 (West 1994). Consequently, the standing requirement limiting review to a party aggrieved by the agency’s decision has been met by the members of Engineers’ Union. It follows that Engineers’ Union, as an organization meeting the requirements of the doctrine of associational standing, need not meet the standing requirement independently. Rather, Engineers’ Union derives its standing from the standing of its members.” (Emphasis in original.) International Union, 215 Ill. 2d at 57. The court found support for this conclusion in federal courts’ interpretation of standing under the Administrative Orders Review Act (the Hobbs Act) (28 U.S.C. §2341 et seq. (2000)), a federal statute similar to the Illinois Administrative Review Law in that it confers the right to judicial review of certain rules, regulations, or final decisions of federal administrative agencies. As with the Illinois Administrative Review Law, section 2344 of the Hobbs Act limits the right to bring an action for administrative review to persons who were parties to the administrative proceedings and were aggrieved by the resulting administrative decision. 28 U.S.C. §2344 (2000). In interpreting this requirement, courts have held that an organization that was not a party to the administrative proceedings may nevertheless bring an action under the Hobbs Act, so long as the individual members of that organization were parties to the administrative proceedings and aggrieved by the results, and the organization meets the other requirements for associational standing. See Nuclear Energy Institute, Inc. v. Environmental Protection Agency, 373 F.3d 1251, 1266 (D.C. Cir. 2004); Committee for Effective Cellular Rules v. Federal Communications Comm’n, 53 F.3d 1309, 1315 (D.C. Cir. 1995); National Treasury Employees Union v. United States Merit Systems Protection Board, 743 F.2d 895, 911 (D.C. Cir. 1984). Rather than following the holding of International Union, the trial court here stated that it found persuasive the special concurrence of Justices Thomas and Garman, who dissented from that portion of the majority opinion holding that an association may file an administrative appeal even where it was not a party to the underlying proceedings. International Union, 215 Ill. 2d at 71-72 (Thomas, J., specially concurring, joined by Garman, J.). We cannot condone the trial court’s approach, as the lower courts have no power to ignore the holdings of our supreme court’s decisions and to adopt some other approach that they may prefer. See Kelley v. Sheriff’s Merit Comm’n, 372 Ill. App. 3d 931, 934 (2007), quoting Agricultural Transportation Ass’n v. Carpentier, 2 Ill. 2d 19, 27 (1953) (“ ‘ “Where the Supreme Court has declared the law on any point, it alone can overrule and modify its previous opinion, and the lower judicial tribunals are bound by such decision and it is the duty of such lower tribunals to follow such decision in similar cases” ’ [citation]”). We are bound to follow the majority opinion in International Union, not the special concurrence, and therefore we conclude that WCCCG had associational standing to bring its members’ claims under the Administrative Review Law, regardless of whether WCCCG could bring a separate claim under that statute. The defendants argue that International Union is distinguishable because in that case the union was permitted to, and did, serve as legal counsel for the individual union members in the administrative proceedings. The supreme court noted this fact in its decision and suggested that it provided extra support for allowing the union to challenge the administrative decisions in court. International Union, 215 Ill. 2d at 58. The defendants argue that, since in this case WCCCG did not itself represent any individual members in the proceedings before the zoning board or the county board, and indeed was not even in existence when those proceedings took place, the holding of International Union does not apply. In our view, the participation of the union on behalf of the individual union members was not a dispositive factor in International Union. Instead, the supreme court expressly adopted the Hunt three-part test for associational standing (International Union, 215 Ill. 2d at 51) and held that organizations meeting this test may bring claims for administrative review on behalf of their members (International Union, 215 Ill. 2d at 57). The court did not impose any additional requirement that the organization seeking such standing also have represented its members in the administrative proceedings. Thus, we reject the defendants’ argument that International Union is not applicable to this case. As the Seventh Circuit commented in Rockford League of Women Voters v. United States Nuclear Regulatory Comm’n, 679 F.2d 1218, 1221 (7th Cir. 1982), “the standing of an organization is derivative of its members’ standing.” Applying this principle to the case before us, we find that WCCCG has standing to bring its claim for administrative review because its members have standing. Several of WCCCG’s members participated in the initial hearing before the zoning board. As WCCCG also meets the other requirements for associational standing, it is entitled to step into the shoes of its members in bringing a claim pursuant to the Administrative Review Law. Accordingly, we reverse the trial court’s dismissal of count I. C. The Number of Members With Individual Standing  We turn to the last issue, whether a majority of an organization’s members must have individual standing in order for the organization to have standing to bring suit on behalf of all members. The defendants do not raise any argument on this issue, stating in their brief that the question of whether a majority of WCCCG’s members have individual standing is “a non-issue on appeal.” Nevertheless, the trial court appeared to base its decision at least in part on this issue. We may affirm the trial court on any basis appearing in the record (Rockford Memorial Hospital v. Havrilesko, 368 Ill. App. 3d 115, 121 (2006)), and thus we review the trial court’s holding on this issue to determine whether it supports affirmance. In deciding that WCCCG did not have associational standing, the trial court rejected WCCCG’s argument regarding the first prong of the Hunt test — that this prong is met so long as at least one member of the organization has individual standing — as being “entirely inconsistent” with the case law of associational standing and against the ratio decidendi of International Union, in which the plaintiff union had actually represented the “vast majority” of the individual union members in their unemployment appeals. However, WCCCG is correct that, under the federal law of associational standing adopted in International Union, there is no requirement that the majority of an organization’s members have standing to sue in their own right. In Brown Group, Inc., 517 U.S. at 554, 134 L. Ed. 2d at 768, 116 S. Ct. at 1535, the Supreme Court described the first prong of the Hunt test as requiring only “that at least one of the organization’s members would have standing to sue on his own.” Our own supreme court cited to Brown Group, Inc. with approval in describing the parameters of the doctrine that it was adopting. International Union, 215 Ill. 2d at 47-48. We therefore reject the trial court’s emphasis, in its decision that WCCCG lacked associational standing, on the fact that fewer than half of WCCCG’s members have individual standing. The parties do not dispute that at least some of WCCCG’s members have individual standing to bring the claims asserted by WCCCG here. Thus, the first prong of the Hunt test does not preclude WCCCG’s associational standing. CONCLUSION For all of the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of Winnebago County is reversed, and the case is remanded for further proceedings. Reversed and remanded. CALLUM, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9738234 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:46:19.660859+00 ===

JUSTICE McLAREN, specially concurring: I specially concur because I wish to emphasize a few points that are contained in the majority disposition. I also have a minor disagreement with a comment made by the majority. The trial court dismissed sundry counts, based upon the following findings: “[T]he trial court stated that, under the doctrine of associational standing adopted in International Union of Operating Engineers, Local 148 v. Department of Employment Security, 215 Ill. 2d 37 (2005), WCCCG did not have standing to bring suit on behalf of its members, because a majority of the members did not have standing to sue individually. The trial court further found that the La Salle claim in count II must be dismissed because an analysis of this claim would not involve pure questions of law and thus would require the participation of individual members in the suit. As to count I, the trial court stated that it was following the special concurrence of Justices Thomas and Garman in International Union, and it therefore found that WCCCG did not have standing to bring suit under the Administrative Review Law, because it had not been a party to the administrative proceedings being challenged.” 383 Ill. App. 3d at 739. I wish to emphasize the following points: first, a majority or minority of an associational membership that has standing is not the benchmark by which associational standing is determined; second, pure questions of law are not the only questions that entitle an entity to qualify for associational standing; third, the mere existence of issues of fact neither constitutes nor requires the “participation” of individual members in the suit; fourth, and finally, associational standing does not require the entity to have been in existence, let alone present, during the administrative proceedings — it requires only that a member of the association was a party to the administrative proceedings. The majority has opined that, “If later developments make it clear that significant individual participation will be required to establish WCCCG’s right to the relief it seeks, the trial court is free to revisit this issue.” 383 Ill. App. 3d at 747.1 submit that, as long as the pleadings remain unchanged, there is no need to revisit the issue, and the trial court is not free to revisit the issue. In Worth v. Seldin, 422 U.S. 490, 511, 45 L. Ed. 2d 343, 362, 95 S. Ct. 2197, 2212 (1975), the Supreme Court stated that, “so long as the nature of the claim and the relief sought does not make individual participation of each injured party indispensable to proper resolution of the cause, the association may be an appropriate representative of its members, entitled to invoke the court’s jurisdiction” (emphasis added). Thus, according to Warth, it is the plaintiffs pleadings that determine the claim, the relief sought, and the level of “participation.” We have determined that presently the pleadings do not establish that the “participation” of individual members is necessary to grant the relief sought by the plaintiff. Until such time as the plaintiffs complaint is altered to expand the relief sought, there will not be a point in the proceedings that requires revisitation as the majority has stated. 383 Ill. App. 3d at 747. I submit that the parameters of “participation” are determined by the proofs required. The proofs required are determined by the relief sought. The relief sought is determined by the claim, and the claim is determined by the pleadings. Thus, if there is no amendment to the plaintiffs complaint, there will be no need to revisit the issue of “participation” and no need to revisit standing.

=== CASE 2214179 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:43.534967+00 ===

32 Cal.App.2d 734 (1939)
GEORGE Y. HAMMOND, Appellant,
v.
OMAR'S DOME (a Corporation) et al., Respondents.
Civ. No. 11753.
California Court of Appeals. Second Appellate District, Division One.
April 17, 1939.
Newby & Newby for Appellant.
Hanna & Morton for Respondents.
Memorandum
York, P. J.
On August 25, 1937, appellant commenced the instant action to abate a nuisance resulting from the alleged illegal sale of alcoholic beverages at XXX-XXX-XXX South Hill Street, in the city of Los Angeles, pursuant to the provisions of the Unlawful Liquor Sales Abatement Act (Act 3778, Gen. Laws, Stats. 1915, p. 236). The complaint alleged that defendants, in violation of section 22, article XX of the Constitution (as amended Nov. 6, 1934), and in violation of subdivision "m" of section 2, and of section 53 of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act (Stats. 1935, p. 1123, as amended by Stats. 1937, pp. 1934, 2126), "are maintaining and conducting upon the premises herein described a public saloon, public bar and public barroom, in which intoxicating liquors (other than beers) are being unlawful sold and served to the general public".
A general and special demurrer to the complaint was sustained without leave to amend, and thereafter, the court having denied appellant's motion for permission to file an *735 amended complaint, a judgment of dismissal was entered. This appeal is taken from such judgment.
The facts in the instant case are the same in legal effect as the facts alleged in the complaint in the case of Hammond v. McDonald et ux, Civil No. 11752 (ante, p. 187 [89 PaCal.2d 407]) this day decided. [1] The principles of law involved herein are identical with those involved in the case to which reference has just been made. For the reasons stated in the opinion in that case, the judgment of dismissal herein is reversed, and the trial court is directed to permit the filing of appellant's amended complaint.
Doran J., and White, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2214189 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:43.690341+00 ===

32 Cal. App. 2d 678 (1939)
GEORGE LANGAZO, Respondent,
v.
SAN JOAQUIN LIGHT AND POWER CORPORATION (a Corporation), Appellant.
Civ. No. 6071.
California Court of Appeals. Third Appellate District.
May 18, 1939.
Thomas J. Straub, W. H. Spaulding, John J. Briare and F. H. Pearson for Appellant.
Louis T. Milburn and Preston & Braucht for Respondent.
The Court.
This is an action brought to recover damages arising out of the death of Gilbert Langazo, the minor son of plaintiff. Judgment upon the verdict of the jury was entered against appellant in the sum of $15,400. Upon motion for new trial, the sum of $5,000 was remitted therefrom. The appeal is taken from the judgment.
On the afternoon of February 22, 1937, the deceased, Gilbert Langazo, while walking across a field near Mariposa, traversed by a power line of the appellant, San Joaquin Light and Power Corporation, met his death by electrocution from contact with a sagging portion of an abandoned telephone line, attached to poles of the power line. The only witnesses to the fatal accident were his two girl companions, Phyllis Richardson and Hazel Swanzey. When the party reached the point where it became necessary to pass under the power line, Phyllis Richardson was walking a short distance ahead of Gilbert Langazo, the deceased, and Hazel Swanzey was a few feet behind. Hazel Swanzey is, therefore, the only person who saw all that happened. She testified that as Phyllis, who was ahead of the others, went underneath the telephone wire, she touched it with her hand and went over and sat down under a tree, "and as Gilbert (the deceased), reached the line he took hold of it with one hand to lift it over his head, and as he started to do that, to lift it over his head, he let out a scream" and fell, and that the witness "was just within one foot or two from his head when he fell". She further testified that she and Phyllis are each about five feet *681 two or three inches in height, and that the sagging telephone wire, with reference to Phyllis' height, "was not quite to the top of her head; it was along her forehead". After the deceased fell, the witness observed that the grass at his feet was on fire, and she stamped the fire out.
Dr. John B. Webster, who was called to the scene of the accident immediately after it happened, testified that the deceased died as a result of electric shock, and that fact is not disputed.
The land on which the accident occurred is owned by the Mariposa Commercial and Mining Company, and has been leased to E. J. Gann for twenty-six or twenty-seven years. The scene of the accident is a wooded hillside about one hundred yards from the Mariposa High School, and was frequented both by the general public and by high school students. The general public had been accustomed for many years to walk over the land. This land was under lease to the lessee, Gann, for grazing purposes only, and at the time of the accident, was not plowed or under cultivation. In addition to the fact that the general public had had free access to the field in which the accident occurred, and that they walked over and across it at will, it was shown that the field was used occasionally as a playground by a small number of high school students. The telephone line was disconnected in the year 1921. For some years prior to the accident the defendant had permitted unused fragments of the line to remain on the power-line poles at various points along the right of way. The portion of the abandoned telephone line which was the wire the deceased took hold of at the time of the accident, was attached to two of the poles carrying a high tension line, and there was an intervening pole from which the cross-arm which formerly carried the sagging wire had become broken, and the insulator and a part of the cross-arm had fallen to the ground, and the wire had thus become detached and permitted to sag between the other two poles to which it was still affixed. On the day of the accident the insulator attached to the broken part of the cross-arm which had fallen from the power-line pole was found imbedded in the dry, dead grass. This cross-arm had been broken a long time before the accident on February 22, 1937, as was evidenced by the appearance of the cross-arm which was admitted in evidence, and from the fact that the grass had grown up over *682 the cross-arm and the insulator affixed thereto, and from the photograph in evidence showing such condition.
The appellant had a right of way for its transmission line over and across the tract of land which was leased to Gann, the grant of the power company providing "that the party of the second part, its successors and assignors, shall exercise the rights hereby granted, in such manner as shall cause the least possible interference with the use of the said strip of land by the party of the first part, its successors and assigns, for pasture, agricultural, horticultural and mining purposes, or any thereof". Just how the old telephone wire became charged with the fatal current of electricity is not disclosed by the evidence.
[1] It is first contended by appellant that the evidence is insufficient to support a finding of negligence. Respondent takes the position that the case comes within the general rule "that a violation of a statute or of a county or municipal ordinance, which directly causes injury to another, constitutes negligence as a matter of law". (19 Cal.Jur., p. 632, sec. 65.)
In this connection the latter relies upon a violation of the following general orders of the railroad commission of this state:
"Lines or portions of lines permanently abandoned shall be removed by their owners so that such lines shall not become a public nuisance or a hazard to life or property." (Par. 31.7 of section III of General Order No. 64-A of California Railroad Commission.) "The owners and employees of such system shall at all times exercise due care to reduce to a minimum the hazard of accidental injury to their own or fellow employees, to the public and other utilities due to the presence of overhead wires." (Par. 31.1 of section III of General Order No. 64-A of California Railroad Commission.)
"Lines shall be inspected frequently and thoroughly for the purpose of insuring their maintenance in a good condition so as to conform to these rules. Any defects found shall be promptly rectified. Lines temporarily out of service shall be inspected and maintained in such condition as not to create a hazard". (Par. 31.2, sec. III, of above order.)
As to the sufficiency of the evidence to bring the case under the first order above quoted, the facts proven show clearly *683 that the jury were justified in finding that the telephone line in question was "permanently abandoned". It had not been used for over a period of sixteen years, nor had it been in a condition where any use whatever could be made of it for a number of years preceding the accident. The span of wire with which the decedent came in contact lead nowhere. Each end thereof had been cut and wrapped around the cross-arm of the power pole to which it was attached. Under the middle pole, where the wire had become detached, an insulator which formerly supported the wire at that point, was found imbedded in the dry grass. The cross-arm was broken and a portion lay upon the ground, in a similar situation.
[2] It is urged, however, that the regulations of the railroad commission mentioned above do not have the force of law, and hence are not within the rule quoted above from California Jurisprudence. This court decided the question adverse to appellant's contention in the case of Morris v. Sierra etc. Power Co., 57 Cal. App. 281-289 [207 P. 262]:
"We presume it will not be questioned that the legislature in the exercise of the power conferred upon it by the provisions of Sections 22 and 23 of Article XII of the Constitution may rightfully invest the Railroad Commission with plenary power to regulate the manner in which Railroad Corporations and other public utilities shall maintain and conduct their business and the essential appliances thereof and that said Commission may prescribe such regulations with respect to the carrying on of such utilities as may be necessary to safeguard and protect any rights of the public which may be affected thereby. And it will not be doubted that, upon the adoption of such regulations as it is within the legal competence of the Railroad Commission to promulgate with respect to public utilities and the maintenance of the essential equipments thereof, such regulations immediately acquire the force of law. Indeed, it is so declared by the legislature itself in Section 30 of an Act of the extra sessions of the legislature of 1911, page 18, entitled, in part: 'An Act to provide for the organization of the Railroad Commission, to define its powers and duties and the rights, remedies, powers and duties of public utilities', etc. Said section reads: 'Every public utility shall obey and comply with each and every requirement of every order, decision, direction, rule or regulation made or prescribed by the commission in the matters *684 herein specified, or any other matter in any way relating to or affecting its business as a public utility, and shall do everything necessary or proper in order to secure compliance with and observance of every such order, decision, direction, rule or regulation by all of its officers, agents and employees.'"
The same rule was followed in Howell v. San Joaquin Light & Power Corp., 87 Cal. App. 44 [261 P. 1107], where it is stated:
"Likewise, as held in the case of Morris v. Sierra etc. Co., supra, and as also held in the case of Sickles v. Mt. Whitney Power & Electric Co., 177 Cal. 278 [170 P. 599], the failure of the Power Company to maintain its line carrying 11,000 voltage with a minimum clearance of 25 feet, as provided by the order of the Railroad Commission, and its disregard of the order of the Railroad Commission in this respect, must be held as showing negligence per se on the part of the defendant."
The case of Winkie v. Turlock Irr. Dist., 24 Cal. App. 2d 1 [74 PaCal.2d 302], is not inconsistent with the foregoing authorities. We merely held there that the irrigation district was not subject to the jurisdiction of the railroad commission, and that therefore the rules of the commission, which had no legal application, could not be set up as the measure of care in determining the question of negligence of the district. We are of the opinion, therefore, that there was sufficient evidence of negligence upon the part of appellant to justify a finding in favor of plaintiff on that issue.
[3] It is next contended that "the physical facts demonstrate, against any testimony to the contrary, that the sole cause of the accident was the wilful act, or at best the negligent act of decedent himself". Expert testimony upon the part of appellant was to the effect that in no other way could the telephone wire become charged with current from the power line except by being brought in contact therewith. A witness who saw the accident in its entirety, being but a few steps away, testified that the deceased merely lifted the telephone wire, or was in the act of lifting it (apparently endeavoring to pass under it), and that he did not pull on it or jerk it. Relying upon such expert testimony, the position of the body after the accident (parallel to the power lines), and a burn on the right side of the neck, appellant contends that the testimony of plaintiff's witness is inherently impossible, *685 and must be disregarded. Having disregarded it, we are asked to accept its version of the accident, which is that decedent jerked the wire uphill so far and with such force as to cause it to rise and flip into the power wires in a span over two succeeding poles. They contend that we must recognize that certain facts are controlled by immutable physical laws which cannot be contradicted by positive testimony to the contrary, citing Coughlin v. Great Western Power Co., 183 Cal. 548 [191 P. 920], which lays down such a rule. In that case, all experts testified that a current of 22,000 volts (twice the voltage here), could not jump or "arc" more than 1.2 of an inch from the wire, and testimony to the effect that it jumped 21 inches was eliminated upon appeal. Expert testimony here was to the effect that the accident could only occur through jerking and flipping the telephone wire. We believe that expert testimony as to the distance an electric spark will jump is in a different category from the expert testimony in this case. Here, the expert did not confine himself to a demonstrated law of physics. He told the jury that the telephone wire could not be charged with electricity without contact with a power line, but it does not necessarily follow, nor were the jury bound to find from such testimony, that decedent made such contact. That was clearly a matter for the jury, and they impliedly found that he did not. We do not believe that the rule stated by appellant is applicable to the situation here; hence, we hold that there was sufficient evidence to sustain a finding that deceased was not guilty of contributory negligence. [4] We might add that appellant does not dispute the fact that the current which killed the young man came from its power line overhead, and it must be remembered that the burden of establishing a defense of contributory negligence is upon the defendant. Such burden has not been sustained to the degree that "from the facts, reasonable men can draw but one inference, which inference points unerringly to the negligence of plaintiff proximately contributing to his own injury". (Crawford v. Southern Pacific Co. et al., 3 Cal. 2d 427 [45 PaCal.2d 183].)
[5] It is further urged that decedent was a trespasser, or at most, a mere licensee, and that defendant owed him no legal duty, except that while upon the premises, no wanton or wilful injury should be inflicted upon him. (Means v. Southern California R. R. Co., 144 Cal. 473-474 [77 Pac. *686 1001, 1 Ann. Cas. 206].) There is evidence in the record that the tenant of the real property where the accident occurred, permitted students of the high school a short distance away, and other members of the public to walk across his land. There is evidence that some students used the land for athletic activities. "In a general sense, any invasion of another's rights is a trespass." (63 C.J. 886.) Did the decedent invade any right of the power company? We must first determine what the rights of the company were in respect to the land where the accident occurred. If the rights of the latter were not invaded by decedent in being upon the real property involved, there obviously could be no trespass committed as against the power company. The record shows that the owner of the real property granted "a right of way" to the power company over a strip of land 20 feet in width, with the right to erect a single line of towers or poles thereon and wire suspended thereon. "The rights of any person having an easement in the land of another are measured and defined by the purpose and character of that easement; and the right to use the land remains in the owner of the fee so far as such right is consistent with the purpose and character of the easement." (17 Am. Jur. 993.) Appellant had no right to fence the right of way, nor did it have any right to the use or possession thereof, except for limited purposes, such as repair, maintenance and construction, as set forth in the grant. Thus, except for the reservations made in the grant, the owner had the same complete dominion and control over this 20-foot strip as he had over the remainder of his property. For the reasons given, the weight of authority in this country is to the effect that although decedent may have been a trespasser as to the owner of the real property, the power company cannot take advantage of that fact. The general rule, deduced from a long line of cases referred to in a note, is thus expressed by the editor in 56 A.L.R. 1030:
"The doctrine that a power company or person maintaining wires over another's land cannot take advantage of the fact that the injured person was a trespasser on the property where he was injured has gained additional support from a considerable number of recent decisions in addition to those cited in the previous annotation,--some of which, it will be noted, are in jurisdictions which had theretofore not passed upon this troublesome question; and these accessions, perhaps, *687 give that doctrine the weight of authority, although, as stated in the earlier annotation, the cases were then quite evenly divided upon it."
This is the law laid down in 20 C.J., page 350:
"The doctrine of non-liability to trespassers or licensees has been applied to relieve defendant of liability where the trespass or license was with respect to the property of a third person and not to that of defendant. But according to the apparent weight of authority, that doctrine has no application to such class of cases, because, conceding that plaintiff was a trespasser as to the owner, he was not a trespasser as to defendant, and defendant may be held liable for negligence in failing to exercise proper care and precaution to prevent injury, not only to persons who had a right to be at the place where the injury occurred, as to whom liability for negligence is unquestioned, but also as to persons whom defendant should reasonably have anticipated might be present and exposed to danger at that place, as in the case of places to which children or other persons are accustomed to resort, although without technical right to be at such places."
One of the leading cases upon this point is Humphrey v. Twin State Gas & Elec. Co., 100 Vt. 414 [139 A. 440, 56 A.L.R. 1011]. We quote from the decision:
"The parties disagree as to plaintiff's standing while the was on the Thomas land: The plaintiff says he was there by an implied license; the defendant says he was a trespasser. We do not stop to consider this question. He was not an invitee, and for the purposes of this discussion we will assume that he was a trespasser. Being such, he could recover nothing from Thomas for injuries resulting from the condition of the premises, though these existed through the latter's carelessness. This result follows from the fact that Thomas owed him no duty to keep the premises safe for his unlawful use. The defendant takes the position that, so far as the plaintiff's rights go, it stands in Thomas' position and can make the same defense that he could; that it owed the plaintiff no duty, and consequently any negligence proved against it is not actionable so far as the plaintiff can assert. ... A trespass is an injury to the possession; and, as it is only he whose possession is disturbed who can sue therefor, so it should be that he, alone, could assert the unlawful invasion *688 when suit is brought by an injured trespasser. One should not be allowed 'to defend an indefensible act' by showing that the party injured was engaged in doing something which, as to a third person, was unlawful."
Another case where the matter is given exhaustive treatment is that of Guinn v. Delaware & A. Tel. & Tel. Co., 72 N. J. L. 276 [62 A. 412, 111 Am. St. Rep. 668, 3 L.R.A. (N. S.) 988], where it is said:
"The exemption of the landowner from liability as to trespassers and licensees is necessary to secure him the beneficial use of his land; but no reason exists for extending this exemption to the case where the rights of the defendant have not been interfered with. There is no proof that the defendant had any right to maintain the pole and wire; but, even if it had, the deceased is not shown to have interfered with the defendant's rights. The right to maintain the pole and wire did not involve the right to have the wire swing loose or occupy another portion of the field. Whoever interfered with the pole and wire in place might be a trespasser, but he would not be a trespasser upon the defendant's rights if he came in contact with the wire elsewhere."
Turning to California, this court, in the case of Roberts v. Pacific Gas & Elec. Co., 102 Cal. App. 422, 429 [283 P. 353], disposed of a similar situation in the following language:
"The fact that the deceased was a trespasser with respect to the defendant City of Chico by virtue of his wrongful violation of its property rights, in no sense exempts the defendant Pacific Gas and Electric Company from liability for negligence. The electric company had no property rights in the fallen tree which were interfered with. In spite of the exemption from liability on the part of the owner of the tree, the electric company still owed the deceased the duty of exercising due caution for his safety. In 2 Joyce on Electric Law, 986, it is said: 'The fact that one is a trespasser as between himself and a landowner is not held to relieve an electric company from the duty to exercise care towards the former and the jury may infer negligence from the omission of a guard wire.' In the case of Guinn v. Delaware & A. Tel. Co., 72 N. J. L. 276 [111 Am. St. Rep. 668, 2 L.R.A. (N. S.) 988, 62 A. 412, 413], a guy-wire had been stretched *689 by the defendant electric company over an open field across which people were accustomed to travel at will to and from a ball ground in an adjoining field. The guy-wire broke and fell across a live electric wire. Thus charged with electricity the guy-wire dangled down into the grass where a boy who was crossing the field without license came in contact with it and was killed. The defendant electric company contended it owned the deceased no duty to preserve his safety for the reason that he was a trespasser. This theory was denied by the court, which held that although the landowner might set up his defense in a proper action, the defendant electric company could not avail itself of this exemption from liability. The court said: 'If (the deceased were) a trespasser, his wrong would be to the landowner alone, not a public wrong, nor a wrong to the defendant. The case differs from one where a trespasser or licensee seeks to recover of the landowner. A landowner may, in fact, reasonably anticipate an invasion of his property, but in law he is entitled to assume that he will not be interfered with. His right to protect his property and the use of his property is paramount. ... The exemption of the landowner from liability as to trespassers and licensees is necessary to secure him the beneficial use of his land; but no reason exists for extending this exemption to the case where the rights of the defendant have not been interfered with.'"
It is the position of appellant that it "stood in the shoes" of the landowner, and if decedent was a trespasser as to the owner, it was likewise a trespasser as to the power company. There are a number of authorities which so hold, but we believe that both reason and logic favor the opposing view. The owner of the easement must stand upon his own rights, and no wave of the wand can transmit the landowner's rights to the easement owner, for the sole purpose of permitting the latter to escape responsibility for negligence. The case of Borgnis v. California-Oregon Power Co., 84 Cal. App. 465 [258 P. 394], is not authority for the rule which appellant would have us adopt. In denying a hearing in that case the Supreme Court expressly refused to approve a rule which tended to uphold the appellant here; hence, what was said in the main opinion on the question of the status of the plaintiff there, has no authoritative effect whatever. It is possible *690 that the Supreme Court, in thus limiting the effect of that decision, had in mind the rule which we have set forth, and which we believe to be the correct one. In the case of Lindholm v. Northwestern Pacific R. R. Co., 79 Cal. App. 34 [248 P. 1033], cited by appellant, the defendant was repairing boat machinery on the premises of Moore Shipbuilding Company, using its own workmen. The evidence showed that defendant was there with the permission and consent of the Moore company, and the court held that plaintiff was a trespasser not only in respect to the owner of the premises, but also as to anyone else who was rightfully and lawfully in possession under the owner. Here, the power company not only had no right to the possession of the land upon which the easement was imposed, but it never was in actual possession of the strip covered by the right of way. We have carefully reviewed other California cases relied upon by appellant to sustain their contention, but in none of them is the question squarely raised or decided, and we therefore adopt the view sustained by the weight of authority in this country.
[6] The status of decedent, if we assume that he was a mere trespasser, cannot be used to limit the measure of care in this case for another reason which is explained in the rule laid down in 45 Corpus Juris, page 730, where it is said:
"Notwithstanding the general rule that the owner or person in charge of property owes to trespassers or mere licensees thereon, no duty to keep the premises safe, it has been held that violation of a statutory duty with respect to the condition of property, imposed for the safety of the individuals composing the general public, may result in liability to one who is injured in consequence thereof, although he is a mere licensee or even a trespasser."
As we have stated above, the violation of the order of the railroad commission in respect to the duty of appellant to remove the abandoned telephone line was, in effect, a violation of the law, and therefore negligence per se. The order quoted above specifically recites that its purpose is to remove a hazard to "life or property". Section 73 of the Utilities Act (above) gives a right of action in damages to any person who is injured through an omission to comply with any order of the commission. The action of the company in permitting the telephone wires to remain, was clearly "a violation of a *691 statutory duty with respect to the condition of the property"; hence, the facts bring the case directly within the scope of the rule laid down in Corpus Juris. The cases which support this rule are based upon the fundamental concept that the question of the status of the party injured cannot be raised, for the reason that the law is a police regulation designed to protect the public. The case of Conway v. Monidah Trust Co., 47 Mont. 269 [132 P. 26, L.R.A. 1915E, 500], lays down this rule with clarity and thoroughness. There, the statute provided that all mining shafts within certain limits of a town or city, must be enclosed by a substantial fence. Plaintiff, a child of seven years, while trespassing upon the property where the shaft was situated, fell down the shaft and was injured. There was no fence, and the defendant thus violated the law in failing to maintain one. We quote from the opinion:
"The question, then, is whether or not a trespasser upon private property may recover damages for injury suffered by him while so trespassing, because of the property owner's failure to comply with section 8535, Revised Codes. This section is found in title 10 of part 1 of the Penal Code, under the heading: 'Crimes Against the Public Health and Safety', and, so far as pertinent to this case, reads as follows: 'Every person who sinks any shaft ... or causes the same to be done, within the limits of any city or town or village in this state, or within one mile of the corporate limits of any city or town ... and who shall fail to place a substantial cover over, or tight fence around the same, is punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars. The owner of any property ... shall be deemed to be within the provisions of this act if he permit any such shaft ... to remain open, exposed or unprotected upon his property ... for a period of more more than ten days. ... Does the duty imposed by section 8535 apply for the benefit of persons who may by chance be technical trespassers upon mining property? This question, both directly and in its analogies, has been before many courts with apparent diversity of result; but not real difficulty is encountered in extracting a consistent rule out of the apparent conflict of decision, when it is observed that the various statutes involved are interpreted according to substantially this classification: (a) Those imposing duties to or *692 for the benefit of the municipality or to the public considered as an entity. From such statutes no private right of action arises. (Heeney v. Sprague, 11 Rawle I. 456 [23 Am. Rep. 502]; Taylor v. Lake Shore & M. S. Ry., 45 Mich. 74 [7 N.W. 728, 40 Am. Rep. 457]; Frontier Steam Laundry Co. v. Conolly, 72 Neb. 767 [101 N.W. 995, 68 L.R.A. 425].) (b) Those imposing duties to persons of a particular class. To have a right of action from such a statute one must clearly belong to the contemplated class. (Osterholm v. Boston & Mont. etc. Co., supra, 40 Mont. 508 [107 P. 499]; Toomey v. Southern Pacific Ry., 86 Cal. 374 [24 P. 1074, 10 L.R.A. 139]; Flanagan v. Sanders, 138 Mich. 253 [101 N.W. 581].) (c) Those imposing duties to the public, considered as a composite of individuals, in which case a right of action does arise in one of the public when, and only when, he has sustained some special injury by reason of non-compliance. (Hayes v. Michigan C. R. Co., 111 U.S. 228, 239, 240 [4 S. Ct. 369, 28 L. Ed. 410]; Philadelphia W. & B. Ry. v. Stebbing, 62 Md. 504, 516, 517; Sluder v. St. Louis Transit Co., 189 Mo. 107 [88 S.W. 648, 5 L.R.A. (N. S.) 187]; Union Pacific Ry. v. McDonald, 152 U.S. 262, 282 [14 S. Ct. 619, 38 L. Ed. 434].) It may be said, and perhaps correctly, that these are essentially restatements of the same thing, looked at from different angles (note, 9 L.R.A. (N. S.) 343; but that is unimportant. The important thing is that there are statutes such as we have mentioned under (c), and these statutes usually bear the aspect of police regulations for the protection of the public relative to matters with which the public contact is commonly through individuals, and as to which the individuals are entitled to assume that the law has been observed. (South & North Alabama Ry. Co. v. Donovan, 84 Ala. 141 [4 So. 142]; Jackson v. Kansas C. etc. Ry., 157 Mo. 621 [58 S.W. 32, 80 Am. St. Rep. 650].) ... The benefits to be derived from its performance inure to the public through the added safety assured to individual person and property, and can affect the public in no other way. That the failure to observe the requirements of such a statute will, if the proximate cause of injury, support an action even by a trespasser is sustained by an abundance of authority. (Richardson v. El Paso, C. G. etc. Co., 51 Colo. 440 [118 P. 982]; Erb v. Morasch, 8 Kan. App. 61 [54 P. 323]; Alabama & Va. R. Co. v. Carter, 77 Miss. *693 511 [27 So. 993]; Chicago, B. & Q. R. Co. v. Grablin, 38 Neb. 90 [56 N.W. 796, 57 N.W. 522]; Keyser v. Grand Trunk Ry., 66 Mich. 390 [33 N.W. 867]; Meeks v. Southern Pac. Railway Co., 56 Cal. 513 [38 Am. Rep. 67]; South & North Alabama Ry. Co. v. Donovan, supra; Hayes v. Michigan C. R. Co., supra; Jackson v. Kansas C. etc. Ry. Co., supra.)"
A similar law was enacted in the State of Colorado, and was construed in Richardson v. El Paso C. G. etc. Co, supra. The matter there was thus disposed of:
"On this state of facts it is contended that plaintiffs, as well as the deceased, were mere licensees, which did not entitle either of them to the use of the dump in the immediate vicinity of the shaft, which was about 110 feet from the house; that deceased was, therefore, a trespasser when upon the dump, and at the shaft, or, if the license extended to the immediate vicinity of the shaft, which was there when the house was constructed, the defendant violated none of its obligations growing out of the relationship of owner to licensee or trespasser. The proposition is wholly inapplicable. Plaintiffs' action is not based upon the ground of a failure on the part of the defendant to fulfill any obligation which it owed them or the deceased, because they occupied a house on the Australia claim, but upon the failure of the defendant to comply with a statutory requirement the purpose of which was to protect the public from injury, which neglect, they claim, caused the death of their son. ... The failure to perform a statutory duty imposed by a valid statute under the police power of the state for the protection of the public is negligence per se. (Platte & Denver C. & M. Co. v. Dowell, 17 Colo. 376 [30 P. 68].) The party upon whom such duty is imposed must not only exercise reasonable care in the first instance to comply with the requirement of the statute, but must thereafter exercise such care in complying with the statutory requirements. (Jones v. Flint & P. M. R. Co., 127 Mich. 198 [86 N.W. 838].)"
Appellants attempt to distinguish these last two cases because in each the plaintiffs happened to be children, but it clearly appears that these adjudications were not based upon the "attractive nuisance" theory, which would limit the recovery to children. The case of Texas-Louisiana Power Co. v. Webster, (Tex. Civ. App.) 59 S.W. (2d) 902 (affirmed, *694 Supreme Court, 127 Tex. 126 [91 S.W. (2d) 302]), also holds that under the circumstances we have here, the question of the status of the injured party cannot be urged in defense of the liability of the power company. By statute in the State of Texas it is provided, with reference to power lines, that "such lines shall be constructed upon suitable poles in the most approved manner, and maintained at a height above the ground of at least twenty-two feet". Plaintiff, while driving his automobile, ran out of gasoline. In search of a supply, he started toward a barn in a field adjoining the highway, and ran into a high voltage wire which had sagged to some three feet from the ground, due to damage done by a recent storm. The power company was the owner of an easement across the field, as explained by the court in the following portion of the opinion, which reviews exhaustively many cases upon all phases of this question:
"Obviously, one of the purposes of the quoted provision of the statute is to protect from injury all persons while using the premises in a manner consistent with the easement rights of the power company. What are these rights? The generally accepted doctrine is that the owner of the fee or proprietor of the premises has dominion over, and the right to use the land in a manner consistent with the reasonable enjoyment of the easement by its owner. (15 Texas Jur., p. 802, par. 59. See annotations 46 A.L.R. 1463-1465.) Appellant acquired the right of way through the Carter farm by a deed from the owner, granting the right of ingress and egrees over adjacent lands to or from said right of way for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting, controlling, hanging new wires on, maintaining, and removing said line and appurtenances, the right to relocate along the same general direction of said line, etc. Neither under this express grant, nor under the statute, did appellant have the right to prevent the owner of the fee, or proprietor, from using the ground under the power line so long as it was not put to a use inconsistent with the seasonable enjoyment of the easement. We do not think it can be said that, in attempting to pass under appellant's power line at the time and place in question, deceased was interfering with, or trespassing upon any right of the appellant; in fact, if deceased was trespassing, *695 it was upon the rights and premises of the owner or tenant."
[7] We now come to the instructions. It is first claimed that the court erred in giving an instruction upon the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur, upon the ground that such instruction was inapplicable. The fundamentals of that doctrine are as follows:
"In order that the doctrine of res ispa loquitur should apply to a given case, the plaintiff must have first shown by a preponderance of the evidence that certain conditions existed; amongst these conditions are the following: 1. That the general experience of mankind shows that the accident was such that it does not usually occur in the ordinary course of events without negligence upon the part of those in control, and 2. The person against whom the doctrine is sought to be invoked must have been in control of that instrumentality, and 3. The person invoking the doctrine must not be in a position to know the cause of the accident. ..." (Parker v. Granger, Inc., 4 Cal. 2d 668, 674, 675 [52 PaCal.2d 226].)
[8] As to the first condition, it is clearly the general experience of mankind that telephone or other wires within several feet of the ground are not charged with a deadly current of electricity. As to the second, the instrumentalities--the electric current and the wire--were in control of the power company. As to the third condition, neither the plaintiff nor anyone else could tell exactly how the current got into the telephone wire. In making this reference to the facts, we, of course, are bound to accept the testimony of respondent o the effect that the deceased did nothing to cause a contact between the telephone wire and the power line, and to hold that the contention of the appellant that deceased jerked the wire, is untrue. The following quotation from 18 American Jurisprudence, 504, expresses our views, and clearly authorized the giving of the instruction:
"The mere introduction of the facts surrounding an injury from electricity, showing that such injury resulted from contact with live electric wires or other appliances when out of proper condition or out of their proper place, may suffice under the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur to raise a prima facie presumption that the electrical company having such appliances *696 in charge was negligent in the performance of its duty and to place upon the company the burden of overthrowing such presumption. Even though a fallen wire received the electricity by coming in contact with another wire upon which it sagged, the doctrine may apply. The exceedingly dangerous character of live electric wires lends force to the strict application of this rule of law to accidents occurring through contact with them under such circumstances; and unless the rule of res ipsa loquitur is applied, it is evident in a large number of cases that liability for the resulting injury will be escaped. It is within the power of electric companies at all times to show whether they have exercised due care in the erection and subsequent supervision and maintenance of their wires and appliances, while in many cases it would be almost impossible for the person injured to prove an actionable failure of duty in these things."
[9] Furthermore, an instruction on this doctrine was offered by appellant and given by the court. It is a fundamental rule that under such circumstances appellant cannot complain of a like instruction given by respondent. Appellant states that this rule is not applicable because the trial court announced that it "intended to apply the doctrine". No reference is made in the transcript as to when and where such announcement was made, and we do not feel that it is incumbent upon us to examine the hundreds of pages of such transcript to ascertain the facts.
[10] The court gave the following instruction at request of respondent:
"You are instructed that from the very nature of its business, an electric company using highly charged wires owes a legal duty toward every person who, in the exercise of a lawful occupation in a place where he has a legal right to be and is liable to come into contact with the wires, to see that such wires are properly placed with reference to the safety of such persons."
Other instructions defining the rights of a licensee were given. It is contended that in the first instruction the jury were told that the deceased had a lawful right to be upon the property, while in another they were told that deceased was not an invitee. The first instruction was not one on the facts, and consequently it did not, as appellant contends, have the *697 effect of telling the jury that decedent was lawfully upon the property. It was a mere statement of the law, and was therefore proper, and no conflict resulted.
Lastly, the court instructed the jury that a violation of the rule of the railroad commission constituted negligence as a matter of law. This correctly stated the law, as we have fully explained above.
Other points raised by appellant have either been disposed of without specific mention being made of them, or have been found so devoid of merit as to require no discussion.
The judgment is affirmed.

=== CASE 2214194 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:43.745031+00 ===

32 Cal. App. 2d 521 (1939)
MANUEL GARCIA THOME, Petitioner,
v.
THE SUPERIOR COURT OF MERCED COUNTY et al., Respondents.
Civ. No. 6186.
California Court of Appeals. Third Appellate District.
May 4, 1939.
J. L. Royle for Petitioner.
Earl Warren, Attorney-General, Eugene M. Elson, Deputy Attorney-General, Allen A. Henderson, District Attorney, and F. A. Silveira, Special Deputy District Attorney, for Respondents.
Ben Harrison, United States Attorney, Francis C. Whelan, Assistant United States Attorney, Leslie A. Cleary, District *522 Attorney (Stanislaus County), Frank Collier, Deputy District Attorney, and Roger R. Walch, District Attorney (Kings County), as Amici Curiae, on Behalf of Respondents.
The Court.
A rehearing was granted in this case in order that we might have the benefit of further argument. Additional briefs have been filed and the matter orally argued, and after further consideration we adopt the opinion heretofore filed, as follows:
"By this writ petitioner seeks to review an order of the Superior Court of the County of Merced finding petitioner guilty of contempt."
"This is another case growing out of the preliminary injunction issued by the superior court restraining and enjoining certain defendants, including petitioner, from interfering with the agents of the state department of agriculture in testing cattle under the provisions of the Bovine Tuberculosis Act. (Secs. 221-254.)"
"After the issuance of the preliminary injunction an order was directed to petitioner to show cause why he should not be punished for contempt of said preliminary injunction. A hearing was had and petitioner adjudged in contempt of court, and ordered punished therefor."
"There seems to be no conflict in the testimony. Upon a certain day petitioner was notified to have his cattle in stanchions, preparatory to receiving the tuberculin test. Upon that day a duly authorized veterinarian of the agricultural department appeared at the dairy of petitioner, and found the cattle were all confined in their stanchions. Petitioner was present in person and with a duly licensed veterinarian. Petitioner then requested of the state veterinarian a sample or smear of the tuberculin about to be injected into his cattle. This request was refused, and the petitioner then would not permit the test to proceed, and the citation and conviction of contempt followed."
[1] "This court recently upheld the constitutionality of that portion of the Agricultural Code relating to bovine tuberculosis (Affonso Bros. v. Brock, 29 Cal. App. 2d 26 [84 PaCal.2d 515]) upon the ground it was a valid exercise of the police power enacted in the interest of the public health. We there pointed out, however, that although stringent and summary, the act did not deprive the owner of his remedy *523 for wilful and unlawful destruction of his cattle, if in fact they were not afflicted with tuberculosis, and that he had a remedy for the wilful or wrongful destruction in a subsequent action for damages against those who were responsible for such killing. The destruction of healthy animals was not authorized by the statute, and while an owner of cattle may not obstruct an official inspection of his animals nor interfere with the department nor its agents while carrying out the provisions of the act, there is nothing to prevent him from being present with his own veterinarian to observe and participate in the examination."
[2] "A misunderstanding seems to have arisen as to the meaning of the word 'participate'. By the use of that word it was intended, and its meaning justifies the interpretation, that an owner might at that time, do any and all things, either by himself or through his veterinarian that would not in any manner or way interfere with the performance of the duties of the state veterinarian."
"Accordingly we believe an owner in the protection of his subsequent right to challenge the acts of the state, was entitled to and was justified in requesting a smear of the tuberculin about to be injected into his cattle. One of the prerequisites of the administration of this test is the use of approved virus. The only practical way that such a fact can be determined is to obtain, prior to its use, a sample thereof. Where, as in the case at issue, this right was refused the owner, he was justified in refusing to permit the department to further proceed with its test."
"The law accords the owner every right and opportunity to show that the law had been carelessly or improperly administered or that his cattle were not reactors, and to deprive him of the means of so showing, would be to deprive him of a constitutional right. It would be an idle act to declare that the owner could, upon an appropriate showing, recover for abuse upon the part of the state and at the same time deny him the opportunity of obtaining the evidence necessary to make such showing."
"As regards the uncertainty of the terms of the preliminary injunction, we have, in Mattos v. Superior Court, 30 Cal. App. 2d 641 [86 PaCal.2d 1056], considered that point. We need not here repeat what was there said. *524"
[3] "Petitioner also objected to the use of the tuberculin by the veterinarian because it did not have affixed to the container a printed label stating certain facts required by section 1065 of the Agricultural Code. We do not believe that tuberculin is a substance as that term is used in the definition of economic poison."
"'"Economic poisons" includes any substance, or mixture of substances intended to be used for preventing, destroying, repelling, or mitigating any and all insects, fungi, bacteria, weeds, rodents, predatory animals or any other form of plant or animal life which is, or which the director may declare to be, a pest, which may infest or be detrimental to vegetation, man, animals or households, or be present in any environment whatsoever.' (Sec. 1061a, Agricultural Code.)"
"Tuberculin is defined as the 'produce of the growth of the tubercle bacillus from any source, used or intended to be used in diagnosing tuberculosis in cattle'." (Sec. 221a, Agricultural Code.)
"The order is annulled and the petitioner discharged."

=== CASE 2214198 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:43.785901+00 ===

32 Cal. App. 2d 610 (1939)
HARRIET M. THRASHER, Appellant,
v.
MARY E. THRASHER et al., Respondents.
Civ. No. 2331.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Appellate District.
May 10, 1939.
No appearance for Appellant.
A. Heber Winder, William H. Wood and Winthrop O. Gordon for Respondents.
Barnard, P. J.
Motion by respondent to dismiss appeal on the ground that no transcript has been filed and that proceedings for the preparation of a record have been terminated in the trial court.
[1] From the certificate of the county clerk it appears that judgment was entered on February 21, 1938; that a motion for a new trial was denied on April 25, 1938; that notice to the clerk to prepare a transcript was filed on May 31, 1938; that no further steps have been taken by the appellant since said date with respect to preparing a record; that on February 26, 1939, on motion, an order was made in the trial court terminating any proceedings for the preparation of a record; that no proceedings for the preparation of a bill of exception or of a transcript are now pending before said court; and that the time therefor has expired. The motion must, therefore, be granted. (Bruce v. Tunstall, 24 Cal. App. 2d 370 [75 PaCal.2d 120]; Christensen v. Couey, 136 Cal. App. 268 [28 PaCal.2d 689].)
The appeal is dismissed.
Marks, J., and Griffin, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2214199 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:43.800237+00 ===

785 N.W.2d 655 (2010)
2010 WI App 79
STATE of Wisconsin, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
Matthew C. PARMLEY, Defendant-Respondent.[]*656
No. 2009AP1210-CR.
Court of Appeals of Wisconsin.
Submitted on Briefs January 14, 2010.
Opinion Filed May 26, 2010.
*657 On behalf of the plaintiff-appellant, the cause was submitted on the briefs of Rebecca Rapp St. John, assistant attorney general, and J.B. Van Hollen, attorney general.
On behalf of the defendant-respondent, the cause was submitted on the brief of Christopher M. Eippert of Holden & Hahn, S.C., Sheboygan.
Before BROWN, C.J., ANDERSON and SNYDER, JJ.
ANDERSON, J.
¶ 1 The State appeals from the circuit court's order exempting Matthew C. Parmley from registering as a sex offender. The court compared Parmley's age of eighteen with the victim's age of fourteen and concluded that he was not more than four years older than the victim and excused Parmley from registering as a sex offender. We conclude the court erred because the disparity in ages is a measurement of time and not of age; the court should have calculated the time between the two birthdays and held that Parmley was more than four years older than the victim. Therefore, we reverse.
¶ 2 The State charged Parmley, birth date January 18, 1986, with one count of second-degree sexual assault of a child, birth date June 9, 1990, for a single act of sexual intercourse on September 26, 2004. He subsequently entered a no contest plea to the felony charge of second-degree sexual assault of a child. The court imposed and stayed a sentence and placed Parmley on probation for five years. The court also ordered Parmley to register as a sex offender.
¶ 3 Approximately three weeks later, Parmley filed a request to be exempted from the requirement to register as a sex offender, contending that he met the exception under WIS. STAT. § 301.45(1m) (2003-04).[1] The circuit court denied his *658 request, reasoning that the request was too close to the sentencing, there was still a risk that Parmley could reoffend, and the circuit court was concerned about the difference in age between Parmley and the victim. The circuit court did suggest there might come a time, when Parmley is out of adolescence, when there would not be a risk to the public, leaving open the door that Parmley could reapply for exemption from the registration requirement.
¶ 4 Parmley walked through that open door when three and one-half years later he filed a pro se request seeking an early discharge from probation and exemption from the sex offender registration requirements. Parmley informed the court that he had completed seventy percent of his probation term without any significant violations and provided examples of how he had turned his life around. Parmley's probation agent approved of his early discharge from probation.
¶ 5 At the motion hearing, the State had no objection to Parmley's early discharge from probation. However, the State argued that under WIS. STAT. § 301.45(1m) an exemption from the registration requirement can only be granted if there is "less than a four-year difference in age, and that is certainly not the case in what occurred here." Further, the State pointed out that in a psychosexual evaluation performed at the time of sentencing, the examiner "gave some significant concerns that this type of behavior itself may occur if there is not continued treatment." The State suggested that under § 301.45, the court should order another psychosexual examination "to provide further information that the concerns that were initially involved in this case and that the initial report gave have changed. And without that information, and seeing that it is not statutorily eligible, [the State] would object to that second request."
¶ 6 Without addressing the State's apprehension about the possibility of Parmley reoffending, the circuit court granted Parmley's request to be exempted from registering as a sex offender. The court noted that at the time of the offense Parmley was eighteen years old and the victim was fourteen years old and, "taking the statute at its face, there is a four-year difference, not more than a four-year difference." The State appeals.[2]
¶ 7 On appeal, the State argues that the clear language of WIS. STAT. §§ 301.45 and 990.01(49) only exempts an individual from registering as a sex offender if the individual is four or less calendar years younger than the victim. This issue presents a question of statutory interpretation. The interpretation of a statute is a question of law which this court reviews de novo. State v. Hughes, 218 Wis. 2d 538, 543, 582 N.W.2d 49 (Ct.App.1998). When we interpret a statute, our goal is to ascertain the intent of the legislature and give effect to the intent of the legislature. State ex rel. Frederick v. McCaughtry, 173 Wis. 2d 222, 225, 496 N.W.2d 177 (Ct.App. 1992). We first look to the language of the statute itself. Anderson v. City of Milwaukee, 208 Wis. 2d 18, 25, 559 N.W.2d 563 (1997). If the language of the statute is unambiguous in its meaning, we go no further. We also apply "[a] cardinal rule of statutory interpretation ... that statutes must be construed so as to avoid absurd results." Wisconsin Citizens v. DNR, 2004 WI 40, ¶ 35, 270 Wis. 2d 318, 677 N.W.2d 612.
*659 ¶ 8 The statutes at play, WIS. STAT. §§ 301.45 and 990.01(49) provide, in relevant parts:
301.45 Sex offender registration.
....
(1m) EXCEPTION TO REGISTRATION REQUIREMENT; UNDERAGE SEXUAL ACTIVITY. (a) A person is not required to comply with the reporting requirements under this section if all of the following apply:
1. The person meets the criteria under sub. (1g)(a) to (dd) based on any violation, or on the solicitation, conspiracy or attempt to commit any violation, of s. 948.02(1) or (2), 948.025, or 948.085(2).
1g. The violation, or the solicitation, conspiracy or attempt to commit the violation, of s. 948.02(1) or (2), 948.025, or 948.085(2) did not involve sexual intercourse, as defined in s. 948.01(6), either by the use or threat of force or violence or with a victim under the age of 12 years.
2. At the time of the violation, or of the solicitation, conspiracy or attempt to commit the violation, of s. 948.02(1) or (2), 948.025, or 948.085(2), the person had not attained the age of 19 years and was not more than 4 years older or not more than 4 years younger than the child.
3. It is not necessary, in the interest of public protection, to require the person to comply with the reporting requirements under this section. (Emphasis added.)
990.01 Construction of laws; words and phrases.
....
(49) YEAR. "Year" means a calendar year, unless otherwise expressed....[3]
¶ 9 We begin by restating the legislative intent in establishing a sex offender registry and requiring all convicted sex offenders to register. The purpose underlying the registration requirements of WIS. STAT. § 301.45 are to "assist law enforcement agencies in investigating and apprehending offenders in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the local community and members of the state." State v. Bollig, 2000 WI 6, ¶ 20, 232 Wis. 2d 561, 605 N.W.2d 199.
¶ 10 In State v. Joseph E.G., 2001 WI App 29, ¶ 11, 240 Wis. 2d 481, 623 N.W.2d 137, we examined the legislative objective in carving out the exemption from registration that we are examining in this opinion:
Interpreting Wis. STAT. § 301.45(1m) as a whole, we conclude that the legislature's purpose was to craft a narrow exception to mandatory registration for sex offenders in cases of factually consensual sexual contact between two minors who, but for the age of the younger child, would have broken no law. For example, sexual contact between an eighteen-year-old male and a fifteen-year-old female, even though factually consensual, could result in the male's conviction for second-degree sexual assault of a child because a person under the age of sixteen cannot legally consent to sexual relations. There, the offender and the fifteen-year-old child could have been equally consenting participants, where the offender was not a predatory seeker of sexual contacts. In such a case, the circuit court has the discretion to excuse the offender from registration if it determines that factually consensual contact has occurred, the offender presents no danger to the public, and the *660 court is satisfied that the purposes of § 301.45 are not undermined by excusing registration. However, if the court is concerned about whether the sexual contact was truly consensual or if the offender appears to be predatory in seeking out younger partners for sexual contacts, the circuit court can deny the juvenile's request to be excused from the registration requirements of WIS. STAT. §§ 938.34(15)(bm) and 301.45.
¶ 11 Our mission in this decision is to clarify how the difference in age between a sexual offender and a victim is to be calculated. The State urges us to adopt an interpretation that considers the actual ages of Parmley and his victim. The State argues that the clear language of the statutes leads to the conclusion that age difference is calculated by using Parmley's and the victim's dates of birth.
¶ 12 Parmley argues in support of the circuit court's conclusions and proposes that calculating the age difference is no more difficult than subtracting fourteen years old from eighteen years old and getting the result that Parmley and the victim are four years apart. According to Parmley, because he is not more than four years older than the victim, he is exempt from sex offender registration. He also maintains that the statute is unconstitutionally vague as applied to him.
¶ 13 While the method of calculating age disparity between an actor and a victim is a question of first impression in this state, it has been addressed in other jurisdictions. We find the opinion of the Supreme Court of Connecticut in State v. Jason B., 248 Conn. 543, 729 A.2d 760 (1999), to be instructive. Jason B. was appealing from an adjudication that he was a youthful offender for an incident of sexual inter-course. Id. at 764. On the date of the incident, September 21, 1994, Jason was sixteen years of age, his birthday being May 9, 1978, and the victim was fourteen years old, her birthday being August 16, 1980. Id. at 765.
¶ 14 Jason was convicted under a Connecticut statute that provided in relevant part:
A person is guilty of sexual assault in the second degree when such person engages in sexual intercourse with another person and: (1) Such other person is thirteen years of age or older but under sixteen years of age and the actor is more than two years older than such person....
Id. at 764 n. 1. On appeal, he claimed that at the time of the incident, he was not more than two years older than the victim within the meaning of the statute. Id. at 764. He also argued that the statute was unconstitutionally vague as applied to him. Id. at 764-65.
¶ 15 In constructing his argument, Jason relied upon common parlance, the criminal statute and the definitions of "month" and "year" in the Connecticut statutes.[4]Id. at 767. He argued that for the purposes of the statute, "a [sixteen year old] is always within two years of age of a [fourteen year old]...." Id. It was his contention that "he did not violate the statute because he `was less than two calendar years older [than the victim].'" Id.
¶ 16 The Supreme Court of Connecticut explained why it rejected Jason's argument:
Although in other comparative contexts, for example, a comparison of the increase in population growth between *661 two cities, the use of a calendar year may be appropriate, common sense dictates that in comparing the relative ages of individuals, the difference in their ages is determined by reference to their respective birth dates. In other words, although a person, when asked his age, often will respond with a whole number, for example, "I am forty years old," without specifying how many months have passed since his most recent birthday, it is understood that his exact age actually consists of this abbreviated whole number plus the number of months and days that have passed since the date of his last birthday. This linguistic tendency is best illustrated by the response that ordinarily would be given by one who is asked, not simply how old she is, but how much older she is than someone else. For example, if a woman who was born on January 7, 1950, was asked how much older she is than her husband, who was born on December 7, 1950, in all likelihood she would respond that she is "nearly one year older," or perhaps, "eleven months older," than her husband. She hardly would respond, as the defendant's argument suggests, that neither is "older" than the other simply because they were both born in the same calendar year. Indeed, even twins know how to respond when asked which of them is "older" than the other; they ordinarily will respond based on their birth order, even though when asked their age they ordinarily will respond with the same whole number of years.
Id.
¶ 17 The Connecticut court adopted the method of computing the disparity in ages urged by the State in this appeal:
[I]n determining whether the actor was "more than two years older" than the complainant, the parties' birth dates will be used to calculate the differences in their ages. Application of this basic, commonsense principle leads to the conclusion that the defendant, who was born in May, 1978, was "more than two years older" than the victim, who was born in August, 1980.
Id. at 768 (footnote omitted).
¶ 18 The court of appeals of North Carolina recently interpreted a statute criminalizing sexual intercourse with a "person who is 13, 14, or 15 years old and the defendant is more than four but less than six years older than the [victim] ...." State v. Faulk, 683 S.E.2d 265, 267 (N.C.Ct.App.2009). The North Carolina court pointed out that the emphasized portion "requires a calculation of time, not of age." Id. The North Carolina court concluded that to determine the disparity in ages, it was proper to calculate the total time between the birthday of the actor and the birthday of the victim. See id.
¶ 19 Wisconsin's calculation of time under its liquor laws supports a calculation that is time based and not age based. In Paetz v. State, 129 Wis. 174, 175, 107 N.W. 1090 (1906), Paetz was convicted of a second offense of selling liquor within a year. The applicable statute provided that "[i]n case of a second or any subsequent conviction of the same person during any year the punishment shall be by both such fine and imprisonment." Id. at 176-77, 107 N.W. 1090 (emphasis added). Paetz argued that the phrase during any year meant a calendar year and because his convictions were on July 3, 1903, and January 26, 1904, the enhanced penalty did not apply. Id. at 175, 179, 107 N.W. 1090.
¶ 20 While acknowledging that Paetz's argument was "able and ingenious," the court rejected his conclusions. Id. at 179, 107 N.W. 1090. The court opined, "We are of the opinion that the year contemplated by the statute is a period of 365 *662 days...." Id. It thought that Paetz's argument would yield absurd results, e.g., a person convicted for sales on December 31 of one year and January 1 of the next year could not be punished for the second offense. See id. "We do not think such is a proper construction of the statute. We think that the words `during any year' mean the ensuing year from the date of the first conviction." Id.
¶ 21 From these cases we conclude that to calculate the disparity of ages required in WIS. STAT. § 301.45(1m)(a)2., to determine if an actor is exempt from registering as a sex offender, the time between the birth dates of the two parties is to be determined. Using this method we first consider Parmley's birthday of January 18, 1986, and then the victim's birthday of June 9, 1990. We conclude that there is a difference of four years, four months and twenty-three days. Therefore, Parmley is more than four years older than the victim.
¶ 22 The legislative intent in carving out this narrow exception to the sex offender registration program supports this commonsense approach of calculating who is "not more than 4 years older" than the victim. "[T]he legislature's purpose was to craft a narrow exception to mandatory registration for sex offenders in cases of factually consensual sexual contact between two minors who, but for the age of the younger child, would have broken no law." Joseph E.G., 240 Wis. 2d 481, ¶ 11, 623 N.W.2d 137. If we were to adopt Parmley's view, there could be almost a five-year gap between an actor and a victim. Assuming an act of sexual intercourse happened on December 31, 1998, and the actor had a birthday of January 1, 1980, and the victim's birthday was December 27, 1984, under Parmley's method of calculation, the actor would have been eighteen years old and the victim fourteen years old and he would be exempt from sex offender registration because he is not more than four years older than the victim. However, under the method of calculation we adopt in this opinion, Parmley would have to register as a sex offender because the actual difference between their ages is four years and 360 daysmaking Parmley almost one additional full year older physically, emotionally and sexually.
¶ 23 This method of calculating age disparity between an actor and a child victim promotes the overarching state policy of protecting our children from those who would abuse them. In a different context, interpreting the statute defining statutory rape, WIS. STAT. § 948.02(2) (1997-98), in State v. Fisher, 211 Wis. 2d 665, 674, 565 N.W.2d 565 (Ct.App.1997), we recognized
a significant state interest in regulating sexual activity on the part of its children. The state has a strong interest in the ethical and moral development of its children. This state has a long tradition of honoring its obligation to protect its children from others and from themselves. Section 948.02(2) has many salutary purposes; among the many significant interests of the state are the dangers of pregnancy, venereal disease, damage to reproductive organs, the lack of considered consent, heightened vulnerability to physical and psychological harm, and the lack of mature judgment. (Citations omitted.)
¶ 24 Our method of calculating age disparitycomparing actual birth datesis consistent with the purpose of sex offender registration, to "assist law enforcement agencies in investigating and apprehending offenders in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the local community and members of the state." Bollig, 232 Wis. 2d 561, ¶ 20, 605 N.W.2d 199. It also prevents the narrow exception to registration, recognized by Joseph E.G., from being enlarged by application to actors who *663 are actually more than four years older than the victim.
¶ 25 Although not conceding that the statute is unambiguous, Parmley mounts a second challenge to the statute, he argues that it is unconstitutionally vague as applied to him. He complains that, being eighteen, he would not have considered himself more than four years older than the victim. He contends that he "did not have sufficient notice under the statute that his conduct may possibly not fall within the exemption to the sex offender registration statute."
¶ 26 Our standard of review when confronted with a challenge to the constitutionality of a statute has been repeated frequently:
We review the constitutionality of statutes de novo, without deference to the trial court. Statutes enjoy a presumption of constitutionality and we review the statutes so as to preserve their constitutionality. A party challenging the constitutionality of a statute must demonstrate that it is unconstitutional beyond a reasonable doubt.
State v. Chvala, 2004 WI App 53, ¶ 9, 271 Wis. 2d 115, 678 N.W.2d 880 (citations omitted), aff'd, 2005 WI 30, 279 Wis. 2d 216, 693 N.W.2d 747.
¶ 27 This same challenge was rejected by the Supreme Court of Connecticut in Jason B., and we cannot improve upon its reasoning:
The defendant's contention that our vagueness analysis should focus on the warning provided to the average sixteen year old lacks merit. First, the scope of the statute is not confined to defendants of teenage years. Second, vagueness analysis ordinarily does not depend on the individual or categorical capabilities of the defendant. It focuses on the warning that is afforded by the language and its gloss to persons of ordinary intelligence. Although the knowledge possessed by a particular defendant may undermine a vagueness challenge ... the converse is not true. Lack of knowledge, either by the individual defendant or a person in his particular age category, does not enhance a vagueness challenge.
Jason B., 729 A.2d at 770 (citations and emphasis omitted).
¶ 28 To enhance and promote the state's policy of protecting our children from sexual predators, the application of the exemption from registration as a sex offender when the actor is "not more than 4 years older," is determined by calculating the time between the birthday of the actor and the birthday of the victim. We reverse because it was error for the circuit court to only compare calendar year ages.[5]
Order reversed.
NOTES
[]  Petition For Review Filed.
[1]  All references to the Wisconsin Statutes are to the 2007-08 version unless otherwise noted.
[2]  The State is appealing as a matter of right under WIS. STAT. § 974.05(1)(a). The State may appeal from any "[f]inal order or judgment adverse to the state ... if the appeal would not be prohibited by constitutional protections against double jeopardy." Id.
[3]  We do not find WIS. STAT. § 990.01(49) to be of any help because "calendar year" has one definition: "1. Twelve calendar months beginning January 1 and ending December 31.Also termed calendar year." BLACK'S LAW DICTIONARY 1646 (8th ed. 2004).
[4]  The court noted that the Connecticut General Statutes § 1-1(i) defined "month" as a calendar month and "year" as a calendar year. State v. Jason B., 248 Conn. 543, 729 A.2d 760, 767 (1999).
[5]  The circuit court also erred because it failed to follow the dictates of the statute after Parmley filed his motion to be exempted from the registration requirements of WIS. STAT. § 301.45(1m). The calculation of the age difference between the actor and child is only the beginning of the analysis the circuit court must follow in considering such a motion. Sec. 301.45(1m)(bm)-(e).

=== CASE 2214213 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:43.98034+00 ===

273 Cal. App. 2d 612 (1969)
MARSHALL L. GANZ, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
THE JUSTICE COURT FOR THE ARVIN-LAMONT JUDICIAL DISTRICT OF KERN COUNTY, Defendant and Respondent; THE PEOPLE, Real Party in Interest and Respondent.
Civ. No. 1068.
California Court of Appeals. Fifth Dist.
June 2, 1969.
Michael J. Brennan, Paul Driscoll and James F. Smith for Plaintiff and Appellant.
No appearance for Defendant and Respondent.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, Doris H. Maier, Assistant Attorney General, and Jack R. Winkler, Deputy Attorney General, for Real Party in Interest and Respondent.
CONLEY, P. J.
In this proceeding, the plaintiff appeals from the denial by the Superior Court of Kern County of a writ to forbid the Justice Court of the Arvin- Lamont Judicial District from using its general jury panel for a specific criminal trial. Marshall L. Ganz, the appellant, was originally charged in that court with failure to yield the right of way at an intersection (Veh. Code,  21800, subd. (b)). The defendant entered a not guilty plea and demanded a jury *616 trial. The demand was granted and the case was set for trial on January 3, 1968. On January 2, 1968, appellant challenged the entire jury panel (Pen. Code,  1058), on the ground "that there are material departures from the forms prescribed in respect to the drawing and return of the jury." (Pen. Code,  1059.) The justice of the peace denied the challenge and trial was reset for March 22, 1968. It was later continued without date at the request of the appellant in order to permit a hearing in the superior court on the question whether or not a writ of prohibition should be directed to the justice court preventing it from taking further proceedings with its present jury panel in the criminal action. On March 27, 1968, the Kern County Superior Court directed respondent justice court to show cause why a peremptory writ of prohibition should not issue. A return was made by the filing of a demurrer and an answer; the latter pleading was later amended to correct clerical errors.
The demurrer was argued on May 15, 1968, and on June 5, 1968, it was sustained without leave to amend on the grounds:
"There is no showing that the method used to select a jury panel denies the Petitioner, Marshall L. Ganz, an impartial jury. There is no showing that there is a systematic exclusion of persons or classes of persons to which Petitioner belongs."
"Sustained without leave to amend on Ground II, Page 2 of demurrer, that the Petition does not state a cause of action as a matter of law."
A judgment dismissing the petition for a writ of prohibition was entered on July 25, 1968, and a notice of appeal to this court was filed on July 30, 1968.
The petition alleges that Marshall L. Ganz was charged with a traffic offense in the justice court and that his challenge of the entire jury panel was denied. It is further said that denial of said motion exceeded the respondent justice court's jurisdiction because it deprived appellant of his right to trial by a fair and impartial jury "... in that certain definite and identifiable groups in the district are excluded from jury service by the method used to select jurors for the jury list."
It is claimed that the petitioner "has no plain, speedy or adequate remedy in the ordinary course of law," and further alleged (A) that jury panels in said justice court are drawn solely from the list of registered voters of Kern County; (B) that the "percentage of persons with Spanish surnames on the jury lists for the Arvin-Lamont Judicial District for the years 1963 up to and including 1967 varied from a high of 4 percent *617 to a low of 2.5 percent in 1967"; (C) that a study conducted by the Fair Employment Practices Commission based on the 1960 United States Census indicates that 10 percent of the total population of Kern County then had Spanish surnames; (D) that the telephone directory for the City of Arvin indicates that nine percent of the telephone users are persons with Spanish surnames; (E) that the records of the Lamont Water and Sewage District show that 21 percent of the persons receiving such services have Spanish surnames; and (F) that the Pacific Gas and Electric Company has customers with Spanish family names consisting of 18 percent of 2,000 subscribers. The appellant contends that his petition stated a cause of action, and that the sustaining of the general demurrer was error; he also claims that the court abused its discretion in not giving him leave to amend.
While a writ of prohibition may be requested to prevent trial by the use of an alleged unconstitutional jury panel, practical considerations make the granting of such a remedy unwise except in unusual cases.
[1] The Attorney General has alleged in his brief, without contradiction, that petitioner has not cited any instance in which a criminal trial has been halted by a writ of prohibition on the ground urged here. It is proper, therefore, to consider briefly whether such a writ may be applied for in a situation of this kind. The practice of using a writ of prohibition to halt a proposed trial has grown remarkably in recent years, due to the fact that if it is apparent that improper methods are being employed in a prosecution, the postponement of their consideration until appeal after judgment results in lost time and consequent damage to the participants as well as to the judicial system of the State of California. It has been held, for example, that prohibition is a proper remedy to test venue (Van Zanten v. Superior Court, 214 Cal. App. 2d 510 [29 Cal. Rptr. 625]), to prevent the retrial of a defendant who has been once in jeopardy (Paulson v. Superior Court, 58 Cal. 2d 1, 5 [22 Cal. Rptr. 649, 372 P.2d 641]), to restrain prosecution under an unconstitutional statute or ordinance (Canon v. Justice Court, 61 Cal. 2d 446, 450 [39 Cal. Rptr. 228, 393 P.2d 428]), and to ascertain whether a defendant was committed for trial without probable cause (Mardis v. Superior Court, 218 Cal. App. 2d 70, 72 [32 Cal. Rptr. 263]); but, the Attorney General assures us that every case found in California in which discrimination in the selection of a jury is discussed *618 arose by an appeal after conviction (People v. Durrant, 116 Cal. 179, 199 [48 P. 75]; People v. Vaughn, 14 Cal. App. 201, 205 [111 P. 620]; People v. Manuel, 41 Cal. App. 153, 155 [182 P. 306]; People v. Shannon, 203 Cal. 139, 142 [263 P. 522]; People v. Hines, 12 Cal. 2d 535 [86 P.2d 92]; People v. Parman, 14 Cal. 2d 17, 19 [92 P.2d 387]; People v. Jackson, 88 Cal. App. 2d 747, 751 [199 P.2d 322]; People v. Hernandez, 100 Cal. App. 2d 136, 137 [223 P.2d 76]; People v. Hess, 104 Cal. App. 2d 642, 669 [234 P.2d 65]; People v. White, 43 Cal. 2d 740, 748 [273 P.2d 9]; People v. Carter, 56 Cal. 2d 549, 568 [15 Cal. Rptr. 645, 364 P.2d 477]; People v. Mason, 259 Cal. App. 2d 30 [66 Cal. Rptr. 601]).
While the Attorney General raises the question whether a cause of action for prohibition founded on discrimination in jury selection may be stated at all, we do not concur with him in his doubt concerning the answer. There is no reason why a petition for a writ of prohibition cannot be filed in objecting to an unconstitutional and improper jury panel. However, this case itself furnishes a good example of the delay and consequent basic interference with the functions of the criminal courts that result from an application for a writ of prohibition with respect to the jury panel assigned to a given case. Here, the defendant was accused of a relatively minor breach of the law in August of 1967, and the trial has not been held and will be delayed for a considerable period of time still, because of the question whether the proposed jury panel is proper. It is apparent, furthermore, that a court is much better able to answer the question whether a defendant's jury panel is fair after trial rather than before. It, therefore, seems clear to us that the courts should not hesitate to invoke their discretionary right to refuse the issuance of a writ of prohibition before trial in cases of this caliber. The right to challenge a jury panel in advance through application for a writ of prohibition exists, but common sense would indicate that it should not be frequently asked for or granted.
[2] It is the policy of the federal and state governments throughout the country to provide a fair and unprejudiced jury for the trial of any case, criminal or civil. [3] As a consequence, there has grown up a basic viewpoint with respect to the quality of juries which is perhaps well phrased as anywhere else by Congress in the Jury Selection and Service Act of 1968 (Public Laws 90-274; 82 Stats. 53), where sections 1861 and 1862 read as follows:
" 1861. Declaration of policy *619"
"It is the policy of the United States that all litigants in Federal courts entitled to trial by jury shall have the right to grand and petit juries selected at random from a fair cross section of the community in the district or division wherein the court convenes. It is further the policy of the United States that all citizens shall have the opportunity to be considered for service on grand and petit juries in the district courts of the United States, and shall have an obligation to serve as jurors when summoned for that purpose."
"1862. Discrimination prohibited"
"No citizen shall be excluded from service as a grand or petit juror in the district courts of the United States on account of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, or economic status."
When the principles of the foregoing declaration of policy are observed, much is left to the wise discretion of the trial judge and the attorneys in selecting a jury. The statutory right of counsel to exercise challenges for cause and peremptory challenges also gives wide scope to persons tried in the criminal courts to secure juries that are fair and competent.
The sustaining of the demurrer without leave to amend was proper for the reasons hereinafter stated.
(A) The petition did not state a cause of action as it did not and could not allege that the plaintiff was a member of a class discriminated against.
The petitioner has described himself as a "Jewish man" and his complaint with respect to the jury panel is that there are not sufficient people with Spanish names on it to correspond mathematically with the proportion of such named people in the district. Counsel for the petitioner contend that if the proportion of persons on the jury panel is not in line with the actuality of Spanish named persons in the vicinity this "Jewish man" is constitutionally entitled to challenge the entire jury.
[4] In criminal trials, the rights of the defendant who is being tried are at issue. A defendant is entitled, from his standpoint, to a fair jury. The defendant is not an assistant to the court, or the sheriff or the jury commissioner. Generally speaking, defendants are not charged in an abstract matter with securing juries that comply with the laws; they are entitled, under the federal and state Constitutions, to juries which, from the standpoint of such defendants, comply with their right to a fair trial. [5a] It is, therefore, necessary in *620 a case like this, as an essential part of the challenge to the panel, that a defendant bring himself in his petition within the class concerning which he is complaining. The defendant here did not do this. The petition is silent with respect to how he believes that he is prejudiced through the fact that more people with Spanish names are not on the jury panel. In the oral argument made in this court, counsel for the appellant stated that Mr. Ganz is aligned with former employees of vineyards in the Kern County area who are striking, and that, as there are many Mexicans with Spanish names in this classification, he thinks he would be better off to have more people with Mexican names on his jury. However, even this is not alleged in the petition; furthermore, it is by no means certain that there are not many people with Mexican names who are opposed to the strike. This is a remote and personal reason in any event why Mr. Ganz would like to see more Mexicans or Spaniards on the jury. It is too far removed from a precise showing of actuality for us to accede to the argument, even if it had been made in the petition.
[6] In People v. White, 43 Cal. 2d 740, 753 [273 P.2d 9], the general rule in this state is thus expressed: "It is generally recognized that as a general rule, errors and irregularities in making up a jury list will not invalidate the list when the person objecting is not a member of the group discriminated against. [Citing authority.]" As stated in People v. Hess, 104 Cal. App. 2d 642 [234 P.2d 65], "a defendant cannot complain if he is tried by an impartial jury and can demand nothing more."
The United States Supreme Court apparently made the same assumption in Eubanks v. Louisiana, 356 U.S. 584, 585 [2 L. Ed. 2d 991, 993, 78 S. Ct. 970], when it said: "In an unbroken line of cases stretching back almost 80 years this Court has held that a criminal defendant is denied equal protection of the laws guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment if he is indicted by a grand jury or tried by a petit jury from which members of his race have been excluded because of their race." [Italics added.]
[7] The ruling of the trial court is supported by the fact that the appellant does not allege that he is one of the race discriminated against or that, because people with Spanish names are not more plentiful on the panel, it is unconstitutional. [5b] We conclude that, under the laws of the State of California, the challenger of a jury panel must show that he himself is likely to be prejudiced by whatever factors are objected to in the situation. *621
Admittedly, there is a different viewpoint in some other jurisdictions. (Thiel v. Southern Pac. Co., 328 U.S. 217 [90 L. Ed. 1181, 66 S. Ct. 984, 166 A.L.R. 1412]; Labat v. Bennett, 365 F.2d 698, 723; Allen v. State, 110 Ga.App. 56 [137 S.E.2d 711]; State v. Madison, 240 Md. 265 [213 A.2d 880].) But California law is as stated.
(B) Purposeful discrimination should have been alleged.
[8] Generally speaking, administrative application of a constitutional statute denies equal protection only if the situation complained of is intentionally or deliberately discriminatory. (Snowden v. Hughes, 321 U.S. 1, 8 [88 L. Ed. 497 502, 64 S. Ct. 397]; Oyler v. Boles, 368 U.S. 448 [7 L. Ed. 2d 446, 82 S. Ct. 501].) [9] There are no allegations in the present petition showing a purposeful discrimination. Several recent opinions of the United States Supreme Court have used the adjective "purposeful" in qualifying the alleged discrimination. (Swain v. Alabama, 380 U.S. 202, 203 [13 L. Ed. 2d 759, 763, 85 S. Ct. 824]; Whitus & Davis v. Georgia, 385 U.S. 545 [17 L. Ed. 2d 599, 87 S. Ct. 643].) This term should have qualified the allegation of discrimination if it existed. This much, however, is certain: the omission could have been cured easily by amendment, and if this were the only defect in the petition the ruling should have allowed the petitioner the right to amend.
(C) The petition was faulty in not alleging a separate class discriminated against.
[10] There is no showing in the petition that any group in the community is a class discriminated against. Such an allegation, if true, should have been made, and the evidence adduced should have shown that it was indeed a fact. (Hernandez v. Texas, 347 U.S. 475 [98 L. Ed. 866, 74 S. Ct. 667].) However, such an absence of proper allegations could have been cured by an amendment; and it, therefore, is not as important as it would otherwise be.
(D) The allegation relative to the failure to compose the jury panel in accordance with the prevalence of Spanish names in the district does not show that it is unconstitutional.
[11] It is clearly established that juries are not to be made up on any theory of proportional representation. (Akins v. Texas, 325 U.S. 398, 403 [89 L. Ed. 1692, 1696, 65 S. Ct. 1276]; Cassell v. Texas, 339 U.S. 282, 286-287 [94 L. Ed. 839, 846-847, 70 S. Ct. 629]; Swain v. Alabama, supra, 380 U.S. 202, 208 [13 L. Ed. 2d 759, 766, 85 S. Ct. 824]; People v. White, *622 43 Cal. 2d 740, 749 [273 P.2d 9].) But, even if this were not true, the allegations in the petition relative to the fact that the percentage of people with Spanish names in the district is greater than the proportion of Spanish-named persons on the jury panel would not establish discrimination. A brief reflection clearly indicates that this statement is accurate. Spanish names which, generally speaking, are identical with Mexican names, although Spain and Mexico are thousands of miles apart, are under different governments and frequently are people with different racial make-ups, do not in this "melting pot" of ours establish much, if anything. Let us suppose a hypothetical case: German or Irish immigrants of many generations have a daughter, who, when grown up, marries a man with a Spanish name and has five children, who become qualified to act as jurors; all of the six have a Spanish name, but their racial inheritance is not by any means totally or necessarily Spanish. Under appellant's proposed system of jury selection, should the German or Irish wife and her five children be counted as Spanish or Mexican because they have a Latin name? Would effective proportional representation be based on nationality or on some other proscribed basis such as linguistic similarity of names?
(E) The case of People v. White supports the conclusion of the trial court rejecting a writ of prohibition.
[12] Whatever may be said about the laws and decisions in other jurisdictions, the State of California has a judicial system of its own and the laws, which have been established by the Legislature and noted in the opinions of the courts of this state, must control the present action, unless, of course, the United States Supreme Court has enunciated some control rule based on the federal Constitution which is at variance with the laws of California.
People v. White, supra, 43 Cal. 2d 740, considers the selection of juries in California. Among the many common-sense propositions pointed out in the opinion it is said at page 753: "Even though the jury panel in question may have been selected in an improper manner it cannot be said that its actual composition resulted in any substantial prejudice to the defendant by reason of the exclusion of members of the group to which defendant belonged." It is also stated at page 754: "The American system requires an impartial jury drawn from a cross-section of the entire community and recognition must be given to the fact that eligible jurors are to be found in every stratum of society. In selecting a truly representative *623 jury panel, the membership lists of various clubs and organizations may properly be used, but they should not be relied on as the principal source of prospective jurors nor should they be used to the complete exclusion of other general sources more likely to represent a cross- section of the population, such as telephone directories, voting lists, and city directories. Any system or method of jury selection which fails to adhere to these democratic fundamentals, which is not designed to encompass a cross-section of the community or which seeks to favor limited social or economic classes, is not in keeping with the American tradition and will not be condoned by this court." These observations are prospective as well as retrospective.
(F) The exclusive use of voters lists was not discriminatory.
The use of voters lists from which to select a jury panel has been approved in many cases. (See: United States v. Van Allen, 208 F. Supp. 331, 334; Gorin v. United States, 313 F.2d 641, 644; United States v. Brown, 281 F. Supp. 31, 38; People v. Hess, 104 Cal. App. 2d 642, 669-670 [234 P.2d 65].)
The petitioner alleges that article II, section 1, of the California Constitution provides in part: "... no person who shall not be able to read the Constitution in the English language and write his or her name shall ever exercise the privilege of an elector in this state."
And he alleges further that as section 198 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides that: "A person is competent to act as a juror if he be: [among other things] ... 3. Possessed of sufficient knowledge of the English language," many people have a sufficient knowledge of spoken English to qualify as jurors, even though their standing as linquists is not as good as that of voters. [13] This, it seems to us, is a false assumption; the required qualification of citizens to become voters is not very exacting. It might well be that the requirements to act as jurors from a practical standpoint are more stringent than the requirements to act as voters. [14] This much is certain: we should have jurors who are fully able to understand spoken and written English on our juries, if justice is to be achieved.
(G) Sustaining general demurrer without leave to amend was proper.
[15] As heretofore shown, in paragraph (A), the petitioner could not have alleged that a "Jewish man" was *624 injured by the fact that there were not enough people with Spanish names on the jury panel. The court's conclusion that it was not proper to grant leave to amend the petition was, therefore, valid. Furthermore, the mere fact that there were not more people with Spanish names on the jury panel was not a ground to grant the petition for a writ of prohibition, and it would have been impossible by amendment to allege a valid ground for so acting.
The judgment of dismissal is affirmed.
Stone, J., concurred.
Gargano, J., deeming himself disqualified, did not participate.

=== CASE 9738235 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:46:31.181234+00 ===

ANN WALSH BRADLEY, J.
¶ 1. This case is before the court on a petition and a cross-petition for review of a decision of the court of appeals.1 It involves a contractual dispute between Jon Hauser ("Hauser") and Robert Ehlinger ("Ehlinger"), who are the joint and equal *291shareholders of Evald Moulding, Inc. ("Evald"), a Wisconsin corporation located in Watertown. The parties' Buy-Sell Agreement provides that if one of the shareholders becomes totally disabled, the non-disabled shareholder is entitled to purchase his shares at "book value."
¶ 2. Hauser contends that both the circuit court and court of appeals incorrectly concluded that the buyout agreement is unenforceable. First, he asserts that the circuit court erred when it determined that the undefined term "book value" rendered the buyout agreement unenforceable. Second, Hauser argues that the court of appeals incorrectly determined that supporting documentation is a necessary component of a computation under generally accepted accounting practices ("GAAP"). Third, he asserts that the circuit court erroneously exercised its discretion when it denied him further opportunity to challenge and counter the special magistrate's conclusions. He argues that the meaning of "book value" is ambiguous and that he is entitled to a trial to determine the intent of the parties.
¶ 3. We conclude that the circuit court did not err when it determined that the agreement was unenforceable. Both parties agree that Ehlinger is entitled to examine Evald's books to determine whether they accurately reflect the corporation's assets and liabilities, a task that the special magistrate was unable to perform due to the state of Evald's records. Accordingly, we need not resolve whether the contract is indefinite or ambiguous here because under these circumstances, it cannot be enforced.
¶ 4. Additionally, to the extent that Hauser's characterization of the court of appeals' decision is accurate, we determine that his argument about the scope of *292GAAP fails. The question is not what is required under GAAfi but what is required to determine the parties' rights.
¶ 5. Finally, we conclude that the circuit court did not erroneously exercise its discretion when it denied Hauser the opportunity to subject the special magistrate to a broader scope of cross-examination, to depose the special magistrate, and to present his own expert witness in rebuttal.
¶ 6. In his cross-petition, Ehlinger argues that the circuit court erroneously permitted the defendants' litigation expenses to be paid by the corporation. This decision would not be erroneous if Hauser was entitled to indemnification or if Evald spent its assets in its own defense. We determine that Hauser was not entitled to indemnification by Evald according to the provisions of Wis. Stat. § 180.0855 (2007-08).2 Further, under these facts, the litigation expenses were not incurred by the corporation for its own defense. Therefore, we conclude that the circuit court erroneously exercised its discretion when it permitted the corporation to pay Hauser's litigation expenses.3
*293¶ 7. Accordingly, we affirm the court of appeals as modified in this opinion and remand to the circuit court for the appointment of a receiver.4
I
¶ 8. The procedural history of this case is lengthy. It encompasses over seven years of litigation between two former friends, William Ehlinger and Jon Hauser, the sole and equal shareholders of Evald Moulding, Inc. Both men are corporate officers, but Hauser manages Evald's day-to-day operations.5
¶ 9. Evald's shareholders have not held a meeting since 2002, and they last successfully elected corporate officers in 1995. These failures are caused in part by an *294ongoing dispute over the provisions of a Buy-Sell Agreement executed by Ehlinger and Hauser in 1992.6
¶ 10. The agreement provides for the transfer of a disabled shareholder's shares upon total disability.7 The purchase price for the disabled shareholder's shares is set forth in the agreement as follows:
For transfers of all of a Shareholder's stock .. . upon his becoming disabled, the purchase price of a Shareholder's shares of stock shall be $350,000.00 or Book Value whichever is greater .... For transfers of all of a Shareholder's stock on threat of involuntary transfer, the purchase price of a Shareholder's shares of stock shall be the book value of said shares as of the end of the last fiscal year.
The agreement was signed by Hauser and Ehlinger in their capacities as corporate officers and as shareholders. Shortly after the parties signed the agreement, Ehlinger developed Parkinson's Disease.
¶ 11. In December 2000, Ehlinger and Hauser met for dinner at a restaurant in Watertown. According *295to Hauser's notes, Ehlinger said that he had lost interest in the business and asked Hauser to make an offer to purchase his shares. The parties did not agree to any buyout terms at the meeting, but they did agree that Ehlinger was entitled to inspect Evald's books.
¶ 12. On June 20, 2001, Hauser sent a letter to Ehlinger invoking the disability buyout agreement. He stated that he intended to initiate the process of buying out Ehlinger's entire interest in Evald. The letter explained:
According to Section 3 of the Agreement, when a shareholder becomes "totally disabled", that shareholder must sell their interest in Evald Moulding Company. Further, this section also states that the other shareholder has the first right to purchase this interest. Jon Hauser will act on this right to purchase your interest in Evald Moulding Company.
Hauser enclosed Evald's most recent fiscal year-end statement. Based on that statement, Hauser calculated the book value of Ehlinger's shares to be $431,400 and explained that the first payment installment would be sent "immediately upon the acceptance of this purchase offer." Ehlinger did not accept Hauser's offer.
¶ 13. Ehlinger called a meeting of the shareholders on April 22, 2002. He moved that Evald's books be audited in order to determine the value of the corporation, but Hauser declined to second the motion. The shareholders also attempted to hold their annual election of corporate officers, but due to deadlock, they were unable to do so.8
¶ 14. Hauser attempted to hold a closing on Ehlinger's shares. On April 30, he sent Ehlinger a check *296for $86,280, 20 percent of what Hauser calculated to be the book value of the shares. Ehlinger refused the offer and never cashed the check.
¶ 15. Ehlinger filed suit seeking judicial dissolution. He alleged that the shareholders of the corporation were at an impasse and had failed to elect officers for more than two successive years.
¶ 16. He also sought a declaratory judgment that the buyout agreement was "unenforceable for lack of essential terms," including the definition and means of determining "book value." Further, Ehlinger contended that even if the contract was enforceable, "determining the true book value would be difficult or impossible due to the way the defendant has kept Evald's books." He asserted that "[b]ecause of the ambiguity of the agreement and the defendant's subsequent actions there has never been a meeting of minds between the parties as to the meaning of book value in the 1992 Buy-Sell Agreement."9
¶ 17. The parties engaged in discovery. Both parties submitted expert reports purporting to determine the book value and fair market value of Evald. Discovery was completed in September 2003.
*297¶ 18. Ehlinger moved for summary judgment on two grounds. He argued that Hauser was not entitled to invoke the disability buyout agreement because Ehlinger was not "totally disabled" within the meaning of the agreement. Further, he sought summary judgment ordering the judicial dissolution of Evald due to shareholder impasse.
¶ 19. Hauser argued that no such impasse existed because the corporation had initiated the process of buying out Ehlinger's shares. As a result, Hauser contended, Ehlinger could dispute the price Evald would pay for the shares but he no longer had the authority to vote the shares. Hauser moved for summary judgment declaring that he had validly exercised the disability buyout agreement.
¶ 20. The court issued an order on January 12, 2004. It declined to grant summary judgment to either party regarding the enforceability or applicability of the buyout agreement. Instead, it concluded that there were material issues of fact in dispute.
¶ 21. Further, finding that the shareholders were deadlocked and had failed to elect officers for more than two successive years, the court ordered judicial dissolution pending resolution of the contract issue:
The plaintiffs motion for summary judgment ordering the dissolution and liquidation of Evald Moulding Company, Inc.... and appointing a receiver to make an accounting of the financial affairs of Evald and to dispose of its business for the benefit of its shareholders is granted pending resolution of the parties dispute about defendant's exercise of the option to purchase plaintiffs shares. If defendant prevails, plaintiffs claim for dissolution will be moot. If plaintiff prevails, final judgment of dissolution will be entered.
*298¶ 22. The court determined that no alternative to dissolution could resolve the deadlock between the shareholders:
While the defendant urges the Court to consider alternatives to dissolution, none resolve the impasse. One solution offered by the defendant is to order an accounting. This exercise has been undertaken at least once ... and the underlying conflict continues. Nor will declaration of dividends, capital distribution or money damages provide adequate remedy. The shareholders have been deadlocked for years and remain so today without expectation of extrication.10
¶ 23. In May, July, and September of 2005, the court held a five-day bench trial on the applicability and enforceability of the buyout agreement. It found that Ehlinger was "totally disabled" within the meaning of the agreement. Further, the court determined that the agreement "requires the sale of the disabled shareholder's stock on the occurrence of total disability."
¶ 24. The court stopped short of ordering the sale and dismissing the action, however. It determined that there was an outstanding dispute about the enforceability of the agreement that required the court to address the meaning of the term "book value":
The remedy sought by Mr. Hauser is dismissal. And I hesitate to dismiss the case because I perceive additional — an additional unresolved contract dispute *299regarding the meaning of "book value" and I don't want to leave the parties without recourse in this lawsuit. I don't want to have you come back in some other forum and have that delay.
... I don't want to dismiss if there are further contract terms[]like book value to be interpreted.
....
And what I think I'm going to get from Plaintiff is that there is more than one way to calculate book value, and what I'm going to get from the Defendant is: This is how we have calculated book value for Evald by custom and practice and that's what's determinative.
Thus, the court retained jurisdiction of the case. Neither party objected.
¶ 25. The court ordered each party to provide a definition of "book value." It explained that the parties' definitions would be provided to a special magistrate, who would determine book value according to the court's instructions.
¶ 26. Both parties agreed that "book value" would be defined as "assets minus liabilities." They differed, however, on how to determine which assets and liabilities should be computed in the calculation, and what degree of verification was needed. Ehlinger argued that the company's financial statements were calculated for tax purposes and thus failed to represent the true worth of the assets of the corporation. He further asserted that deficiencies of supporting documentation "make clear that simply focusing on the definition of book value is too simplistic."
¶ 27. The court appointed Del Chmielewski, a certified public accountant, as the special magistrate. During a hearing held in October 2005, the court explained:
*300Hit's my present intention to instruct the Special Magistrate to review the subject year-end statement and report any deviation from the prior two-years' accounting method, and to report any deviation from generally-accepted accounting methods and to recalculate as necessary to come to book value.... [YJou're required to answer inquiries of the Special Magistrate, but I don't want any advocacy.
Further:
When I say generally-accepted accounting principles, I don't mean to adopt any set of rules. I expect Mr. Chmielewski — [w]ho does plenty of books for plenty of small corporations — to know what's generally acceptable and what's not. And his conclusions could be subject to examination by you folks. You know, I just don't think this is going to be as much of an impediment or as mysterious as you folks fear. I think it's going to be real straightforward.
The court did not specify the statute under which the special magistrate was appointed, or whether he would perform the role of a referee or an expert.
¶ 28. Neither of the parties objected to the special magistrate's appointment or the instructions provided by the court. Hauser's attorney clarified:
I think what the Court's saying is that Mr. Chmielewski is going to look at these things; he's going to say:... in these accounting situations is this good accounting or not? Is this reasonable, accurate accounting or not? If that's the way he's going to do it, I got no problem with that. I wouldn't want there to be some suggestion that there's an elaborate set of rules which is called GAAP in the sense of a formal reference ....
¶ 29. In an order setting out instructions for the special magistrate, the court stated:
*301The Court's special magistrate will determine Evald's March 31, 2001, book value using generally accepted accounting principles which are appropriate for the size, function and structure of this corporation. The special magistrate will advise the Court of any departures from GAAP in his report to the Court. Finally, the special magistrate will report any substantial inconsistencies in the reporting methodology used by Evald in 2001 vis a vis the previous two years.
Neither party objected to the order, and over the next several months, the special magistrate obtained documents from Evald.
¶ 30. During the course of his inquiry, the special magistrate discovered that it was impossible to verify Evald's financial statements. Some of the supporting documentation underlying Evald’s computer summaries had been discarded or were otherwise unavailable.11 The special magistrate determined that he could not confirm that the financial statements represented "book value."
¶ 31. Specifically, his May 8, 2006 report explained:
We have verified that all of the items on Evald's balance sheet have been recorded in accordance with GAAP for F/Y/E 3/31/01 except the following items. Evald has stated that they are not able to provide the information needed to verify items 1 through 5 because their computer software summarizes data and the information for the F/Y/E 3/31/01 is not retrievable.
(1) Physical inventory
(2) Accounts receivable and invoice cutoff procedures
*302(3) Accounts payable and cutoff procedures
(4) The use of PO clearing account
(5) The use of IC clearing account
...
Since the value of the business is based on the balance sheet, it is necessary to have back up documents to support the numbers reported on the balance sheet. ... Without verification of the aforementioned we cannot confirm that the items mentioned above, which are presented on Evald's balance sheet are generated in accordance to Generally Accepted Accounting Principles.
¶ 32. Ehlinger filed a motion asking the court to reconsider its prior decision that he was not entitled to a declaratory judgment. He asserted that the buyout agreement was not enforceable because the book value of Evald could not be calculated. Hauser opposed the motion, and the court set the matter for trial on June 29, 2006. Two days before trial, Hauser requested an opportunity to cross-examine the special magistrate.
¶ 33. At the outset of what the court expected would be a one-day trial, the court clarified the role of the special magistrate:
[O]ur primary purpose today is to address, see if we can determine book value to effectuate the Court's earlier order. I would like to give both counsel an opportunity to give me a brief statement, offer evidence that you might have, and then argument.
Regarding calling the special magistrate as witness, I didn't talk to Mr. Chmielewski about this, but I would allow either of you to question him regarding just a couple of things which are essentially clarification of *303his reports. One is any arithmetical calculation he's made; two is what, what sources he had as abase to the figures that he used; and third, the opinions that he made in his report to the Court. He's not anybody's expert witness; but I would, if you have questions just on those aspects of his report, allow him to testify.
¶ 34. Hauser called Evald's accountant and bookkeeper as fact witnesses. He called the accountant that Ehlinger had engaged as an expert witness. Additionally, he called the special magistrate as a witness and cross-examined him extensively. The examination of the special magistrate occupies 126 pages of the trial transcript.
¶ 35. The special magistrate testified that he was unable to calculate Evald's book value based on the financial records that were provided;
The computer records that I [was] given really ... were in summarized form. And so the standard that I'm trying to apply is difficult to apply in a summarized manner, because you haven't got any assurances as to what it’s made up of because ... the accounting procedures that happen on a day-to-day basis are kind of transparent, you can't see them.... And by being able to see that some normal accounting procedures were applied, then you can assure yourself that at least it looks like the documents were prepared properly to support the financial statement.
He testified that he was unable to validate 76 percent of Evald's assets and 90 percent of Evald's liabilities.
¶ 36. Hauser argued that the requisite information was available and blamed the special magistrate for failing to ask for it. Additionally, he requested that the court permit him to present an expert accountant to rebut the special magistrate's conclusions. The court *304declined to do so, but it adjourned the trial until August so that the special magistrate could conduct more investigation:
I deny your request for a — for time for you to have your own expert provide a report on book value. I will, however, assign the special magistrate to do as he testified this morning he could do, and that is, avail himself of those items which are available and which he mistakenly thought weren't....
¶ 37. On August 10, 2006, four days before the trial was to recommence, Hauser submitted multiple documents to the court. They included a "motion in limine to exclude the expert opinion" of the special magistrate, a "motion for a deposition and full cross examination and the opportunity to present a rebuttal expert," and a "motion that no adverse inference from missing records is appropriate."
¶ 38. On August 11, the special magistrate submitted a revised report stating that he could not substantiate the balance for physical inventory, accounts receivable, or accounts payable. He explained that the problems were due to Evald's accounting software, which summarized reports:
This summarizing caused a lot of reports, which any normal accounting system would have, to be unavailable for the F/Y/E 3/31/01. We could not view a detailed listing or subsidiary ledger report of the A/R aging report, the A/R account, the A/P account, the inventory account, the PO clearing account or the IC clearing account, as of 3/31/01.
¶ 39. The second day of trial was held on Monday, August 14. The court was unable to address Hauser's motions before receiving evidence because they were untimely.
*305¶ 40. Hauser again cross-examined the special magistrate at length. The special magistrate testified that he was unable to verify Evald's financial statements because the corporation had not retained subsidiary ledgers which were necessary to support the balance sheet.
¶ 41. In a written order dated November 29, 2006, the court determined that the term "book value" was indefinite, precluding the enforceability of the contract. The court concluded that it could not "cure the contract deficiency by grafting a requirement that the value be ascertained by using generally accepted accounting principles appropriate for a corporation of Evald Moulding’s size, structure and function." Further:
As the Court's special magistrate made his inquiry, report and presentation, it became clear that the parties' contractual term was too vague to cure. "Book value" could mean anything from simple adoption of the year end statement to an audited determination. The Court's attempt to give definite meaning to the contract term is as arbitrary as any other definition.
Although the parties discussed waiting for the year end statement in their December 2000 meeting, any inference that this discussion ratified Defendants' definition of hook value is vitiated by the parties' agreement to have Plaintiff review the books thereafter. The parties' conduct is insufficient to give definite meaning to the vague term.
(Citations omitted).
¶ 42. Hauser submitted a "motion for reconsideration, and for an order setting for trial the issue of the ambiguity of the term book value in the buy/sell agreement." He argued that "book value" was ambiguous rather than indefinite and that the court committed a *306manifest error of law. At a January 2007 hearing, he reminded the court of the presumptive validity of contracts:
Counsel: The law is very clear in Wisconsin that courts do not look for ways — look for fingerholes to void contracts.
Court: Well, clearly not what I did here. I sought and struggled to try to hold this contract together.
The court denied his motion.
¶ 43. In February, Ehlinger submitted a motion, titled a motion for reconsideration, requesting an injunction prohibiting Hauser from directing the corporation to pay for the litigation expenses.12 The court denied the motion, concluding that the corporation had an "interest" in the lawsuit and it would be "impossible as we sit here today" to assign fees between Hauser and the corporation.
¶ 44. Hauser appealed, and Ehlinger cross-appealed. The court of appeals affirmed the circuit court with some modification of its rationale.13 Ehlinger v. Hauser & Evald Moulding, Inc., 2008 WI App 123, 313 Wis. 2d 718, 758 N.W.2d 476. It did not determine that the term "book value" was indefinite. Id., ¶ 30. Rather, it concluded that the term was ambiguous and that the circuit court resolved the ambiguity by reasonably determining that the parties intended "book value" to be calculated using GAAP *307rather than by simply accepting the calculation listed on Evald's year-end statement. Id,., ¶ 31.
¶ 45. Regarding Ehlinger's cross-petition, the court of appeals concluded that the circuit court did not erroneously exercise its discretion when it determined that Evald's assets could be used to pay the defendants' litigation expenses. Id., ¶¶ 46, 48. Additionally, it concluded that Hauser was entitled to corporate indemnification for his own litigation expenses. Id., ¶ 48.
II
¶ 46. This case requires us to examine several decisions of the circuit court and the court of appeals. We must determine whether the circuit court erred when it concluded that the undefined term "book value" rendered the buyout agreement unenforceable. In addition, we must determine whether the court of appeals erred by concluding that supporting documentation is a necessary component of a GAAP computation.
¶ 47. The interpretation of a contract is generally a question of law. Levy v. Levy, 130 Wis. 2d 523, 528-29, 388 N.W.2d 170 (1986). The necessary components of a GAAP computation is also a question of law. We determine questions of law independently of the conclusions rendered by the circuit court and the court of appeals. Id. at 529.
¶ 48. We also must determine whether the circuit court erroneously exercised its discretion when it denied Hauser further opportunity to challenge and counter the special magistrate's conclusions and when it permitted the corporation to fund the litigation expenses incurred in these proceedings. We will uphold *308the circuit court's exercise of discretion if it "examined the relevant facts, applied a proper standard of law, and, using a demonstrated rational process, arrived at a conclusion that a reasonable judge could reach." DeWitt Ross & Stevens, S.C. v. Galaxy Gaming & Racing Ltd., 2004 WI 92, ¶ 21, 273 Wis. 2d 577, 682 N.W.2d 839.
Ill
¶ 49. We begin by addressing the issues set forth in Hauser's petition for review. Hauser raises three issues: (A) did the circuit court err when it determined that the undefined term "book value" rendered the agreement unenforceable;14 (B) did the court of appeals err by concluding that supporting documentation is a "necessary component" of a GAAP computation; and (C) did the circuit court erroneously exercise its discretion when it denied Hauser's motion to subject the special magistrate to complete cross-examination, to depose the special magistrate, and to present his own expert witness in rebuttal? We address these issues in turn.
A
¶ 50. The disability buyout agreement sets the price for the disabled shareholder's shares at "book value." Nevertheless, the agreement does not define "book value." Both parties agree that in the absence of a contractual definition, "book value" refers to the value of the assets of a company after deducting its liabili*309ties.15 The parties disagree, however, as to which assets and liabilities should be included in the calculation and how those values should be calculated.
¶ 51. In his complaint, Ehlinger alleged that the agreement was unenforceable because, among other reasons, it did not indicate how "book value" would be computed. Over the course of several years of circuit court proceedings, the court attempted to give meaning to the term.
¶ 52. During the proceedings at the circuit court, Hauser asserted that the parties intended "book value" to refer to the value of assets minus liabilities computed on the year-end financial statements, which are calculated in order to minimize tax liability. By contrast, Ehlinger argued that "book value" refers to the value of assets minus liabilities, computed according to generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP).
¶ 53. Hauser now argues that the circuit court erred when, without holding a trial on the intent of the parties, it concluded that the term "book value" was "too vague to be cured." He asserts that the term may be ambiguous, but it is not indefinite. Therefore, he argues that a trial on the parties' intent is necessary to solve what he considers to be a contractual ambiguity.16
*310¶ 54. There are two distinct questions embedded within our inquiry. First, can the parties' agreement be interpreted to give meaning to the term "book value"? Second, if it can be so interpreted, what was the dollar amount of "book value" on March 31, 2001?
¶ 55. The circuit court concluded that the term "book value" was vague and indefinite, and that the agreement was therefore unenforceable. The court of appeals rejected the circuit court's conclusion that the term was indefinite. Rather, it concluded that the term was ambiguous.
¶ 56. A contract can be ambiguous without being indefinite. See Management Computer Servs., Inc. v. Hawkins, Ash, Baptie & Co., 206 Wis. 2d 158, 178, 557 N.W.2d 67 (1996) ("An ambiguous contract is not necessarily indefinite."). A contract is ambiguous when it is "fairly susceptible of more than one construction." Id. at 177. If a contract term is ambiguous, extrinsic evidence may be used to help construe its meaning. Id.
¶ 57. By contrast, "the definiteness requirement is relevant to contract formation, not interpretation." Id. at 178. A contract requires mutual assent of the parties and "must be definite as to the parties' basic commitments and obligations." Id. Mutual assent is judged based on an objective standard, looking to the express words used in a contract. Id. "Vagueness or indefiniteness as to an essential term of the agreement prevents the creation of an enforceable contract." Id.
¶ 58. We have explained that "[b]ook value is a term of ambiguous meaning" when it is not further defined by a contract. Schumann v. Samuels, 31 Wis. 2d *311373, 376, 142 N.W.2d 777 (1966). Under some circumstances, an undefined term might not only be ambiguous, but it might he indefinite as well. If a contract term is indefinite, a trial cannot cure the contract deficiency.
¶ 59. Here, however, we need not resolve whether the buyout agreement is indefinite, ambiguous, neither, or both because resolution of that question would not change the outcome of this case. If we concluded that the contract was indefinite, further fact-finding could not cure the deficiency and the agreement would not be enforced. Moreover, if we determined that the agreement was ambiguous, a trial on the parties' intentions would be a superfluous exercise due to the specific circumstances presented in this case. Because Ehlinger cannot now validate any claimed "book value," the contract cannot be enforced regardless of how the term could be defined.
¶ 60. The parties agree that Ehlinger is entitled to examine the books in order to validate that the buyout price accurately reflected Evald's book value.17 See Townsend v. LaCrosse Trailer Corp., 254 Wis. 31, 35 *312N.W.2d 325 (1948). This is a task that the special magistrate was unable to perform due to the state of Evald's financial records.
¶ 61. In Townsend, we concluded that the employee-stockholder had the "right to go behind the financial statement in order to examine all of the books, records, and files of the defendant corporation which might reflect the book value" of his stock. Id. at 37. In that case, a contract between an employee and his employer provided that upon the employee's termination, the corporation had the right to buy out the former employee's stocks at a price equal to one-half of their book value. We evaluated the employee's request to examine accounting records to support his argument that the corporation's financial statements did not accurately reflect the book value of the corporation.
¶ 62. The corporation argued that the employee "should be limited to an examination of the financial statement prepared by the company's auditors ... because such statement definitely sets the book value of the stock." Id. at 36. We rejected the corporation's contention that a financial statement "definitely sets the book value of the stock," holding that the book value is not just any value that may be arbitrarily entered upon the books of a company. Id. at 37.
¶ 63. In this case if we decided that the contract was ambiguous and a trial on the meaning of "book value" was warranted, the fact-finder might accept Hauser's position that the parties intended "book value" to mean the value of assets minus liabilities calculated for tax purposes as recorded on the year-end statement. Under those circumstances, Ehlinger would be entitled to "go behind the financial statement in order to exam*313ine all of the books, records, and files" of Evald which might reflect that value. This task cannot now be performed.
¶ 64. Alternately, the fact-finder might accept Ehlinger's position that the parties intended "book value" to mean the value of assets minus liabilities, computed according to GAAE Again, Ehlinger would be entitled to examine the books, records, and files, which cannot now be done.
¶ 65. Here, regardless of whether the parties intended assets and liabilities to be computed on a cost basis, a tax basis, a fair market value basis, or any other basis, the unavailability of Evald's financial records prevents Ehlinger from exercising his right to examine the books in order to assess the accuracy of the buyout price. From both a practical and a legal standpoint, the unavailability of the records precludes this agreement from being enforced.18
¶ 66. Typically, an appellate court should decide cases on the narrowest possible grounds. State v. Blalock, 150 Wis. 2d 688, 703, 442 N.W.2d 514 (Ct. App. 1989). Issues that are not dispositive need not be addressed. Gross v. Hoffman, 227 Wis. 296, 300, 277 N.W. 663 (1938). A court generally will not engage in an exercise which circumstances have rendered purely academic. State ex rel. Olson v. Litscher, 2000 WI App 61, ¶ 3, 233 Wis. 2d 685, 608 N.W.2d 425.
*314¶ 67. Here, the resolution of whether the term "book value" is indefinite or ambiguous has no practical effect upon the existing controversy. We therefore need not resolve the question.19 We conclude that, under the circumstances presented, the circuit court did not err when it determined that the buyout agreement could not be enforced.
B
¶ 68. In addition, Hauser contends that the court of appeals erred by concluding that supporting documentation is a "necessary component" of a valid GAAP computation. See Ehlinger, 313 Wis. 2d 718, ¶ 35. He asserts that under GAAP a compilation does not require supporting documentation.
¶ 69. As a threshold matter, Hauser may be misconstruing the court of appeals' conclusion. It is not clear whether the court of appeals made a general statement that supporting documentation is a necessary component of a valid GAAP computation in all cases, or whether it determined only that supporting documentation was required under the facts of this case.20
*315¶ 70. Even if Hauser correctly construes the court of appeals' conclusion, Hauser's assertion misses the mark. The question before the court is not what is required to do a compilation under GAAP but what is required to determine the parties' contractual rights.
¶ 71. During the two-day trial over the corporation's book value, Hauser cross-examined the special magistrate. The special magistrate agreed that accountants perform three levels of service under GAAP: compilations, reviews, and audits.21 He agreed that it was not necessary to verify financial statements when performing a compilation.
¶ 72. Hauser argues that, based on the circuit court's instructions, the special magistrate was required to "accept the representations of Evald Moulding, Inc. and Hauser." He asserts that in performing a compilation, the special magistrate was not permitted to express any assurance on the statements.
¶ 73. Hauser's position misconstrues the circuit court's instructions to the special magistrate. The circuit court did not ask the special magistrate to perform a compilation. Instead, it asked him to "determine Evald's March 31, 2001 book value using generally *316accepted accounting principles which are appropriate for the size, function and structure of this corporation." The special magistrate concluded that he could not determine Evald's book value without knowing the basis from which the numbers on the corporation's financial statements were computed.
¶ 74. The problem with Hauser's argument is that it assumes that by "book value," the parties intended nothing more than the number taken from Evald's year-end statement. Hauser's argument is tantamount to an assertion that Ehlinger is required to accept the value listed on Evald's year-end financial statement without further inquiry. Yet we soundly rejected that argument in Townsend. See supra, ¶¶ 61-62. Although a corporation may keep its books within the confines of the law and as it sees fit,22 the company's financial statements do not "definitely set[] the book value of the stock." Townsend, 254 Wis. at 36.
C
¶ 75. Finally, Hauser contends that the circuit court erroneously denied his motion to depose and fully cross-examine the special magistrate and to present an expert witness in rebuttal. He asserts that the special magistrate was appointed not as a referee under Wis. Stat. § 805.06, but rather as a court-appointed expert under Wis. Stat. § 907.06. As such, Hauser argues that the court erred by preventing him from using all of the *317tools of the adversary system to challenge and counter the special magistrate's conclusions.
¶ 76. The Wisconsin statutes authorize a court to appoint a referee to determine "matters of account" and other complicated issues.23 "The role of a referee is to help the court in cases where the expertise of the referee is needed" to assist the court in obtaining facts and arriving at a correct result in complicated litigation. Patricia Graczyk, The New Wisconsin Rules of Civil Procedure Chapters 805-807, 59 Marq. L. Rev. 671, 683-84 (1976).
¶ 77. The procedure for appointing a referee in Wisconsin is similar to the procedure for appointing a master under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 53. The court order appointing a referee and describing the referee's powers is called a "reference." If a party wishes to contest the reference, it should move the court to revoke the reference. 3A Jay E. Grenig, Wisconsin Practice Series: Civil Procedure 35 (3d ed. 2003) (citing La Buy v. Howes Leather Co., 352 U.S. 249 (1957)).
¶ 78. Section 805.06(3) provides a circuit court with broad discretion in crafting the reference. Although a referee is generally permitted to conduct hearings and subpoena witnesses, the reference may specify or limit the referee's powers. It may direct the referee to "receive and report evidence only." Wis. Stat. § 805.06(3); see also Grenig, supra, at 36 ("The order may direct the referee to report only upon particular issues, to do or perform particular acts, or to receive and report evidence only.").
*318¶ 79. The referee must file his or her report with the clerk of court. Wis. Stat. § 805.06(5)(a). Parties may-object to the referee's report within 10 days of filing. Upon objection and after a hearing, the court is permitted to adopt the report, modify it, reject it in whole or in part, receive further evidence, or recommit it with instructions. Wis. Stat. § 805.06(5)(b).
¶ 80. Wisconsin statutes also permit a court to appoint an expert witness. See Wis. Stat. § 907.06. When the court appoints an expert witness, the parties may take the expert's deposition and the expert can be called as a witness by either the court or a party. Hauser contends that because the referee did not conduct hearings or file his report with the court, he was an expert witness, subject to discovery and full cross-examination.
¶ 81. The court did not cite to either the referee statute or the court-appointed expert witness statute when it appointed the special magistrate and instructed him to determine the book value of Evald. Nevertheless, it is apparent from the record that at the time of appointment, the parties and the court understood the role of the special magistrate to be analogous to a referee or a master. Computation of Evald's book value was a "matterO of account" that had proved to be a complicated issue which the parties had disputed over the course of several years. It appears that the court determined that it required the expertise of the special magistrate to help the court obtain facts and arrive at a correct result.
¶ 82. In its order appointing the special magistrate, the court specified the magistrate's role as follows: he "will determine Evald's March 31, 2001 book value," "will advise the Court of any departures from GAAfi" and "will report any substantial inconsistencies" *319in Evald's books. During a hearing, the court clarified that the special magistrate was to receive and report evidence only. The court stated: "[YJou're required to answer inquiries of the Special Magistrate, but I don't want any advocacy." Further, the court prohibited ex parte conversations.
¶ 83. Hauser agreed to the procedure outlined by the court. During a hearing, his attorney stated:
I think what the Corat's saying is that Mr. Chmielewski is going to look at these things; he's going to say:... in these accounting situations is this good accounting or not? Is this reasonable, accurate accounting or not? If that's the way he's going to do it, I got no problem with that.
It was only after the special magistrate's report was complete and he concluded that he was unable to verify Evald's assets and liabilities that Hauser first objected to the proceedings. The record does not evince an understanding by the parties that the, special magistrate was appointed as an expert witness.
¶ 84. The court first discussed the special magistrate's appointment at a hearing held on October 19, 2005. Over the course of the following nine months, the special magistrate investigated Evald's books, communicated with the parties, and prepared drafts of his report.
¶ 85. Neither party asserted a right to cross-examine the special magistrate until June 27, 2006, two days before trial. At that point, Hauser first asserted that the special magistrate was an expert witness subject to cross-examination. The circuit court permitted a limited cross-examination of the special magistrate, but it clarified that "[h]e's not anybody's expert witness."
*320¶ 86. Further, neither party requested an opportunity to depose the special magistrate or present rebuttal expert testimony until after the trial had already commenced. Toward the end of the first day24 and in response to an objection by opposing counsel, Hauser's attorney first suggested that he should be entitled to depose the special magistrate and present his own expert witness.
¶ 87. Under these circumstances, Hauser forfeited his right to object to the procedures specified by the court in the reference. See State v. Ndina, 2009 WI 21, ¶¶ 29-30, 315 Wis. 2d 653, 761 N.W.2d 612. We conclude that the circuit court did not erroneously exercise its discretion when it denied Hauser the opportunity to subject the special magistrate to a broader scope of cross-examination, to depose the special magistrate, and to present his own expert witness in rebuttal.
¶ 88. At oral argument, both parties expressed admiration for the circuit court's persistent and pragmatic attempts to resolve this complicated litigation. Nevertheless, Hauser points to certain procedural irregularities at the circuit court. For instance, although the special magistrate submitted his report to the court and the clerk of courts provided the report to the parties, there is no indication that the clerk of courts filed the report in the circuit court record.25 See Wis. Stat. § 805.06(5)(a). Further, during Ehlinger's cross-*321examination of the special magistrate, he asked the magistrate about his opinions "to a reasonable degree of accounting certainty" — a phrase generally reserved for expert witnesses.
¶ 89. Because referee appointments are an exceptional procedure,26 the court, the parties, and the referee will often be unfamiliar with the process. It would have been better had the reference more clearly defined the special magistrate's powers and responsibilities. A reference should clearly delineate the court's expectations regarding the types of evidence the referee should examine and the form of the report, including whether the referee should make findings of fact and conclusions of law. Explicit parameters that are enu*322merated in a reference will help clarify the procedures and keep the court, the parties, and the referee on track.
¶ 90. Nevertheless, on this record we are satisfied that at the time the order appointing the special magistrate was issued, the court and the parties contemplated that the special magistrate would fulfill the role of a referee. We are also satisfied that the parties were given a full opportunity to object to the special magistrate's factual determinations. We therefore conclude that the circuit court's exercise of discretion was not erroneous.
IV
¶ 91. We turn next to Ehlinger's cross-petition for review, which presents an issue of first impression in Wisconsin. Ehlinger argues this is primarily a dispute between shareholders and it was improper for Hauser's litigation expenses to be paid from the corporate till.
¶ 92. Both Hauser and Evald are named parties in this dispute. During the proceedings in circuit court, Ehlinger learned that Hauser was directing the corporation to pay for the defendants' litigation expenses. On four occasions, Ehlinger asked the circuit court to enjoin Hauser from paying for the litigation with corporate funds.
¶ 93. In addressing Ehlinger's concern, the circuit court opined that it presented a close call. Without further discussion, the court concluded that the corporation had an interest and that is was more than a nominal party in the litigation:
I think that the prospective attorney fee sourcing is a closer issue. But it seems to me that the Corporation is more than a nominal party; it does have an interest *323here and, seems to me, would be impossible for the Court as we sit here today to ascertain prospectively how to assign any attorney's fees.
Accordingly, it denied Ehlinger's motion.
¶ 94. Ehlinger contends that this action is primarily a dispute between two shareholders, and that the corporation is only a party to the action so that the court has jurisdiction to order its dissolution. Thus, he argues that it was improper for the defendants' litigation expenses to be paid from the corporate till.
¶ 95. Under these circumstances, it would be appropriate for the corporation to fund the lawsuit if either Evald indemnified Hauser for actions he took in his capacity as a corporate officer or the corporation spent its funds in its own defense. We address these arguments in turn.
¶ 96. In his brief to this court, Hauser contended that he had been indemnified by the corporation for expenses incurred on his behalf as a corporate officer. Wis. Stat. § 180.0851(1) and (2) require indemnification of an officer under certain circumstances when the officer "was a party because he or she is a director or officer of the corporation."
¶ 97. Under the statute, however, indemnification is not self-executing. Rather, certain formalities are required. There is a good policy reason for these formalities. They prevent after-the-fact justification for taking corporate funds for personal use. Without these formalities, an officer could direct the corporation to pay funds for his own defense and only later assert that he had been indemnified by the corporation.
¶ 98. "A director or officer who seeks indemnification under [180.0851] shall make a written request to the corporation." Wis. Stat. § 180.0851(3). Further, if *324the officer wants the corporation to pay the expenses in advance of a final disposition, the officer must provide the corporation with "[a] written affirmation of his or her good faith belief that he or she has not breached or failed to perform his or her duties to the corporation" as well as "[a] written undertaking, executed personally or on his or her behalf, to repay the allowance" if it is later determined that indemnification is not required. Wis. Stat. § 180.0853.
¶ 99. An officer who is "successful on the merits or otherwise" is entitled to indemnification under section 180.0851(1).27 An officer who was not successful may still be entitled to indemnification under sub. (2), but there must be a "determination of whether indemnification is required." Wis. Stat. § 180.0851(2)(b). Section 180.0855 prescribes six procedures by which the determination that a director is entitled to indemnification can be made. 28
*325¶ 100. Given the deadlock of the board of directors in this case, the only viable option would have been a court order. Section 180.0854(1) provides that "a director or officer who is a party to a proceeding may apply for indemnification to the court conducting the proceeding or to another court of competent jurisdiction." The court "shall order indemnification" if it determines that the director is entitled to indemnification under the statute or that the officer is fairly and reasonably entitled to indemnification in view of all the relevant circumstances. Id. § 180.0854(2).
¶ 101. In his brief in this court, Hauser contended that the circuit court ordered his indemnification under Wis. Stat. § 180.0854(1). The record does not support this assertion.
¶ 102. Hauser did not follow any of the formalities described above. There is no indication in the record that Hauser made a written request to Evald for indemnification as required by section 180.0851(3). Further, there is no indication that he provided a written affirmation of his good faith belief and a written undertaking to repay the allowance if necessary as required by section 180.0853. Finally, there is no indication that he applied to the court for indemnification under section 180.0854.29 Rather, it appears that he simply directed the corporation to pay all legal expenditures for the pending lawsuit.
*326¶ 103. We need not determine here whether Hauser could have been indemnified by court order had he followed the statutory procedure. Rather, we simply observe that Hauser did not follow that procedure and was therefore not entitled to indemnification by Evald.
¶ 104. At oral argument, Hauser abandoned the assertion that he had been indemnified and instead argued that under these circumstances, he could have been indemnified. When his attorney was asked to pinpoint the order for indemnification, he responded that he could not:
Well, let me bury this indemnification issue. I don't think it was ever asked for, and frankly I don't think the trial court ever explicitly ordered it. I think the court of appeals was essentially saying that the trial court could have done so and perhaps impliedly did so when it denied all of Dr. Ehlinger's motions.
¶ 105. Having abandoned the argument that he was indemnified by Evald, Hauser now rests exclusively on the assertion that the litigation expenses were incurred in defense of the corporation. He notes that Evald is a named party, and he asserts that Evald could retain counsel to represent its own interest in a dissolution proceeding.
*327¶ 106. Hauser cites to Petition of Levitt, 492 N.Y.S.2d 736 (N.Y. App. Div. 1985), as authority for his argument. That case, however, tends to undermine his argument. The Levitt court clearly states that "in the usual dissolution proceeding,. . . the corporation appears as a nominal party and the proceeding amounts to a dispute between the shareholders[.]" Id. at 742. The corporation appears as a party "for the limited and passive purpose of rendering it amenable to the orders of the court." Id. (citing Matter of Clemente Bros., 239 N.Y.S.2d 703 (N.Y. App. Div. 1963)).
¶ 107. The Levitt court acknowledged that there are exceptions to this general rule:
[T]here appears to be merit to [the non-dissenting stockholder] Toohey's claim that, inasmuch as he had already exercised his buy-out option under [New York law], all that remains is a determination of the fair value of the [other shareholder's] stock, and once that is made, he will be the beneficial owner of all the corporate stock. Therefore, it may be found that, as to the period after Toohey's exercise of the buy-out option ... , there was no impropriety in his use of corporate funds to pay his own legal expenses. Corporate funds could not, however, be properly used to pay his counsel fees incurred prior to that election.
Id.
¶ 108. In this case, the question at the core of the parties' dispute was whether Hauser was entitled to invoke the disability buyout agreement and thus become the "beneficial owner of all the corporate stock." The circuit court concluded that he was not. As such, this case does not fit under the exception enumerated in Petition of Levitt. Rather, this is "the usual dissolution *328proceeding," which "amounts to a dispute between the shareholders."30
¶ 109. We acknowledge that under some circumstances, a corporation can and does retain counsel for its own defense in a dissolution proceeding. In Esposito v. Riverside Sand & Gravel Co., 191 N.E. 363 (Mass. 1934), the defendant caused the corporation to retain counsel to resist dissolution and directed the payment of corporate funds for the litigation expenses. The court concluded that these actions were reasonable:
[T]he corporation was attacked; [] both a temporary and a permanent receiver for the corporation was prayed for in the bill; and [] there was a prayer for the liquidation of the assets of the corporation. . .. the practical danger to the corporation cannot be pronounced so negligible that it could well have ignored the plaintiffs suit as the plaintiff now contends. The corporation was not a mere nominal defendant.
Id. at 364.
¶ 110. We have repeatedly stressed, however, that the interests of shareholders and the corporation are not always the same. See, e.g., Button v. Hoffman, 61 Wis. 20, 20 N.W. 667 (1884); Milwaukee Toy Co. v. Industrial Commission, 203 Wis. 493, 234 N.W. 748 *329(1931). Additionally, the corporation may not assume a "militant alignment on the side of one of two equal, discordant stockholders." Matter of Clemente Bros., 239 N.Y.S.2d at 706. In this case, Evald does not have an interest in whether Ehlinger remains a shareholder.
¶ 111. Here, only one answer, signed by Attorney Ahrens, was filed in response to the complaint. Throughout the proceedings and in the court filings, Attorney Ahrens repeatedly signed on the defendants' behalf.31 The singularity of Attorney Ahrens' representation is indicia that only one interest is being represented— that of Hauser, one of the two equal, discordant shareholders.
¶ 112. A review of the record underscores the conclusion that this is a dispute between shareholders and Evald is merely a nominal party. In his complaint, Ehlinger asked the court to enter a judgment declaring that Hauser "has no present right... to require plaintiff to tender his shares of Evald Moulding, Inc. for redemption by that corporation." He sought judicial dissolution of the corporation because "[t]he shareholders of Evald are deadlocked in voting power."
*330¶ 113. Ehlinger clarified that "Evald is named as a defendant because plaintiff seeks judicial dissolution of Evald because of impasse and because of the actions of defendant Hauser." Under these facts, the corporation was not made a defendant in any way related to the corporation's actions towards Ehlinger. Rather, it is Hauser's actions that form the basis of the complaint.
¶ 114. We have concluded that Hauser was not entitled to indemnification according to the provisions of Wis. Stat. § 180.0855. We further determine that Evald may not militantly align itself on the side of Hauser, one of two equal, discordant shareholders, by paying for expenses incurred by Hauser in defense of his actions as a shareholder.
¶ 115. Here, although the court concluded that Evald had an interest in the dispute, it did not define that interest or apply the relevant law. Therefore, we conclude that the circuit court erroneously exercised its discretion by failing to enjoin Hauser from charging the litigation expenses to the corporation. See State v. Delgado, 223 Wis. 2d 270, 281, 588 N.W.2d 1 (1999).
V
¶ 116. In sum, we conclude that the circuit court did not err when it determined that the agreement was unenforceable. Both parties agree that Ehlinger is entitled to examine Evald's books to determine whether they accurately reflect the corporation's assets and liabilities, a task that the special magistrate was unable to perform due to the state of Evald's records. Accordingly, we need not resolve whether the contract is indefinite or ambiguous here because under these circumstances, it cannot be enforced.
¶ 117. Further, to the extent that Hauser's characterization of the court of appeals' decision is accurate, *331we determine that his argument about the scope of GAAP fails. The question is not what is required under GAAR but what is required to determine the parties' rights.
¶ 118. We also conclude that the circuit court did not erroneously exercise its discretion when it denied Hauser the opportunity to subject the special magistrate to a broader scope of cross-examination, to depose the special magistrate, and to present his own expert witness in rebuttal.
¶ 119. Finally, we conclude that the circuit court erroneously exercised its discretion when it permitted the corporation to pay Hauser's litigation expenses. We determine that Hauser was not entitled to indemnification by Evald according to the provisions of Wis. Stat. § 180.0855. Further, under these facts, the litigation expenses were not incurred by the corporation for its own defense.
¶ 120. Accordingly, we affirm the court of appeals as modified in this opinion and remand to the circuit court for the appointment of a receiver.
By the Court. — The decision of the court of appeals is modified and affirmed and, as modified, the cause is remanded.
¶ 121. N. PATRICK CROOKS, J., did not participate.
See Ehlinger v. Hauser & Evald Moulding, Inc., 2008 WI App 123, 313 Wis. 2d 718, 758 N.W.2d 476, affirming decisions of the circuit court for Jefferson County, Jacqueline R. Erwin, J.
All subsequent references to the Wisconsin Statutes are to the 2007-08 version.
The first issue addresses whether the buyout agreement is unenforceable. Four justices (Chief Justice Abrahamson and Justices Bradley, Prosser, and Roggensack) conclude that the agreement is unenforceable, although they differ on the rationale. See supra, ¶ 3; concurrence, ¶ 122. Two justices (Justices Ziegler and Gableman) would remand to the circuit court for a determination of whether the contract is enforceable.
In regards to the second issue, all justices agree that we need not decide what is required to do a compilation under GAAP and that Hauser's argument fails.
*293Answering the third issue, four justices (Chief Justice Abrahamson and Justices Bradley, Prosser, and Roggensack) conclude that the circuit court did not erroneously exercise its discretion when it denied Hauser further opportunity to challenge and counter the special magistrate's conclusions. Two justices (Justices Ziegler and Gableman) would remand to the circuit court for further development on this issue.
Finally, the fourth issue is whether the circuit court erroneously permitted the corporation to pay Hauser's litigation expenses. Four justices (Chief Justice Abrahamson and Justices Bradley, Roggensack, and Ziegler) conclude that the circuit court erroneously exercised its discretion. Two justices (Justices Prosser and Gableman) conclude that the circuit court did not err.
In appointing a receiver, the circuit court shall hold a hearing and describe the powers and duties of the receiver. Wis. Stat. §§ 180.1432(1), 180.1432(2). The receiver may sell the assets of the business in parts or as a whole. See Wis. Stat. § 180.1432(3)(a).
Hauser is Evald's President, Chief Executive Officer, and Treasurer. He manages Evald's day-to-day operations. Ehlinger is Evald's Secretary.
The opening paragraph of the Buy-Sell Agreement states:
Agreement made this 14 day of August 1992, by and between William N. Ehlinger and his wife, Kathleen L. Ehlinger ("Ehlinger"), and Jon A. Hauser and his wife, Diana M. Hauser ("Hauser"), the Shareholders of all of the issued and outstanding stock of Evald Moulding Company, Inc., a Wisconsin Corporation ("the Corporation").
Upon a Shareholder becoming totally disabled as defined hereafter, for a period of twenty-four (24) consecutive months, the other Shareholder shall have the first right to purchase all or part of the stock owned by the disabled Shareholder.... The disabled Shareholder or his legal representative shall sell all of the stock owned by the disabled Shareholder at the Agreed Purchase Price as defined in Section 6 hereof and upon the terms and conditions set forth herein.
According to the April 22, 2002 minutes taken by Ehlinger and subsequently rejected by Hauser:
*296Mr. Ehlinger then nominated himself as a director for the coming year. Mr. Hauser then nominated himself as a director for the coming year. Mr. Ehlinger voted all of his shares for his election as a director and Mr. Hauser voted nay. Mr. Hauser voted all of his shares for his election, and Mr. Ehlinger voted nay. Since neither candidate received a vote of a majority of the shares, Mr. Hauser declared that neither candidate had been elected at the meeting and that, accordingly, both directors would remain in office by virtue of their previous election and continuing status as directors.
Ehlinger also sought an accounting of Hauser and Ehlinger's partnership and an injunction preventing Hauser from voting Ehlinger's shares by proxy. These claims are not relevant to this appeal.
Wis. Stat. § 180.1430(2)(a) permits a court to order dissolution of a corporation due to shareholder deadlock. Hauser has not appealed the grant of summary judgment ordering dissolution. Additionally, he has not argued on appeal that the circuit court erroneously exercised its discretion when it determined that grounds for dissolution existed.
Hauser asserted that accounting detail information was lost in a computer system crash. Ehlinger did not argue that the loss of this information was intentional.
Ehlinger had asked for a similar injunction on four occasions during the course of the litigation. The court never granted an injunction.
The court of appeals' mandate neglected to acknowledge the necessity of remanding to the circuit court for further proceedings.
In his brief to this court, Hauser contends that the court of appeals erred when it concluded that "book value" was ambiguous, but then upheld the circuit court's reasonable interpretation of the term without a trial. In his brief to the court of appeals, Hauser argued that the circuit court erred by concluding that the term "book value" was indefinite.
But see Schumann v. Samuels, 31 Wis. 2d 373, 377, 142 N.W.2d 777 (1966). In Schumann, the court concluded that in the absence of a contractual definition, "book value" referred to the "market value of the assets of the company after deducting its liabilities." (Emphasis added.) Neither party cites to Schumann for this premise or appears to advance the Schumann definition.
It should be noted that over the course of seven years, the circuit court held seven days of trial regarding the enforceability of the buyout agreement: May 9, 2005, May 10, 2005, July 26, 2005, July 27, 2005, September 7, 2005, June 26, 2006, and *310August 14, 2006. Additional hearings were held on the following dates: May 7, 2002, October 19, 2005, November 17, 2005, October 31, 2006, January 17, 2007, and February 28, 2007.
In his brief, Hauser agreed that "Shareholders in a Wisconsin corporation have a statutory right to inspect and copy the accounting records of the corporation."
At oral argument, one of the justices sought to clarify Hauser's argument:
Court: Your position is just look at the books. Look at the value of the assets on the books, look at the value of liabilities on the books, and divide it in half, right?
Hauser's attorney: Clearly that's our position. But I do want to clarify it was never our position that Dr. Ehlinger wouldn't have the right to dig into the books to make sure that the books accurately—
Court: Sure.
We accept Hauser's contention that the destruction of some of Evald's books, records, and files was unintentional, and we draw no inference based on their absence. We do not infer that the financial statements prepared by Evald inaccurately represent the corporation's "book value" as valued on a tax basis. Conversely, we cannot make the opposite inference — that Evald's financial statements represent the actual "hook value" valued on a tax basis.
Contrary to Justice Roggensack's assertion, we do not assume that the parties intended Evald's March 31, 2001 balance sheet to be the basis for determining book value. Justice Roggensack's concurrence, ¶ 123. Further, we do not contend that availability of the documents that underlie Evald's balance sheet could cure any ambiguity or indefiniteness in the proposed buy-sell agreement. Id. We simply determine that we need not answer the question of what (if anything) the parties intended by "book value" because resolution of the question would not change the outcome of the case.
The court stated, "[W]e are satisfied that the use of GAAP rather than the use of Hauser's calculations, is the more *315reasonable construction of 'book value.' In addition, the supporting documentation was a necessary component of a valid GAAP computation." Ehlinger, 313 Wis. 2d 718, ¶ 35.
As the Third Circuit explained, a compilation provides "the lowest level of assurance regarding an entity's financial statements," expressing "neither an opinion nor any level of assurance." Otto v. Pennsylvania State Edu. Ass'n, 330 F.3d 125, 133 (3d Cir. 2003). A review provides "limited assurance on the entity's financial statements." An audit provides "the highest level of assurance," and the accountant "provides verification of the financial statements' claims and assertions, and expresses an opinion on the entity's financials." Id.
By these determinations, we do not require accountants to use GAAP instead of tax accounting principles when keeping their client's books. Instead, we simply reaffirm our prior case law regarding the determination of a corporation's book value in a shareholder dispute.
"A reference shall be the exception and not the rule.... [I]n actions to be tried without a jury, save in matters of account and of difficult computation of damages, a reference shall be made only upon a showing that some exceptional condition requires it." Wis. Stat. § 805.06(2) (emphasis added).
It appears that the parties and the court expected the trial to last only one day and for the court to issue a final judgment based on the court's decision. In fact, due to unresolved questions that emerged during the trial, the court was required to schedule a second day.
Justice Ziegler's concurrence/dissent asserts that the parties could not have been clear about their opportunity to *321object to the special magistrate's report. See Justice Ziegler's coneurrence/dissent, ¶ 207. Such an assertion is a misread of the record.
The record reveals that the clerk of court provided the special magistrate's report to the parties at some time prior to June 1, 2006 — at least 29 days before the June 29 trial. The record also reveals that Hauser exercised his opportunity to object.
Hauser first objected to the report by letter on June 6. He asserted that the report inaccurately stated that Evald was an S-Corporation rather than a C-Corporation, and that the report failed to account for a calculation of an accrual for deferred income taxes. The special magistrate adjusted his report to reflect that Evald was a C-Corporation.
The June 29 trial was scheduled as a one-day trial. At trial, Hauser again objected to the report, asserting that the special magistrate had failed to consider certain financial documents. The court adjourned the trial so that the special magistrate could consider these documents. However, the special magistrate indicated that the documents did not alter his conclusion that he was unable to determine the book value of Evald.
See Wis. Stat. § 805.06(1).
Wis. Stat. § 180.0851(1) provides that "[a] corporation shall indemnify a director or officer, to the extent that he or she has been successful on the merits or otherwise in the defense of a proceeding, for all reasonable expenses incurred in the proceeding . . .." Hauser does not assert that he is entitled to indemnification under sub. (1), likely because he has not been successful in the defense of this proceeding and did not follow the procedural requirements in section 180.0851(3) and section 180.0853.
Section 180.0855 provides that the director seeking indemnification shall select one of the following six means for determining the right to indemnification: (1) a majority vote of a quorum of disinterested directors; (2) independent legal counsel; (3) a panel of three arbitrators; (4) an affirmative vote of the shares (but not the shares of any shareholder interested in the litigation); (5) court order under § 180.0854; or (6) any other method provided for in any additional right (not applicable here).
The court of appeals mistakenly concluded that "the circuit court did in fact order that Hauser be indemnified." Ehlinger, 313 Wis. 2d 718, ¶ 48. In fact, there is no indication that Hauser ever applied to the court for indemnification, and there is no order for indemnification in the record.
Justice Prosser suggests that by failing to rule on Ehlinger's motions to enjoin the corporation from paying the litigation expenses, the circuit court exercised its discretion to order *326Hauser's indemnification. See Justice Prosser's concurrence/dissent, ¶ 193. This assertion is incorrect for two reasons.
First, the statute does not authorize indemnification by default. A court's failure to rule on a motion cannot be the functional equivalent of ordering indemnification. Second, when the court finally denied Ehlinger's motion for an injunction in February of 2007, the court did not cite or discuss statutory indemnification at all. See supra, ¶ 93. Accordingly, the circuit court did not "exercise its discretion" on the subject of indemnification. Cf. Justice Prosser's concurrence/dissent ¶¶ 193-194.
See also Reinschreiber v. Lipp, 416 N.Y.S.2d 31 (N.Y. App. Div. 1979) (concluding that "[t]he trial court abused its discretion in directing that the funds of the corporations he used to reimburse the [shareholder resisting dissolution] for the cost of attorney's fees incurred in defending the dissolution proceedings."); Application of Cantelmo, 104 N.Y.S.2d 282 (N.Y. App. Div. 1951) ("In the dissolution proceeding of the corporation [which had two 50 percent shareholders,] the court had no power to fix the fees of attorneys who were retained by [one of the shareholders] to resist the dissolution.")
For instance, Attorney Ahrens was the only counsel to sign the following documents on behalf of the defendants: Defendants' Motion to Dismiss Pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 805.17(1) (filed August 29, 2005), Defendant's [sic] Motion for Partial Reconsideration of September 9, 2005 Ruling Regarding Particularization and Trial of Any Claim by Plaintiff of Waste By Defendants (filed September 9, 2005); Notice of Motion and Motion in Limine (filed January 27, 2006); Stipulation and Order (stipulating to the entry of exhibits for the 2005 trial, filed June 21, 2006); Notice of Motion and Motion for Reconsideration and for an Order Setting for Trial the Issue of the Ambiguity of the Term Book Value in the Buy/Sell Agreement and Whether Defendant's [sic] Substantially Performed (filed December 11, 2006); Notice of Appeal (filed April 25, 2007).

=== CASE 9738246 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:46:38.652836+00 ===

ROBB, Judge,
concurring.
I concur fully in the majority opinion, but write separately to address certain points made by the dissent.
First, with regard to Kirk’s affidavit, I note that for the allegations therein that fall within the parameters of Evidence Rule 606(b), we accept the allegations as true because the law requires us to do so. Curto did not file a response to Henri’s motion and did not controvert the claims made by Kirk in her affidavit; therefore, we must accept the contents of the affidavit as true. See op. at 141 (citing Jewell v. State, 624 N.E.2d 38, 42 (Ind.Ct.App. 1993)); cf. Evans v. Buffington Harbor River Boats, LLC, 799 N.E.2d 1103, 1109 n. 6 (Ind.Ct.App.2003) (“The import of the Jewel decision is that we must accept the alternate juror’s claims as true. Nonetheless, that does not remove the claim from the reach of Evidence Rule 606(b) .... ”), trans. denied. The law does not support weighing the allegations in a juror’s affidavit against the juror’s conduct at trial in *145order to determine which assertions are truthful as the dissent suggests.
The dissent cites a recent criminal case addressing alleged juror misconduct during a criminal case and notes that the defendant therein faced a sixty-five year sentence. See op. at 145 (citing Myers v. State, 887 N.E.2d 170 (Ind.Ct.App.2008)). I do not believe we can judge cases against each other in this manner. Although the stakes in Myers were the defendant’s personal liberty for sixty-five years, the stakes here are personal reputation for a lifetime. The stakes are high to every litigant and each case should be considered on its own merits, within the bounds of the law.
The dissent also calls reversing the jury verdict and remanding for a new trial a “radical act.” Op. at 145. I acknowledge that parties are not entitled to a perfect trial; they are entitled only to a fair trial. See Ind. Trial Rule 61 (“The court at every stage of the proceeding must disregard any error or defect in the proceeding which does not affect the substantial rights of the parties.”). Nonetheless, when a party can demonstrate that she has not received a fair trial, reversal is not “radical”—it is the appropriate course of action.

=== CASE 9738247 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:46:38.656423+00 ===

BAKER, Chief Judge,
dissenting.
I dissent from the result reached by the majority. Initially, I must part from my colleagues’ conclusion that we are compelled to accept the version of events contained in Kirk’s affidavit as true. See op. p. 141. In fact, I believe that Kirk, herself, offered the trial court two differing versions of events: (1) jury deliberations that were tainted by the allegedly improper events, as described in the affidavit; and (2) jury deliberations that were fair, proper, and normal, as implicit in Kirk’s acts of standing before the trial court during the polling of the jurors in open court, raising no complaints, and affirmatively telling the trial court that she agreed with the rest of the jury. I believe that it was for the trial court to weigh this conflicting evidence and determine whether Kirk was telling the truth in open court or, instead, in her affidavit.
Furthermore, even if I were to accept the majority’s conclusion that we must take the version of events in the affidavit as true, I do not believe that the events described by Kirk therein warrant a reversal. The events relied upon by the majority in reversing include: (1) the statement made by the bailiff to the jurors regarding a unanimous verdict; (2) the statement made by a juror during a cell phone call that she “would get to class as soon as she could,” appellant’s app. p. 48; and (3) the actions of the alternate juror, which included tapping the table and making other, nonverbal gestures.
A panel of this court very recently considered a criminal case—in which the defendant faced sixty-five years of imprisonment—involving the following jury conduct: (1) jurors who indicated that, before the trial began, they had already reached conclusions about the defendant’s guilt and connection to the case; (2) jurors who impermissibly used cell phones and watched television; and (3) jurors who consumed alcoholic beverages at some points during the relevant period of time. Myers v. State, 887 N.E.2d 170 (Ind.Ct.App. May 30, 2008). In affirming the trial court, this court cautioned that “[t]he trial court was in a better position than we are to gauge the jurors’ comportment at trial and their representations regarding their ... behavior.” Id. at 195.
I do not believe that the alleged events that occurred during deliberations herein rise to the level of those described in Myers. In my opinion, it could not be *146clearer that the facts that an alternate juror tapped the table or a juror commented on the phone that she hoped to be able to leave soon do not meet the high bar such that a reversal is warranted. And while I acknowledge that if, in fact, the bailiff informed the jurors that they had to reach a unanimous verdict, the situation was not ideal, I simply do not find it sufficient to take the radical act of reversing a jury verdict and remanding for a new trial. For all of the reasons stated herein, I disagree with the majority’s resolution of this issue and would proceed to address the other arguments made by Henri on appeal.

=== CASE 2214288 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:45.077932+00 ===

891 N.E.2d 1131 (2008)
Samuel M. BAUMGARTNER, Jr., Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 53A05-0708-CR-463.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
August 15, 2008.
*1132 Clarence C. Frank, Monroe County Chief Deputy Public Defender, Bloomington, IN, Attorney for Appellant.
Steve Carter, Attorney General of Indiana, Joby D. Jerrells, Deputy Attorney *1133 General, Indianapolis, IN, Attorneys for Appellee.
OPINION
MATHIAS, Judge.
Samuel M. Baumgartner, Jr. ("Baumgartner") was convicted in Monroe Circuit Court of Class D felony performing sexual conduct in the presence of a minor. Baumgartner appeals and presents three issues, which we restate as:
I. Whether the trial court erred in denying Baumgartner's motion for dismissal pursuant to Indiana Criminal Rule 4(C).
II. Whether the statute defining the crime for which Baumgartner was convicted is unconstitutionally vague;
III. Whether the evidence is sufficient to support Baumgartner's conviction.
We affirm.
Facts and Procedural History
At the time relevant to this appeal, Baumgartner was staying at the home of his girlfriend, Deborah Harden. Also living with Deborah were her daughter Brandy Harden and Brandy's two children, B.H. and C.H. The children, who were age two and three respectively, slept in a bedroom which was across the hall from their grandmother's bedroom, where Baumgartner slept. On the evening of November 16, 2005, Brandy put her children to bed. The children did not immediately go to sleep, causing their mother to turn off their television and scold them. However, the children continued to play and make noise. When Brandy went to check on the children yet again, she saw Baumgartner standing in the doorway of his bedroom, looking at the children and masturbating. Baumgartner was initially unaware that Brandy saw him. However, when he saw her, he continued to masturbate. When later confronted about his behavior by Deborah, Baumgartner claimed that he was simply scratching himself.
On January 26, 2006, the State charged Baumgartner with child molesting and performing sexual conduct in the presence of a minor. The count of child molesting was dismissed on the State's motion on February 15, 2007. Also on February 15, Baumgartner moved to dismiss the remaining count under Criminal Rule 4(C). The trial court denied this motion, and a jury trial was held on June 11, 2007. Before trial, Baumgartner again moved for dismissal under Criminal Rule 4(C), and the trial court again denied this motion. The jury found Baumgartner guilty as charged, and the trial court sentenced him to two and one-half years incarceration. Baumgartner now appeals.
I. Criminal Rule 4(C)
Baumgartner claims that the trial court erred in denying the motions to dismiss the charges pursuant to Criminal Rule 4(C) that he made on the day of his trial. Criminal Rule 4(C) provides in relevant part:
No person shall be held on recognizance or otherwise to answer a criminal charge for a period in aggregate embracing more than one year from the date the criminal charge against such defendant is filed, or from the date of his arrest on such charge, whichever is later; except where a continuance was had on his motion, or the delay was caused by his act, or where there was not sufficient time to try him during such period because of congestion of the court calendar.
Our review of the trial court's ruling on a Criminal Rule 4(C) motion is de novo. Kirby v. State, 774 N.E.2d 523, 530 (Ind. Ct.App.2002), trans. denied.
*1134 Here, Baumgartner was arrested on February 13, 2006, and it is from this date that the one-year time limit of Criminal Rule 4(C) is calculated. See Isaacs v. State, 673 N.E.2d 757, 762 (Ind.1996) (one-year period of Criminal Rule 4(C) commences with the date of arrest or filing of charges, whichever is later). On June 30, 2006, Baumgartner agreed to a continuance of a hearing on his motion to suppress until August 28, 2006. Baumgartner now admits that this sixty-day continuance should also be charged to him for purposes of Criminal Rule 4(C).[1] Thus, when the Criminal Rule 4(C) "clock" started again on August 28, 2006, 137 days had elapsed, and the State had 228 days remaining to try Baumgartner. On January 5, 2007, the trial court set a trial date of April 9, 2007, which was within this period.[2]
On March 29, 2007, Baumgartner's trial counsel filed a motion to withdraw his appearance.[3] The trial court held a hearing on this motion on April 5, 2007, at which it granted the motion to withdraw and vacated the April 9, 2007 trial date. Baumgartner concedes that "[d]elays caused ... requests to change attorneys are the responsibility of the defendant." O'Neill v. State, 597 N.E.2d 379, 384 (Ind. Ct.App.1992). However, he claims that any delay caused by the withdrawal of his trial counsel should not be charged to him because he "did not request new counsel. [Trial counsel] withdrew on his own accord." Br. of Appellant at 6.
If the defendant is not the cause of his counsel's resignation or withdrawal, then the defendant is not charged with the resulting delay. Vermillion v. State, 719 N.E.2d 1201, 1204 (Ind.1999). Although we have not been provided with the hearing on Baumgartner's counsel's motion to withdraw his appearance, it is apparent from the materials before us that Baumgartner was not without fault in the withdrawal of his trial counsel. The trial court described the situation as "clearly a breakdown in attorney-client relations." Tr. p. 146. The April 5, 2007 withdrawal of Baumgartner's trial counsel required vacation of the April 9, 2007 trial date, which was not reset until a pre-trial conference held on May 10, 2001, after Baumgartner had been appointed new counsel.[4] This delay is chargeable to Baumgartner. See Isaacs, 673 N.E.2d at 763 (delay caused by *1135 withdrawal of defendant's counsel was chargeable to defendant because it was caused either by his act, which in turn caused his counsel's withdrawal, or was the result of an act by defendant's counsel); cf. Young v. State, 521 N.E.2d 671, 673 (Ind. 1988) (delay caused by withdrawal of defendant's counsel could not be charged to the defendant because counsel had resigned his position as a public defender, something that was totally unrelated to the behavior of the defendant).[5]
From August 28, 2006, when the Criminal Rule 4(C) "clock" restarted, until it stopped again on the March 29, 2006 motion to withdraw, 213 days passed. When this is added to the 137 days which were already charged against the one-year time period, a total of 350 days had elapsed for purposes of Criminal Rule 4(C), leaving the State fifteen days to bring Baumgartner to trial.
The delay caused by the withdrawal of Baumgartner's counsel lasted, at least, until the pre-trial conference was held on May 10, 2007, at which time the trial court set a trial date of May 21, 2007. Under Isaacs, Baumgartner is charged with the delay until May 21, 2007the date to which his trial was reset. See 673 N.E.2d at 763.
However, the trial did not occur on May 21. Instead, on May 16, 2007, still within the one-year time limit, the State moved to continue the trial. That same day, the trial court granted this continuance and set the trial for June 11, 2007, which was outside the one-year time limit. Importantly, there is no indication that Baumgartner objected to this June 11, 2007 setting. Therefore, even though the trial court set a trial date which was outside this time limit, this setting drew no objection from Baumgartner. As such, Baumgartner waived his right to a speedy trial under Criminal Rule 4(C). State ex rel. Bramley v. Tipton Circuit Court, 835 N.E.2d 479, 481 (Ind.2005) (citing Vermillion, 719 N.E.2d at 1204).
II. Vagueness
Baumgartner next claims that the statute defining the crime for which he was committed is unconstitutionally vague. We agree with the State that Baumgartner failed to preserve any claim to the constitutionality of the statute by failing to file a motion to dismiss raising the constitutional challenge.
Indiana Code section 35-34-1-6(a) (2004) provides that "[a]n indictment or information is defective when ... the statute defining the offense charged is unconstitutional or otherwise invalid." Further, Indiana Code section 35-34-1-4(a) (2004) provides that the trial court "may, upon motion of the defendant, dismiss the indictment or information upon any of the following grounds: ... (1) The indictment or information, or any count thereof, is defective under section 6 of this chapter." This statute further requires that such a motion "be made no later than ... twenty (20) days if the defendant is charged with a felony ... prior to the omnibus date." I.C. § 35-34-1-4(b)(1). A motion made after this time "may be summarily denied if based upon a ground specified in subdivision (a)(1)[.]" I.C. § 35-34-1-4(b). In Payne v. State, 484 N.E.2d 16, 18 (Ind. 1985), our supreme court noted these statutory provisions and held, "Generally, the failure to file a proper motion to dismiss raising the Constitutional challenge waives *1136 the issue on appeal." See also Rhinehardt v. State, 477 N.E.2d 89, 93 (Ind.1985) (holding that defendant failed to preserve claim that statute was unconstitutionally vague where he failed to raise the issue prior to trial by a timely and proper motion to dismiss).
Still, some cases have considered challenges to the constitutionality of statutes even where the defendant failed to file a motion to dismiss. Notably, in Morse v. State, 593 N.E.2d 194, 197 (Ind.1992), the court addressed the defendant's challenge to the constitutionality of a statute even though the issue was raised for the first time in a pro se motion filed with the court by a defendant who was represented on appeal by counsel who did not raise the issue in the appellant's brief. Without mention of Payne or Rhinehardt, the court stated, "the constitutionality of a statute may be raised at any stage of the proceeding including raising the issue sua sponte by this Court." Id. See also Vaughn v. State, 782 N.E.2d 417, 420 (Ind.Ct.App. 2003) (citing Morse in deciding to address defendant's challenge to constitutionality of statute even though defendant filed no motion to dismiss and State did argue waiver on appeal), trans. denied; Boyd v. State, 889 N.E.2d 321, 323-24 (Ind.Ct.App. 2008) (following Morse and Vaughn in choosing to address on the merits defendant's claim that statute was unconstitutionally vague even though he did not file proper motion to dismiss and the State argued waiver on appeal), trans. pending.
But, even if we were to consider Baumgartner's argument upon the merits, he would not prevail because his challenge to the statute as unconstitutionally vague fails. When a statute is challenged as unconstitutional, we presume the statute is constitutional. Boyd, 889 N.E.2d at 324 (citing State v. Lombardo, 738 N.E.2d 653, 655 (Ind.2000)). It is the defendant's burden to rebut this presumption, and we must resolve all reasonable doubts in favor of the statute's constitutionality. Lombardo, 738 N.E.2d at 655. A statute will not be held to be unconstitutionally vague if individuals of ordinary intelligence would comprehend it adequately to inform them of the proscribed conduct. Id. The statute need only inform the individual of the generally proscribed conduct; it need not list with exactitude each item of prohibited conduct. Id. A statute may also be impermissibly vague if its terms invite arbitrary or discriminatory enforcement. Klein v. State, 698 N.E.2d 296, 299 (Ind.1998). There must be something in the criminal statute in question to indicate where the line is to be drawn between trivial and substantial things, so that erratic arrests and convictions for trivial acts and omissions will not occur. McIntosh v. State, 638 N.E.2d 1269, 1276 (Ind.Ct.App.1994), trans. denied. However, a statute is void for vagueness only if it is vague as applied to the precise circumstances of the present case. Boyd, 889 N.E.2d at 324 (citing Glover v. State, 760 N.E.2d 1120, 1123 (Ind.Ct.App.2002), trans. denied; Mallory v. State, 563 N.E.2d 640, 645 (Ind.Ct.App. 1990)), trans. denied. The defendant is not at liberty to devise hypothetical situations which might demonstrate vagueness. Mallory, 563 N.E.2d at 645.
Turning to the facts and circumstances of the present case, Baumgartner challenges the constitutionality of Indiana Code section 35-42-4-5(c) (2004), which provides:
A person eighteen (18) years of age or older who knowingly or intentionally:
(1) engages in sexual intercourse;
(2) engages in deviate sexual conduct; or
(3) touches or fondles the person's own body;
*1137 in the presence of a child less than fourteen (14) years of age with the intent to arouse or satisfy the sexual desires of the child or the older person commits performing sexual conduct in the presence of a minor, a Class D felony.
Baumgartner now claims that this statute is vague because it could criminalize the conduct of parents who engaged in sexual activity in their own bedroom if their infant was in a crib in the corner of the bedroom, or if one of their children accidentally walked in to their bedroom while they were engaged in sexual activity. We disagree.
Importantly, Baumgartner's argument is not addressed to the precise circumstances of the present case, but instead simply devises hypothetical situations which might demonstrate vagueness. As noted, this is not permitted. See Mallory, 563 N.E.2d at 645. Furthermore, we do not read the statute to prohibit the hypothetical conduct mentioned by Baumgartner.
In addition, the facts most favorable to the jury's verdict reveal that Baumgartner, while standing in a doorway which was across the hall from a bedroom where two small children were in bed, masturbated while looking at the children. A person of ordinary intelligence would have no difficulty in determining that such behavior was prohibited by the statute. See Mallory, 563 N.E.2d at 645. Therefore, Baumgartner's claim that this statute is unconstitutionally vague fails. See Boyd, 889 N.E.2d at 325 (rejecting defendant's claim that domestic battery statute was unconstitutionally vague).
III. Sufficiency of the Evidence
Baumgartner next claims that the evidence was insufficient to support his conviction. In reviewing a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, this court will neither reweigh the evidence nor judge witness credibility. Kien v. State, 782 N.E.2d 398, 407 (Ind.Ct.App.2003), trans. denied. Instead, we consider only the evidence which supports the conviction along with the reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom. Id. We will affirm the conviction if there is substantial evidence of probative value from which a reasonable trier of fact could have drawn the conclusion that the defendant was guilty of the crime charged beyond a reasonable doubt. Id.
Baumgartner first challenges the sufficiency of the evidence by claiming that, even if we consider the facts favorable to the verdict, his conduct did not fall under the conduct proscribed by the statute. Specifically, he claims that he did not touch or fondle himself "in the presence" of a child because there was no evidence that the children were aware of Baumgartner's conduct. Baumgartner's claim has already been rejected by this court.
In Glotzbach v. State, 783 N.E.2d 1221 (Ind.Ct.App.2003), the defendant was seen masturbating in the stacks of a public library. He was ultimately convicted of public indecency, which was elevated to a Class D felony because it was committed "`in or on a place where a child less than sixteen years (16) years of age is present.'" Id. at 1226 (quoting Ind.Code § 35-45-4-1(b)(1)).
Upon appeal, the defendant claimed that the State failed to establish that any children were "present" at the library because there was no evidence that any children[6] were in the immediate vicinity of where the incident occurred. The court first looked to a dictionary definition of the word "present," which defined the word as "being at the specified or understood *1138 place; at hand; in attendance." Id. at 1227 (quoting WEBSTER'S NEW WORLD DICTIONARY 1065 (3d ed.1988)). The court then concluded that "for children to be present within the meaning of [the pubic indecency statute] they only must be in the general area in the public place where the perpetrator is so that there is a reasonable prospect that children under sixteen might be exposed to the perpetrator's conduct." Id. Because children were in the library near where Glotzbach had been seen, the court held that children were "present" when the defendant had committed his crime and that "the State need not prove that [the children] actually witnessed the defendant's act." Id.
Baumgartner attempts to distinguish Glotzbach by claiming that the crime at issue there was committed in a public place, whereas he was convicted of conduct which occurred in a private home. Baumgartner argues that applying the Glotzbach holding to the present case would criminalize private sexual conduct. This is simply the same argument made in Baumgartner's challenge to the constitutionality of Indiana Code section 35-42-4-5(c), which we rejected above. We repeat that this statute criminalizes sexual conduct performed in the presence of a child under the age of fourteen when the conduct was done in the presence of such a child with the intent to arouse or satisfy the sexual desires of either the defendant or the child.
We see no reason not to follow the holding in Glotzbach. The public indecency statute at issue there used the word "present," and the statute at issue here uses the phrase "in the presence of." The noun "presence" is defined as "the fact or condition of being present." WEBSTER'S THIRD NEW INTERNATIONAL DICTIONARY 1793 (1976). The holding in Glotzbach is therefore directly on point with the present case. As in Glotzbach, the statute here does not require that the defendant's conduct be witnessed by the child or that the child be aware of the defendant's conduct. Instead, it simply requires that a child under the age of fourteen be at the place where the defendant's conduct occurs. See Glotzbach, 783 N.E.2d at 1227.
This brings us to the final aspect of Baumgartner's challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence. Specifically, Baumgartner claims that the testimony of Brandy Harden, who witnessed his conduct, is "incredibly dubious." Application of the "incredible dubiosity" rule is limited to those situations where a sole witness presents inherently contradictory testimony which is equivocal or the result of coercion and there is a complete lack of circumstantial evidence of the defendant's guilt. Majors v. State, 748 N.E.2d 365, 367 (Ind.2001). Further, we will overturn a conviction based upon the incredible dubiosity rule when the testimony is so incredibly dubious or inherently improbable that it runs counter to human experience, and no reasonable person could believe it. Kien, 782 N.E.2d at 407.
Here, there is nothing in Brandy Harden's testimony which is inherently contradictory and there is no indication that her testimony was coerced. Moreover, there is nothing about her testimony which is so inherently improbable that it runs counter to human experience such that no reasonable person could believe it. She testified that she saw Baumgartner standing in the doorway of a bedroom which was across the hall from the bedroom where her two young children were in bed and that Baumgartner was masturbating while looking at the children. From this, the jury could have reasonable concluded that *1139 Baumgartner[7] knowingly or intentionally touched or fondled his own body in the presence of a child less than fourteen years of age with the intent to arouse or satisfy his sexual desires.
Conclusion
Baumgartner waived his rights under Criminal Rule 4(C) by failing to object to the trial court setting a trial date which was outside the one-year time limit provided by that rule. Indiana Code section 35-42-4-5 is not unconstitutionally vague, and the evidence is sufficient to support Baumgartner's conviction thereunder for performing sexual conduct in the presence of a minor.
Affirmed.
MAY, J., and VAIDIK, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Baumgartner admits that this delay should be charged to him, and thereby toll the one-year time limit of Criminal Rule 4(C) because, otherwise, the initial April 9, 2007 trial date set by the trial court would have been outside the one-year time limit. This would mean that the trial court, acting within the one-year time limit of Criminal Rule 4(C), set a trial date which was beyond the one-year time limit. And by failing to object under these circumstances, Baumgartner would have waived his rights under Criminal Rule 4(C). See State ex rel. Bramley v. Tipton Circuit Court, 835 N.E.2d 479, 481 (Ind.2005).
[2]  Baumgartner is incorrect in his assertion that any other motions made by him prior to the initial setting of the trial date could not cause a delay because "there was no trial date available to delay." Br. of Appellant at 5. In Cook v. State, 810 N.E.2d 1064, 1067 (Ind. 2004), our supreme court held that any delay caused by action taken by the defendant are chargeable to the defendant regardless of whether a trial date has been set.
[3]  On February 15, 2007, before the withdrawal of his counsel, Baumgartner moved for dismissal under Criminal Rule 4(C) which the trial court properly denied, because the one-year time limit had not yet run.
[4]  The chronological case summary ("CCS") indicates that after the withdraw of Baumgartner's counsel but before his newly-appointed counsel had filed an appearance, Baumgartner filed a motion for dismissal and discharge. Even if this motion were made under Criminal Rule 4(C), it was premature, as the one-year limit had not yet run as of this date.
[5]  Even Baumgartner's newly-appointed counsel had problems dealing with him. At a hearing at which these problems were explained to the trial court, Baumgartner's new counsel explained that Baumgartner had accused his former counsel of being a "liar." Tr. p. 156.
[6]  The individual who saw Glotzbach masturbating was over sixteen years of age.
[7]  Baumgartner does not allege that he was under the age of eighteen, as required by Indiana Code 35-42-4-5(c).

=== CASE 9738248 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:46:41.950927+00 ===

*462VERGERONT, J.
¶ 1. This adverse possession claim concerns approximately seventeen acres of undeveloped land in a larger tract of several hundred acres primarily used for hunting by the titleholder, Newell Easley.1 Easley appeals the circuit court's determination that the plaintiffs established title to the disputed area by adverse possession. We conclude that, properly applying the presumption in favor of the titleholder and placing the burden of proof on the plaintiffs, the hunting and related activities of the plaintiffs' predecessors do not constitute open, notorious, visible, exclusive, and hostile use of the disputed area. We also conclude that a swampy area and a man-made drainage ditch do not constitute a substantial enclosure as required by Wis. Stat. § 893.25(2)(b)1. (2007-08).2 Finally, we conclude the plaintiffs have not established adverse possession under the doctrine of acquiescence, assuming without deciding that this is an alternative means of proving adverse possession. Accordingly we reverse and remand.
BACKGROUND
¶ 2. Easley owns at least 360 acres of undeveloped land in the Township of Shields, Marquette County. He uses his land primarily for hunting and also for activities such as gathering firewood, picking apples, and hiking on the hiking trails. He has set aside some of his land as a sanctuary for the purpose of managing, growing and protecting a deer herd.
*463¶ 3. The property in dispute lies in the northeast corner of Lot 6, which Easley purchased in 1987. Consisting of approximately seventeen acres, the disputed area is bounded on the east by the property of the plaintiffs,3 on the west by Mud Lake, and on the south by a swampy area and a man-made drainage ditch. The northern boundary is the line between Lot 6 and another neighbor.4
¶ 4. The complaint alleges that the use of the disputed area by the plaintiffs' predecessors in title for more than twenty years has established ownership by adverse possession as provided in Wis. Stat. § 893.25.5
*464¶ 5. At the trial to the court, Dale Daggett, the plaintiffs' predecessor in title, testified that when he purchased the property in 2001, he believed he owned the disputed area and he treated it as his. He bow hunted there in the fall of 2003; he went four-wheeling there three or four times in 2003 and a couple times in 2004; he took friends to walk there; and he cleared brush off a trail. He never saw anyone else in that area.
¶ 6. The owner of the plaintiffs' property before Daggett, Gordon Daniels, testified that when he bought the property in 1974, he believed it included the disputed area. He hunted that area steadily with friends from 1974 through 2003, putting up several tree stands and leaving them up year round. In 1974, in order to gain access to the lake, he and a neighbor made a road across Daniels' property and into the disputed area and then made a walking trail from there to the lake.
¶ 7. Easley testified that he and one or more of his family and friends are on his land approximately 180 days per year. They do not hunt in the sanctuary, which includes the disputed area. He goes into the disputed area once or twice a year and tries to observe it from a distance because walking through it defeats the purpose of a sanctuary. He never noticed persons trespassing in the disputed area nor saw anything that caused him to believe someone was doing something of a permanent nature. No one in his family or his hunting group gave him any indication there was hunting or other activities going on in the disputed area. He did see two tree stands in the area, but they were very old, and *465he was sure they had been there for many years prior to his purchase of the property.
¶ 8. The court concluded that the plaintiffs had established title by adverse possession to the disputed area and entered judgment granting full right and title to that property to the plaintiffs. The court determined that Daniels’ testimony and that of the persons with whom he had hunted established that he had made open, notorious, visible, exclusive, hostile, and continuous use of the disputed area as hunting land for twenty-nine years without interference from anyone. The court found that the discharge of guns would have been audible to Easley but that not once, before 2006, did he evict any trespasser or hunter from the disputed area. The court also determined that the disputed area on the southern border was protected by a substantial enclosure: a swampy area and the man-made drainage ditch. The court found that the disputed area was "fairly impenetrable" from Lot 6 but was easily accessed from the plaintiffs' property. Finally, the court determined that Easley acquiesced in the man-made ditch as the boundary line between his property and that of the plaintiffs and their predecessors in title.
DISCUSSION
¶ 9. On appeal Easley contends: (1) the circuit court disregarded the presumption in favor of the titleholder and improperly placed the burden on him to prove he had taken measures to keep people off his property; (2) the evidence is insufficient to establish adverse possession when the correct legal standard is applied; and (3) the evidence is insufficient to show he acquiesced to the man-made ditch as the boundary between his property in Lot 6 and the plaintiffs' property.
*466¶ 10. The plaintiffs respond that the circuit court correctly applied the presumption and that the evidence is sufficient to satisfy the legal standard for adverse possession and for acquiescence.
¶ 11. In reviewing a circuit court's determination of adverse possession, we accept the circuit court's factual findings unless they are clearly erroneous. Klinefelter v. Dutch, 161 Wis. 2d 28, 33, 467 N.W.2d 192 (Ct. App. 1991). We review de novo whether those facts fulfill the legal standard for adverse possession. Id. Our standard of review is the same regarding the doctrine of acquiescence. See Arnold v. Robbins, 209 Wis. 2d 428, 432, 563 N.W.2d 178 (Ct. App. 1997).
¶ 12. Our review in this case is facilitated by the circuit court's extensive findings of fact and discussion, and we appreciate the circuit court's effort. However, our analysis of the correct application of the legal standards differs from that of the circuit court, and we therefore reach a contrary conclusion.
I. Adverse Possession under Wis. Stat. § 893.25
¶ 13. Pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 893.25(2)(a) and (b), real estate is possessed adversely only if "the person possessing it, in connection with his or her predecessors in interest, is in actual continued occupation under claim of title, exclusive of any other right," and "[o]nly to the extent that it is actually occupied." In addition, the property must be "protected by a substantial enclosure" or "usually cultivated or improved." § 893.25(2)(b). Pursuant to § 893.25(1), the adverse possession must be uninterrupted for twenty years.6
*467¶ 14. In order to constitute adverse possession, "the use of the land must be open, notorious, visible, exclusive, hostile and continuous, such as would apprise a reasonably diligent landowner and the public that the possessor claims the land as his own." Pierz v. Gorski, 88 Wis. 2d 131, 137, 276 N.W.2d 352 (Ct. App. 1979) (citations omitted). "Hostile" in this context does not mean a deliberate and unfriendly animus; rather, the law presumes the element of hostile intent if the other requirements of open, notorious, continuous, and exclusive use are satisfied. Burkhardt v. Smith, 17 Wis. 2d 132, 139, 115 N.W.2d 540 (1962) (citations omitted). "Both. . . the fact of possession and its real adverse character" must be sufficiently open and obvious to "apprize the true owner ... in the exercise of reasonable diligence of the fact and of an intention to usurp the possession of that which in law is his own . . . ." Allie v. Russo, 88 Wis. 2d 334, 343-44, 276 N.W.2d 730 (1979) (citations omitted). The size and nature of the disputed area are relevant in deciding if the use is sufficient to apprise the true owner of an adverse claim. See Pierz, 88 Wis. 2d at 139.
¶ 15. The party seeking to claim title by adverse possession bears the burden of proving the elements by clear and positive evidence. Allie, 88 Wis. 2d at 343. The evidence must be strictly construed against the claimdnt and all reasonable presumptions must be made in favor of the true owner. Id. One of these presumptions is that "actual possession is subordinate to the right of [the true] owner." Zeisler Corp. v. Page, 24 Wis. 2d 190, 198, 128 N.W.2d 414 (1964).
¶ 16. We first consider Easley's assertion that the circuit court ignored the presumption in favor of the *468titleholder and improperly placed the burden on him. Easley points to the court's several references to Easley's failure, until 2006, to post no-trespassing signs on the eastern boundary of the disputed area to keep out people entering from the plaintiffs' property. The court contrasted Easley's failure to take "anti-trespasser actions" regarding the disputed area with his posting of the rest of his property and his concern with trespassers on the rest of his property. The court also apparently found it significant that there was no trail cut from the lower portion of Lot 6 into the disputed area.
¶ 17. The circuit court acknowledged that a titleholder need not use his or her land at all in order to retain title and that the burden was on the plaintiffs to prove adverse possession. However, we agree with Easley that certain of the court's findings and comments appear to require that Easley prove efforts to keep trespassers out, to post his land, and to patrol it. We clarify here that this is not the law. The elements of adverse possession are directed to the claimant's use of the land, and the claimant has the burden to prove those elements by clear and positive evidence. See Allie, 88 Wis. 2d at 343. If the claimant's use gives the titleholder reasonable notice that the claimant is asserting ownership and the titleholder does nothing, that failure to respond may result in losing title. However, in the absence of such use by the claimant, the titleholder is not obligated to do anything in order to retain title.7
*469¶ 18. We next examine whether the facts as found by the circuit court are sufficient to fulfill the legal standard that the use of the disputed area by Daggett and Daniels was open, notorious, visible, exclusive, hostile, and continuous. The circuit court determined that the regular use of the disputed area for hunting in the various annual hunting seasons by Daggett and Daniels and their friends, the dirt road and trail, and the deer stands should have been noticed by anyone who claimed title to the disputed area. The exclusivity of this use, in the circuit court's opinion, was demonstrated by an incident Daniels described, occurring in approximately 1998, in which he cut down a tree in the disputed area because a tree stand that did not belong to him or his friends was in the tree. The use was continuous, the court determined, because it occurred regularly according to the seasonal nature of hunting.
¶ 19. For the following reasons, we conclude the regular use of the disputed area for hunting, the deer stands, and the dirt road and trail do not constitute open, notorious, visible, exclusive and hostile use. Because of this conclusion, we do not discuss the requirement of continuous use.
¶ 20. There was no finding that Easley ever met Daniels, Daggett or their friends hunting in the disputed area. The circuit court found that Easley could have and should have heard the gun shots during spring and fall gun seasons. We do not agree that the *470sound of gunshots gives a reasonably diligent titleholder notice of adverse possession. Even assuming that the shots come from the titleholder's property and not from someone else's property beyond, the gunshots would have been consistent with trespassers. As for the deer stands, the testimony was that they were portable deer stands, some kept in place all year. Even if visible, the deer stands, too, are consistent with trespassers. The dirt road and the trail continuing on to the lake are consistent with an easement to the lake rather than adverse possession of the seventeen acres. See Pierz, 88 Wis. 2d at 138 (logging road was at best consistent with an easement rather than adverse possession).
¶ 21. We also do not agree that Daniels' act of cutting down a tree on one occasion because it held someone else's deer stand showed Easley and the public that Daniels was attempting to keep others out of the disputed area. Given the nature and size of the disputed area, this is not reasonable notice of an exclusive claim by another. Notably, neither Dagget nor Daniels posted the disputed area, which would have been notice to Easley that someone else claimed it. The court did not consider it significant that Easley went into the disputed area, because, the court found, those instances were "isolated and sporadic," but Easley did go there occasionally and, as we have explained above, Easley was not obligated to do anything in order to retain his title.
¶ 22. The circuit court and the plaintiffs rely on the statement in Burkhardt, 17 Wis. 2d at 138, that "actual occupancy" for purposes of adverse possession is "the ordinary use of which the land is capable and such *471as an owner would make of it."8 The circuit court reasoned, and the plaintiffs argue on appeal, that the "highest and best use" of the disputed area was hunting, and the plaintiffs' predecessors used the area for hunting just as much as a true owner would or could. However, the quoted sentence from Burkhardt is followed by the italicized sentence:
Actual occupancy is not limited to structural encroachment which is common but is not the only physical characteristic of possession. Actual occupancy means the ordinary use of which the land is capable and such as an owner would make of it. Any actual visible means, which gives notice of exclusion from the property to the true owner or to the public and of the defendant's domination over it, is sufficient.
Id. at 138 (emphasis added). In other words, although the use need be only the ordinary use an owner would make of it, the use must also be open, notorious, visible, exclusive, and hostile (as well as continuous).
¶ 23. Our conclusion that the evidence does not establish a use that was open, notorious, visible, exclusive, and hostile is consistent with the policy statement in Pierz. There the court concluded that the use of wooded lands by creating a worm bed, spraying, planting clover and trees, cutting down windfall, using a "logging road" and making a rock pile were either not sufficiently visible or were consistent with trespassing or an easement. Pierz, 88 Wis. 2d at 138-139. The court stated:
The activities described were consistent with sporadic, trivial and frequently benign trespass. To allow adverse possession based upon such acts would encourage land*472owners to fence and post their wild land to prevent usurpation by their neighbors. Public policy favors open use of wild lands by the public. The law relating to adverse possession of wild lands ought not force landowners to avoid the risk of losing their land by denying their neighbors the use and enjoyment of the forest.
Id. at 139.
¶ 24. The necessary implication of a determination of adverse possession based on the facts here is that a titleholder of large areas of hunting land must either fence or post his or her lands and be diligent about keeping trespassers off in order to avoid the risk of losing title. This result is inconsistent with the Pierz policy, and is not supported in this case by evidence that satisfies the legal standard for adverse possession with the presumption favoring the titleholder and the burden properly allocated to the plaintiffs.
¶ 25. The next issue we take up is that of the substantial enclosure requirement in Wis. Stat. § 893.25(2)(b)1.9 Although we could conclude our discussion of adverse possession without addressing this issue, we choose to address it. Doing so will provide a more complete analysis of the adverse possession arguments of the parties and will be useful in addressing their arguments on acquiescence.
¶ 26. The purpose of the substantial enclosure requirement is to alert a reasonable person to the possibility of a border dispute. Klinefelter, 161 Wis. 2d at 35. "The boundaries may be artificial in part and *473natural in part if the circumstances are such as to clearly indicate that the inclosure, partly artificial and partly natural, marks the boundaries of the adverse occupancy." Illinois Steel Co. v. Bilot, 109 Wis. 418, 441, 85 N.W. 402 (1901). In addition, the enclosure "must be of a substantial character in the sense of being appropriate and effective to reasonably fit the premises for some use to which they are adapted." Id. at 446. However, the enclosure need not actually prevent others from entering. Id.
¶ 27. Given the configuration of the disputed area and the location of the lake, the issue of a substantial enclosure in this case focuses on the southern boundary of the disputed area. As noted above, the court found that there was a substantial enclosure of the disputed property on the south, consisting of the swampy area and a man-made drainage ditch that runs approximately 200 feet from that swampy area to the eastern boundary of Lot 6. The ditch continues eastward, slightly to the north of the boundary line between the plaintiffs' property and Lot 5, owned by Easley. The circuit court found that the man-made ditch was already in existence in the mid 1950s.10 There was no testimony on when precisely the ditch was dug or by whom, but it appears undisputed from the testimony that the purpose of the man-made ditches in this area generally was to drain water from Mud Lake to the farm or farms to the east of the plaintiffs' property. The court found that one could traverse the man-made ditch *474in hunting boots or waders or by crossing on downed trees, depending on the season and the rainfall.
¶ 28. The plaintiffs appear to disagree with the circuit court's determination that the swampy area is part of the substantial enclosure, and they focus only on the 200 feet of man-made ditch in Lot 6. They assert that the man-made ditch goes to the ordinary high water mark of Mud Lake and, as we understand their argument, a substantial enclosure on the southern border of the disputed area need extend no further. Whether we consider the man-made ditch alone or together with the swampy area, we conclude that there is not a substantial enclosure on the southern border of the disputed area.
¶ 29. With respect to the swampy area, a natural, swampy area on a titleholder's property does not provide reasonable notice that someone else is or may be claiming title to land on the other side. Therefore, the fact that the swampy area may make it harder to access the disputed area from the southern portion of Lot 6 than from the plaintiffs' property is irrelevant to the issue of a substantial enclosure. This difficulty of natural access does not contribute to providing notice to the Lot 6 titleholder that the owner of the property to the east is or may be claiming ownership of a part of Lot 6.
¶ 30. With respect to the man-made drainage ditch running 200 feet from the swampy area to the eastern boundary of Lot 6, then continuing eastward, this ditch does not alert a reasonable titleholder of Lot 6 that someone else is or might be claiming land on the north side of the ditch in Lot 6. The ditch had already been on Lot 6 for at least three decades when Easley purchased it. There is no evidence suggesting that the *475ditch was dug without the consent of the prior owners of Lot 6, and there is nothing in the nature and function of the ditch itself that would reasonably suggest it was dug by a non-titleholder claiming land on the other side.
¶ 31. The plaintiffs contend that the approximately 200 feet of man-made ditch constitutes an enclosure at least as substantial as the "mere furrow" referred to in Illinois Steel Co. in a passage relied on in Klinefelter:
An inclosure having no purpose of physical exclusion of outside interferences — a mere furrow turned with a plow around the land (Sage v. Morosick, 69 Minn. 167) [71 N.W. 930 (1897)], or a line marked by cutting away the brush (Worthley v. Burbanks, 146 Ind. 534) [45 N.E. 779 (1897)], or a fence opened so as to admit outside disturbers (Sauers v. Giddings, 90 Mich. 50) [51 N.W. 265 (1892)] — may be sufficient under the circumstances to indicate, as a matter of fact, the boundaries of the adverse claim; and such boundaries may be evidenced satisfactorily to a jury by any means reasonably calculated to clearly suggest the same or suggest inquiry in regard thereto that would probably readily and clearly lead to a discovery of the truth.
Klinefelter, 161 Wis. 2d at 34-35 (quoting Illinois Steel Co., 109 Wis. at 446) (emphasis added).
¶ 32. We disagree with the plaintiffs' contention. Although a "mere furrow" sounds initially most unlike a "substantial enclosure," the facts in Sage were that there were no fences or other enclosures of land in the vicinity and the custom was to mark the boundary lines of one's land by plowing furrows along those lines. Sage, 71 N.W. at 931. Thus, in the factual circumstances of Sage, the furrows would have been reasonably calculated to alert the titleholder of the land so marked to a *476potential adverse claim. As we have already explained, this is not true of the man-made drainage ditch or of the swampy area.
¶ 33. We conclude the evidence does not establish that Daggett's and Daniels' use of the disputed area was open, notorious, visible, exclusive, and hostile, and also does not establish that the disputed area was protected by a substantial enclosure as required by Wis. Stat. § 893.25(2)(b)1.
II. Acquiescence
¶ 34. The parties dispute whether the plaintiffs have established adverse possession by showing that Easley acquiesced for twenty years to the man-made ditch as the northern boundary line of his property in Lot 6. As we explain below, it is not clear whether the doctrine of acquiescence remains a distinct means of proving adverse possession when, as here, there is no issue concerning the twenty-year time period. However, whatever the precise relationship between adverse possession and the doctrine of acquiescence, we conclude the evidence does not establish acquiescence.
¶ 35. As already noted, the "hostile" requirement of adverse possession does not refer to a particular state of mind on the part of the claimant. Burkhardt, 17 Wis. 2d at 139. However, the law at one time did require a hostile intent — knowledge that the land was owned by another and the intent to dispossess the true owner. Buza v. Wojtalewicz, 48 Wis. 2d 557, 563, 180 N.W.2d 556 (1970). The result was that "one who occupied part of his neighbor's land, due to an honest mistake as to the location of his boundary" could never establish adverse possession. Id. Thus, courts developed the doctrine of acquiescence under which, even though a *477hostile intent was absent, a party could acquire land by adverse possession if the true owner acquiesced in such possession for twenty years. Id. More specifically, "acquiescence by adjoining owners in the location of a fence as establishing the common boundary line of their respective properties was conclusive as to the location of such line" where the fence had stood in the same location for more than twenty years. Nagel v. Philipsen, 4 Wis. 2d 104, 108, 90 N.W.2d 151 (1958).
¶ 36. It would appear that, once it was established in the early twentieth century that actual hostile intent on the part of the claimant was no longer required for adverse possession,11 the elements of adverse possession could be proved in the "fence-as-common boundary line" situation without the need for specific proof of acquiescence by the titleholder. With the focus now on the acts of possession rather than on the subjective intent of the parties, it would appear that the elements of adverse possession — actual occupancy that is open, notorious, visible, exclusive, hostile, and continuous, plus a substantial enclosure — can be established with the evidence that has sufficed under the case law to show occupancy up to a fence line for twenty years, without the need for specific proof of acquiescence by the titleholder.
¶ 37. Nonetheless, at least one "modern" case has treated the acquiescence doctrine as a distinct means of proving adverse possession See Menzner v. Tracy, 247 Wis. 245, 251-52, 19 N.W.2d 257 (1945). In addition, there are cases in which the doctrine of acquiescence has been used to determine the true boundary line, and, *478depending on which party prevails on that issue, the claim of adverse possession has been resolved separately. See Grell v. Ganser, 255 Wis. 381, 383-84, 39 N.W.2d 397 (1949) (applying the acquiescence doctrine to establish a boundary line favorable to the plaintiff, which then made it unnecessary to address the plaintiffs claim for adverse possession); and Seybold v. Burke, 14 Wis. 2d 397, 403-06, 111 N.W.2d 143 (1961) (after rejecting the boundary line advanced by the plaintiff under the acquiescence doctrine, addressing the plaintiffs adverse possession claim and rejecting that as well).
¶ 38. If we assume the doctrine of acquiescence remains a distinct means of proving adverse possession where there is no dispute regarding the twenty-year requirement, that assumption does not aid the plaintiffs. The cases on which the plaintiffs rely—Grell and Menzner—as well as those cited in Nagel, all differ significantly from the facts in this case.12 See also Krembs v. Pagel, 210 Wis. 261, 246 N.W. 324 (1933). These cases all involve visible activities such as gardening, planting, farming or building up to a fence or fence line for twenty years without objection from the titleholder. The visible nature of the activity together with the commonly understood purpose of a fence to define property lines forms the basis for the reasonable inference that the titleholder's lack of objection constitutes acquiescence to that boundary line. See Menzner, 247 Wis. at 249-50.
*479¶ 39. We have already concluded that the activity of the plaintiffs' predecessors in the disputed area was not open and visible. We have also concluded that the swampy area and man-made ditch do not provide reasonable notice to the titleholder of a potential adverse claim. Even if we assume a fence is not essential to the acquiescence doctrine, the boundary must be physically defined in some equivalent way that makes it reasonable to infer the titleholder understood it as the boundary. The swampy area and man-made ditch do not meet this standard.
¶ 40. The plaintiffs point to findings of the circuit court that, they contend, support the conclusion that Easley acquiesced to the drainage ditch being the northern boundary of his property in Lot 6. However, the court's findings on an incident in which Daniels shot a deer that ran onto Easley's property and an incident in which Easley placed a tree stand on Daniels' property do not specifically indicate that these incidents involved the portion of the drainage ditch in Lot 6. Our review of the record indicates that both incidents occurred to the east of the eastern boundary of the disputed area and concerned the boundary line between the plaintiffs property and Easley's Lot 5.
¶ 41. The same is true with most of the evidence of the no-trespassing signs south of the drainage ditch facing north. Most of the signs were described as located in Easley's Lot 5 and are therefore not relevant to the boundaries of the disputed area. The testimony on a sign or two posted in Lot 6, just to the south of the disputed area, is as follows. Daggett's friend testified that he saw a sign there in 2003 but did not know how long it had been there or who put it up. Daniels' neighbor's testimony appears to be that he saw a sign in *480that area, too, but that was before Easley bought Lot 6. Easley testified that, before he bought Lot 6 he "policed" for the then-owners of Lot 6 and may have "posted the ditch" in Lot 6 for them, and he did not later take any sign down. This testimony does not meet the requirements of visible activity up to a fence or fence equivalent for twenty years, which requirements form the necessary premise for the conclusion of acquiescence. The same is true of Easley's failure to post the boundary between the disputed area and the plaintiffs' property.
¶ 42. Accordingly, we conclude the plaintiffs have not established adverse possession under the doctrine of acquiescence, assuming this doctrine remains a distinct means of establishing adverse possession.
CONCLUSION
¶ 43. We conclude the plaintiffs have not established adverse possession of the disputed area. We therefore reverse and remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
By the Court. — Judgment reversed and cause remanded.
For purposes of the trial on the adverse possession claim, the plaintiffs stipulated that Easley would be considered the titleholder of the disputed area.
All references to the Wisconsin Statutes are to the 2007-08 version unless otherwise noted.
The plaintiffs are the Peter H. and Barbara Jo Steuck Living Trust, Peter H. Steuck, and Barbara Jo Steuck. For ease of reference, we refer to them collectively as the plaintiffs.
As noted in footnote 1, the parties stipulated that, for purposes of the trial on adverse possession, Easley owned the disputed area. That means, as we understand it, that for purposes of this trial, the disputed area is in Lot 6. The circuit court explains in its opinion that, because of the shrinkage and drainage of Mud Lake, there may be a dispute over whether the resulting "new" land is in Lot 6 or is part of the plaintiffs' property, but that is an issue that will be tried separately, if necessary.
Wisconsin Stat. § 893.25 provides:
Adverse possession, not founded on written instrument. (1) An action for the recovery or the possession of real estate and a defense or counterclaim based on title to real estate are barred by uninterrupted adverse possession of 20 years, except as provided by s. 893.14 and 893.29. A person who, in connection with his or her predecessors in interest, is in uninterrupted adverse possession of real estate for 20 years, except as provided by s. 893.29, may commence an action to establish title under ch. 841.
(2) Real estate is possessed adversely under this section:
(a) Only if the person possessing it, in connection with his or her predecessors in interest, is in actual continued occupation under claim of title, exclusive of any other right; and
*464(b) Only to the extent that it is actually occupied and:
1. Protected by a substantial enclosure; or
2. Usually cultivated or improved.
There is no dispute that, if the activities of the plaintiffs' predecessors and their friends fulfill the standard for adverse possession, this twenty-year requirement is met.
Certain of the circuit court's findings suggest that Easley's subjective intent is relevant to a claim of adverse possession. However, as the circuit court correctly recognizes elsewhere, the *469subjective intent of neither party is relevant to a claim of adverse possession. Allie v. Russo, 88 Wis. 2d 334, 347, 276 N.W.2d 730 (1979). We discuss in the next section the subjective intent of the parties in relation to the doctrine of acquiescence.
"Actual continued occupation" is the term used in Wis. Stat. § 893.25(2)(a).
The court did not determine that the disputed area was "usually cultivated or improved," see Wis. Stat. § 893.25 (2)(b)2., and the plaintiffs do not argue that the facts support this conclusion.
Although not specifically part of the circuit court's finding, it appears from the testimony that the portion of the man-made ditch in existence as of the mid-1950s included the portion that extends into Lot 6, as well as the portion running from there eastward.
The court in Burkhardt v. Smith, 17 Wis. 2d 132, 140, 115 N.W.2d 540 (1962), explains that this has been the law since Ovig v. Morrison, 142 Wis. 243, 125 N.W. 449 (1910).
Wiese v. Swersinske, 265 Wis. 258, 61 N.W.2d 312 (1953); Grell v. Ganser, 255 Wis. 381, 39 N.W.2d 397 (1949); Wunnicke v. Dederich, 160 Wis. 462, 152 N.W. 139 (1915); Brew v. Nugent, 136 Wis. 336, 117 N.W. 813 (1908); Wollman v. Ruehle, 104 Wis. 603, 80 N.W. 919 (1899); Welton v. Poynter, 96 Wis. 346, 71 N.W. 597 (1897); and Toby v. Secor, 60 Wis. 310, 19 N.W. 99 (1884).