=== CASE 2225198 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:39.999385+00 ===

88 Ill. App. 2d 146 (1967)
232 N.E.2d 231
In the Matter of the Estate of Jay Samuel Hartt, Deceased.
Sylvia Mona Hartt, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
Harris Trust and Savings Bank, Executor of the Last Will and Testament of Jay Samuel Hartt, Deceased; Jane Hartt and Michigan State University, Respondents-Appellees.
Gen. No. 50,284.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District, Fourth Division.
September 22, 1967.
*147 Springer & Hansen, of Chicago, for appellant.
*148 John H. Thomson, of Vedder, Price, Kaufman & Kammholz, and Lennon, King & Denniston, of Chicago, for appellees.
MR. PRESIDING JUSTICE ENGLISH delivered the opinion of the court.
From a judgment denying her petition for distribution of $8,000 or more, which she alleges is intestate property from the estate of Jay Samuel Hartt, plaintiff appeals, contending that since decedent's will contained no provisions directing or authorizing the accumulation of unexpended or undistributed property and because his widow renounced her share, plaintiff, as sole remaining heir-at-law, is entitled to the intestate property.
On April 13, 1962, Jay Samuel Hartt died testate, leaving as his sole heirs-at-law his widow, Phyllis Ann Hartt, and his sister, plaintiff, Sylvia Mona Hartt. The will was admitted to probate on June 1, 1962, and the defendant, Harris Trust and Savings Bank, was appointed executor and cotrustee. Decedent's widow filed her renunciation of the will on November 28, 1962, and plaintiff filed her petition for distribution on August 13, 1964.
The defendant contends, as at trial, that the will does authorize accumulation of income not required or, in the trustee's discretion, permitted to be distributed, and that, therefore, the remaining sum of money should pass through the residuary clause of the will to Michigan State University, the named beneficiary thereof.[1]
After other provisions not here relevant, the will of decedent created two trusts, the first of which, Trust "A," was for the benefit of his wife. All the income of Trust "A" was to be paid directly to the wife, and the Trustees were authorized to invade the principal if, in their discretion, it became necessary to provide adequately *149 for the widow's continued comfort and needs. At her death, the trust was subject to her testamentary power of appointment. Failing a valid exercise of this power, the entire remaining principal was to be added to and become a part of Trust "B," subject to and administered as per the directions applicable to that trust. In case the wife predeceased the testator, or if Trust "B" had terminated, the principal was to pass through Paragraph 7 to Michigan State University, the named beneficiary. This appeal presents no question specifically applicable to Trust "A." The question concerns Trust "B" insofar as income not distributed thereunder has accumulated.
Testator created Trust "B" in Paragraph 6 of his will to provide annual payments to one Jane Dempsey and to plaintiff of:
"... so much of the income and principal of Trust `B': as shall be necessary in the uncontrolled opinion of the Trustees ... to provide for her comfortable support maintenance and welfare, ...." (Emphasis supplied.)
In subparagraph (c) of Paragraph 6, testator limited the amounts payable to plaintiff and Jane Dempsey:
"(c) Payments ... shall not exceed ... $7200 a year ... taking into consideration all other income of which the Trustees have knowledge which is available to either of said persons. The Trustees are also authorized to pay, over and above the limitation ... such additional amounts as may be required, in the uncontrolled discretion of the Trustees, ... to pay unusual or extraordinary expenses...."
Testator further provided:
"(d) If at any time Trust `A' shall have been exhausted in the support of my wife, ... then my *150 Trustees shall use so much of the income from and principal of Trust `B' (limited to $4,000 per year) as may be necessary ... and ... without endangering further payments to Jane Dempsey, or my sister, ... under subparagraphs (a) and (b) above...."
In Paragraph 7 (b), testator willed that:
"... when the Trustees have discharged all obligations of Trust `A' and Trust `B', said Trustees shall pay over to Michigan State University... the remaining principal and income of Trust `B' and the principal of Trust `A' which has not otherwise been disposed of through the valid exercise of the power or appointment granted to my wife...." (Emphasis supplied.)
Plaintiff argues that courts must consider the language used in a will when construing it in order to ascertain the intention of the testator; that a court cannot properly guess as to what the testator may have wished to provide where the language used does not permit accumulation of undistributed income; that such an authorization must be express where income exceeds the requirements of trust payments; that here the language not only does not authorize accumulation, but actually indicates that testator did not intend accumulation of income since he directed the Trustees to make payments of "income and principal"; and, finally, that where there is no provision for the disposition of excess income and no provision for its accumulation, it will pass as intestate property.
Defendant agrees that the prime duty of the construing court is to ascertain and give force to the intentions of the testator as found in the will, so long as such intent is valid; that where, as here, the testator disposes of his estate by will, there arises a presumption that he did not intend any partial intestacy and that courts will adopt any reasonable construction to avoid partial intestacy, *151 since the presumption will be rebutted only where the contrary interpretation clearly appears; that a residuary clause in a will also raises the presumption that testator intended the designated beneficiary to take, rather than unspecified heirs who would take under intestacy statutes; that testator's authorization for accumulation can be implied from the stated terms of the will as well as the general scheme of distribution and consideration of the entire will, and that there needn't be a specific expression of such authorization; and that, therefore, no intestacy exists as to the undistributed income in this case.
[1, 2] The authorities advanced by all parties to this appeal raise no unsettled questions of Illinois law and present no difficulty or disagreement insofar as they pertain to the proposition that the primary duty of a court is to ascertain the intent of the testator in a legally valid will. It is likewise true that the court must not engage in conjecture in its construction, since the intention to be carried out must be found on the face of the will, and, further, if there are contingencies for which the testator did not provide, either through faulty draftsmanship or oversight, the court will not supply remedial provisions.[2] Nevertheless, the court will look to the entire will and not construe intent merely from isolated and non-contextual language where to do so would violate the overall expressed intent.[3] Therefore, the essence of this appeal is whether the testator expressly authorized *152 the Trustees to accumulate income which the will did not require, or permit them to distribute. If the authorization to accumulate is not found, then the contested sum would pass as intestate property and the judgment must be reversed. (Ill Rev Stats 1963, c 3, §§ 11, 16, 51.)
We find from the language creating the trust and the general scheme of distribution, as evident in consideration of the entire will, that testator intended the Trustees to have power to accumulate the excess income in Trust "B." In subsections (c) and (d) of Paragraph 6 (quoted above), testator set limitations on the annual payments to each beneficiary of $7,200, but directed the Trustees to augment those allowances if they deemed it necessary. Therefore, the amounts payable to these beneficiaries were flexible up to and even in excess of $7,200. In the Trustees' discretion, payments could be made from either income or principal, and the guide was to be the needs of the individual beneficiaries, with consideration given to other income and an assessment of the standard of living in each case. There was no direction for the Trustees to pay first from income of the trust and invade principal only when necessary, nor was there any mention of the estate's earning capabilities as an indication of the size of the payments or limitation thereon. Therefore, it seems clear to us that the testator contemplated use of income and principal as a common fund, with no distinction between the two for this purpose.
This question was considered in Hartford Nat. Bank & Trust Co. v. Yearly Meeting, 137 Conn. 648, 81 A2d 104, 107 (1951), wherein the Supreme Court of Errors noted that testator had provided for annual payments from either income or principal, and held:
"It is apparent that the testator contemplated the possibility that in some years the income might shrink to such an extent that it would be necessary to use principal to pay the annuities. He, however, *153 made no provision for the recoupment of the principal out of surplus income in other years, as would have been natural if his intent had been to keep the income and the principal as two separate funds. The language employed evidences the testator's intent to create a `trust fund' comprised of income as well as principal."
In further evident disregard of any need for the Trustees to distinguish between income and principal, the testator provided in 6(d) that income and principal up to $4,000 per year should be used if necessary to supplement payments being made under Trust "A," so long as it would not endanger payments directed under Trust "B." This shows not only a desire for the Trustees to treat income and principal as a common fund, but also that testator contemplated that the amounts available in Trust "B" would vary, depending on trust earnings and particularly because payments made to the two beneficiaries would depend upon consideration of outside income available in each case. It would therefore not be reasonable to construe the will as overlooking the possibility that income might accrue and be undistributed in any given year, since testator provided for a common fund of income and principal, and directed that the specified payments should vary from year to year, depending on external factors of income and standard of living peculiar to each beneficiary, and discretionary judgments of the Trustees. Since these flexible amounts were to be paid from income and principal of Trust "B," as a common fund, the reasonable construction is that excess earnings, if they occurred, were to be conserved as part of that trust fund for use in future years if and when needed.
[3] The legal effect of such a common fund was also considered in the Yearly Meeting case and is applicable here:
*154 "Where a testator establishes a fund, the income from which is to be used for certain purposes, but that income is in excess of the amount required for those purposes, the question whether the excess shall accumulate and be added to the principal or shall be otherwise disposed of depends primarily upon the intent of the testator." [Citation.] ... however, even though the will contains no expression of an intent that the excess income shall be accumulated, such course must be followed where the disposition of the excess as it accrues would be contrary to the scheme of the testator as disclosed in the will. Accordingly, the absence of an accumulation provision is only one of several indications of the testator's intention and in view of the character and contents of the will, may be one by no means as significant as those of a contrary import. [Citation.] In short, a will may be effective to require the accumulation of excess income either by reason of its express terms or by implication from its general scheme of disposition." [Citation.] [81 A2d at 106-107.] (Emphasis supplied.)
[4] Plaintiff, however, argues that in Illinois there must be an express direction to accumulate income in order to satisfy the "Income and Principal Act" (Ill Rev Stats 1963, c 30, § 161(3)) which requires direction "by the terms of the transaction by which the principal was established," as a condition to the accumulation of income. Nevertheless, such a direction may be found to exist in a will irrespective of the absence of an isolated, specific phrase. We emphasize that we have no intention of supplying a provision that the testator may have overlooked, or that we feel he may have wanted. Instead, we find an express, though not specific, direction to accumulate from the language of the will which created the trusts and which controls the manner of distribution.
*155 Further, in section II, Paragraph 3, the testator provided that: "My said Trustees shall have power to hold or to retain any property coming into their possession...." In Halderman v. Halderman, 342 Ill. 550, 555-556, 11 N.E. 526, the court considered the question of whether after-acquired property should pass intestate or under a will which gave "my entire real and personal property wherever found," then listed the real estate owned at the time the will was executed. Even though the testator conveyed away some of the described realty and subsequently acquired other real estate not described in the will, the court found no intestacy. Noting that both statute and decisional law required that "an intention of the testator to dispose of after-acquired property must affirmatively appear from the will," the court then reasoned:
"The word `affirmatively,' ... means merely that the will must show an intention on the part of the testator that such after-acquired property as well as his other property shall pass by the will. This rule is satisfied by the intention appearing from the language used that all property owned by him at the time of his death shall pass by the will, and it is not necessary to use different language showing a specific intention.... The intention must be gathered from the language of the entire will and considered as a whole."
Just as "affirmatively" may be found from the language of the entire will, so may a specific direction to accumulate income be expressed by the general scheme and language of the will.
[5] Our conclusion finds further support in the familiar presumption against a partial intestacy, as stated in Caracci v. Lillard, 7 Ill. 2d 382, 386, 130 NE2d 514:
"Thus it is presumed the testatrix intended to dispose of her entire estate unless it clearly appears otherwise *156 by the provisions of the will; and any reasonable construction, consistent with the terms of the instruments will be adopted so as to find a disposition of the entire estate rather than an intention to die testate as to one portion of her property and intestate as to another.... The intention of the testatrix must be sought in the general tenor of the instrument; and the scheme of disposition so disclosed must control, even though it involves the rejection of words in the will which are irreconcilable or inconsistent with the general context."
See also First Nat. Bank of Chicago v. Piaget, 2 Ill. App. 2d 207, 222, 119 NE2d 457; Wise v. First Nat. Bank of Greenville, 10 Ill. 2d 623, 627-628, 141 NE2d 1; Schroeder v. Benz, 9 Ill. 2d 589, 595, 138 NE2d 496; Halderman v. Halderman, 342 Ill. 550, 11 N.E. 526.
[6] Therefore, the presumption against partial intestacy, and the intended general scheme of distribution as found in express language of the will, are sufficient to support a finding that accumulation of income was authorized and that there was no intestacy as to undistributed income.
[7] Even were we to accept, arguendo, the proposition that no implication of a direction to accumulate income may properly control in Illinois, whether or not based on express language, the presence of a residuary clause and a named beneficiary thereof raises a further presumption. The direction to the Trustees in Paragraph 7(b), to "pay over to Michigan State ... the remaining principal and income of Trust `B' and the principal of Trust `A'" constituted a specific, express direction to accumulate undistributed income for the residuary beneficiary, and it is therefore presumed that the testator intended that beneficiary to take, rather than unspecified intestate beneficiaries. Schroeder v. Benz, 9 Ill. 2d 589, 593, 138 NE2d *157 496; Cahill v. Michael, 381 Ill. 395, 405, 45 NE2d 657; Strauss v. Strauss, 363 Ill. 442, 449, 2 NE2d 699.
[8] Plaintiff has cited many authorities which we feel are distinguishable as not directly applicable to the legal or construction problems of this particular will. Our situation in being called upon to construe a will was discussed in First Nat. Bank of Chicago v. Piaget, 2 Ill. App. 2d 207, 216-217, 119 NE2d 457:
"We have not undertaken to distinguish the other cases cited by the ... defendants. We have examined them and do not think they support their position. Comfort can always be found in the general language used by courts in the multitude of opinions written in will cases. Cases involving the construction of wills do not have the controlling force of precedent as in other cases. Cahill v. Michael, 381 Ill. 395, 45 NE2d 657; Sloan v. Beatty, 1 Ill. 2d 581, 590, 116 NE2d 375. It is recognized that wills are found in a great variety of forms and are executed under circumstances peculiar to each individual case. Walker v. Walker, 283 Ill. 11, 118 N.E. 1014; Smith v. Garber, 286 Ill. 67, 121 N.E. 173."
See also Halderman v. Halderman, 342 Ill. 550, 556, 11 N.E. 526; and Glaser v. Chicago Title & Trust Co., 393 Ill. 447, 456, 66 NE2d 410.
The judgment of the Circuit Court is affirmed.
Affirmed.
DRUCKER and McCORMICK, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Michigan State University is also a party to this appeal as a respondent-appellee seeking affirmance of the judgment.
[2]  Hampton v. Dill, 354 Ill. 415, 188 N.E. 419; Glaser v. Chicago Title & Trust Co., 393 Ill. 447, 66 NE2d 410; LaSalle Nat. Bank v. MacDonald, 2 Ill. 2d 581, 119 NE2d 266; Whitmore v. Starks, 17 Ill. 2d 202, 161 NE2d 254; Hart v. Hart, 316 Ill. App. 89, 43 NE2d 853.
[3]  Halderman v. Halderman, 342 Ill. 550, 556, 11 N.E. 526; Strauss v. Strauss, 363 Ill. 442, 447, 448, 2 NE2d 699; Scott v. Crumbaugh, 383 Ill. 144, 147, 48 NE2d 532; Golstein v. Handley, 390 Ill. 118, 121, 60 NE2d 851; Hayden v. McNamee, 392 Ill. 99, 105, 63 NE2d 876.

=== CASE 9740473 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:15.951634+00 ===

STEINMETZ, J.
(dissenting). The majority opinion does not recite whether the tribal authorities license drivers operating on the reservation roads and highways or whether such drivers are required to possess a State of Wisconsin operator’s license. Also left unanswered is if a *438tribal driver’s license is issued, is it valid on any highway other than those on the reservation ?
If the driver’s license of the tribal member, such as James A. Webster, is granted by the state as an operating privilege, then the balancing of the interest must be in favor of state enforcement. Unanswered is whether the tribal government can impose fines or penalties for a person’s violation of state motor vehicle laws.
Certainly, the state has a strong interest in the safety of its highways to all persons using them and, therefore, applying the balancing test of Rice v. Refiner, 103 S. Ct. 3291 (1983), I would reverse the trial court. The impact of jurisdiction over motor vehicle rules and regulations and, in particular, the licensing provisions, have an impact beyond the reservation boundaries. Persons other than Menominee tribe members use Highway 47. Many nonenrolled tribal members use it as a regular means of travel. After this decision of the majority, the state should post signs on Highway 47 at the borders of the reservation warning users that Wisconsin motor vehicle laws do not apply to members of the Menominee tribe while on the highway within the reservation.
Argument was made in this case that confusion of authorities would prevail among the federal government, tribal government and the state if state rules and regulations were applied to Highway 47. This does not seem evident since applying state motor vehicle rules and regulations to Highway 47, a state highway, to all persons using it would eliminate, not cause confusion.
There is a claim that this majority decision applies only to the Menominee reservation and enrolled members of the Menominee nation; however, the same criteria if present could be inferred to apply to all reservations. They are:
(1) No direct federal pre-emption;
*439(2) An established tribal government with its own set of rules and regulations which have been and are enforced ; and
(3) No paramount state interest or a presumption against state regulation.
Balancing the interests as provided for in Rice tip in favor of applying Wisconsin motor vehicle laws to all users of a state highway such as Highway 47, especially as they apply to operating privileges.
I would reverse.

=== CASE 9740474 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:18.172204+00 ===

WOLLMAN, Justice.
This is an appeal from a summary judgment dismissing an action to recover rent. We affirm.
Until early 1974, David H. Rankin, appellant, and J. Lee Rankin, his brother, owned ranch land in Stanley County as tenants in common. The Rankin family trust, of which J. Lee Rankin wás the trustee, also owned Stanley County land.
For some thirty years prior to 1974, appellant and J. Lee Rankin operated under an oral land exchange agreement with Donald Iversen, appellee, under which Iversen utilized the cotenancy Rankin land that lay within Iversen’s ranch unit, and appellant and J. Lee Rankin utilized an equivalent amount of land owned or leased by Iversen.
In early 1974, J. Lee Rankin sold the Rankin trust land and his interest in the cotenancy land to the Bad River Cattle Company. Appellant declined to sell his interest in the cotenancy land.
Shortly before this sale, appellant advised Iversen that if Iversen continued the land exchange agreement with Bad River Cattle Company, appellant would expect payment for his one-half interest in the cotenancy land.
Iversen continued to utilize the cotenancy land covered by the exchange agreement during the years 1974-1978. In April of 1978, Bad River Cattle Company and appellant partitioned the cotenancy property, with appellant becoming the sole owner of the property that had been covered by the exchange agreement with Iversen. Thereafter, appellant brought this action against Iversen to recover the reasonable rental value of appellant’s one-half interest in the cotenancy land for the years 1974-1977.
A lessee under a lease made by one cotenant alone becomes a cotenant with the non-leasing cotenant for the term of the lease. Because each cotenant is entitled to possession of the property, the non-leasing cotenant may not bring an action for ejectment against the lessee unless the latter has by some act ousted the former. Satterlee v. Umenthum, 47 S.D. 372, 198 N.W. 823 (1924).
As a general rule any of the cotenants may lease his undivided interest in the common property, either with or without the consent of the other cotenants, and by such lease, whether it be of the property generally, or specifically of his undivided interest, he will confer upon the lessee his full right to occupy and enjoy the premises. The lessee becomes, as against the lessor’s co-owners, equally entitled to the possession and use of the whole property, and becomes for the term of the lease substantially a tenant in common of the nonjoining owners.... In most jurisdictions the lessee does not become liable to pay the nonjoining owners rent, or anything as for the value of his use and occupation while they are not excluded.
20 Am.Jur.2d, Cotenancy and Joint Ownership § 101, p. 202 (1965) (footnotes omitted).
We agree with the trial court that on the basis of the showing made in opposition to the motion for summary judgment, there exists no genuine issue of fact on the question of ouster. Thus no cause of action lies to recover rent for appellant’s undivided interest in the property.* SDCL 15-6-56(c); Wilson v. Great Northern Railway Co. 83 S.D. 207, 157 N.W.2d 19 (1968).
The judgment is affirmed.
FOSHEIM, C.J., and DUNN and MORGAN, JJ., concur.
HENDERSON, J., concurs specially.
We note that counsel on appeal did not represent appellant in the trial court.

=== CASE 9740475 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:18.175869+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(concurring specially).
On the morning of trial, i.e., March 9, 1982, appellee filed a trial brief and orally *109moved for summary judgment. Appellant consented to such a hearing without any prior notice. A bench decision was then granted for summary judgment in favor of appellee, but terms were assessed against appellee. Some seventeen days passed and appellee served appellant with a proposed Order Granting Summary Judgment and Summary Judgment. Written objections were then filed and the trial court thereupon entered Summary Judgment on April 14, 1982. I find this procedure rather unusual.
No allegation was made in appellant’s complaint that he had been excluded from the property in. question or denied its peaceable enjoyment. This action was brought for damages and without such allegation no damages could flow. See 4 Thompson on Real Property, Cotenants’ Liability for Use and Occupation of Premises, § 1805, at 167 (1961). The pleading was fatal.
Thus, from the pleadings, and as a matter of law, appellee was entitled to summary judgment.

=== CASE 2223750 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:07.392534+00 ===

933 N.E.2d 432 (2010)
The NORTHERN TRUST COMPANY, as Co-guardian of the Estate of Benjamin Hayes, a Minor, and Michelle Hayes and Aaron Hayes, Indiv. and as Co-guardians of the Estate of Benjamin Hayes, a Minor, Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
BURANDT AND ARMBRUST, LLP, and Steven Armbrust, Defendants-Appellants.
No. 2-08-0193.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Second District.
July 27, 2010.
*435 James K. Horstman, Jennifer L. Tweeton, Cray, Huber, Horstman, Heil & VanAusdal LLC, Chicago, for Steven Armbrust M.D., Burandt & Armbrust, LLP.
Robert P. Sheridan, Keith A. Hebeisen, Clifford Law Offices, P.C., Chicago, for Estate of Benjamin Hayes, Aaron Hayes, Michelle Hayes, Northern Trust Company.
Justice BURKE delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiffs, the Northern Trust Company and Aaron and Michelle Hayes, the parents of Benjamin Hayes, filed this action alleging that defendant Dr. Steven Armbrust, a family practitioner with defendant Burandt & Armbrust, LLP, caused Benjamin to suffer neurological injuries at the time of his birth. Specifically, plaintiffs alleged that Dr. Armbrust negligently delayed the cesarean section delivery of Benjamin by (1) obtaining an operating room for Michelle too late and (2) failing to take steps to slow Michelle's contractions after Dr. Armbrust decided that a cesarean section was necessary.
Plaintiffs' theory is that Benjamin's injuries were caused by decreased oxygen flow, known as hypoxia or asphyxia. Before trial, plaintiffs successfully moved to bar defendants' expert witnesses from opining that Benjamin's injuries were caused by a preexisting infection. First, the defense experts concluded that the placenta and Michelle's amniotic cavity were infected and that the infection caused a "cascade of cytokines" that produced fetal inflammatory response syndrome (FIRS) in Benjamin, which caused his brain damage. Second, the defense experts opined that Benjamin himself was infected and that his body's response also caused brain damage. According to this infection-causation defense, Benjamin arrived at the hospital with the infection, and therefore Dr. Armbrust's actions did not proximately cause the injuries.
The trial court concluded that the defense experts relied on scientific principles and methodology that passed the "general *436 acceptance" test of Frye v. United States, 293 F. 1013 (D.C.Cir.1923), in that they had gained general acceptance in the medical field. Nevertheless, the court excluded the experts' opinions as too speculative because the medical records did not support them. A jury found defendants liable and awarded plaintiffs $12 million.
Defendants appeal, arguing that they are entitled to a new trial because (1) the trial court abused its discretion in barring the infection-causation defense and (2) the jury's verdict is against the manifest weight of the evidence. Plaintiffs respond that the infection-causation defense was properly excluded because (1) it is too speculative; (2) defendants' offer of proof was too voluminous and was introduced late, during jury deliberations; and (3) even if there was an evidentiary foundation to support the infection-causation defense, the theory failed to pass the Frye test of "general acceptance." Plaintiffs also argue that the jury's verdict is not against the manifest weight of the evidence.
We hold that the trial court correctly ruled that the infection-causation defense passed the Frye test but that the court abused its discretion in excluding all of the related evidence as speculative. The defense experts cited sufficient evidence to support their opinions such that it was an abuse of discretion to withhold the entire theory from the jury. Specifically, the court erred in excluding evidence of sepsis in Benjamin and of maternal infection, but the exclusion of evidence of meningitis in Benjamin was appropriate.
Defendants argue that they were entitled to a directed verdict at trial because "there was a total failure of proof on the element of proximate causation," but on appeal, defendants merely request a new trial rather than an outright reversal for the alleged failure of proof. Thus, defendants have forfeited any argument that they are entitled to a directed verdict. Forfeiture notwithstanding, we conclude that the jury heard sufficient evidence to support the judgment such that a directed verdict for defendants would have been inappropriate. Based on the evidentiary error, however, we reverse the judgment and remand the cause for a new trial.
FACTS
Benjamin suffers from cerebral palsy, and he was eight years old at the time of trial. Dr. Armbrust does not perform cesarean sections because, like most family practitioners, he does not have surgical privileges. Dr. Armbrust saw Michelle regularly for prenatal care as her family practitioner.
A. The Delivery
Early in the evening on December 22, 1999, Michelle went into labor and she went to Central Du Page Hospital (CDH) to deliver Benjamin. At 5 p.m., her membranes ruptured, and around 1 a.m. or 2 a.m. on December 23, 1999, Dr. Armbrust arrived at the hospital to monitor Michelle's progress. Dr. Armbrust ordered that Michelle be given Pitocin, a synthetic version of the hormone oxytocin, which is used to stimulate contractions. Michelle was completely dilated at 5:30 a.m. and began pushing around 6 a.m.
Michelle was administered an epidural to control the pain of her contractions. The Pitocin was turned off from 6 a.m. to 6:30 a.m. Michelle's contractions resumed within a half-hour of the Pitocin being restarted. Michelle's epidural was cut back around 7 a.m. so she could push better.
Just before 8 a.m., Dr. Armbrust brought Dr. Messitt, a physician specializing in obstetrics and gynecology with surgical privileges at CDH, to see Michelle and give a second opinion. Dr. Armbrust *437 was concerned about Michelle's progress and thought a cesarean section might be necessary. Dr. Messitt examined Michelle and opined that the best course was to allow her to continue pushing for another hour and a half, with the epidural turned down, after which they would reassess the need for a cesarean section. Benjamin was in the undesirable "right occiput posterior position," which means that his head was facing up, but Dr. Messitt felt that this would not make the labor more complicated because the head usually rotates downward in the last phase of labor. Dr. Messitt reviewed fetal monitors that showed that Benjamin had a couple of decelerations of his heart rate, but Dr. Messitt believed those had cleared.
Around 8:30 a.m., Michelle developed a fever of 100.3 degrees. Dr. Armbrust testified that, around 8:40 a.m., he decided to go forward with the cesarean section because of his concern about the fever. Dr. Armbrust told the charge nurse that he wanted an operating room "now," but he was told that no room was ready.
A cesarean section could be performed in operating room 14, 15, or 16, all of which were near Michelle's room. The labor and delivery area was in charge of room 16, which was generally reserved for cesarean sections. To schedule a cesarean section in room 14 or 15, the labor and delivery charge nurse must contact the operations leader in charge of the "Inner Core." The "Inner Core" refers to the entrance to the sterile area around operating rooms 14 and 15. Then the operations leader would contact an anesthesiologist and other necessary staff for the operating room. Once in a while, a doctor might contact the Inner Core directly to obtain an operating room, but those rare cases involve surgeons with surgical privileges. Beginning at 7:55 a.m., there was already a cesarean section taking place in room 16, but operating rooms 14 and 15 were open.
Carol Rimdzius was the labor and delivery charge nurse on duty on the morning of December 23, 1999. Nurse Rimdzius testified that she specifically remembered Dr. Armbrust telling her that he wanted to schedule a cesarean section and that room 16 was occupied with a cesarian section. Nurse Rimdzius testified that, in 1999, if room 16 was occupied and somebody requested a room for an emergency cesarean section, she would first need to "find out if it was by 1999's definition of an emergency, something that had to be done immediately or was it something that could wait." If the cesarean section was not an emergency, she would wait for room 16 to open rather than call the Inner Core to ask for another room. In 1999, "emergency" was defined as a life-threatening crash, with impending potential death. In a situation less serious than a "crash emergency" and more serious than a "can wait" situation, Nurse Rimdzius's decision would depend on what the doctor told her. About 20 minutes passed from when Dr. Armbrust first told her he wanted a room for a cesarean section to when Benjamin crashed. Someone from the nurses' station first contacted the Inner Core after Nurse Rimdzius knew Benjamin had crashed. She testified that, even if she had been told it was an "emergency" at 8:40 or 9 a.m., she would not have done anything differently because there had not been a crash at that time. Nurse Rimdzius testified that she would contact the Inner Core only if the situation was a "true c-section emergency with risk of death for the baby" and that she was aware that Dr. Armbrust wanted the room "urgently" and "as soon as possible."
Dr. Armbrust testified that he did not recall any previous situation where he was unable to get an operating room when he *438 wanted one. He testified that he told Nurse Rimdzius that he wanted a room "now" but that he did not describe the situation as an emergency because Benjamin had not crashed. Nurse Rimdzius testified that she asked Dr. Armbrust if it was an emergency, told him that room 16 was in use, and asked him if it was something that could wait. Nurse Rimdzius testified that Dr. Armbrust replied that he could wait but that he did not want to "dilly dally," so she told him she would tell the people using room 16 that a cesarean section was waiting and the room should be prepared as soon as they finished. Nurse Rimdzius admitted that she did not try to find out whether another operating room was available.
Dr. Armbrust testified that, for the 40 minutes from when he decided to proceed with the cesarean section to when it began, he traveled back and forth from Michelle's room to the nurses' station to ask for an operating room every three minutes. The nurses' station was near Michelle's room. Dr. Armbrust testified that he was concerned about Benjamin's heart rate from 9:03 and 9:07 a.m., but he was unaware that an operating room was available. Because he believed there was no operating room available, Dr. Armbrust continued to tell Michelle to push during contractions, even though he had decided to proceed with the cesarean section.
Dr. Messitt testified that Dr. Armbrust called him around 8:35 a.m. and told him that Michelle had a fever of 100 degrees and was not making any further progress. Dr. Messitt testified that he told Dr. Armbrust to tell the nursing supervisor to prepare an operating room for a cesarean section and then he went to the nurses' station. At the nurses' station, Dr. Messitt was told that they were "getting the room ready." Drs. Armbrust and Messitt testified that they told the charge nurse that they needed an operating room "as soon as possible." Dr. Messitt testified that he stood at the nurses' station so he could monitor the baby's heart rate.
Aaron and Michelle testified that they saw Dr. Armbrust walking back and forth from Michelle's room to the nurses' station across the hall as he and Dr. Messitt tried to convey the urgency of getting an operating room. Dr. Armbrust told them that he wanted to perform a cesarean section but that he could not get an operating room. Michelle continued to receive two milliunits of Pitocin, which is a very small dose, while they waited for the operating room to become available. Michelle also received Mefoxin, an antibiotic, at 9:10 a.m. to treat her fever.
Nurse Carol Sue Borowski was a registered nurse who worked with Michelle at CDH from 7 a.m. until she delivered. Nurse Borowski testified that she had no independent recollection of any of the events of December 23, 1999, but according to the medical charts, Michelle received two milliunits of Pitocin between 7:15 a.m. and 8:45 a.m. Nurse Borowski testified that Dr. Armbrust may have told her to turn off the Pitocin before Benjamin crashed, but she could not recall.
Dr. Armbrust's notes indicated that he had told a nurse to stop administering Pitocin, although there was no written order to that effect. He testified that the order to discontinue the Pitocin did not need to be in writing to be effective and that physicians do not usually follow nurses around to confirm that orders are carried out. Dr. Armbrust testified that he told the nurse to discontinue the Pitocin when he decided to proceed with the cesarean section, but that he later discovered that the Pitocin had not been discontinued and that Michelle was still receiving it while he walked back and forth between the nurses' station and Michelle's room. *439 Aaron testified that Dr. Armbrust told the nurses several times to turn off the Pitocin and that Dr. Armbrust eventually did so himself.
At 9:21 a.m., Benjamin's fetal heart rate dropped from 180 to 60 beats per minute. The drop to 60 beats per minute was a "crash." Dr. Armbrust had instructed Michelle to continue pushing until a few minutes before the crash, at which point he instructed her to stop pushing. Dr. Armbrust testified that it is basically impossible to tell a woman in the middle of a contraction not to push, and because he could not get an operating room, he hoped the pushing would turn the baby since the epidural had worn off.
The crash prompted Dr. Armbrust to run to get an operating room as quickly as possible. Michelle testified that she tried not to push for a couple of minutes but then she felt a "blinding pain" and all of a sudden people were grabbing things and rushing her out the door. When the monitors sounded the alarm that Benjamin's heart rate had dropped, Nurse Borowski and Dr. Armbrust started gathering Michelle's equipment and they pushed her bed down the hall. Dr. Armbrust testified that he had "no idea where [he] was going," and that he just pushed Michelle's bed into the first available operating room. Someone told Dr. Armbrust he could not go in the room, but he pushed past saying, "we're coming in now, we have to get this baby out." The anesthesiologist was prepared to restart the epidural but Dr. Armbrust instructed the anesthesiologist to put Michelle to sleep to get the baby out as quickly as possible. At that time, Dr. Messitt was in the hall at the nurses' station. Dr. Messitt "scrubbed in" and delivered Benjamin via cesarean section at 9:38 a.m., which was 17 minutes after the crash.
After the delivery, Benjamin was in the neonatal intensive care unit (ICU) and was on a ventilator for breathing for one week. Benjamin spent 14 days in the hospital. Some time after the delivery, Dr. Armbrust expressed his frustration at the hospital for not giving him an operating room sooner.
B. Plaintiffs' Medical Experts
1. Dr. Carl Hunt
Dr. Hunt, a pediatrician and neonatologist, opined that Benjamin's cerebral palsy was caused by a "hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy," which is a brain injury caused by a lack of oxygen. Dr. Hunt opined that Benjamin suffered from meconium aspiration syndrome (MAS), which is fetal fecal matter in the lungs, which hurt Benjamin's respiration initially but did not cause long-term effects. Dr. Hunt based his opinions on Benjamin's arterial blood gases, which indicated severe acidosis, as well as Benjamin's reduced heart rate and breathing rate immediately after birth, his Apgar score, and the seizures he suffered within four hours after birth.
2. Dr. Sander Alan Kushner
Dr. Kushner, a family medicine practitioner, testified to the standard of care that Dr. Armbrust owed plaintiffs. Dr. Kushner testified that Dr. Armbrust did not meet the standard of care when he failed to ensure that Benjamin was delivered by cesarean section before the crash and failed to have the Pitocin and pushing discontinued when he decided a cesarean section was necessary. According to Dr. Kushner, the fetal monitor strips put Dr. Armbrust on notice that the baby's heartbeat had a problem beginning at 8 a.m. Dr. Kushner agreed with Dr. Armbrust's assessment that a cesarean section was indicated at 8:40 a.m., but he opined that waiting for the room and telling the nurse he wanted a room "ASAP" was not within the standard of care.
*440 Dr. Kushner opined that Benjamin's respiratory distress at birth resulted from umbilical cord compression and that the Pitocin and the pushing put pressure on the cord, preventing blood from flowing from the placenta to the baby. Dr. Kushner testified that even a small dose of Pitocin stimulates the uterus to contract. On cross-examination, Dr. Kushner opined that Benjamin's chances would have been better if he had been delivered between 9 a.m. and 9:10 a.m. If Benjamin had been delivered before he crashed, his disabilities would have been avoided or lessened. Dr. Kushner testified that, to meet the appropriate standard of care, Dr. Armbrust should have told the labor and delivery charge nurse that the cesarean section needed to be done "now, as soon as possible," to communicate the "true urgency" of the situation.
3. Dr. John Elliot
Dr. Elliot, an expert in obstetrics and high-risk obstetrics, testified to the cause of Benjamin's condition. Dr. Elliot testified that the cause of the brain damage and resulting cerebral palsy was umbilical cord compression and uterine hyperstimulation, which caused the crash and subsequent bradycardia, or reduced heart rate. Dr. Elliot testified that Benjamin's brain injuries began at the time of the crash and continued until he was resuscitated.
Dr. Elliot opined that the oxygen delivery to Benjamin was affected by uterine hyperstimulation, or contractions coming too quickly, beginning at 8:14 a.m. on December 23, 1999. According to Dr. Elliot, uterine hyperstimulation can be caused by as little as two milliunits of Pitocin. Dr. Elliot also testified that the fetal monitor strips showed periods of hypoxia, or lack of oxygen, from 6:10 a.m. to 9:21 a.m. and that the baby's positioning during labor would make delivery more difficult. A higher dose of Pitocin is more likely to cause uterine hyperstimulation than a low dose. Dr. Elliot opined that Pitocin must have been the cause of the contractions because the contractions stopped when the Pitocin was switched off between 6 a.m. and 7:40 a.m. and then resumed almost immediately after the Pitocin was restarted. Dr. Elliot testified that the brain damage occurred between the time of the crash and the time of the delivery.
On cross-examination, Dr. Elliot testified that, if Benjamin had been delivered within six to eight minutes after the crash, he would have been fine. Dr. Elliot also testified that there is a relationship between the amount of Pitocin and the risk of hyperstimulation, but that hyperstimulation can occur in the absence of Pitocin, in response to the mother's own hormones.
4. Drs. Yarkony and Linke
Drs. Yarkony and Linke testified for the purpose of establishing the dollar amount of damages arising from Benjamin's cerebral palsy. Dr. Yarkony, a specialist in rehabilitative medicine, prepared a comprehensive "Life Care Plan" that outlined the medical treatment, therapy, and care Benjamin would need for the rest of his life. Dr. Linke, an economist, determined a present value of the predicted future medical costs and therapies, as well as lost income.
5. Dr. Adrian Upton
Dr. Upton, a physician and neurologist, testified that the damage to Benjamin's brain was consistent with a severe hypoxic ischemic injury, which results from low blood flow or low oxygen, that occurred within 15 minutes before Benjamin's delivery.
C. Defendants' Medical Experts
1. Drs. Messitt and Armbrust
Dr. Messitt testified to the appropriate standard of care of a reasonable physician. *441 Dr. Messitt testified that when Dr. Armbrust determined that a cesarean section was necessary he did everything he possibly could have done to move it forward. Dr. Armbrust could not get the operating room ready himself or call the anesthesiologist because those things should have happened automatically when Dr. Armbrust called for a cesarean section. Dr. Messitt also testified that it was reasonable to keep the Pitocin running and to have Michelle keep pushing for one last chance for the baby to progress. Dr. Messitt explained that neither he nor Dr. Armbrust could get an operating room sooner because the nursing supervisors controlled the rooms. Dr. Messitt testified that it takes half an hour for Pitocin to stop having an effect and that the onset of fetal distress was acute and abrupt at 9:21 a.m. and there was nothing on the fetal monitor strips before that time to indicate the baby was not tolerating labor well. Dr. Armbrust testified consistently with Dr. Messitt, stating that he did everything he could have done to get the operating room before the crash occurred.
2. Dr. Loafman
Dr. Loafman, a family practitioner with surgical privileges, testified to the appropriate standard of care and to the cause of the injuries. Dr. Loafman opined that Dr. Armbrust complied with the standard of care in all aspects of his care of Michelle and Benjamin on December 23, 1999. A cesarean section was indicated at 9:10 a.m., but it was not "absolutely indicated" until 9:21 a.m., because the monitors showed no evidence of fetal distress before then.
Dr. Loafman testified that Dr. Armbrust asking for the room "ASAP" and continuing to try to deliver the baby while waiting for the operating room were appropriate responses to the situation. According to Dr. Loafman, the standard of care did not require Dr. Armbrust to navigate the system because delivering the baby was a "team effort" and the family practitioner's duty was limited to requesting the room. Dr. Loafman also testified that continuing the Pitocin and the pushing while trying to get the room was within the standard of care because two milliunits is a very low dose and the baby still could have turned and moved out when there was no indication of fetal distress. The effects of the Pitocin continue for awhile after it is turned off.
Dr. Loafman testified that there was nothing on the fetal monitors that would have made a doctor suspect that a crash was imminent. The force of the labor did not cause Benjamin's cerebral palsy or the crash, because if asphyxia, or hypoxia, had caused the crash, there would have been evidence of acidosis on the fetal monitors before the delivery, and there was no such evidence.
ANALYSIS
On appeal, defendants argue that they are entitled to a new trial because (1) the trial court abused its discretion in excluding expert medical opinions that a preexisting infection caused the injury and (2) the jury's verdict is against the manifest weight of the evidence. Plaintiffs respond that the infection-causation defense was properly excluded because (1) it is too speculative; (2) defendants' offer of proof was too voluminous and was late, as it was introduced during jury deliberations; and (3) even if there was an evidentiary foundation to support the infection-causation defense, the theory failed to pass the Frye test of "general acceptance." Plaintiffs also argue that the jury's verdict is not against the manifest weight of the evidence.
A trial court's ruling regarding the admissibility of an expert's opinion will be reversed only when the error was prejudicial *442 or the result of the trial was materially affected. Scassifero v. Glaser, 333 Ill. App.3d 846, 852, 267 Ill.Dec. 487, 776 N.E.2d 859 (2002). For the following reasons, we hold that (1) the infection-causation defense passed the general-acceptance test of Frye; (2) the trial court abused its discretion in excluding the defense; and (3) defendants made an adequate offer of proof to preserve the issue for this appeal. The erroneous exclusion of the infection-causation defense prejudiced defendants' case and materially affected the trial, and therefore we grant defendants their requested relief of a new trial. See Turner v. Williams, 326 Ill.App.3d 541, 555, 260 Ill.Dec. 804, 762 N.E.2d 70 (2001).
On appeal, defendants also argue that they were entitled to a directed verdict at trial because "there was a total failure of proof on the element of proximate causation," but defendants do not request the judgment's outright reversal based on the alleged insufficiency of the evidence. Defendants' prayer for relief in their appellate brief states, "the verdict in favor of plaintiffs was against the manifest weight of the evidence. The verdict with respect to the element of proximate causation is contrary to the great weight of evidence. Therefore, defendants are entitled to a new trial." We conclude that defendants have forfeited in their brief any argument that we must reverse the judgment for insufficient evidence and grant them a directed verdict. See 210 Ill. 2d R. 341(h)(7) ("Points not argued are waived and shall not be raised in the reply brief, in oral argument, or on petition for rehearing"). However, defendants' notice of appeal asks us to "vacate or reverse the judgment, to enter judgment notwithstanding the verdict in their favor, * * * and to grant any other relief warranted by the applicable law and record on appeal." Because a notice of appeal is to be construed liberally (Burtell v. First Charter Service Corp., 76 Ill.2d 427, 433-34, 31 Ill.Dec. 178, 394 N.E.2d 380 (1979)), we consider defendants' alternative argument that they are entitled to a directed verdict or a judgment n.o.v.
A. The Excluded Testimony
Defendants argue that the trial court committed reversible error in barring them from introducing evidence to show that Benjamin's injury was caused by a group beta strep (GBS) bacterial infection, a preexisting condition, rather than by hypoxia. Defendants argue that they were so prejudiced by the error that a new trial is required.
1. Dr. Michael Radetsky
Dr. Radetsky, a specialist in pediatric infectious diseases, opined that Benjamin acquired a GBS infection while in the womb and that the infection continued after birth. Benjamin had sepsis, as shown by his positive blood culture, his depressed state at birth, seizures, and white blood cell ratios evincing an inflammatory reaction. Sepsis is the presence of bacteria in the blood with serious clinical disease, or the presence of bacteria plus symptoms of infection. In response to the GBS infection, cytokines were involved in causing Benjamin's brain to become inflamed. Cytokines are molecules that facilitate cellular communication, and the infection triggered the release of the cytokines. The brain damage occurred as Benjamin's body responded to the infection. Benjamin was directly infected with GBS, and he also likely had meningitis.
Moreover, Michelle had developed chorioamnionitis at the time of the delivery, as shown by a clinical evaluation and an infection found in the umbilical cord. Chorioamnionitis is an inflammation in the amniotic cavity, including the placenta and amniotic fluid. The infection caused Michelle *443 to develop funisitis, which is an inflammation of the membranes of the umbilical cord in response to germs. Dr. Radetsky based his opinions, in part, on specific articles regarding chemical mediators of inflammation.
2. Dr. Rebecca Baergen
Dr. Baergen, a board-certified anatomical and clinical pathologist, opined that Benjamin's intrauterine environment was infected. Dr. Baergen would testify that microscopic examination of placental tissue slides revealed bacteria. After observing inflammation in the placenta and umbilical cord and comparing the finding with the records, including Benjamin's blood culture, she opined that Benjamin's infection and subsequent brain injuries were caused by GBS in utero that had been present for at least two days before the delivery. Michelle's chorioamnionitis and funisitis caused the infection. Dr. Baergen also opined that cytokines were present, though she could not say if they actually caused the brain injuries. Dr. Baergen stated that the presence of maternal fever is one of the signs and symptoms used by clinicians to diagnose acute chorioamnionitis. Her review of the placental slides showed acute chorioamnionitis. Dr. Baergen stated, based on her knowledge of the literature on the topic, that the risk for brain damage increases seven to nine times with acute chorioamnionitis. Dr. Baergen's opinions were based, in part, on her experience and training, including five years of training with Dr. Benierschke, a world-renowned expert in placental pathology.
3. Dr. Jeremy Marks
Dr. Marks, a board-certified neonatologist, opined that Benjamin's cerebral palsy was caused by FIRS, sepsis, and possibly meningitis. Regarding sepsis and meningitis, Dr. Marks believed that, at the time of Benjamin's birth, two potential diagnoses and courses of care were equally possible. First, one could accept Benjamin's negative cerebrospinal fluid culture as being accurate and exclude meningitis as a possible cause and treat the GBS sepsis. Alternatively, one could disregard the negative spinal culture as inaccurate because such tests are "notoriously unreliable" and presumptively treat the baby for meningitis. Meningitis can injure white matter in the brain and possibly the basal ganglia. Generally, injury to white matter could result from other causes, but not in this case.
But for the GBS, Benjamin would not have been injured. Dr. Marks and Dr. Radetsky shared essentially the same opinion, except that Dr. Radetsky did not rely as heavily on the FIRS theory. Dr. Marks opined that maternal infections, like Michelle's, could produce inflammatory cytokines that could lead to cerebral palsy. Dr. Marks based his opinions, in part, on his familiarity with literature, including a publication called "the Green Book," entitled Neonatal Encephalopathy and Cerebral Palsy.
4. Dr. Messitt
Dr. Messitt testified in his deposition that Michelle's fever represented a GBS infection, and he opined that the GBS infection caused the crash.
5. Dr. Loafman
Dr. Loafman testified in his deposition that Michelle had chorioamnionitis, based upon the funisitis. Dr. Loafman concluded that Benjamin was "profoundly septic" at birth and that sepsis is a more likely explanation for Benjamin's brain damage than the short period of bradycardia, or a drop in heart rate from 160 to 110 beats per minute.
6. Dr. Jessica Corsino
Dr. Corsino, Benjamin's neonatologist, explained why a second blood culture, taken four days after Benjamin had been *444 receiving intravenous antibiotics, could have been negative even though he had a GBS infection at the time he was born. Dr. Corsino concluded that the positive blood culture conclusively meant that Benjamin had bacteremia because bacteremia and sepsis both describe bacteria in the blood. Sepsis is simply bacteremia accompanied by clinical symptoms. Dr. Corsino opined that when a baby is treated with antibiotics for 48 to 72 hours, as Benjamin was treated, subsequent blood cultures will be negative if the antibiotics work. In fact, the reason for follow-up blood cultures is to ascertain the efficacy of the antibiotics. Dr. Corsino emphatically stated that a blood culture for GBS cannot be falsely positive and, therefore, a single positive blood test can be conclusive of a true infection.
B. The Trial Court's Ruling
The trial court found that "the defense has met its burden of showing that the methodology employed by its retained experts that forms the basis of their ultimate conclusion that infection, including a cascade of cytokines, is a potential cause of the plaintiff's cerebral palsy; that this is generally accepted by the scientific community." Nevertheless, the court concluded that the evidence must be excluded because the experts' opinions were based on speculation and conjecture. The court found that there was an inadequate foundation of evidence to support the ultimate conclusion that the cerebral palsy was caused by an infectious process or a release of inflammatory cytokines. Specifically, the court emphasized that (1) no bacteria was found in Benjamin's cerebral spinal fluid to show that he had meningitis; (2) a single positive blood culture does not confirm sepsis, by any scientific tests or literature; and (3) no cultures from the placenta or the surrounding structures were taken and, therefore, no GBS was detected.
C. Legal Standards
Initially, defendants argued that the exclusion of their infection-causation defense amounted to a directed verdict for plaintiffs. However, defendants conceded at oral argumentand we agreethat the exclusion of the infection-causation defense did not amount to a directed verdict for plaintiffs. In a negligence action, the plaintiff must provide sufficient facts showing the existence of a duty owed by the defendant, a breach of that duty, and an injury proximately resulting from the breach. Klitzka v. Hellios, 348 Ill.App.3d 594, 596, 284 Ill.Dec. 599, 810 N.E.2d 252 (2004). By excluding the infection-causation defense, the trial court did not enter a finding for plaintiffs on each of the elements of negligence. Plaintiffs still were required to prove to the jury that defendants owed a duty, breached that duty, and by that breach proximately caused the injury. The evidentiary ruling did not rise to the level of a directed verdict simply because the decision smoothed the path for plaintiffs to make their case.
It is well settled that the decision to admit or exclude expert testimony is within the sound discretion of the trial court. Thompson v. Gordon, 221 Ill.2d 414, 428, 303 Ill.Dec. 806, 851 N.E.2d 1231 (2006). A person may testify as an expert if his experience and qualifications afford him knowledge that is not common to laypersons and if his testimony will aid the trier of fact in reaching its conclusions. Thompson, 221 Ill.2d at 428, 303 Ill.Dec. 806, 851 N.E.2d 1231. "`There is no predetermined formula for how an expert acquires specialized knowledge or experience and the expert can gain such through practical experience, scientific study, education, training or research.'" Thompson, 221 Ill.2d at 428-29, 303 Ill.Dec. 806, 851 N.E.2d 1231, quoting People v. Miller, 173 *445 Ill.2d 167, 186, 219 Ill.Dec. 43, 670 N.E.2d 721 (1996). "Thus, `[f]ormal academic training or specific degrees are not required to qualify a person as an expert; practical experience in a field may serve just as well to qualify him.'" Thompson, 221 Ill.2d at 429, 303 Ill.Dec. 806, 851 N.E.2d 1231, quoting Lee v. Chicago Transit Authority, 152 Ill.2d 432, 459, 178 Ill. Dec. 699, 605 N.E.2d 493 (1992). To testify, an expert need only have knowledge and experience beyond that of an average citizen. Thompson, 221 Ill.2d at 429, 303 Ill.Dec. 806, 851 N.E.2d 1231. "Expert testimony, then, is admissible `if the proffered expert is qualified by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education, and the testimony will assist the trier of fact in understanding the evidence.'" Thompson, 221 Ill.2d at 429, 303 Ill.Dec. 806, 851 N.E.2d 1231, quoting Snelson v. Kamm, 204 Ill.2d 1, 24, 272 Ill.Dec. 610, 787 N.E.2d 796 (2003).
Plaintiffs do not challenge the credentials of defendants' expert witnesses. Instead, plaintiffs challenge (1) the science underlying the opinions and (2) the sufficiency of the evidence relied upon for those opinions. In Illinois, the admission of expert testimony is governed by the standard first expressed in Frye. Donaldson v. Central Illinois Public Service Co., 199 Ill.2d 63, 76-77, 262 Ill.Dec. 854, 767 N.E.2d 314 (2002), overruled on other grounds, In re Commitment of Simons, 213 Ill.2d 523, 290 Ill.Dec. 610, 821 N.E.2d 1184 (2004). Commonly called the "general acceptance" test, the Frye standard dictates that scientific evidence is admissible at trial only if the methodology or scientific principle upon which the opinion is based is "sufficiently established to have gained general acceptance in the particular field in which it belongs." Frye, 293 F. at 1014. In this context, "general acceptance" does not mean universal acceptance, and it does not require that the methodology in question be accepted by unanimity, consensus, or even a majority of experts. Donaldson, 199 Ill.2d at 78, 262 Ill.Dec. 854, 767 N.E.2d 314. Instead, evidence meets the Frye standard if the underlying method used to generate an expert's opinion is reasonably relied upon by experts in the relevant field. Donaldson, 199 Ill.2d at 77, 262 Ill.Dec. 854, 767 N.E.2d 314. Significantly, the Frye test applies only to "new" or "novel" scientific methodologies. Donaldson, 199 Ill.2d at 78-79, 262 Ill.Dec. 854, 767 N.E.2d 314. Generally, a scientific methodology is considered "new" or "novel" if it is "`original or striking'" or "does `not resembl[e] something formerly known or used.'" Donaldson, 199 Ill.2d at 79, 262 Ill.Dec. 854, 767 N.E.2d 314, quoting Webster's Third New International Dictionary 1546 (1993).
The decision as to whether an expert scientific witness is qualified to testify in a subject area, and whether the proffered testimony is relevant in a particular case, remains in the sound discretion of the trial court. Simons, 213 Ill.2d at 530-31, 290 Ill.Dec. 610, 821 N.E.2d 1184. The trial court's Frye analysis, however, is subject to de novo review, in which the reviewing court may consider not only the trial court record but also, where appropriate, sources outside the record, including legal and scientific articles, as well as court opinions from other jurisdictions. Simons, 213 Ill.2d at 531, 290 Ill.Dec. 610, 821 N.E.2d 1184.
In Simons, our supreme court plainly stated that "[u]nder the Frye standard, the trial court is not asked to determine the validity of a particular scientific technique." Simons, 213 Ill.2d at 532, 290 Ill.Dec. 610, 821 N.E.2d 1184. In Donaldson, the supreme court held, "[t]he trial court is not required to conduct a two-part inquiry into both the reliability of the *446 methodology and its general acceptance." Donaldson, 199 Ill.2d at 81, 262 Ill.Dec. 854, 767 N.E.2d 314. Indeed, the Donaldson court explained that "[t]he determination of the reliability of an expert's methodology is naturally subsumed by the inquiry into its general acceptance in the scientific community." Donaldson, 199 Ill.2d at 81, 262 Ill.Dec. 854, 767 N.E.2d 314. In other words, once it is determined that a methodology is generally accepted, it follows that it has achieved a sufficient degree of reliability and validity to cross the threshold of admissibility. This is not to say, of course, that an opposing litigant cannot question at trial the reliability or validity of a methodology. In re Commitment of Sandry, 367 Ill. App.3d 949, 966, 306 Ill.Dec. 202, 857 N.E.2d 295 (2006).
In Simons, the supreme court set forth one additional requirement for admissibility under Frye: an expert's reliance on a particular methodology must be reasonable. Simons, 213 Ill.2d at 530, 290 Ill.Dec. 610, 821 N.E.2d 1184, citing Donaldson, 199 Ill.2d at 77, 262 Ill.Dec. 854, 767 N.E.2d 314. "Reasonable" obviously cannot mandate an inquiry into "validity" or "reliability," because Simons and Donaldson exclude those things. Sandry, 367 Ill.App.3d at 966, 306 Ill.Dec. 202, 857 N.E.2d 295. Thus, the question of whether an expert's reliance on the challenged methodology is reasonable constitutes a rather low standard. "Without inquiring into the validity or reliability of a particular methodology, our analysis appears to be limited to whether there is some rational basisnot necessarily a correct basisfor an expert to rely upon it, guided largely by common sense." Sandry, 367 Ill. App.3d at 966, 306 Ill.Dec. 202, 857 N.E.2d 295.
1. Frye
In their brief, plaintiffs argue that the trial court denied them a Frye hearing on the admissibility of the infection-causation defense. However, at oral argument, plaintiffs' counsel acknowledged that the proceedings in the trial court were sufficient under Frye. Indeed, the trial court heard testimony and reviewed voluminous scientific literature submitted by the parties before determining that the defense theory was based on generally accepted science.
Further, the record supports the trial court's determination that the defense experts' methodology passes the Frye test of general acceptance. Plaintiffs admit in their brief that their own scientific literature indicates that chorioamnionitis is "associated with" or "increases the risk" of brain injury, as defendants' experts opined. However, plaintiffs argue that the defense theory fails the Frye test because (1) plaintiffs' literature does not go as far as stating that chorioamnionitis "causes" brain injuries like Benjamin's, (2) plaintiffs' literature shows that the infection-causation theory is "complex and not completely understood"; and (3) plaintiffs' literature shows that there are "too few" studies to identify a causal relationship between "specific lesions" and cerebral palsy. Plaintiffs attempt to elevate the Frye standard to requiring unanimity, which is beyond any supreme court holding. Defendants introduced numerous experts who cited specific scientific literature when concluding that the clinical observations supported the infection-causation defense. "General acceptance" does not mean universal acceptance, and it does not require that the methodology in question be accepted by unanimity, consensus, or even a majority of experts. See Donaldson, 199 Ill.2d at 78, 262 Ill.Dec. 854, 767 N.E.2d 314. Defendants' evidence meets *447 the Frye standard because defendants' experts reasonably relied on methods generally accepted in the relevant field. See Donaldson, 199 Ill.2d at 77, 262 Ill.Dec. 854, 767 N.E.2d 314. Moreover, the relative complexity and novelty of the subject matter are irrelevant, as Frye applies only to "new" or "novel" scientific methodologies. See Donaldson, 199 Ill.2d at 78-79, 262 Ill.Dec. 854, 767 N.E.2d 314. Plaintiffs' Frye challenge is really an argument that their evidence outweighs defendants' evidence and that, therefore, defendants' evidence should be excluded. Such a position has no support in the law or the facts of this case.
2. Admissibility of Infection-Causation Defense
The parties disagree about how passing the Frye test of general acceptance affects the admissibility of the infection-causation defense. The gist of defendants' position is that, once the trial court determined that the defense experts relied on a methodology that met the Frye standard of general acceptance, the court was required to admit the evidence and to let the jury weigh the evidence. In response, plaintiffs quote Ruffin v. Boler, 384 Ill.App.3d 7, 18, 322 Ill.Dec. 255, 890 N.E.2d 1174 (2008), for the proposition that "`[b]efore expert testimony will be admitted at trial, the proponent of the evidence must persuade the trial court to make three preliminary determinations: (1) the witness may be of assistance to the trier of fact; (2) the witness is qualified to give the testimony sought; and (3) the testimony sought is supported by adequate facts, data, or opinions.'" We agree with plaintiffs.
Expert opinions are offered routinely without Frye objections because the subject matter involves science and methodology that are generally, or even universally, accepted. If we were to accept defendants' proposal that all evidence passing the Frye test is admissible, no expert opinion involving well-settled principles could be excluded, regardless of the paucity of evidence to support the opinion. The supreme court did not intend such an absurd result. We agree with plaintiffs that a Frye determination is a threshold matter and that opinion evidence surviving a Frye challenge may nevertheless be excluded if it lacks an evidentiary foundation.
That said, we conclude that the trial court abused its discretion in excluding the infection-causation defense as speculative, i.e., in finding that it was not supported by adequate facts, data, or opinions. The trial court emphasized that (1) no bacteria was found in Benjamin's cerebral spinal fluid, which would have shown that he had meningitis; (2) the single blood culture testing positive for bacteria was "not confirmatory of sepsis by any scientific tests or literature"; and (3) no cultures from the placenta or the surrounding structures were taken and, therefore, no GBS bacteria were found.
However, the clinical evidence, when viewed as a whole, reasonably supports the defense experts' medical opinions. The defense experts opined that the presence of infection, which was indicated by Benjamin's positive blood culture at birth, was corroborated by the following objective indicators: (1) bacteria consistent with GBS was found on the fetal membranes covering the placenta as well as the amniotic cavity; (2) funisitis, the inflammation of the umbilical cord, indicated an ascending infection; (3) maternal fever; (4) Benjamin's depressed state at birth, seizures, and white blood cell ratios indicating an inflammatory reaction; (5) clinical signs of sepsis, including pulmonary hypertension, irritability, and hypoxia; (6) Benjamin's automated differential white blood cell *448 count; (7) Benjamin's manual differential white blood cell count; and (8) Benjamin's need for ventilation for seven days.
Plaintiffs rely on Simers v. Bickers, 260 Ill.App.3d 406, 198 Ill.Dec. 160, 632 N.E.2d 219 (1994), in arguing that the trial court properly excluded the infection-causation defense as speculative. In Simers, the plaintiff sued an optometrist when she received eye injuries from contact lenses fitted by the optometrist. The defense expert opined that the plaintiff's eyes were injured from bacteria that formed because the plaintiff failed to clean her lenses. The expert stated that he had to "`surmise'" the cause of the infection based upon all of the available evidence, because a culture of the solutions used was never taken. Simers, 260 Ill.App.3d at 412, 198 Ill.Dec. 160, 632 N.E.2d 219. The court described the testimony as conjecture, which it defined as "a conclusion based on assumption not in evidence or contradicted by the evidence." Simers, 260 Ill.App.3d at 412, 198 Ill.Dec. 160, 632 N.E.2d 219, citing Nelson v. Speed Fastener, Inc., 101 Ill.App.3d 539, 56 Ill.Dec. 903, 428 N.E.2d 495 (1981). Although several physicians inferred that bacteria somehow entered the cornea or eye surface by way of the cleansing process, "there exist[ed] no factual, scientific, or expert evidence to support this." Simers, 260 Ill.App.3d at 412, 198 Ill.Dec. 160, 632 N.E.2d 219. The court held that the expert's testimony that the plaintiff's eyes were infected due to her own lack of proper cleaning was mere conjecture and should have been stricken. Simers, 260 Ill.App.3d at 413, 198 Ill.Dec. 160, 632 N.E.2d 219.
This case is factually distinguishable in that there was some evidence to support the defense experts' opinions. Dr. Corsino opined that a single positive blood culture could not be falsely positive and could conclusively establish the presence of GBS. Further, Dr. Corsino opined that the use of antibiotics explained why the blood culture taken four days later was negative. The single positive blood culture indicated bacteremia, the presence of bacteria in the blood, but not necessarily sepsis, which is bacteremia plus clinical symptoms. However, the degree to which bacteremia could have caused the injury is an appropriate question to be argued to the jury.
The infection-causation defense would be stronger if cultures from the placenta and the surrounding structures had been taken and had shown GBS bacteria, but the absence of such a test and a positive result does not render the underlying theory too speculative to submit to the finder of fact. The defense had clinical evidence of inflammation in the placenta and the umbilical cord and of bacteria in the placenta. The weight to be given the evidence is to be decided by the jury, not the trial court.
However, we conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in excluding the medical opinions that Benjamin was so thoroughly infected with GBS that he was born with bacterial meningitis. In asserting the meningitis theory, defendants rely solely on Drs. Radetsky and Marks, but their opinions were equivocal and speculative. In the area of medical malpractice, "proximate cause must be established by expert testimony to a reasonable degree of medical certainty." Simmons v. Garces, 198 Ill.2d 541, 556, 261 Ill.Dec. 471, 763 N.E.2d 720 (2002). Dr. Marks opined that, at the time of Benjamin's birth, two potential diagnoses and courses of care were equally possible. Dr. Marks was certain that Benjamin had GBS sepsis, but he felt that the negative cerebrospinal fluid culture was not necessarily accurate, as such tests are "notoriously unreliable." Dr. Marks concluded definitely that Benjamin had GBS sepsis, but essentially he speculated that Benjamin had *449 meningitis even though the spinal fluid culture was negative. Dr. Marks pointed to no specific evidence to indicate why the negative result was wrong. Dr. Radetsky stated at his deposition that "the baby more likely than not had meningitis," but defendants have not illustrated the basis for his conclusion. Defendants' other experts opined that Benjamin did not have meningitis. Under these circumstances, we conclude that the court did not abuse its discretion in excluding the meningitis opinion evidence.
D. Offer of Proof
Plaintiffs argue that we must disregard defendants' offer of proof as too voluminous and as late because it was introduced during jury deliberations. We disagree.
A ruling on a motion in limine is an admissibility determination that is likely to arise at trial and is subject to reconsideration. Jones v. Rallos, 384 Ill. App.3d 73, 88, 322 Ill.Dec. 271, 890 N.E.2d 1190 (2008). To preserve an error in the exclusion of evidence, the proponent of the evidence must make an adequate offer of proof in the trial court. Jones, 384 Ill. App.3d at 88, 322 Ill.Dec. 271, 890 N.E.2d 1190. Failure to make an adequate offer of proof results in forfeiture of the issue on appeal. Jones, 384 Ill.App.3d at 88, 322 Ill.Dec. 271, 890 N.E.2d 1190.
An adequate offer of proof apprises the trial court of what the offered evidence is or what the expected testimony will be, by whom it will be presented, and its purpose. Kim v. Mercedes-Benz, U.S.A., Inc., 353 Ill.App.3d 444, 451, 288 Ill.Dec. 778, 818 N.E.2d 713 (2004). The purpose of an offer of proof is to disclose to the trial court and opposing counsel the nature of the offered evidence and to enable a reviewing court to determine whether the exclusion of the evidence was proper. Kim, 353 Ill.App.3d at 451, 288 Ill. Dec. 778, 818 N.E.2d 713. Defendants filed their offer of proof with express leave of the trial court, and the court's rulings on the parties' opposing motions in limine were consistent with the exclusion of defendants' infection-causation defense. Moreover, the large volume of documents related to defendants' offer of proof reflected the complexity of the subject matter and of the deposition testimony of the many defense experts who opined on the matter. Plaintiffs and defendants briefed and argued the issue extensively, which brought the infection-causation defense into focus for the trial court. Plaintiffs are disingenuous in suggesting for the first time on appeal that the trial court and opposing counsel were unaware of the nature of the evidence that defendants offered.
E. Sufficiency of the Evidence
Defendants contend that the trial court erred by failing to grant them a directed verdict or a judgment n.o.v. based on plaintiffs' failure to prove the proximate-causation element of their negligence claim. A motion for a directed verdict is reviewed in the same way as a motion for a judgment n.o.v. Evans v. Shannon, 201 Ill.2d 424, 427, 267 Ill.Dec. 533, 776 N.E.2d 1184 (2002). The motion should be granted where all of the evidence, when viewed most favorably to the opposing party, so overwhelmingly favors the moving party that no contrary verdict based on the evidence could ever stand. Evans, 201 Ill.2d at 428, 267 Ill.Dec. 533, 776 N.E.2d 1184. The issue presents "a question of law as to whether, when all of the evidence is considered, together with all reasonable inferences from it in its aspect most favorable to the plaintiffs, there is a total failure or lack of evidence to prove any necessary element of the plaintiffs' case." Merlo v. *450 Public Service Co., 381 Ill. 300, 311, 45 N.E.2d 665 (1942). Because the standard for entering a directed verdict or a judgment n.o.v. is a high one (Razor v. Hyundai Motor America, 222 Ill.2d 75, 106, 305 Ill.Dec. 15, 854 N.E.2d 607 (2006)), such a judgment is inappropriate if "reasonable minds might differ as to inferences or conclusions to be drawn from the facts presented" (Pasquale v. Speed Products Engineering, 166 Ill.2d 337, 351, 211 Ill.Dec. 314, 654 N.E.2d 1365 (1995)). The reviewing court reviews de novo the trial court's decision on a motion for a directed verdict or a judgment n.o.v. York v. Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center, 222 Ill.2d 147, 178, 305 Ill.Dec. 43, 854 N.E.2d 635 (2006); Evans, 201 Ill.2d at 427, 267 Ill.Dec. 533, 776 N.E.2d 1184.
Plaintiffs' standard-of-care expert, Dr. Kushner, testified that Dr. Armbrust had a duty to be adamant and more aggressive in obtaining an operating room sooner. Dr. Kushner testified that Dr. Armbrust acted below the standard of care by failing to ensure that Benjamin was delivered by cesarean section before he crashed. Specifically, one could infer from Nurse Rimdzius's testimony that Dr. Armbrust failed to communicate the appropriate level of urgency. According to Nurse Rimdzius, Dr. Armbrust did not tell her before the crash that Benjamin's condition was an emergency. Moreover, plaintiffs introduced scientific evidence from which the jury could infer that the delivery delay proximately caused Benjamin's injuries. Under these circumstances, reasonable minds might differ as to inferences or conclusions to be drawn from the facts presented such that a directed verdict or a judgment n.o.v. for defendants would have been inappropriate. See Pasquale, 166 Ill.2d at 351, 211 Ill.Dec. 314, 654 N.E.2d 1365.
CONCLUSION
We determine that defendants are entitled to a new trial because the trial court abused its discretion in excluding the infection-causation defense. We also determine that defendants are not entitled to the judgment's outright reversal for inadequate evidence on the proximate-causation element of plaintiffs' negligence claim.
On remand, the trial court should allow defendants to introduce the evidence supporting the medical experts' infection-causation theory of the injuries. However, based on the evidence presented at the time, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in excluding the expert opinions that meningitis contributed to Benjamin's cerebral palsy.
For the preceding reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of Du Page County is reversed, and the cause is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.
ZENOFF, P.J., and McLAREN, J., concur.

=== CASE 9740476 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:19.436177+00 ===

WOLLMAN, Justice.
This is an appeal from a summary judgment. We affirm in part and reverse and remand in part.
Appellants, Marjory and Francis Schaub, filed suit on behalf of their minor sons, Paul and Charles, for injuries sustained by Paul and Charles and medical expenses incurred as a result of the collision between a fire truck owned by the city of Aberdeen (City) and driven by Terry Ellingson and a vehicle occupied by Paul and Charles.*
City and Ellingson filed motions to dismiss based on the doctrine of sovereign immunity, submitting a brief in support of their motions. Appellants’ brief in opposition to the motions to dismiss presented matters outside their amended complaint. After hearing argument on the motions, the trial court filed a memorandum decision announcing that it was treating the motions as motions for summary judgment and that it was granting summary judgment on the basis of sovereign immunity.
Appellants contend that it was improper for the trial court to convert the motions to dismiss into motions for summary judgment without providing them notice and opportunity to present material in opposition. We agree.
SDCL 15-6-12(b) provides in part:
If, on a motion ... to dismiss for failure of the pleading to state a claim upon which relief can be granted, matters outside the pleading are presented to and not excluded by the court, the motion shall be treated as one for summary judgment and disposed of as provided in § 15-6-56, and all parties shall be given reasonable opportunity to present all material made pertinent to such a motion by § 15-6-56.
We held in Olson v. Molko, 86 S.D. 365, 195 N.W.2d 812 (1972), that since summary judgment is an extreme remedy, a trial court’s noncompliance with SDCL 15-6-12(b) precludes granting summary judgment. Accordingly, the trial court should not have entered summary judgment against appellants.
City and Ellingson contend, however, that appellants suffered no prejudice as a result of the trial court’s action in that “the application of the doctrine of sovereign immunity, would be the same, regardless of anything else that any party could have conceivably represented to the court.” We disagree.
Appellants concede on appeal that in providing fire protection City is engaged in a governmental rather than a proprietary function. Appellants acknowledge that pursuant to Conway v. Humbert, 82 S.D. 317, 145 N.W.2d 524 (1966), the doctrine of governmental immunity bars their suit against City. Appellants contend, however, that governmental immunity does not bar their claim against Ellingson.
*111The amended complaint states that at the time the collision occurred Ellingson was operating the fire truck in the scope of his employment as an employee for City. Appellants allege that Ellingson failed to keep the fire truck under control, failed to keep a proper lookout, failed to give appropriate warning of the presence and operation of the fire truck, and failed to operate the fire truck in a manner which was reasonably prudent under the circumstances.
Subsequent to the trial court’s entry of summary judgment in this case, we addressed the issue of sovereign or governmental immunity as it relates to a governmental employee in Kruger v. Wilson, 325 N.W.2d 851 (S.D.1982), and in National Bank of South Dakota v. Leir, 325 N.W.2d 845 (S.D.1982). See also, Kringen v. Shea, 333 N.W.2d 445 (S.D.1983); Smith v. Greek, 328 N.W.2d 261 (S.D.1982). In Leir, we stated:
Whether immunity is available to a governmental employee depends upon the nature of the function exercised by the employee. Sioux Falls Const. Co. v. City of Sioux Falls, [297 N.W.2d 454 (S.D.1980)]; Walters v. City of Carthage, 36 S.D. 11, 153 N.W. 881 (1915); State v. Ruth, 9 S.D. 84, 68 N.W. 189 (1896); see 72 Am.Jur.2d States § 115 (1974). Immunity extends to an employee who,while acting within the scope of his employment, exercises a discretionary function. Sioux Falls Const. Co. v. City of Sioux Falls, supra. In reviewing the discretionary versus ministerial dichotomy, we have held that a state employee who “fails to perform a merely ministerial duty, is liable for the proximate results of his failure to any person to whom he owes performance of such duty.” State v. Ruth, 9 S.D. at 90, 68 N.W. at 190. See, Conway v. Humbert, supra; Walters v. City of Carthage, supra.
325 N.W.2d at 848.
We have looked to Restatement (Second) of Torts § 895D (1979), for guidance in determining whether a function is discretionary or ministerial. See Kruger, supra; Leir, supra; City of Sioux Falls, supra. Comment (h) to § 895D lists the driving of a vehicle as an example of acts held to be ministerial under ordinary circumstances. See also, James v. Prince George’s County, 288 Md. 315, 418 A.2d 1173 (1980); Kruger, supra. The comment notes, however, that under particular fact circumstances, each of the examples listed may be held to involve the exercise of a discretionary decision.
Newson v. City of Kansas City, 606 S.W.2d 487 (Mo.App.1980), involved an immunity issue similar to the one presented in this case. The Missouri court stated:
The liability the petition asserts against the defendant Waits has to do with the operation of a fire truck into an intersection in a negligent manner and also the faitee to use adequate warning devices in the circumstances. These allegations do not, as a matter of law, describe either conduct “required to [be] perform[ed] in a prescribed manner” — and therefore ministerial — or conduct which inherently “requires] the exercise of reason in the adaptation of means to an end” — and therefore discretionary. That remains for the proof.
606 S.W.2d at 491.
Although it may very well be difficult to conceive of cases in which the operation of a fire truck would constitute a discretionary act, that is a matter to be considered by the trial court in the first instance.
That portion of the summary judgment in favor of City is affirmed. That portion in favor of Ellingson is reversed and the case is remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings.
DUNN and MORGAN, J., concur.
HENDERSON, J., concurs specially.
FOSHEIM, C.J., concurs in part and dissents in part.
Defendant Moerke is not a party to this appeal. The trial court entered the requisite determination of finality under SDCL 15-6-54(b).

=== CASE 9740477 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:19.440016+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(concurring specially).
That the City of Aberdeen, or any other city in South Dakota, is immune, as it scur-*112ríes to put out the fires, I have no reservation. Accordingly, I concur in that aspect of the majority opinion. But the immunity of this fireman, driving the city’s fire truck responding to a fire alarm, is a totally different issue. Can we in the law affix individual liability on him? As the majority opinion perceives, ordinarily, I should think not. See Shawnee Tp. Fire Dist. No. 1 v. Morgan, 221 Kan. 271, 559 P.2d 1141 (1977). On a hypothetical level, a situation could arise where a drunk fireman operating a fire truck in response to a fire alarm, could kill or maim someone. It appears this fireman was acting within his scope of employment as an employee for the City of Aberdeen when the collision occurred. It further appears that he and the City were involved in governmental functions. It is the traditional governmental/proprietary function test which is presently at issue. It does not appear the fireman herein served a proprietary function.
If firemen are successfully sued for responding to fires, as they exercise their governmental function to stop the spread of fires, I fear that firemen will leave their vocation for safer legal ground. Firemen, after all, are trying to minimize damage and protect the public’s best interests. Therefore, in my opinion, a fireman should only be subject to liability when he acts in reckless disregard for the safety of others which is clearly without the scope of his employment. SDCL 32-31-5 provides:
The provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.
Firemen deserve legal latitude when called upon to save life and limb. The undeniable truth is that the public calls upon firemen to ¿xecute a dangerous journey through traffic en route to a perilous mission. We need to recognize that these public servants must of necessity rush to a fire. See SDCL 32-31-4, which provides:
The speed limit set out in §§ 32-25-1 to 32-25-17, inclusive, does not apply to authorized emergency vehicles when responding to emergency calls provided the drivers thereof sound audible signals by siren or horn and two lighted red lights are displayed to the front, or one beacon light visible 360°, or to authorized emergency vehicles operated by peace officers who are measuring the speed of other vehicles by use of the emergency vehicle speedometer. Moreover, the driver of an ambulance who has been certified pursuant to § 34-11-6 and who, due to his training and experience, believes that the operation of audible signals would result in a serious threat to the condition of the patient may operate his emergency vehicle in excess of the speed limit without audible signals while operating outside the city limits of a municipality.
When we call upon firemen to act, we must legally insulate their actions executed in furtherance of their mission. It is wrong, in law, to be unduly critical of an on-the-scene judgment.
Substantively, I now have written.
Procedurally, I point out that appellants never got to “swing at the ball” when they were summarily judgmented out of the lawsuit. This legal point I brought home in Kringen v. Shea, 333 N.W.2d 445, 447 (S.D.1983) (Henderson, J., specially concurring), when I stated:
The trial court did not simply enter an order dismissing the complaint; rather, it treated the Motion to Dismiss as a Summary Judgment Motion.... ... Under.SDCL 15-6-12(b), a trial court has a right to treat a motion to dismiss based upon a failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted as a motion for summary judgment. .However, this triggers a responsibility of the trial court to grant unto the parties moved against, a reasonable opportunity to present all material which is pertinent to such a motion as called for by SDCL 15-6-56. Appellant was given no such notice. Therefore, the trial court erred in this highly critical procedural matter thereby depriving appellant of his day in *113court. See Olson v. Molko, 86 S.D. 365, 195 N.W.2d 812 (1972), for case in point. Therefore, I join in a reversal in part and would accordingly remand for pretrial discovery procedures so that the issue on appellee Shea’s alleged liability may be factually developed. This would permit the trial court to examine the facts and consider the criteria in making a determination of Shea’s discretionary or ministerial function. Appellant, before called “out,” should have a swing at the ball.
Therefore, I agree with the majority that the trial court’s procedural transformation of a motion to dismiss into a summary judgment was fatally flawed and thus prejudicial error.
I wish to note for the record that I did not participate in the decision of Leir and I am not bound by the precedent therein.

=== CASE 9740478 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:19.443465+00 ===

FOSHEIM, Chief Justice
(concurring in part and dissenting in part).
I agree with the majority decision affirming dismissal of the action against the city. I would, however, also affirm dismissal of the action against the city employee. We have held that a unit of state government can act only through its employees. Norgeot v. State, 334 N.W.2d 501 (S.D.1983); Merrill v. Birhanzel, 310 N.W.2d 522 (S.D.1981). It logically follows that a municipal employee, acting within the scope of his employment, and thus performing the governmental will, should derive the same immunity as his employer.
Sioux Falls Construction Co. v. City of Sioux Falls, 297 N.W.2d 454 (S.D.1980), set forth the concept that, in determining whether municipal immunity extends to an employee, a court should inquire into the nature of the function exercised by the employee. National Bank of South Dakota v. Leir, 325 N.W.2d 845 (S.D.1982). If the activity was ministerial, personal liability attached to the employee; if discretionary — no liability. We embraced this rule while recognizing its chaotic potential:
We perceive the possibility of some instances where a city could be immune while exercising a governmental function, yet an officer could be liable; or, in the alternative,-a situation where a city could be liable while acting in a proprietary function, yet the officer could be immune.
To uphold governmental immunity as to the governmental unit only, while allowing the officers, agents, and employees to be held liable, would be chaotic.
Sioux Falls Construction Co. v. City of Sioux Falls, supra, at 458 (emphasis added). That dreaded chaos now appears. The majority would hold the City of Aberdeen immune while its employee could be liable for acts performed in the scope of his employment.

=== CASE 9740479 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:20.125746+00 ===

OPINION
BRADFORD, Judge.
Appellants/Plaintifis Jeff Koehlinger and Jeff Frazier, as individuals and as class representatives of all others similarly situated ("Appellants"), appeal from the trial court's grant of summary judgment in favor of Appellee/Defendant the State Lottery Commission of Indiana ("the Lottery"). The Lottery contends that the trial court should have entered summary judgment in its favor on the ground that the Appellants did not exhaust their administrative remedies. Appellants contend that the trial court erred in concluding that the Lottery was entitled to summary judgment on their claims of contract rescission, false advertising, negligence, negligent misrepresentation, unjust enrichment, restitution, and money had and received. Concluding that the trial court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of the Lottery on Appellants' contract claim, we reverse and remand.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
Most of the underlying facts of this case are not in dispute. The Lottery is authorized by the General Assembly to "enable the people of Indiana to benefit from significant additional money for capital improvements." Ind.Code § 4-80-1-1 (2010). The Lottery offers and has offered various seratch-off games, including "Cash Blast," which began in December of 2004. The Lottery posts information regarding scratch-off games on its website, including the number of prizes not yet claimed. Approximately 5 million Cash Blast tickets were available for purchase, at a price of $10 apiece. Prizes were available in amounts of $10, $20, $50, $100, $200, $500, $1000, $10,000, and $250,000, and, as stated on the tickets, the odds of purchasing a winning card of any denomination was one in 3.29. Cash Blast included ten winning tickets at the $250,000 level. Approximately $36,688,000 in prizes were available to be won in Cash Blast, for an aggregate return-to-player ("RTP") of approximately 73.4 percent of the money spent on tickets.1
In early 2005, approximately 2.5 million Cash Blast tickets had to be replaced prior to sale due to a manufacturing defect. The Lottery's computer system that tracked the number of unclaimed prizes, however, treated the replacement tickets as additional tickets, resulting in, inter alia, an overstatement of slightly more than fifty percent of unclaimed prizes on the Lottery website at the time.2 For *537example, at the time of the error, the Lottery website indicated that thirteen $250,000 prizes were unclaimed when, in fact, there were only eight.
In the summer of 2006, the Lottery became aware of the error on its website after a player contacted it regarding where he could purchase Cash Blast tickets. The Lottery checked its inventory of Cash Blast tickets and discovered that ninety-eight percent of them had been sold. The Lottery's computer system, however, indicated that only sixty-five percent of Cash Blast tickets had been sold. Upon discovery of the error, the Lottery posted a message on its website explaining the error. Shortly thereafter, several Cash Blast players contacted the Lottery expressing displeasure that the number of prizes available had been overstated on the website. None of the Lottery's responses to these players indicated that any administrative process was available to address their concerns.
In particular, the Lottery's responses to players requesting that it "make this right" neither initiated administrative process nor provided information regarding the availability of such process. Plaintiffs Ex. 12 p. 5. The Lottery's responses to players dissatisfied with its explanation of the error neither initiated administrative process nor provided information regarding the availability of such process. The Lottery's responses to players requesting refunds or other compensation neither initiated administrative process nor provided information regarding the availability of such process. The Lottery's responses to players stating or implying that they would take the matter to court neither initiated administrative process nor provided information regarding the availability of such process.
On July 10, 2006, named plaintiff Koeh-linger wrote the Lottery and requested "an appropriate responsel,]" but the Lottery's response neither initiated administrative process nor provided information regarding the availability of such process. Plaintiff's Ex. 12 p. 37. On August 29, 2006, Koekhlinger again wrote the Lottery, requesting a refund for 231 losing Cash Blast tickets. Koehlinger's communication included the following language:
Please consider this written communication an official request of complaint. If there is some sort of administrative remedy that you offer, please consider this a request for that remedy. If I need to complete some form other than this letter in order to invoke that procedure, please send me any such form.
Plaintiff's Ex. 12 p. 169. The Lottery's response the next day indicated that it would not compensate Koehlinger for any losing Cash Blast tickets and did not indicate that any additional administrative remedy was available.
In January of 2007, the Lottery initiated a program whereby any person who held a Cash Blast ticket purchased between May 18, 2005, and July 6, 2006, could redeem the ticket for a ten-dollar coupon for a scratch-off ticket of the person's choice. On March 29, 2007, however, the Lottery posted a notice on its website and sent letters to it retailers indicating that Cash Blast tickets and claim forms submitted for redemption would have to be postmarked no later than April 30, 2007, in order to be considered.
Meanwhile, on January 5, 2007, Plaintiffs filed suit against the Lottery, requesting certification of a class of those who had *538bought non-winning Cash Blast tickets between May 2005, and July 7, 2006. Plaintiffs raised claims of negligent misrepresentation, negligence, breach of contract, fraud, money had and received, restitution, unjust enrichment, and deceptive sales practices under Indiana's Deceptive Consumer Sales Act (CDCSA"). On April 2, 2007, the Lottery filed a motion to dismiss, which the trial court denied on February 1, 2008. On July 7, 2008, the trial court granted the Plaintiffs' motion for class certification. On September 16, 2008, this court denied the Lottery's request to accept jurisdiction of an interlocutory appeal of the trial court's certification of the class.
On August 28, 2009, the Plaintiffs filed a motion for summary judgment. On September 1, 2009, the Lottery filed a motion for summary judgment. On March 8, 2010, the trial court denied the Plaintiffs' motion for summary judgment and granted the Lottery's.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
When reviewing the grant or denial of a summary judgment motion, we apply the same standard as the trial court. Merchs. Nat'l Bank v. Simrell's Sports Bar & Grill, Inc., 741 N.E.2d 383, 386 (Ind.Ct.App.2000). Summary judgment is appropriate only where the evidence shows there is no genuine issue of material fact and the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. Id.; Ind. Trial Rule 56(C). All facts and reasonable inferences drawn from those facts are construed in favor of the nonmoving party. Id. To prevail on a motion for summary judgment, a party must demonstrate that the undisputed material facts negate at least one element of the other party's claim. Id. Once the moving party has met this burden with a prima facie showing, the burden shifts to the nonmoving party to establish that a genuine issue does in fact exist. Id. The party appealing the summary judgment bears the burden of persuading us that the trial court erred. Id.
I. Whether the Trial Court Erred in Failing to Grant the Lottery Summary Judgment on the Basis that the Plaintiffs had Failed to Exhaust Their Administrative Remedies
Both sides acknowledge that the Lottery and claims against it are subject to the Administrative Orders and Procedures Act ("AOPA"). The Lottery contends that the Appellants did not exhaust the administrative remedies available to them while the Appellants argue that they should be excused from the exhaustion requirement because no adequate remedy existed at the time their claims became ripe.
There exists a strong bias in case law in favor of the requirement that administrative remedies be exhausted. The objective of such a requirement is to avoid collateral, dilatory action, ensure the efficient, uninterrupted progression of administrative proceedings and the effective application of judicial review, and provide an agency with an opportunity to correct its own errors and to compile a factual record as necessary for judicial review. Austin Lakes [Joint Venture v. Avon Utilities, Inc.], 648 N.E.2d [641, 649 (Ind.1995).]
Be that as it may, we recognize that there are exceptions to the requirement of exhaustion of remedies at the agency level. For instance, a party is excepted from the exhaustion requirement when the remedy is inadequate or would be futile, or when some equitable consideration precludes application of the rule. Indiana State Building and Construction Trades Council v. Warsaw Community School Corp., 493 N.E.2d 800, 806 (Ind.Ct.App.1986). To prevail upon a *539claim of futility, "one must show that the administrative agency was powerless to effect a remedy or that it would have been impossible or fruitless and of no value under the cireumstances." Id. Furthermore, the requirement of exhaustion of administrative remedies "will be relaxed where there is grave doubt as to the availability of the administrative remedy." Indiana High Sch. Athletic Ass'n v. Raike, 164 Ind.App. 169[, 195], 329 N.E.2d 66, 82 (1975)[, implied overruling on other grounds recognized by Bojrab v. Bojrab, 810 N.E.2d 1008 (Ind.2004) ].
Smith v. State Lottery Comm'n of Ind., 701 N.E.2d 926, 981 (Ind.Ct.App.1998), trans. denied.
In Smith, on which the Appellants rely, the plaintiff had purchased a lottery ticket that turned out to be a five dollar winner, but was denied payment by a retailer on the basis that he failed to redeem the ticket within sixty days of the end of the game. Id. at 928. Smith went to the principal office of the Lottery and was again denied payment and told that nothing could be done to obtain his prize. Id. Although the ticket in question stated that all prizes were to be claimed within sixty days of the announced end of the game, no closing date for the game was posted at the retailer, the Lottery did not publish one in the Indiana Administrative Code, and neither the retailer nor the Lottery advised Smith of an administrative process or provided him with any kind of claim form. Id.; id. n. 8.
Smith filed suit against the Lottery for breach of contract seeking damages on behalf of himself and all others similarly situated. Id. The Lottery filed a motion to dismiss, contending that Smith had failed to exhaust his administrative remedies. Id. The trial court agreed with the Lottery that an administrative process existed and that Smith had failed to avail himself of it and therefore granted the Lottery's motion to dismiss. Id.
In reversing the trial court's dismissal, we first noted Smith's difficulty in determining when the game was to end, which apparently the Lottery did not publicize at all and which could have come at any time. Id. at 981. Second, we noted the difficulty Smith had in initiating an administrative proceeding with the Lottery, although it claimed that such a process was available. Id. In the end, we concluded that Smith could be exeused from the exhaustion requirement because there was " 'grave doubt as to the availability of an administrative remedy'" Id. at 932 (quoting Raike, 164 Ind.App. at 195, 329 N.E.2d at 82).
We reach the same result here. The designated evidence contains myriad examples of persons attempting to contact the Lottery regarding the website error, and there is no indication that any of these contacts was successful in initiating any kind of administrative process. Simply put, it seems that the Lottery had no mechanism for addressing player concerns of this type at the time, leaving us in grave doubt as to the availability of an administrative remedy.
Moreover, we cannot agree that the Lottery's losing-ticket redemption program qualifies as an administrative remedy that needed to be exhausted for purposes of AOPA, as it did not exist when the Plaintiffs' claims became ripe. We are cognizant of the strong public policy considerations weighing in favor of having administrative grievances aired and resolved in the agency first, including that "[plremature litigation may be avoided, an adequate record for judicial review may be compiled, and agencies retain the opportunity and autonomy to correct their own errors." State Bd. of Tax Comm'rs v. *540Montgomery, 730 N.E.2d 680, 684 (Ind.2000). If we allowed agencies to fashion post hoe remedies, however, it is difficult to see where it would all end; all an agency would ever have to do to avoid litigation or final resolution of any dispute would be to devise yet another "remedy" to be exhausted.3 While we are strongly inclined, as a general rule, to allow the Lottery-or any other agenecy-the opportunity and autonomy to correct its own errors, that particular ship has sailed in this case. The trial court did not err in failing to grant the Lottery summary judgment on exhaustion grounds.
II. Contract Rescission
Appellants contend that the trial court erred in not addressing their contract rescission claim and in apparently concluding that it may not move forward. Appellants note that they entered into contracts with the Lottery when they bought Cash Blast tickets and argue that they should be able to rescind those contracts due to both a material misrepresentation by the Lottery and a mutual mistake of fact by the parties. We need not address the Appellants' second contention, because their first is dispositive of this issue.
"The doctrine is well settled that where a party to a contract makes a misrepresentation as to a material existing fact, and, without means at hand of knowledge, 'the one to whom it is made believes it to be true, relies and acts upon it' to his prejudice, he may, in a court of equity, rescind it, if the parties can be placed in statu guo, whether the falsity of the representation was known to the party making it or not." 4 Gardner v. Mann, 36 Ind.App. 694, 698, 76 N.E. 417, 418 (1905) (citations omitted) (cited favorably by Franklin v. White, 493 N.E.2d 161, 164 (Ind.1986)). It is undisputed that the Lottery misrepresented the number of Cash Blast prizes remaining and that the Appellants had no means at hand to discover the true number. The Lottery does not argue that the misrepresentation was not material, and we would have had little trouble concluding that it was in any event. Moreover, it is of no importance that website listings of unclaimed prizes were not, strictly speaking, part of the contract. See Franklin, 493 N.E.2d at 163-65 (concluding that oral misrepresentation regarding suitability of septic system for real estate was sufficient to support contract rescission where such suitability was not mentioned in contract). ©
The question, then, is whether the Appellants have designated evidence tending to show detrimental reliance. The designated evidence, at least in the cases of some class members, tends to establish scenarios that seem to fit squarely within the doctrine stated in Gardner. There is ample designated evidence that several class members relied on the misinformation on the Lottery's website when deciding to purchase Cash Blast tickets. It is reasonable to infer that many of these players also suffered prejudice as a result.5 *541We conclude that the trial court erred to the extent that it granted summary judgment in favor of the Lottery on Appellants' contract rescission claim and remand for trial on the issue of detrimental reliance. If a player can prove to the trial court6 that he or she relied on the Lottery's misinformation to his or her detriment, that player will be entitled to rescission.7
III. DCSA
Appellants contend that the trial court erred in concluding that the Lottery enjoys immunity under the DCSA. The Lottery contends that it is immune from the DCSA because its advertising activities are required or expressly permitted by state law.
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which is reserved for the courts. When interpreting a statute, we follow several rules of statutory construction. First, we do not interpret a statute that is facially clear and unambiguous. Rather, we give the statute its plain and clear meaning. Second, if a statute is ambiguous, we seek to ascertain and give effect to the legislature's intent. In so doing, we read a statute as a whole and strive to give effect to all of the provisions. Indeed, when construing a statute, all sections of an act are viewed together. Additionally, we will avoid an interpretation that renders any part of the statute meaningless or superfluous.
Zanders v. State, 800 N.E.2d 942, 944-45 (Ind.Ct.App.2003) (citations omitted).
The DCSA is to be "liberally construed and applied to promote its purposes and policies[, which] are to: (1) simplify, clarify, and modernize the law governing de-eeptive and unconscionable consumer sales practices; (2) protect consumers from suppliers who commit deceptive and unconscionable sales acts; and (8) encourage the development of fair consumer sales practices." Ind.Code § 24-5-0.5-1 (2010). To that end, the DCSA entitles a person relying upon one of several enumerated deceptive acts to recover "damages actually suffered as a consumer as a result of the deceptive act or five hundred dollars ($500), whichever is greater." Ind.Code § 24-5-0.5-4 (2010). The DCSA does not apply, however, to "an act or practice that is ... required or expressly permitted by state law, rule, regulation, or local ordinance." Ind.Code § 24-5-0.5-6(2) (2010).
While we are unconvinced that any state law requires the Lottery to promote and advertise, Indiana Code section 4-30-3-*5428(a) (2010) clearly states that the Lottery "may promote and advertise the lottery." There can be little doubt that that part of the Lottery's website listing remaining prizes in seratch-off games is a promotional or advertising tool designed to encourage purchases. As such, it is activity expressly permitted by Indiana Code section 4-30-38-8(a). Although Appellants argue that the General Assembly could not have intended for the Lottery's actions to be immune from the DCSA for various reasons, there is no wiggle room in the plain language of the statutes in question. As previously mentioned, we will not interpret statutes that are, as here, facially clear and unambiguous. See Zanders, 800 N.E.2d at 944. The trial court properly granted the Lottery summary judgment on Appellant's DCSA claim.
IV. Negligence and Negligent Misrepresentation
Appellants contend that the trial court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of the Lottery on its tort claims of negligence and negligent misrepresentation. Although the Lottery contends that neither of these torts may be pursued because negligent misrepresentation is limited in Indiana to an employment context and Appellants' negligence claim is essentially the same claim, we conclude that they cannot be pursued for a more fundamental reason.
All agree that the Appellants and the Lottery have entered into contracts. "The rule of law is that a party to a contract or its agent may be liable in tort to the other party for damages from negligence that would be actionable if there were no contract, but not otherwise." Greg Allen Const. Co. v. Estelle, 798 N.E.2d 171, 175 (Ind.2003). As in Greg Allen Construction, the question is not whether Appellants have, as we assume, adequately pled their tort claims, but, rather, whether the Lottery is alleged to have done anything that "constituted an independent tort if there were no contract." Id. at 178.
Here, Appellants have alleged nothing that would be an actionable tort without the contract they entered into with the Lottery. The allegations, however they are styled, are all essentially that Appellants were duped into purchasing Cash Blast tickets by false information on the Lottery's website. Without the purchase that completed the formation of the contract, there could be no possibility of damages. Appellants have failed to allege anything that would constitute an independent tort in the absence of a contract, and are therefore limited to remedies arising from that contract. The trial court properly granted summary judgment in favor of the Lottery on Appellants' tort claims.
V. Quasi-Contractual Claims
Finally, Appellants contend that the trial court erred in dismissing its quasi-contractual claims for unjust enrichment, money had and received, and restitution. As with the tort claims, however, Appellants may not pursue these claims due to their contract with the Lottery. See Wenning v. Calhoun, 827 N.E.2d 627, 630 (Ind.Ct.App.2005) ("[RJlestitution, in the form of quasi contract, is available to the court if no contract exists."), trans. denied; DiMizio v. Romo, 756 N.E.2d 1018, 1025 (Ind.Ct.App.2001) ("Unjust enrichment operates when there is no governing contract."), trans. denied; Shelby Eng'g Co. v. Action Steel Supply, Inc., 707 N.E.2d 1026, 1028 (Ind.Ct.App.1999) ("There is no question that the existence of an express contract precludes recovery on the equitable theory of money had and received."). The trial court did not err in granting summary judgment in favor of the Lottery on Appellants' quasi-contractual claims.
*543Conclusion
The trial court correctly refused to grant the Lottery summary judgment on its claim that Appellants had failed to exhaust their administrative remedies. The trial court correctly granted summary judgment in favor of the Lottery on Appellants' tort, DCSA, and quasi-contractual claims. The trial court, however, erred in granting summary judgment in favor of the Lottery on Appellants' contract rescission claim, and we therefore remand for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion, up to and including bench trial, if necessary.
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded.
MATHIAS, J., concurs.
RILEY, J., concurs in part and dissents with separate opinion.
. RTP is to be distinguished from "odds," which, as used in Cash Blast, are the likelihood that any one game ticket will be a winner. In our view, RTP is the more accurate way to estimate the value of chance to the player of buying a lottery ticket. Based on the 73.4% RTP of Cash Blast, each $10 ticket was "worth" approximately $7.34.
. This overstatement became significantly more pronounced over time. The following table lists the Cash Blast prizes shown on the Lottery's website as supposedly unclaimed on June 22, 2006 (before the error was discovered), and July 7, 2006 (after the error was discovered):
[[Image here]]
*537So, near the end of the overstatement period, the total number of unclaimed Cash Blast prizes was overstated by approximately 1260 percent.
. If a person with a claim against an administrative agency decides to accept such a "remedy" as an offer to settle, he is, of course, free to do so.
. The version of this citation found in the www.westlaw.com database omits the word "he" and fails to italicize "In statu quo." While these errors do not seem to alter the meaning of the citation, we will continue to exercise caution in citing to non-official authorities.
. Because of the nature of the contract here, i.e., sale of a chance to win cash prizes as opposed to a more-easily-defined product or service, a few words regarding prejudice are in order. Proof that one purchased a Cash Blast ticket in reliance on the misinformation is not sufficient, standing alone, to show prej*541udice. After all, if the player simply diverted money to Cash Blast away from a game of chance with a lower RTP than Cash Blast, he was actually better off, although perhaps not as well-off as he thought he was. On the other hand, a class member who can establish that he bought Cash Blast tickets in reliance on the misinformation using money that would not otherwise have been spent has shown prejudice. Additionally, a class member who can prove that he diverted funds to Cash Blast that would have otherwise been spent on a game of chance with a higher RTP has shown prejudice. These are not trivial concerns, as it seems likely that several class members diverted money to Cash Blast from other games of chance.
. Because contract rescission is a claim sounding in equity, it will be heard by the bench and not a jury. See Songer v. Civitas Bank, 771 N.E.2d 61, 63 (Ind.2002) ("[It is a well-settled tenet that a party is not entitled to a jury trial on equitable claims.").
. The Lottery contends that allowing rescission for Appellants would force players to disgorge winnings as well. While this might be true in a case of mutual mistake of fact, misinformation cases are a decidedly one-way street. No such disgorgement will be required because the Lottery cannot show detrimental reliance on misinformation it produced.

=== CASE 9740480 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:20.131124+00 ===

RILEY, J.,
concurring in part and dissenting in part.
I respectfully disagree with the majority's opinion in the resolution of this case. While I concur with the majority on the denial of the Lottery's claim that Appellants. had failed to exhaust their administrative remedies and its decision on Appellants' DCSA and quasi-contractual claims, I concur in result with respect to Appellants' contract rescission claim, and dissent on the majority's handling of Appellants' negligence claim.
I. Contract Rescission Claim
It is well established that rescission is a proper remedy when the parties to a contract are mistaken about a material fact underlying the contract. Here, the majority opines and the Lottery does not contest that a material misrepresentation occurred when the Lottery misrepresented the number of Cash Blast prizes remaining without Appellants having the means to discover the true number. See Op. p. 541. However, whereas the majority decides this issue based on the material misrepresentation theory, I foeus my decision on the mutual mistake of material fact doe-trine. Because the majority's solution still requires each individual class member to establish detrimental reliance, I believe my outcome better reflects the economic realities and the judicial efficiency of a class action suit.
Equitable relief, i.e. rescission of the contract and the return of the purchase price of the Cash Blast tickets, may be granted if a contract is based upon a mutual mistake of material fact. Hancock v. Ky. Cent. Life Ins. Co., 527 N.E.2d 720, 723 (Ind.Ct.App.1988), trans. denied. As properly stated by the trial court, "bly over reporting its prizes by half, the Lottery was representing to the public that Cash Blast tickets had characteristics which they did not have, those being that the game provided the chance not only to win the prizes which were actually available, but to win prizes which were not available." (Appellants' App. pp. 754-55). It is undisputed that both the Lottery and the Appellants were mistaken about the prizes available to be won. As such, the trial court should have granted Appellants' motion for summary judgment on their contractual rescission claim and I would remand this case to the trial court for a determination of damages.
II. Negligence
With respect to Appellants' negligence claim, I dissent from the result reached by the majority. Mindful that summary judgment is rarely appropriate on allegations of negligent behavior, I find that Appellants' designated evidence support a genuine issue of material fact with respect to the existence of a negligence claim.
*544It is well established that a plaintiff may plead alternative theories of lability in a complaint and proceed under either or both. Ind. Trial Rule 8(E)(2). In this light, Appellants pled both a contractual claim and a negligence claim in their complaint on the understanding that the negligence claim may only be successful in conjunction with a pled contract claim if the designated evidence independently establishes the elements of the pled tort. See Greg Allen Const. Co., Inc. v. Estelle, 798 N.E.2d 171, 175 (Ind.2003).
To recover under a negligence theory, a plaintiff must prove (1) a duty on the part of the defendant owed to the plaintiff; (2) a breach of that duty; and (38) an injury to the plaintiff proximately caused by the breach. Coffman v. PSI Energy, Inc., 815 N.E.2d 522, 527 (Ind.Ct.App.2004). A duty, when found to exist, is the obligation to exercise reasonable care under the circumstances. Goodrich v. Indiana Michigan Power Co., 783 N.E.2d 793, 796 (Ind.Ct.App.2003), trans. denied. Here, the Lottery had a duty to exercise reasonable care not to misinform its eustomers about the remaining prizes in its Cash Blast game. (See also Ind.Code § 4-30-1-2(6): "That lottery game advertising and promotion shall be consistent with the dignity and integrity of the state"). The Lottery breached that duty when it failed to accurately represent the number and prizes available in its instant game. Specifically, the evidence reflects that the Lottery admitted that it was a mistake not to delete the separate electronic files from its computers for the prizes attributable to those withdrawn tickets and equally admits that it was a mistake not to catch this when reporting this daily for fourteen months. Appellants present evidence claiming injury after relying on these false representations. As such, I believe that there are issues of material fact which require Appellants' negligence claim to be presented to a jury. I would reverse the trial court on this issue.

=== CASE 2223762 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:07.574888+00 ===

127 Mich. App. 287 (1983)
338 N.W.2d 387
HUFF
v.
FORD MOTOR COMPANY
Docket No. 64942.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided May 25, 1983.
Milan, Miller, Berger, Brody & Miller, P.C. (by Martin M. Miller) (Edward Grebs, of counsel), for plaintiff.
Collins, Einhorn & Farrell, P.C. (by Morton H. Collins and Noreen L. Slank), for defendant Envirofab, Inc.
Before: T.M. BURNS, P.J., and R.M. MAHER and HOOD, JJ.
PER CURIAM.
Plaintiff appeals as of right from a summary judgment granted to defendant Envirofab, Inc., in this wrongful death action.
Plaintiff's decedent, Ted Huff, Jr., died on April 20, 1980, as a result of injuries he sustained on the job on April 11, 1980. Mr. Huff was a painter employed with the Morgan Watt Painting Company. Morgan Watt was a subcontractor for the Stanley-Carter Company, general contractor for a building project at the Ford Motor Company's Dearborn Engine Plant.
Mr. Huff entered a newly manufactured oily waste treatment tank in order to coat the tank's interior with PLV-2000-Viton, an elastomer compound manufactured by defendants Pelmor Laboratories, Inc., and E.I. DuPont de Nemours & Company. While in the tank, Mr. Huff apparently dropped an unguarded electrical light. Sparks ignited PLV-2000-Viton fumes which caused an explosion. Mr. Huff died from severe burns and other injuries he sustained in that explosion.
Defendant Envirofab fabricated the oily waste *290 tank and Stanley-Carter Company employees erected the tank at the Engine Plant.
Plaintiff filed her complaint on May 21, 1980. In that complaint, she alleged that applying Viton in the manner specified created an inherently hazardous and dangerous condition within the tank. Plaintiff generally alleged that the dangerous condition and resulting explosion were caused by the defendants' negligence, and gross, wilful, and wanton misconduct. As to defendant Envirofab plaintiff alleged:
"26. That the defendants herein, including the fabricator, were negligent in failing to provide and recommend a means of safe ventilation of the fumes created by the aforementioned ultra-hazardous substance during its application, as well as a lighting system within said tank that was safe and compatible with the ultra-hazardous nature of the substance used by the plaintiff's decedent.
"27. That said defendants herein failed to provide, prescribe and recommend the use of a safe lighting mechanism that plaintiff's decedent could have used during the course of applying the aforementioned ultra-hazardous substance so as to prevent the creation of ingredients for an explosion which resulted in plaintiff's decedent's severe, painful and fatal injuries as hereinbefore set forth.
* * *
"30. That the defendant, Envirofab, Inc., [failed?] to provide a lighting system and openings for the aforesaid tank which would allow plaintiff's decedent to perform his work in a safe environment.
* * *
"33. That all of said defendants contributed to the creation of the inherently hazardous and dangerous condition resulting in the death of plaintiff's decedent."
However, plaintiff also alleged:
*291 "36. That said defendant, Ford Motor Company, and the defendant, Cunningham Engineers, Inc., were responsible for the design and development of the specifications on said oily waste tank, and further, said defendant, Ford Motor Company, employed its agents, representatives and employees to supervise and monitor the contruction of said oily waste tank."
Plaintiff alleged that defendants Stanley-Carter and Ford Motor Company owed Mr. Huff certain duties which they had breached and that the defendants had "violated the Federal OSHA requirements as well as the Michigan OSHA requirements and the Common Law of the State of Michigan".
At the hearing on defendant Envirofab's motion for summary judgment, defense counsel referred to interrogatories and requests to admit to argue that plaintiff had not discovered any evidence to show that the tank design or specifications violated government standards. Plaintiff argued that Envirofab's own employees testified when deposed that safety vents could have been installed in the tank that would have eliminated the pressure from the Viton fumes. Plaintiff's counsel argued that defendant knew that individuals, like Mr. Huff, would be coating the inside of the tank and should have protected those individuals by adding extra safety devices, such as the vents. Plaintiff's counsel argued that an expert fabricator like defendant would know that the design specifications were negligent and, by failing to correct that design, would also be negligent.
The trial court responded to plaintiff's arguments:
"I don't have any problem with the possibility of the designer being negligent without the particular vents, *292 but we're not concerned with the designer, what we're concerned with is a subcontractor having a contract to do a particular thing, and the contractor does exactly what's expected of him, and you assert it's negligent. Not to  really it's negligent to perform his contract. Mr. Berger, that is a theory I can't accept in any way.
"Motion is granted".
Plaintiff raises two arguments in this appeal. First, plaintiff argues that the trial court erred by granting summary judgment because plaintiff raised material issues of fact; that constructing the tank according to defendant Cunningham's specifications does not absolve defendant of liability if it knew or should have known those specifications were inadequate or defective. Plaintiff's second argument is that summary judgment was prematurely granted before discovery was complete. Plaintiff's counsel stated at the hearing that 4 depositions were pending and an additional 15 had been noticed.
We review this summary judgment without a complete lower court record. The record does not include the defendant's motion and brief in support or plaintiff's reply and brief in support. Thus, we are unable to conclusively determine whether this motion was brought pursuant to GCR 1963, 117.2(1), failure of plaintiff to state a claim, or GCR 1963, 117.2(3), no genuine issue of material fact. Moreover, the trial court failed to state the basis for granting the motion either on the record or in the written order. This, of course, adds confusion to our review as we are forced to guess at the basis for the motion. See, Bashara, The Elusive Summary Judgment Rule: Sifting Through the Maze, 1967 D C L Rev 397, 400.
A motion for summary judgment brought pursuant to 1963, 117.2(1), failure of the opposing party *293 to state a claim, is to be resolved by reference to the pleadings alone. Chatham Supermarkets, Inc v Ajex Asphalt Paving, Inc, 370 Mich. 334; 121 NW2d 836 (1974); Todd v Biglow, 51 Mich. App. 346; 214 NW2d 733 (1974). This motion tests the legal sufficiency of the claims, not whether there is any factual support for the claims. Crowther v Ross Chemical & Manufacturing Co, 42 Mich. App. 426; 202 NW2d 577 (1972).
A motion for summary judgment premised upon the ground that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact, GCR 1963, 117.2(3), requires the trial court to review the entire record to determine whether the non-moving party has discovered facts to support the claim or defense. The trial court is obligated to look beyond the pleadings and consider affidavits, depositions, and interrogatories. Based upon the entire record, the trial court must give the benefit of any reasonable doubt to the opposing party in determining whether there is a genuine issue as to a material fact. Rizzo v Kretschmer, 389 Mich. 363, 371-372; 207 NW2d 316 (1973). Before judgment may be granted, the court must be satisfied that it is impossible for the claim asserted to be supported by evidence at trial. Partrich v Muscat, 84 Mich. App. 724; 270 NW2d 506 (1978); Fry v Ionia Sentinel-Standard, 101 Mich. App. 725; 300 NW2d 687 (1980).
In this case, because both parties relied on matters outside the pleadings to argue the motion, we construe this motion as one brought pursuant to GCR 1963, 117.2(3), no genuine issue of material fact, and review it as such.
Michigan courts recognize that a manufacturer owes a duty to users of its product to furnish a product which is not unreasonably dangerous when used in a manner intended or in a manner *294 reasonably foreseeable by the manufacturer. Antcliff v State Employees Credit Union, 95 Mich. App. 224, 230; 290 NW2d 420 (1980), aff'd 414 Mich. 624; 327 NW2d 814 (1982). A product may be unreasonably dangerous if the manufacturer omits a safety device. Id. However, an important exception to this rule is recognized in other jurisdictions, but is novel in Michigan.
In Spangler v Kranco, Inc, 481 F2d 373 (CA 4, 1973), plaintiff, a plumbing subcontractor's employee, was injured when struck by an overhead pendant crane at a Reynolds Metals Company construction project. The crane was manufactured by defendant Kranco according to Reynolds' plan to equip the crane with warning bells or other similar safety devices. Plaintiff alleged in his complaint that the failure of Kranco to so equip the crane caused it to be inherently dangerous.
The Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the district court's grant of a directed verdict for Kranco. The court said:
"We find additional support for the action of the district judge in the principle that the products liability rule holding a manufacturer liable does not apply where the product has been manufactured in accordance with the plans and specifications of the purchaser except when such plans are so obviously dangerous that they should not reasonably be followed. Littlehale v E.I. DuPont, de Nemours & Co, 268 F Supp 791, 802, fn 16, (SD NY, 1966), aff'd 380 F2d 274 (CA 2, 1967); Davis v Henderlong Lumber Co, 221 F Supp 129 (ND Ind, 1963)." 481 F2d, p 375.
See, also, Lesnefsky v Fischer & Porter Co, Inc, 527 F Supp 951 (ED Penn, 1981); Orion Ins Co, Ltd v United Technologies Corp, 502 F Supp 173 (ED Penn, 1980).
*295 This exception is explained in Prosser, Law of Torts (4th ed), § 104, p 681:
"[T]he contractor is not liable if he has merely carried out carefully the plans, specifications and directions given him, since in that case the responsibility is assumed by the employer, at least where the plans are not so obviously defective and dangerous that no reasonable man would follow them. Where this is the case, there appears to be no doubt that there will be liability." (Footnotes omitted.)
See, also, Leininger v Stearns-Roger Manufacturing Co, 17 Utah 2d 37; 404 P2d 33 (1965); McCabe Powers Body Co v Sharp, 594 S.W.2d 592 (Ky, 1980); Moon v Winger Boss Co, Inc, 205 Neb 292; 287 NW2d 430 (1980); Hunt v Blasius, 55 Ill App 3d 14; 370 NE2d 617 (1977).
In this case, plaintiff admits that defendant Envirofab constructed the tank according to the design and specifications of defendant Cunningham. Plaintiff did not allege that Envirofab constructed the tank defectively. Thus, the complaint against Envirofab is limited to an allegation that the defendant fabricated a defectively designed product. Therefore, in order to withstand a summary judgment based upon GCR 1963, 117.2(3), plaintiff must support her claim on the record with facts tending to show that defendant Cunningham's design and specifications were obviously dangerous and defective, which plaintiff had not done in this case at the time summary judgment was granted.
We find, nevertheless, that the trial court erred by granting the summary judgment in this case.
Although in almost 24 months it appears plaintiff did not discover any fact to support her claim against Envirofab, plaintiff argued at the motion *296 that her expert witnesses could support her claim with their trial testimony. Thus, giving the benefit of any reasonable doubt to plaintiff, we are not satisfied that it is impossible for the claim asserted to be supported by evidence at trial. Partrich v Muscat, supra.
Furthermore, we agree that the trial court granted summary judgment prematurely. Summary judgment is granted prematurely under GCR 1963, 117.2(3) if discovery on a disputed issue is incomplete. Kortas v Thunderbowl & Lounge, 120 Mich. App. 84; 327 NW2d 401 (1982); Durkee v Cooper of Canada, Ltd, 99 Mich. App. 693, 700; 298 NW2d 620 (1980). Material issues exist unless further discovery does not stand a fair chance of uncovering factual support for the litigant's position. Kortas, supra; Crider v Borg, 109 Mich. App. 771, 772-773; 312 NW2d 156 (1981).
When the trial court heard arguments on this motion, discovery was incomplete. Wayne County Court Rule 301.3(c) automatically cuts off discovery after 26 months. Thus plaintiff had at least 2 months to complete discovery. Furthermore, we cannot say conclusively, based upon this record, that plaintiff did not stand a fair chance of uncovering factual support for her position.
Reversed and remanded.

=== CASE 9740481 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:21.458999+00 ===

PAULSON, Surrogate Justice.*
This is an appeal by Northwestern Bell Telephone Company [Bell] from a judgment entered upon a jury verdict in favor of Linda Johnson [Johnson] and from a denial of Bell’s alternative motions for judgment notwithstanding the verdict or for a new trial. Judgment affirmed in part, reversed in part, and order denying judgment notwithstanding the verdict or for a new trial affirmed.
Johnson was an employee of Bell from 1974 until the events complained of in this action. In 1979, while an employee of Bell, Johnson became pregnant. As a result of this pregnancy and the subsequent birth of her child, Johnson applied for and received a variety of leaves from her employment, culminating with an extension of her leave of absence for the care of newborn children. Prior to deciding to apply for the final extension of her child care leave, Johnson consulted documents provided by her employer which purported to summarize the child care leave and job reinstatement provisions of the contract negotiated between her union, Communication Workers of America [CWA] and Bell. Johnson also referred to the leave application forms provided by Bell and spoke with Rosemary Glaspell [Glaspell], a Bell supervisor, before extending her child care leave. Approximately seven months after the birth of her child, Johnson notified Bell that she was ready to return to work and accordingly applied for reinstatement. She was subsequently advised, however, that no appropriate positions were available. Johnson then commenced this action against Bell.
Prior to trial, Johnson relied on three separate theories of liability:
1. Under the terms of the agreement between Bell and her union, Johnson was entitled to receive a maximum of 12 months of child care leave, with guaranteed job reinstatement at any point during that 12 months. Bell breached the terms of this agreement by failing to reinstate Johnson when she applied for reinstatement in August of 1980.
2. Through the terms of various Bell publications and through the oral representations of one of its supervisors, *624Bell misrepresented the terms of the child care leave program by assuring Johnson that she was entitled to a maximum of 12 months of leave with guaranteed job reinstatement at any point during that 12 month period. Bell should thereby be estopped from asserting the terms of the union agreement which in fact limited Johnson’s period of guaranteed reinstatement to six months from the date of delivery.
3.Bell was contractually bound to make a “reasonable effort” to reinstate employees requesting to return from child care leave more than 6 months but less than 12 months from the date of delivery. Bell did not make a reasonable effort to reinstate Johnson.
Prior to commencement of trial, Bell sought summary judgment on the first (contract) and second (estoppel) liability theories. The trial court ruled that Johnson’s contractual rights, including reinstatement rights, were governed by the terms of the agreement negotiated between Bell and CWA. The trial court concluded that the contract was clear and unambiguous and that, by its terms, Bell employees returning from child care leave were guaranteed reinstatement only during the initial six months following delivery of their babies. Accordingly, the trial court ordered judgment for Bell on the contractual liability theory. Bell’s motion for summary judgment on the estoppel theory, however, was denied and the remaining two theories were tried to a jury.
The jury returned a general verdict in favor of Johnson. She was awarded compensatory damages of $45,000 and punitive damages of $15,000. Following the jury’s verdict Bell filed alternative motions for judgment notwithstanding the verdict or a new trial. The judge denied Bell’s motions and this appeal followed.
Bell presents the following issues for our determination on appeal:
1.Does the documentary evidence which Johnson relied on to establish her es-toppel claim entitle Bell to judgment in its favor on that issue as a matter of law?
2. Was the evidence sufficient to support the jury’s verdict on either liability theory?
3. Does a determination that either or both of the alternative liability theories were erroneously submitted to the jury mandate reversal?
4. Is there a basis for the jury’s award of punitive damages?
5. Did the trial court commit prejudicial error in certain of its evidentiary rulings?
We will discuss these issues in the order listed.
I
Bell contends, because written documents such as the summary pamphlets and leave application forms constitute the basis of Johnson’s estoppel claim, that the claim should have been resolved as a matter of law. Bell also argues that it was entitled to judgment on the estoppel issue as a matter of law because the evidence presented in support of that theory was insufficient to present a question of fact for the jury. Bell points in particular to two elements of equitable estoppel which, in its view, Johnson failed to prove.
Section 31-11-06 of the North Dakota Century Code is North Dakota’s statutory restatement of the principle of equitable estoppel. Cranston v. Winters, 238 N.W.2d 647, 652 (N.D.1976). Section 31-11-06, N.D.C.C., provides that:
“When a party, by his own declaration, act, or omission, intentionally and deliberately has led another to believe a particular thing true and to act upon such belief, he shall not be permitted to falsify it in any litigation arising out of such declaration, act, or omission.”
In Farmers Cooperative Association of Churchs Ferry v. Cole, 239 N.W.2d 808 (N.D.1976), we set forth the elements of an estoppel applicable to non-real estate matters such as that before us here:
*625“Based as it is upon a consideration of the facts in light of public policy, fair dealing, and the like, the basic elements of an equitable estoppel, insofar as it relates to the person being estopped, are: (1) conduct which amounts to a false representation or concealment of material facts, or, at least, which is calculated to convey the impression that the facts are otherwise than those which the party subsequently attempts to assert; (2) the intention, or at least the expectation, that such conduct will be acted upon by or will influence, the other party or persons; and (3) knowledge, actual or constructive, of the real facts. Insofar as related to the party claiming the estoppel, the elements are: (1) lack of knowledge and of the means of knowledge of the truth as to the facts in question; (2) reliance, in good faith, upon the conduct or statements of the party to be estopped; and (3) action or inaction based thereon, of such a character as to change the position or status of the party claiming the estoppel, to his injury, detriment, or prejudice.”
Id. at 813. We have held this statement to be consistent with our statute and the principles contained therein. Id.
The burden of proving each element of an estoppel is on the party asserting it. Aune v. City of Mandan, 167 N.W.2d 754, 759 (N.D.1969). Bell argues that Johnson has failed to prove: (1) that Bell made false or misleading representations; and (2) that Johnson lacked the means of knowledge of the truth regarding her reinstatement rights.
This court’s review of questions of fact is limited to consideration of whether or not there is substantial evidence to sustain the jury’s verdict. In reviewing the evidence, we view it in the light most favorable to the verdict. Powers v. Martinson, 313 N.W.2d 720, 728 (N.D.1981). In so doing, however, we note that unless clearly warranted by the facts of the case, estoppel is not favored. Knauss v. Miles Homes, Inc., 173 N.W.2d 896, 905 (N.D.1970).
We turn first to the question of whether there is substantial evidence which, when viewed in the light most favorable to Johnson, would support the jury’s verdict. Bell points to the undisputed fact that Johnson had access to a copy of the memorandum of understanding which set forth her reinstatement rights; that the trial court found this contract to be clear and unambiguous and guaranteed reinstatement only during the first six months following delivery; that at no time prior to applying for the extension to her leave of absence for care of newborn children did she approach a Bell management person and ask, point blank, what her reinstatement rights were. Bell argues that she, instead, relied on her own inferences from the summaries, the leave application forms, and the statements of Glaspell. We find it significant that none of the documents relied upon by Johnson specifically guarantee her a position of lesser status if she should apply for reinstatement more than six months after delivery of her child. Glaspell’s statements to Johnson in regard to the consequences of staying on leave longer than six months do, however, contain a logical implication that Johnson was risking only her status, not her employment, if she were to do so. The documents referred to by Johnson, when read in light of Glaspell’s statements, might also be determined to contain the logical implication that she would be reinstated after six months, although to a position of lesser status. It should also be noted that Johnson was referred to Glaspell by her supervisor because Glaspell “was usually up on these things”.
In 31 C.J.S. Estoppel § 71, it is said that “[o]ne relying on an estoppel must have exercised such reasonable diligence to acquire knowledge of the real facts as the circumstances of the case require. If he conducts himself with a careless indifference to means of information reasonably at hand or ignores highly suspicious circumstances which should warn him of danger or loss he cannot invoke the doctrine of estoppel.” In Sittner v. Mistelski, 140 N.W.2d 360 (N.D.1966), we stated that the doctrine of equitable estoppel “is essentially one of good conscience, and does not permit a liti*626gant to assert that he was misled by another's error when the real facts were open for his convenient ascertainment.” Id. at 367. The question of fact for the jury was whether Johnson had “knowledge or the means of knowledge of the truth as to the facts in question”. Johnson offered no evidence whatever that she did not have “convenient access” to the truth. She, in fact, admitted in her testimony that she never posed the question of her reinstatement rights directly to Bell management, including Glaspell, and that she did not contact her union representative until after the six-month period had expired. Johnson cannot therefore invoke the doctrine of estoppel in this instance.
In view of our conclusion above, we need not discuss Bell’s other contentions relative to the estoppel theory of liability.
II
Bell further argues that the evidence is insufficient to sustain a jury verdict in favor of Johnson on the issue of Bell’s alleged breach of duty to use “reasonable effort” to reinstate Johnson.
Whether Bell did exert “reasonable effort” is clearly a question of fact for the jury. As we have already noted, our “review of questions of fact is limited to consideration of whether or not there is substantial evidence to sustain the jury verdict”. Powers v. Martinson, supra 313 N.W.2d at 728. We will view that evidence in the light most favorable to the verdict. Id. Viewed in this light, the jury might well have concluded not only that Bell’s efforts to find another position for Johnson were unreasonable, but that Bell willfully refused to reemploy her. Evidence was presented to the jury that it was Bell’s policy not to fill the positions of persons in Johnson’s category while they were on guaranteed status, i.e., within six months of delivery. In Johnson’s case, however, Bell had filled her position long before her guaranteed reinstatement status had terminated. In addition, the evidence indicated that what effort Bell did make in reinstating her was strictly limited to the Fargo-Moorhead area. The jury might well have determined that such a limited effort was unreasonable under the circumstances. The only position which Bell presented to Johnson was as a typist. Evidence indicated that Bell knew in advance that Johnson was unqualified for that position. When Johnson confirmed this the offer was immediately withdrawn without affording Johnson an opportunity to become qualified. Under the facts and circumstances of the case a determination that Bell failed to make a “reasonable effort” to reinstate Johnson was supported by substantial evidence and we therefore do not disturb the jury’s verdict.
Ill
Because the jury returned a general verdict for Johnson we are now faced with the question of whether or not this case must be remanded for a new trial in view of our conclusion that Johnson’s estoppel theory was not supported by substantial evidence but Bell’s breach of duty to use reasonable effort to reinstate Johnson was so supported.
Bell contends that because one of the alternative theories of liability fails, a new trial must be granted. In support of its argument, Bell cites Powers v. Martinson, 313 N.W.2d 720, 724 (N.D.1981), wherein we quoted from our opinion in Barta v. Hondl, 118 N.W.2d 732, 736 (N.D.1962);
“... the erroneous submission to the jury of one of several issues is ground for granting a new trial where the jury renders a general verdict and it is impossible for the appellate court to determine upon which of the issues the verdict is based.”
In this case the jury awarded Johnson punitive damages. The judge instructed the jury that it could not award punitive damages unless it found that Bell had acted with oppression, fraud, or malice. We do not, at this time, pass upon the propriety of the instruction in this case. Upon reviewing the evidence and testimony, however, we note that virtually all evidence of “oppression, fraud, or malice”, was directed toward Bell’s failure to use reasonable ef*627fort to reinstate Johnson. There was no evidence of malice on the part of Glaspell presented to the jury. We are therefore able to determine that the jury decided this case on the theory that Bell failed to use reasonable effort to reinstate Johnson. Consequently, we need not remand for a new trial.
IV
Bell’s fourth contention is that punitive damages are not authorized by statute in cases of this kind or, in the alternative, that they were not proved.
Section 32-03-07, N.D.C.C., sets forth those instances when a jury may award punitive or exemplary damages:
“In any action for the breach of an obligation not arising from contract, when the defendant has been guilty of oppression, fraud, or malice, actual or presumed, the court or jury, in addition to the actual damages, may give damages for the sake of example and by way of punishing the defendant.”
Bell contends that this is a breach of contract action and that Bell’s obligation to make “reasonable effort” arises from contract, not from law. We agree. Bell was under no obligation to use reasonable effort to reinstate Johnson apart from its contractual obligation. Johnson is therefore not entitled to punitive damages.1
V
Bell’s final contention is that the judge committed prejudicial error in admitting testimony concerning alleged sexual harassment of Johnson by one of her supervisors and testimony alleging that Bell exerted pressure on its employees concerning their testimony at trial. Johnson offered this testimony in support of her claim for punitive damages. Although we have determined that punitive damages cannot be recovered in this action, it does not necessarily follow that the admission of such testimony was improper. The testimony objected to by Bell was relevant to the issue of whether Bell had made “reasonable effort” to reinstate Johnson. The testimony also went to the credibility of Bell’s witnesses, and was therefore admissible.
A party cannot assign as error that which is not prejudicial to him. Powers v. Martinson, 313 N.W.2d 720, 724 (N.D.1981); Holten v. Amsden, 161 N.W.2d 478, 485 (N.D.1968). We do not find that Bell was prejudiced in any way by the trial court’s evidentiary rulings. There was sufficient evidence before the jury to return a verdict for Johnson, even without the testimony to which Bell objects.
We affirm the judgment as to compensatory damages and reverse as to punitive damages, and affirm the order denying judgment notwithstanding the verdict or in the alternative for a new trial.
ERICKSTAD, C.J., and SAND and VANDE WALLE, JJ., concur.
Justice WM. L. PAULSON served as a Surrogate Justice for this case pursuant to Section 27-17-03, N.D.C.C.
. It is argued by appellee that our opinion in Vallejo v. Jamestown College, 244 N.W.2d 753, 758 (N.D.1976), provides authority for the award of punitive damages upon proof of “malice wantonness, or oppression”, Johnson then cites Corwin Chrysler-Plymouth v. Westchester Fire Insurance Company, 279 N.W.2d 638, 645 (N.D.1979), for further support, in which case we said that:
“Here, the underlying controversy arises from an insurance contract. ‘Generally, damages for breach of contract are limited to the pecuniary loss sustained. Exemplary damages are not recoverable in an action for breach of contract unless the breach amounts to an independent, willful tort, in which event exemplary damages may be recovered under proper allegations of malice, wantonness, or oppression.’ Vallejo v. Jamestown College, 244 N.W.2d 753, 758 (N.D.1976). The insurer’s duty to act in good faith, however, emanates not from the terms of the insurance contract but from an obligation ‘imposed by the law, under which the insurer must act fairly and in good faith in discharging its contractual responsibilities.’ ” [Emphasis added.]
In the instant case Johnson has neither alleged nor proved breach of any obligation save that imposed by the employment contract. She is therefore not entitled to punitive damages.

=== CASE 9740483 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:23.644963+00 ===

FOSHEIM, Chief Justice.
Appellant Timothy J. Holmes was convicted of receiving stolen property in violation of SDCL 22-30A-7. He appeals, alleging that the trial court erred in refusing his proposed jury instruction on presumption of innocence. We affirm.
At trial, appellant cross-examined . the State’s witnesses but did not testify or present evidence on his behalf. In settling the jury instructions, the trial court refused appellant’s request to include South Dakota Pattern Jury Instruction 1-4 on presumption of innocence. It reads:
It is a fundamental principle of our law that a person accused of a crime is presumed to be innocent, and this presumption follows the accused throughout every stage of the trial. So in this case the defendant is presumed to be innocent, and this presumption follows him through every stage of the prosecution and must continue and abide with you until you are satisfied from the evidence beyond a reasonable doubt that he is guilty.
Relying on Kentucky v. Whorton, 441 U.S. 786, 99 S.Ct. 2088, 60 L.Ed.2d 640, reh. den. 444 U.S. 887, 100 S.Ct. 186, 62 L.Ed.2d 121 (1979), the trial court determined that overwhelming evidence of guilt made such an instruction unsuitable. The court did, however, instruct the jury that the burden of proof rested upon the State to establish appellant’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
Despite the trial court’s determination that there was overwhelming evidence of guilt, appellant maintains that SDCL 23A-22-3 entitled him as a matter of right to a jury instruction on presumption of innocence. SDCL 23A-22-3 provides: “A defendant in a criminal action is presumed to be innocent until the contrary is proved, and in case of a reasonable doubt as to whether his guilt is satisfactorily shown, he is entitled to be acquitted.” While this statute sets out the presumption of innocence which accompanies each accused throughout a criminal proceeding, it does *105not mandate that such an instruction be given in every case.* In addition, failure to give a requested instruction on presumption of innocence does not in and of itself violate the Constitution.
... [S]uch a failure must be evaluated in light of the totality of the circumstances — including all the instructions to the jury, the arguments of counsel, whether the weight of the evidence was overwhelming, and other relevant factors — to determine whether the defendant received a constitutionally fair trial.
Kentucky v. Whorton, 441 U.S. at 789, 99 S.Ct. at 2090, 60 L.Ed.2d at 643.
The jury received an instruction on reasonable doubt. Such instruction practically secured the benefit of the presumption of innocence to the defendant. Kindle v. State, 174 Ark. 1179, 297 S.W. 827 (1927); see Cane v. Commonwealth, 556 S.W.2d 902 (Ky.App.1977). This instruction, considered in conjunction with the instruction on the burden of proof and the trial court’s determination that evidence of guilt was overwhelming, rendered an instruction on innocence not absolutely necessary. While our review of the record convinces us that the trial court was correct in its assessment that the evidence of guilt was overwhelming, we believe, however, that it is better practice for the instruction to be routinely given in every criminal case. “[Tjrial judges should not get caught up in sophisticated reasoning employed by other courts in order to determine when the failure to give a presumption of innocence instruction is violative of the Constitution. Give the instruction as you have always done.... ” Slaughter v. State, 630 P.2d 517, 520 (Wyo.1981).
The judgment is affirmed.
DUNN and MORGAN, JJ., concur.
WOLLMAN, J., concurs specially.
HENDERSON, J., dissents.
Indeed, in City of Sioux Fails v. Wolf, 79 S.D. 519, 114 N.W.2d 100 (1962), where the trial court refused a similar instruction under SDCL 23-44-5, the predecessor of SDCL 23A-22-3, we said,
Defendant contends that the instructions given the jury did not make clear that the presumption of innocence attends an accused throughout the progress of the trial. The jury was told that at the outset of the trial the defendant was presumed to be innocent and that he was not required to put in any evidence of his innocence. An examination of the record shows that the jury was also instructed on burden of proof and reasonable doubt. In view of the entire charge, it was not necessary that this instruction should have been given. Jurors competent to sit upon a trial would know that the presumption of innocence continued with defendant from the beginning to the end of the trial.
79 S.D. at 520, 114 N.W.2d at 101. (Emphasis supplied) In the case at bar, the record does not clearly show whether the jury was told at the outset about the presumption.

=== CASE 9740485 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:23.651952+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(dissenting).
I dissent. As a general rule, trial courts should avoid applying an appellate analysis to a requested instruction on the presumption of innocence. In particular, this trial court’s actions amounted to reversible error.
This case fails to fall neatly within the ambit of Whorton, 441 U.S. 786, 99 S.Ct. 2088, 60 L.Ed.2d 640, because appellant has cast his cause in a statutory mold rather than in a constitutional form as was the focus of Whorton. As the United States Supreme Court has so recently proclaimed: “It is elementary that states are free to provide greater protections in their criminal justice system than the Federal Constitution requires.” California v. Ramos, - U.S. -, 103 S.Ct. 3446, 76 L.Ed.2d - (1983). The majority opinion fastens itself onto a federal constitutional premise. Appellant steadfastly maintains his statutory rights were violated. The majority opinion’s position is refuted by State v. Opper-*106man, 247 N.W.2d 673, 674 (S.D.1976), for, indeed:
There can be no doubt that this court has the power to provide an individual with greater protection under the state constitution than does the United States Supreme Court under the federal constitution. Oregon v. Hass, 1975, 420 U.S. 714, 95 S.Ct. 1215, 43 L.Ed.2d 570. This court is the final authority on interpretation and enforcement of the South Dakota Constitution. We have always assumed the independent nature of our state constitution regardless of any similarity between the language of that document and the federal constitution. (Footnotes omitted.)
However, I emphasize again that appellant based his appeal upon a violation of state statute. SDCL 23A-22-3 provides: “A defendant in a criminal action is presumed to be innocent until the contrary is proved, and in case of a reasonable doubt as to whether his guilt is satisfactorily shown, he is entitled to be acquitted.” Since SDCL 23A-22-3 is an integral part of the criminal law in South Dakota, a trial court would be remiss to choose not to inform a jury of the presumption of innocence when a proposed instruction provides an opportunity.
Wolf, 114 N.W.2d 100, 101, as relied upon by the majority opinion, is distinguishable from the case at bar * because the trial court in Wolf informed the jury “at the outset of the trial the defendant was presumed to be innocent and that he was not required to put in any evidence of his innocence.” The trial court herein failed to ever inform the jury of appellant’s SDCL 23A-22-3 presumption of innocence. In People v. French, 5 Ill.App.3d 908, 909, 284 N.E.2d 481,482 (1972), the Illinois Appellate Court held:
If, as here, the defense counsel does not offer this instruction, it should be tendered by the prosecution, or the court should give it on its own motion. We do not reach the question of whether or not it is reversible error to fail to give this instruction in any case. Under the facts in this case, where the presumption of innocence was not mentioned in any instruction or in argument to the jury, the failure to give this instruction amounted to either a denial of due process or inadequate representation, and requires reversal.
In a post- Whorton decision, People v. Carpenter, 57 Ill.Dec. 303, 101 Ill.App.3d 792, 428 N.E.2d 983 (1981), the Appellate Court of Illinois explained why failure to instruct on the presumption of innocence is reversible error:
Failure to instruct the jury on the presumption of innocence in its most pernicious aspect amounts to a manipulation of fundamental legal principles to achieve results apparently favorable to the State but at the expense of basic protections guaranteed the accused. (See Estelle v. Williams (1976), 425 U.S. 501, 96 S.Ct. 1691, 48 L.Ed.2d 126.) When that principle is not impressed upon the minds of the jurors, the trial could become a mere formality in which the jury presumes guilt and its function would thus deteriorate into one simply ratifying the criminal investigation. Although it is established that the presumption of innocence is not evidence favoring the accused (Taylor v. Kentucky [436 U.S. 478, 98 S.Ct. 1930, 56 L.Ed.2d 468]), it remains a vital principle of legal rhetoric which serves to inform the jury not to automatically agree with the prosecution. Its purpose also is to afford fair and evenhanded treatment to all persons accused of criminal offenses, so that guilt or innocence is based exclusively on evidence adduced at trial.
Carpenter, 57 Ill.Dec. at 305, 428 N.E.2d at 985. Moreover, other post- Whorton decisions have held that the trial court must instruct the jury on the presumption of innocence. See State v. Cabral, 410 A.2d 438 (R.I.1980); People v. Mullen, 35 Ill.Dec. *107573, 80 Ill.App.3d 369, 399 N.E.2d 639 (1980); State v. Goff, 272 S.E.2d 457 (W.Va.1980).
Particularly objectionable in the case at bar was the trial court’s determination “that overwhelming evidence of guilt made such an instruction unsuitable.” In the trial court’s mind, perhaps this was true. But there was cross-examination of the State’s witnesses and was it overwhelming in the minds of the jury members? In a jury trial, the jury is the trier of fact, not the trial court. The trial court usurped the role of the jury and in so doing neglected its statutory duty to properly instruct the jury on this state’s criminal law. The trial court was both the judge and the jury. Appellant’s statutory rights suffered under the trial court’s dual role. The presumption of innocence throughout the trial is historic: “The history of this presumption can be traced from Deuteronomy through Roman law, English Common Law, and the common law of the United States. Coffin v. United States, 156 U.S. 432, 453, 15 S.Ct. 394, 403, 39 L.Ed. 481 (1895).” Slaughter, 630 P.2d at 518. Casting aside a fundamental right, inherent in this Nation’s system of justice, does not come easy for me. That the accused is presumed not to be innocent was and is found in fascist and tyrannical cultures led by Adolf Hitler, Joseph Stalin, Ho Chi Minh, and Ayatollah Khomeini. I highly question that the patriots of the American Revolution or the men who died on Omaha Beach or Heartbreak Ridge would favor a fluid approach to the presumption of innocence, a right so basic to the American way of life.
I would reverse and remand for a new trial wherein the trial court would be directed as the majority opinion would have it: “Give the instruction as you have always done ....”
Likewise, Slaughter, 630 P.2d 517, is distinguishable because an instruction on the presumption of innocence was given therein.

=== CASE 9740486 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:23.884729+00 ===

Per Curiam.
Plaintiff appeals by right the trial court’s award of $3,501.25 in attorney fees to defendant Northville Public Schools (hereinafter "defendant”). The court based its award upon GCR 1963, 111.6, finding that "plaintiff unreasonably put defendants to their proofs on the statute of limitations issue”. We reverse and remand.
In challenging the award of attorney fees, plaintiff raises two arguments, as follows: (1). GCR 1963, 111.6 does not authorize an award unless there has been a full-scale trial, and (2) the court rule *198was improperly applied here, where the trial court based its award upon a finding that plaintiffs claims were legally — as opposed to factually — unwarranted. We base our ruling solely upon resolution of the latter issue.
We are willing to assume arguendo that an award of attorney fees may be proper in situations, such as the present one, where there has been no actual trial. See Russell v Glantz, 57 Mich App 44; 225 NW2d 191 (1974). We recognize that in certain recent decisions panels of this Court have used language suggesting that an award of attorney fees under GCR 1963, 111.6 is appropriate only where there has been an actual trial, Reppuhn v Abell, 97 Mich App 407; 296 NW2d 44 (1980); Goodrich Theaters, Inc v Warner Brothers Distributing Corp, 103 Mich App 548; 302 NW2d 913 (1981). However, we believe that an award of attorney fees in the present case would not necessarily be inconsistent with the language of Reppuhn and Goodrich. Those decisions arguably left the door open to an award of attorney fees in situations where the lower court proceedings in question were the "only time and place where the (parties’) dispute * * * could be settled”. 103 Mich App 554.
In the present case, the trial court found that the subject proceedings, hearings on defendants’ motions for accelerated judgment, were the "functional equivalent” of a trial, because defendants’ motion for accelerated judgment was dispositive. This reasoning was sound: such a motion is, in the words of the Goodrich opinion, the only time and place where certain defenses — such as the statute of limitations defense — may be adjudicated. See also Robinson v Emmet County Road Comm, 72 Mich App 623, 638; 251 NW2d 90 (1976), charac*199terizing accelerated judgment as a proceeding which "provides a method by which certain disputed issues can be adjudicated at an early stage with a possibility of ending the case and avoiding an expensive trial”. We conclude that the trial court’s characterization of the motion for accelerated judgment as the "functional equivalent of a trial” for purposes of GCR 1963, 111.6 was consistent with the notion that accelerated judgment can serve as a direct substitute for trial. Accordingly, we decline to find the award of attorney fees improper solely because there had been no trial below.1
Nonetheless, we agree with plaintiff that the trial court’s award of attorney fees was improper, because the court based its award largely upon its finding that plaintiff had taken an unwarranted position on a legal, as opposed to a factual, issue.
In Valley National Bank of Arizona v Kline, 108 Mich App 133; 310 NW2d 301 (1981), this Court held that GCR 1963, 111.6 could only be used to award attorney fees which were related to the cost of proving disputed facts. 108 Mich App 143. The court rule itself contains language which limits a trial court’s authority in awarding fees to situations in which a party has made an unwarranted factual claim:
"If it apepars * * * that any fact alleged or denied by a pleading ought not to have been so alleged or denied, *200the court may * * * require the party making such allegation or denial to pay to the adverse party the reasonable expenses incurred in proving or preparing to prove or disprove such fact, including reasonable attorney fees.” (Emphasis added.)
Nothing in GCR 1963, 111.6 confers any authority to award attorney fees for costs incurred in disputing an adverse party’s position as to issues of law. The rule refers solely to the preparation of proofs and other steps taken by an opponent to establish disputed matters of fact. See Harvey v Lewis, 10 Mich App 23, 37; 158 NW2d 809 (1968), where Judge (now Justice) Levin observed:
"Surely, the order appealed from should be set aside to the extent the award is apportionable to the successful legal argument that petitioners’ allegations were legally insufficient, or to preparation to disprove such legally insufficient allegations. There can be no justification for awarding 'reasonable expenses incurred in proving or preparing to prove or disprove such fact’, if the fact is insufficient as a matter of law, as then there is no need factually to disprove it. If it be said the successful counsel might or could not have known in advance the court would rule favorably on his claim the allegations were legally insufficient, then how can it properly be held — if successful counsel is in doubt as to the outcome — that the unsuccessful litigant made allegations which 'ought not to have been’ made or that were 'unreasonable’.” (Levin, J., dissenting.) (Emphasis in original.)
Neither the rule nor any of the cases cited by defendants contain any language suggesting that a party may collect attorney fees for time spent researching, and preparing responses to, a party’s legal theories, merely because such theories may ultimately be found lacking in merit.
We cannot condone the principle of allowing a *201trial court to apply GCR 1963, 111.6 to reimburse a party for time spent in disputing questions of law, no matter how improbable or novel the legal theory involved. Such an application not only contravenes the narrowly drawn language of GCR 1963, 111.6, as demonstrated supra, but more importantly carries with it the potential for deterring even good-faith litigants from seeking legitimate relief in the courts. If this Court were to uphold the principle that a party may be compelled to pay attorney fees, merely because that party advanced a legal theory which was found to lack merit, it is not only conceivable but indeed inevitable, that many persons with legitimate claims for relief would be deterred from bringing them for fear of facing such a penalty. Others who do bring claims might venture to advance only a limited number of legal theories in support of their claims, in order to avoid a finding that one or more of their theories was sufficiently lacking in merit to qualify as "unwarranted” under the trial court’s reading of GCR 1963, 111.6. In situations where a case is rather complex or sophisticated, the prospective penalty for advancing a mariginal legal theory (one which justifies the opponent’s extensive legal research in preparing a response) could loom particularly large.
We also note that certain inequities would inhere in any ruling that GCR 1963, 111.6 is applicable to pleadings which are legally (as opposed to factually) "unwarranted”. As the award of attorney fees under GCR 1963, 111.6 is largely a matter left to a trial court’s discretion, awards under the rule would inevitably vary with the views and predilections of trial judges. One trial judge could regard a particular legal argument as a legitimate one which, although lacking in merit, was prop*202erly brought before the court for consideration. Another trial judge could determine that the same legal argument or theory, when advanced by a different litigant in an unrelated case, is not only marginal and lacking in merit, but "unwarranted” within the meaning of GCR 1963, 111.6 and thus a proper subject of an attorney fee award. The potential for inequity and prejudice is apparent.
In short, we conclude that the application of GCR 1963, 111.6 to a party’s pleading of legally (as opposed to factually) "unwarranted” claims would create uncertainty which would at best stifle legal creativity and which could indeed severely deter the filing of legitimate claims. In concluding our discussion of this issue, we add that this Court has previously taken notice of the chilling effect which an assessment of costs may have upon a litigant’s exercise of his right of access to the courts. See People v Cousino, 81 Mich App 416; 265 NW2d 355 (1978).2
In the present case, the trial court based its award of fees upon its finding that plaintiff unreasonably put defendants to their proofs on the statute of limitations issue. However, it is undisputed that only a small portion of defendants’ attorney fees resulted from time spent in responding to plaintiff’s factually unwarranted denial that the three-year statute had run. The itemized bill of time prepared by defendants’ attorney showed only 1.75 hours spent on the issue of whether the three-year statute of limitations had run. Most of *203the remaining time (the majority of the $3,501.25 awarded to defendants) was attributable to time spent researching a legal issue — namely, whether plaintiff was correct in making her belated assertion that the case was governed by a six-year statute of limitations. This assertion in turn rested upon plaintiff’s theory that she was a third-party beneficiary of a contract between defendants and the federal government, a legal theory which, although somewhat novel, was by no means frivolous. Even if the theory had been totally baseless, the award of attorney fees must be limited to time spent by defendants in contesting factual matters, Harvey v Lewis, supra; Kline, supra. We conclude that the present case should be remanded for a recomputation of attorney fees; on remand the court should award fees only to the extent that they reflect costs incurred in countering unwarranted factual allegations contained in plaintiff’s pleadings.3
Finally, we reject the argument advanced in defendants’ cross-appeal, namely, that the trial court erred in determining that it was without jurisdiction to award attorney fees under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The court determined that it lacked subject-matter jurisdiction over plaintiff’s Title VII claims. Defendant concedes that this aspect of the trial court’s disposition was correct. The Supreme Court has held that, where a court lacks subject-matter jurisdiction, "any action with respect to such a cause, other than to dismiss it, is absolutely void”. Fox v Board of Regents, University of Michigan, 375 *204Mich 238, 242; 134 NW2d 146 (1965). Since the trial court lacked jurisdiction over plaintiffs Title VII claim, it could not make findings of fact, which are required for any award of attorney fees, Sturgis Savings & Loan Ass’n v Italian Village, Inc, 81 Mich App 577; 265 NW2d 755 (1978). The federal case cited by defendant, Freeman v Taft Broadcasting, 17 CCH EPD, ¶ 8506 (ND Ala, 1978), is distinguishable because, there, the trial court did not lack subject-matter jurisdiction. Instead, the plaintiff in Freeman merely failed to meet a certain deadline for filing his discrimination charge with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), a defect which the United States Supreme Court has held "is not a jurisdictional prerequisite to a Title VII suit in federal court”, Zipes v Trans World Airlines, Inc, 455 US 385; 102 S Ct 1127; 71 L Ed 2d 234 (1982). We conclude that the trial court in the present case acted properly in refusing to award attorney fees under Title VII for lack of jurisdiction.
Reversed and remanded for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
In concluding discussion of this aspect of plaintiffs appeal, we note that both of the cases cited by plaintiff, Reppuhn, supra, and Goodrich, supra, are distinguishable, in that each involved an agreement among the parties to voluntarily dismiss the trial court proceedings. For example, in Reppuhn, the parties specifically stipulated that the defendants were to receive only a limited award of "costs” incurred in the subject litigation; any award of attorney fees would have contravened the express terms of the stipulation in that case. Contrast the present case, where there has been no comparable stipulation to dismiss the lower court proceedings.
We acknowledge that Cousino is arguably distinguishable, in that it was a criminal case decided on the basis of Const 1963, art 1, § 20, guaranteeing the right of an accused in criminal proceedings to bring an appeal. Arguably, that provision is inapplicable in a civil context such as the present one. However, the practical reality underlying the decision in Cousino remains applicable to civil matters: the prospect of an imposition of costs can serve as a significant deterrent to a party’s pursuit of relief in the courts.
To the extent that the court’s award is based upon plaintiffs "vexatious” or uncooperative behavior during the course of discovery, the proper remedy is not an award of fees under GCR 1963, 111.6, but instead imposition of the sanctions specifically applicable to lack of cooperation during discovery. See, for example, GCR 1963, 313.

=== CASE 9740487 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:23.889005+00 ===

Mackenzie, P.J.
(concurring in part and dissenting in part). I do not agree with the majority as to the circumstances in which attorney fees may be awarded for unreasonable allegations and denials. GCR 1963, 111.6 provides:
"If it appears at the trial that any fact alleged or denied by a pleading ought not to have been so alleged or denied and such fact if alleged is not proved or if denied is proved or admitted, the court may, if the allegation or denial is unreasonable, require the party making such allegation or denial to pay to the adverse party the reasonable expenses incurred in proving or preparing to prove or disprove such fact as the case *205may be, including reasonable attorney fees.” (Emphasis added.)
In Russell v Glantz, 57 Mich App 44, 49-51; 225 NW2d 191 (1974), appellant accused a court reporter of overcharging him for transcripts. However, appellant failed to appear at the hearing on his motion to compel the reporter to reimburse him for excess charges. The Court approved the trial court’s award of attorney fees pursuant to GCR 1963, 111.6, without discussing the language emphasized above.
In Reppuhn v Abell, 97 Mich App 407; 296 NW2d 44 (1980), and in Goodrich Theaters, Inc v Warner Brothers Distributing Corp, 103 Mich App 548; 302 NW2d 913 (1981), appellants’ actions had been voluntarily dismissed with prejudice prior to trial. In both cases, the Court held that the language emphasized above precluded an award of attorney fees. In neither case was Russell approved, but in both cases the Court pointed out that Russell was distinguishable. Russell involved a dispute between a party to the litigation and a third party. That dispute could not have been the subject of an independent action but had to be resolved by motion in the action out of which it arose. Under such circumstances, the hearing on the motion in Russell could be characterized as "the only type of 'trial’ which could have conceivably been held”, Reppuhn, supra, p 409, or as "the 'functional equivalent’ of 'trial’ ”, Goodrich Theaters, supra, p 555.
Here, as in Reppuhn and Goodrich Theaters, it is unnecessary to decide whether Russell can be reconciled with the language of the rule. The motion for accelerated judgment at issue here is not analogous to the dispute with the court reporter at issue in Russell. The majority claims *206that hearings on a motion for accelerated judgment are the "functional equivalent” of a trial, because such hearings are the only time and place where certain defenses, such as the expiration of the statute of limitations, may be adjudicated. However, GCR 1963, 116.1 states that such defenses may be raised either in a party’s first responsive pleading or by motion filed not later than the first responsive pleading. GCR 1963, 116.3 provides:
"Any defense or objection raised under this rule, whether in a responsive pleading or by motion, may be noticed for hearing by either party as if raised by motion. Affidavits or other evidence may be submitted by either party to support or oppose the grounds asserted in the pleading or motion, and in every case where the grounds asserted do not appear on the face of the pleading attacked, the demand shall be supported by affidavits or other evidence filed with the pleading or motion. As to defenses and objections based upon (1), (2), (3), or (4) in sub-rule 116.1, the court may order immediate trial of any disputed questions of fact, and judgment may be rendered forthwith if the proof shows that the moving party is entitled to júdgment upon the facts as determined; or the court may postpone the hearing on the matter until the trial on the merits. As to defenses and objections based upon sub-rule 116.1(5), the court may order immediate trial of any disputed questions of fact, and judgment may be rendered forthwith if the proof shows that the moving party is entitled to judgment on the facts as determined; or the court may postpone the hearing on the matter until the trial on the merits, and shall postpone the hearing if a jury trial has been demanded pursuant to right on or before the day of the hearing.”
This rule shows that the defenses specified in GCR 1963, 116.1 need not be resolved at a hearing on a motion for accelerated judgment, and in some *207cases cannot be resolved at a hearing on a motion for accelerated judgment. The majority’s reasoning, therefore, does not support a conclusion that such a hearing is the "functional equivalent” of a trial.
Note that the rule provides, in some instances, for an "immediate trial” of disputed questions of fact. Such a proceeding is a trial, not merely the "functional equivalent” of a trial. But, where no such immediate trial takes place, a hearing on a motion for accelerated judgment is not the "functional equivalent” of a trial.
The majority correctly holds that the language of GCR 1963, 111.6 requires that awards of expenses and attorney fees be limited to cases in which unreasonable allegations or denials of facts have been made. An assertion of an unreasonable legal position does not fall within the rule. However, the majority concludes that this case should be remanded for recomputation of attorney fees, and the majority implicitly approves an award which reflects costs incurred in countering unreasonable factual allegations contained in plaintiffs pleadings. I believe that such an award is neither authorized by the language of the rule nor warranted by the circumstances presented here. No trial or "functional equivalent” of a trial took place. Moreover, a requirement of an award under the rule is that "such fact if alleged is not proved or if denied is proved or admitted”. No evidentiary proceeding at which plaintiff could fail to prove facts alleged has ever been held here. Finally, the record shows that plaintiff agreed that the claims at issue were barred by the statute of limitations and stipulated to their dismissal. Plaintiff at first moved to amend her complaint but subsequently abandoned this motion. These actions by plaintiff *208are indistinguishable from the agreements for voluntary dismissals with prejudice at issue in Reppuhn and Goodrich Theaters.
I agree with the majority’s resolution of the issue raised on cross-appeal. I would reverse the circuit court’s award of expenses and attorney fees pursuant to GCR 1963, 111.6, and I would otherwise affirm the circuit court’s decision.

=== CASE 9740488 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:24.525622+00 ===

SCHULTZ, Justice.
This appeal presents issues concerning the enforceability of a covenant not to compete contained in an employment contract. At trial the district court denied the employer, Iowa Glass Depot, Inc., (Glass) the injunction it sought against its ex-employee, Robert Jindrich. We affirm.
Glass has been in the business of selling and installing automobile glass for more than 50 years. It has twelve retail outlets, including an Iowa City store that has been in operation since 1969.
In 1970 Jindrich, a high school student, began working part-time for Glass in its Iowa City outlet. After graduation he started working full-time as an installer-trainee. He was promoted to the position of manager of the Burlington outlet in 1973. He received further promotions when he became manager of the Iowa City outlet in 1975 and manager of the Davenport outlet in 1981.
As manager of an outlet Jindrich was responsible for sales, solicitation of business, inventory, bookkeeping and installation of glass. He was aided by two employees, a secretary and an installer.
In the later months of 1976, after a manager in Mason City left Glass and started a competing business, Glass decided that each manager would be asked to execute an em*379ployment contract containing a covenant not to compete. Although he never previously had a written employment contract with Glass, Jindrich executed such a contract on November 18, 1976.
Following his last promotion, Jindrich began his duties in Davenport on January 1, 1981. He was not asked to sign another employment contract at that time. Because of marital difficulties he did not move to Davenport but commuted from Iowa City until September 17,1981, the day he voluntarily terminated his employment with the company.
After his termination Jindrich was unable to secure full-time employment and worked part-time in mobile home sales and service. In December 1981 Jindrich and a friend formed a partnership named Glass Services. This partnership commenced to sell, repair and install all types of glass in the Iowa City area. As a partner in the business, Jindrich occasionally contacted and sold auto glass to some of the same customers he had served while he was an employee of Glass.
On December 14, 1981, Iowa Glass brought a suit in equity seeking an injunction against Jindrich to enforce the covenant not to compete in the selling or installing of auto glass. The trial court held that the parties abandoned the employment contract and the covenant not to compete when Jindrich accepted employment in the Davenport outlet.
The initial issue on appeal is whether or not the employment contract was abandoned. If Glass is correct in its assertion that the contract was not abandoned, secondary issues arise concerning the validity of the covenant. The parties cannot agree whether there was adequate consideration for the covenant and whether in the circumstances the covenant was reasonable.
Each issue has its source in the written employment contract. The pertinent portions of this form contract are as follows:
1. First Party agrees to employ Second Party as a Salesman for the purpose of selling and installing auto glass which has been purchased by customers from First Party. The employment of Second Party shall also include the solicitation of orders for the sale and installation of auto glass. The place of employment of Second Party shall be the place of business of First Party in the City of Iowa City, the business address of which is 113 Stevens Road, in said city. The place of employment shall also include the county in which that city is located. The installation of the auto glass shall be made at the place of business of First Party in that city, or at such other place within the county which is necessary to secure the sale of the auto glass.
[[Image here]]
4. The employment of Second Party shall continue so long as his services are satisfactory to First Party. However, both parties reserve the right to terminate the employment under this agreement by giving notice to the other as hereinafter provided.
[[Image here]]
7. Both parties recognize that Second Party will be the key man who will be responsible for the development of the business of First Party in the city and county above named. Second Party will be the person who will be in direct contact with the customers of First Party in that area. Both parties expect that through the efforts of Second Party, for which he will be compensated in accordance with the terms of this agreement, a substantial patronage and good will should be developed within the area covered by this agreement. Both parties recognize that the nature of the services to be rendered by Second Party are such that it might be very detrimental to First Party if Second Party was privileged to terminate his employment under this agreement and enter into competition with First Party within the area covered by this agreement.
8. Second Party agrees that, upon the termination for any cause of his employment under this agreement, he will not for a period of three (3) years thereafter, *380either directly or indirectly engage in the business of selling or installing auto glass or soliciting orders for the sale and installation of auto glass in the City of Iowa City, or the County in which that city is located. Second Party further agrees that he will not within that time, or within that area, in any manner, directly or indirectly, attempt to hire the employees of First Party engaged in the business of selling or installing auto glass, or attempt to take away any of the auto glass customers of First Party, within the City of Iowa City, or in the County in which that city is located, during the period of three (3) years from the date of the termination of his employment.
I. Abandonment. Abandonment of a contract is “the relinquishment, renunciation or surrender of a right. Its existence depends upon intention and acts evidencing intention to abandon.” Storck v. Pascoe, 247 Iowa 54, 64, 72 N.W.2d 467, 472-73 (1955). The act of relinquishment must be unequivocal and decisive. Id. 247 Iowa at 64, 72 N.W.2d at 473.
Abandonment of a valid contract may be accomplished by express agreement of the parties, or the parties, by conduct inconsistent with the continued existence of the original contract, may estop themselves from asserting any right thereunder. Severson v. Elberon Elevator, Inc., 250 N.W.2d 417, 421 (Iowa 1977). Since there is no express agreement to abandon this contract, we must examine both the acts of the parties and the contract itself to determine whether the parties unequivocally and decisively relinquished their rights under the covenant.
Jindrich claims that the contract of employment was abandoned or terminated by his transfer to Davenport. In his brief he cites no authority for his position and only reaches this contention as a part of his claim that he did not breach the employment contract. Neither party breached the terms of the contract of employment, since the transfer to Davenport was mutually acceptable. Nonetheless, the question of abandonment of the covenant remains.
The specific terms of paragraph 8 of the agreement provide that the restriction will take place “upon the termination for any cause of his employment under this agreement.” The restrictive covenant is ancillary to the employment contract and, by its terms, only becomes enforceable upon termination of employment under the contract. Thus, while the oral agreement between the parties concerning Jindrich’s transfer to Davenport at a new salary supports an inference Jindrich terminated his employment under the contract, this conduct is not inconsistent with continued existence of the covenant not to compete in Iowa City. Indeed, the record supports a contrary conclusion. Glass testified at trial that no new written contract was entered into restricting competition in the Davenport area because Jindrich was still living in Iowa City. Both the absence of a new written contract covering the Davenport location and Jindrich’s continued residence in Iowa City are wholly consistent with the inference the employer still desired protection in Iowa City and did not intend to abandon the covenant not to compete.
Based on our de novo review of the record, we conclude Jindrich has not established that the parties unequivocally and decisively relinquished their rights under the covenant. As noted earlier, we can infer that the transfer was a termination of the Iowa City employment on January 1, 1981, and triggered the time limitation clause contained in the covenant. Since we disagree with the trial court’s determination that the covenant not to compete was abandoned, we find it necessary to examine the other claims concerning the validity of the covenant provisions of the contract.
II. Validity of the covenant not to compete.
A. Consideration. Jindrich argued to the trial court that the covenant not to compete was unenforceable because it lacked consideration. He points out that he was already employed as a manager when he signed the employment contract and re*381ceived no additional compensation, security, promises or other benefits for the covenant. As the trial court did not reach this issue, we must decide it without the aid of an initial determination.
We agree with Jindrich on the facts that he has outlined. Nevertheless, we also must consider that Jindrich retained his employment and prospered from it for several years. We held in Farm Bureau Services Co. of Maynard v. Kohls, 203 N.W.2d 209 (Iowa 1972) and Ehlers v. Iowa Warehouse Co., 188 N.W.2d 368 (Iowa 1971) that continued employment for an indefinite period of time is sufficient consideration to support a covenant not to compete. Although other jurisdictions are evenly split on the question of whether continued employment by itself is adequate consideration, see Davies and Davies Agency, Inc. v. Davies, 298 N.W.2d 127, 130 (Minn.1980), we find no compelling reason to overrule our prior decisions. This is especially true since we determine the covenant is invalid for reasons indicated hereafter.
B. Reasonableness of the contract. Issues concerning the validity of covenants not to compete have been a cause of much litigation and have provided a generous source of material for legal writers. There is a fair consensus on the rules governing restraints on competition in employment contracts, but difficulty frequently arises in applying the rules to individual cases. Both parties agree on the basic rules but disagree about the conclusions that may be drawn from the facts in this case.
The general rule in Iowa is that we will enforce a noncompetitive provision in an employment contract if the covenant is reasonably necessary for the protection of the employer's business and is not unreasonably restrictive of the employee’s rights nor prejudicial to the public interest. Ehlers, 188 N.W.2d at 369. Our rule is analogous to the Restatement rule which provides that a noncompetitive agreement is unreasonably in restraint of trade if “(a) the restraint is greater than is needed to protect the promisee’s legitimate interest or (b) the promisee’s need is outweighed by the hardship to promisor and the likely injury to the public.” Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 188(1). Essentially, these rules require us to apply a reasonableness standard in maintaining a proper balance between the interests of the employer and the employee. Although we must afford fair protection to the business interests of the employer, the restriction on the employee must be no greater than necessary to protect the employer. Moreover, the covenant must not be oppressive or create hardships on the employee out of proportion to the benefits the employer may be expected to gain. Mutual Loan Co. v. Pierce, 245 Iowa 1051, 1055, 65 N.W.2d 405, 407 (1954); Brecher v. Brown, 235 Iowa 627, 630-31, 17 N.W.2d 377, 379 (1945). The burden of proving reasonableness is upon the employer who seeks to enforce such a covenant. Pierce, 245 Iowa at 1056, 65 N.W.2d at 408.
Assessment of the reasonableness of noncompetitive covenants generally requires us to examine both the time and area restrictions contained in the covenant. Although Jindrich argued at trial that the time and area limitations were unreasonable, his argument on appeal is confined to his claim that Glass did not show the covenant was necessary to protect its business or that the entire covenant was reasonable in the circumstances of the case. A proposition advanced at trial but not argued on appeal is deemed waived. Anderson v. Hadley, 245 Iowa 550, 554, 63 N.W.2d 234, 236 (1954). Consequently for the purposes of this appeal, we will not individually scrutinize the time and area restrictions.
Our failure to focus on time and area, however, does not relieve Glass of its initial burden to prove that a restrictive covenant was reasonably necessary to protect its business. Nor does it relieve this court of its duty to weigh the countervailing interests of the employer and employee and assess whether the detriment suffered by Jindrich is outweighed by the potential benefits Glass would derive from enforcement of the covenant. See Restatement *382(Second) of Contracts § 188(1) comment (d).
Glass claims that it has met its burden to show that the covenant here is reasonably necessary for its business. It points out that Jindrich, by virtue of his employment, had extensive and close contact with its customers. Essentially, Glass relies on our prior cases upholding noncompetitive covenants when the employee is placed in a position of close customer relationship and has an opportunity to pirate customers from the employer at the termination of his employment. Prior to our review and assessment of these cases, we must point out that reasonableness of the restraint and the validity of the covenant seldom depend exclusively on a single fact. Rather, all the facts must be considered and weighed carefully, and each case must be determined in its entire circumstances. Only then can a reasonable balance be struck between the interests of the employer and the employee. Barker v. Starkey, 259 Iowa 480, 495, 144 N.W.2d 889, 897-98 (1966).
In justifying restraints enforced against an employee, we have often relied upon the employee’s close proximity to customers along with peculiar knowledge gained through employment that provides a means to pirate the customer. Kohls, 203 N.W.2d at 211; Ehlers, 188 N.W.2d at 373; Orkin Exterminating Co., Inc. v. Burnett, 259 Iowa 1218, 1222-23, 146 N.W.2d 320, 324 (1967); Cogley Clinic v. Martini, 253 Iowa 541, 112 N.W.2d 678, (1962); Federated Mutual Implement and Hardware Insurance Co. v. Erickson, 252 Iowa 1208, 1215-16, 110 N.W.2d 264, 267 (1961); Sioux City Night Patrol v. Mathwig, 224 Iowa 748, 752-53, 277 N.W. 457, 460 (1938). Where there is little customer contact, we have refused to enforce the covenant on the basis that the restriction was unreasonable. Pierce, 245 Iowa at 1059, 65 N.W,2d at 408.
Proximity to customers is only one aspect. Other aspects, including the nature of the business itself, accessibility to information peculiar to the employer’s business, and the nature of the occupation which is restrained, must be considered along with matters of basic fairness. 54 Am.Jur.2d, Monopolies, Restraints of Trade, and Unfair Trade Practices § 512 at 959 (1971). Jindrich’s position as a manager did place him in close proximity with his employer’s customers. Although his position bears some similarity with the employees’ positions in prior cases where restrictive covenants were upheld, other important differences support Jindrich’s claim that the covenant was not necessary to protect Glass’s business.
Glass’s managers received little training. An employee could learn installation of auto glass by on-the-job instructions in anywhere from one to thirty days, depending on his mechanical ability. The sales training was also unsophisticated. The district representative taught them to use the yellow pages of the telephone book to acquaint themselves with the names of potential customers such as insurance agencies and auto repair shops. Managers were allowed to take a Dale Carnagie course. Thus, Jindrich received little specialized training and there were no trade secrets or exclusive customer lists which he could purloin. In summary, we conclude Jindrich, unlike many of the employees in our previous cases, did not receive from his employer nor did he possess any special training or peculiar knowledge that would allow him to unjustly enrich himself at the expense of his former employer. See Orkin, 259 Iowa at 1222, 146 N.W.2d at 323 (employee given eight weeks’ training in exterminating insects and methods of operation); Federated, 252 Iowa at 1215, 110 N.W.2d at 268 (insurance company’s agent had intimate knowledge of customer list, policyholders’ insurance needs and, undoubtedly, policy expiration dates); Cogley Clinic, 253 Iowa at 544, 112 N.W.2d at 679-80 (cost clinic $10,000 to train a new doctor and doctor’s acquaintance with patients, referral doctors, hospital personnel and local procedures was through his association with the clinic); Mathwig, 224 Iowa at 753, 277 N.W. at 460 (employee’s position made him privy to con*383fidential information about his employer’s business and the property of its customers).
We also believe that Jindrich did not fall into the classification of what we might refer to as a route case. In Kohls, the employee was given a designated area in which he routinely serviced his employer’s customers. 203 N.W.2d at 210. Similarly, in Orkin the employee was given an established route where he regularly serviced the company accounts. 259 Iowa at 1224, 146 N.W.2d at 323. In referring to route cases, we stated in Pierce that in these cases “the employee has had a close contact with the employer’s customers and it is only fair on termination of his employment there be an interval when a new employee will be able to get acquainted with the customers.” 245 Iowa at 1058, 65 N.W.2d at 409. We believe from the testimony of the witnesses that Glass’s business in Iowa City did not lend itself to the type of close personal relationship with the customers that a normal route salesman ordinarily would develop.
The outlet was described as the store or shop. Glass’s management stated that the business was no different than a hamburger store where everyone is a customer. The manager went out from the outlet at times to solicit business; however, there was no established routine of calls and service to customers. Primarily, it is a walk-in business. Moreover, the glass business in Iowa City is highly competitive. There are four major glass distributing agencies there along with numerous body shops and garages that install their own auto glass. The large customers such as insurance companies, body shops, and auto dealers used several different suppliers and were not exclusive customers of Glass. Auto glass sales are primarily generated by the location of the supplier, availability of immediate service and the quality of the work.
Additionally, unlike the route employees in both Ehlers and Kohls, Jindrich did not attempt to solicit Glass’s customers for himself while he was employed by Glass. Ehlers, 188 N.W.2d at 373; Kohls, 203 N.W.2d at 210. Nor did he avail himself of a list of exclusive customers or other peculiar knowledge gained in employment to pirate away Glass’s customers. Federated, 252 Iowa at 1215, 110 N.W.2d at 268.
Finally, Jindrich had not worked in Johnson County for almost a year before he went into competition. During this time, he was not in contact with Iowa City customers and was unavailable to them until he set up his partnership in December of 1981. Any opportunity to pirate away customers because of his close proximity to them during his employment was significantly reduced by this prolonged absence from the glass business in the Iowa City area.
In summary, we find that Glass’s claim, based on Jindrich’s close proximity with customers, has some merit. Nevertheless, we find this claim is considerably weakened by the nature of the auto glass business in Iowa City and by the termination of the relationship between Jindrich and the customers for a period of 11' months. Were this the only evidence that must be considered in covenant not to compete cases, we still might be disposed to grant enforcement, despite Glass’s weaker showing of .the necessity for protection.
In testing the validity of a restrictive covenant, we must look to the facts and circumstances of the particular case that shed light on the reasonableness of the restraint as applied to the individual interests of both parties. Although an employer has an interest in protecting his business from an employee’s use of personal influence or peculiar knowledge gained in employment, the employer has no right to unnecessarily interfere with the employee following any trade or calling for which he is fitted and from which he may earn his livelihood. An employee cannot be precluded from exercising the skill and general knowledge he has acquired or increased through experience or even instruction while in the employment. Baker v. Starkey, 259 Iowa 480, 493-94, 144 N.W.2d 889, 897 (1966). Thus we are required to consider the employee’s situation and the sur*384rounding circumstances in order to fairly weigh the interests of the parties.
The facts indicate that Jindrich only possessed a high school education and had little training for any other type of employment. Both parties agree he was an excellent manager for Glass and possessed natural sales and management ability. He was undergoing severe financial problems because of a. marital breakup and the necessity to support his children. He wanted to remain in Iowa City because he was attempting to gain custody of his children and he wanted to exercise his full visitation rights. Iowa City was also his home and he always had lived there except for the short period of time when he was manager of Glass’s outlet in Burlington, Iowa. Finally, despite his innate sales and management abilities, Jindrich was unable to obtain full-time employment after he quit his job at Glass’s outlet in Davenport. In addition to these facts demonstrating Jindrich’s need to remain in Iowa City, his pressing financial situation, and his inability to obtain full-time employment in the area, another element in this case tilts the balance in Jind-rich’s favor.
Although the consideration may be sufficient to bind a noncompetitive covenant, the court may still consider it in determining whether the consideration is grossly disproportionate to the injury incurred by the covenanter or the benefit accruing to the covenantee from the enforcement of the covenant. 54 Am.Jur.2d Monopolies, Restraints of Trade, and Unfair Trade Practices § 513 at 960 (1971).
Jindrich signed the covenant not to compete approximately one year after his promotion to manager of the Iowa City outlet. He did not receive any additional compensation, security, promises or other benefits. Glass also testified Jindrich was not required to sign it and no adverse action would probably have been taken if he refused to do so. Thus, while his continued employment served as sufficient consideration for the restrictive covenant, we view Jindrich’s gain from the contract to be grossly disproportionate to the injury he would sustain from enforcement of the restrictive covenant. We also find the potential gain to Glass from enforcement does not outweigh the injury Jindrich would sustain.
The general manager of Glass indicated that any management change affected sales. He testified sales would level off during the first year rather than show an increase. He also testified that it usually took a new manager 6 months to establish himself with the customers and offset any detriment created by a change in management. After Jindrich was transferred to Davenport, the 1981 sales of the Iowa City outlet dropped 5 percent. In 1982, the year Jindrich began competing with Glass, sales recovered and were comparable to the 1980 figures. Although Glass claimed that they anticipated a gain in 1982, we note that contrary to the usual pattern the 1981 sales decreased rather than leveling off after the management change.
Since the new manager had 11 months without competition from Jindrich to establish himself with the customers and the 1982 sales are comparable to the 1980 sales, we conclude Glass has not shown Jindrich’s subsequent competition caused substantial harm to its business. In arriving at this conclusion, we are aware that Jindrich has done business with some óf Glass’s customers. As noted earlier, these customers were not exclusive customers and seldom did all of their business at one shop. Indeed, despite Jindrich's solicitation of these customers, almost all of them are still doing business with Glass.
Admittedly, not all of our past cases have required a concrete showing of harm from subsequent competition by a former employee as a prerequisite to obtaining enforcement of noncompetitive covenants. Cogley Clinic v. Martini, 253 Iowa at 548, 112 N.W.2d at 682. We think, however, the circumstances of this case require a greater showing of harm or, conversely, a greater likelihood of expected gain to Glass before it is entitled to enforce the restrictive covenant.
*385In summary, we find that the enforcement of the covenant is not reasonably necessary for the protection of Glass’s business and would be unreasonably restrictive of Jindrich’s rights. For these reasons, we agree that the trial court should have dismissed plaintiff’s petition.
AFFIRMED.
All Justices concur except CARTER, J., who dissents.

=== CASE 2225201 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:40.079323+00 ===

90 Ill. App. 2d 356 (1967)
232 N.E.2d 750
Government Employees Insurance Company, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Saweren J. Dennis, et al., Defendants-Appellants.
Gen. No. 67-122.
Illinois Appellate Court  Second District.
December 21, 1967.
*357 Reese, Schlueter & Ecklund, of Rockford, for appellants.
Early and Lundin, of Rockford, for appellee.
*358 MR. PRESIDING JUSTICE DAVIS delivered the opinion of the court.
Plaintiff, Government Employees Insurance Company (herein called GEICO) brought this suit seeking a declaratory judgment that an automobile insurance policy issued by it was null and void from its inception. Saweren J. Dennis, the insured, Patricia Gilbertson, the driver of the insured car, and Marjorie Maffei and Joni Lynn Short, two persons injured while riding with Patricia Gilbertson, all were joined as defendants in the action. A jury returned a verdict finding the issues for the defendants, the trial court entered judgment for the plaintiff notwithstanding such verdict and the defendants have appealed.
This case was previously before this court and our opinion was reported in 65 Ill. App. 2d 365, 212 NE2d 759 (1965). The first trial was before the court, without a jury. On appeal, we reversed and remanded the judgment of the trial court against the plaintiff, GEICO, with directions for a new trial in accordance with the views therein expressed. We will summarize the factual background reported in our earlier decision and the additional matters brought out or occurring subsequent to our first decision. The basis of GEICO's complaint  to have its insurance policy declared void  is, in part, the misrepresentation and concealment of material facts.
Dennis made an application to GEICO for insurance on two cars, the title thereto being in his name. In his application, he stated that his fiancee, Mrs. Patricia Gilbertson, (herein called Gilbertson), would drive one of the cars  a 1956 Pontiac  ninety-five per cent of the time. The policy was issued on August 27, 1962, and the declaration stating that Dennis was the owner of the 1956 Pontiac, was made a part of the policy.
Within a few days after issuing the policy, GEICO sent a questionnaire to Dennis to be completed by Gilbertson. In this questionnaire she stated that no insurance company had "refused, cancelled or refused to *359 renew any automobile insurance" for her. However, the evidence conclusively established that in 1960 Gilbertson owned a Ford which was involved in an accident when, ironically, her 1957 Ford was being driven by the same Marjorie Maffei who is one of the defendants in this action. At that time, no liability insurance was carried on the Ford car. Thereafter, Gilbertson sought such insurance coverage. She was refused insurance by one company, and was told by another that a policy would issue, but only through an assigned risk plan, which she did not accept. Subsequently, she bought the Pontiac in question, which she admittedly owned, although the title thereto was in Dennis. As to her answer on the questionnaire that she had not been refused any insurance, she stated that she had forgotten all about the other insurance company refusals.
Within a month after the issuance of the policy, Gilbertson was driving the Pontiac and was involved in an accident in which her passengers, the defendants, Maffei and Short, were injured. Marjorie Maffei is the defendant who is prosecuting this appeal. She raises three issues for review:
(1) Was she denied a vested property right in the insurance policy without due process of law in violation of her constitutional rights?
(2) Were the provisions of section 154 of Article IX of the Insurance Code (Ill Rev Stats 1965, c 73, par 766) interpreted by this court so as to deny her of her constitutional rights?
(3) Did the trial court err in depriving her of the findings of a jury and in making certain rulings on the evidence and law?
The major portion of defendants' brief is devoted to the contention that the plaintiff should not be permitted to rescind or have its policy declared null and void after the date of the accident because to do so would deprive Maffei *360 of vested property rights without due process of law. She attempts to draw a number of analogies to justify this position, admitting that she has found no case directly supporting her contention, but arguing that we should depart from the law as it presently is to protect her constitutional rights.
We do not believe this argument merits extended discussion. The defendants first appealed to the Supreme Court alleging these constitutional issues as grounds for the appeal to that Court. In transferring the case to this court, the Supreme Court said:
"This case is here on direct appeal from the trial court from a declaratory judgment order holding that the plaintiff insurance company was not obligated under an automobile liability insurance policy. The person who was injured in the automobile accident was a party to the suit and participated therein. She contends that upon her being injured she acquired a vested interest under the policy and that the company could not escape liability because of any policy defense which it might have against the policy holder. She argues that the ruling of the trial court deprived her of due process of law. There was no lack of procedural due process for she had an opportunity to participate in the suit. The question of whether the trial court's judgment was correct presents only a question of error and not a substantial constitutional question. On the Court's own motion the cause is transferred to the Appellate Court for the Second District."
[1-3] We agree that automobile public liability insurance assumes an importance to the general public beyond that normally found in private contracts. Because the general public could be subjected to possible injury through the operation of the car in question, its *361 members may be treated as third-party beneficiaries. They possess a sufficient interest in the procurement and coverage under such policies to be classified as a real party in interest in an insurance contract. Simmon v. Iowa Mut. Cas. Co., 3 Ill. 2d 318, 322, 324, 121 NE2d 509 (1954); Gothberg v. Nemerovski, 58 Ill. App. 2d 372, 385-387 incl., 208 NE2d 12 (1965). This, however, does not afford an injured person any rights greater than those actually resulting from the policy itself. As a third-party beneficiary, such a third person's rights must stand or fall on the contract itself. The GEICO policy recognized this right. It, like the policy in the Gothberg case, provided that any person who had secured a judgment against the insured could recover under the policy "to the extent of the insurance afforded by the policy."
[4] Defendant Maffei can only recover against GEICO to the extent that insurance was afforded under the policy in question. If, in fact, that policy was null and void because of material misrepresentations, then she could make no recovery against GEICO. As the Supreme Court pointed out, she has had an opportunity to participate in the trial and, in fact, did so. She was not denied any procedural due process. She was a third-party beneficiary of this insurance contract, but only insofar as it provided insurance coverage.
[5] As to the defendants' contentions regarding the interpretation to be given to chapter 73, par 766, Ill Rev Stats 1965, that issue was raised and determined in the former appeal of this case, and we are not at liberty in this appeal in the same case, to reexamine and redetermine such issue. Government Employees Inc. Co. v. Dennis, supra, 370-372 incl. Also see: People v. Winston, 399 Ill. 311, 318, 319, 77 NE2d 664 (1948); Lundstrom v. Winnebago Newspapers, Inc., 42 Ill. App. 2d 306, 312, 313, 192 NE2d 307 (1963).
*362 The defendants, without the citation of authority, contend that a certain letter and certain admissions introduced into evidence were erroneous. They urge that the introduction of the evidence was erroneous in that it would permit Maffei's "vested interests" to be defeated. In reply to this contention, we reiterate that her interests in the contract, if any, could be no greater than the insurance coverage actually afforded by the contract; and that any person who had secured a judgment against the insured could recover under the policy only to the extent of the insurance afforded by the policy. Maffei could not by reason of her injury, unfortunate though it may be, extend the coverage afforded by the contract or the liability assumed by GEICO. Consequently, the evidence relating to whether the insurance contract was valid and in force, or null and void, was relevant and was properly admitted.
The insurance policy contained a provision reserving the right in the insurer to rescind for fraud or material misrepresentation. On retrial, the underwriting manager for GEICO testified that the insurance policy would not have been issued or maintained if Gilbertson had affirmatively answered that insurance previously had been refused or denied to her. It appears that such an answer would have caused GEICO to make an investigation of the facts, which procedure was not followed when such question was answered in the negative.
The defendants called two witnesses in the insurance business and questioned them regarding the underwriting business and the materiality of certain information in determining whether or not a given risk would be accepted. Neither had any familiarity with the plaintiff company, GEICO, or its procedures and policies in regard to underwriting.
Objections to hypothetical questions presented to these witnesses were sustained upon the grounds that all of the necessary facts were not contained in the questions. *363 However, in the offer of proof, one witness stated that he would take into consideration in determining whether to underwrite a risk, the fact that another insurer had refused insurance to the applicant. He also stated that some insurance companies use this fact as a basis for refusing an application for automobile insurance; and that the effect of a prior refusal is governed by the policy of the company involved and the circumstances which caused the other company to refuse the insurance coverage. The other witness testified that the fact that a party had been refused insurance coverage on two prior occasions, and had answered a questionnaire falsely that no insurance had been refused or denied to her, would "not necessarily" have an effect on the issuance of the policy "because we would order an inspection report."
Finally, the defendants contend that the trial court erred in overturning the verdict of the jury, and that in doing so, the defendants were deprived of their right to trial by jury on those matters which were jury questions. When this case was originally tried, it was tried before the court without a jury. The defendants did not file a jury demand until after the case was remanded. The plaintiff objected to the filing of a jury demand, contending that it came too late, but the court permitted the filing of the demand and the case was tried by the jury.
The trial court set aside the verdict on two grounds: (1) that it erred in permitting the filing of the jury demand in that the defendants were not entitled to a jury determination based upon the jury demand filed after remandment; and (2) that the evidence could not support the verdict in that the representation that Dennis was the owner of the car was false, and the representation that Gilbertson had not previously been denied insurance was false, and both such representations were material to the risk.
[6] As to the failure to file the jury demand until the case was remanded, the Supreme Court in Reese v. *364 Laymon, 2 Ill. 2d 614, 621, 119 NE2d 271 (1954) held that when the cause was remanded, its status was not as though the case had not yet been commenced, but rather, only as though no trial had been held, with a complaint and answer on file, but no jury demand made by either party. Thus, the time requirements of section 64 of the Civil Practice Act (Ill Rev Stats 1965, c 110, par 64(1)) were held to be constitutional, even though construed to deny the right to a jury trial when demanded for the first time after a judgment on a trial without a jury is reversed and the cause remanded for a new trial. If there is no right to demand a jury under given circumstances at the original trial, there is no reason to grant greater rights on the retrial after a case has been remanded. Wherever possible, however, the right to a trial by jury is afforded even though the litigant seeking such right has not strictly complied with the statute. Hudson v. Leverenz, 10 Ill. 2d 87, 93, 139 NE2d 255 (1956); Department of Public Works and Buildings v. Melling, 78 Ill. App. 2d 37, 41-43 incl., 222 NE2d 515 (1966). Under section 59 of the Civil Practice Act and present Supreme Court Rule 183, the court, "for good cause shown on motion after notice" may extend the time for the doing of any particular act. It does not appear, however, that the defendants here filed any such motion after notice, or showed any good cause for extending the time within which to file a jury demand. They merely filed their demand, to which the plaintiff, GEICO, objected. The defendants only contention is that a disputed fact issue did not arise until after the first opinion by this court. From our examination of the pleadings and the issues presented to us on the first appeal, we do not believe this to be so.
However, the question of whether the jury demand was properly filed does not assume great significance in our determination. We believe that the trial court properly entered the judgment notwithstanding the verdict based *365 upon the evidence before it. Whether the plaintiff had the right to declare the insurance policy null and void depends on whether certain representations were made, were false, and were material to the risk.
[7] Viewing the evidence most favorably to the defendants, we must answer these questions in the affirmative as to two representations. They are: the representation by Dennis that he was the owner of the car and the representation by Gilbertson that she was never refused or denied insurance coverage.
As heretofore stated in our earlier opinion, the failure of Dennis to disclose the true ownership was material to the risk. This is particularly true under the factual situation before us: Gilbertson was admittedly the owner of the car, but the title thereto was placed in Dennis for the obvious reasons that Gilbertson could not then register a car in Illinois, and would have had difficulty in obtaining insurance coverage thereon. She had actual control over the car, but she was not, as represented, the "fiancee" of Dennis.
[8] An insurer is interested in ascertaining the true owner of a car particularly where the policy covers any person who may be driving the car with the owner's consent. The character and judgment of the owner, as well as his or her true status, have a definite bearing upon the risk involved. The status, number and character of the persons who are likely to be driving the car with the owner's permission are also material to the risk. The representation as to ownership was false and materially affected the risk or hazard assumed. Government Employees Ins. Co. v. Dennis, supra, 65 Ill. App. 2d 365, 372, 212 NE2d 759; Western States Mut. Automobile Ins. Co. v. May, 18 Ill. App. 2d 442, 452, 453, 152 NE2d 608 (1958).
We also stated in our earlier opinion that the representation that she had not previously been denied insurance was material to the risk. (Government Employees *366 Ins. Co. v. Dennis, supra, 65 Ill. App. 2d 365, 212 NE2d 759, and cases cited therein.) It is clear from the evidence that the statement was made and that it was false. It is also obvious from the testimony of the employee of GEICO, as well as the testimony of the defendants' witnesses, that the fact of prior refusal or denial of insurance was material. It, to use their description, "waves a red flag," and is a cause for further investigation, if not an outright refusal to insure.
[9] The defendants also contend that the plaintiff is barred by laches from asserting that the policy is null and void. The accident happened on September 27, 1962. On or about October 25, 1962, the plaintiff first became aware of the misrepresentations to which we have referred. The defendant, Maffei, had counsel by that time. The plaintiff brought this suit in April of 1963. We fail to see how there was either a sufficient lapse of time or other circumstances to cause undue prejudice such as to constitute laches. Freymark v. Handke, 415 Ill. 360, 366, 367, 114 NE2d 349 (1953); Monroe v. Civil Service Commission of Waukegan, 55 Ill. App. 2d 354, 357, 204 NE2d 486 (1965).
We believe that this was a case in which all of the evidence, when viewed in its aspect most favorable to defendants, so overwhelmingly favored the GEICO that no contrary verdict based on that evidence could ever stand. Pedrick v. Peoria & E.R. Co., 37 Ill. 2d 494, 510, 229 NE2d 504 (1967). Consequently, the judgment of the trial court is thus affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
MORAN and ABRAHAMSON, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2225203 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:40.14644+00 ===

38 Ill. 2d 575 (1967)
232 N.E.2d 734
In re ESTATE OF GEORGE WILLIAM MOREY  (FORREST L. MOREY, Admr., Appellant,
v.
MARY O'BRIEN et al., Appellees.)
No. 40577.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed November 30, 1967.
Rehearing denied January 18, 1968.
*576 WILLIAMS AND RESCH, of Casey, for appellant.
LEMNA & LEE, of Tuscola, for appellees.
Reversed and remanded.
Mr. JUSTICE KLUCZYNSKI delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiff initiated this action in the probate division of the circuit court of Douglas County by a petition for citation to discover assets of the estate of the decedent, George Morey. The purpose of the action was to determine the ownership of a share certificate of the Villa Grove Building and Loan Association representing 50 installment shares, having a matured value of $100 each, issued in the name of "George W. Morey or Mary O'Brien or Survivor," which was paid for by decedent and found among his personal effects. The administrator-plaintiff claimed the proceeds of the account for the estate on the basis that there was no joint ownership and right of survivorship in Mary O'Brien since no written agreement was executed by the registered owners. Villa Grove Building and Loan Association filed a petition of interpleader asking for declaratory relief to determine the interests of possible claimants to the property represented by the certificate. Mary O'Brien, one of the interpleaded parties and a claimant, maintained that the certificate represented shares of stock in which the right of survivorship was created by registration of the stock on the association's books in the names of the joint tenants or survivor. After a hearing, the trial court found Mary O'Brien *577 to be the owner of the 50 shares by right of survivorship.
The Appellate Court, Fourth District, affirmed (79 Ill. App. 2d 257) and we granted leave to appeal.
The facts pertinent to this appeal are as follows: On September 6, 1952, Villa Grove Building and Loan Association issued share certificate No. 2175 representing 50 installment shares to George Morey in the following form: `George W. Morey or Cleo Morey or Barbara Lee Baker, or survivor." On July 2, 1958, George Morey endorsed and surrendered certificate No. 2175 to the association which in turn issued certificate No. 2276 also representing 50 installment shares in a new form, to-wit: "George W. Morey or Jeanie McCollom or Judy McCollom, or survivors." Then, on September 17, 1962, George Morey endorsed and surrendered certificate No. 2276 to the association which issued the certificate in question, No. 2352, designating the owners as "George W. Morey or Mary O'Brien, or survivor." The form of this certificate is set out in extenso in the appellate court opinion (79 Ill. App.2d at 259-260) and we need not reproduce it here. For the certificate holder's convenience, a passbook was issued to reflect installments paid, the last payment apparently being made between the certificate's date of issuance and the decedent's death in October, 1962.
The parties other than the plaintiff, the association, and Mary O'Brien were defaulted for failure to appear. The testimony disclosed that all the transfers of the certificates were carried out on the books of the association in customary manner without requiring any written agreement to create a joint tenancy with right of survivorship. Specifically, the testimony of the association officers and employees was that at the time the certificates were issued, association capital included both fully paid and installment shares which were represented by share certificates, that the withdrawable capital accounts of the association were represented by passbooks, and that consequently the installment shares in question were never referred to as withdrawable *578 accounts and were transferable only on the books of the association. An officer further testified that, had either decedent or Mary O'Brien surrendered the certificate to the association, he or she would have received the cash value of the shares at the time of surrender.
The sole issue presented in this court, as below, is whether the registration of the certificate on the books of the association in the form described was sufficient to vest title in Mary O'Brien with right of survivorship. Necessary to resolution of this issue is the determination of the nature of the certificate since under the Joint Rights and Obligations Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1961, chap. 76, par. 2(b)) and other relevant statutory authority, specifically, the Illinois Savings and Loan Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1961, chap. 32, pars. 701 et seq.), the procedures prescribed for creating joint tenancies differ with the nature of the personalty. For example, to create joint rights in a bank account it is necessary to execute a written agreement to that effect signed by the parties (Doubler v. Doubler, 412 Ill. 597), whereas in the case of corporate stock registration of ownership on the corporation books in appropriate statutory language is sufficient. (Frey v. Wubbena, 26 Ill. 2d 62, 69.) It was in view of this latter holding, that the appellate court resolved the issue in favor of Mary O'Brien, since it found, from an examination of the certificate and the testimony of the association officers concerning what they intended the certificate to represent, that "the shares of stock represented by the Certificate, at least when matured, as they were at the time of issuance of Certificate No. 2352, fall into the category of corporate stock and not into the category of a bank account."
While the record tends to support this finding, since the parties evidently regarded the certificate as similar to a share of corporate stock, we hold that the intent of the parties is not the only determining factor for the reason that all the rights and duties of the association, including the *579 types of shares it may issue and the procedure for creating joint rights therein, were and are controlled by the Illinois Savings and Loan Act. See Ill. Rev. Stat. 1961, chap. 32, pars. 703, 704.
Section 4-1(a) of that Act, in pertinent part, provides: "The capital of an association may be represented by withdrawable capital accounts (shares and share accounts) or permanent reserve shares or both, as provided in this article and as authorized by the articles of incorporation." (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1961, chap. 32, par. 761(a).) These categories are exclusive as no authorization is made anywhere in the Act for the issuance of any other type of account.
Section 4-2 (par. 762) defines "Withdrawable capital accounts" prescribing that such accounts are entitled to dividends, are nonassessable for either debts or losses of the association and must be issued according to plan, including a "(1) Regular installment plan: agreed weekly or monthly payments, with dividends credited to or in behalf of the account until the ultimate value agreed upon in the subscription is reached." (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1961, chap. 32, par. 762(d)(1).) Section 4-8 sheds further light on the nature of a withdrawable capital account as it provides that such accounts be evidenced by one or more certificates and/or a passbook delivered to the holder, and that these evidences of membership are nonnegotiable and, unlike permanent reserve shares, not subject to article 8 of the Uniform Commercial Code concerning investment securities. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1961, chap. 26, par. 8-101 et seq.) Regarding the nature of permanent reserve shares, section 4-3 of the Illinois Savings and Loan Act provides that they are nonwithdrawable, with certain exceptions, until all other liabilities of the association, including payment of withdrawable capital accounts, have been satisfied, and that they may issue only upon full cash payment of not less than their par value.
When the characteristics of the instant certificate are *580 examined in light of these statutory provisions, it is manifest that this certificate represents a withdrawable capital account of the Villa Grove Building and Loan Association. Moreover, aside from the dictates of these provisions, which we find controlling, there are important factual distinctions between this certificate and a share of corporate stock which mitigate against treating them alike. Whereas a share of corporate stock may not be issued until consideration in the amount of its par or stated value is received (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1961, chap. 32, par. 157.17), the instant certificate could be and was issued with payment of its matured value to be made by installments and the crediting of association dividends. In addition, all or part of the capital paid in for the certificate was withdrawable at will before or after full payment of the matured value of the share. These factors unquestionably indicate that the certificate cannot properly be considered in the category of a corporate stock and substantiate our conclusion, based on the statutory provisions, that the certificate represents a withdrawable capital account. As such, section 4-10 of the Illinois Savings and Loan Act sets forth the applicable procedure for the creation of a right of survivorship in this type of capital account, and makes the signing of an agreement among the parties mandatory. (Frey v. Wubbena, 26 Ill. 2d 62, 68.) Since no such agreement was executed here, we hold that no joint tenancy with right of survivorship was created in the certificate.
As Mary O'Brien advances no other theory to support her claim to ownership of the certificate, the fifty shares in the association represented by the certificate belong to the estate claiming it. (See Doubler v. Doubler.) Therefore, the judgments of the trial and appellate court are reversed and the cause is remanded to the circuit court of Douglas County with directions to enter an order consistent with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded, with directions.

=== CASE 2223798 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:08.109943+00 ===

126 Mich. App. 754 (1983)
338 N.W.2d 4
PEOPLE
v.
McCUAIG
Docket No. 61111.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided July 6, 1983.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Louis J. Caruso, Solicitor General, L. Brooks Patterson, Prosecuting Attorney, Robert C. Williams, Chief Appellate Counsel, and Margaret G. Horenstein, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
James Howard Grant, for defendant.
Before: DANHOF, C.J., and V.J. BRENNAN and N.A. BAGULEY,[*] JJ.
DANHOF, C.J.
Defendant was convicted of criminal sexual conduct in the first-degree, MCL 750.520b; MSA 28.788(2), following a bench trial. He was sentenced to a term of from 10 to 25 years *757 in prison. Defendant appeals his conviction as of right.
Defendant's conviction arose out of an incident which occurred during the early morning hours of May 27, 1980. On that date, complainant was driving home from a friend's house when she noticed a dark-colored AMC Jeep stopped at the intersection of 12 Mile Road and Telegraph Road in the City of Southfield. Complainant was travelling on 12 Mile Road at the time. Shortly thereafter, she noticed headlights in her rear-view mirror. She drove to the home of her parents, with whom she resided in Southfield. After she exited from her car, a man appeared and placed his hand over her mouth. He led her to the side of the house where he forced her to engage in an act of fellatio and then fled.
Complainant became hysterical and went into the house where she was met by her mother. Her mother called the police. A description of complainant's assailant and the Jeep she had seen earlier was relayed over the police dispatch. The defendant was stopped at the intersection of 12 Mile Road and Telegraph Road a short time later. He was driving a dark-colored AMC Jeep. Complainant was transported to the scene and identified defendant as her assailant. The identification took place less than 30 minutes after the assault occurred.
Defendant claims that his right to counsel was violated because he was without counsel at the on-the-scene identification. We disagree.
Generally, a defendant is entitled to have counsel present during identification. People v Jackson, 391 Mich. 323; 217 NW2d 22 (1974). However, an exception to the rule exists where a prompt on-the-scene identification is conducted. People v Tucker, *758 86 Mich. App. 608, 611; 273 NW2d 498 (1978). The reasons for the exception are: (1) it permits the police to ascertain whom to arrest; and (2) such prompt identification may exculpate the person apprehended. People v Turner, 120 Mich. App. 23, 34-35; 328 NW2d 5 (1982).
At present, a split exists amount various panels of this Court concerning the scope of the exception. Compare People v Dixon, 85 Mich. App. 271; 271 NW2d 196 (1978), with People v Coward, 111 Mich. App. 55; 315 NW2d 144 (1981). We are of the opinion that the test adopted by the Court in People v Turner, supra, represents the most well-reasoned approach. In Turner, supra, the Court ruled that police may conduct a prompt on-the-scene identification without counsel being present unless the police have very strong evidence that the person stopped is the culprit. Strong evidence exists where the person apprehended has confessed or presented highly distinctive evidence of the crime or where there is such a close proximity in place and time to the scene of the crime that it is highly likely that the person apprehended is the perpetrator. Turner, pp 36-37.
In the present case, strong evidence was not present. Although complainant had seen the Jeep on her way home, she did not see it after she left the intersection of 12 Mile Road and Telegraph Road. She could not tell if the headlights she had seen behind her were those of the Jeep. Furthermore, although defendant had grass stains on his pants and other aspects of his appearance presented evidence that he was the culprit, a longer period of time had elapsed between the assault and the time the defendant was stopped than was necessary for a person to travel the distance between the home of the complainant's parents and *759 the place where defendant was stopped. Finally, although complainant had a fairly good opportunity to view her assailant, she was not able to give the police a particularly accurate description concerning the clothing he was wearing.
Defendant next complains that statements he made to police following his arrest should have been suppressed. At the time of his arrest, defendant was informed of his basic rights as spelled out in Miranda v Arizona, 384 U.S. 436; 86 S. Ct. 1602; 16 L. Ed. 2d 694 (1966). In response thereto, defendant indicated that he wished to remain silent. No further questioning was conducted at that time. However, at approximately 10:20 a.m., after defendant had been transported to the police station, he was again advised of his rights. Defendant indicated that he wished to remain silent and that he wanted to speak with an attorney. The officer responded that he would comply with defendant's request and that no further questioning would take place. However the officer did advise defendant concerning the nature of the charge against him and described the circumstances which led the police to believe that defendant was the culprit. Defendant responded by stating that the officer had been fair with him and that he had changed his mind and wished to give him a statement. After defendant signed a waiver of rights form, he gave a statement to the police in which he admitted that he had engaged in sex with the complainant. However, he maintained that the encounter was completely consensual. The version of events he testified to at trial was entirely consistent with the statement he made to the police.
Once a criminal defendant invokes his right to counsel all interrogation must cease until counsel is made available unless the accused himself initiates *760 further communication. Edwards v Arizona, 451 U.S. 477, 484-485; 101 S. Ct. 1880; 68 L. Ed. 2d 378 (1981); People v Paintman, 412 Mich. 518, 525; 315 NW2d 418 (1982). Therefore, the critical determination is whether defendant initiated the questioning or whether defendant's statement was made in response to further interrogation by the police officer. People v Lytal, 415 Mich. 603, 614; 329 NW2d 738 (1982).
In our opinion, the statements made by the police officer, which merely advised defendant of the crime with which he was charged and which described the events which led to that charge, cannot be characterized as further interrogation by the officer or its functional equivalent. See Rhode Island v Innis, 446 U.S. 291, 300-301; 100 S. Ct. 1682; 64 L. Ed. 2d 297 (1980). The nature of the statements were not such that it can be said that they were intended to elicit a response. Furthermore, the record does not support a finding that the officer should have known that defendant was likely to change his mind in response to the statement. On the contrary, the statement was made in connection with the officer's acknowledgment that he would comply with defendant's request to see an attorney and that no further questioning would occur. Defendant responded by unequivocally indicating that he had changed his mind and that he wished to speak with the officer. Thereafter, he executed a waiver of rights form. The statement which he gave, unlike the statement made in Paintman, supra, was, to a large degree, exculpatory. In our opinion, a clear demonstration was shown that defendant knowingly, voluntarily and intelligently waived his previously invoked right to counsel. Paintman, supra, p 528.
Defendant claims that he was denied the effective *761 assistance of trial counsel. People v Garcia, 398 Mich. 250; 247 NW2d 547 (1976). Two of defendant's claims with respect to this issue relate to defense counsel's failure to move to suppress, in a timely fashion, the on-the-scene identification and the statements made to the police officer by the defendant. Since we have previously determined that that evidence was admissible, we find these claims to be without merit.
Defendant also complains that his trial counsel's failure to investigate the topography of the area where the events took place inhibited his attorney's ability to effectively cross-examine the complainant and constituted a serious mistake without which he would have had a reasonably likely chance of acquittal. People v Degraffenreid, 19 Mich. App. 702, 715-719; 173 NW2d 317 (1969). This argument is refuted by the findings made by the trial court following defendant's motion for a new trial. The court indicated that it would not have decided the case differently had this issue been more thoroughly explored. We find no reason to upset the court's ruling.
Defendant next complains that resentencing is required because he was not permitted to be present during a presentence in-chambers conference involving the court, the prosecutor and his trial attorney. Defendant has failed to demonstrate that he was prejudiced by his absence from the conference. People v Pulley, 411 Mich. 523, 531-532; 309 NW2d 170 (1981).
Defendant finally complains that he is entitled to be resentenced because sentencing was based on inaccurate information contained in the presentence report. The presentence report contained a reference to another criminal incident of a sexual nature in which defendant was alleged to have *762 been involved. It is clear that the court seriously considered that incident in sentencing defendant despite the fact that the report indicated that defendant denied that the incident had taken place. In his motion for a new trial, defendant again claimed that no such incident had taken place. The trial court did not respond to defendant's claim.
It is clear that a sentencing court may consider other criminal activities in which a defendant was involved even though they did not result in conviction. People v Raymond, 119 Mich. App. 413, 416-417; 326 NW2d 526 (1982). However, reliance on such information is not proper unless it is accurate. See People v Books, 95 Mich. App. 500, 505; 291 NW2d 94 (1980). In the present case, the court did not conduct a hearing to determine the accuracy of the statement. It failed to respond at all to defendant's claim that the information was inaccurate. Therefore, the case is remanded for a hearing at which the court shall determine the accuracy of the statement. If the statement is determined to be accurate, defendant's sentence shall stand. If determined otherwise, defendant shall be resentenced without consideration of the complained-of matter.
Defendant's conviction is affirmed. The case is remanded for proceedings in conformity with this opinion. We do not retain jurisdiction.
NOTES
[*]  Circuit judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.

=== CASE 9740490 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:26.011892+00 ===

Krivosha, C.J.
The appellant, Charles Jess Palmer (Palmer), appeals from a jury verdict finding him guilty of felony murder, in violation of the provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-303(2) (Reissue 1979), and from the subsequent sentence of death imposed by the trial court. This is the second appearance of this case before this court. See State v. Palmer, 210 Neb. 206, 313 N.W.2d 648 (1981) (Palmer I). The facts of the case are fully set out in Palmer I and for purposes of this appeal need not be repeated here.
Palmer has assigned some 26 alleged errors which he maintains entitle him to a reversal of his conviction. We need not consider all of the errors, because if one of his assigned errors, that the trial court erred in permitting his “former wife,” Cheri Palmer, to testify against him, in violation of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 27-505(2) (Reissue 1979), is correct, then we are required by law to once again order a new trial in the case. We have examined the record and find that indeed the trial court did err in permitting Cheri Palmer to testify; therefore, we must reverse the conviction.
Mrs. Palmer did not testify in the first case. This was obviously due to the fact that the Palmers were then still married and she was precluded by the provisions of § 27-505(2), which provide: “During the existence of the marriage, a husband and wife can in no criminal case be a witness against the other. This privilege may be waived only with the consent of both spouses.”
. The record discloses that on February 24, 1982, following our decision in Palmer I, Mrs. Palmer filed *275suit for divorce in the Travis County District Court located in Austin, Texas. A decree of divorce was entered hy the Travis County District Court on May 12, 1982. On May 25, 1982, the State requested the court to grant a continuance of the Palmer murder trial because, apparently, prosecutors intended to call Mrs. Palmer as a witness, but, believing that Palmer would appeal the divorce decree, anticipated that Mrs. Palmer would be ineligible to testify. The trial court denied the continuance and ordered the case to trial. On May 25, 1982, Palmer filed a motion for new trial in the Travis County District Court. On June 8, 1982, when Cheri Palmer testified in the District Court for Hall County, Nebraska, the motion for new trial in the divorce case was still pending in the Texas court; and even without the motion for new trial, this was within the 30-day period after the decree, during which the parties were barred from remarriage. On July 29, 1982, the trial court in Texas overruled the motion for new trial and Palmer filed an appeal with the Texas Court of Civil Appeals. According to the record presently before us, that appeal is still pending.
The question then specifically presented to us is whether Charles Palmer and Cheri Palmer were still husband and wife on June 8, 1982, when Mrs. Palmer testified against Palmer. If they were husband and wife on June 8, 1982, § 27-505(2) clearly precluded Cheri Palmer from testifying without Palmer’s consent. One may argue that the underlying basis for the husband and wife privilege no longer existed in this case and therefore the statute should be so interpreted as to permit Cheri Palmer’s testimony. This court, however, is without authority to do that. As we have previously noted, in the construction of a statute which is clear and unambiguous, courts cannot supply missing language, and it is not within the court’s power to read into a statute meaning which the clear language of the statute does not warrant. See Omaha Public Schools *276v. Hall, 211 Neb. 618, 319 N.W.2d 730 (1982). Moreover, where the language of the statute is plain and unambiguous, no interpretation is needed, and a court is without authority to change such language. See State v. Schneckloth, Koger, and Heathman, 210 Neb. 144, 313 N.W.2d 438 (1981). The Legislature, in adopting § 27-505(2), has barred the testimony of one spouse against another in a criminal case, except as specifically exempted, and we are powerless to ignore its direction.
While at first blush it may appear important to determine which law, Texas or Nebraska, should be applied in determining whether the divorce decree was final and therefore the Palmers no longer spouses, on closer examination it appears to make little difference, because, under either law, the divorce was not final. The law in both Texas and Nebraska seems clear that the relationship of husband and wife continued certainly while the motion for new trial was pending and during the time of appeal. Texas has on two specific occasions directly responded to this question. In the case of Davis v. The State, 96 Tex. Crim. 367, 257 S.W. 1099 (1924), the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals reversed a murder conviction. because the defendant’s wife, who had been granted a divorce, testified on behalf of the State at the trial which occurred while the divorce was pending on appeal. Specifically, the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals held that while a divorce was pending on appeal the wife could not testify against her husband. The rule in Davis was reaffirmed by the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals in Acker v. State, 421 S.W.2d 398 (Tex. Crim. 1967). As in the Davis case, Acker, the defendant, was charged with murder. Shortly after the case was set for trial, the State requested a continuance on the grounds that the only eyewitness, the defendant’s wife, was presently in the process of obtaining a divorce so that, she might testify against him. When the motion for continuance was overruled, the *277State dismissed the criminal charges. The defendant’s wife subsequently divorced him and the charges were later refiled. However, at the time of the defendant’s criminal trial, the divorce case was pending in a Texas Court of Civil Appeals. The trial court overruled the defendant’s motion in limine, as well as his objections at the time of trial to any testimony by his wife. In reversing the defendant’s conviction the Texas appeals court specifically concluded that after rendition of a decree of divorce but before the divorce became effective to change the status of the parties, they are husband and wife with respect to their competency to testify against one another. Specifically, the Texas court held that the pendency of the appeal precluded the divorce from becoming effective so as to change the status of the parties. See, also, Ex Parte J. C. Hodges, 130 Tex. 280, 109 S.W.2d 964 (1937).
The Texas rule is consistent with the general rule. In 97 C.J.S. Witnesses § 80 at 474-75 (1957), the author notes: “Where a decree of divorce is not final, as where there is a writ of error pending, the status of husband and wife continues as far as concerns their competency to testify. During the period after rendition of the decree and before a divorce becomes effective to change the status of the parties, the parties are husband and wife with respect to their competency to testify for or against each other.”
While it appears that Nebraska has never directly passed upon this question, it would appear that the laws regarding divorce in Nebraska are such that a similar rule would apply. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 42-372 (Reissue 1978) specifically provides in part: “A decree dissolving a marriage shall not become final or operative until six months after the decree is rendered, except for the purpose of review by appeal, and for such purpose only the decree shall be treated as a final order as soon as rendered. If an appeal is instituted within one month, such decree shall not *278become final until such proceedings are finally determined. If no such proceedings have been instituted, the court may, at any time within such six months, vacate or modify its decree.” (Emphasis supplied.) Furthermore, we have consistently held that in an appeal to the Supreme Court from a decree of dissolution, the marital status continues until a final determination is had. Lippincott v. Lippincott, 141 Neb. 186, 3 N.W.2d 207 (1942); Westphalen v. Westphalen, 115 Neb. 217, 212 N.W. 429 (1927). Moreover, if one of the parties dies before the 6-month period has expired, the surviving party once again becomes the surviving spouse, entitled to all of the rights and privileges of a surviving spouse. In re Estate of Waller, 116 Neb. 352, 217 N.W. 588 (1928).
It would appear that we have no choice but to determine that Cheri Palmer was still the wife of Charles Jess Palmer on June 8, 1982, and as such was barred from testifying against him. Nor can we regard the error as being nonprejudicial. Her testimony was that of an eyewitness to the alleged crime, and we cannot possibly say that her testimony, if inadmissible, was not prejudicial.
This is not the first time this court has been confronted with such a decision. In the case of Garrett v. State, 118 Neb. 373, 224 N.W. 860 (1929), this court likewise reversed and remanded for new trial a murder conviction because the trial court permitted a former wife to testify when in fact the decree of divorce was void due to the fact that it had been entered 1 day before the statutory waiting period. In ordering the new trial this court observed at 380, 224 N.W. at 863: ‘‘Whether or not the provision is a wise one is not for us to decide. Where a provision is plain and unambiguous in its terms and not susceptible of more than one construction, courts are not concerned, with the consequences that may result therefrom but must enforce the law as they find it.” Courts are often called upon to decide cases con*279trary to their own views but consistent with the law. That is what the American judicial system is all about. Regardless of how we may feel about the matter, the record clearly discloses that the trial court erred in permitting Cheri Palmer to testify. Because that error was prejudicial to the rights of the defendant, he must be granted a new trial, free of error.
Having thus disposed of this case on this error, we need not consider any of the other alleged errors raised by Palmer. The judgment is reversed and the cause remanded with directions for a new trial.
Reversed and remanded for a new trial.

=== CASE 9740491 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:26.016741+00 ===

Boslaugh, J.,
dissenting.
The defendant has been tried twice, convicted of first degree murder, and sentenced to death. The majority now holds that the defendant must be tried a third time or set free because the State used the testimony of his divorced spouse in the second trial.
All authorities seem to agree that once a divorce decree becomes “final,” a divorced spouse is a competent witness. At the time of the second trial in this case, a judgment had been entered in the trial court divorcing the defendant from his spouse. Because the defendant’s appeal in the divorce proceeding was pending, the court holds that the marriage was still “in existence” within the meaning of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 27-505(2) (Reissue 1979).
It seems to me that the relatively few cases that have considered the question and support this result ignore the reason for the rule.
The usual reason given for the rule barring the testimony of one spouse against the other in a criminal proceeding is that “such a policy is necessary to foster family peace.” See Hawkins v. United States, 358 U.S. 74, 79 S. Ct. 136, 3 L. Ed. 2d 125 (1958). Once a dissolution proceeding has proceeded to judgment and a decree of divorce has been entered, it would seem that there is little family peace to be fostered.
*280As Chief Justice Burger observed in Trammel v. United States, 445 U.S. 40, 52, 100 S. Ct. 906, 63 L. Ed. 2d 186 (1980): “The contemporary justification for affording an accused such a privilege is also unpersuasive. When one spouse is willing to testify against the other in a criminal proceeding — whatever the motivation — their relationship is almost certainly in disrepair; there is probably little in the way of marital harmony for the privilege to preserve. In these circumstances, a rule of evidence that permits an accused to prevent adverse spousal testimony seems far more likely to frustrate justice than to foster family peace. Indeed, there is reason to believe that vesting the privilege in the accused could actually undermine the marital relationship.”
The privilege itself has been severely criticized. According to Wigmore, the privilege no longer has adequate reason for retention and is an indefensible obstruction to truth in practice. See 8 J. Wigmore, Evidence in Trials at Common Law § 2228 (1961). In 2 J. Weinstein & M. Berger, Weinstein’s Evidence ¶ 505[02] at 505-10 (1982), the author states: “Nevertheless, many leading commentators concluded that the privilege is unjustified, that it does not contribute to marital felicity, is based on the outmoded concept that husband and wife are one, and causes the suppression of relevant evidence, thereby impeding the doing of justice. Wigmore termed the privilege ‘a legal anachronism,’ McCormick called it ‘an archaic survival of a mystical religious dogma,’ Hutchins, and Slesinger could ‘see no reason for sacrificing individual justice ... to a mythical family unity,’ and both the Model Code and the Uniform Rules refused to adopt such a rule.”
In Trammel v. United States, supra at 48-50, the Court noted: “Since 1958, when Hawkins was decided, support for the privilege against adverse spousal testimony has been eroded further. Thirty-one jurisdictions, including Alaska and Hawaii, then allowed an accused a privilege to prevent adverse *281spousal testimony. 358 U.S., at 81, n. 3 [79 S. Ct. 136, 3 L. Ed. 2d 125 (1958)] (Stewart, J., concurring). The number has now declined to 24. In 1974, the National Conference on Uniform State Laws revised its Uniform Rules of Evidence, but again rejected the Hawkins rule in favor of a limited privilege for confidential communications. See Uniform Rules of Evidence, Rule 504. That proposed rule has been enacted in Arkansas, North Dakota, and Oklahoma' —each of which in 1958 permitted an accused to exclude adverse spousal testimony. The trend in state law toward divesting the accused of the privilege to bar adverse spousal testimony has special relevance because the laws of marriage and domestic relations are concerns traditionally reserved to the states. See Sosna v. Iowa, 419 U.S. 393, 404 [95 S. Ct. 553, 42 L. Ed. 2d 532] (1975). Scholarly criticism of the Hawkins rule hás also continued unabated.”
Some recent cases suggest that divorce or dissolution of the marriage is not necessary to bar the privilege if the facts indicate that in reality there is no marriage to preserve. In United States v. Brown, 605 F.2d 389 (8th Cir. 1979), in noting that the privilege is not absolute, the court said at 396: ‘‘Clincy was totally unharmed by his wife’s testimony. We conclude, moreover, that the marital privilege itself went unscathed in this case. The privilege is not absolute. The Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 501, concerning privileges in general, requires application of common law principles to privileges as those principles ‘may be interpreted . . . in the light of reason and experience.’ Privileges are impediments to the search for truth, finding their justification in the priority of societal values they serve. The higher-than-truth value served by the privilege before us is the protection of the marital bond. Where, as here, Mrs. Clincy was with her husband for two weeks and had not seen him for the entire eight months between his leaving her and the date of trial, it is difficult to visualize *282how preservation of that value would have required the total exclusion of Mrs. Clincy from the witness stand. See United States v. Cameron, 556 F.2d 752, 756 (5th Cir. 1977).”
In United States v. Cameron, 556 F.2d 752 (5th Cir. 1977), in holding the testimony of a spouse admissible, the court said at 755-56: “The exclusion of adverse testimony by a spouse is not an absolute privilege. There have been long recognized exceptions, such as exist in prosecutions for crimes committed by one spouse against the other or against the children of either; actions by one of the spouses against an outsider for an intentional injury to the marital relation; or in a criminal prosecution against one spouse in which a declaration of the other spouse made confidentially to the accused would tend to justify or reduce the grade of the offense. McCormick, Evidence, Section 85 (1972). See Wolfe v. United States, 291 U.S. 7, 54 S. Ct. 279, 78 L. Ed. 617 (1934); Funk v. United States, 290 U.S. 371, 54 S. Ct. 212, 78 L. Ed. 369 (1933). The Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 501, recognizes no marital privilege per se, but rather recognizes a general privilege which ‘shall be governed by the principles of the common law as they may be interpreted by the courts of the United States in the light of reason and experience.’
‘‘This reason and experience which the Supreme Court spoke of in Wolfe, Hawkins, and various other opinions, and which Congress refers to in Rule 501, places oh the federal courts the responsibility of examining the policies behind the federal common law privileges so as to alter or amend them when reason and experience demand. If we are to fashion any exception in the case before us we must do so consistent with the rationale for the privilege. In the present case there were a number of factors which indicate that in spite of the legal existence of the marriage, as a social fact it had expired. There was no residence at which both spouses lived; there was a great disparity between the amount of time that *283the couple cohabited and the time that one or the other chose not to live together; the husband had a more permanent living arrangement with another partner than with his spouse and, indeed, fathered a child with that person. All these factors cumulatively signify a marriage that was moribund. If the marital privilege is intended to preserve domestic harmony — the most substantial argument that judges and writers today advance in support of it — it is apparent that the present case is not one in which the privilege would serve any such purpose.
“We fashion no broad rule with our holding today as to when the marital privilege should be disallowed. We decide narrowly on the facts as they appear before us. That is, where, as here, the spouse was called to testify only as to objective facts, with no questions allowed as to any communication between the spouses, and where the evidence supported a finding that the marriage was no longer viable and its members had little hope or desire for reconciliation, reason, experience and common sense indicate that the traditional policy reasons for the privilege are non-existent. It was properly disallowed.”
See, also, United States v. Fisher, 518 F.2d 836 (2d Cir. 1975); Hudson v. State, 295 So. 2d 766 (Miss. 1974); United States v. Ryno, 130 F. Supp. 685 (S.D. Cal. 1955), aff’d 232 F.2d 581 (9th Cir. 1956) (on ground testimony was not prejudicial).
The interest of the State in bringing the defendant to justice in this case should outweigh any hope of reconciliation between the parties after the decree of divorce had been entered in the dissolution proceeding.
McCown, J., joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 9740492 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:26.020506+00 ===

Hastings, J.,
dissenting.
The dissenting opinion of Boslaugh, J., traces the origin and reason for the rule relating to spousal testimonial privilege. When considered against that backdrop, it seems obvious to me that once a court *284of competent jurisdiction has entered a decree of dissolution, whether subject to appeal or not, the marriage is no longer in existence within the meaning of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 27-505(2) (Reissue 1979).
Cases like Lippincott v. Lippincott, 141 Neb. 186, 3 N.W.2d 207 (1942), and Westphalen v. Westphalen, 115 Neb. 217, 212 N.W. 429 (1927), which refer to special circumstances such as property rights, right of inheritance, privilege to remarry, etc., are not applicable to this situation. To insist, for example, that a marriage is still in existence so as to prohibit the testimony of one spouse while the other spouse contests on appeal the amount of an alimony award makes no sense at all.
I do not believe that the testimony of Cheri Palmer should be rejected for the reason given in the majority opinion.
Boslaugh, J., joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 2223822 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:08.405868+00 ===

338 N.W.2d 761 (1983)
215 Neb. 379
RICHMAN GORDMAN STORES, INC., et al., Appellees,
v.
BOARD OF EQUALIZATION OF HALL COUNTY, Nebraska, and Raymond Hessel, Assessor, Hall County, Nebraska, Appellants.
No. 82-562.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
September 30, 1983.
*762 Stephen L. Von Riesen, Hall County Atty., and Kevin A. Brostrom, Grand Island, for appellants.
Luebs, Dowding, Beltzer, Leininger, Smith & Busick, Grand Island, for appellees.
KRIVOSHA, C.J., and BOSLAUGH, WHITE, HASTINGS, CAPORALE, SHANAHAN, and GRANT, JJ.
HASTINGS, Justice.
Richman Gordman Stores, Inc., filed protests with the Board of Equalization of Hall County (board), complaining that the value *763 of the plaintiff's real estate, on which a retail department store was located, was in excess of the actual value of the property for the years 1979 and 1981. The protests were denied by the board and Richman Gordman appealed to the District Court.
After the cases were consolidated in the District Court and trial was held, the court determined the property had an actual value of $1,200,000 for each of the years 1979 and 1981. The board has appealed to this court, assigning as error the finding that Richman Gordman sustained its burden of proving that the values determined by the board were arbitrary, unlawful, and discriminatory.
The real estate involved here was approximately 13 acres of property in Grand Island, Hall County, Nebraska, on which a retail department store was located. According to the trial court record, in 1975 and 1976 Western Appraisals and Surveys reappraised all real property in Hall County, using the Nebraska cost valuation manual. This was a manual which the state Tax Commissioner's office mandated be used in 1975 or 1976 but which both an appraiser employed by Hall County and one retained by the plaintiff described as "very confusing," and "a very poor manual." Values used in this appraisal were first relied upon in the 1977 assessment. The plaintiff's property was valued at $1,723,110 for the year 1977, and for 1979 the initial actual value of the property was also $1,723,110.
However, the State Board of Equalization and Assessment ordered an increase of 23.14 percent for this type of property to increase the total actual value to $2,121,830 for assessment purposes in 1979. In the year 1980 the board reduced the actual value of the property in question by $185,640, to $1,936,190, to adjust for an error in the establishment of the "finishing" cost. The 1980 tax protest is not part of this appeal.
For the year 1981 the total actual value assessed for tax purposes was $1,936,190. The assessor and the board of equalization relied upon the 1977 appraisal for the valuation and assessment of Richman Gordman's property for 1979.
This court is governed by consistent guidelines in legal matters such as this. In appeals from actions of the county board of equalization in determining the actual value of property, the burden is upon the taxpayer to show by clear and convincing evidence that the board's determination as to actual value is incorrect and invalid. Spencer Holiday House v. County Bd. of Equal., 215 Neb. 194, 337 N.W.2d 759 (1983).
The trial of an appeal from a county board of equalization involving the valuation of real estate, both in District Court and the Supreme Court, is de novo as an equitable proceeding. There is a presumption that a board of equalization has faithfully performed its official duties in making an assessment and has acted upon sufficient competent evidence to justify its action, which presumption remains until there is competent evidence to the contrary. Such presumption disappears when there is competent evidence on appeal to the contrary, and from that point on the reasonableness of the valuation fixed by the board of equalization becomes one of fact based upon the evidence, with the burden of showing such valuation to be unreasonable resting upon the appellant on appeal from the action of the board. Hastings Building Co. v. Board of Equalization, 212 Neb. 847, 326 N.W.2d 670 (1982).
In the present case there is more than ample evidence to rebut the presumption of correctness of the assessed valuation by the board. Besides testimony concerning the 1980 adjustment for "finishing" costs, the record also contained the testimony of Michael J. Mullen, an expert who testified on behalf of both the board and Richman Gordman, that further errors in the identification of materials used in construction were found when the parking lot and structural steel were improperly classified. These errors were more than mere errors of judgment, and as such the reasonableness of the valuation fixed by the board becomes a question of fact based upon the evidence.
*764 The record indicates the actual value of the plaintiff's property for 1979 was quite different than the value listed on the assessment record for Hall County. The highest valuation placed upon the property after adjusting for obvious errors in the identification of materials used in construction was $1,421,386. This valuation figure was offered by Mr. Mullen, who testified for both parties. The lowest valuation placed on the property was by Richman Gordman's expert, J.G. Strawn, who found it to be $1,100,000.
Mr. Strawn testified that he used a cost approach, an income approach, and a market approach, and that after considering all factors he determined the actual value of the property for 1979 and 1981 was $1,100,000. Strawn's testimony on direct examination established that he was quite knowledgeable about valuing retail stores in the Midwest. He utilized the Marshall-Swift manual in making his appraisal, which, according to his testimony, the State of Nebraska has required county assessors to use since either 1980 or 1981.
In view of the entire record it is clear that the 1977 appraisal by Western Appraisals and Surveys contained numerous errors. In comparison, the record created by Richman Gordman's expert contained detailed, competent evidence to support the determination of the actual value of the property. The record in this case clearly rebuts the presumption of correctness of the assessed valuation, and establishes that the valuation of plaintiff's property for the years 1979 and 1981 was made arbitrarily and capriciously. From a de novo review of the record, we conclude that the actual value of the property in question for the years 1979 and 1981 was $1,200,000.
The judgment of the District Court was correct and is affirmed.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 2223833 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:08.549257+00 ===

933 N.E.2d 465 (2010)
In the Matter of FEES CHARGED BY the CLERK OF COURTS FOR MISCELLANEOUS SERVICES.
No. 94S00-1008-MS-457.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
August 27, 2010.
PUBLISHED ORDER GOVERNING FEES CHARGED BY CLERK OF COURTS FOR MISCELLANEOUS SERVICES
This order governs the fees charged by the Clerk of the Supreme Court, Court of Appeals, and Tax Court for miscellaneous services provided to the public and the legal profession, including charges for copies and faxes of court records, e-mails and CDs containing digital versions of court records, CDs containing selected portions of the roll of attorneys database, convenience fees for payment by credit card, returned check fees, and charges for replacement attorney cards and certificates of good standing.
Effective immediately, the Clerk of the Supreme Court, Court of Appeals, and Tax Court is authorized to charge the following fees for its miscellaneous services:
$  1.00      Copies, per page (letter or legal size)
$  2.00      Faxes, per page (letter or legal size)
$  3.00      Certificate of Good Standing
$  5.00      Replacement of Attorney Card
$ 20.00      Returned Check Fee
$150.00      CD containing Roll of Attorneys database (except that the CD shall not include
attorney electronic mail addresses, nor shall it contain attorney home addresses
unless the home address is the only address listed for the attorney in the Roll of
Attorneys)
$  5.00      E-mail of documents under twenty pages
$ 10.00      E-mail of documents twenty to fifty pages
- Documents over fifty pages cannot be sent via e-mail.
$ 20.00      CD containing documents under fifty pages
$ 30.00      CD containing documents fifty to eighty pages
$ 40.00      CD containing documents eighty to 120 pages
$ 50.00      CD containing documents over 120 pages
- Requests for CDs containing documents over 400 pages or from multiple cases
will be subject to additional charges to be determined in the Clerk's discretion
The following credit cards are accepted: MasterCard, American Express, and Discover. A convenience fee of 2.25% will be charged for all payments by credit card
The Clerk is also authorized to receive payment in advance for applicable postage charges when documents are sent via U.S. mail or private carrier.
The Clerk of this Court is directed to post the schedule of fees contained in this Order in a conspicuous place in the Clerk's Office, to forward a copy of this Order to the Lexis/Nexis Company and Thomson Reuters, and to make copies of this order available to the media. The Clerk shall also forward a copy of this order to the Administrator of the Indiana Supreme Court; the Administrator of the Indiana Court of Appeals; the Administrator of the Indiana Tax Court; the Chairperson of the Appellate Practice Section of the Indiana State Bar Association; the Attorney General of Indiana; and the Public Defender of Indiana. The Clerk is also directed to post this Order to the Court's website.
Thomson Reuters shall publish this Order in the advance sheets of this Court.

=== CASE 9740493 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:31.798766+00 ===

AMDAHL, Chief Justice.
This litigation challenges the validity of legislation passed by the Minnesota Legislature on December 10, 1982, and signed into law by Governor Albert H. Quie on December 13,1982. Act of December 10,1982, 3rd Spec.Sess. ch. 1, 1982 Minn.Sess. Law Serv. 1819 (the “Act”). On that same day, various parties, representing public employees affected by the terms of the Act, petitioned this court for a writ of quo warranto in an effort to prevent the enforcement of the Act. Finding that this case did not present the type of controversy which fits within the nature of quo warranto, this court issued an order, on December 20, 1982, denying the petition and remanding the case to a special three-judge district court panel for an expedited hearing. The panel consisted of retired District Court Judges Archie L. Gingold, Gordon L. McRae and Bruce C. Stone.
In conjunction with the filing of their amended complaint on December 23, 1982, appellants brought a motion for a temporary injunction seeking to immediately restrain that part of the Act increasing government employees’ existing contributions to the pension funds by 2%.1 On December 30, 1982, the trial court denied appellants’ motion for a temporary injunction and set the case for trial on January 6, 1983. Thereafter, on January 24, 1983, the trial court issued its findings of fact, conclusions of law and order for judgment dismissing plaintiffs’ complaint. On that same day, a notice of appeal from the order and judgment of the trial court was filed with this court.
The Act was written and passed upon rather short notice in response to an imminent, and very serious, fiscal crisis facing the government of the State of Minnesota. Governor Quie called the Third Special Session of the 72nd Legislature in early December 1982 to address an anticipated short fall in state revenue of approximately $312,000,000.2 This substantial anticipated *565deficit was the latest of six distinct financial crises which have been faced by Minnesota government since July of 1980.3
Three major factors operated to further accentuate the severity of the crisis and the need for a swift legislative response. First, the crisis was compounded by the fact that local-government aids and homestead credits in excess of $1,000,000,000 were due to be paid by the state to Minnesota cities and counties in mid-December 1982. A second factor emphasizing the immediacy of the need for remedial attention was the state’s obligations for $930,000,000 in short term certificates of indebtedness. These certificates were recently issued by the state to alleviate a severe cash flow problem, and contained convenants which gave unqualified priority to an impoundment schedule, commencing February 1, 1983, established to assure the satisfaction of the indebtedness upon maturity in June 1983. An additional pressure for an expeditious legislative response to this crisis was exacted by a statutory provision requiring the Commissioner of Finance to “unallot,” or withhold the payment of, appropriated funds when projected revenues are insufficient to meet the state’s expenses. Minn.Stat. § 16A.15, subd. 1(b) (1982). Unallotment would result in drastic cuts in funding to public agencies which, because 75-80% of the funds allotted to public agencies are appropriated for personnel costs, would fall most heavily on public employees. When viewed in this fiscal context, and against the backdrop of the measures already taken in response to previous revenue shortfalls, it is evident that this revenue shortfall did indeed present a crisis.
Although the Act effects a number of tax increases, spending cuts and spending shifts, the only portion of the Act challenged in this action are the provisions impacting upon the terms of public employees’ employment, primarily the provision regarding public employees’ pension contributions.4 In relevant part, the Act requires that, beginning with the first full pay period after December 28, 1982, various state, county and municipal employees are required to pay an additional 2% of their salaries into their respective pension funds. This increase in employee contributions is limited in duration to the last pay period before January 1, 1984; then the preexisting formula returns. The Act also requires that, beginning with the first full pay period after December 28, 1982, and continuing until the last full pay period before July 1, 1983, employer contributions to the pension funds equal to 4 percent of salary are to be either diverted from the pension funds and credited to the general fund, or deferred altogether and not paid to the funds. It is projected that these reductions in employer contributions will save the state approximately $63,000,000. In addition, the Act provides that, until June 30, 1983, state employees who choose to go on unpaid leaves of absence may continue to accrue most fringe benefits as if they had been working during their leave periods. The Act also contains provisions which raise issues of federal taxation, the most important of which is a provision to reduce the federal adjusted gross income of public employees by the amount of their employee contributions.5
*566The issues presented by this appeal can be grouped into four broad categories: (1) contract clause issues; (2) equal protection and uniformity clause issues; (3) due process issues; and (4) unfair labor practice issues.
1. CONTRACT CLAUSE ISSUES
Appellants argue that the Act unconstitutionally impairs contractual obligations between public employers and employees regarding the level of public employee pension contributions.6 This court recently addressed the issue of the nature of a public employee’s interest in a public pension or retirement plan and the degree to which that interest is afforded constitutional protection. In Christensen v. Minneapolis Municipal Employees Retirement Board, 331 N.W.2d 740 (Minn.1983), we abandoned the gratuity approach in analyzing such issues in favor of an expanded contract approach. Recognizing that a conventional contract approach, with its strict rules of mutuality, can seldom operate to provide protection for specific, legitimate interests of public employees in this context, the Christensen case augmented the contract approach to include the closely related doctrine of promissory estoppel. Id. at 747. Under Christensen, public employees can challenge changes affecting their interests in a public pension plan under the contract clause by establishing their right to the maintenance of the preexisting terms or conditions as a matter of either express contract, implied-in-fact contract, or promissory estoppel.7
In the case at bar, appellants advance each of these theories in arguing that the Act unconstitutionally impairs contractual obligations between public employers and employees regarding the level of public employee pension contributions. We conclude that no contract or contract term, express or implied, existed between public employ*567ers and employees which guaranteed fixed levels of employee retirement contributions to the pension funds. We further hold that the record does not support appellants’ claim to a fixed level of employee pension contributions based on a theory of promissory estoppel. Because we therefore affirm the trial court’s findings that appellants have failed to establish a right, based either on conventional contract or promissory es-toppel theories, to a fixed level of employee pension contributions, we need not address the issue of whether the Act operates to unconstitutionally impair such a right.
It cannot be disputed that the record contains no evidence of an express contract designating rates at which public employees must contribute to their pension funds. In the absence of an express contract, appellants argue that the legislature’s promise to supply pension benefits to public employees constitutes an implied-in-fact contract to maintain employee pension contributions at a fixed level during their employment. Where the evidence does not prove the existence of an express agreement, a contract implied in fact may be established by circumstantial evidence showing a mutual intention to contract. See Bergstedt, Wahlberg, Berquist Associates, Inc. v. Rothchild, 302 Minn. 476, 479-80, 225 N.W.2d 261, 263 (1975). Whether a contract is to be implied in fact, and the existence of the terms of such a contract, are questions of fact to be determined by the trier of fact, and the trier’s findings in this regard will not be set aside by this court unless they are found to be clearly erroneous. Id., Minn.R.Civ.P. 52.01. .
Appellants urge that the pension plans themselves constitute contracts between public employees and their employer, and that the maintenance of employee pension contributions at a fixed level may be implied as a term of these contracts. The trial court found, however, that a contract right to the maintenance of fixed employee contribution levels could not be implied from evidence in the record concerning the pension plans. In so finding, the trial court relied, in part, upon specific statutory provisions which greatly restrict the contract rights created by the establishment and maintenance of public pension plans. For example, in Minn.Stat. § 353.38 (1982), the legislature addressed the rights of members of the Public Employees Retirement Association by providing that:
Nothing done under the terms of this chapter and acts amendatory thereof shall create or give any contract rights to any person, except the right to receive back upon withdrawal from the association through separation from the public services, the accumulated deductions, as by law defined, standing to his credit on the books of the association.
Similar restrictive statutory provisions exist with regard to most of the state’s other major public retirement funds. See, e.g., Minn.Stat. §§ 354.07, subd. 8 (teachers’ retirement fund), 352.022 (1982) (state retirement fund); see also Minn.Stat. § 645.27 (1982) (state not bound by statute unless statute expressly provides). These statutes clearly support the trial court’s conclusion that the legislature did not intend to enter into a contractual obligation with public employees concerning a particular rate of employee contributions to the pension plans.8 We therefore affirm, as not *568clearly erroneous, the trial court’s finding that no implied contract exists.
Relying upon the doctrine of promissory estoppel, appellants next contend that the legislature promised that their contribution levels would remain fixed throughout their contribution periods and that they relied upon that promise to their detriment. Promissory estoppel is applicable when (1) a promise has been made, (2) which the prom-isor expected or should have reasonably expected to induce action of a definite and substantial character by the' promisee, (3) which in fact induced such action, and (4) in circumstances requiring the enforcement of the promise to avoid injustice. See Grouse v. Group Health Plan, Inc., 306 N.W.2d 114, 116 (Minn.1981); Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 90 (1981). The trial court found both that the legislature made no promise regarding fixed employee pension contribution levels and that, even if such a promise had been made, the appellants did not establish the essential element of detrimental reliance. These findings must be upheld unless they are shown to be clearly erroneous. Minn.R.Civ.P. 52.01.
Appellants have failed to designate evidence in the record which tends to establish that the legislature made any promise to maintain employee contributions to the pension plans at a fixed level during the contribution period.9 To the contrary, the record shows that the state had varied contribution levels in the past within a number of the pension funds at issue and that employees were aware of such changes. Consequently, appellants were unable to produce a single witness to testify to any reliance on a fixed, unchanging level of employee contributions. This record belies the appellants’ claim to promissory estoppel.10 *569In this regard, we endorse the following conclusion of the trial court:
There is no basis for the contention that, no matter what the legislature has said, what it has done is induce employee contributors to rely on the expectation that contributions levels would remain fixed. The employee contributions, the employer contributions, and the appropriations to cover unfunded liabilities have been modified on a number of occasions in the past decade. Therefore, an employee aware enough of his or her pension contribution rate to formulate some kind of reliance interest would be aware that those contribution levels have fluctuated over time. Given that history, an expectation that contribution rates would remain fixed is patently unreasonable.
We conclude that the trial court’s findings that the state made no promise regarding guaranteed levels of employee contributions, and that, even if such a promise had been made, appellants have not established that they reasonably and detrimentally relied upon such a promise, are not clearly erroneous.
2. EQUAL PROTECTION AND UNIFORMITY CLAUSE ISSUES
Appellants argue that the Act is violative of both federal and state constitutional guarantees of equal protection and of the state constitutional guarantee of uniformity of taxation. With regard to appellants’ equal protection challenge, we hold that the legislative classification at issue is rationally related to the achievement of a legitimate governmental purpose. Similarly, we reject appellants’ uniformity clause challenge on the ground that public employee pension contributions are not a tax within the meaning of that constitutional provision.
It is not disputed that the standard of review applicable to this case under both the state and federal equal protection clauses is the “rational basis”11 test. Although we have expressed this standard in *570various ways,12 the preeminent expression of rationality analysis under the equal protection clause is the requirement that legislative classifications make distinctions which are rationally related to legitimate legislative goals or interests. See, e.g. Minnesota Clover Leaf Creamery Co., 449 U.S. 456, 461-63, 101 S.Ct. 715, 722, 66 L.Ed.2d 659 (1981); State v. Hopf, 323 N.W.2d 746, 753 (Minn.1982). As the United States Supreme Court recently noted, the application of this standard entails two basic inquiries:
In determining whether a challenged classification is rationally related to achievement of a legitimate state purpose, we must answer two questions: (1) Does the challenged legislation have a legitimate purpose: and (2) Was it reasonable for the lawmakers to believe that use of the challenged classification would promote that purpose?
Western & Southern Life Insurance Co. v. State Board of Equalization, 451 U.S. 648, 668, 101 S.Ct. 2070, 2083, 68 L.Ed.2d 514 (1981) (citations omitted). At the outset, however, it must be recognized that statutes carry a presumption of constitutionality, and that it is not the role of the judiciary, in applying the rational basis standard, to question either the factual accuracy or political wisdom of the reasoning and judgments underlying the legislative enactment. See, e.g., Estate of Petroff, 319 N.W.2d 400, 405 n. 10 (Minn.1982); Nelson v. Peterson, 313 N.W.2d 580, 581 n. 2 (Minn.1981).
It is not disputed that the impetus for the Act was a sudden determination that revenues actually available to the state in meeting its budgeted obligations would be precariously less than the figure which had been relied upon from previous projections. Acting within this fiscal context and under heavy time pressures, the legislature sought to achieve a balanced corrective approach which combined tax increases, budget cuts and budget shifts in an effort to spread the impact of the effects of the legislation.13 Thus, the purpose of the Act, *571as stated by the legislature, is to correct the state’s grave fiscal condition without creating undue economic displacement.14 Among the many budget cuts contained in the Act, all of which were enacted for the purpose of reducing the budget deficit by decreasing state expenditures, are those which temporarily decrease employer pension contributions. The challenged provisions which correspondingly require a tern-porary increase in employee pension contributions were included for the purpose of preventing the undue economic dislocations which would otherwise have resulted from the significant increase in the unfunded liability of the public pension funds caused by budget cuts.15 We conclude that these are the purposes of the challenged provisions of the Act, and that these purposes are legitimate. We therefore turn to the dispositive issue in appellants’ equal protection challenge and assess the claim that, in *572designing the Act to achieve these purposes, the legislature irrationally treats differently persons who are similarly situated.
Appellants advance a number of arguments in an effort to support their contention that the Act classifies persons who are similarly situated in a manner which, when viewed in relation to the purposes of the Act, is wholly irrational. First, appellants argue that the employee contribution provision is not rationally related to its underlying purpose because the provision, which does not affect all public employee pensioners, is impermissibly underin-clusive.16 The class of public employees not affected by the employee contribution provisions of the Act is the University of Minnesota faculty, and appellants contend that there is no rational basis for this omission. There are, however, a number of considerations which support the rationality of the legislature’s decision to exempt University faculty from the obligation to increase their pension contributions. University faculty have a separate pension fund and employer contributions to this fund were not affected by the Act.17 Thus, if the purpose of the challenged provision was to maintain the actuarial integrity of the public pension funds affected by the Act’s budget cuts, it was rational to exclude the unaffected plan of the University of Minnesota faculty. Moreover, the legislature’s initial failure to reduce employer contributions to the University faculty’s pension plan was not irrational. In order for the legislature to have effectuated a four percent reduction of employer contributions to the University faculty’s pension plan, state appropriations to the University would have had to have been “earmarked,” or specifically set aside for that purpose. See Regents of the University of Minnesota v. Lord, 257 N.W.2d 796, 800-01 (Minn.1977). Under the Minnesota Constitution, such conditions may be an improper invasion of the management prerogatives of the Board of Regents and, in any event, the Board of Regents may decide whether or not to accept appropriations made with such conditions. Id., Minn. Const. art. XIII, § 3. The independent nature of the University faculty’s pension fund, and the fact that that fund was not affected by the Act’s budget cuts, provide a rational basis for the omission of the University faculty from the Act’s employee contribution provisions.18
*573Appellants’ primary argument in the equal protection context is that the increased employee pension contributions, when considered in conjunction with the purpose and effect of the related decrease in employer contributions, constitutes a discriminatory tax. In other words, appellants contend that, although the increase in employee contributions is physically paid into the pension funds, the increase of employee contributions replaces employer contributions which are withheld for general fund purposes and that this, in effect, is a payroll tax which directly benefits the state general fund. Constitutional challenges of a tax as discriminatory arise under the federal equal protection clause and the state uniformity clause.19 The requisite initial determination in any analysis under the uniformity clause is that the challenged provision is, indeed, a tax. We conclude that the increased employee pension contribution is not a tax and we therefore reject appellants’ uniformity clause challenge.
The characteristics of the increase in employee pension contributions differ significantly from those of a tax. These different characteristics include the facts that employee pension contributions are credited to the employee’s individual retirement account, and that the contributions entitle the employee to receive pension benefits upon retirement. Therefore, unlike a tax, the pension contribution inures to the benefit of the employee upon his retirement, and is not collected for the benefit of the public generally. As stated by the trial court, “[i]t is definitely not the nature of a tax that it should inure to the direct financial gain of the taxpayer.” These characteristics distinguish pension contributions from taxes. See Gossman v. State Employees Retirement System, 177 Neb. 326, 332-33, 129 N.W.2d 97, 102 (1964) (public employee pension contribution held not to be a tax because not “an exaction or tax for the purposes of carrying on the general functions of government”). The absence of a tax is dispositive of appellants’ uniformity clause challenge.
3. DUE PROCESS ISSUES
Appellants’ claim that the Act violates the substantive guarantees of due process has two components.20 In a variation of the arguments made in the equal protection context, appellants first contend that the provisions of the Act increasing employee pension contributions are not rationally related to a legitimate governmental purpose and therefore violate both the state due process clause, Minn. Const. art. I, § 7, and *574the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment, U.S. Const. amend. XIV.21 Second, appellants argue that increased employee pension contributions constitute a “taking” of property for a public use without just compensation. Constitutional prohibitions of such uncompensated expropriations exist in both the federal constitution, U.S. Const. amend V,22 and the state constitution, Minn. Const. art. I, § 13.
The threshold determination in a due process claim is whether the interest allegedly interfered with rises to the level of a constitutionally protected “liberty” or “property” interest. Appellants present two arguments in an effort to establish a constitutionally protected property interest that has been affected by the increase in employee pension contributions.23 First, appellants argue that they have a contractual right in employee contributions levels that has been altered by the Act. It is recognized that contractual rights are a form of property within the meaning of the due process clause. See United States Trust Co. v. New Jersey, 431 U.S. 1, 19 n. 16, 97 S.Ct. 1505, 1516 n. 16, 52 L.Ed.2d 92 (1977). Appellants’ claim to such property fails, however, because, as is treated more fully in our discussion of appellants’ claim under the contract clause, we reject the theory that appellants ever had a contractual right to fixed levels of employee pension contributions.
A second theory advanced by appellants is that they have a property interest in their individual salaries which has been interfered with. Although it is clear that salary is a form of property protected by the guarantees of due process, it is unclear whether this interest has been interfered with to an extent which requires an analysis of whether that interference meets due process standards. Appellants concede that the Act does not affect the gross salaries of public employees. Appellants maintain, however, that it is the Act’s effects upon employees’ net salaries which constitutes the impermissible interference. Yet, the Act’s effects upon the net salaries of public employees is, in most cases, beneficial. It is true that the net salaries of affected public employees will be temporarily reduced by two percent. Countervailing this temporary decrease, however, is the long term net increase conferred by the “pick up” provision of the Act which permits an employee’s total pension contribution to be treated for federal income tax purposes as an employer contribution. This “pick up” provision is permanent and will result in a substantial federal income tax savings. See supra note 5. In most cases, and even considering the two percent increase in employee pension contributions, the Act will operate to provide public employees more disposable income than would have been available to them if the Act had never been enacted.
Even if we assume, however, that appellants have demonstrated a property right which has been interfered with, it is clear that that interference satisfies the demands of due process. With regard to appellants’ due process challenge to the rationality of the Act, our rationality analysis in the due process context is no more restrictive than that conducted in the equal protection context. See, e.g., Guilliams v. Commissioner of Revenue, 299 N.W.2d 138, 144 (Minn.1980). Therefore, for the reasons discussed above in our analysis of appellants’ equal protection challenge, we reiter*575ate our conclusion that the temporary increase is rationally related to a legitimate governmental purpose.
With regard to appellants’ “taking” claim, the constitutional prohibition against governmental expropriation of private property applies only when it is demonstrated that that property has been taken for public purposes. See generally L. Tribe, American Constitutional Law, § 9-2 (1978). Here the increased employee pension contributions were enacted for the purpose of maintaining the actuarial integrity of the public employee pension funds. This action benefits the contributors themselves, and is not a public use within the meaning of the constitutional proscription because only the contributing members can be beneficiaries of the pension plans. See Stevens v. Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund of Shreveport, 370 So.2d 528, 531 (La.1979) (public employee’s pension contribution not a public use of private funds). Accordingly, assuming the requisite interference with a property right, there has been no impermissible taking of private property for a public use.
4. UNFAIR LABOR PRACTICE ISSUES
Appellants argue that employee pension contribution levels are a subject of bargaining which the legislature cannot unilaterally change without committing an unfair labor practice. Originally enacted in response to widespread dissatisfaction with the prevailing system of public employment labor relations, the Public Employment Labor Relations Act of 1971 (PELRA) provides a comprehensive structure for conflict resolution in public employment. See generally Note, The Minnesota Public Employment Labor Relations Act of 1971: Another Public Employment Experiment, 57 Minn.L. Rev. 134 (1972). Pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 179.66, subd. 2 (1982), PELRA places an obligation upon public employers to negotiate “terms and conditions of employment,” which in relevant part are defined, at Minn. Stat. § 179.63, subd. 18 (1982), as: “the hours of employment, the compensation therefor including fringe benefits except retirement contributions or benefits, and the employer’s personnel policies affecting the working conditions of the employees.” (Emphasis added). Appellants’ primary argument in support of their theory that the Act constitutes an unfair labor practice under PELRA is that the Act’s 2% increase in employee contributions is violative of the employer’s obligation to collectively bargain terms and conditions of employment. Although appellants concede that the express exclusion of “retirement contributions or benefits” in PELRA’s definition of terms and conditions of employment removes the issue of employee pension contributions from the category of mandatory subjects of bargaining, they nonetheless argue that this statutory exclusion has no effect upon the status of employee contributions as a permissive subject of bargaining upon which, because contribution levels had been implicitly bargained into existing agreements,24 the employer was obligated to negotiate.
Appellants advance two arguments in support of their contention that pension contribution levels are a permissive subject of bargaining. First, appellants rely upon a 1975 letter to that effect from an attorney general’s staff attorney who was assigned to the Metropolitan Transit Commission. This letter, however, is apparently not a formal opinion of the attorney general and, in any event, is not binding upon this court. *576See, e.g., Village of Blaine v. Independent School District No. 12, 272 Minn. 343, 353, 138 N.W.2d 32, 39 (1965). Second, appellants argue that the absence of a reference to retirement contributions or benefits in the provision of PELRA which lists matters upon which the public employer is not obligated to negotiate establishes that PELRA does not prohibit negotiations on these subjects. See Minn.Stat. § 179.66, subd. 1 (1982). In view of the fact that the cited provision expressly provides that it contains a nonexclusive list, this argument is hardly persuasive.
A review of the legislative history of PELRA indicates that pension contribution levels were never intended to be a permissible subject of bargaining. The statutory exclusion of “retirement contributions or benefits” from the scope of bargainable “terms and conditions of employment” was added as an amendment to PELRA in 1973. Act of May 24, 1973, ch. 635, § 6, 1973 Minn.Laws 1526, 1527. The author of the amendment, Representative Donald Moe, explained the purpose of the exclusion when he offered the amendment before the House Committee on Governmental Operations: “The purpose of the amendment is to take the negotiation of pension benefits out of the bill and preserve the present situation with regard to pension benefits and that is to keep them within the realm of the legislature." Statement of Rep. Donald Moe, House Committee on Governmental Operations, March 13,1973. Representative Moe went on to explain that the exclusion was necessary to prevent the decentralized and discordant administration of public pensions, and to maintain legislative discretion over significant matters of budgetary policy. Id. This legislative record reflects a legislative intent to remove pension issues from the scope of permissible bargaining.
Reviewing a statutory scheme of public employment relations which, in relevant part, is very similar to PELRA, the Iowa Supreme Court recently addressed this issue of the effect of a statutory exclusion of retirement issues from the scope of bargaining. In City of Mason City v. Public Employment Relations Board, 316 N.W.2d 851 (Iowa 1982), the Iowa court found that the legislative intent underlying the statutory exclusion was to completely remove issues regarding pensions from the scope of collective bargaining. Id. at 854. In so holding, the Iowa court identified three policy considerations which support the prohibition against negotiations concerning pension systems: (1) to permit employers to contain the rising cost of pension benefits; (2) to permit the legislature to participate in the making of significant government policy; and (3) to promote uniformity and to prevent the existence of disparate benefits between different funds based upon the skill and success of employees’ bargaining representative. Id. We rely upon this reasoning and this evidence of legislative intent and hold that, pursuant to the exclusion in Minn.Stat. § 179.63, subd. 18 (1982), public pension issues are not subjects which may be collectively bargained.25
Pursuing a separate unfair labor practice theory, appellants argue that the Act’s provision which permits employees who choose to go on unpaid leaves of absence to continue to accrue most fringe benefits is a subject of bargaining which the legislature cannot unilaterally change without committing an unfair labor practice under PELRA. The Act provides that, until June 30, 1983, state employees who choose to go on unpaid *577leaves of absence may continue to accrue most fringe benefits as if they had been working during their leave periods. The accrual of such benefits in these circumstances was not permitted in any existing collective bargaining agreements, so there is no question that a unilateral change in the terms of existing contracts was made. The State Budget Director testified that the purpose of the provision was to save approximately $4,500,000 to help solve the state’s immediate cash flow problem and to provide a benefit to employees that would offset any short-term losses caused by the increase in employee retirement contributions. Appellants challenge this “unpaid leave” provision on the ground that it constitutes an unfair labor practice because it produces a change in the terms and conditions of employment which was not collectively bargained.
We hold that the legislature cannot commit an unfair labor practice under PELRA. Because the provision of PELRA that concerns employer unfair labor practices applies only to “public employers,” Minn.Stat. § 179.68, subd. 2 (1982), and because the Legislature is not a “public employer” under PELRA, Minn.Stat. § 179.74, subd. 2 (1982), legislative acts are not covered by PELRA. Public employees’ sole avenue of relief for a unilateral legislative change in the terms and conditions of employment under an existing collective bargaining agreement is to proceed under state and federal constitutional provisions. Appellants contend that the collective bargaining process will be wholly undermined if the legislature is permitted to make unilateral changes after an agreement has already been reviewed and ratified. Any unilateral legislative change would, however, still be subject to constitutional constraints. These constraints, such as the standards discussed above regarding the guarantees of equal protection and due process and the constitutional prohibition of the impairment of contracts, would appear to respond to appellants’ fears by operating to invalidate legislative actions which are arbitrary or irrational, or which do not further overriding public interests.
Support for the view that legislative acts are not governed by PELRA can be found in Minnesota Education Association v. State of Minnesota, 282 N.W.2d 915 (Minn.1979), appeal dismissed, 444 U.S. 1062, 100 S.Ct. 1001, 62 L.Ed.2d 744 (1980). In that case, an arbitrator’s award, rendered after an impasse in negotiations, was changed by the legislature during its ratification of the award. This unilateral change in the terms and conditions of employment was challenged, in part, on the ground that the legislature had no authority under PELRA to modify an arbitration award. In upholding the legislature’s action, we reviewed the legislative history of PELRA and concluded that the legislature had reserved the “right to modify all contracts, including arbitration awards.” Id., 282 N.W.2d at 918. The policy reasons discussed in support of this holding are “the necessity for the representatives of the people to retain final control over appropriations and to apply uniform budgetary considerations to numerous bargaining units.” Id. Appellants attempt to distinguish Minnesota Education Association by arguing that its holding applies only to the authority of the legislature to modify terms and conditions of employment in conjunction with its approval of state employee collective bargaining agreements, and that the holding cannot be extended to apply where, as in the case at bar, the legislature enacts a unilateral change after it has previously approved an agreement. Although these changed circumstances may trigger greater constitutional constraints upon the legislature’s ability to act, we find that the policy considerations found controlling in the challenge to the legislature’s power to act under PELRA in Minnesota Education Association apply with equal force to the issue of legislative authority in the present context. Accordingly, we hold that the legislative enactment of the “unpaid leave” provision does not constitute an unfair labor practice under PELRA.
Affirmed.
. The original plaintiffs in this action were the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees Councils 6, 14, 65 and 96, and the Minnesota Association of Professional Employees. On December 27, 1982, the International Union of Operating Engineers, Local 49 and Law Enforcement Labor Services, Inc., filed a motion for leave of court to file a brief amicus curiae. That motion was granted by the court. Shortly thereafter, approximately 15 other public employee organizations were permitted to intervene as plaintiffs. In all, there are approximately 235,000 public employees participating in public pension plans in Minnesota.
. Governor Quie first received the news of this latest shortage in anticipated revenues on November 18, 1982, although preliminary warnings of it were available in early November in the reports compiled from the October revenue figures. Upon receiving this news, Governor Quie consulted with legislative leaders and a *565determination was made to convene a special legislative session.
. At trial, the State Budget Director testified that, prior to the enactment of the Act, the legislature had responded to the first five of the financial crises since July 1980 by enacting $1,223,000,000 worth of tax increases, $688,-000,000 worth of accounting changes that shifted current obligations into subsequent accounting periods, and approximately $500,000,000 in spending cuts.
. In addition to the Act’s provisions regarding pension contributions and other terms of public employment, the legislature also reduced appropriations to state agencies, reduced education aids, reduced aids to local units of government and increased income taxes.
.In order to understand the issues concerning the tax implications of the Act, it is necessary to have a general understanding of the taxation of retirement plans. The subject public employee pension plans have long been treated as “qualified” pension plans within the meaning of I.R.C. § 401. Qualified retirement plans have very favorable tax consequences. The qualified plans at issue include both employer *566and employee contributions. The employee contribution is made from adjusted gross income, and is therefore not immediately deductible. However, both the employer contributions and the income generated by the pension corpus are tax deferred, and the only taxable event occurs when proceeds exceeding the amount of an employee’s actual contributions are distributed to ¿he employee. See generally Canan, Qualified Retirement Plans § 3.1 (1977).
The primary tax benefit created by the Act is a provision which directs that the entire employee pension contribution be “picked up” by the employer and thereby treated for tax purposes as an employer contribution. This provision provides a substantial benefit to public employees to offset the effects of the temporary increase in employee contributions. Prior to the Act, employees made contributions to their individual pension accounts from their adjusted gross income, and their payments were therefore made from after-tax earnings. Under the Act’s employer “pick up” provisions, the employee contributions will be treated as an employer contribution and each employee’s gross income for federal (not state) tax purposes will be reduced by the amount of the contribution. This “pick up” provides significant benefits to employees: first, the employee’s annual federal tax liability will be reduced and there will be a corresponding reduction in the amount of federal taxes withheld from an employee’s net earnings; second, no tax will be paid on this money until the employee draws it out upon retirement, at which point the employee is often in a lower tax bracket. The most beneficial aspect of this provision, however, is that it applies to the employee’s entire contribution, not just the additional 2%, and that the provision is a permanent benefit, and not just effective until the expiration of the additional 2% contribution on December 31, 1983. Although the effect of this pick up will vary considerably among different employees, in general it seems clear that the long-term tax benefits of this provision will operate to fully compensate employees for the payment of an additional 2% in 1983. The I.R.S. recently issued a private letter ruling which approved this tax shelter provision under I.R.C. § 414(h).
. The appellants’ claims are limited to the implementation of the Act as it relates to a 2% increase in public employee retirement contributions and unpaid leaves of absence. Accordingly, our review of appellants’ contract clause claim is restricted to the issue of whether contractual rights or enforceable promises exist in maintaining fixed levels of employee pension contributions. This restricted inquiry is consistent with the established practice of “not decidpng] constitutional questions except when necessary to do so in order to dispose of the case at bar.” State v. Hoyt, 304 N.W.2d 884, 888 (Minn.1981).
. Another contract theory available to public employees in this context is that of unilateral contract. See, e.g., Sylvestre v. State, 298 Minn. 142, 156-57, 214 N.W.2d 658, 667 (1973). This theory, however, is not presented by this appeal.
. Appellants also argue that the compensation provisions negotiated in their collective bargaining agreements reflect an implied contract concerning levels of employee retirement contributions. This argument presupposes that the terms of existing agreements were agreed to by negotiators in conjunction with an agreement upon a fixed rate of employee pension contributions. As is treated more fully in the discussion concerning the unfair labor practice issues raised by this appeal, pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 179.63, subd. 18 (1982), pension issues are not a permissible subject of bargaining. Rather, the legislative history of the Public Employees Labor Relations Act of 1971 demonstrates a clear legislative intent to retain broad discretion in determining conditions, classifications and membership in public pension plans. Minn.Stat. § 353.38 (1982), and related statutes, reflect a legislative determination to exercise this discretion with flexibility in a manner deemed by the legislature to be in the best interests of both public employees and the public generally. This court must extend considerable deference to the legislature’s exercise of *568that discretion. Cf. Grossman v. Gilchrist, 519 F.Supp. 173, 178 (N.D.Ill.1981), aff'd, 676 F.2d 701 (7th Cir.1982) (rationality analysis does not permit court to substitute its judgment for that of the legislature concerning conditions of participation in public employee retirements plans).
. The provisions of the Act do not affect either the requirements for pension benefits or the levels of those benefits. Therefore, in contrast to the promise enforced in Christensen v. Minneapolis Municipal Employees Retirement Board, 331 N.W.2d 740 (Minn.1983), appellants concede that the Act does not affect their expectations concerning the benefits available to them upon leaving public employment. Rather, appellants’ claim to promissory estoppel rests upon the allegation that they detrimentally relied upon their employer’s promise to maintain employee contribution levels at a fixed rate.
. Although it does not distinguish the independent legal standards applicable to the separate contract theories at issue, the dissenting opinion appears to rely upon the doctrine of promissory estoppel in concluding that the Act’s employee pension contribution provisions are invalid. In so concluding, the dissent both fails to apply appropriate legal standards and inaccurately characterizes evidence in the record, and these omissions merit some comment.
Promissory estoppel is an equitable doctrine which is triggered by a showing of reasonable and substantial detrimental reliance upon a promise. In this action’s present procedural posture, the dissent’s theory can only be supported through a discussion of evidence in the record which not only establishes the existence of both the promise and the substantial detrimental reliance, but which also is sufficiently compelling to support the determination that the trial court’s findings to the contrary are clearly erroneous. The dissent’s discussion fails to meet these legal standards.
Additionally, in its effort to designate the nature of the alleged promise the dissent mis-characterizes the evidence. The dissent apparently concedes that the evidence supports the trial court’s finding that the legislature made no promise to maintain employee pension contributions at a fixed level. The dissent maintains, however, that the legislature’s past financial management of public pensions constitutes a promise that employer contributions will always “match” (i.e., equal the amount of) employee contributions to meet normal costs, and that contributions will only be increased in conjunction with an increase in benefits. The dissent bases its analysis upon the following conclusion: “Since * * * 1957, employer contributions have matched employee contributions.” The dissent also states: “Increases in contributions since the 1950’s have been, in every instance, accompanied by increases in benefits.” Both of these statements are inaccurate.
The record in this case clearly reflects the facts that employer contributions have not always matched employee contributions, and that contributions have been increased for purposes other than the increase of pension benefits. For example, Karen Dudley, the Executive Secretary of the Legislature’s Commission on Pensions and Retirement, was quite clear in her testimony regarding these points:
*569Q. I notice * * * that the [Legislative Commission on Pensions and Retirement] is recommending [in its report to the Legislature] that for regular public-employees the employee-employer should make matching contributions to meet normal costs. Has the Legislature always followed this advice?
A. No, it has not.
[[Image here]]
Q. During these years [1957-1980], has the Legislature changed benefit levels for the various plans?
A. Yes.
Q. Have they made changes in the contribution levels, both for employer and employee?
A. Yes.
Q. For the various plans?
A. Yes.
Q. Have the contribution levels of either the employer or employee always been tied to an increase in benefits?
A. No.
Ms. Dudley’s testimony provides the requisite evidence to support the trial court’s findings, and can be easily verified through independent research. For example, with regard to the fact that employer contributions have always matched employee contributions, see Act of March 27, 1974, ch. 289, § 20-21, 1974 Minn. Laws 442, 450-51 (amending Minn.Stat. § 354.-42 (Supp.1973) (to temporarily establish contribution rates to the Teachers’ Retirement Association of 4% for employees and Zlh% for the employer), and Minn.Stat. § 352.92 (1982) (establishing contribution rates for correctional employee members of the Minnesota State Retirement System which requires the employer to pay at least IV2 times the amount contributed by the employee). Similarly, to confirm that contribution levels have been increased without an accompanying increase in benefits, see Act of May 31, 1979, ch. 293, § 1, 1979 Minn.Laws 641, 641-42 (amending Minn.Stat. § 354.42, subd. 3 (1978), to raise the employer contribution level in response to concerns of the actuary regarding funding levels, and without an accompanying increase in benefits). We can only reiterate that a careful review of the record compels the conclusion that the trial court properly denied the appellants’ claim to promissory estoppel.
. We have recognized that the standard applied to claims brought under the state equal protection clause, Minn. Const. art. I, § 2, is the same as that applied to claims brought under the federal equal protection clause, U.S. Const. amend XIV, § 1. See State v. Forge, 262 N.W.2d 341, 347 n. 23 (Minn.1977); Minneapolis Federation of Teachers Local 59 v. Obermeyer, 275 Minn. 347, 354, 147 N.W.2d 358, 363 (1966).
. A recurring expression of this rational basis standard is the following three-part test, which operates to uphold legislative classifications if:
(1) the classification uniformly, without discrimination, applies to and embraces all who are similarly situated with respect to conditions or wants justifying appropriate legislation;
(2) the distinctions which separate those who are included within the classification from those who are excluded are not manifestly arbitrary or fanciful, but are genuine and substantial so as to provide a natural and reasonable basis in the necessity or circumstances of the members of the classification to justify different legislation adapted to their peculiar conditions and needs; and
(3) the classification is germane or relevant to the purpose of the law, that is, there must be an evident connection between the distinctive needs peculiar to the class and the remedy or regulations therefor which the law purports to provide.
We first applied this three-part test in Loew v. Hagerle Bros., 226 Minn. 485, 489, 33 N.W.2d 598, 601 (1948), in the context of a challenge brought under the special legislation prohibition of the Minnesota Constitution, Minn. Const, art. XII, § 1. Subsequently, we have applied the three-part test developed in Loew in a number of cases arising under the state and federal equal protection clauses. See, e.g., Nelson v. Peterson, 313 N.W.2d 580, 581 (Minn.1981). The three-part test developed in Loew has also been carried over to the analogous context of challenges to tax statutes brought under the uniformity clause of the Minnesota Constitution, Minn. Const, art. X, § 1. See, e.g., Guilliams v. Commissioner of Revenue, 299 N.W.2d 138, 142 (Minn.1980). Some confusion has consequently arisen regarding both the propriety of applying the three-part test developed in Loew in these different contexts, and the degree to which our use of that test in the interpretation of the Minnesota Constitution indicates a departure from the standard of rationality analysis developed by the United States Supreme Court for application in cases arising under the federal equal protection clause. We therefore reiterate that the prohibition against arbitrary legislative action embodied in the state equal protection clause, Minn. Const., art. I, § 2, the state uniformity clause, Minn. Const, art. X, § 1. and the state special legislation clause, Minn. Const, art XII, § 1, are coextensive with those afforded by the federal equal protection clause, U.S. Const, amend. XIV, § 1.
. Commenting upon the Act’s legislative history, the dissent states that “the legislature did not sufficiently consider other fiscal relief measures * * and that “[tjhere is no indication that the sought-after $63.5 million was obtainable nowhere else than from public employees’ pockets.” However, the record repeatedly shows, perhaps most clearly through the testimony of State Budget Director Val Vik-*571manis who was the primary official of the executive branch informing the legislature of the options available to it in responding to the fiscal crisis, that the legislature considered enacting a number of different combinations of the following measures: unallotment (which was originally proposed as a 28.6% across-the-board reduction in available appropriations), raising the sales tax, raising the surtax on individual income, budget shifts such as shifting the recognition of revenue from property taxes to delay the payment of state aids to school districts, reducing contributions to the pension funds, reducing local government aids, reducing school aids, and reducing the budgets of all state agencies. The record is clear in demonstrating that the legislature carefully considered each of these fiscal relief measures, and that in doing so the legislature also reviewed the merits of proposals to meet the deficit through different combinations of these measures. Apparently it should be emphasized that we are reviewing the limited question of the extent of the legislature’s authority, and that it is not our role to make determinations regarding the economic efficiency or political effect of the legislative enactment.
. In challenges to statutes under the equal protection clause, we accept legislative expressions regarding the purposes of the legislation as the actual purposes unless our review of the legislative history and the statutory scheme convinces us that they “could not have been a goal of the legislation.” Minnesota v. Clover Leaf Creamery Co., 449 U.S. 456, 463 n. 7, 101 S.Ct. 715, 723 n. 7, 66 L.Ed.2d 659 (1981) (quoting Weinberger v. Wiesenfeld, 420 U.S. 636, 648 n. 16, 95 S.Ct. 1225, 1233 n. 16, 43 L.Ed.2d 514 (1975).) Here, a review of the legislative history and the statutory scheme confirms that the purposes stated in the Act’s preamble are its actual purposes.
In its Preamble, the Act states that Minnesota “is presently confronted with a grave economic emergency” and that “legislation designed to correct this economic emergency must not create undue economic or social dislocations, place an oppressive tax burden on the state’s citizens and corporate community, cause massive expenditure reductions which would eliminate basic public services, cause further extensive unemployment, or jeopardize the financial integrity of state government.” Act of December 10, 1982, 3rd Spec.Sess. ch. 1, art. 1, § 1, 1982 Minn.Sess. Law Serv. 1819, 1820.
. The budget crisis was a “no-win” situation in the sense that it presented the legislature with only unsavory alternatives. Because of the vast size of the deficit, and because personnel costs constitute approximately 75 to 85% of the state budget, it was apparent that any substantial budget cuts would dramatically affect public employees in some manner. Once the political decision was made to enact budget cuts as a part of the legislative response to the deficit, the alternative of reducing employer pension contributions was explored. Because of the state’s strong reliance upon debt financing and in recognition of the prominent role which the state’s recent efforts to reduce the unfunded liabilities in its pension plans has played in the favorable opinions of agencies which rate the credit of state and local units of government, the Legislature had to ensure that a decrease in employer pension contributions would not have an unfavorable impact upon the state’s credit rating. Moreover, there was considerable concern that a $64,000,000 reduction in pension contributions would cause too much damage to the actuarial soundness of the plans.
Effecting a corresponding increase in employee contributions was an obvious answer to these concerns, but the legislature was initially unwilling to impose such a financial hardship on public employees. When it was later determined, however, that the legislature could, through imposing some relatively insignificant new restrictions upon the operation of the pension plans, provide a permanent and very advantageous “tax shelter” benefit to public employees which would operate to more than compensate these employees for the temporary increase in employee contributions, the political decision to enact the pension contribution provisions was made. This record demonstrates that the legislature proceeded with care and creativity to enact a program of budget *572cuts which would be least harmful to employees of state and local government.
.Appellants also argue that the provision increasing employee contributions creates a classification distinguishing public from nonpublic employees which is not rationally related to the achievement of the purposes of that provision. This argument is without merit. The purposes of the provision which temporarily raises public employee pension contributions 2% are to maintain the actuarial soundness of those portions of the public retirement system affected by the budget cuts and to thereby, albeit indirectly, enhance the general financial posture of state government. In drafting the challenged provision, the legislature did not make a classification which distinguished public from nonpublic employees. Nonpublic employees do not contribute, and are not beneficiaries of, public retirement systems. The two purported “classes” were not similarly situated because the legislature was not in a position to raise the pension contribution rates of nonpublic employees, nor would such a provision have furthered the purposes' of the Act. Put another way, the requirement that only public, and not nonpublic, employees temporarily contribute an additional 2% of salary to their pension funds is rationally related to the legitimate state interest in preventing undue economic displacement by maintaining the actuarial integrity of the public retirement system.
. In determining the unique status of the University faculty’s pension plan, the Commission on Pensions and Retirement stated:
One plan is not established specifically by statuate and is not governed to any substantial extent by statute or special law other than the acturial reporting required under Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 356. [See Minn.Stat. § 356.20, subds. 2(9), (10) (1982) ] This plan is the University of Minnesota Faculty Retirement Plan. Policy determinations for this plan lies with the Board of Regents of the University of Minnesota.
Legislative Commission on Pensions and Retirement, Report to the 1979-1980 Minnesota State Legislature, at 12.
. In addressing appellants’ equal protection challenge regarding the omission of the University faculty, the dissent asserts that it is a denial of equal protection to increase any public employee’s pension contributions without similarly increasing the pension contribution of *573all other public employees. The application of such a per se rule is inappropriate under any standard of equal protection, but is particularly improper in the context of a review of the rational basis of a legislative act. Appellants concede that the applicable constitutional standard is the rational basis test, and this test does not remotely correspond to the dissent’s blanket prohibition. Rather, under the applicable standard, the proper judicial inquiry is whether the challenged legislative classification is rationally related to a legitimate governmental interest.
Perhaps the dissent means to suggest that legislation which raises the pension contribution rates of one group of public employees without imposing a corresponding increase upon all other public employees can never be rationally related to a legitimate governmental interest. This proposition also lacks merit. It must be remembered that there are 640 different plans which provide retirement benefits to approximately 225,000 public employees in Minnesota, and that these plans “reflect a very complex picture of varying structure, legal authority, membership coverage, benefits, costs and financing.” Legislative Commission on Pensions and Retirement, Report to the 1979-1980 Minnesota State Legislature, at 8. There are a number of legitimate purposes for which contribution levels to any one of the 640 plans may be changed, including the financial condition of the particular plan, the changing of that plan’s benefit levels and general budget considerations. The rationality of an increase in contribution levels to participants in any one plan must be assessed on its merits by reference to the purposes for which the increase was imposed. Contrary to the position of the dissent, any such change would not necessarily be wholly unrelated to any legitimate governmental interest.
. As previously indicated, the state uniformity clause, Minn. Const. art. X, § 1, restricts the legislature’s ability to tax to the same extent as the federal equal protection clause.
. Appellants do not contend that the challenged governmental action was the result of *574an unfair procedure, and this appeal therefore does not raise “procedural” due process issues.
.We have repeatedly recognized that our state due process clause is not more restrictive than the federal due process clause. See, e.g., Shreve v. Department of Economic Security, 283 N.W.2d 506, 509 (Minn.1979); Anderson v. City of St. Paul, 226 Minn. 186, 190, 32 N.W.2d 538, 541 (1948). We will therefore apply a common standard in our discussion of the challenges brought under the separate clauses.
. The Fifth Amendment’s proscription of the uncompensated taking of private property for public uses has, of course, been applied to state action through the fourteenth amendment. See, e.g., Penn Central Transportation Co. v. New York City, 438 U.S. 104, 122, 98 S.Ct. 2646, 2658, 57 L.Ed.2d 631 (1978).
. Appellants do not allege, and the record does not show, that the increase in employee pension contributions interferes with a protected “liberty” interest.
. Appellants’ contention that employee contribution levels are implicitly fixed in existing collective bargaining agreements is based on the rationale that the terms and conditions specified in existing agreements were agreed to by negotiators in reliance upon a fixed rate of employee pension contributions. Even assuming that such “implicit bargaining” did occur, it is clear that appellants’ contention is premised upon the legal conclusion that pension issues are a permissible subject of bargaining. However, we conclude that PELRA’s express exclusion of pension considerations from the definition of terms and conditions of employment was established to take all pension issues completely out of the scope of permissible bargaining, and that it is consequently illegal to agree to provisions, express or implied, which purport to restrict the legislature’s freedom to act with respect to such issues.
. Another argument presented by appellants in support of an unfair labor practice theory is that the Act’s two percent employee contribution requirement results in a two percent decrease in the actual salary or wage of each employee which, because wages are clearly a negotiable term of employment and the Act was not negotiated, constitutes an unfair labor practice. This argument is essentially an attempt at an “end-run” around PELRA’s exclusion of retirement benefits from negotiable terms and conditions of employment. Because we hold that the statutory exclusion bars negotiations regarding pension contributions, we also hold that the consequences upon net salaries which result from an exercise of legislative discretion over pension contributions are permissible as a necessary incident of the scope of the statutory exclusion.

=== CASE 9740494 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:31.80887+00 ===

YETKA, Justice
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent. Because I would hold that the mandatory 2% withholding *578provision is a tax that violates the state uniformity clause, Minn. Const, art. X, § 1, and an unconstitutional impairment of contract, Minn. Const, art. I, § 11, I would reverse the decision of the district court.
Nearly a year ago, in my dissent in In re U.S. Steel Corporation v. State of Minnesota, 324 N.W.2d 638 (1982), I wrote:
We all must remember that our constitutions — both state and federal — were intended to protect not only one citizen from another, but also to protect all citizens from oppressive acts of the government. If the legislature can strike an illegal blow at the mighty and be permitted to get away with it, it can more easily strike again at those least able to respond. I think there is a point at which to call a halt to such activity, and this is a good opportunity.
Id. at 647 (Yetka, J., dissenting). Here, public employees are the victims of an illegal act of the legislature less than a year later!
I surely agree that we must give great deference to a legislative act, but the constitution was written for the courts to interpret. We must not allow the constitutional language to be an illusionary protection only.1 To uphold the authority of the legislature to levy a tax on public employees, while excluding the general public, and unilaterally to deprive state employees of their contractual rights without sufficient justification constitute an abdication of this court’s responsibility to ensure that Minnesota citizens are protected from arbitrary and discriminatory legislative action.
Uniformity Clause
We have previously addressed what constitutes a tax. “Taxes are pecuniary charges imposed by the legislative power to raise money for public purposes — a burden imposed to supply the very lifeblood of the state.” Great Lakes Pipe Line Co. v. Commissioner of Taxation, 272 Minn. 403, 407, 138 N.W.2d 612, 615, appeal dismissed, 384 U.S. 718, 86 S.Ct. 1886, 16 L.Ed.2d 881 (1965), quoting In re Petition of S.R.A., Inc., 213 Minn. 487, 488, 7 N.W.2d 484, 485 (1942). “In a general sense, [a tax is] any contribution imposed by government upon individuals, for the use and service of the state, whether under the name of toll, tribute, tallage, gabel, impost, duty, custom, excise, subsidy, aid, supply, or other name.” Black’s Law Dictionary 1307 (rev. 5th ed. 1979); see also Staub v. Harris, 626 F.2d 275, 278 (3d Cir.1980).
The 2% withholding provision is a tax. It is an enforced contribution, exacted pursuant to legislative authority, and collected from public employees to address the general budget crisis facing the state. The form of the payment is not as important as is its substance. State employees are forced to pay 2% of their gross income to the state while non-public employees are not.
The majority and the district court emphasize several characteristics of the form and nature of the contribution and conclude that it is not, in fact, a tax. They stress that each contribution is credited to an individual account, that the money is refunded if the employee leaves public service (though only prior to vesting), and that the contribution is recouped in the form of *579retirement benefits. These justifications are either erroneous or irrelevant. Retirement benefits were not increased. The end benefits remained the same after the contribution as they did without it. Thus, the finding of the district court that the contribution inures to the benefit of the employee is clearly erroneous.2 While it is true that a favorable IRS ruling allowing an employee to deduct the state tax from the gross income is beneficial, some funds already had such a privilege prior to the passage of the new tax.
Further, the claim that the contribution is necessary to ensure the integrity of the pension fund and, therefore, of direct benefit to the employees is not persuasive. There is no evidence in the record that, prior to the contribution, the fund was in a less-than-adequate financial position. The district court, in its findings of facts, found that the fund was in a “reasonably good financial condition.” The Legislative Commission on Pensions and Retirement,3 in its report to the 1979-1980 Minnesota State Legislature, came to the same conclusion. To the extent that the fund is compromised, it is the result of the companion decrease in the state’s contributions to the fund. The legislature enacted both provisions in the same bill to combat the same problem — the state’s budget crisis. One cannot be reviewed without consideration of the other.
In light of our obligation to review statutes as a whole and to pierce form to evaluate the substance of legislation, I can only conclude that state employees received no greater benefit than did the public at large from the pension fund contributions. If all taxpayers were required to contribute an extra 2% of their income to the state coffers, no one would dispute that the contribution would constitute a tax. If a bird looks like a duck, quacks like a duck, and walks like a duck, it is most likely a duck. Likewise, if an act looks like a tax, raises revenue like a tax, and is mandatory like a tax, it is a tax.
The great majority of our citizens pay into the federal social security fund. Congress has mandated coverage for most workers. The payments are made to the federal government in the form of payroll deductions. Historically, these deductions have been referred to as “payroll taxes.” One need only pick up recent newspaper and magazine articles addressing recent amendments to that act and read the pros and cons of increasing the taxes to make the system solvent to conclude that the contributions are indeed taxes. Those taxes are dedicated for the specific purposes set forth in the Social Security Act. Minnesota has road user, motor vehicle, and gasoline taxes. These funds are also dedicated for specific state highway funding purposes, but are they any less a tax? To ask the question, it seems to me, is to answer it. Of course they are taxes and so is the levy the *580legislature has made on state employees in the act before us.
Concluding that the contribution constitutes a tax, I now subject the provisions to the standards of judging constitutionality in light of the state uniformity clause. In interpreting our state uniformity clause, we are not bound by federal court interpretation of the federal equal protection clause. Because I conclude that the statute fails to pass constitutional muster under the independent state basis mandated by our state uniformity clause, I do not address whether it would pass the “rational basis” test under the federal equal protection clause.
The first step in analyzing any statute under the uniformity clause “rational basis” standard is identifying the purpose the statute was intended to fulfill. Here we have both the expressed purpose to solve the state’s budget crisis, contained in the statute itself, and a purpose argued by the state’s attorneys that the 2% contribution is necessary to ensure the integrity of the pension fund because of the 4% cut in employer contribution.
No single approach has been followed by courts in identifying the appropriate purpose to apply in constitutional analysis. See Leedes, The Rationality Requirement of the Equal Protection Clause, 42 Ohio St.L.J. 639, 642-47 (1981). The United States Supreme Court has taken several different approaches, including hypothesizing any potential purpose, whether or not expressed by the legislature or the state’s advocates, see United States R.R. Retirement Bd. v. Fritz, 449 U.S. 166, 101 S.Ct. 453, 66 L.Ed.2d 368 (1980), and requiring that a deliberate choice of purpose be expressly stated in the legislation itself or actually discernible from legislative history, see Schweiker v. Wilson, 450 U.S. 221, 101 S.Ct. 1074, 67 L.Ed.2d 186 (1981). Between these two extremes is an approach that looks for something less than express statements, but falls short of out- and-out speculation. In the instant case, we have two conflicting purposes — an express purpose stated in the legislation itself and one advocated by the state’s attorneys.
I cannot accept the integrity of the fund as the proper purpose for analysis under the state uniformity clause. The entire statute must be examined, not any one provision in isolation. The legislature cannot create a purpose by one portion of the statute and then use the need created thereby to justify another portion, at least when the secondary portion impinges on the constitutional rights of state citizens.
The applicable purpose is the one expressly stated in the legislation, that is, the need to balance the state budget as opposed to the “need” to shore up the pension fund. The preamble to the act clearly states the purpose of the legislation. The fact that the legislature was in special session, called for the specific purpose of addressing the budget deficit, reinforces a narrow interpretation of the purpose for constitutional analysis. Finally, to adopt any other purpose would be to elevate form over substance and ignore the actual effect of the legislation.
The majority, in effect, consolidates multiple purposes. It does so in two ways. First, it says that the adverse impact on the pension fund caused by the deprivation of employers’ contributions will affect the state’s credit rating which will, in turn, exacerbate the state’s fiscal crisis by affecting the state’s ability to borrow. Second, the majority argues that the reduction in employer contributions threatened the soundness of the fund, thereby requiring that the legislature act to protect the fund.
Neither argument is sufficient. Although no one can deny the importance to the state of a good credit rating, the 6-month decrease in employer contributions is merely one of the numerous factors threatening the rating and the equally numerous measures being pursued to protect it. The majority’s argument is simply too attenuated to bring the increase in employee contributions within the ambit of the legislative purpose outlined in the bill’s preamble.
The second argument is superficially more persuasive, but also fails to withstand scrutiny. To begin with, there is something facile and dangerous in saying that creating *581a problem gives one carte blanche in resolving it, particularly where there is insufficient proof that the problem exists in the first place. True, there is evidence that the decrease in employers’ contributions may somewhat postpone full funding of the pension system. There is also evidence, however, that full funding is not, under any circumstances, envisioned during this century. When the state’s pension system was reformed in Í957, Act of April 29, 1957, ch. 935, 1957 Minn.Laws 1472, the target date for full funding was 1997. This date was pushed back to 2009 by the 1979 Legislature, Act of May 24,1979, ch. 184, § 1,1979 Minn.Laws 283, 285 (codified at Minn.Stat. § 356.215, subd. 4 (1982), and a procedure was adopted for revising the target date in light of changed circumstances in the future, see Legislative Commission on Pensions and Retirement, Report to the 1979-1980 Minnesota State Legislature at 6 (1979-1980). Nowhere are there signs of an imminent collapse of the system.
The majority repeatedly refers to the magnitude of the state’s economic crisis and the need for swift solutions. This may explain the legislature’s actions; it does not remove the taint of unconstitutionality. The constitutional entitlement to uniform treatment cannot be subverted in pursuit of credit ratings and quick fixes. Here, the money that is levied by the state can be traced directly to the general revenue fund. The statute states clearly that, in some pension plans, the state is withholding its contributions while, in others, the proceeds of the additional employee levies are to be paid directly to that fund.4 State employees are thus contributing millions to the state revenue fund to help balance the budget.
It has been argued that, since the legislature has the power to decrease employer contributions currently, it also has the power to raise employee contributions at sometime in the future to maintain the financial integrity of the pension funds. Taking both steps in the same act must, therefore, be permissible. This argument fails for two reasons. First, it is far from clear that the legislature may unilaterally decrease employer contributions. The contract clause discussion that follows in this dissent indicates that such an act would violate the state constitutional provision proscribing impairment of contract.
Second, even assuming that a decrease in employer contributions would not violate the contract clause, a subsequent increase in employee contributions would still run afoul of the uniformity clause. A delay in imposing a tax on public employees does not render the levy any less a tax. If the classification fails to address the purpose of the legislation, it fails constitutional muster whether enacted today or 2 years from now. The applicable purpose remains the curing of the state’s financial crisis. Funds previously incorporated into the general revenue fund through the decrease in employer contributions are merely replaced by subsequent employee contributions. The substance remains the same, though the form is manipulated to avoid constitutional barriers.
Any law passed by the legislature that imposes a tax,on citizens of this state must pass the two-step uniformity clause test of a legitimate purpose and a classification rationally related to that purpose. Here, the test is not met because the classification consisting of state employees does not rationally relate to the purpose of curing the state’s financial crisis.
*582The state admitted at oral argument that if the legislature had attempted to solve the entire $312 million shortfall by the levying of an increase in employee contributions to pension plans, it perhaps would have been illegal. If that is so, how can the $63 million be any less illegal? • On what theory would the larger levy be illegal and the smaller not?5
To me, nothing can be clearer than that the levy is a tax, a tax devoted to the general welfare of the entire citizenry of the State of Minnesota. If we uphold this scheme, what is to prevent the legislature from levying a special tax on steel workers only to help alleviate certain economic conditions on Minnesota’s Iron Range, on farm families to alleviate problems on the farms, or on other industrywide workers to help or maintain industries in the State of Minnesota? I can see no distinction.
I conclude that the act violates the state uniformity clause and the district court must be reversed.
Contract Clause
I would also hold that contract rights existed between the state and its employees and therefore disagree with the majority’s finding that no contract, express or implied, governed the levels of employee contributions. Since the 1950’s, the legislature has made it clear by a series of actions that it intended to guarantee that public pension funds would be actuarily sound and able to pay certain benefits. When it found those funds not sound, it increased contributions not only on the part of the employees, but the employers as well.6 As a matter of fact, from 1959 until 1973, it imposed a special 2½ percent levy on local political subdivisions, in addition to the normal employer-employee contributions, until pre-ex-isting fund deficits were eliminated. See Act of May 24, 1973, ch. 753, § 85, 1973 Minn.Laws 2266, 2308, repealing Minn.Stat. § 353.27, subd. 5 (1971).7 Increases in contributions since the 1950’s have been, in every instance, accompanied by increases in *583benefits.8 It is beyond belief that, in 1983, we could find there is no guarantee that the state will continue to match the employee contribution in at least the amounts heretofore made in the past.
For the same reasons, I take strong exception to the majority opinion finding no intent to promise specific levels of state contributions or pensions. For, as we held in Sylvestre v. State, 298 Minn. 142, 214 N.W.2d 658 (1973), insofar as it affected the judiciary, a sound pension system is one of the few inducements for public employment. Id. at 149, 214 N.W.2d at 663. It is similar to a deferred compensation plan where the state offers a pension in addition to the regular salary if a public employee works for a specified period of years. For the most part, state employees are paid far less than either their federal counterparts or those in private employment for similar work. There will be a shock wave felt throughout the state if public employees are now told, in effect, that never mind what your salary was or what your pension estimates were at the time you came to work 10 years ago, these can be changed anytime.9 Such a holding simply does not square with today’s reality nor is such a holding even consistent, in my opinion, with our recent decision in Christensen v. Minneapolis Municipal Employees Retirement Board, 331 N.W.2d 740 (Minn.1983).10
The legislature considered also a 2% across-the-board decrease in salaries, we are told. Undoubtedly, there was fear that if that course of action were taken, it would be violative of the impairment of contract clauses of the state and federal constitutions because the state had entered into a collective bargaining agreement and the legislature had ratified a contract with state employees that prohibited a cut for the period of that contract. A fiscal crisis that fails to justify a direct impairment of contract, however, cannot then be held to justify the same impairment, though accomplished in a circuitous manner.
The state emphasizes horror stories of possible layoffs in the tens of thousands in an apparent attempt to show that, even if the statute impaired contract rights, such an impairment was justified by the seriousness of the state’s fiscal crisis. The state’s scenario, however, envisions solving the entire $312 million shortage through layoffs and does not limit itself to the $63 million initially taxed to state employees. The con*584sequences of solving only $63 million of the shortage through layoffs are obviously far less serious and do not justify the state’s impairment of its employees’ contract rights. Further, the legislature did not sufficiently consider other fiscal relief measures before it resorted to the expedient of tampering with the pension fund. There is no indication that the sought-after $63.5 million was obtainable nowhere else than from public employees’ pockets.
Perhaps there is some validity to the argument that the legislature felt state employees ought to share in the cost of the solutions to the state’s financial, crisis. In my opinion, however, the legislature has passed far over the line on what is permissible and what is not in enacting this statute. Other jurisdictions have held that increases in public employee pension contributions without counterbalancing increased benefit to the employee constitute impairments of contract rights. Allen v. City of Long Beach, 45 Cal.2d 128, 287 P.2d 765 (1955); Marvel v. Dannemann, 490 F.Supp. 170 (D.Del.1980); Singer v. City of Topeka, 227 Kan. 356, 607 P.2d 467 (1980); Opinion of the Justices, 364 Mass. 847, 303 N.E.2d 320 (1973). California recently held that a decrease in employer contributions to a public pension reserve fund was an unconstitutional impairment of contract. Valdes v. Cory, 139 Cal.App.3d 773,189 Cal.Rptr. 212 (1983).
I conclude that the doctrine of promissory estoppel creates actionable contract rights in public employees as to the state pension fund. By decreasing employer contributions and increasing employee contributions, the legislature has substantially impaired its contract with state employees, an impairment not justified by the extent of the financial crisis the legislature acted to cure.
Under the circumstances of this case, I must conclude that the legislature has failed to act in a constitutional manner. Thus, I must dissent from the majority opinion. To do otherwise appears to me to be nothing less than abolishing the historical protection afforded by our constitutions and to say, in effect, taxpayers beware because there is no longer a limit on legislative authority to classify and to tax or to . rewrite state contracts at will. In this case, state employees are the victims; tomorrow, anyone else could be.
. As Justice Jackson stated in discussing the federal equal protection clause:
I regard it as a salutary doctrine that cities, states and the Federal Government must exercise their powers so as not to discriminate between their inhabitants except upon some reasonable differentiation fairly related to the object of regulation. This equality is not merely abstract justice. The framers of the Constitution knew, and we should not forget today, that there is no more effective practical guaranty against arbitrary and unreasonable government than to require that the principles of law which officials would impose upon a minority must be imposed generally. Conversely, nothing opens the door to arbitrary action so effectively as to allow those officials to pick and choose only a few to whom they will apply legislation and thus to escape the political retribution that might be visited upon them if larger numbers were affected. Courts can take no better measure to assure that laws will be just than to require that laws be equal in operation.
Railway Express Agency, Inc. v. New York, 336 U.S. 106, 112-13, 69 S.Ct. 463, 466, 93 L.Ed. 533 (1949) (Jackson, J., concurring).
. The majority cites Gossman v. State Employees Retirement System, 177 Neb. 326, 129 N.W.2d 97 (1964), for the proposition that pension contributions are distinguishable from taxes. In Gossman, the Nebraska Supreme Court considered the constitutionality of a state employee retirement system at the time of its creation. The court held that a 1 percent contribution by current employees to fund a prior service benefit fund was not a tax. The court, however, focused on the fact that the contribution was a voluntary one, arising from the acceptance of employment. Further, the contribution was for the purpose of providing benefits under the pension plan and was “not an exaction or tax for the purposes of carrying on the general functions of government." Id at 332, 129 N.W.2d at 102 (emphasis added).
In the instant case, the contribution did not result in the creation or maintenance of any retirement benefits. It was intended to replace funds no longer contributed by the state, such funds being diverted to the state’s general fund for the purpose of alleviating the general budget deficit.
. The Legislative Commission on Pensions and Retirement was originally established as an interim commission by the 1955 Legislature. Its purpose was to study public retirement problems in light of changes made by the 1955 Legislature. The commission was maintained as an interim commission by each successive legislature, with the exception of the 1961 session, until 1967. The 1967 Legislature established the current permanent commission, which has issued reports to each legislature up to the present.
. Moreover, the distinction between not putting money into the pension plan and taking money out is an elevation of form above substance. Both are deprivations of contributions to the fund. An analogy can be drawn to the concept of tax expenditures. It has been clear for some time that, despite superficial differences, direct government subsidies and tax preferences (deductions and credits) are substantively the same. Not taking money from taxpayers is the functional equivalent of giving money to taxpayers. The former is an indirect tax “expenditure” while the latter is merely a more direct expenditure. See Surrey, Tax Incentives as a Device for Implementing Government Policy: A Comparison with Direct Government Expenditures, 83 Harv.L.Rev. 705 (1970). Here, we are faced with the converse situation-not giving money to employee pension plans is functionally equivalent to taking money from the plans.
. Subsequent to the instant action, the 1983 Legislature amended the contribution provisions by requiring reimbursement to state employees of half the increased contributions, payable with interest at the time of the first annuity payment or upon withdrawal. See Act of June 8, 1983, ch. 301, §§ 225-26, 1983 Minn. Laws 1706, 1855-56. The new provisions are applicable from January 1, 1983, to June 30, 1985, and affect employees retiring during this period and participants whose contributions were increased by the legislation challenged here. While this recent enactment does lessen the impact of the original contribution provisions, it does not cure the taint of unconstitutionality.
. Since the current scheme of the state’s pension system was established in 1957, employer contributions have matched employee contributions. In the 1957 legislation, employee contributions were set at 6 percent. Employer contributions were gradually raised over a 2-year period until they too reached 6 percent. Act of April 29, 1957, ch. 935, § 7, 1957 Minn.Laws 1472, 1475. In 1973, when employee contributions were again increased and basic and coordinated plans were differentiated, the statute was amended to provide that employer contributions would be equal to those of employees. Act of May 24, 1973, ch. 753, § 28, 1973 Minn. Laws 2266, 2279. The express policy of the new pension system was to guarantee the financial integrity of the various pension funds by matching current employer contributions to employee contributions and by providing for adequate future financing. Legislative Committee on Retirement and Pensions, Report to the 1979-1980 Minnesota State Legislature, at 26-27 (1979-1980).
The exceptions to the policy of lock-step contribution increases noted in the majority opinion are not significant. The 1974 amendments to the Teachers Retirement Association levels of contributions consisted of a temporary ⅛ percent difference enacted along with significant alterations to the operation of the fund itself. The contribution levels for correctional employee members of the state retirement system merely reflect the unique status of these employees pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 352.90 (1982), which provides special retirement benefits due to the potential for early retirement caused by the nature of the employment.
.The repealed section, originally enacted by the 1957 Legislature, provided:
An additional contribution shall be made to the fund based on two and one-half percent of the salary of each member not to exceed $4,800 in any calendar year for the purpose of amortizing the deficit in the fund. This contribution shall be made from funds available to the employing subdivision in the manner provided in section 353.28. This subdivision takes effect July 1, 1959.
Minn.Stat. § 353.27, subd. 5 (1957).
. The 1979 amendments to the Teachers Retirement Association pension plan, Act of May 31, 1979, ch. 293, § 10, 1979 Minn.Laws 641, 648-49, noted as an exception to this overriding policy in the majority opinion, did contain an $11,600,000 appropriation to fund post-retirement adjustments, id, and increased both employer and employee contributions by an identical ½ percent, see Legislative Committee on Retirement and Pensions, Report to the 1979-(1980) Minnesota State Legislature, at 6 (1979-1980).
. The majority correctly points out that the University of Minnesota faculty and other state employees were left out of the 2% levy. It attempts to justify the omission by inherent powers given the University Board of Regents. I cannot follow that logic. Whether one works for the State of Minnesota or one of its political subdivisions, if one employee must pay the 2% contribution, all should pay, or in my opinion, there is a denial of equal protection under both federal and state constitutions. Because the autonomy of the Board of Regents is created by state constitutional provisions, and analysis of these provisions here would involve us in additional constitutional analysis, 1 do not reach this issue here. The tax and contract analyses are dispositive of this appeal and further discussion of this issue is unnecessary.
.In Christensen, this court recognized a cause of action grounded in promissory estop-pel to challenge deprivation of pension benefits and other changes in pension terms and conditions. The majority opinion rejects this claim here and endorses the district court’s finding that, due to numerous modifications of contributions and appropriations in the past, any employee expectation in fixed contribution rates is unreasonable. This logic ignores the fact that the clear pattern of the modifications made by the legislature is one of increasing benefits and matching employer contributions. The modification in dispute in the instant case is drastically different in that employee contributions were raised and employer contributions lowered. There may be no reasonable expectation in fixed rates. There may be, however, a reasonable expectation in matching contributions and continued maintenance of benefits as well as salary.

=== CASE 9740497 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:31.821208+00 ===

KELLEY, Justice
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent. I concur with the majority that appellants have failed to establish an express or implied contract. The three-judge panel made findings that the state made no promises regarding guaranteed levels of employee contributions to the pension funds and that appellants have failed to establish that they reasonably and detrimentally relied upon any express or implied promises made by the state. While perhaps different findings could have been made, as Justice Yetka points out in his dissent, I conclude the panel’s findings on the contract issues were not clearly erroneous. I further concur that the enactment of the “Act” by the legislature was not an unfair labor practice under PELRA.
However, because I cannot escape the conclusion that the mandatory 2% withholding provision is a tax, and, as such, that it violates the state uniformity clause, Minn. Const, art. X, § 1, I join the dissent of Justice Yetka and would reverse on that ground only.

=== CASE 9740498 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:32.900363+00 ===

PER CURIAM.
This is an original action commenced by Attorney General Bronson C. La Follette seeking a declaratory judgment that the State of Wisconsin Operating Notes of 1983 when issued, sold and delivered in the manner provided by the Authorizing Resolution issued by the State Building Commission pursuant to 1983 Wisconsin Act 3, will be valid enforceable contractual *361obligations of the State of Wisconsin. The respondents, both members of the legislature, ask this court to declare Act 3 invalid because it was not properly enacted and because it authorizes a state debt in violation of the state constitution.1 Because we decline to review the validity of the procedure followed by the legislature in enacting Act 3 and because we conclude the operating notes are not public debt within the prohibition of Article VIII, Sec. 4 of the Wisconsin Constitution, we declare that the notes issued pursuant to the authority of 1983 Wisconsin Act 3, are evidence of a valid enforceable obligation of the State of Wisconsin.
The facts are undisputed: The state proposes to issue $750 million of operating notes of 1983 to ease cash flow imbalances during the 1983-84 fiscal year. Such notes are to be issued pursuant to 1983 Wisconsin Act 3. The act provides that at any time the department of administration determines that a deficiency will occur in the funds of the state so that the state will be unable to meet its operating obligations in a timely manner, the department may by a request signed by the secretary of administration and the governor and approved by the joint committee on finance, ask the state building commission, by authorizing resolution, to issue operating notes to fund the anticipated deficit. The act further specifies that no request from the department of administration can be made, nor authorizing resolution from the state building commission adopted, on or after the effective date of the 1985 biennial budget act. Moreover, the act states that *362no operating note issued may have a maturity date later than the effective date of the 1985 biennial budget act. The authorizing resolution issued by the state building commission provides that the notes will mature on June 15, 1984, with all principal and interest on such notes to be paid from revenue received during the fiscal year. The proceeds from the notes will be deposited in the state’s general fund to be used to fund state assistance payments to municipalities and school districts, to reimburse various segregated funds of the state from which monies have been temporarily allocated for general fund purposes and to finance the state’s day-to-day operations.
Funds derived from anticipated tax revenues — primarily personal income, corporate income and sales taxes —to be paid within this fiscal year will be used to repay the notes. The act requires the secretary of the department of administration to impound such funds and transfer them from the general fund to the operating note redemption fund periodically during the 1983-84 fiscal year. According to the authorizing resolution, the final impoundment is to be made on May 15, 1984, at which time 100 percent of the amount of principal and interest payable on the notes at maturity on June 15, 1984, is to be on deposit in the redemption fund. The act appropriates from the general fund to the redemption fund a sum sufficient for the payment of principal and interest on the notes and for the payment of all monies required to be impounded. Funds in the redemption fund are subject only to the rights of the holders of the state’s general obligation bonds and notes. If the state fails to pay any operating note, the act gives the holder the right to compel such payment in an action against the state.
We granted the petition to commence an original action because this matter is publici juris and requires a prompt and authoritative determination by this court in the first instance, Petition of Heil, supra; see also, In Re Exercise *363of Original Jurisdiction, 201 Wis. 123, 229 N.W. 643 (1930).
We deem the two issues raised in this action to be:
(1) Is 1983 Wisconsin Act 3 invalid because the legislature did not follow specified statutory procedures in enacting the legislation ?
(2) Are the operating notes “public debt” within the meaning of Article VIII, Sec. 4 of the Wisconsin Constitution which prohibits the state from contracting “public debt” except in certain situations not applicable here ?
Procedural Validity of Enactment
The respondents contend that Act 3 is invalid because neither house of the legislature referred the act to the joint survey committee on debt management as required by sec. 13.49(6) before passage. Section 13.49(5) states that the purpose of the joint survey committee on debt management is to “. . . advise the legislature on matters regarding coordination of activities of state agencies and independent state authorities issuing debt and revenue obligations or using proceeds of such obligations . . . .” The committee is charged with reviewing and advising the legislature whenever legislation is proposed which involves state debt or revenue obligations. Subsection (6) of sec. 13.49 provides in pertinent part:
“Upon the introduction in either house of the legislature of any proposal which affects any existing statute or creates any new statutes relating to the authorization to issue state debt or revenue obligations as set forth in ch. 18, . . . shall at once be referred to the committee by the presiding officer instead of to a standing committee. The -proposal shall not be considered further by either house until the committee has submitted a report, in writing, setting forth an opinion on the fiscal effect upon the state or local government, the effect upon the state’s and local government’s ability to issue debt and *364revenue obligations, the appropriateness of the proposal in relation to the state’s and local government’s debt policies and the desirability of the proposal as a matter of public policy and the report has been printed as an appendix to the bill and attached to the bill as are amendments . . .” (Emphasis added.)
The respondents contend that the failure of either the assembly or the senate to refer Act 3 to this committee prior to passage invalidates the act. The petitioner, on the other hand, contends that Assembly Bill 104 which ultimately became 1983 Wisconsin Act 3 did not have to be referred to the committee because it did not create state debt or revenue obligations as set forth in ch. 18, Stats.
Because we conclude this court will not determine whether internal operating rules or procedural statutes have been complied with by the legislature in the course of its enactments, we do not address the question of whether sec. 13.49(6), Stats., applies to this legislation. To discuss or consider the petitioner’s argument that the procedure mandated in sec. 13.49, does not apply to Act 3 because the latter did not create state debt or revenue obligations as set forth in ch. 18, would imply that this court will review legislative conduct to ensure the legislature complied with its own procedural rules or statutes in enacting the legislation. For the reasons discussed below, we conclude we will not intermeddle in what we view, in the absence of constitutional directives to the contrary, to be purely legislative concerns; accordingly, we decline to resolve the question of whether sec. 13.49 applies to Act 3.
Courts are reluctant to inquire into whether the legislature has complied with legislatively prescribed formalities in enacting a statute. This reluctance stems from *365separation of power and comity concepts, plus the need for finality and certainty regarding the status of a statute. Baker v. Carr, 369 U.S. 186, 215 (1962). Although since Marbury v. Madison, 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137, 2 L. Ed. 60 (1803) courts have had the authority to review acts of the legislature for any conflict with the constitution, courts generally consider that the legislature’s adherence to the rules or statutes prescribing procedure is a matter entirely within legislative control and discretion, not subject to judicial review unless the legislative procedure is mandated by the constitution. 73 Am. Jur. 2d Statutes, sec. 49, p. 296. If the legislature fails to follow self-adopted procedural rules in enacting legislation, and such rules are not mandated by the constitution, courts will not intervene to declare the legislation invalid. The rationale is that the failure to follow such procedural rules amounts to an implied ad hoc repeal of such rules.
This principle has been expressed in 1 Sutherland, Statutory Construction (4th Ed.) sec. 7.04, p. 264, as follows:
“The decisions are nearly unanimous in holding that an act cannot be declared invalid for failure of the house to observe its own rules. Courts will not inquire whether such rules have been observed in the passage of the act. Likewise, the legislature by statute or joint resolution cannot bind or restrict itself or its successors as to the procedure to be followed in the passage of legislation.”
Wisconsin has long followed this general rule. See, e.g., McDonald v. State, 80 Wis. 407, 411-12, 50 N.W. 185 (1891) ; State v. P. Lorillard Co., 181 Wis. 347, 372, 193 N.W. 613 (1923) ; State ex rel. Hunsicker v. Board of Regents, 209 Wis. 83, 86, 244 N.W. 618 (1932) ; and Outagamie County v. Smith, 38 Wis. 2d 24, 41, 155 N.W.2d 639 (1968). See also, 63 Op. Att’y Gen. 305, 308 (1974) ; 60 Op. Att’y Gen. 245, 251 (1971) ; 68 Op. Att’y *366Gen. 113 (1976) ; and Luce, “Judicial Regulation of Legislative Procedure in Wisconsin,” 1941 Wis. L. Rev., 439, 453-4 (1941).
In McDonald v. State, supra, this court held that it would not declare a law invalid because of the legislature’s failure to comply with its own rules of procedure so long as the constitutional requirements for the enactment of legislation had been followed. This court stated:
“The courts will take judicial notice of the statute laws of the state, and to this end they will take like notice of the contents of the journals of the two houses of the legislature far enough to determine whether an act published as a law was actually passed by the respective houses in accordance with constitutional requirements. Further than this the courts will not go. When it appears that an act was so passed, no inquiry will be permitted to ascertain whether the two houses have or have not complied strictly with their own rules in their procedure on the bill, intermediate its introduction and final passage. The presumption is conclusive that they have done so. We think no court has ever declared an act of the legislature void for noncompliance with the rules of procedure made by itself, or the respective branches thereof, and which it or they may change or suspend at will. If there are any such adjudications, we decline to follow them.” Id. at pp. 411-12 (Emphasis added.)
Similarly, in State v. P. Lorillard Co., supra, the question was whether sec. 13.06, Stats., which required the legislature to refer appropriation bills to the joint committee on finance before passage, meant that such bills had to be referred by each house before final passage. This court, in rejecting the argument that each house had to refer the proposal, pointed out that there was no constitutional requirement involved and moreover, that the statute as written did not require reference by each house. This court stated: “This is a question of policy for legislative, not judicial, determination.” Id. at p 372.
*367Likewise, in Outagamie County v. Smith, supra, this court held it had jurisdiction over legislative affairs only to insure that constitutional provisions had been followed by the legislature:
“This court will not interfere with the conduct of legislative affairs in the absence of a constitutional mandate to do so or unless either its procedures or end result constitutes a deprivation of constitutionally guaranteed rights. Short of such deprivations which give this court jurisdiction, recourse against legislative errors, non-feasance or questionable procedure is by political action only.” Id. at p. 41.
There is no claim in the instant case that sec. 13.49, Stats., embodies any constitutional requirements. That statute does not codify any constitutional provisions regarding legislative procedures. It is simply a procedural rule, albeit in statute form and thereby imbued with all the dignity and importance of a legislative act passed by both houses of the legislature and signed by the governor. Nevertheless, the fact that sec. 13.49 is something more than a mere internal procedural rule but less than a constitutional requirement, does not remove it from the application of the general rule as stated by Sutherland, supra. In one court which has considered the question it has been held that the legislature’s failure to follow a procedural rule — even if such rule is embodied in a statute — is not open to judicial scrutiny and cannot be a basis for judicial invalidation of a legislative enactment. Schweizer v. Territory, 5 Okla. 297, 47 P. 1094 (1897). Cf. State v. Essling, 128 N.W.2d 307 (Minn. 1964), (Nelson, J., concurring pp. 317-23.)
The respondents argue that this court has, on at least one occasion, deviated from the general rule that courts have no authority to invalidate legislation on the ground of legislative noncompliance with procedural statutes. In State ex rel. General Motors Corp. v. Oak Creek, 49 Wis. *3682d 299, 182 N.W.2d 481 (1971), the basic and dispositive question was, however, whether the statute had been enacted in compliance with Article VIII, sec. 8 of the Wisconsin Constitution which requires that the yeas and nays be recorded in the legislative journals. Peripherally, a question was raised whether the statute had been validly enacted when the legislature had not first referred the matter to the joint finance committee as required by the provisions of sec. 13.10(1), Stats. (1967). This court held that the recording of yeas and nays in the legislative journal as set forth in the constitution was mandatory and that the legislature’s failure to do so was sufficient to render the statute in question a nullity.
Despite this dispositive holding on constitutional grounds, this court concluding that sec. 13.10 was mandatory, also stated that the statute was a nullity because the legislature failed to comply with the “. . . statutory mandates for the enactment of a statute relating to taxation.” Id. at p. 329. This language is obiter dictum because the court having concluded the statute was invalid on constitutional grounds, unnecessarily proceeded to discuss whether the statute was invalid due to the legislature’s failure to follow statutory procedures. Because this dicta is inconsistent with the uniform holding of prior Wisconsin cases and the general rule which limits a court’s authority to invalidate legislation only for constitutional violations, we withdraw this language in the OaJc Creek case and expressly disavow any implication that this court will invalidate legislation when it finds the legislature has violated a procedural statutory provision in passing an act. Unless the claim is that the legislative procedure violated some constitutional provision or right, this court will not, under separation of powers concepts and affording the comity and respect due a co-equal branch of state government, interfere with the conduct of legislative affairs. This is consistent with this court's *369decision in State ex rel. Lynch v. Conta, 71 Wis. 2d 662, 239 N.W.2d 313 (1976). The issue in that case was whether certain legislators had violated the open meeting law and whether they could be subject to forfeitures for such violations. The case did not present the question of the voidability of legislative actions taken in violation of the open meeting law. Id. at p 668. We hold that we will not invalidate a legislative action unless the legislative procedures or statute itself constitutes a deprivation of constitutionally guaranteed rights. Outagamie County v. Smith, supra, at p. 41. Because there is no claim here that the legislature’s failure to comply with sec. 13.49 and refer A.B. 104 to the joint survey committee on debt management before passage amounts to a constitutional violation or deprivation, we will not further consider the issue of the validity of Act 3’s enactment.
Accordingly, we turn to a consideration of whether the operating notes authorized by Act 3 amount to the state contracting public debt in contravention of the constitution.
Operating Notes as Public Debt
Art. VIII, sec. 4 of the Wisconsin Constitution states:
“The state shall never contract any public debt except in the cases and manner herein provided.”
The constitution does not define the term public debt. However, this court has frequently been called on to determine what is public debt within the meaning of this constitutional prohibition. In State ex rel. Owen v. Donald, 160 Wis. 21, 151 N.W. 331 (1915) this court held that a legislative appropriation of money for the purchase of land for reforestation and water power purposes, was public debt within the prohibition of Art. VIII, sec. 4. The court defined the word debt as used in the constitution as follows at p. 59:
*370“There is nothing particularly technical about the meaning of the word ‘debt’ as used in the constitution. It includes all absolute obligations to pay money, or its equivalent, from funds to be provided, as distinguished from money presently available or in process of collection and so treatable as in hand.” Earles v. Wells, 94 Wis. 285, 68 N.W. 964, Doon Tp. v. Cummings, 142 U.S. 366, 376, 12 Sup. Ct. 220.
Under this definition, public debt in the constitutional sense has two components: (1) it must be an absolute obligation to pay money or its equivalent; and, (2) such money must be paid from funds to be provided, that is, funds that are not presently available or in the process of collection so as to be considered in hand.
In other words, “public debt” includes absolute obligations to pay money or its equivalent; and public debt is further defined in terms of when and how it is payable. If the state’s obligation to pay money, even if absolute, is an obligation to pay from money “presently available or in the process of collection,” it is not public debt within the meaning of the constitutional prohibition.
The court in the Donald case relied on an earlier decision in Earles v. Wells, 94 Wis. 285, 68 N.W. 964 (1896) a case involving the issue of municipal, as opposed to state, indebtedness. Municipal indebtedness is regulated in sec. 3 Art. XI of the Wisconsin Constitution. However, cases dealing with municipal debt and its constitutional limitations are relevant to cases involving issue of public debt in the state context of sec. 4, Art. VIII. In State ex rel. Thomson v. Giessel, 267 Wis. 331, 352, 65 N.W.2d 529 (1954) a case involving an issue of state debt under Art. VIII, sec. 4, this court stated:
“We deem that the terms ‘debt’ and ‘indebtedness’ as used in these two constitutional provisions have the same meanings as both deal with public debt and the under*371lying intent is the same.” See also, State ex rel. La Follette v. Reuter, 33 Wis. 2d 384, 405, 147 N.W.2d 304, (1966) and State ex rel. Bowman v. Banczak, 34 Wis. 2d 57, 73, 148 N.W.2d 683 (1967).
Thus, indebtedness under Art. VIII and Art. XI is the same. Consequently, court decisions approving of various plans to meet the constitutional strictures in respect to state indebtedness apply with equal force to municipalities; and, conversely, decisions dealing with municipal debt and its limitations, apply to state indebtedness. See Kiernan, Wisconsin Municipal Indebtedness, Part I, The Power to Become Indebted and Its Limits, 1964 Wis. L. Rev., 173,176, n. 7.
In Earles v. Wells, supra, this court dealt with the question of whether certain municipal liabilities were debt within Art. XI. This court stated:
“So long as the current expenses of the municipality are kept within the limits of the moneys and assets actually in the treasury, and the current revenues collected or in the process of immediate collection, the municipality may be fairly regarded as doing business on a cash basis, and not upon credit — even though there may be for a short time some unpaid liabilities. In other words, a municipality’s capacity for doing business on such cash basis, with outstanding liabilities, is necessarily measured by the amount of cash on hand and the available assets and resources readily convertible into cash to meet the payment of such liabilities as they become due. But the moment an indebtedness is voluntarily created ‘in any manner or for any purpose’ with no money or assets in the treasury, nor current revenues collected or in process of collection for the payment of the same, that moment such debt must be considered in determining whether such municipality has or has not exceeded the constitutional limit of indebtedness.” Earles v. Wells, supra at 298-99.
Thus, this court recognized that obligations for municipal current expenses are not debt in the constitutional sense to the extent that there are current assets on *372hand or nearly so to pay off such expenses. These assets on hand include “current revenues collected or in the process of immediate collection.” Id.
The state in the instant case intends to “borrow” short-term money by issuing the 1983 operating notes to pay for what can generally be classified as current operating expenses. (See Authorizing Resolution). In School District v. Marine Nat’l Exch. Bank, 9 Wis. 2d 400, 101 N.W.2d 112 (1960), a statute which authorized short-term borrowings by school districts to pay current operating expenses was challenged on the basis that such borrowings were “indebtedness” under sec. 3, Art. XI of this state’s constitution. This court held that such borrowings did not constitute indebtedness for constitutional purposes because they were payable in the current year, the current year’s budget included an amount sufficient to pay principal and interest, and taxes in that amount were in the process of collection. This court stated:
“The purpose of the constitutional provision was to limit the burden which those who contract obligations may place upon posterity ... It is entirely reasonable to conclude that sec. 3, Art XI does not contemplate that the . . . limitation should apply to short-term loans, such loans constituting the doing of business on a cash basis rather than indebtedness.
“What the statute does is put into plain words what the language of sec. 3, art. XI, Const., clearly implies, and what this court since the Wells Case has held the constitutional limitation to mean. Sec. 67.12 (8a) Stats., deals with short-term loans required for current operating expenses of the school district and payable out of revenues to which the district is entitled at the time the loans are made ... To consider as ‘indebtedness’ loans negotiated for the purpose of paying such current obligations as they arise — loans payable as soon as the awaited tax revenues are actually received — would involve a more-strict construction than this court is willing to place upon the constitutional language, particularly in *373view of the interpretation placed upon it in the Wells Case and since approved in a number of cases.” Id. at 407-08.
The attorney general as petitioner contends that the rationale of the Marine Bank case controls this case; therefore, the proposed operating notes are not to be considered public debt within the meaning of Art. VIII, sec. 4, because they are simply short-term obligations to be repaid in the current year from current budgeted revenues. According to the petitioner, both this case and the Marine Bank case involve the issuance of short-term notes to meet cash-flow imbalances.
The respondents, on the other hand, argue that these operating notes,- even if they are short-term notes, are public debt within the constitutional prohibition. According to the respondents, the constitution does not authorize the contracting of public debt for funding state operating deficits. They assert that public debt can be created only for the specific purposes and pursuant to the specific procedures set forth in Art. VIII, secs. 6 and 7. Section 6 provides an exception for state debt for “extraordinary expenditures” and sec. 7 provides an exception for state debt to repel invasion or for “an emergency.” According to the respondents, if the framers of the constitution had intended to permit borrowing to pay for current operating expenses as an exception to the prohibition against creating a public debt, they would have expressly so provided.
Moreover, the respondents cite a 1913 attorney general opinion wherein it was stated that the state could not borrow money for current expenses and pay interest thereon because to do so would violate the provision of secs. 6, 7, and 9, Art. VIII Wis. Const, which:
“. . . clearly prohibit the creation of any debt against the state for ordinary current expenses.” 2 Op. Atty. Gen.207,208 (1913)
*374According to the respondents, the only thing that has changed in the 70 years since this 1913 attorney general’s opinion is fiscal expediency.
We hold that the proposed 1983 operating notes do not contravene the constitutional prohibition against creating public debt because such notes, issued in the manner provided by the authorizing resolution adopted by the state building commission pursuant to 1983 Wis. Act 3, are to be repaid within the current fiscal year from current revenues. School District v. Marine Nat’l Exch. Bank, supra. The operating notes are not public debts within the constitutional definition of that term set forth in our prior cases because such notes are only short-term borrowings and such notes are to be repaid in the current year from tax revenues which are in the process of collection. Clearly, the repayment schedule adopted by the current legislature avoids placing a burden “upon posterity.” Id. at 407. This was, as the Marine Bank case stated, the purpose of the constitutional limitation upon debt.
Concededly, the operating notes are intended to be absolute contractual obligations on the part of the state. See, State ex rel. Warren v. Nusbaum, 59 Wis. 2d 391, 428, 208 N.W.2d 780 (1973) and Wisconsin Solid Waste Recycling Authority v. Earl, 70 Wis. 2d 464, 482, 235 N.W.2d 648 (1975). The act itself in sec. 18.76(2), Stats., gives purchasers remedies against the state if the state fails to repay the notes. However, that is not sufficient to make these notes a public debt within the meaning of the constitutional prohibition. The definition of public debt requires not only an absolute obligation to the state to pay, but also payment is to be made from money “to be provided” as contrasted to that presently available or in the process of collection. State ex rel. Owen v. Donald, supra, at p. 59. It is precisely because these operat*375ing- notes are to be paid from money in the process of collection that they are not public debt.
The respondents reliance on the 1913 attorney general’s opinion to support their argument that the state could not borrow money to meet current expenses is misplaced. Attorney general opinions are entitled only to such persuasive effect as this court deems the opinion warrants. Wood County v. Bd. of Voc. T & A Ed., 60 Wis. 2d 606, 613, 211 N.W.2d 617 (1973) ; Hahner v. Bd. of Ed., 89 Wis. 2d 180, 192, 278 N.W.2d 474 (Ct. App. 1979). We do not find the 1913 opinion persuasive for several reasons.
The 1913 opinion is in error when it states that secs. 6, 7, and 9 of Art. VIII prohibit the creation of any debt by the state for current expenses. Only sec. 4 prohibits the creation of public debt. The other sections are specific exceptions to such prohibition.
An important factor relied upon in the 1913 opinion was the absence of any statute authorizing borrowing to meet state current operating expenses. Unlike the 1913 situation, here there is a detailed statute authorizing the borrowing by the issuance of operating notes.
Also, the 1913 plan to borrow $600,000 to meet current operating expenses made no provision for the repayment of the loan. By the state’s failure to detail any plan to repay the $600,000 at a time certain, the obligation surely would have become a debt — a burden on future generations of taxpayers. In the instant case, future taxpayers will not be required to pay off present borrowings. Such borrowings accordingly do not frustrate the purpose of the constitutional prohibition and are not public debt.
The respondents have argued however, that under certain provisions of Act 3, future taxpayers in fact may be required to repay the 1983 operating notes. The re*376spondents cite the definition section of Act 3, sec. 18.71 (4) (a), Stats., which states:
“ (4) ‘Operating note’ means every undertaking of the state to repay a certain amount of a financial obligation which is:
(a) Created for the purpose of funding operating deficits of the state as determined under sec. 16.504(1) [sic] which must be repaid prior to the end of the fiscal year next following." (Emphasis added.)
According to the respondents, the emphasized portion of this statute would permit the state to issue operating notes in this 1983-84 fiscal year which would not have to be repaid until the end of the 1984-85 fiscal year — i.e., June 30, 1985; thus, such notes might be a burden on future taxpayers. However, we find that this is not a possibility under other sections of Act 3. The act contains several time limit provisions. Specifically applicable is sec. 18.72(4), Stats., which provides:
“ (4) No operating note issued under this section may have a maturity date later than the effective date of the 1985 biennial budget act.”
We are presently in the 1983-85 biennium. The 1985 biennial budget act will have an effective date of July 1, 1985. Thus, under 18.72(4) any operating note issued this year or next must have a maturity date no later than July 1, 1985. Even though under the Act operating notes may be issued so that they have a maturity date in a different fiscal year, this provision makes it clear that such notes cannot mature in other than the current biennium. Thus, such notes cannot be a burden on any generation of taxpayers other than the present one.
Moreover, the attorney general asks this court to declare that the operating notes when issued pursuant to the authorizing resolution adopted by the state building commission will be valid contractual obligations of *377this state enforceable by their terms and the terms of such authorizing resolution. The terms of both the operating notes themselves and the authorizing resolution specify that the maturity date of the notes will be June 30, 1984. Thus, these operating notes will not and cannot become a burden on future taxpayers. Furthermore, sec. 18.72(1) specifies that “. . . no operating notes originally issued in a fiscal year may be funded or refunded by proceeds of an operating note to mature in a later fiscal year.”
The respondents deny the applicability of the rationale of the Marine Bank case and the other municipal debt cases to questions of state debt because the municipal cases involved repayment from funds derived from easily calculated and ascertained ad valorem property taxes whereas the operating notes are to be paid from estimated tax revenues. Accordingly to the respondents, such anticipated revenues have not been received; although concededly they have been voted and levied, they are not in the process of immediate collection. Moreover, the respondents assert such levies, unlike real estate tax levies, are not certain of collection and in the past the estimated tax revenues have been short from actual receipts by as much as $158 million.
The argument is not persuasive. The fact that municipalities rely on real estate taxes to repay their borrowing for current operating expenses and avoid the debt limitations of Art. XI, and the state relies on different taxes, is not a relevant distinction. Although in the fiscal year 1980-81 estimates of state tax revenues exceeded receipts by some $158 million, this was a difference of less than 5 per cent. Moreover, we do not view municipal tax levies as significantly more certain of collection than are estimated state tax revenues. Both taxes are statistically predictable even though in respect *378to each of the actual amounts collected might vary from predicted levels.2
In Rice v. City of Milwaukee, 100 Wis. 516, 76 N.W. 341 (1898) this court defined revenues to include such taxes as the municipality had levied and had a legal right to enforce regardless of anyone’s will or pleasure. Id. at 521. There can be little doubt that in the immediate future there will be an annual personal state income tax as provided in sec. 71.01 (1), Stats; an annual state corporate income tax pursuant to sec. 71.01(2), Stats; and a state sales tax pursuant to sec. 77.52(2). These various taxes provide the bulk of the state general fund revenues earmarked to repay the operating notes. These taxes when considered with the personal income tax withholding provisions of sec. 71.20, and the provisions enforcing the payment of estimated personal income taxes under sec. 71.21, and estimated corporate income taxes under sec. 71.22, are sufficiently certain in amount and collection to be considered revenues collected or in the process of immediate collection thereby satisfying the constitutional requirements.
Relying on the rationale accepted by this court in School District v. Marine Nat’l Exch. Bank, supra, and the cases cited therein, we conclude that operating notes sought to be issued pursuant to 1983 Wisconsin Act 3 will not contravene the constitutional prohibition against contracting public debt. In this case, as in Marine Bank, the purpose of the borrowing is to meet current operating obligations. In this case, as in Marine Bank, the borrowing is to be repaid in the current year from current budgeted revenues which are presently in the process of collection. In neither case are the burdens of current expenses being passed on to the taxpayers of future years. *379Under the act and consistent with the facts stipulated to by the parties, the borrowings do not constitute public debt.
The amicus brief of Rep. David Prosser argues that Act 3 is unconstitutional because it improperly delegates legislative power. In State ex rel. Wisconsin Inspection Bureau v. Whitman, 196 Wis. 472, 505, 220 N.W. 929 (1928) this court discussed the limits of the legislature’s authority to delegate its powers:
“The power to declare whether or not there shall be law; to determine the general purpose or policy to be achieved by the law; to fix the limits within which the law shall operate, — is a power which is vested by our constitution in the legislature and may not be delegated. When . . . the legislature has laid down the fundamentals of the law, it may delegate to administrative agencies the authority to exercise such legislative power as is necessary to carry into effect the general legislative purpose.
According to Rep. Prosser, Act 3 delegated to the governor, secretary to the department of administration, joint committee on finance, and state building commission the complete and unlimited authority to issue operating notes and to obligate the state within a stated period of time. Prosser contends that under the test outlined in Whitman, supra, the legislature has delegated too much because it has delegated the power to determine whether notes shall ever be issued; it has delegated the power to fix the limits, if any, within which the law operates; and it has delegated ultimate legislative power to a select group of legislators making up the joint finance committee.
This sweeping indictment of Act 3 does not withstand scrutiny. The legislature by Act 3 created a method of funding anticipated state operating deficits. The legislature did not, by this act, delegate any authority to any group to make law. The legislature only delegated to the *380identified individuals, the authority to implement the purposes of the act by issuing operating notes in appropriate amounts. In Watchmaking Examining Board v. Husar, 49 Wis. 2d 526, 534, 182 N.W.2d 257 (1971) this court cited the Whitman case and stated:
“Later cases have stressed not the nature of the power delegated, but the reasonableness of consequent rules in light of the general legislative purpose, and, in addition, have stressed the necessity of procedural safe guards to prevent the abuse of delegated legislative power.
“A delegation of legislative power to a subordinate agency will be upheld if the purpose of the delegating statute is ascertainable and there are procedural safe guards to insure that the board or agency acts within that legislative purpose.” Id. at 534 and 536. See, also In Matter of Guardianship of Klisurich, 98 Wis. 2d 274, 280, 296 N.W.2d 742 (1980).
The purpose of Act 3 is clear: It authorizes under specified circumstances, issuance of operating notes to fund state operating deficits. The act contains sufficient internal safe guards and procedures to insure that the governor, secretary of the department of administration, joint finance committee, and the building commission act within such legislative purpose. Although no limit on the amount of operating notes that can be issued has been set by the legislature, it is clear from the act itself that the amount of operating notes cannot exceed the amount necessary to fund a readily ascertainable operating deficit. See, sec. 18.72(2), Stats. Furthermore, before the operating notes can be issued, a plan describing the specific nature of the proposed action including the amount of operating notes to be issued must be approved by the joint committee on finance of the legislature. Sec. 16.405(2). The act gives the department of administration discretion to request the issuance of operating notes *381whenever it determines that a deficiency will occur in the funds of the state which will not permit the state to meet its operating obligations in a timely manner. This court has held that the legislature may delegate any power which it may itself rightfully exercise which is not legislative. State v. Wakeen, 263 Wis. 401, 407-09, 57 N.W.2d 364 (1953). Furthermore, the legislature may enact a statute which is dependent on the happening of a contingency fixed therein, and that contingency may consist of the determination of some fact, even if such fact is determined by private individuals. Niagra of Wisconsin Paper Corp. v. Dept. of Natural Resources, 84 Wis. 2d 32, 51, 268 N.W.2d 153 (1978). Here the department of administration’s authority to request the issuance of the operating notes and the building commission’s authority to adopt an authorizing resolution depends on a determination by the department that an operating deficit exists. Act 3 is not simply a broad legislative policy statement which leaves to the board or agency the task of fashioning regulations to effectuate that policy. See, e.g., State ex rel. La Follette v. Reuter, supra. Instead, the policy and purposes of Act 3 are clear and well defined. There are sufficient procedural safeguards in the act to ensure that the power to issue operating notes to fund state operating deficits is not abused. Under these circumstances, the act is not unconstitutional as an improper delegation of legislative power.
In view of the presumption of constitutionality which attaches to all legislation and the heavy burden of establishing unconstitutionality beyond a reasonable doubt, see, School Dist. v. Marine Nat’l Exchange Bank, supra at 403; see also, State ex rel. Hammermill Paper Co. v. LaPlante, 58 Wis. 2d 32, 47, 205 N.W.2d 784 (1973) and cases cited therein, and in view of the failure of the respondents’ arguments to overcome that presumption, 1983 Wisconsin Act 3 must be held to be constitutional.
*382We declare that State of Wisconsin operating notes of 1983 when issued, sold and delivered in the manner provided by the authorizing resolution adopted by the state building commission pursuant to 1983 Wis. Act 3, will be valid contractual obligations of this state enforceable in accordance with their terms and the terms of the authorizing resolution.
William A. Bablitch, J., took no part.
Prior to the commencement of this action the respondents had commenced an action in Dane County Circuit Court against the Secretary of the Department of Administration and others seeking a declaration that Act 3 was not properly enacted and is unconstitutional. Further proceedings in that action were stayed pending further order of this court. See, Petition of Heil, 230 Wis. 428, 446, 284 N.W. 42 (1934). Based on our holding in this action, we now direct the dismissal of the circuit court action.
The petitioner at pp. 3 and 4 of his reply brief has provided tables, to which no objection has been taken, which illustrate the statistical predictability of state tax revenues as well as municipal real estate tax revenues.

=== CASE 9740499 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:32.913444+00 ===

LOUIS J. CECI, J.,
(dissenting). I dissent on one ground: By declaring 1983 Wisconsin Act 3 to be a valid, enforceable contractual obligation of the state, the majority has authorized a state debt, in violation of the state constitution. Article VIII, sec. 4 of the Wisconsin Constitution specifically provides that, “The state shall never contract any public debt except in the cases and manner herein provided.” By holding that the operating notes are not public debt within the meaning of this constitutional prohibition, the majority has effectively undermined the purpose of this prohibition.
The majority states that the constitution does not define the term “public debt,” but points out that the court has frequently defined the term in past cases. The majority refers to State ex rel. Owen v. Donald, 160 Wis. 21, 151 N.W. 331 (1915), to conclude that public debt has two components: (1) It must be an absolute obligation to pay money or its equivalent, and (2) the obligation is to be paid from money which is to be funded in the future, or, in other words, money that is not presently available. The majority concedes that the operating notes are clearly intended to be absolute obligations to pay money on the state’s part, as the act in sec. 18.72(2), Stats., provides for purchasers’ remedies against the *383state.1 Thus, the first element of public debt is present in 1983 Wisconsin Act 3. However, because the majority finds that these operating notes are to be paid from money in the “process of collection,” the majority holds that the second element of public debt is missing from the act. It is with this holding that I disagree.
The majority initially relies upon Donald in its analysis of the second component of public debt. However, in that case, the court found the state’s contract to purchase land for reforestation and water-power purposes constituted a public debt within the prohibitions of Wis. Const, art. VIII, sec. 4. This was based upon the fact that the agreements in the contract were “absolute promises to pay sums of money, fixed as to amount, in 'praesenti, with payments deferred and without reference to money in hand or equivalent.” Id. at 61. In the instant case, I believe that the act authorizing the issuance of the operating notes is equivalent to the above contract in the Donald case. The operating notes represent absolute promises by the state to pay money in fixed amounts, and the money to be used for the payments is not “in hand.”
In the Donald case, the court warned that:
“It may well be admitted that courts have been quite, and perhaps too, resourceful in discovering methods of so construing the term ‘debts’ and ‘indebtedness’ as to restrict the meaning thereof so as to meet the exigencies of particular cases.” Id.
I believe that this is what the majority has accomplished by interpreting 1983 Wisconsin Act 3 as a valid, enforceable contractual obligation, in order to meet the exigency of the state’s cash-flow imbalance. Like the Donald court, I submit that the safest way to avoid restricting *384the meaning of the word debt is to “cut quite loose from case law and look to the fair meaning of the constitution itself.” Id.
The meaning of art. VIII, sec. 4 of the state constitution is quite clear. It succinctly states that, “The state shall never contract any public debt except in the cases and manner herein provided.” (Emphasis added.) Concerning the historical background of the constitution, one author has stated the following:
“The delegates also displayed a horror of public debt. An obligation incurred must be met and the people must be taxed to pay it and within a short time after the debt was incurred. Then, as now, men looked askance at taxes. Traditionally in governments especially, those not responsible directly to the people, were engines of oppression and extortion. So, severe limitations were placed upon the power of the state Legislature to incurring public debts. They looked with horror on the idea of one generation imposing liability on the next. A limitation of $100,000.00 public debt was fixed and this debt had to be concurred in by a two-thirds vote of each house, with the imposition of a tax large enough to retire this debt in five years with interest.” J. McGalloway, Historical Background of the Constitution of Wisconsin, Wis. Stat. Ann, Const, 1, 9 (West 1957).
As a result of this attitude, art. VIII, sec. 4 was drafted containing its specific prohibition against the creation of public debt, with the subsections following containing the exceptions to public debt and the limitations on such exceptions. The majority clearly has not found that the operating notes fall within the exceptions to public debt. Rather, the majority finds that the notes are not public debt, thereby ignoring the historical context of art. VIII and authorizing exactly that which the framers strove to guard against.
Further, the majority utilizes cases dealing with debts of Municipalities in order to determine whether or not *385the operating notes are funded by “current revenues collected or in process of immediate collection.” Earles v. Wells, 94 Wis. 285, 298, 68 N.W. 964 (1896). See also, School Dist. v. Marine Nat. Exchange Bank, 9 Wis. 2d 400, 101 N.W.2d 112 (1960). However, what the majority fails to grasp is that the constitution of Wisconsin originally contained no limitation on the borrowing capacity of municipal operations. School Dist. v. Marine Nat. Exchange Bank, 9 Wis. 2d at 404. Obviously, the framers were not as concerned with debts of municipalities as they were with debts of the state, or such a limitation would have been included at the time of the original drafting. In 1874, art. XI, sec. 3 of the constitution was amended to place the limitation upon municipal debts. Id. The majority cites to State ex rel. Thomson v. Giessel, 267 Wis. 331, 352, 65 N.W.2d 529 (1954), for its argument that because the terms “debt” and “indebtedness” as used in arts. VIII and XI of the constitution have the same meaning, indebtedness for municipalities and the state is the same. I am unable to make this leap, for the simple reason that the framers originally included no limitation for municipality debt, yet found it necessary to include an express bar upon state indebtedness, except in very extreme and well-delineated circumstances. Because of this very fundamental difference in the history of the two provisions, I believe that although the terms “debt” and “indebtedness” may be used in identical contexts, municipal and state debt are not the same and, thus, should not be treated identically. Therefore, I am unable to accept the majority’s contention that municipal debt considerations should control in state debt issues.
Along this same line of reasoning, the majority refers to Earles v. Wells, 94 Wis. 285, to support its argument that the operating notes do not constitute public debt. However, Earles dealt with the issue of whether a municipality could contract for the construction of waterworks, *386through authorizing the firm with which it contracted to issue bonds in order to raise money for the construction, for which the city was to be considered a party to the bond. In that case, the court stated that:
“So long as the current expenses of the municipality are kept within the limits of the moneys and assets actually in the treasury, and the current revenues collected or in process of immediate collection, . . . .”
No indebtedness had occurred, and the municipality could be regarded as doing business on a “cash basis.” Id. at 298 (emphasis added). Once again, I submit that the majority opinion errs in applying this “cash basis” theory to the issue of state indebtedness. I believe this because it is clear to me that the framers had no such theory in mind when they drafted the constitution. Rather, they envisioned an absolute bar on the creation of state debt except in the express exceptions for which the framers provided. However, assuming arguendo that the debts of municipalities and the state should be treated identically, I believe that the majority further erred when it interpreted the language of the Earles decision dealing with the “cash basis” theory.
Initially, I would stress that as the Earles decision held that the ordinance in question was void because it exceeded the constitutional limitations, the court stated that:
“The method by which the attempt was made may be regarded as ingenious, but it should be remembered, . . . that the city could not do by indirection what it could not do directly.” Id. at 299.
I believe that this is what the legislature has attempted to do in 1983 Wisconsin Act 3. It has created public debt, yet attempted to disguise it by stating that the notes are created for the purpose of funding state operating deficits or, in other words, to ease cash-flow imbalances, *387sec. 18.71 (4) (a), Stats., and are not public debt, sec. 18.71 (4) (c). However, once the legislature is allowed to create such a debt, it can continue to create them in the future as it desires, and the constitutional prohibition becomes meaningless.
The majority has stated that because the operating notes are to be paid from money in the process of collection, they are not public debt. This rationale is based upon the language in the Donald case, which states that “money presently available or in process of collection and so treatable as in hand” does not constitute “debt.” State ex rel. Owen v. Donald, 160 Wis. at 59. The Donald case cites the Earles v. Wells decision, which, as I have pointed out above, deals with “current revenues collected or in process of immediate collection.” Earles v. Wells, 94 Wis. at 298 (emphasis added). The language concerning “the process of immediate collection” has been interpreted in numerous later cases; see, School Dist. v. Marine Nat. Exchange Bank, 9 Wis. 2d at 405; Balch v. Beach, 119 Wis. 77, 95 N.W. 132 (1903) ; and Rice v. The City of Milwaukee, 100 Wis. 516, 76 N.W. 341 (1898). In the Marine case, after citing from the Earles decision, the court concluded that the school district’s budget included an amount sufficient to cover the debt in question, that the tax levy included such an amount, as did the “tax roll which ha [d] been delivered to the city treasurer with a warrant for collection.” 9 Wis. 2d at 405. The Marine case also refers to the prior decision of Batch v. Beach, 119 Wis. 77. In the Batch case, the court interpreted “in process of immediate collection” to mean the following:
“Taxes in immediate process of collection do not include taxes merely voted. Taxes are not in immediate process of collection till the tax roll shall have been placed in the hands of the proper collecting officer with authority to receive, and with the right of the taxpayer to pay, the tax.” Id. at 82.
*388In both the Marine case and the Balch case, it is clear that the funds were “in the process of immediate collection” because a tax roll had been delivered to the proper authority for collection. Tax roll is defined as:
“A schedule or list of the persons and property subject to the payment of a particular tax, with the amounts severally due, prepared and authenticated in proper form to warrant the collecting officers to 'proceed with the enforcement of the tax.” Black’s haw Dictionary 1194 (5th ed. 1979). (Emphasis added.)
I believe that the funds to be used to reimburse purchasers of the operating notes issued pursuant to 1983 Wisconsin Act 3 are not “in the process of immediate collection.” The secretary of administration does not have a form which authorizes the secretary to “proceed with the enforcement of the tax.” Rather, the secretary is authorized to impound moneys of the general fund at future dates, sec. 18.75(4), Stats., with the final im-poundment occurring on May 15, 1984. Such future im-poundments do not constitute moneys “in hand” or “in the process of immediate collection.” The Marine court, upon which the majority bases its holding, clearly states that when loans are made prior to the delivery of a tax roll to the treasurer with a warrant for collection of the taxes, indebtedness occurs. “The anticipated revenues were not ‘taxes in immediate process of collection’ . . .” 9 Wis. 2d at 406 (Emphasis added.) It is clear to me that the earlier cases contemplated tax rolls which could be proceeded upon immediately for collection of taxes, which must be delivered prior to the creation of the obligation upon the state. Under 1983 Wisconsin Act 3, the operating notes are issued and the obligation created prior to any impoundment by the secretary. Thus, the funds from which the principal and interest on these notes are to be repaid are not “taxes in the immediate *389process of collection,” but are merely “anticipated revenues.”
Further, it appears that the majority is basing its holding upon dicta from Rice v. The City of Milwaukee, 100 Wis. 516. In the Rice decision, after referring to the Earles decision, the court held that liquor licenses to be paid in the future did not constitute funds in the process of collection. The court stated the following:
“[T]he moneys to be derived from these sources are entirely indefinite and uncertain. They were not in the process of collection, and could be collected only at the will of the parties who sought privileges for which license charges were made, and for that reason could not be considered as available assets or resources. The ‘revenues’ mentioned in [the Earles'] decision had reference only to such revenues as the corporation had levied, and had a legal right to enforce, regardless of any one’s [sic] will or pleasure.” Id. at 521.
It appears that the language upon which the majority relies regarding “anyone’s will or pleasure” is dicta, since the Rice court had decided that the taxes were not in the process of collection.
The final reason for which I feel the majority erred is in analogizing income, gift, inheritance, and sales tax revenues collected by the state to property tax revenues collected by the municipality. Article XI, sec. 3 of the Wisconsin Constitution reads as follows:
“(2) No county, city, town, village, school district, sewerage district or other municipal corporation may become indebted in an amount that exceeds an allowable percentage of the taxable property located therein . . .”
Clearly, this constitutional provision contemplates loans based upon property taxes, which are fairly fixed and ascertainable from year to year. This fits within the rationale behind the strict circumstances set out in the above case law as to when loans may be made without *390incurring indebtedness: Only when a tax roll for an ascertainable amount has been placed in the hands of the proper authority with the power to begin enforcement of the tax. I do not believe that this should be extended to encompass taxes such as gift, income, inheritance, and sales taxes, since, as the respondent has pointed out, these may vary from year to year and may depend upon contingencies which the state has no way of accurately predicting, such as the economy, number of people in the work force, etc.2 Clearly, then, the revenues upon which the legislature has relied are not definite and certain within the Rice criteria. Rice v. The City of Milwaukee, 100 Wis. at 521.
Although the presumption of constitutionality attaches to 1983 Wisconsin Act 3 and the burden of establishing the unconstitutionality is beyond a reasonable doubt, I am unable to overcome the obstacles which I have stated in order to find the act constitutional. State ex rel. Hammermill Paper Co. v. La Plante, 58 Wis. 2d 32, 47, 205 N.W.2d 784 (1973). In conclusion, I believe that 1983 Wisconsin Act 3 authorizes an enforceable contractual obligation in violation of Wis. Const, art. VIII, sec. 4. I base this contention upon the grounds that municipal debt considerations should not be applied to state debt issues because of the historical contexts surrounding the two separate articles, and because of the actual structure of Wis. Const, art. XI, sec. 3, centering around property taxes. Also, even should one decide that state debt and municipal debt should be treated identically despite these considerations, I feel that the majority further erred by finding that the revenues utilized to fund the operating *391notes are “in the process of immediate collection.” I do not believe that future impoundments of anticipated revenues may be reconciled with the court’s past determinations of which taxes are in the process of immediate collection. For these reasons, I dissent.
See, State ex rel. Warren v. Nusbaum, 59 Wis. 2d 391, 428, 208 N.W.2d 780 (1973), and Wisconsin Solid Waste Recycling Auth. v. Earl, 70 Wis. 2d 464, 482, 235 N.W.2d 648 (1975).
Respondents cite to the Annual Fiscal Report, State of Wisconsin, Department of Administration, 1981, for their argument that the revenues relied upon to fund 1983 Wisconsin Act 3 are “uncertain and speculative.” They point out that in 1980-81, the state revenue projections erred by $157,966,019.

=== CASE 9740500 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:36.072724+00 ===

ERICKSTAD, Chief Justice.
The appellant, Erna Gruebele, appeals from a judgment of the District Court of Hettinger County, dated January 21, 1983, quieting title to the following 640 acres of farmland in Hettinger County:
Township 136 North, Range 91 West East Half of the Southwest Quarter (EWSWVi) and South Half of the Southeast Quarter (SVi) of Section 8; Northwest Quarter (NWVi) of Section 16;
North Half (NVfe) of Section 17.
The appellee, Jacob W. Gruebele, initiated this quiet title action to ascertain the validity and priority of Ema’s adverse claim to the described real property. Erna claims to be the owner in fee simple of an undivided one-fourth interest in all oil, gas, asphalt, coal, uranium, sand and gravel and all other minerals in and under and that may be produced from the property. The District Court of Hettinger County, The Honorable Allan L. Schmalenberger, decreed that Jacob is the owner in fee simple of the property, free of all claims of Erna, and that Erna has no right, title or interest in and to the land and premises. We reverse the judgment of the District Court of Hettinger County.
On November 8, 1979, a judgment was entered in the District Court of Burleigh County pursuant to findings of fact, conclusions of law, and order for judgment of the Honorable Benny A. Graff entitling Ema to an absolute decree of divorce from Jacob upon grounds of adultery. The court’s judgment contained the following language: 1
*808“It is FURTHER ADJUDGED AND DETERMINED that the real estate described as , all in Township One Hundred Thirty-six North (136N), Range Ninety-one West (91W), Hettinger County, North Dakota, and all of the personal property consisting of farm machinery, grain, and all other personal property used in connection with the farming operation inclusive of motor vehicles shall be sold by a receiver and the proceeds therefrom less expenses of the receivership and other legitimate expenses of sale and any encumbrances thereon being deducted, and the balance thereof divided equally between the parties hereto, less the sum of $800.00 to be deducted from the share of the plaintiff.”2
Service of the notice of entry of judgment was made on November 26,1979. A partial transcript of the order dated September 20, 1979, clearly reveals the district court’s “intention ... to divide this property equally among the parties subject to the payment of all debts presently outstanding.”
On November 26, 1979, the district court entered an order appointing a receiver, Jim Raaum, for purposes which included the liquidation by public auction of “all of the real estate of the parties.” Raaum filed an acknowledged surety bond in the amount of $50,000, dated November 21, 1979, and executed an acceptance of receivership on November 26, 1979. Thereafter, Raaum caused the placement of several advertisements in newspapers in the general circulation area of the land. The advertisements included, apparently without written direction from the. court, the language: “Mineral rights will be retained by the present owners.”
Jacob was the successful bidder at the May 5,1980, sale of the real property.3 An order confirming the propriety of the sale by Raaum to Jacob was entered in the District Court of Burleigh County on March 11, 1981. The order directed Raaum to execute and deliver a receiver’s deed to Jacob. The receiver’s deed, executed by Raaum and dated March 23,1981, conveyed to Jacob “all of the estate, title and interest” in the described real property. The deed was recorded on September 18, 1981, in the office of the Register of Deeds in Hettinger County. Neither the district court’s order confirming the sale nor the receiver’s deed executed by Raaum contain any language which may be construed as a reservation of a mineral interest in the property.4
On June 2, 1981, the District Court of Burleigh County issued an ex parte order purporting to convey to Erna a mineral interest in the described real property previously conveyed to Jacob by court-ordered *809receiver’s deed. The district court’s order provided as follows:
“Max D. Rosenberg, attorney for the above-named plaintiff, having brought to the court’s attention that the plaintiff Erna Gruebele is entitled to an undivided one-half interest in and to certain mineral interests in and to the real estate hereinafter described, and having found that the defendant has failed and refused to execute the proper conveyance to convey to the said plaintiff her share of said mineral interests, and it appearing to the court from all of the files and records herein that the said plaintiff is entitled to such conveyance, and having further found that the defendant has refused to execute a mineral deed in favor of said plaintiff, Erna Gruebele, and having determined that it was unnecessary to set a hearing in this matter and having determined that he could act in said matter on an ex parte order, it is hereby
“ORDERED that the plaintiff be and she is hereby entitled to an undivided one-half interest as shown by the records of the Register of Deeds of Hettinger County, North Dakota, in and to all of the oil, gas, asphalt, coal, uranium, sand and gravel, and all other minerals in and under and that may be produced from the ... described [real property].
“It is FURTHER ORDERED that upon the filing of record of this order with the above-named Register of Deeds, it shall constitute and have the same force and effect as a proper conveyance of said mineral interests from the defendant, Jacob W. Gruebele, to the plaintiff, Erna Gruebele.”
Thereafter, because of an error in the legal description of the property in the order of June 2, 1981, an amended order, also ex parte, dated January 11, 1982, and recorded January 12,1982, in the office of the Register of Deeds of Hettinger County, was entered in the District Court of Burleigh County on motion of Erna’s attorney.
On January 27, 1982, another ex parte order was executed, amending further the order of June 2, 1981, which purported to convey to Erna an undivided one-half interest in the mineral estate held by Erna and Jacob in the described real property on November 9, 1979. This order was apparently deemed necessary to reflect the fact that Jacob and Erna together owned only a one-half mineral interest rather than the entire mineral interest in the described real property prior to their divorce on November 8, 1979. The order was recorded February 10, 1982, in the office of the Register of Deeds of Hettinger County.
Jacob contends that he first learned of the ex parte orders after receiving a less than adequate delay rental payment from Gulf Oil Exploration and Production Company for an oil and gas lease on the described real property. Upon inquiry, Jacob received a letter, dated March 30, 1982, from Gulf Oil, along with copies of the order of June 2, 1981, and the amended order of January 11, 1982. The amended order of January 27, 1982, was apparently not brought to his attention until he secured updated abstracts of title dated April 12, 1982.
Jacob then initiated a quiet title action by service of summons and complaint on April 26, 1982. The action was heard in the District Court of Hettinger County on December 15, 1982. In her trial brief, Erna alleged fee title ownership of an undivided one-fourth mineral interest in the described real property “based upon the record that has developed. concerning the divorce between Erna and Jacob Gruebele.” Erna contended that the ex parte orders of the District Court of Burleigh County were properly entered pursuant to Rule 60(a) of the North Dakota Rules of Civil Procedure and that the District Court of Hettinger County lacked jurisdiction to hear the case because it was “seeking to circumvent the valid orders of the divorce court.”
Judgment was entered on January 21, 1983, pursuant to the findings of fact, conclusions of law, and order for judgment of the District Court of Hettinger County, which quieted title to the described real property in favor of Jacob. The court found that the District Court of Burleigh *810County lacked jurisdiction to enter its ex parte orders purporting to affect the mineral rights of the described property. Specifically, the court found that the ex parte orders of the District Court of Burleigh County were not properly entered pursuant to Rule 60(a), N.D.R.Civ.P., because the “effect of the orders issued subsequent to judgment [was] ... to change the original authority and direction of the receiver.” The court determined that the divorce court’s intent for equal distribution “was accomplished all pursuant to the clear, concise orders of the court, by the sale of all the property, and the division of the proceeds.” As to the advertisements placed by Raaum, the court found that the language of the purported mineral reservation was unclear and was inserted in the advertisements by the receiver contrary to the clear intent and wording of the judgment and order appointing the receiver.
Erna now contends that the quiet title action was heard without jurisdiction in the District Court of Hettinger County and, therefore, represents an impermissible collateral attack upon the orders of the District Court of Burleigh County.
The record before us reflects that Jacob did not move, pursuant to Rule 60(b), N.D. R.Civ.P., to set aside the ex parte orders of the District Court of Burleigh County. Instead, he initiated a quiet title action in a different district court.
Erna raises the following issues:
1. Was the collateral action in the District Court of Hettinger County properly instituted to ascertain the validity of the ex parte orders made by the District Court of Burleigh County?
2. If such action was appropriate, did the District Court of Hettinger County properly interpret the divorce decree so as not to entitle Erna to a one-quarter mineral interest in the described real property?
Volume 56, Am.Jur.2d, Motions, Rules, and Orders, § 46, states in part as follows:
“Orders within the exercise of the inherent powers of the court and not absolutely void are not ordinarily subject to collateral attack. But a void order may be attacked collaterally.
“Generally, an order made by a court within the scope of its jurisdiction and regular on its face is presumed to be valid on collateral attack. Jurisdiction will be deemed to exist in the face of a collateral attack unless the record affirmatively shows that the tribunal did not have jurisdiction to make the order in question.”
This court has previously set forth similar principles applicable to the collateral attack of judgments. We have held that a judgment may not be collaterally attacked by a party to the action in whose name it is entered or by one in privity with a party to the judgment. Oakes Farming Association v. Martinson Brothers, 318 N.W.2d 897, 905 (N.D.1982); Hull v. Rolfsrud, 65 N.W.2d 94, 98 (N.D.1954). An exception to this rule is that a judgment may be collaterally attacked if the court lacks jurisdiction to enter the judgment and the lack of jurisdiction is obvious from the record. Oakes, supra; Texaro Oil Co. v. Mosser, 299 N.W.2d 191, 195 (N.D.1980); Lende v. Wiedmeier, 179 N.W.2d 736, 738 (N.D.1970). Thus, in determining whether or not the quiet title action in the District Court of Hettinger County was properly instituted, we must determine whether or not the District Court of Burleigh County had jurisdiction to enter the ex parte order of June 2, 1981, and the amended orders of January 11, 1982, and January 27, 1982.
The divorce decree of the District Court of Burleigh County ordered that the property be sold and that the proceeds be divided equally. It contained no language directing a reservation of mineral interests. We have held that, except for matters over which the court has continuing jurisdiction when there are changed conditions, a divorce decree is final as to all issues litigated in the divorce suit. Zent v. Zent, 281 N.W.2d 41, 44 (N.D.1979); Albrecht v. Albrecht, 120 N.W.2d 165, 167 (N.D.1963). Jacob contends that the ex parte order of June 2, 1981, and the subsequent amendments thereto, modify the previous judgment of the divorce court by conveying to *811Erna a mineral interest in the property not reserved in the court’s order confirming the sale or the receiver’s deed.
We have held that a division of property decreed by the court is not subject to modification other than in the same manner and on the same grounds as other judgments. Harwood v. Harwood, 283 N.W.2d 144, 146 (N.D.1979); Nastrom v. Nastrom, 262 N.W.2d 487, 492 (N.D.1978). The following language from the court’s syllabus in Cokins v. Frandsen, 136 N.W.2d 377, 378 (N.D.1965), is relevant to this appeal:
“3. Any order made subsequent to final judgment must be for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the judgment. Insofar as any such order attempts to modify such judgment, unless made on grounds provided for in the North Dakota Rules of Civil Procedure for amending or correcting a judgment, and unless made within the time provided for such amendment or correction, it is void.”
Thus, in determining whether or not the District Court of Burleigh County had jurisdiction to enter its order of June 2, 1981, and the subsequent amendments thereto, we look to whether or not the orders were made on grounds provided for in the North Dakota Rules of Civil Procedure.
The District Court of Burleigh County did not specifically set forth its authority for issuing the ex parte order of June 2, 1981, but merely determined that “it was unnecessary to set a hearing in this matter” and that it “could act in said matter on an ex parte order.” Erna contends that the order was issued pursuant to Rule 60(a), N.D.R.Civ.P. Rule 60(a), in relevant part, reads:
“(a) Clerical Mistakes. Clerical mistakes in judgments, orders or other parts of the record and errors therein arising from oversights or omission may be corrected by the court at any time of its own initiative or on the motion of any party and after such notice, if any, as the court orders.... ”
Rule 60(a) applies to the correction of errors that properly may be described as clerical or arising from oversight or omission. Erna contends that the District Court of Burleigh County confirmed the conveyance of the described real property to Jacob by oversight. The alleged oversight is that the order confirming the sale and the receiver’s deed should have contained the reservation language of the advertisement.
Generally, Rule 60(a) can only be used to make the judgment or record speak the truth and cannot be used to make it say something other than what originally was pronounced.5 Pattiz v. Schwartz, 386 F.2d 300, 303 (8th Cir.1968); 11 Wright & Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure: Civil § 2854, p. 149 (1973). We believe it clear that Rule 60(a) was not designed to affect substantive portions of a judgment or order, nor to act as a substitute for appeal. Schnell v. Schnell, 252 N.W.2d 14, 17 (N.D.1977). The rule is appropriately utilized only for “the correction of irregularities which becloud but do not impugn [the judgment].” United States v. Stuart, 392 F.2d 60, 62 (3d Cir.1968). The problem is essentially one of characterization. Kelley v. Bank Building and Equipment Corporation of America, 453 F.2d 774, 778 (10th Cir.1972). It must be determined “whether a substantive change or amendment was made or whether the amended conclusions and judgment were in the nature of corrections.” Kelley, supra.
A court may correct, pursuant to Rule 60(a), errors created by oversight or omission that cause the judgment to fail to reflect what was intended at time of trial. Mullins v. Nickel Plate Mining Company, 691 F.2d 971, 973 (11th Cir.1982); Warner v. City of Bay St. Louis, 526 F.2d 1211, 1212 (5th Cir.1976); Pattiz, supra, 386 F.2d at 303. However, Rule 60(a) is not a vehicle *812for relitigating matters that have already been litigated and decided, nor to change what has been deliberately done. Security Mutual Casualty Co. v. Century Casualty Co., 621 F.2d 1062, 1065 (10th Cir.1980); Morgan Guaranty Trust Co. of New York v. Third National Bank of Hampden County, 545 F.2d 758, 760 (1st Cir.1976); see generally, 6A Moore’s Federal Practice, § 60.06(1), p. 4055 (1983); 11 Wright & Miller § 2854, supra, at 154.
Erna contends that the divorce court’s order of June 2, 1981, was entered “to effectuate the court’s original intent, as expressed in the divorce decree” and, therefore, is within the scope of Rule 60(a). It appears clear from the record that it was the original intent of the District Court of Burleigh County to divide the described real property equally between Erna and Jacob. The sale of the real property by the court-appointed- receiver was the means utilized by the court to effectuate its intent to divide the property equally.
At first glance, it may appear that the sale part of the judgment was carried out when the sale to the highest bidder was confirmed and the receiver’s deed was delivered. In reality, however, it was not properly carried out as the real property had been advertised for sale with a reservation of the mineral interests which the parties owned and the bid was only for the surface interest. The equal distribution part of the judgment was also affected by the advertising procedure as Jacob bid for the surface and received both the surface and the minerals for the price of the surface. The error could have been corrected through a 60(b) motion under the North Dakota Rules of Civil Procedure providing notice and hearing. Had that been done, the court would have had the alternative of canceling the sale and ordering a new one without the reservation of minerals or of doing what it did, permitting the surface to be sold as advertised with an equal division of the minerals. The main object of the court’s judgment was not the sale of all the property, but the equal division of it. The sale was only the means of attaining that objective. With this analysis, it is clear that a mistake occurred in carrying out this objective.
Unless an abuse of discretion is shown, a 60(b) order is not normally reversed by this court. Galloway v. Galloway, 281 N.W.2d 804, 806 (N.D.1979); Bettger v. Bettger, 280 N.W.2d 915, 917 (N.D.1979); Gajewski v. Bratcher, 240 N.W.2d 871, 886 (N.D.1976). As the correction of the judgment was done under Rule 60(a), N.D.R.Civ.P., and not under Rule 60(b), N.D.R.Civ.P., we are faced with the issue of determining whether or not that was a fatal defect in this case.
In light of the analysis that we have made, although we would have preferred that change be made under Rule 60(b), N.D.R.Civ.P., we do not believe, under the circumstances of this case, a 60(b) motion procedure was required to correct what was an error arising from oversight. Thus, we conclude that the district court’s order of June 2, 1981, was properly entered pursuant to Rule 60(a), N.D.R.Civ.P., as the correction of a mistake resulting from the failure to incorporate the mineral reservation language contained in the advertisements in the order confirming the sale and the receiver’s deed. The mistake caused the order confirming the sale of March 11, 1981, to fail to reflect the intent of the District Court of Burleigh County to give each of the parties an equal share of the marital estate.
The district court’s amended orders of January 11, 1982, and January 27, 1982, were also proper pursuant to Rule 60(a). It is apparent from the record that the incorrect land description in the order of June 2, 1981, as corrected by amended order dated January 11, 1982, was the result of a clerical mistake. See United States v. 706.98 Acres of Land in Montgomery County, Arkansas, 158 F.Supp. 272, 275 (W.D.Ark.1958). The January 27, 1982, order, which clarified the fact that the parties together owned only one-half of the minerals instead of all of the minerals, is also properly char*813acterized as a Rule 60(a) correction involving a clerical mistake.
Our determination that the ex parte orders of the District Court of Burleigh County were within the scope of Rule 60(a) necessitates the conclusion that the District Court of Hettinger County did not have jurisdiction to review the matter in a quiet title action.6 We therefore reverse the judgment of the District Court of Hettinger County and reinstate the orders of June 2, 1981, January 11, 1982, and January 27, 1982, of the District Court of Burleigh County, with costs on appeal to Erna.
SAND and PEDERSON, JJ., and PAULSON,* Surrogate Justice, concur.
. We note that the order for judgment of the District Court of Burleigh County contains an incorrect description of the real property previously owned by Jacob and Ema Gruebele. Similar errors exist in the district court’s judgment, amended judgment, and order for the appointment of a receiver. A correct description of the real property at issue is set forth at *808the outset of this opinion and is taken from the amended order of the District Court of Burleigh County dated January 11, 1982, and the order confirming the sale of the real property dated March 11, 1981.
. The $800 deduction in Ema’s share of the sale proceeds, as determined in the court’s judgment, reflects advancements made by Jacob to Erna prior to the divorce decree.
, A motion to hold Jacob in contempt of court and to set aside the sale of real and personal property was filed on November 24, 1980, together with the sworn affidavits of Ema Grue-bele and Jim Raaum. Ema contended that Jacob became the successful bidder at the sale through his intimidation and coercion of other bidders and by causing other interested persons to withdraw from the bidding. The district court, after holding a hearing on the motion, determined that Ema failed to prove intimidation and coercion of bidders on the part of Jacob. In an order dated January 22, 1981, the court concluded that the sale of real property was proper; however, Jacob was ordered to account for certain improper sales of personal property. An amended judgment dated January 22, 1981, was entered to reflect the district court’s order.
.The effect, if any, of the advertisements and mineral retention language contained therein on the quantity and value of bids submitted at the sale of the described real property is not ascertainable from the record. Testimony elicited from Jacob at trial in the District Court of Hettinger County reveals, however, that Jacob believed that his own bid was being submitted for the surface acreage of the land only:
“Q. After referring to that newspaper advertisement and when you submitted your bid, you were well aware, were you not, that that bid was being submitted for the surface acreage only, correct?
“A. Right.”
. Rule 60 was adopted from Rule 60 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure; therefore, when construing it, we are guided by and give deference to Federal case law interpreting Rule 60 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. See Byron v. Gerring Industries, Inc., 328 N.W.2d 819, 821, n. 3 (N.D.1982); In re Estate of Elmer, 210 N.W.2d 815, 820 (N.D.1973).
. The impropriety of the collateral action in the District Court of Hettinger County obviates our resolution of the second issue raised by Ema regarding the court’s interpretation of the divorce decree.

=== CASE 9740501 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:36.077367+00 ===

VANDE WALLE, Justice,
concurring specially.
I agree that the basic premise of the divorce court’s judgment was to divide the property of the parties equally, but it also appears that it was the intent of the court that all the property of the parties be sold. The property was, in fact, all sold and Jacob purchased the real property in question. In this respect there was no mistake. However, because the real property was advertised as being offered with a reservation of minerals and because Jacob testified he knew he was not to receive the minerals, the question arises as to whether or not Erna received a fair share of the proceeds of the sale of the property. Although, as the majority opinion notes, there is no evidence in the record to indicate that the bids on the property would have been higher had it been advertised without a mineral reservation, it is apparent the minerals have some value because there is a lease on the minerals and the reduced delay rental payment was the cause of Jacob’s realization of the divorce court’s ex parte orders.
I concur in the result reached by the majority opinion because it appears to me that in matters of property division the divorce court is the proper place to determine any mistakes which may have occurred in carrying out the court’s judgment. Therefore, in the broad sense, I agree that the divorce court had jurisdiction to issue the ex parte orders which gave Erna one-half of the couple’s interest in the minerals. If Jacob was dissatisfied with this result he could have petitioned the divorce court for a hearing on the matter rather than instituting a separate action before another court to challenge those orders.
Because it is apparent that the divorce court intended that all the property, including the minerals, be sold, the real property should have been advertised and sold without reservation. When the sale, but not the advertisement, was completed without reservation, the divorce court, in an apparent attempt to rectify any possible inequity, determined, ex parte, that an amended judgment should be entered transferring one-half of the minerals Jacob had purchased, which purchase the divorce court had affirmed, to Erna. At that time, it seems to me, the better procedure would have been to give notice to Jacob and permit a hearing thereon. It stretches the intention of Rule 60(a), N.D.R.Civ.P., to conclude that this series of events was a clerical mistake or an “error arising from oversights or omission” which permitted the entry of a corrective order without a hearing as contemplated by that rule. The error was on the part of the receiver in advertising the property for sale subject to a mineral reservation in the owners (Jacob and Erna) contrary to the order of the court and then, in an apparent attempt to correct that error, compounding the problem by conveying the property to Jacob without such a reservation. There is no evidence, however, that Jacob was the cause of these actions by the receiver. Had a hearing been held at the time this error was brought to the attention of the trial court by Erna’s attorney, perhaps the proceedings *814resulting in this appeal would have been avoided.
Although equity demands that we reverse the judgment, due process also may demand that Jacob receive notice and the opportunity for a hearing before one-half of the mineral interest he purchased, which purchase the divorce court affirmed, was transferred to Erna. If, as Jacob contends, the advertisement with the mineral reservation had no effect on the bids submitted for the property, he would be entitled to present his evidence, Erna would have the opportunity to challenge his contention, and the judge ordering the sale of the property in the first instance would, most properly, be the one to resolve the issue.

=== CASE 2223880 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:09.384227+00 ===

848 N.E.2d 348 (2006)
James R. DILLMAN, et al, Appellants-Plaintiffs,
v.
TRUSTEES OF INDIANA UNIVERSITY, Appellees-Defendants.
No. 53A01-0505-CV-247.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
June 2, 2006.
*349 Gojko Kasich, Hebron, Roy Graham, Bloomington, for Appellants.
Ellen E. Boshkoff, Scott D. Himsel, Baker & Daniels, Indianapolis, for Appellees.
OPINION
MATHIAS, Judge.
James R. Dillman, et al ("Appellants") appeal from the Monroe Circuit Court's grant of summary judgment in favor of the Trustees of Indiana University ("Trustees"). Appellants raise the following combined and restated issues:
I. Whether the trial court erred in determining that the Indiana Open Door Law did not apply to a gathering of less than a majority of the Trustees; and,
II. Whether the trial court erred in determining that the Indiana University President's decision to terminate the contract of a basketball coach was made pursuant to a delegation of authority by the Trustees and not subject to the Open Door Law.
Concluding that neither a gathering of less than a majority of the nine Trustees nor the university president's decision to terminate a contract were subject to the Open Door Law, we affirm.
Facts and Procedural History
On July 27, 1982, Robert M. Knight ("Knight") and the Trustees entered into a contract whereby Knight agreed to serve as head coach of the Indiana University men's basketball team. Knight exercised an option to renew the contract on June 29, 1987. In 1991, an addendum was executed and the contract was extended until June 20, 2002. The employment agreement provided a detailed mechanism for Indiana University's President to remove Knight for cause. The agreement also permitted a no-cause removal, stating that *350 "[i]f University at any time desires, Coach [Knight] shall cease to serve as Head Basketball Coach when so advised in writing." Appellants' App. p. 110.
At a public meeting held on September 11, 1987, the Trustees passed a resolution which retained their authority to set policy, but delegated to the university president the "explicit authority ... to manage[] and administer the University." Appellants' App. pp. 123-24. Specifically, the resolution provided that "the Board hereby delegates to the President the authority of the Board as permitted by Indiana Code 20-12-1-4. The Authority so delegated shall also include that conferred by [] Indiana Code 20-12-23-2[], Indiana Code 20-12-1[], but subject to the exceptions and conditions stated in this Resolution." Appellants' App. p. 124.
On May 14, 2000, the Trustees held an executive session regarding Knight's continued employment at Indiana University. During that session, the Trustees and then Indiana University President Myles Brand ("President Brand") discussed possible sanctions and termination of Knight's employment with the University.
On the morning of September 9, 2000, President Brand met informally with members of the Board of Trustees at his home in Bloomington prior to an I.U. football game in order to update them on an ongoing investigation into Knight's alleged battery of an I.U. freshman. They also discussed other instances of Knight's alleged misconduct and insubordination. President Brand first spoke with four of the Trustees, while four other Trustees waited in another room.[1] Roughly thirty minutes after speaking with the first four Trustees, President Brand spoke with the remaining four Trustees. President Brand later explained in deposition testimony that he deliberately gathered with fewer than a quorum of the Trustees "to exclude any impropriety with respect to the Open Door Act." Appellants' App. p. 53. The following day, September 10, 2000, President Brand announced his decision to fire Knight pursuant to the no-cause removal provision of his employment agreement.
On October 2, 2000, Appellants filed a complaint against the Trustees in Monroe Circuit Court, alleging violations of the Open Door Law and requesting that the trial court void "any policy, decision or final action" of the Trustees "as it relates to the termination ... of Robert M. Knight."[2] Appellants' App. p. 17. On October 17, 2000, the Trustees moved for summary judgment. Appellants filed a cross-motion for summary judgment on April 23, 2001. On July 19, 2001, the trial court entered an order granting partial summary judgment in favor of the Trustees, finding that "the President of Indiana University had the authority to make, enforce and terminate contracts and thus had the authority to terminate the contract of Robert M. Knight." Appellants' App. p. 8.
On October 5, 2001, Appellants filed a second motion for summary judgment, arguing that they were entitled to summary judgment on the issues of whether the Trustees' May 14, 2000 executive session and their September 9, 2000 gatherings violated the Open Door Law. The Trustees also filed a second motion for summary *351 judgment. The trial court conducted a hearing on April 15, 2005. At that hearing, Appellants agreed to the dismissal of the portion of the complaint regarding the May 14, 2000 executive session. On May 4, 2005, the trial court issued findings and conclusions granting summary judgment in favor of the Trustees. This appeal ensued.
Standard of Review
When reviewing a grant or denial of summary judgment our well-settled standard of review is the same as it is for the trial court: whether there is a genuine issue of material fact, and whether the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Summary judgment should be granted only if the evidence sanctioned by Indiana Trial Rule 56(C) shows that there is no genuine issue of material fact and the moving party deserves judgment as a matter of law. All evidence must be construed in favor of the opposing party, and all doubts as to the existence of a material issue must be resolved against the moving party.
Monroe Guar. Ins. Co. v. Magwerks Corp., 829 N.E.2d 968, 973 (Ind.2005) (internal citations omitted).
Discussion and Decision
I. Meeting Under the Open Door Law
First, Appellants argue that the trial court erred when it determined that the September 9, 2000 gatherings of the Trustees were not a meeting subject to the requirements of the Open Door Law.
The purpose of the Open Door Law is to assure that the business of the State of Indiana and its political subdivisions be conducted openly so that the general public may be fully informed. Frye v. Vigo County, 769 N.E.2d 188, 192 (Ind.Ct.App. 2002); Ind.Code § 5-14-1.5-1 (2002). We are to liberally construe the statute in order to give effect to the legislature's intention. Ind.Code § 5-14-1.5-1. The Open Door Law requires that, except for those situations where an executive session is authorized, "all meetings of the governing bodies of public agencies must be open at all times for the purpose of permitting members of the public to observe and record them." Ind.Code § 5-14-1.5-3(a) (2002).
For purposes of the Open Door Law, a meeting is defined as "a gathering of a majority of the governing body of a public agency for the purpose of taking official action on public business." Ind.Code § 5-14-1.5-2(c) (2002 & Supp.2005). In addition, official action means to "(1) receive information; (2) deliberate; (3) make recommendations; (4) establish policy; (5) make decisions; or (6) take final action." Ind.Code § 5-14-1.5-2(d).
Appellants assert that because "there is no specific language that requires that a majority of a political subdivision meet simultaneously in one room at the same time," the term meeting must be construed to include consecutive gatherings of less than a majority. However, the legislature has specifically defined "meeting" under the Open Door Law as "a gathering of a majority of the governing body...." Ind.Code § 5-14-1.5-2(c). Thus, without a majority present, no meeting occurs for purposes of the Open Door Law.
Moreover, as the Trustees point out, a public agency cannot take official action subject to the Open Door Law without a quorum present. They direct us to caselaw from other jurisdictions which recognize that their open door laws do not apply when a quorum is not present. See Auburn Univ. v. Advertiser Co., 867 So.2d 293, 301 (Ala.2003) ("The attendance of a quorum is a condition precedent to everything. Until then there is an absolute *352 incapacity to consider or act in any way upon any matter."); Dewey v. Redevelopment Agency of City of Reno, 119 Nev. 87, 64 P.3d 1070, 1078 (2003) (rejecting the argument that back-to-back briefings constituted a "constructive quorum" and holding when less than a quorum is present, private discussions and information gathering do not violate the Open Meeting Law).
The conduct of the I.U. Trustees was in direct contravention to the public policy behind the Open Door Law. While a more open process in matters of governance such as this might be preferable, the legislative branch of our state government has spoken. The law does not prohibit this conduct. Moreover and importantly, we know this because the General Assembly has repeatedly considered and declined to amend the Open Door Law to change the definition of a meeting to include a "series of at least two [ ] gatherings of members of the governing body ... attended by at least two [] members but less than a quorum ... [where] [t]he sum of the number of different members of the governing body attending any of the series of gatherings at least equals a quorum of the governing body." S.B. 0089, 114th Gen. Assem., 2d Reg. Sess. (Ind.2006). See also H.B. 1359, 109th Gen. Assem., 2d Reg. Sess. (Ind.1996). See also H.B. 1717, 110th Gen. Assem., 1st Reg. Sess. (Ind.1997); H.B. 1726, 111th Gen. Assem., 1st Reg. Sess. (Ind.1999); H.B. 1738, 112th Gen. Assem., 1st Reg. Sess. (Ind.2001); S.B. 0319, 113th Gen. Assem., 2d Reg. Sess. (Ind.2004); S.B. 0310, 114th Gen. Assem., 1st Reg. Sess. (Ind.2005); H.B. 1221, 114th Gen. Assem., 1st Reg. Sess. (Ind.2005).
This repeated refusal to amend the definition makes clear the legislature's intent to preserve the meaning of the term "meeting" as it is written. See Miller Brewing Co. v. Bartholemew County Beverage Co., 674 N.E.2d 193, 206 (Ind.Ct. App.1996), trans. denied. Therefore, we conclude that the trial court properly determined that the gatherings of less than a majority of the Trustees did not constitute a meeting subject to the Open Door Law.[3]
II. Trustees' Delegation of Authority to the University President
Appellants also assert that the trial court erred in determining that the Trustees' delegation of authority to the Indiana University President took President Brand's decision to terminate Knight's employment out of the purview of the Open Door Law. Specifically, Appellants argue that the Trustees' 1987 resolution delegating the Board's authority under certain statutes was to then University President Thomas Erlich personally. Therefore, Appellants contend, "any authority that *353 may have been given to Thomas Erlich in 1987 is irrelevant to what happened in September of 2000." Br. of Appellants at 38.
We find this argument unpersuasive. Indiana Code section 20-12-1-4 provides that the Board of Trustees is
authorized to employ such officers, faculty, employees, consultants and counsel as it may deem necessary or convenient to aid in the formulation and implementation of its policies and to execute its will within its particular institution. To such end[,][the] board may delegate to such persons and to others such authority as it may possess[.]
Ind.Code § 20-12-1-4 (1994). The minutes of the Trustees' September 11, 1987, public meeting demonstrate the Board's intention "to become more actively and deeply involved in the substantial policy issues" affecting the university. Appellants' App. p. 123. In order to "streamline the Board's operations[,]" the Trustees delegated to the "President of the University" their administrative authority under Indiana Code chapter 20-12-1. Appellants' App. pp. 123-29. By using this language, the Trustees clearly delegated their authority to the person holding the office of president of the university, and not to Thomas Erlich personally. Included in this delegated administrative authority is the power "to govern, by lawful means, the conduct of its students, faculty, and employees[.]" Ind.Code § 20-12-1-2(a)(3) (1994 & Supp.2005).
Appellants also argue that the Trustees' delegation of administrative authority to the university president constitutes "a delegation to a committee of one" and should thus be subject to the Open Door Law. Br. of Appellants at 34. In support of this argument, they rely on Riggin v. Board of Trustees of Ball State University, 489 N.E.2d 616 (Ind.Ct.App. 1986), trans. denied, in which this court held that the Open Door Law applied to a five-member ad hoc committee which reviewed a decision to discharge a tenured professor. However, this case is distinguishable. As the Trustees point out, the Open Door Law applies to meetings of governing bodies, which are defined as "two [ ] or more individuals" constituting "a board, a commission, an authority, a council, a committee, a body, or other entity[.]" Ind.Code § 5-14-1.5-2(b). Thus, the Open Door Law does not apply to the decisions of a properly-authorized individual university officer.
Conclusion
The trial court properly entered summary judgment in favor of the Trustees.
Affirmed.
ROBB, J., and VAIDIK, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  The ninth trustee was apparently out of the country. Appellants' App. p. 62.
[2]  The record before us does not contain the complaint; however, the trial court's Entry of Summary Judgment quotes this language from the complaint and cites it as "Prayer, Count I Amended Complaint, ¶¶ 1, 3." Appellants' App. p. 17.
[3]  In a related argument, Appellants assert that the trial court erred when it determined that, even had the gatherings constituted a meeting subject to the requirements of the Open Door Law, the Trustees were nonetheless entitled to summary judgment because there is no evidence of a "policy, decision or final action" of the Trustees relating to Knight's termination. Appellants' App. p. 20. As discussed above, the Open Door Law defines a meeting as "a gathering of a majority of the governing body of a public agency for the purpose of taking official action upon public business." Ind.Code § 5-14-1.5-2(c). "'Official action' means to: (1) receive information; (2) deliberate; (3) make recommendations; (4) establish policy; (5) make decisions; or (6) take final action." Ind.Code § 5-14-1.5-2(d). While the trial court correctly determined that there was no evidence of a "policy, decision or final action," we note that the undisputed evidence clearly demonstrates that the Trustees received information from President Brand. See Simon v. City of Auburn, Ind., Bd. of Zoning Appeals, 519 N.E.2d 205, 209 (Ind.Ct.App.1988) ("the Board undeniably received informationalbeit in the form of legal advice from its attorney.").

=== CASE 2223884 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:09.474922+00 ===

848 N.E.2d 577 (2006)
364 Ill. App. 3d 996
302 Ill. Dec. 278
In re JOHN N., a Person Asserted to be Subject to Involuntary Admission and Treatment (The People of the State of Illinois, Petitioner-Appellee, v. John N., Respondent-Appellant).
No. 3-05-0441, 3-05-0442.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Third District.
March 17, 2006.
As Modified Upon Denial of Rehearing May 23, 2006.
Cynthia Z. Tracy (Court-appointed), Guardianship & Advocacy Commission, Peoria, Jeff Plesko, Managing Attorney, Guardianship & Advocacy Commission, Anna, for John N.
Lawrence M. Bauer, Deputy Director, Judith Z. Kelly, State's Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor, Ottawa, Kevin W. Lyons State's Attorney, Peoria, for the People.
Modified Upon Denial of Rehearing
Justice BARRY delivered the opinion of the court:
The State filed a petition asking the trial court to involuntarily admit the respondent, John N., to a mental health facility. *578 The respondent had been transported to the facility by emergency medical personnel and a police officer. The petition was signed by one of the emergency medical personnel. The trial court found the respondent to be a person subject to involuntary admission. Later, the court also found the respondent to be a person subject to involuntary administration of psychotropic medication. The respondent appealed from both orders, and the appeals were consolidated by this court. On appeal, the respondent argues that because the petition was not signed by a peace officer, as required by statute, both orders are void. The State agrees.
BACKGROUND
Because the State confessed error in this case, initially we issued a minute order reversing both of the trial court's orders. The respondent then submitted a motion requesting that we publish this case as an opinion. The State did not object to the respondent's motion. We have granted the respondent's motion and now issue this opinion.
ANALYSIS
The relevant statute states that if the person who is the subject of an emergency petition for involuntary admission is taken into custody and is transported to a mental health facility by a peace officer, the officer shall complete the petition. 405 ILCS 5/3-606 (West 2004). Under such circumstances, the failure of the officer to complete the petition is reversible error. In re Demir, 322 Ill.App.3d 989, 256 Ill. Dec. 226, 751 N.E.2d 616 (2001). Failure to comply with the statutory requirements for involuntary admission renders the trial court's judgment erroneous and of no effect. In re George O., 314 Ill.App.3d 1044, 248 Ill. Dec. 305, 734 N.E.2d 13 (2000). Because this issue involves the interpretation of a statute, which is a question of law, the standard of review is de novo. George O., 314 Ill.App.3d 1044, 248 Ill. Dec. 305, 734 N.E.2d 13.
In this case, the police officer who took the respondent into custody and transported him to a mental health facility failed to complete the petition for involuntary admission, as required by statute. Under Demir and George O., the trial court erred as a matter of law by involuntarily admitting the respondent. Therefore, we reverse the Peoria County circuit court's order ruling that the respondent is a person subject to involuntary admission.
We also reverse the circuit court's order regarding the involuntary administration of psychotropic medication. Pursuant to the relevant statute, a court may authorize administration of involuntary treatment to a "recipient of services." 405 ILCS 5/2-107.1 (West 2004). Under the Mental Health and Developmental Disabilities Code (Code) (405 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq. (West 2004)), a "recipient of services" is defined as a person who has received or is receiving treatment. 405 ILCS 5/1-123 (West 2004). Treatment, for purposes of the Code, includes, but is not limited to, hospitalization, partial hospitalization, outpatient services, examination, diagnosis, evaluation, care, training, psychotherapy, pharmaceuticals, and other services provided for recipients by mental health facilities. 405 ILCS 5/1-128 (West 2004). Under the facts of the instant case, the circuit court's order was dependent upon the respondent currently receiving treatment as an inpatient at a mental health facility. See 405 ILCS 5/2-107.1 (West 2004). Because we reversed the order concerning the respondent's involuntary admission, he will no longer be receiving such treatment at the mental health facility and therefore no longer qualifies as a "recipient of services" *579 for involuntary administration of medication.
CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, we reverse the Peoria County circuit court's orders to (1) involuntarily admit the respondent; and (2) involuntarily administer psychotropic medication to the respondent.
Involuntary admission order reversed; involuntary administration of psychotropic medication order reversed.
SLATER and LYTTON, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9741352 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:54:04.926346+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice.
ACTION
This appeal stems from an uncontested quiet title judgment entered in Yankton County. Appellants E. W. Boyles and El-loween G. Boyles (Boyles) appeal from the trial court’s order denying Boyles’ motion to vacate this judgment in favor of appellees Norma Mae Ryken, John M. Ryken, and Lester L. Ryken (Rykens). Appellant Frank Biegelmeier (Biegelmeier) filed a motion in joinder pursuant to SDCL 21-14-6. The trial court entered an order likewise denying this motion, from which Biegelmeier appeals. We reverse and remand for a determination on the merits of the quiet title action for the reasons outlined below.
FACTS
On April 28, 1977, Rykens obtained a judgment from the trial court quieting title to certain real property located in Yankton County, South Dakota. Prior to this judgment, Rykens caused a publication of a summons to be made in a Yankton newspaper. Boyles and Biegelmeier were treated as unknown defendants. Rykens contend that they followed this procedure due to their inability to discover any filings or cross-indexings in the applicable public records which reflected any color of title conflicts with respect to the realty in question.
Approximately one year after the quiet title judgment was entered, Boyles filed a motion pursuant to SDCL 15-6-60(b) to vacate the trial court’s judgment of April 28, 1977. Said motion was accompanied by affidavits from E. W. Boyles and Robert Johnson, an engineer and land surveyor. Soon thereafter, Biegelmeier also filed an affidavit and moved to join the motion of Boyles. Both Boyles and Biegelmeier stated in their affidavits that the land claimed by Rykens encroaches upon land in which they have an interest. A hearing on these motions was held October 5, 1978, whereat Boyles and Biegelmeier were represented by the same counsel. The issue at this hearing was whether Boyles and/or Biegel-meier were entitled to receive personal service as to the April 1977 quiet title action. After Boyles and Biegelmeier had submitted a joint brief, the trial court denied their motions and ruled that the judgment of April 28,1977, was valid and binding per court order of October 25, 1979. In its conclusions of law, the trial court stated that a diligent search of the records in the offices of the Yankton County register of deeds, county auditor, and county treasurer could not have produced the names of E. W. Boyles or Elloween G. Boyles as interested property owners. The trial court further concluded that no record of any conflicting property ownership as to Biegelmeier could have been ascertained from the Yankton County register of deeds prior to the initiation of the quiet title action. Boyles and Biegelmeier subsequently filed a joint notice of appeal on December 12, 1979.
ISSUE
Appellees having proceeded by publication and not by personal service, did the trial court err in denying Boyles’ and Biegelmeier’s motion to relieve them from the trial court’s final judgment.of April 28, 1977? We hold that it did.
*395DECISION
Boyles and Biegelmeier timely filed a motion pursuant to SDCL 15-6-60(b)(l), (4) and (6) for relief of the trial court’s judgment quieting title in the name of Rykens. SDCL 15-6-60(b)(l), (4) and (6) states:
On motion and upon such terms as are just, the court may relieve a party or his legal representative from a final judgment, order, or proceeding for the following reasons:
(1) Mistake, inadvertence, surprise, or excusable neglect;
(4) The judgment is void;
(6) Any other reason justifying relief from the operation of the judgment.
Boyles and Biegelmeier contend that they were not properly served with process regarding the April 1977 quiet title action; thus, the trial court was acting without proper jurisdiction and its judgment quieting title in favor of Rykens should be rendered void. Johnson v. Bruflat, 45 S.D. 200, 186 N.W. 877 (1922). In support of their position, Boyles and Biegelmeier rely on SDCL 21-41-5, which states in pertinent part:
[In a quiet title] action all persons who have or claim to have or who appear of record to have ever had any interest or estate in, claim to, or lien or encumbrance upon the premises described in the summons and complaint or any part thereof ... may be made defendants by name, if known.
See also SDCL 21-41-1. Also relevant is SDCL 15-9-7, which provides:
Where the person on whom the service of the summons, writ, order, or decree is to be made cannot, after due diligence, be found ... [the] court or judge may grant an order that the service be made by publication.
It is this Court’s task to determine whether the trial court’s ruling that Boyles and Bie-gelmeier were not required to receive personal service prior to the April 1977 quiet title judgment was clearly erroneous. SDCL 15-6-52(a). The question, when reduced to its essence, is whether Rykens exercised due diligence in attempting to discover any recorded interest Boyles and Biegelmeier might have had in the realty involved.
The test of the sufficiency of the showing of due diligence is not whether all possible or conceivable means of discovery are used, but rather it must be shown that all reasonable means have been exhausted in an effort to locate interested parties. Davis v. Kressly, 78 S.D. 637, 107 N.W.2d 5 (1961). In Coughran v. Markley, 15 S.D. 37, 40-41, 87 N.W. 2, 3 (1901), this Court stated:
Judgments which exclude persons from any interest in or lien upon land should not be rendered without actual notice, when by the exercise of reasonable diligence actual notice can be given. There should be either actual notice, or an honest and reasonable effort to give it.
In this state, the due diligence standard is applicable to quiet title actions. Berry v. Howard, 33 S.D. 447, 146 N.W. 577 (1914); Grigsby v. Wopschall, 25 S.D. 564, 127 N.W. 605 (1910). Whether a party has exhausted all reasonable means available for locating interested parties must be determined by the circumstances of each particular case. Cone v. Ballard, 68 S.D. 593, 5 N.W.2d 46 (1942).
We now turn to the circumstances of this particular case, dealing with each appellant separately. Boyles’ interest in the realty stems from a warranty deed from Florence J. Edmunds and Harold E. Ed-munds dated October 2, 1969. Filed and recorded with the Yankton County register of deeds on November 4, 1971, this deed conveyed to Boyles:
The South half of Lot five, and all of Lots Six, Seven and Eight, Block forty-two, in that part of the city of Yankton, platted and known as J.W. Glazier’s Addition
and
Outlot 22 of County Auditor’s Plat of Outlots, in the city of Yankton, as platted in Book G, page 28.
*396and
All interest grantors may have in all that land south of and adjacent to said Lot eight and Outlot 22 above described, beyond the River Bluff.
Rykens do not deny that this deed was on record at the time of the initiation of the quiet title proceedings. It is argued by Rykens, however, that it was impossible to tell from the record books maintained by the register of deeds whether or not the realty involved in the quiet title action included realty claimed by Boyles. The crux of the dispute stems from the last line of the warranty deed conveyed to Boyles: “All interest grantors may have in all that land south of and adjacent to said Lot eight and Outlot 22 above described, beyond the River Bluff.” The realty involved in the quiet title action is located directly south of Lot eight, bordering the Missouri River. This realty is unplatted while the realty conveyed in the deed to Boyles is platted. Upon an inspection of the documents at the register of deeds office, and the discovery of the language in the deed to Boyles, it would be unreasonable not to consider Boyles as interested parties who should have been named as defendants in Rykens’ complaint and entitled to personal service. Accordingly, we rule that Rykens did not exercise due diligence in discovering Boyles’ interest in the quiet title action. Boyles were entitled to personal service.
Biegelmeier’s interest in the realty is based upon a tax deed from Yankton County to Biegelmeier dated July 1, 1954. This deed was not recorded in the Yankton County register of deeds office until approximately nine months after the quiet title judgment was entered on behalf of Rykens. The deed was, however, made a matter of public record in the Yankton County Treasurer’s office in July of 1954.
Possession of a tax deed vests in the grantee a fee simple estate in the realty involved. SDCL 10-25-12. Also, when a tax deed is regular on its face and has been of record for twenty-three years, the title conveyed thereunder is considered marketable. SDCL ch. 43-30, Appendix, Standard 8.2. We believe that an exercise of due diligence on the part of Rykens would have resulted in the discovery of Biegelmeier’s interest in the land in question. Consequently, we hold that Biegelmeier was an interested party who should have been named as a defendant and entitled to personal service.
The order of the trial court denying Boyles’ motion to vacate and Biegelmeier’s joinder motion is reversed, and these proceedings are remanded for a determination on the merits.
WOLLMAN, C. J., and DUNN and FOSHEIM, JJ., concur.
MORGAN, J., dissents.

=== CASE 9740503 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:39.25526+00 ===

DARDEN, Judge,
dissenting.
I would respectfully dissent because I find an implicit due process issue presented here. In an analogous scenario, Wolff v. McDonnell, 418 U.S. 539, 557, 94 S.Ct. 2963, 41 L.Ed.2d 935 (1974), held that where the State has created a statutory right to “good time” credit for a prison inmate, this is a liberty interest which “entitle[s] [the inmate] to those minimum procedures appropriate under the circumstances and required by the Due Process Clause to insure that the state-created right is not arbitrarily abrogated.” Further, “the touchstone of due process is *1175protection of the individual against arbitrary action of government.” Id. at 558, 94 S.Ct. 2963. Therefore, I believe due process requires some showing to the trial court that the Department of Correction has a policy in place that determines the credit to be awarded for the various vocational education programs approved by the Department.
I cannot fault the reasoning of the majority based upon the language of the statute at issue. The statute indeed provides that the inmate “may earn” up to a total of six months of credit for the completion of vocational education programs. Ind. Code § 35-50-6-3.3(d). However, I am reluctant to find that the statutory language gives the personnel of the Department unfettered discretion to determine whether to award anywhere from one day to 180 days of credit to the inmate who has completed such a program. Are there different kinds of vocational programs that result in different amounts of credit awarded? If so, why? Does a single Department official make the credit determination, or is it by committee? To protect the inmate “against arbitrary action” in deciding the credit to be awarded, id., I believe due process requires that there be a written policy with objective criteria for making this determination.
My concern is not meant to cast doubt upon or disparage the integrity of DOC personnel. Rather, I believe that having a policy in place that defines the process for determining a credit toward the inmate’s sentence will serve the best interests of both the Department — to shield it from inmate distrust and claims of arbitrary action, and the inmates — providing a real incentive to pursue programs that will, hopefully, make them more productive members of society upon release.
Accordingly, I would reverse and remand for the trial court to consider evidence concerning how the determination of the amount of credit awarded to Appellants was determined.

=== CASE 2223887 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:09.544283+00 ===

338 N.W.2d 18 (1983)
The MINNEAPPLE CO., Respondent,
v.
William NORMANDIN, individually and d.b.a. Billy Buttons, Appellant.
No. C0-82-603.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
September 2, 1983.
*19 Kevin Sullivan, St. Paul, for appellant.
Allan Shapiro, Minneapolis, for respondent.
Considered and decided by the court en banc without oral argument.
AMDAHL, Chief Justice.
William Normandin appeals from the order for judgment of the Hennepin County District Court which awarded The Minneapple Company damages for trademark infringement plus attorney fees and which enjoined Normandin from all use of the infringing design.
The Minneapple Company is a partnership formed by Joshua Levenson, Stephen Jones, and Kurt Tausche.[1] They developed the concept of "The Minneapple" as a nickname for the City of Minneapolis, based on a contrast with "the big apple," New York City. On August 21, 1980, the partnership applied for and received registration as a trademark a design consisting of block letters spelling out "THE MINNEAPPLE." The letters are followed by a period and rest above a snow-covered apple, the stem of which rests between the two "P's." The partnership claimed August 23, 1980, as the date of the first use of the trademark. The Minneapple Company received its first shipments of T-shirts bearing the registered *20 design sometime in August 1980, and made its first sale on August 25, 1980.[2]
The Minneapple Company promoted its concept in various ways, including give-aways of T-shirts and other novelty items on WLOL-FM radio, appearances on WCCO-TV, and mentions on WCCO radio. The concept was the subject of columns in Twin Cities newspapers and the subject of an article in the Mpls/St. Paul Magazine. The partnership commissioned the building of a "Minneapple" float, which was entered in local parades including the Minneapolis Aquatennial parade and the St. Paul Winter Carnival parade. The float was also featured at the Minnesota Kicks' soccer game. Additionally, at the time of trial, the partners were negotiating with the Minneapolis Chamber of Commerce for the official adoption of the nickname "The Minneapple" for the City of Minneapolis.
The Minneapple Company opened a retail outlet in St. Anthony Main in Minneapolis in 1980. The outlet, which is in the form of an apple cart, sells T-shirts, sweatshirts, coffee mugs, glasses, aprons, postcards, luggage tags, tote bags, and other items bearing the registered design. A second retail outlet is located in Southdale Mall. The Minneapple Company also has wholesaled its imprinted products to 48 retail outlets in the Twin Cities area. The partnership employs three full-time and 15 part-time employees.
In June 1981, the partners of The Minneapple Company became aware of a design on the market which they considered to be similar to their logo. The design was marketed by appellant Normandin, d/b/a Billy Buttons. The design consists of the letters "Minne," a line drawing of an apple with a happy face, then the letters "lis." The picture of the apple phonetically substitutes for a portion of the word "Minneapolis."[3] Below the design, in small letters, is: "© 1981 Billy Buttons."[4]
Normandin has been in business as Billy Buttons since 1975. He claimed to have originated his design in late January or early February 1981 without knowledge of the existence of the design "The Minneapple." Normandin claimed he was aware of an "apple-type" cart located at St. Anthony Main but was not aware of what was sold there. The trial court, however, found that Normandin had seen the partnership's "Minneapple" design at St. Anthony Main in February or March 1981.
In an attempt to protect a common-law copyright for his design, Normandin sent himself a certified letter postmarked March 19, 1981. The letter contained his design and the words: "The original designs, January 24, 1981," and "© 1981, all rights reserved." By the end of February 1981, Normandin had made the first sale of his design, in the form of buttons, to local retail outlets. He first sold a transfer design for T-shirts in May or early June 1981. Personal contact with potential customers was Normandin's sole means of promoting his design.
*21 During early summer 1981, Normandin's T-shirt transfer design was sold mainly at the Shirt Works and Novelty Nook retail outlets. Before and after stocking Normandin's design, Shirt Works had received customer requests for the "Minneapple" T-shirt. A Shirt Works clerk testified that initially she responded to customer requests by stating that the store did not have the requested design, but that it did have Normandin's transfer. Because most customers chose to purchase Normandin's design, the Normandin transfer subsequently was sold to customers who requested Minneapple T-shirts without the clerk distinguishing the design sold from the one requested. All the transfers sold contained the Billy Buttons copyright line in small print.
On June 15, 1981, the Minneapple Company commenced the present action for trademark infringement. The Hennepin County District Court issued a preliminary injunction on July 6, 1981, enjoining Normandin from marketing his transfer design and from "using or employing the T-shirt transfer design in advertising, promoting or in any way using the T-shirt transfer design that it currently manufactures or distributes." Subsequent to the preliminary injunction order, Normandin continued to sell buttons and mirrors containing the design because he interpreted the injunction to preclude only T-shirt and T-shirt transfer sales.
Following trial, the court found Normandin's design infringed The Minneapple Company's trademark and constituted unfair competition. The court issued an order permanently enjoining Normandin "from the manufacture, distribution, use, advertising, promotion, or sale" of the "Minne-Apple-Lis" design "on any product, item, goods or services in any manner within the State of Minnesota" and awarded the Minneapple Company $565, representing profits Normandin received as a result of the sale of products bearing the infringing design. The Minneapple Company also was awarded attorney fees of $2,500 plus costs and disbursements.
This appeal raises two issues: (1) whether the design of The Minneapple Company is entitled to trademark protection, and (2) whether Normandin's design is so similar to that of The Minneapple Company to constitute trademark infringement or unfair competition.
Whether a particular design is entitled to trademark protection depends on the nature of the design and on how the design is used. If a design is "geographically descriptive or deceptively nondescriptive" of the goods or services it represents, then the design is not entitled to trademark registration or protection unless it has become distinctive of the goods or services it represents. Minn.Stat. § 333.19, subd. 1(5)(b) (1982). See also Imported Auto Parts Corp. v. R.B. Shaller & Sons, Inc., 258 N.W.2d 797 (1977). Additionally, the design must be used as a "nonfunctional" element of the product; that is, the design must serve a primary purpose of indicating the origin of the product. See Vuitton Et Fils S.A. v. J. Young Enterprises, Inc., 644 F.2d 769, 772-73 (9th Cir.1981); International Order of Job's Daughters v. Lindeburg & Co., 633 F.2d 912, 919 (9th Cir.1980), cert. denied, 452 U.S. 941, 101 S. Ct. 3086, 69 L. Ed. 2d 956 (1981).
Modification of a geographical word may make it sufficiently distinctive to entitle the resulting word or phrase to trademark protection. See 3 R. Callmann, The Law of Unfair Competition, Trademarks and Monopolies § 18.21 (4th ed. 1983). Here the Minneapple design substantially modifies the geographical name of Minneapolis. We find it to be sufficiently distinctive for purposes of trademark protection.
We find more difficult the question whether the design is a "nonfunctional" element of the product. The Minneapple design is, in effect, the product marketed by The Minneapple Company. The design serves an ornamental function. We need not decide, however, whether a design may simultaneously serve an aesthetic function and constitute a trademark because we resolve this case on the issue of the similarity of the two designs.
*22 Assuming that the Minneapple design is entitled to trademark protection, the burden of proof was on The Minneapple Company to establish infringement by showing that Normandin's design is "identical to or so similar to the registered mark as to be likely to cause confusion or mistake on the part of a purchaser of the goods or services or to deceive such a purchaser as to the source or origin of the goods or services * * *." Minn.Stat. § 333.28 (1982).[5] Likelihood of purchaser confusion also is an element of common-law unfair competition. See Imported Auto Parts, Inc. v. R.B. Shaller & Sons, 258 N.W.2d 797, 800-01 (Minn. 1977); Jordan Sulphur Springs & Mud Bath Sanitarium Co. v. Mudbaden Sulphur Springs Co. 135 Minn. 123, 126, 160 N.W. 252, 253 (1916).
In the memorandum accompanying his order, the trial judge stated that he found Normandin's design "strikingly similar" to that of The Minneapple Company. With regard to buyer confusion, the trial court relied upon the testimony of the Shirt Works clerk that Normandin's design was sold to customers requesting "Minneapple" T-shirts to find that "[v]ery few customers knew the difference between defendant's design and the Minneapple T-shirts."
In general, findings by a trial court regarding likelihood of confusion are factual findings and should not be disturbed by this court unless clearly erroneous. Minn.R.Civ.P. 52.01; Levi Strauss & Co. v. Blue Bell, Inc., 632 F.2d 817, 822 n. 6 (9th Cir.1980). However, in cases in which the critical evidence is documentary, there is generally no need to defer to the trial court's assessment of the documentary evidence. See In Re Trust Known as Great Northern Iron Ore Properties, 308 Minn. 221, 225-26, 243 N.W.2d 302, 305-06 (1976); Hubbard v. United Press International, Inc., 330 N.W.2d 428, 441 (Minn.1983). Therefore, to the extent a finding of likelihood of confusion depends on a comparison of the two designs at issue, an appellate court may make an independent judgment regarding their similarity. Dallas Cowboys Cheerleaders, Inc. v. Pussycat Cinema, Ltd., 604 F.2d 200, 204 n. 7 (2d Cir.1979); Hills Brothers Coffee, Inc. v. Hills Supermarkets, Inc., 428 F.2d 379, 380 (2d Cir.1970).
The two designs at issue here differ substantially. The Normandin design is distinguished from the design of The Minneapple Company in its concept as a phonetic device rather than a representation of Minneapolis as a small New York City. The Minneapple design is more sophisticated-looking than Normandin's simple line drawing containing a smiling face. Additionally, Normandin has made an effort to distinguish his design from that of The Minneapple Company by including the copyright words along with his designs. That effort is important to preventing customer confusion. Cf. Imported Auto Parts, Inc. v. R.B. Schaller & Sons, 258 N.W.2d 797, 800 (Minn.1977) (effort by defendant to distinguish trade name important to finding no unfair competition). Any confusion that may result probably is due to the fact that both designs originate from the name of the City of Minneapolis and are marketed as souvenirs of the city.
The purpose of trademark law is to protect the public from confusion regarding the sources of goods or services and protect business from diversion of trade through misrepresentation or appropriation of another's goodwill. Boston Professional Hockey Association, Inc. v. Dallas Cap & Emblem Manufacturing, Inc., 510 P.2d 1004, 1010-11 (5th Cir.), cert. denied, 423 U.S. 868, 96 S. Ct. 132, 46 L. Ed. 2d 98 (1975). However, the consequence of such protection is the bestowal of a monopoly upon the *23 owners of trademarks. In the instant case, to find infringement by Normandin of The Minneapple Company's mark would be to grant the company a monopoly over the use of an apple with any portion or version of the name of the City of Minneapolis. We decline to grant The Minneapple Company such a monopoly. We hold that the design created and marketed by Normandin does not rise to the level of similarity required to constitute either trademark infringement under Minn.Stat. § 333.28 (1982) or common-law unfair competition.
Reversed.
NOTES
[1]  Tausche subsequently withdrew from the partnership.
[2]  The partnership registered three similar designs as trademarks with the Secretary of State. These designs are not at issue in the instant matter, however, because The Minneapple Company has not marketed these alternative designs.
There was no evidence that the partners' names were filed or published as required by Minn.Stat. § 333.01 (1982) as persons conducting business of The Minneapple Company. However, the issue whether the partners' failure to register estops them from securing trademark law protection is not at issue in the instant case. Even if it were at issue, the general rule appears to be that equity would not estop the plaintiffs here. See Annot., 42 A.L.R. 2d 516, 542-43 (1955).
[3]  Normandin has fashioned similar designs for the cities of Indianapolis and Annapolis. There is some evidence he has marketed the Indianapolis design but he apparently has not marketed the Annapolis design. Additionally, Normandin has made some effort to market his concept in Minneapolis, Kansas.
[4]  At trial Normandin was questioned on the purpose and source of a small "R" in a circle near the stem of the apple which was found on some of the versions of his design. It remains unclear whether Normandin had placed the symbol near the apple at some stage in his design process or whether the symbol appeared there because Normandin had taken the smiling face apple from a source in which it was a registered design.
[5]  Our trademark statutes, Minn.Stat. §§ 333.18 to 333.31, were passed in 1959 and patterned closely after relevant provisions of the federal Lanham Trade-Mark Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 1051 to 1127. Under the Lanham Act, the requirement of likelihood of purchaser confusion is satisfied by "[t]he public's belief that the mark's owner sponsored or otherwise approved the use" of the alleged infringing mark. Dallas Cowboys Cheerleaders, Inc. v. Pussycat Cinema, Ltd., 604 F.2d 200, 205 (2d Cir.1979); see International Order of Job's Daughters v. Lindeburg and Company, 633 F.2d 912, 920 (9th Cir.1980).

=== CASE 2223888 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:09.563248+00 ===

848 N.E.2d 699 (2006)
Richard BROWN, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 49A05-0506-CR-321.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
June 7, 2006.
*702 Joel M. Schumm, Indianapolis, IN, Attorney for Appellant.
Steve Carter, Attorney General of Indiana, Jodi Kathryn Stein, Deputy Attorney General, Indianapolis, IN, Attorneys for Appellee.
OPINION
CRONE, Judge.
Case Summary
Richard Brown appeals his convictions and sentence for three counts of class D felony criminal confinement and his guilty verdicts for three counts of class D felony identity deception.[1] We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand.
Issues
Brown raises nine issues, which we reorder and restate as the following six:
I. Whether the trial court abused its discretion in denying his motion for mistrial;
II. Whether he waived his constitutional challenges;
III. Whether the criminal confinement statute, Indiana Code Section 35-42-3-3, is unconstitutionally vague as applied to him;
IV. Whether the identity deception statute, Indiana Code Section 35-43-5-3.5, is unconstitutionally vague as applied to him;
V. Whether the evidence is sufficient to support the guilty verdicts for identity deception; and
VI. Whether the trial court violated his statutory and constitutional due process rights by imposing a $400 jury fee.
Facts and Procedural History
On July 28, 2004, Brown called the Greek Islands Restaurant from his home at 1731 Fletcher Avenue in Indianapolis and spoke to A.H., a twenty-five-year-old server at the restaurant. Brown told A.H. that he was from the "93.1 radio station." Tr. at 52. 93.1 Radio Now is an Indianapolis radio station owned by Emmis Communications. Brown explained that the radio station was having a contest and that A.H. could win a car by going to 1731 Fletcher Avenue and persuading the occupant to give him a t-shirt in exchange for A.H.'s clothes. Brown told A.H. that it sometimes helped to bring food to bribe the *703 person, and that A.H. would have to take a lie detector test the following day to see whether he followed the contest instructions. A.H. believed that Brown was a radio disc jockey and that the contest was legitimate because Brown sounded "very fast, very excited" like a radio personality. Id. at 53.
A.H. left the restaurant with a sandwich and drove to the Fletcher Avenue address. A.H. knocked on the front door, and Brown answered. A.H. explained the contest and gave Brown the sandwich. Brown suggested that A.H. drive to the back of the house so that the neighbors would not see him undress. A.H. did so, and Brown let him in the house through the back door. A.H. went to an adjacent room and took off his waiter's uniform while Brown watched from approximately four feet away. Brown gave A.H. a torn t-shirt, and he wrapped it around his waist like a beach towel and left.
On July 29, 2004, at approximately 6:00 a.m., Brown called a Steak 'n Shake restaurant and spoke with J.M., a college freshman employed as a waiter. Brown told J.M. that he was from Radio Now and that the station was holding a "dare contest," in which the contestant could win a new car of his choosing. Id. at 88. The dare was to trade his clothing for a t-shirt with the person at 1731 Fletcher Avenue, who knew about the contest, within the next hour. Afterward, J.M. would talk about the experience on the radio. J.M. agreed to enter the contest and drove to 1731 Fletcher Avenue.
J.M. rang the front door bell. When Brown answered, J.M. asked him if he knew anything about the contest. Brown said that he did not, but that his wife had entered Radio Now contests. J.M. explained the contest. Brown agreed to help, invited J.M. in, and gave him a child-sized t-shirt. J.M. asked Brown if he could go into a restroom to change. Brown replied, "No, that's all right. I'll see you anyway. It's not like I get off on that sort of thing." Id. at 94. J.M. started to unbutton his shirt but stopped when he saw Brown staring at him. He asked Brown to turn around. Brown turned slightly, but J.M. could see his profile. He also noticed that Brown's hand was shaking.
The situation made J.M. nervous. He asked Brown where his wife was. Brown told J.M. that he and his wife were not currently together. He also told J.M. that he should leave through the back door so that the neighbors would not see him. J.M. felt anxious and turned to open the door, but it was locked. He quickly unbolted the door and ran to his car. J.M. turned on Radio Now and heard about an incident that sounded similar to what he had just experienced. J.M. called the phone number broadcast by Radio Now and spoke to a police officer who happened to be at the radio station.
Around 6:30 that same morning, Brown called a McDonald's restaurant and spoke to M.C., a thirty-one-year-old cashier. Brown told M.C. that he was "Scott Ross" from Radio Now and invited M.C. to enter the "Summer dare to be wild contest" and win a Dodge Viper or any car up to $50,000, or elect a cash option of $50,000. Id. at 113. To win, M.C. had to go to 1731 Fletcher Avenue, "a randomly picked address," within the next forty-five minutes and persuade the occupant to give him a t-shirt in exchange for all his clothing. Id. at 131. Then, M.C. should wait by his phone for Radio Now to call and confirm that he had completed the dare. M.C. thought that Brown's voice was friendly and personable and believed him to be legitimate. He gave Brown his home and cell phone numbers. M.C.'s managers *704 gave him permission to leave work, and he did.
M.C. went home and changed out of his uniform into street clothes. He then drove to 1731 Fletcher Avenue and knocked on the door. After Brown answered the door, M.C. explained the contest and asked Brown to help him. Brown agreed. M.C. began to disrobe on the front porch, but Brown told him not to disrobe outside. M.C. walked into the entryway of the house. Brown brought M.C. a very small t-shirt, stood in the entryway, and watched M.C. undress. Brown suggested that M.C. cut the shirt in half and wear it like a skirt, and M.C. did so. Brown told him not to go out the front door and led him to the back of the house. M.C. left and drove home.
When the radio station failed to call, M.C. became suspicious. He turned on the radio to listen to Radio Now and heard the disc jockeys talking about an incident similar to his. He called the number broadcast by Radio Now and spoke to a police officer.
Police interviewed the three men. A.H. and M.C. were individually shown a photo array, and both identified Brown as the man at 1731 Fletcher Avenue. Radio Now did not have an employee named Scott Ross, nor did it have a dare contest in which contestants could win a car by trading their clothing for a t-shirt. At 7:29 p.m. that day, a search warrant was executed for 1731 Fletcher Avenue. Police found clothing belonging to A.H. and M.C. inside the home.
On July 29, 2004, the State charged Brown with three counts of class D felony criminal confinement (Counts I, III, and V) and three counts of class D felony identity deception (Counts II, IV, and VI). On March 30, 2005, a jury trial commenced. Throughout all trial proceedings, Brown wore civilian clothes and a yellow jail bracelet with a sheriff's star on his wrist. He wore the jail bracelet because he was incarcerated at the Marion County Jail and was required to wear it at all times. During trial, M.C. was asked to identify the person he had met at 1731 Fletcher Avenue. M.C. testified, "Uh, he's wearing a white shirt, a tie, a jail armband, black shoes with white socks and blue or black pants." Id. at 119.
Brown moved for mistrial, contending that M.C.'s testimony violated his right to be presumed innocent until proven guilty and violated a motion in limine that prohibited any reference to his criminal history. Brown argued that the witness's identification of the jail armband had the same effect as if the jury had seen him "in handcuffs and paraded around in leg irons." Id. at 121. In response, the State argued that (1) the motion in limine only prohibited reference to past crimes; (2) there was no doubt that Brown had been arrested for this crime; and (3) the statement was made inadvertently in response to the question of identification.
After conducting research, the trial court denied Brown's motion for mistrial. The trial court then asked Brown whether he wished to have a cautionary instruction. Brown declined the instruction, stating that he did not want to draw attention to the armband. However, he asked the trial court to keep the option of a cautionary instruction open in the event that it became apparent that the jurors heard the reference to the "jail armband" and it was "on their minds." Id. at 125. The court deputy informed the trial court that if Brown removed the yellow jail bracelet, he would be charged a fee. The State offered to pay for a replacement bracelet, but the trial court declined the offer. Brown then objected to having to wear the jail bracelet based upon the fact that it had been brought to the jury's attention and identified *705 as jail clothing. The trial court overruled the objection. The jury found Brown guilty as charged.
On May 11, 2005, Brown filed (1) a motion to vacate his identity deception convictions based on double jeopardy principles, (2) a motion to vacate his criminal confinement convictions and identity deception convictions based on statutory vagueness and overbreadth, and (3) a motion to limit any sentence imposed on the identity deception counts to one year based on the proportionality clause of the Indiana Constitution. Notice was provided to the prosecutor and the attorney general.
At the sentencing hearing on May 31, 2005, the prosecutor and the attorney general responded to Brown's motions. The State argued that Brown waived his constitutional claims by failing to raise them in a motion to dismiss prior to trial. However, the trial court declined to find that Brown's constitutional claims were waived as untimely. The trial court granted the double jeopardy motion and denied the other two motions. The trial court merged the identity deception counts into the criminal confinement counts and entered judgment of conviction only on the latter. Appellant's App. at 12, 179. The trial court sentenced Brown to an aggregate eight-year sentence, with five years executed and three years suspended or on probation. In addition, over Brown's objection, the trial court imposed a $400 jury trial fee but waived it after finding that Brown was indigent. Brown now appeals.
Discussion and Decision
I. Motion for Mistrial
Broadly stated, Brown asserts that the trial court erred in denying his motion for mistrial. He bases this claim of error on his assertion that he was compelled to wear the jail bracelet in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment. Before addressing these assertions, we note that Brown's first objection and motion for mistrial were premised on the witness's statement identifying the jail bracelet. Only after the trial court denied Brown's motion for mistrial and denied the State's offer to pay for replacing the jail bracelet did Brown object to having to wear it because the witness had identified it. Given these particulars, we think that Brown's two assertions, while interrelated, are actually two distinct claims and are more properly dealt with separately. First, we consider whether the trial court abused its discretion in denying Brown's motion for mistrial premised on the witness's statement identifying the jail bracelet. Then, we address Brown's claim that he was compelled to wear the bracelet in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment.
In reviewing Brown's claim that the trial court erred in denying his motion for mistrial, we are governed by the following standard of review:
Whether to grant or deny a motion for mistrial is a decision left to the sound discretion of the trial court. We will reverse the trial court's ruling only upon an abuse of that discretion. We afford the trial court such deference on appeal because the trial court is in the best position to evaluate the relevant circumstances of an event and its impact on the jury. To prevail on appeal from the denial of a motion for mistrial, the appellant must demonstrate the statement or conduct in question was so prejudicial and inflammatory that he was placed in a position of grave peril to which he should not have been subjected. We determine the gravity of the peril based upon the probable persuasive effect of the misconduct on the jury's decision rather than upon the degree of impropriety of the conduct.
*706 A mistrial is an extreme sanction warranted only when no other cure can be expected to rectify the situation. Reversible error is seldom found when the trial court has admonished the jury to disregard a statement made during the proceedings because a timely and accurate admonition to the jury is presumed to sufficiently protect a defendant's rights and remove any error created by the objectionable statement.
Alvies v. State, 795 N.E.2d 493, 506 (Ind. Ct.App.2003) (citations omitted), trans. denied.[2]
Specifically, Brown claims that the presumption of innocence and the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution were violated after M.C. pointed out that Brown was wearing a jail identification bracelet. "The presumption of innocence, although not articulated in the constitution, is a basic component of a fair trial under our system of criminal justice." Estelle v. Williams, 425 U.S. 501, 503, 96 S. Ct. 1691, 48 L. Ed. 2d 126 (1976). "The right to a fair trial is a fundamental liberty secured by the Fourteenth Amendment." Id.
The State contends that Brown waived this claim by refusing the trial court's offer to give a cautionary jury instruction and that he fails to articulate how an admonishment would not have corrected the problem. We agree. "[A] timely and accurate admonition to the jury is presumed to sufficiently protect a defendant's rights and remove any error created by the objectionable statement." Alvies, 795 N.E.2d at 506. Here, after the witness identified the jail bracelet, defense counsel did not request an admonishment. Instead, he immediately moved for a mistrial. Further, when the trial court offered him the option of a cautionary instruction, he declined. Had defense counsel requested an admonishment, the trial court would have had the opportunity to admonish the jury and presumably cure any error. See id.
Waiver notwithstanding, Brown's claim must fail. We will not reverse the trial court's denial of a motion for mistrial *707 unless the defendant demonstrates that "he was placed in a position of grave peril to which he should not have been subjected." Alvies, 795 N.E.2d at 506. Brown has not made that required demonstration here. The record reveals that defense counsel was not even sure if the jurors heard the witness's reference to the jail bracelet. Even if the jurors had heard the statement, the record is unclear as to whether the jury knew that Brown had to wear it because he was incarcerated. Further, defense counsel asked the trial court to keep the option of an admonishment open in the event that it became apparent that the jurors heard the reference to the "jail armband" and it was "on their minds." Tr. at 125. Defense counsel's decision not to exercise that option suggests that he did not believe that the reference to the jail bracelet had any significant influence on the jurors. Finally, the jail bracelet did not resemble handcuffs or shackles, and we therefore fail to see how its presence implied that Brown was dangerous. Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying Brown's request for a mistrial.
We now turn to Brown's claim that he was compelled to wear the jail bracelet in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment. "The State cannot, consistently with the Fourteenth Amendment, compel an accused to stand trial before a jury while dressed in identifiable prison clothes." French v. State, 778 N.E.2d 816, 821 (Ind.2002) (citing Estelle, 425 U.S at 512, 96 S. Ct. 1691). However, "[t]he failure to object to being tried in prison clothes negates the compulsion necessary to establish a constitutional violation." Id. (citing Estelle, 425 U.S. at 512-13, 96 S. Ct. 1691). The State asserts that Brown did not object to wearing the jail bracelet until M.C. identified it at trial, and therefore Brown has waived this issue. We agree.
The United States Supreme Court's ruling in Estelle, 425 U.S. 501, 96 S. Ct. 1691, is relevant to this issue. In Estelle, the defendant appeared in clothing distinctly marked as prison issue. He made no objection to the trial court concerning his jail attire before trial. The Supreme Court held that, "[n]othing in this record ... warrants a conclusion that [defendant] was compelled to stand trial in jail garb or that there was sufficient reason to excuse the failure to raise the issue before trial." Id. at 512, 96 S. Ct. 1691.
Our supreme court followed Estelle's reasoning in French, 778 N.E.2d 816. There, the defendant appeared at his habitual offender proceeding in bright orange clothing with the word "jail" on the back. He failed to object to wearing the prison garb. Our supreme court held: "if a defendant objects, it is error to require the defendant to appear in jail garb at the habitual offender phase. Here, however, there was no objection and the issue is not preserved." Id. at 821.
Here, Brown failed to object to wearing the jail bracelet before trial. He did not object to the requirement that he wear the bracelet until a witness identified it as jail clothing. For all intents and purposes, Brown invited the error by failing to object in a timely manner.
Even if the trial court erred in overruling Brown's objection to wearing the jail bracelet because it had been identified, we think any error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. See Chapman v. California, 386 U.S. 18, 24, 87 S. Ct. 824, 17 L. Ed. 2d 705 (1968) (holding that "before a federal constitutional error can be held harmless, the court must be able to declare a belief that it was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt."). We reach this conclusion for the same reasons that we determined that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying Brown's *708 motion for mistrial: (1) defense counsel was not even sure that the jurors heard the reference to the jail bracelet; (2) even if the jurors heard the reference, the record is unclear as to whether the jurors knew why Brown was wearing it; (3) defense counsel chose not to request a cautionary instruction indicating that he did not think that the reference was significant; and (4) the jail bracelet does not resemble handcuffs or shackles.
II. Waiver of Constitutional Issues
The State contends that Brown waived his claims challenging the constitutionality of the criminal confinement and identity deception statutes by failing to raise them in a motion to dismiss prior to trial pursuant to Indiana Code Sections 35-34-1-4 and -6. Indiana Code Section 35-34-1-4 provides in pertinent part:
(a) The court may, upon motion of the defendant, dismiss the indictment or information upon any of the following grounds:
(1) The indictment or information, or any count thereof, is defective under section 6 of this chapter.
....
(b) Except as otherwise provided, a motion under this section shall be made no later than:
(1) twenty (20) days if the defendant is charged with a felony ... prior to the omnibus date. A motion made thereafter may be summarily denied if based upon a ground specified in subdivision (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), or (a)(5) of this section. A motion to dismiss based upon a ground specified in subdivision (a)(6), (a)(7), (a)(8), (a)(9), (a)(10), or (a)(11) of this section may be made or renewed at any time before or during trial. A motion to dismiss based upon lack of jurisdiction over the subject matter may be made at any time.
(Emphases added.) Indiana Code Section 35-34-1-6 provides in relevant part that "[a]n indictment or information is defective when ... the statute defining the offense is unconstitutional or otherwise invalid."
The State cites Adams v. State, 804 N.E.2d 1169 (Ind.Ct.App.2004), to support its argument that Brown waived his constitutional challenges. In Adams, a panel of this Court concluded that the defendant's constitutional claim was waived because the defendant failed to raise it in a motion to dismiss prior to trial. The Adams court relied on supreme court precedent in reaching this decision:
Generally, a challenge to the constitutionality of a criminal statute must be raised by a motion to dismiss prior to trial, and the failure to do so waives the issue on appeal. Ind.Code § 35-34-1-4; I.C. § 35-34-1-6; Payne v. State, 484 N.E.2d 16, 18 (Ind.1985); Smith v. State, 727 N.E.2d 763, 766 (Ind.Ct.App. 2000). Here, Adams failed to file a motion to dismiss, and he did not object to the constitutionality of the statute at trial. As a result, Adams may not challenge the constitutionality of the statute for the first time on appeal, and the issue is waived.
Id. at 1172.
Brown argues that he has not waived his constitutional challenges because (1) Indiana Code Section 35-34-1-4(b) permits a trial court to summarily deny an untimely motion, and the trial court declined to exercise that discretion; and (2) the constitutionality of a statute may be raised at any stage of the proceedings. In support of the latter, he cites Vaughn v. State, 782 N.E.2d 417 (Ind.Ct.App.2003), trans. denied. In Vaughn, the defendant was convicted of domestic battery and challenged the constitutionality of the domestic *709 battery statute for the first time on appeal. The State argued that the defendant waived his constitutional challenge by failing to file a motion to dismiss prior to trial. The Vaughn court chose to review the constitutionality of the domestic battery statute because the facts of the case revealed "just how far the words `living as if a spouse' can arguably be stretched in order to convict an individual under the domestic battery statute." Id. at 419. In choosing to review the constitutional claim, the Vaughn court noted that "our Supreme Court has chosen on occasion to address the merits of the constitutional challenges to criminal statutes by acknowledging that while the argument would normally be waived, it may still be proper to address the argument." Id. Further, the Vaughn court quoted our supreme court for the principle that "`the constitutionality of a statute may be raised at any stage of the proceeding including raising the issue sua sponte by this Court.'" Id. (quoting Morse v. State, 593 N.E.2d 194, 197 (Ind. 1992)).
In reviewing the parties' arguments, we first observe that this Court has applied the waiver doctrine and declined to review a constitutional challenge on its merits on many occasions. See, e.g., Allen v. State, 798 N.E.2d 490, 502 (Ind.Ct.App.2003); Wiggins v. State, 727 N.E.2d 1, 5 (Ind.Ct. App.2000), trans. denied; Newton v. State, 456 N.E.2d 736, 739 (Ind.Ct.App.1983); Marchand v. State, 435 N.E.2d 284, 287 (Ind.Ct.App.1982); Salrin v. State, 419 N.E.2d 1351, 1354 (Ind.Ct.App.1981). In other cases, both this Court and our supreme court have addressed the merits of a constitutional challenge after recognizing that the issue was waived. See, e.g., Payne v. State, 484 N.E.2d 16, 18 (Ind. 1985); Rhinehardt v. State, 477 N.E.2d 89, 93 (Ind.1985), criticized on other grounds by Stout v. State, 528 N.E.2d 476 (Ind. 1988); Szpunar v. State, 783 N.E.2d 1213, 1219 (Ind.Ct.App.2003); Reed v. State, 720 N.E.2d 431, 433 (Ind.Ct.App.1999), trans. denied (2000); Vaillancourt v. State, 695 N.E.2d 606, 610 (Ind.Ct.App.1998), trans. denied.
We think it proper to address Brown's claims on the merits. Unlike Adams, Brown raised his constitutional claim before sentencing and not for the first time on appeal. The trial court declined to find that Brown's claim was waived by its being untimely and considered the claim on its merits. The accused had a fair opportunity to present the issue, the prosecutor and attorney general both received notice and responded to the motion at the hearing, and we have an adequate foundation for addressing the issue. We also think that this case, like Vaughn, involves a unique set of facts, which demonstrates that certain terms used in the statute to define criminal confinement are subject to widely varying interpretation. Thus, this is a question of great public interest. Accordingly, we address the merits of Brown's claims challenging the constitutionality of the criminal confinement statute.
III. VaguenessCriminal Confinement Statute
Brown contends that the criminal confinement statute, Indiana Code Section 35-42-3-3, is unconstitutionally vague as applied to him, where he "merely lied about a radio contest that led individuals to leave their workplace to go to his home." Appellant's Br. at 12. The criminal confinement statute provides in relevant part:
(a) A person who knowingly or intentionally:
(1) confines another person without the other person's consent; or
(2) removes another person, by fraud, enticement, force, or threat of force, from one (1) place to another; *710 commits criminal confinement . . . a Class D felony.
Ind.Code § 35-42-3-3. Brown was charged with knowingly, by fraud and/or enticement, removing three men from their places of employment to his home.
Whether a statute is constitutional is a question of law that we review de novo. State v. Moss-Dwyer, 686 N.E.2d 109, 110 (Ind.1997).
When considering the constitutionality of a statute, we begin with the presumption of constitutional validity, and therefore the party challenging the statute labors under a heavy burden to show that the statute is unconstitutional. All reasonable doubts must be resolved in favor of the statute's constitutionality.
A statute will not be found unconstitutionally vague if individuals of ordinary intelligence would comprehend it adequately to inform them of the proscribed conduct. The statute need only inform the individual of the generally proscribed conduct and need not list with exactitude each item of prohibited conduct.
A statute will only be found to be void for vagueness if it is vague as applied to the precise facts and circumstances of each case. Finally, a statute is not necessarily vague even if a party can demonstrate that the legislature could have provided more precise language.
Szpunar, 783 N.E.2d at 1219 (citations and quotation marks omitted). "[T]he void for vagueness doctrine requires that a penal statute define the criminal offense with sufficient definiteness that ordinary people can understand what conduct is prohibited and in a manner that does not encourage arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement." Healthscript, Inc. v. State, 770 N.E.2d 810, 815-16 (Ind.2002). "[T]here must be something in a criminal statute to indicate where the line is to be drawn between trivial and substantial things so that erratic arrests and convictions for trivial acts and omissions will not occur." State v. Downey, 476 N.E.2d 121, 123 (Ind. 1985).[3]
The facts presented by the State to establish that Brown knowingly, by fraud and/or enticement, removed three men from one place to another are that (1) Brown called each man and told them that he was from 93.1 Radio Now, which was having a contest to win a car or cash, but Brown was not and had never been an agent, representative, or employee of Radio Now, and there was no such contest; and (2) each man left his place of employment and drove himself to Brown's house based on his statements.
*711 Specifically, Brown argues that the criminal confinement statute is unconstitutionally vague because the key words in the statutefraud, enticement, and removeare not defined by the statute, and thus the statute fails to provide adequate notice and does not establish minimal guidelines to govern law enforcement, prosecutors, and juries. Specifically, he argues that the statute does not provide notice to persons of ordinary intelligence that devising a fake radio contest, in which persons drive themselves to someone's house and no force is used to make them enter the home or prevent their exit, constitutes criminal confinement.
In support of his argument, Brown directs our attention to the definitions of the termsfraud, enticement, and remove provided by a dictionary an ordinary person would use. Fraud is "(1) A deception deliberately practiced in order to secure unfair or unlawful gain. (2) A piece of trickery; a trick. (3)(a) One that defrauds; a cheat. (b) One who assumes a false pose; an impostor." Dictionary.com, http://dictionary.reference.com/search?q=fraud (last visited May 1, 2006). To entice means "[t]o attract by arousing hope or desire; lure: The promise of higher pay enticed me into the new job." Dictionary.com, http://dictionary.reference.com/search?q=entice (last visited May 1, 2006). Remove means "[t]o move from a place or position occupied: removed the cups from the table." Dictionary.com, http://dictionary.reference.com/search?q=remove (last visited May 1, 2006).
The State argues that the statute's definition of criminal confinement distinguishes between conduct that is trivial, such as a lie or promise, from conduct that is substantial, such as fraud or enticement, and that Brown did not commit a trivial lie. In support of its argument, the State relies upon Black's Law Dictionary. Fraud is defined as "[a] knowing misrepresentation of the truth or concealment of a material fact to induce another to act to his or her detriment." BLACK'S LAW DICTIONARY 685 (8th ed.2004). A lie is merely "[t]o tell an untruth." Id. at 940. Enticement is "[t]he act or an instance of wrongfully soliciting or luring a person to do something." Id. at 573. A promise is "a person's assurance that the person will or will not do something." Id. at 1249.
We agree with Brown that the ordinary understanding of the terms fraud and enticement is so broad that there is no discernible standard between lawful and unlawful conduct.[4] The same is true with respect to the definitions in Black's Law Dictionary. In Black's definition of fraud, the words "to act to his or her detriment" could have significantly different meanings to different people. Likewise, the word "wrongfully," used in Black's definition of enticement, is subject to a multitude of interpretations. By way of illustration, we note that many activities frequently engaged in by members of society would constitute criminal confinement pursuant to these terms. For example, asking a person to attend a quiet dinner that is actually a surprise birthday party could constitute removal of a person by fraud or enticement because some people do not enjoy surprise parties and might therefore think the lie told to lure them to the party was wrongful. Also, a person participating in a dating service who misrepresents themselves and successfully persuades another person to meet him or her could be subject to a criminal confinement conviction. The person who was misled by the *712 misrepresentation might think that he or she had acted to his or her detriment.
During oral argument, the State asserted that an evil motive is inherently an element of a crime, citing Kinney v. State, 404 N.E.2d 49 (Ind.Ct.App.1980). First, we fail to discern how the insertion of "evil motive" into the criminal confinement statute would provide sufficient definiteness of the proscribed conduct. "Evil motive" is an ambiguous term, and its meaning would vary from person to person. Thus, even if an "evil motive" were required, we do not think that individuals of ordinary intelligence would be adequately informed that conduct such as Brown's is prohibited by the statute. Further, requiring an "evil motive" would not prevent arbitrary enforcement by police, prosecutors, and juries because its interpretation is so variable.
Second, the State's assertion is a misstatement of Kinney's holding. In Kinney, the defendant claimed that the harassment statute, Indiana Code Section 35-45-2-2 (Burns 1979 Repl.), was unconstitutionally vague. In relevant part, the harassment statute read as follows: "Harassment. (a) A person who, with intent to harass, annoy, or alarm another person but with no intent of legitimate communication (1) Makes a telephone call, whether or not a conversation ensues[.]" Id. at 51. In rejecting the defendant's constitutional challenge, we concluded that the specific intent required by the language of the statute, "to harass, annoy, or alarm another person but with no intent of legitimate communication," prevented the statute from being unconstitutionally vague. In reaching this conclusion, we stated:
"... The Court, indeed, has recognized that the requirement of a specific intent to do a prohibited act may avoid those consequences to the accused which may otherwise render a vague or indefinite statute invalid. The constitutional vice in such a statute is the essential injustice to the accused of placing him on trial for an offense, the nature of which the statute does not define and hence of which it gives no warning.... But where the punishment imposed is only for an act knowingly done with the purpose of doing that which the statute prohibits, the accused cannot be said to suffer from lack of warning or knowledge that the act which he does is a violation of law."
Id. (quoting Screws v. United States, 325 U.S. 91, 101-102, 65 S. Ct. 1031, 89 L. Ed. 1495 (1945) (emphasis added). In other words, specific intent was expressly included as an element of the harassment statute, and therefore the statute provided adequate notice of the prohibited conduct.
Here, we note, the criminal confinement statute does not expressly require a specific intent as an element of the crime. Even under Black's definition of fraud and enticement, a specific intent is not included. The best that can be said is that fraud may imply a bad motive, but enticement is completely devoid of such a factor.
We also think that Vaughn, 782 N.E.2d 417, is helpful in determining whether the criminal confinement statute is unconstitutionally vague. The Vaughn court held that the domestic battery statute was unconstitutionally vague because "living as if a spouse" may be based on many things, and therefore different people could interpret the language differently. Id. at 419. Here, as in Vaughn, different people may interpret the undefined terms in the criminal confinement statutefraud and enticementdifferently. We conclude that the criminal confinement statute does not provide notice to persons of ordinary intelligence that devising a fake radio contest, in which persons drive themselves to some-one's *713 house and no force is used to make them enter the home or prevent their exit, constitutes criminal confinement and that the terms are not defined in a manner to avoid arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement.[5] Therefore, the criminal confinement statute is unconstitutionally vague as applied to Brown. We reverse Brown's criminal confinement convictions.[6]
IV. VaguenessIdentity Deception Statute
Brown contends that the identity deception statute, Indiana Code Section 35-43-5-3.5, is unconstitutionally vague as applied to him where he merely lied about working for or being a fictitious person at 93.1 Radio Now. Brown was charged with three counts of identity deception as follows:
Richard Carlos Brown, on or about July 29, 2004, did knowingly use the identifying information of another person, namely: Radio Now (93.1), without the other person's consent and with the intent to harm or defraud another person, that is [J.M., M.C., A.H.], and/or profess to be another person, that is: an agent of Radio Now (93.1).
Appellant's App. at 22-24. The identity deception statute provides in pertinent part:
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b), a person who knowingly or intentionally obtains, possesses, transfers, or uses the identifying information of another person:
(1) without the other person's consent; and
(2) with intent to:
(A) harm or defraud another person;... or
(C) profess to be another person; commits identity deception, a Class D felony.
....
(c) It is not a defense in a prosecution under subsection (a) that no person was harmed or defrauded.
Ind.Code § 35-43-5-3.5 (emphases added). At the time of Brown's offenses, "identifying information" was defined as "information that identifies an individual, including an individual's: (1) name, address, date of birth, place of employment, employer identification number, mother's maiden name, Social Security number, or any identification number issued by a governmental entity[.]" Ind.Code § 35-43-5-1(h) (now XX-XX-X-X(i)) (Emphasis added). We observe that the term "including" indicates that the list of identifying information provided by the statute is not exclusive. "Person," means "a human being, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, unincorporated association, or governmental entity." Ind.Code § 35-41-1-22.
Brown asserts that persons of ordinary intelligence would not be on notice that pretending to be a radio disc jockey constitutes identity deception and that upholding the constitutionality of the statute as applied to the facts of this case creates an enormous potential for erratic and arbitrary enforcement. Specifically, he claims that he was not aware of, nor did he use, any "identifying information" as defined by *714 Indiana Code Section 35-43-5-1(h). The State argues that there is no ambiguity or risk of arbitrary enforcement in the identity deception statute as applied to Brown and that he knew and used the unique identifying information of a corporation and, in so doing, committed identity deception. We agree with the State.
"Person" includes a corporation. I.C. § 35-41-1-22. "Radio Now" and "93.1" constitute information that identifies an existing Indianapolis corporation. Brown knowingly used the name and call number of the radio station without its consent to harm or defraud three men by luring them to his home to undress in front of him as part of a fictitious radio contest.
Brown asserts that ordinary people associate identity deception with the misuse of credit data. Even if that is true, it does not necessarily lead to the conclusion that the identity deception statute applies only to the misuse of credit data and that ordinary people understand it to be so limited. Brown also contends that the statute is so ambiguous that persons dressing up as someone else on Halloween or providing a false name at a bar are committing identity deception. We think that the statute is written in a manner that excludes such conduct in that it requires the "intent to harm or defraud another person." I.C. § 35-43-5-3.5; see Kinney, 404 N.E.2d at 51. Further, contrary to Brown's assertion, his conduct is not comparable to that of a person dressing up in a Halloween costume. He was not merely pretending to be a disc jockey for fun, he was purporting to be an agent of an actual radio station by using its identifying information without its consent in order to lure men to his house to undress in front of him. We conclude that the identity deception statute is defined with sufficient definiteness to adequately inform persons of ordinary intelligence that knowingly using the identifying information of a corporation, such as a radio station, without its consent and with intent to harm or defraud another person constitutes identity deception. We further conclude that it provides satisfactory guidelines to police, prosecutors, and juries to avoid arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement. Accordingly, the identity deception statute is not unconstitutionally vague as applied to Brown.
V. Sufficiency of the Evidence Identity Deception Verdict
Brown contends that there is insufficient evidence to support the jury's verdict that he is guilty of three counts of identity deception.[7]
Our standard of review for sufficiency claims is well settled. We do not reweigh evidence or assess the credibility of witnesses. Rather, we look to the evidence and reasonable inferences drawn therefrom that support the verdict and will affirm the conviction if there is probative evidence from which a reasonable jury could have found the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
O'Connell v. State, 742 N.E.2d 943, 949 (Ind.2001) (citation omitted). To convict Brown as charged, the State had to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that he knowingly used the identifying information of another person without the other person's consent and with the intent to (1) harm or defraud another person and/or (2) profess to be another person.
*715 The State presented evidence that Brown called each man and claimed to be from "the 93.1 radio station" or "Radio Now." Brown contends that by simply claiming to be an agent of Radio Now (93.1), he did not use "the identifying information" of another "person," as that term is used in the identity deception statute, and therefore the State failed to prove either of these elements beyond a reasonable doubt. In particular, he contends that "person" as used in the identity deception statute refers only to a human being and that he never claimed to be another actual human being.
Brown concedes that Indiana Code Section 35-41-1-22 broadly defines "person" as a human being, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, unincorporated association, or governmental entity. Appellant's Br. at 36. However, he asserts that "person" must be considered in conjunction with the definition of "identifying information." He correctly notes that the definition of "identifying information" uses the word "individual" three times and never makes reference to the word "person." He asserts that an "individual" in the context of social security and credit card numbers equates only to a real personnot a made-up name or a real radio station. Therefore, according to Brown, "person" as it is used in the identity deception statute must be limited to a human being. We disagree.
While the identity deception statute and the identifying information statute in effect at the time Brown committed the crimes contain an unfortunate mixture of the terms "person" and "individual," we do not agree with Brown's conclusion that only a human being may be the victim of identity deception. "Person" is used in the identity deception statute multiple times in reference to the victim: "obtains, possesses, transfers, or uses the identifying information of another person without the other person's consent ... to profess to be another person . . . It is not a defense . . . that no person was harmed or defrauded." "Person" is unambiguously defined to include a corporation under Title 35 of the Indiana Code, which governs criminal law. I.C. § 35-41-1-22.[8] Brown's narrow interpretation of the statute would render its language meaningless in that its multiple references to "person" would be mere surplusage. As a practical matter, corporations require identity protection for the same reasons that human beings do, to safeguard their privacy, financial security, goodwill, reputation, etc. We see no evidence that the legislature excluded corporations, or any of the other entities included within the definition of "person" in Indiana Code Section 35-41-1-22, from victimization under the identity deception statute.
We now address Brown's contention that there was insufficient evidence that he used "identifying information." As we previously observed, the list provided by Indiana Code Section 35-43-5-1(h) is not exclusive. Radio Now is the station's name and 93.1 is the station's call number. *716 We think that the name and call number of a radio station are its "identifying information." We conclude that there was sufficient evidence to support the jury's verdict that Brown is guilty of three counts of identity deception. We therefore remand so that the trial court may enter judgment of conviction thereon and resentence Brown as appropriate.[9]
VI. Imposition of Jury Fee
Brown contends that the $400 jury fee violates both the Indiana Code and the Due Process Clause of the state and federal constitutions. In Indiana, criminal defendants are guaranteed the right to a trial by jury through Article 1, Section 13 of the Indiana Constitution and the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution. Gooch v. State, 685 N.E.2d 152, 155 (Ind.Ct.App.1997).
Brown correctly notes that we have held that without statutory authority, the trial court has no power to assess jury costs. See id. at 155; Cranor v. State, 699 N.E.2d 284, 287 (Ind.Ct.App.1998). However, the legislature has now authorized such an assessment. Indiana Code Section 33-37-5-19(a) provides, "The clerk shall collect a jury fee of two dollars ($2) in each action in which a defendant is found to have committed a crime, violated a statute defining an infraction, or violated an ordinance of a municipal corporation." The State concedes that the trial court's assessment of a $400 jury fee exceeded its statutory authority. We therefore affirm the imposition of the jury fee but remand for entry of a two-dollar jury fee. Upon remand, the trial court may reconsider whether to waive the fee based on a determination of Brown's indigency.
Conclusion
In summary, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying Brown's motion for mistrial. The criminal confinement statute is unconstitutionally vague as applied to Brown, and we therefore reverse those convictions. The identity deception statute is not unconstitutionally vague as applied to Brown. There was sufficient evidence to support Brown's guilty verdicts for three counts of identity deception. We remand for judgment of conviction to be entered for the identity deception guilty verdicts and for resentencing. Finally, the trial court had statutory authority to impose jury costs, but the $400 fee exceeded its statutory authority of two dollars. Consequently, we remand for entry of a two-dollar jury fee.
Affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded.
FRIEDLANDER, J., and MAY, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  We held oral argument in Indianapolis on April 25, 2006. We thank counsel for their presentations.
[2]  In a footnote, Brown asserts that Indiana's standard of review for a mistrial "cannot be squared" with that enunciated by the United States Supreme Court. Appellant's Br. at 26 n. 17. In support, he cites Estelle v. Williams, 425 U.S. 501, 96 S. Ct. 1691, 48 L. Ed. 2d 126 (1976), for the principle that "[t]he Supreme Court required the State to demonstrate the harmlessness of an error beyond a reasonable doubt." Id. (citing Estelle, 425 U.S. at 512-13, 96 S. Ct. 1691). We note that the principle he asserts (which can be found at 425 U.S. at 506, 96 S. Ct. 1691) was not the holding of that case. In Estelle, the Supreme Court concluded that there was no constitutional violation, and therefore it did not need to address whether any reversible error was committed. However, in Chapman v. California, 386 U.S. 18, 87 S. Ct. 824, 17 L. Ed. 2d 705 (1968), which Brown cites in passing, the Supreme Court held that "before a federal constitutional error can be held harmless, the court must be able to declare a belief that it was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt." Id. at 24, 87 S. Ct. 824. Inasmuch as Brown raised this issue in a footnote and did not provide a thorough analysis for our review, he has waived this issue. See Ind. Appellate Rule 46(A)(8)(a) ("The argument must contain the contentions of the appellant on the issues presented, supported by cogent reasoning. Each contention must be supported by citations to the authorities, statutes, and the Appendix or parts of the Record on Appeal relied on...."); Davis v. State, 835 N.E.2d 1102, 1113 (Ind.Ct.App.2005) ("A party waives an issue where the party fails to develop a cogent argument or provide adequate citation to authority and portions of the record."), trans. denied (2006). Consequently, we do not address this issue. We note, however, that even if we applied the standard advocated by Brown, we would conclude that under these particular circumstances, any error that the trial court may have committed in denying Brown's motion for mistrial based upon the identification of the jail bracelet was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
[3]  In McIntosh v. State, 638 N.E.2d 1269 (Ind. Ct.App.1994), trans. denied, this Court rejected a vagueness challenge to the criminal confinement statute. Brown contends, the State does not dispute, and we agree, that McIntosh is inapposite. In that case, McIntosh was involved in a conflict with his former girlfriend and her current boyfriend at her residence. His former girlfriend, Ward, had taken her baby to her car, but the car would not start. McIntosh grabbed the baby from the car and stated, "I have your kid by his feet and I am going to drop him on his head." Id. at 1271. Ward ran to a neighbor's home to call the police. McIntosh and his wife drove to the neighbor's house, and McIntosh's wife handed the baby to Ward. McIntosh was charged with and convicted of knowingly or intentionally removing the baby by fraud, enticement, force or threat of force, from one place to another. On appeal, he argued that even if the jury had not believed his version of the facts, i.e., that he was merely returning Ward's abandoned child to her, the jury could not have convicted him under the statute. The McIntosh court rejected his argument, concluding that the statute was "sufficiently specific that no person of ordinary intelligence would be misled into thinking that a person returning an abandoned child to its parent was committing criminal confinement." Id. at 1276-77.
[4]  We think the term "remove" is sufficiently understood by persons of ordinary intelligence so as not to impair the constitutionality of the criminal confinement statute.
[5]  While J.M. testified that the door was locked when he initially tried to leave, the State did not allege, nor was any evidence presented to establish, that Brown attempted to prevent J.M. from unlocking the door and leaving. The record is also unclear as to whether the door locked automatically.
[6]  Consequently, we need not address Brown's claims that the criminal confinement statute is unconstitutionally overbroad, that there was insufficient evidence to support his conviction for criminal confinement, or whether the sentence is inappropriate in light of the nature of the offenses and his character.
[7]  While both Brown and the State refer to Brown's identity deception "convictions," the trial court merged the identity deception counts with the criminal confinement counts and did not enter judgment of conviction on the identity deception verdicts. Appellant's App. at 12, 179.
[8]  In fact, "person" is repeatedly defined throughout the Indiana Code to include corporations. See Ind.Code § 22-2-2-3 (minimum wage law); Ind.Code § 16-18-2-274(a) (health provisions); Ind.Code § 4-2-6-1(11) (ethics and conflicts of interest for state officers); Ind.Code § 5-14-1.5-2(k) (public records and meetings); Ind.Code § 5-16-8-1 (steel procurement for public works); Ind. Code § 8-1-22.5-1(e) (utilities: gas pipeline safety); Ind.Code § 8-21-3-1(12) (aeronautics: aircraft finance); Ind.Code § 9-13-2-124 (motor vehicles); Ind.Code § 13-29-1-2(p) (environment: low-level radioactive waste); Ind.Code § 14-8-2-202(d) (natural resources department); Ind.Code § 22-9-1-3 (labor and industrial safety: civil rights); Ind. Code § 22-12-1-18 (labor and industrial safety: fire safety and building equipment).
[9]  Accordingly, we need not address Brown's claim that the sentence for identity deception is unconstitutionally disproportionate as compared to the sentence for impersonation of a public servant.