=== CASE 9740328 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:32:29.737798+00 ===

T. E. Brennan, J.
(concurring). We granted leave in this casé to review the validity of the procedures of photographic identification employed by the police.
My Brother’s opinion concludes:
"Because of this evidence of the victim’s knowledge before the suggestion took place viewed in combination with her previous acquaintance with defendant, we are satisfied that her in-court identification was accurate in *221spite of the employment of grossly suggestive procedures calculated (albeit unintentionally) to prompt an identification of whatever Indian was pictured.”
Despite careful study, I can see no difference between that conclusion and the conclusion reached by the learned judge of the Court of Appeals:
"An examination of the record in the present case discloses that while the procedures followed in the photographic display were suggestive, they were not impermissibly so in light of complainant’s prior opportunities to view defendant.”
This, then, is the rule of law in the case, both in the Court of Appeals and in this Court.
Where the victim was acquainted with her assailant, and described him to the police, and was in critical condition in the hospital, it was not error to permit an in-court identification of the defendant to be made, despite evidence that the defendant was the only Indian among six persons whose photographs were shown to the victim at the hospital.
The balance of my Brother’s opinion, though scholarly and exhaustive, neither adds nor detracts from the rule of law in the case.
If a Court is to avoid burdening the profession with confusing seriatim opinions, it is necessary for the Justices to ingest much unpalatable dicta. Accordingly, I have signed niy Brother’s opinion. But, if our opinions are to be of any value as precedent, they should be limited to the enunciation of those rules of law which are decisional, related to the facts in the case before us, and supportive of the result arrived at.
Levin and M. S. Coleman, JJ., did not sit in this case.

=== CASE 2222949 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:50.718878+00 ===

44 Mich. App. 508 (1973)
205 N.W.2d 575
HOLLOWAY CONSTRUCTION CO.
v.
STATE OF MICHIGAN.
Docket No. 10248.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided February 20, 1973.
Dykema, Gossett, Spencer, Goodnow & Trigg (by Thomas L. Munson and Sidney L. Frank) and Meisner & Meisner, for plaintiff.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Robert A. Derengoski, Solicitor General, and Louis J. Caruso, Karl S. Vasiloff, Thomas J. Giachino, and James D. Mueller, Assistants Attorney General, for defendant.
*510 Before: J.H. GILLIS, P.J., and T.M. BURNS and TARGONSKI,[*] JJ.
Leave to appeal denied, 390 Mich ___.
TARGONSKI, J.
We have here an appeal from the Court of Claims which denied plaintiff's claim in the amount of $1,250,000 for "extra work" beyond the contract bid price of $3,676,378.38 under a highway construction contract and the further appeal from the finding of the Court of Claims allowing counterclaim I lodged by the defendants against the plaintiff. We also have a cross-appeal from the findings of the Court of Claims denying counterclaims II through VII which defendants had filed against the plaintiff.
On the first issue, the matter of the claim filed by the plaintiff, the parties stipulated and the court concurred that the issue would be limited to a question of liability and if there was a determination of liability the item of damages would be considered in a separate trial. The trial court never reached this issue as it made a finding of no liability from which an appeal has been taken. The record below and the briefs submitted are, however, replete with items concerning damages and litigation of damages. We limit our consideration, however, only to the item of liability as stipulated by the parties and ordered by the trial court.
On June 1, 1960, plaintiff entered into a written contract with defendant to construct for the defendant 7.873 miles of Interstate Highway 94 in Berrien County, being one of the final sections necessary to complete I-94 as a continuous limited-access span across the state from its east to its west boundary. The contract, among other things, *511 provided for four borrow pits, numbered 1 thru 4, from which part of the earth for the construction of the right-of-way, ramps, and service roads would be obtained. The remainder of the earth for these purposes was to be obtained by cutting and filling operations within the right-of-way. One of the other provisions of the contract was to the effect that plaintiff would be paid for earth excavation at the rate of $.29 per cubic yard, and for overhaul (the cost to transport earth beyond 1,000 feet) at $.05 per compensated cubic-yard mile.
The bid proposal indicated that a portion of the right-of-way, numbered parcel 437, and an easement for a service road, numbered parcel 437E, had been secured prior to the signing of the contract. This was a representation made by the defendant and plaintiff relied on the representation in preparing its bid. The plans indicated that borrow pit number 4 was available at the time the contract was signed. This likewise was a representation made by the defendant and plaintiff relied on the same in the preparation of its bid which formed the basis for the contract between the parties.
Although bids were let on April 27, 1960, the contract was not signed until June 1, 1960. Rough grading under the contract was to commence not later than August 1, 1960, and to be completed not later than December 10, 1960. The parties agree that rough grading was, in fact, commenced June 7, 1960, and completed in early May, 1961.
Plaintiff alleges that contrary to the representations made in the bid proposal upon which plaintiff relied, the defendants did not have the sections of right-of-way nor borrow pit number 4 available at the time the proposals were made nor even at the time the contract between the parties was *512 signed. Defendants concede the accuracy of these representations by the plaintiff. Plaintiff further claims that because of defendant's failure to make available borrow pit number 4, it was forced to use other borrow pits, numbers 6, 7, 8, 11, and 3A, which were obtained after construction started, and recourse to which, together with the delay in securing them, increased plaintiff's cost over the contract price by $1,250,000. Plaintiff's action was for this amount.
Defendant, on the other hand, claims that plaintiff's increased cost, if any, was not due to the unavailability of borrow pit number 4 and the delay in securing replacement borrow pits, but was rather due to the plaintiff's diverting men and equipment to other jobs, and providing insufficient men and equipment and inadequate equipment for this job, and to plaintiff's inability to cope with the problem of operating in dune sand.
It is interesting to note that borrow pit number 4 was never secured. Borrow pit number 3 was never used and, in fact, was released to its owner on January 20, 1961. The release of borrow pit number 3 to its owners was part of a package deal whereby defendants secured parcels number 437 and 437E for the right-of-way on January 20, 1961, together with borrow pit number 3A. There is no dispute between the parties that the intent in acquiring borrow pit number 3A was to provide from one location all of the earth borrow which the plans contemplated would have come from borrow pits number 3 and 4. Borrow pit 3A provided approximately 299,000 cubic yards of earth for rough grading which under the terms of the contract between the parties was to have been completed upwards of one month prior to the time that borrow pit 3A was acquired. Despite all of *513 this, the biweekly progress reports prepared by the state engineers which were admitted as one of the almost 100 exhibits in the trial showed plaintiffs on schedule as of January 13, 1961. The delays apparently stemmed from unanticipated weather conditions which created problems with respect to the use of borrow pit 3A after that date.
Borrow pit number 3A was located 4,000 feet west of the right-of-way station at a point referred to on the plans as Station 849. It had no existing haul road and the plaintiff built one to it. This pit contained a minimum of one million cubic yards of dune sand. Plaintiff commenced hauling out of pit 3A in early February, 1961, and by the last week of that month had removed approximately 240,000 cubic yards of earth, at which time an early thaw and rains made the haul road impassable and operations out of that pit ceased temporarily on February 23, 1961. These facts with reference to this borrow pit are not disputed by the parties. After this shutdown, substitute borrow pits farther removed were secured and used. Certain other borrow pits were owned by the defendant at the time the contract was signed. These together with those subsequently acquired were used when attempts to secure pit number 4 were abandoned. Pit number 4 was adjacent to the right-of-way.
Plaintiff originally commenced operations at the north end of the project as contemplated. When pit number 4 was not available, defendant asked plaintiff to move its operations to the south end of the project while attempts to secure pit number 4 continued. Plaintiff contends that this seriously impaired its multiple-operation concept and destroyed flexibility, both of which were important in plaintiff's capacity to meet the deadlines set in the contract and to operate within the framework of the bid proposal.
*514 The trial court found that there were 500,000 cubic yards of material available from pit number 4, that being the estimate of the amount of material as presented in the bid proposal. The proofs, however, do not justify the conclusion by the trial court that this was the upper limit of the material available from pit number 4. In fact, the defendant's witnesses established that there were 700,000 cubic yards or more of the material available from that pit. In fact, there was some testimony to the effect that with certain types of operation it may have been conceivable to secure even upwards of 800,000 cubic yards from that pit.
The complaint in this case was filed July 10, 1963. The record in this case contains more than 80 calendar entries, approximately 100 exhibits with 10 volumes of transcript covering 12 trial days and over 7 years of litigation before 2 Court of Claims judges. Moreover, the appeal in the principal case and that for the counterclaims is set out in 5 volumes of briefs totaling in excess of 238 pages raising 17 claims of error. For purposes of handling such a vast mountain of material, we will consider it in three sections. First, we will consider the plaintiff's appeal from the finding of no liability on the original complaint. Secondly, we will study the appeal from a finding adverse to the plaintiff on defendant's counterclaim I. Lastly, we will consider the defendant's cross-appeal from the dismissal of counterclaims II thru VII.
Our first consideration here is the question of the defendant's liability on the plaintiff's original complaint. All of the parties and the Court of Claims were in agreement that the defendant highway department did not have the right of entry nor ownership of parcels 437 and 437E which constituted part of the right-of-way and a *515 portion of the service road at an interchange. It is also agreed by all concerned that the highway department at the time of the signing of the contract did not have the right of access to borrow pit number 4. The highway department knew these things at the time that their bid proposal was submitted and the contracts signed by the parties. However, this shortcoming as to right-of-way and borrow pit was not disclosed to the plaintiff until it had its men and equipment out in the field and had started operations at the north end of the project as contemplated by the agreement between the parties. We will first consider the authorities which have been cited by the plaintiff as controlling of the fact situation in this cause.
The first such authority is Hersey Gravel Co v State Highway Department, 305 Mich 333 (1943). In that case, the plaintiff obtained plans and specifications from the highway department in connection with an advertisement for bids for the construction of 5.17 miles of highway on US-41 and M-28 in Baraga County. The blueprints which he examined contained notations of soil conditions upon which plaintiff claimed his company placed its bid. Plaintiff claimed that if the material encountered had been of the character indicated by the drawings, the company would have been able to complete the work at the contract price and would have made a reasonable profit. The material encountered, however, according to plaintiff, was not the kind indicated in the drawings and directly and impliedly represented to be, but of a kind vastly more difficult and more expensive to move so that the cost of completing the work of the contract was $59,622.27 in excess of the cost anticipated. The state had taken test borings in the area of the contract and plaintiff claimed that *516 the soil conditions were of a different character from those indicated on the plans. The state maintained that the material encountered in that case was not more difficult and expensive to handle than that described in the plans, and further that despite the notations on the plans, the contractor should have been aware of the difficult and rocky nature of the terrain because of the outcroppings of ledge rock and boulder formation readily discernible to a prospective bidder. The state admitted that the work had progressed slowly but charged that this was due to dilatory methods employed by the contractor and its lack of good enough equipment. Further, the state claimed that if the contractor's representative had made the proper kind of investigation, the exact nature of the soil could have been ascertained and its bid made accordingly.
The trial judge in Hersey, supra, held that the contractor was entitled to rely upon the contract, blueprints, plans, and specifications prepared by the state and upon the engineering practice in that connection. He further stated it was the duty of public authorities, when preparing proposals, to provide all available information and data in unmistakable and clear-cut terms. The trial judge absolved the highway department of any bad faith but held that so far as the excavations along the length of the highway were concerned there was a warranty in connection with the nature of the subsoil and that this warranty had been breached because of a misstatement of the conditions actually existing. The state claimed that the notations on the plans were for information only and did not relieve the bidder of its responsibility to satisfy itself by examining the site of the proposed work as to the actual soil conditions. In that case, the *517 contractor also cross-appealed from the trial court's refusal to allow its claim in connection with material excavated from borrow pits. The state argued that plaintiff's acceptance of payment of the contract price was approval of the final estimate of extras, and acceptance of payment therefor constituted a waiver and barred further recovery. The findings of the trial court were affirmed to the end that the bidder could rely on the state's representations and that the state had an obligation to make full disclosure of its findings with respect to soil conditions where tests had been made.
The second case cited as authority on the issue is W H Knapp Co v State Highway Department, 311 Mich 186 (1945). That case involved a construction contract for 7.532 miles of highway grading and drainage structures in Chippewa and Mackinac Counties. The state had made an examination and survey of the route of the proposed highway. This information was in the office of the State Highway Commissioner but was not shown to the contractor nor set forth in full detail in the specifications. The Court stated, p 199, "[w]e can heartily commend the engineers for their willingness to make a good bargain for the state, but their duty called upon them to set forth in the specifications, descriptive language which would not mislead a bidder. * * * [P]laintiff company was misled by the specifications".
The third case cited is Valentini v City of Adrian, 347 Mich 530 (1956). In that case a sewer contractor brought suit against the defendant city for damages claimed to have been caused by the excessive cost of constructing a sewer for the city on account of the city misrepresenting the character of subsoil conditions, known to the defendant *518 city; namely, quicksand and excessive water. This resulted in a low construction bid and the project was delayed because of unexpected subsoil conditions which greatly increased the cost of constructing this sewer. The Court in affirming the verdict quoted favorably from the opinion of the trial court in Knapp as follows:
"`The court concludes that the State highway department had information at hand relative to the nature and composition of the subsoil which it had neglected to furnish the bidders upon this project; and that the information supplied was of such a nature that only a highly trained expert in soil engineering would have placed the interpretation thereon that defendant claimed it was entitled to. The court finds it was a clear legal duty of the department to furnish all available information on this subject in a form and in a manner that would apprise the prospective bidders of the nature of the difficulties to be encountered and in terms that would be readily understood by the average * * * contractor. Under the record I find that it has not done this and that claimant is entitled to an award of damages.'" Valentini, supra, at 539-540.
Pat J Murphy, Inc v Drummond Dolomite, Inc, 232 F Supp 509 (ED Wis, 1964), was an action for damages for loss sustained in construction of a road and involved an interpretation of Michigan law. From its exploration for further dolomite deposits on the island, the owner granted information as to the nature of the overburden generally in the areas explored which included some core-drilling sites and high elevations near the haul road right-of-way. The owner knew that it had experienced difficulty in stripping overburden; it understood that the blue-gray was most difficult to excavate; and it knew that it had drilled and blasted in areas where overburden was encountered in depth, including some areas at the east *519 face of the old quarry. The owner failed to disclose this information to the contractor.
The court in its findings stated:
"It is the finding of the court that under the circumstances of this case, the owner's representations to the contractor and owner's conduct in conducting a tour of the site constitute a failure to disclose material information concerning extraordinary subsoil conditions of the haul road site, which information was within the knowledge and experience of the owner. Further, this failure to disclose, together with the false representations made by the owner orally and in specifications, misled the contractor concerning the nature of the material to be encountered and the conditions of excavation.
* * *
"Fair dealing required that the owner disclose its knowledge of the unusual characteristics of the subsoil conditions on the island to be encountered in the excavation of the haul road under the circumstances of this case, such as the presence of snow cover and frost at the time of the contractor's inspection of the site.
* * *
"His statement that the contractor `might expect' to encounter, or the more positively worded version recalled by the contractor, constitutes misrepresentation as to existing facts in the light of the superior knowledge of the owner.
* * *
"In any event, failure to give notice in writing under the circumstances of this case, does not bar the contractor's claim. The contractor verbally informed the engineer promptly after encountering the hard material that it would have to get additional compensation if it were to continue to encounter further material of this nature.
* * *
"Further, where it is determined that the owner breached his duty of full disclosure and misrepresented the nature of the excavation to be encountered, its *520 claim for damages based on * * * failure to complete the road construction and to complete it within the time stated in the contract is directly chargeable to the owner's precedent failure to disclose available information concerning the nature of the material and to its representations which led the contractor to miscalculate the price for excavation. * * *" Pat J Murphy, Inc v Drummond Dolomite, Inc, supra, 520, 521, 522, 526.
We have examined the annotation on the question of the right of a public contractor to allowance for extra expense over what would have been necessary if conditions had been as represented by the plans and specifications. In 76 ALR 268, p 269, we find the following statements of interest in conjunction with this question:
"If in fact conditions are substantially different from those indicated on the plans, the question of fraud becomes immaterial, so far as compensation is concerned, if the representations as to conditions are regarded, as serving to define the contractor's undertaking.
* * *
"The general rule may be deduced from the decisions that where plans or specifications lead a public contractor reasonably to believe that conditions indicated therein exist, and may be relied upon in making his bid, he will be entitled to compensation for extra work or expense made necessary by conditions being other than as so represented."
At pages 270-271 of the same annotation, we find the following language from Atlanta Construction Co v State, 103 Misc 233, 175 NY Supp 453 (1918):
"And where plans for highway construction stated: The stone for item 40 shall be local material; the source of supply being one-half mile north of station 88 plus 00 and 133 plus 00 on the road to be improved, the Court, *521 in holding the contractor entitled to rely on this positive statement, said: `We are fully aware that these contracts are so drawn as to excuse the state from almost any statement or representation which it may make in reference to matters similar to the one here involved; but we believe that there should be a limit placed on this method of leading a contractor astray to his damage and loss. There is no reason why the English language, when used by officials of the state, should not have the same meaning and significance which is attached to it when used in contracts between individuals. There was no ambiguity in any way about this statement. It was positive, direct, and peremptory.'"
Further at page 276 we find:
"Upon principle it is clear that where conditions surrounding work have been materially misrepresented, the contractor finds himself in the position of one who, having undertaken one contract, is confronted with another. Few, if any, judicial opinions deny that such is the case. The circumstance is such that if the result provided for by the written contract is to be produced, the unanticipated work must ordinarily be performed of necessity, and cannot be deemed optional as to anybody. Hence, it may be reasoned that provisions in reference to specially authorizing extra work do not meet the case, and that where the contractee has insisted upon the contractor going forward, the authority provided for in the contract, if given, would be superfluous. It is submitted that under the circumstances in question, the most that should be expected of a contractor, by way of formality, is that he seasonably make known his claim that misrepresentation has occurred, and that, if required to go forward, he will expect additional compensation."
Further annotation is found on the question of construction and effect of a "changed conditions" clause in a public works or construction contract in 85 ALR2d 211, 212, 217, to the effect that: *522 "where plans or specifications in a government contract lead a public contractor reasonably to believe that conditions indicated therein exist, and are relied upon in making his bid, he may be entitled to compensation for extra work or expense made necessary by the conditions having been other than presented.
"Probably inasmuch as there is a possibility of recovery by the contractor in any event, where actual conditions are materially different from those stated in the contract, and that fact could be found to have been known to an agent of the government, it has been said that Article 4 contemplates the encountering of latent conditions unknown either to the government or to the contractor at the time of the making of the contract."
In R E Cotton Co Inc v United States, 87 Ct Cl 563 (US, 1938), involving a contract for the construction of a levee, the evidence showed that while the work was in progress an unprecedented rainfall for the month in the particular area had materially changed the conditions attending the work, creating an emergency which justified the suspension of work by the contractor, consented to by the contracting officer, and the resumption of which, as required by the contracting officer, entailed purchasing and furnishing entirely different equipment from that contemplated by the contract, and the employment of a radically different method of work, because of the necessity of taking material from a more remote location. Extra compensation was allowed for the work done even though the contractor refused to proceed when he was not given a written change order as provided in the contract.
The trial court made a determination on a basis of "changed conditions". It held that the plaintiff had an obligation to use pit 3 when pit 4 was unavailable. Apparently no cognizance was taken of the requirement that the state had to stake and *523 cross-section pit 3 before it could be used by the plaintiff. Otherwise plaintiff would be in violation of the very contract which is already the subject of this extended litigation. Apparently no recognition of the fact that the state was desirous of keeping pit 3 untouched for purposes of an exchange was made by the Court in its findings. The fact of the matter is, without dispute, that pit 3 was used in such an exchange.
43 Am Jur, Public Works and Contracts, § 108, p 847, states in part:
"A contractor for public work is generally held entitled to compensation beyond that fixed by his contract * * * or made necessary * * * by reason of changes in plans and specifications, * * * and he may recover damages resulting from delays in the performance of the work, consequent upon fault of public authorities. Lack of knowledge on the contractor's part as to the conditions which have made necessary the disputed work or materials may be a factor entitling him to recover therefor."
The defendant in its brief cites 43 Am Jur, Public Works and Contracts, § 111, pp 852-853, part of which states:
"The rule is that where plans and estimates or specifications, given out by authorized public authorities as the basis for bids for public work lead an intending public contractor reasonably to believe that conditions indicated in such plans and specifications exist, and may be relied upon in making its bid, may recover on a quantum meruit compensation for extra work or expense made necessary by conditions being other than as represented therein. This rule is especially applicable where the representation as to conditions is positive, in which case the right of the contractor is not affected by general language of the contract to the effect that he is expected to investigate facts for himself."
*524 In this case there is no dispute whatever that the state knew it did not have borrow pit number 4 nor parcels 437 and 437E for the right-of-way at the time of the signing of the contract. There was also no dispute that the estimated amounts of borrow material to come from pits 3 and 4 were necessary for the completion of the north end of the project. Further, the availability of such pits in timely fashion was essential to meeting the deadline, avoiding inclement weather, and using the multiple operation concept envisioned by the plaintiff and established as the basis of its bid by the testimony in the court below.
Further, there is no question that the plaintiff was required because of the change in the concept of the work to provide different types of machinery and to work night shifts and winter schedules and other types of activities, all of which meant increased costs to the plaintiff, without any compensation therefor if it was limited to the express payment provided for in its contract.
There was no way that the plaintiff could anticipate the fact that borrow pit number 4 was not available nor that two parcels of the right-of-way were missing. The state knew this but deliberately and wilfully withheld this information from the plaintiff until the plaintiff actually appeared on the job after the execution of the contract.
The plaintiff advances three theories in support of its claim for liability on the part of the defendants.
A. The state has admitted liability and has made partial payment thereon. At the time of payment in May of 1963, it merely disputed the amount of its liability and, of course, this is a damage and not a liability question.
B. The state failed to supply borrow pit 4, represented *525 on the plans as being a state-supplied borrow pit. The failure was material and the contractor relied on the availability of this borrow pit in making its bid. The substitution of other borrow pits and the delay in securing same caused additional costs to the contractor. Thus, liability is established.
C. The contractor is entitled to additional compensation under the contract documents and more specifically, the 1957 standard specifications for road and bridge construction.[1] The plans, the bid proposal, and the standard specifications were prepared by the state and, where possible ambiguity or incompleteness exists, should be construed strictly against the state. The specification provisions pertinent to liability here are:
1.) Specifications 1.05.03 and 1.04.04. The failure to supply borrow pit 4 and the substitution of other borrow pits was a deviation from the plans for the work, requiring the written order of the engineer. The deviation from the plans resulted in commissioner-ordered extra work not included or contemplated by the bid proposal or the contract. This imposed the burden upon the engineer under specification 1.04.04 to furnish a proposal to the contractor for a new unit price or lump-sum bid on the additional work. Authorization number 3003[2] constitutes the written order of the engineer (or his practical equivalent) for the deviation. No proposal for a new unit price or a lump-sum bid on the additional work was ever submitted. Under the circumstances it was impossible or at least impracticable to proceed on other than a force-account basis. Subsequent conduct of the parties confirms *526 this approach. The work was ordered, performed, and accepted, and liability must follow.
2.) Specification 1.05.02. If the additional work or change caused by the elimination of borrow pit number 4 does not come under number 1 above, it must fall within paragraph 1.05.02 of the specifications as to work or materials not clearly covered in the contract or resulting from changed conditions. Any notice requirements of this paragraph were either met or waived and, after performance and acceptance of the work, the liability of the state follows.
D. The failure of the state to supply borrow pit 4, and its delay in securing any substitutions therefor, hindered, frustrated, and delayed the contractor in completing the rough grading in a material fashion and caused additional expense to it. Said failure caused the unilateral change in the contract and in the character and timing of the work to be performed at the north end of the project. The state received the benefit of this work and has the implied obligation to pay the reasonable value thereof, including a profit to the contractor.
From our examination of the contract, the exhibits and the record in the court below and a careful reading of the briefs, both at trail and on appeal, and the various authorities cited therein, we are constrained to the conclusion that there was proof by a preponderance of the evidence that plaintiff's position was sustained on all theories with the possible exception of theory A, but was strongest under theories C(1) and D. The failure of the state to disclose its lack of borrow pit 4 and the subsequent developments created an entirely new contract nowhere within the concept of the parties at the time that the written instrument *527 between them was executed. There was a clear breach of the contract on the part of the state highway department. All of the damages flowing from such breach were the natural and proximate consequence of the breach complained of. "[T]he law in Michigan has for many years provided that in order for damages to be recoverable in contract actions it must be shown that damages are the natural and proximate consequences of the breach complained of." Sattler v Fisher Contracting Co, 30 Mich App 617, 622 (1971).
Thus we are forced to the inevitable conclusion that the preponderance of the evidence in the court below is in favor of a finding of liability on the part of the state. The extent of such damages and the question of the obligation to mitigate and steps taken by plaintiff in mitigation of damages are not questions before this Court in light of the stipulation between the parties, concurred in by the trial court, to the effect that liability would be tried as a separate issue and if liability was found then the question of damages would be tried separately.
We now proceed to the question of the trial court's disposition of counterclaim I filed by the state against the plaintiff and the plaintiff's appeal therefrom. Counterclaim I was based on two payments made by the state to the plaintiff:
1. Down time of equipment from February 23, 1961 through March 9, 1971: $60,160.93.[3]
2. Extra expense incurred from changing to borrow pits 8 and 11: $60,866.[4]
The trial court found against the plaintiff and in favor of the defendant on counterclaim I. The *528 court based its findings on its conclusion that the equipment down time resulted when the haul road out of pit 3A became impassable due to an early thaw. Further, the court found that recourse to pits 8 and 11 was made necessary when pit 3A became unavailable due to its haul road becoming impassable. All three of these borrow pits on which the court relied for its conclusion were not within the state's possession at the time the contract between the parties was entered into. Consequently, they could not be within the contemplation of the parties when they entered into their contract. Furthermore, these all had to be acquired because the state failed to acquire pit number 4 and found it necessary to release pit number 3 in order to secure two parcels of right-of-way which they did not own at the time of the contract and with those parcels, pit 3A. All of these things stem from the state's failure to disclose the fact that it did not have pit 4 nor parcels 437 and 437E of the right-of-way. Coupled with its failure to disclose such information was the fact that they made an affirmative representation in the bid proposal that the defendant in fact had such borrow pit and right-of-way parcels.
This issue can best be resolved by posing this question in the following manner:
Whether, absent a finding of fraud and lack of authority in the State Highway Commissioner who authorized payment, the state can recover monies paid under a highway construction contract for extra work?
Highway officials under MCLA 250.62; MSA 9.902 had the authority to make payments for extra work at the time such payments were made for the items constituting counterclaim I as set forth hereinabove.
*529 The trial court found it unnecessary to decide whether, once payment has been authorized by state officials and payment made pursuant thereto, the state later can recover the sum so paid. This conclusion was based on the court's finding that the highway department's payments had not irrevocably committed the state insofar as the claims remained open under the contract. The court then went on to further find:
"The proofs as to this counterclaim are found in the record made in connection with plaintiff's claim and the defense thereto, and I am of the opinion that the state has satisfied the burden of proof as to it.
"The equipment downtime resulted when the haul road out of pit 3A became impassable due to an early thaw.
"Recourse to pits 8 and 11 was made necessary when pit 3A became unavailable due to its haul road becoming impassable.
"* * * I further conclude that it was [plaintiff's] miscalculation as to the quantities of earth to be obtained from pit 4, and its reliance on this miscalculation, which led to its initial and continuing decision not to use pit 3, which in turn was responsible for abandonment of pit 3 and resort to pit 3A with the delay attendant upon securing pit 3A. [Plaintiff] must therefore assume responsibility for any expense resulting from pit 3A becoming unavailable in February and March of 1961, and should not have been compensated for them as extras."
The trial court based the state's right to recover payments for extra work made in connection with borrow pit 4 delays on the fact that extra expenses in this area constituted an account left open on plaintiff's option to contest the damages. The court found it unnecessary to determine whether, payment once having been made by the state, it was barred from recovering a subsequently alleged *530 overpayment, because, in fact, the payment had never become final. And, contrary to defendants' position, the trial court did not go so far as to say no extra work had been done by plaintiff for the payment received. Rather, the court implied the extra work was the result of plaintiff's failure to mitigate the expensive delay by recourse to pit 3.
Gogebic National Bank v Ironwood Twp, 239 Mich 369 (1927), governs the present case. The circumstances in Gogebic are similar to those herein. The Fitzpatrick brothers contracted with the Township of Ironwood, in Gogebic County, to construct 1-1/2 miles of road in strict conformity with plans and specifications prepared by the county highway engineer. A fixed price for earth and rock excavation, for gravel surface, for concrete, and for loose rock was agreed upon. The Fitzpatrick brothers made claims for extra work relating to loose rock after the completion of the project. Having already issued a $6,000 payment order on the project, the township board and highway commissioner met with the contractors and awarded a payment order for $7,657 in final settlement. These orders were discounted to a local bank for collection. When presented for payment, the Township refused to honor the orders on the basis they made allowance for loose gravel to which the contractors were not entitled. On review, the Supreme Court affirmed the trial court's directed verdict for the bank, making the following observations:
"When the contract was completed and a settlement was attempted, the allowance for loose rock became the bone of contention. The contractors made claim for the removal of a specific number of cubic yards thereof. The board advised with the county engineer and with a competent road builder, a member of the board, who *531 had under its employment acted as an inspector during a part of the time, and finally agreed with the contractors to issue them an order for $7,657 in full settlement of their claim. This was less than they claimed, but they accepted it and the order was issued and delivered to them.
"The question presented was not a legal one. If now submitted to a jury, it would be its duty to determine how many cubic yards of loose rock were removed.
"No claim is made that the members of the board were in any way unduly influenced in reaching this settlement. They were apparently men of probity and honor, and acted in what they believed to be the best interests of their township. No fraud is charged, and certainly none is proven. Nor can it be claimed that the order was issued under a mistake of fact. A settlement thus made cannot afterwards be attacked. In Advertiser and Tribune Co v City of Detroit, 43 Mich 116, 119 [1880], it was said:
"`Where power is given to the common council of a city to audit and allow all accounts chargeable against it, the law presumes that they will investigate all claims presented, and it is clearly their duty so to do. They cannot formally allow claims without any investigation or effort to investigate, and afterwards order an investigation and rescind their action and recover back moneys paid, because of facts existing but not known at the time the account was allowed, and which a proper examination would then have brought to their attention. Such a doctrine would be productive of endless mischief and litigation.'
"See, also, Township of Churchill v Township of Cummings, 51 Mich 446 [1883]; Feily v Campground Association, 210 Mich 197 [1920]; Town of Dekorra v Wisconsin River Power Co, 188 Wisc 501 (205 NW 423) [1925]; 2 Dillon on Municipal Corporations (5th ed), §§ 821, 822." Gogebic National Bank v Ironwood Twp, supra, 372-373.
Applying the test of fraud and mistake appearing in Gogebic to the present case, it is clear, as plaintiff contends that fraud was neither charged *532 nor proven. The trial court did find from its own particular vantage that the plaintiff's own miscalculations led to its failure to skirt the avoidable consequences of delay in connection with the missing borrow pit number 4. The trial court did not find, however, that highway officials had made a specific mistake of fact in granting payment for extra work in connection with borrow pit 4. Indeed, the court earlier found, or seemed to find, that the state's payment for amounts claimed above the contract was an admission of liability. Nothing stated by the trial court overcomes the presumption that payments by authorized government officials are correct as applied to the challenged payments to Holloway.
The trial court merely expanded its earlier finding that plaintiff did not do all that it might have to offset the loss of borrow pit 4 made in connection with its claims beyond the settlement award already made by the state. We expressly emphasize here that we do not by this language give sanction to nor affirm the findings of the trial court on the question of mitigation of damages by the plaintiff with respect to losses arising from the state's failure to provide borrow pit 4. This is a question that is exclusively for the second hearing to be held on the question of damages pursuant to the stipulation of the parties, concurred in by the trial court and now necessary in light of our findings on the question of liability.
The trial court based that conclusion on its finding that the contract relations between the parties had not come to rest because of the plaintiff's decision to further litigate its claims. It does not require a reopening of matters already settled. The state's earlier payment established the lower limits of the plaintiff's recovery, while the current *533 suit sought to establish the upper limit. The trial court sought to alter what had already been settled between the parties without disclosing the particular error in the administrative decision of the highway department to grant the added payment or the approval of the State Administrative Board as to such payment. Without pointing out any specific error the trial court substituted its opinion for the judgment of the highway department officials and the State Administrative Board. The trial court may well have believed the damages could have been mitigated had plaintiff resorted to borrow pit number 3 when pit 4 failed to materialize. This opinion, however, is in no way conclusive against the prior determination of the highway department.
When parties to a contract have given a practical interpretation to the provisions of that contract, such an interpretation is entitled to consideration by the Court. Davis v Kramer Brothers Freight Lines, Inc, 361 Mich 371 (1960).
"Admissions are statements made by or on behalf of a party to the suit in which they are offered which contradict some position assumed by that party in that suit. They are substantive evidence for the adverse party, but never for the party by whom or on whose behalf they are supposed to have been made." Elliotte v Lavier, 299 Mich 353, 357 (1941).
An admission is not conclusive of the facts stated therein and admissions may be varied or contradicted by other evidence. Guarantee Bond & Mortgage Co v Hilding, 246 Mich 334 (1929). The converse is also true. An admission is conclusive unless it is varied or contradicted by other evidence. In other words, an admission of liability which is not satisfactorily explained or contradicted during the trial is persuasive evidence to *534 support the position of the other party suing thereon in accord with such admission or statement. Conroy v Harrison, 368 Mich 310 (1962).
The joint exhibits indicate clear admissions by highway department officials. The testimony of Howard Hill and John Mackie contain identical admissions. It is apparent that the admissions by Messrs. Mackie, Hill, Lundberg, and MacCreery were not varied or contradicted by other evidence since the evidence in this case dealt only with the performance of the contractor, whereas the testimony of the named officials of the highway department dealt with the analysis of that performance as it relates to standard specifications and the question of additional compensation. We find in 5 Corbin, Contracts, § 1001, pp 29-31:
"A plaintiff who has proved the breach of a contractual duty by the defendant is always entitled to a judgment for damages therefor, except in cases where the contract is made unenforceable in this fashion by some statutory provision. For this purpose it is not necessary for the plaintiff to prove the amount of harm that he has suffered by reason of the defendant's breach of duty. If he makes no such proof, however, the judgment in his favor will be for nominal damages only. Such damages are a small sum of money fixed, without regard to the extent of the harm done, by the custom of the jurisdiction in which the action is brought. Of course, in any case where the plaintiff can and does get judgment for compensatory damages, his right to nominal damages as a sum separate from the compensatory damages does not exist. A plaintiff who gets judgment for nominal damages is frequently given judgment for costs of the action also; but this is not necessarily the case. Costs are largely in the discretion of the court; and, in some jurisdictions, costs will not be adjudged to the plaintiff unless he proved some substantial harm done." (Footnotes omitted.)
Next in § 1002, p 35, Compensatory Damages, *535 Corbin discusses the difficulty in balancing plaintiff has against the foreseeability of injury by defendant's breach and concludes by saying:
"The rules for determining the damages recoverable for breach are not rules of interpretation of contract. Interpretation is the process of giving meaning to the expressions of the parties for the purpose of determining what the promised performance was; until interpretation is complete, there is no opportunity for applying the rules as to measure of damages."
The highway department acknowledged their partial breach in failing to provide borrow pit 4 and by practical application of the facts of the contract, assigned the amount of $121,026.93 as liquidated compensation for the breach. Since it would appear that plaintiff was entitled at the very least to nominal damages, and in view of the difficulty entailed in reaching a judicial determination of the damages, it would seem that the practical values set on the breach by defendants was not unreasonable and should have been allowed to stand.
We have every reason to believe that the members of the administrative board in approving the recommendation of the highway department on these payments acted with probity, great care, and diligence, and being gentlemen of probity they conducted themselves accordingly in their action upon such request by the highway department for extra payment to the contractor at the time of the request.
We now come to that important issue of the cross appeal on the denial of counterclaims II thru VII.
Counterclaim II was for return of $106,099.00 which plaintiff had received for the upgrading of *536 aggregate base course material because of weathering through freezing and thawing during the fall and winter of 1960-1961 which caused a breakdown of encrusted material and shale to a point where loss by washing exceeded the 8% allowable under the specifications for the project.
Counterclaim III. Plaintiff was paid the sum of $42,153.72 because of an increase in haul distance resulting from a request by Berrien County to avoid use of Napier Avenue between M-140 and	 I-94 because of its poor condition. This payment was based on the extra haul distance in accordance with Michigan Public Service Commission common-carrier rates. Refund here was claimed on the basis that a specific provision of the contract required the contractor to restore any county roads, damaged by its operations or by its operations in hauling borrow or other construction material, to the original condition.
Counterclaim IV. Payment in the amount of $13,324.59 was made to the Berrien County road commission and the City of Bridgman for restoring haul routes damaged by plaintiff in hauling materials to the job site. The state claims that such cost of restoring roads was an obligation assumed by the plaintiff under the terms of this contract.
Counterclaim V. Plaintiff was paid additional compensation of $10,506.66 for removal of 3 to 9 feet of muck found under the existing shoulders on existing US-12 directly under proposed widening. The muck was not shown on the plans and it was necessary to remove the same under heavy summer traffic which involved frequent stopping of equipment. Operations were further hampered here by overhead power lines and telephone lines. Defendant claims that such muck removal, although not shown in the plans, was covered by *537 specification 2.08.01 of the contract between the parties under the term "earth-excavation". Defendant contends that since earth excavation was agreed upon at a unit price of $.29 per cubic yard and plaintiff received $.85 per cubic yard, plaintiff should be required to refund the difference. The specifications only provided for two types of excavation: rock excavation and earth excavation. No provision was made for any unit price as to muck removal for the apparently simple reason that there was no indication anywhere in the proposal that muck was to be removed or that its encounter was anticipated.
Counterclaim VI. Specification 3.01.01 describes placement and compacting of aggregate base course if damage to the subbase occurred in the course of construction. The state contends that under the provisions of the contract, plaintiff should have restored the subbase to that required by the specifications. Plaintiff was paid the sum of $19,475.88 to repair damages to the subbase and, the state claims, should now be required to reimburse such sum.
Counterclaim VII. Plaintiff was paid the additional sum of $3,149.20 to furnish a flagman to maintain traffic control. The state claims this control was necessitated by the failure to complete the project and open the road to traffic at the agreed-upon time. Completion of contract and open-to-traffic dates were identical in the contract between the parties. The state claims if plaintiff had performed in accordance with the contract, no traffic control would have been required while seal coat was being applied. Consequently, they claim it is the plaintiff's obligation to pay for such flagman.
The following language is contained in the contract documents:
*538 "The undersigned [plaintiff] further proposes to do such extra work as may be authorized by the commissioner, prices for which are not included in the itemized bid. Compensation shall be made on the basis agreed upon before such extra work is begun."
The contract also provides:
"Said party of the first part [Highway Commissioner] further agrees to pay the said party of the second part [plaintiff] for such extra work as may be ordered by the party of the first part or his authorized representative, prices for which are not included in the above items, the price or on the basis agreed upon before the extra work is begun."
Further, the contract provides:
"Authorization and payments for unforeseen contingency shall be as provided by that resolution of the state administrative board adopted and appearing in said board's minutes of July 17, 1956."
Standard specifications which are part of the contract documents recognize and codify the fact that compensation will be paid for extra work and that decisions with respect thereto will be made by the commissioner. (Specifications 1.0, 4.04 and 1.05.12.) Questions as to interpretation of the plans and specifications are to be decided by the chief engineer or his authorized representative under specifications 1.0, 1.04, and 1.05.01. It is elementary that the authority to order and pay for extras, conceded by all parties to this litigation, coupled with the authority to decide questions of interpretation of the plans and specifications, necessarily includes the authority to decide what is extra work.
The state highway commission act, MCLA 250.62, MSA 9.902 then provided:
"The state highway commissioner is hereby authorized *539 to contract with boards of county road commissioners, township boards, or with any other person, persons, firm or corporation for the construction, improvement and maintenance of trunk line highways, or he may do such work on state account. The state highway commissioner, subject to the approval of the state administrative board, is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to do all acts or things necessary to carry out the purpose of this act."
Each of the items covered under these counterclaims, carried a label at the top: "Extras to Plans" except in two cases which were labeled: "Changes in Plans". Each of the authorizations contained an explanation of why the item was considered an extra by the engineering and administrative officials involved. On several occasions during the trial below, the Attorney General conceded the complete good faith of the state officials who approved the several authorizations and claims as extras.
There were no proofs presented to sustain the burden of proof on these counterclaims. In fact, on several occasions a statement was made on the record that the state would offer no testimony but would rely exclusively on the several authorizations involved and the plaintiff's stipulation that it had received the monies indicated by such authorizations. There was no showing that the contract between plaintiff and the defendants was ultra vires or invalid in any respect, or that the state officials who acted did not have authority to order and pay for such extra changes in plans. There was no evidence presented that all of the claims were not fully investigated, audited, allowed, and paid as extras with the full approval of the required highway department and State Administrative Board officials, including the Attorney General. There was no showing of fraud, collusion, or *540 misrepresentation on the part of either the state officials or the plaintiff. For these reasons we were somewhat taken aback when, at oral argument on this appeal, representatives of the Attorney General seemed to question the propriety of the actions of the highway department officials and the State Administrative Board which includes the Attorney General. The plaintiff did offer some evidence on each of the counterclaims to support the determination that the payments were, in fact, for extras. Where the parties to a contract have by their conduct given a practical interpretation to the provisions in question, such interpretation is entitled to consideration by the Court. W O Barnes Co, Inc v Folsinski, 337 Mich 370 (1953).
Examination of the contract and the several exhibits offered with respect to the counterclaims enumerated hereinabove, coupled with the testimony offered by the highway officials called as witnesses on the part of the plaintiff, leads us to the conclusion that there were sections of the contract which placed the responsibilities on parties other than the contractor for many of the items which were performed by the contractor and which the state now seeks to recover by way of counterclaim. We agree with the trial judge that the proofs, both oral and documentary, fail to enable the defendants to sustain their burden of proof with respect to these counterclaims. They should be denied as they were by the trial court.
Accordingly, we affirm the trial court on its disposition of counterclaims II through VII. We reverse as to counterclaim I and we reverse as to the question of liability on the part of the defendants under the plaintiff's complaint and remand to the Court of Claims for the taking of proofs on the question of damages.
All concurred.
NOTES
[*]  Former circuit judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment pursuant to Const 1963, art 6, § 23 as amended in 1968.
[1]  See joint exhibit 1F.
[2]  See joint exhibit 17.
[3]  See joint exhibit 33.
[4]  See joint exhibit 34.

=== CASE 9740331 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:32:34.738085+00 ===

Beilfuss, J.
The defendant first contends that the probation revocation hearing did not comport with due process of law because the trial court denied him the opportunity to cross-examine the opposing witness. We find no error in this respect. The basic requirements of due process of law and fairness require that a factual hearing be held to determine the grounds of revocation. This procedure permits the defendant to be informed of his probation violations, confront his adversary, and to be heard if he so desires. State ex rel. Johnson v. Cady (1971), 50 Wis. 2d 540, 185 N. W. 2d 306, and Hahn v. Burke (7th Cir. 1970), 430 Fed. 2d 100. The sixth amendment right of confrontation also requires the opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses against him. Pointer v. Texas (1965), 380 U. S. 400, 85 Sup. Ct. 1065, 13 L. Ed. 2d 923. In this case these mandates were met. The defendant was given adequate notice of the hearing. The court appointed counsel to represent defendant due to his indigency. The defendant and his attorney appeared at the hearing. A factual hearing was held to determine if the conditions of probation were violated. The defendant, with counsel, confronted his accuser. The court asked the defendant and counsel if there was anything they wished to say as to why probation should not be revoked. The court did not deny defendant or counsel the right to cross-examine any witness; rather, defendant, with counsel, had the opportunity to cross-examine but did not and thereby waived that right. After the probation officer was questioned, the court called the defendant’s attorney *618who, after making a few other remarks, stated: “As to any other features, I have no comment.” The court then called the defendant and asked if there was anything he would like to say. Both defendant and counsel clearly had the opportunity to cross-examine the probation officer. Since neither pursued that right they thereby waived it and cannot now complain.
The defendant also claims that the court erred when it allowed the probation officer, who was not under oath, to testify against him. This was not error, nor did defendant, with counsel, ever object until now on appeal. The revocation hearing need not be a formal trial-type hearing and the technical rules of evidence need not be observed. State ex rel. Johnson v. Cady, supra. The revocation hearing, even though before the judge in this instance, is not a trial in the traditional sense. The issue here is not a determination of the guilt or innocence of the defendant but rather a hearing to determine whether the defendant has violated the conditions of his probation. Although the probationer must be afforded a due-process-type of hearing, all of the technical rules of evidence need not be observed. The trial judge, in the exercise of his discretion, can accept or reject the information offered as reliable or unreliable in making a proper determination.
As his second major claim of error, the defendant contends the trial court violated ■ his rights of equal protection and due process under the fourteenth amendment to the United States Constitution because it required the defendant, as a condition of probation, to make restitution of more than $30,000 for crimes which were “read in” the record, but for which he was not convicted.
Defendant’s right to due process of law was not violated. Sec. 973.09, Stats., gives the court the discretion to stay the sentence, place the defendant on probation, and impose any conditions which appear reasonable and *619appropriate. Restitution is a permissible condition for probation. State v. Garner 1 (1972), 54 Wis. 2d 100, 194 N. W. 2d 649. Trial courts often required as a condition of probation that the defendant make restitution for all property or monetary losses caused by the criminal acts of the defendant which have been brought to the court’s attention, although the defendant has been convicted or pleaded guilty only to one of them. In such situations, when the amount of the loss is determined on the face of the record or by defendant’s admission, no problem arises as to the amount of restitution which can be made a condition of probation. State v. Scherr (1960), 9 Wis. 2d 418, 101 N. W. 2d 77. He could not be specifically sentenced for any of the “read ins,” but restitution for the total amount can be ordered as a condition of probation.
In this case the amount of restitution can be determined from the record as to the acts not charged in the information. The burglaries perpetrated and the amounts lost and not recovered were specifically set forth in the record with detail and admitted by defendant. The defendant should not now be heard to complain. Probation is not a matter of right, but rather a grace or privilege.2 The defendant cannot dictate the terms of probation and should not be allowed to strike a bargain with the prosecutor or the court on the matter of restitution as a condition of probation. State v. Scherr, supra.
The defendant, of his own free will, wanted the twenty uncharged offenses “read in” because the district attorney promised not to prosecute those offenses, and be*620cause the defendant wanted to clear his record. The court, on a number of occasions, warned the defendant that it would consider these read ins when sentencing. The court also stated that because the defendant wanted a chance on probation and wanted the court to give this consideration, the court expected in return the defendant’s cooperation. After the twenty uncharged offenses were read in, the court again inquired as to the defendant’s disposition, efficacy and propriety of the read ins. The following dialogue took place:
“The Court: Have the defendant walk forward.
“Ronald Gerard, did you admit all those, other said offenses to the officers freely and voluntarily?
“Defendant: Yes.
“The Court: Were any threats or any promises made by anyone, any police officer or by any law enforcement officer or by anyone involved in this case in any manner, shape or form to get you to admit those offenses ?
“Defendant: No.
“The Court: Why did you admit them ?
“Defendant: Because I wanted to get everything off the books so I am not any more involved in anything.
“The Court: Is there anything that you want to ask him, Mr. Klinkowitz, about those other admissions ?
“Mr. Klinkowitz: Was any force or coercion applied to you or your person in order to get you to make these admissions, sir ?
“Defendant: No.
“Mr. Klinkowitz: Was your attorney with you when you made the admissions ?
“Defendant: Yes.
“Mr. Klinkowitz: He was with you at all times and with all the interviews with the various detectives?
“Defendant: Yes.
“Mr. Klinkowitz: He advised you to make the admissions to clean your record ?
“Defendant: Yes.
“The Court: Are there any other outstanding matters which you wish to bring to this court’s attention at this time?
“Defendant: Everything that has been brought out is everything I am involved in.
*621“Mr. Klinkowitz: I am satisfied, your honor.
“The Court: Mr. Dinerstein, is there anything that you want to ask him concerning that aspect only ?
“Mr. Dinerstein: No.”
The court then imposed sentence and ordered full and complete restitution at $150 per month.
The defendant did not object to these terms and conditions of probation at the trial nor at the probation revocation hearing. In fact, defendant expressed his desire for probation on numerous occasions. Not until almost two years later did defendant complain by filing a motion for postconviction relief. Prior to this time he indicated he was willing to comply with its terms, and led the court to so believe.
Probation was revoked because defendant failed to even attempt to comply with its terms. He moved from address to address and did not inform the probation officer. He failed to report to his officer as ordered. He did not make any attempt to pay court costs and disbursements, nor make restitution. He did not comply with any of the major conditions imposed by the court.
The defendant argues that the court never ascertained the defendant’s ability to pay, and the court costs, disbursements and restitution are excessive. The court did ascertain the defendant’s ability to pay. True, at the time of sentencing and imposing the conditions of probation the defendant was indigent, but the defendant informed the court that if put on probation he was confident that he could again obtain employment. This led the court to believe he would have suitable employment, would no longer be indigent, and therefore would have the ability to pay.
Defendant contends that notwithstanding all of this, the conditions of probation are still unconstitutional because they invidiously discriminate against him thereby denying him equal protection under the law. In support of this proposition defendant cites In re Antazo *622(1970), 3 Cal. 3d 100, 89 Cal. Rptr. 255, 473 Pac. 2d 999. We do not believe the case provides such support. In Antazo, the indigent petitioner was confined in the county jail pursuant to a court probation order requiring him to pay, as a .condition of probation, a fine in the amount of $2,500, plus a penalty assessment of $625 or, in lieu of payment thereof, to be imprisoned in the county jail one day for each $10 of the unpaid amount. His codefendant paid the amount and was released. The petitioner was unable to pay and was imprisoned. The petitioner there contended that his imprisonment due solely to his indigency to pay such costs constitutes invidious discrimination under the equal protection clause of the fourteenth amendment. In essence, petitioner was incarcerated for nonpayment of a fine. The Antazo court rightly held that such imprisonment because of one’s indigency violated the fourteenth amendment because it is invidious discrimination on the basis of wealth. But the court went on to state in Antazo, at page 116, that:
. . we do not hold that the imposition upon an indigent offender of a fine and penalty assessment, either as a sentence or as a condition of probation, constitutes of necessity in all instances a violation of the equal protection clause. Depending upon the circumstances of the particular case and the condition of the individual offender, there are a variety of ways in which the state may fine the indigent offender, as alternatives to imprisonment, without offending the command of equal protection. . . Rather, our holding is simply that an indigent who would pay his fine if he could, must be given an option comparable to an offender who is not indigent. When the indigent offender refuses to avail himself of such alternatives at the inception, or defaults or otherwise fails to meet the conditions of the particular alternative which is offered him without a showing of reasonable excuse, the indigent offender becomes in the eyes of the court exactly the same as the contumacious offender who is not indigent. When either of these *623conditions obtain the offender’s indigency ceases to be dispositive and he may, consistently with the mandate of the equal protection clause, be relegated to ‘working out’ his fine by imprisonment.”
The case at hand does not involve discrimination based upon wealth, nor is this a case where the indigent defendant could not pay such costs and thereby had to serve an X amount of time in jail at a dollar a day. Rather, this is a case where the defendant led the court to believe he would be working and supporting his family if allowed to be put on probation. He was therefore given an option comparable to an offender who is not indigent — that is, jail or probation. While on probation the defendant had several jobs and was no longer indigent. The first was at Ampco Metal with a $90 per week take-home pay. The second was at Geuder-Paeschke and Frey Company with a $120 a week take-home pay. At this point in time he had the ability to at least make some payments. He refused to pay and did not pay anything — not even a nominal amount. In this case, when the defendant had the ability to pay at least something and refused to avail himself of his alternatives, or refused to even attempt to comply with probation conditions without a showing of reasonable excuse, he became in the eyes of the law exactly the same as the contumacious offender who is not indigent. His in-digency ceases to be dispositive of the issue. In re Antazo, supra. His right to. equal protection under the law has not been wiblated. He was given a fair chance. His indigency did not cause his probation to be revoked, but rather his own refusal to at least attempt compliance. His contumacious actions caused revocation and he knew of this possibility.
The defendant contends his thirteenth amendment right against involuntary servitude under the United States Constitution was violated when the court revoked proba*624tion and imposed sentence for failing to pay all court costs, disbursements and failing to make restitution.
The defendant’s right under the thirteenth amendment was not violated. Probation was revokéd for failure to comply with its terms and not for failure to pay a debt. Revocation of probation is a matter of judicial discretion and the court had a substantial basis in fact to support its determination — that is, the conditions of probation had been violated. Davis v. State (1971), 52 Wis. 2d 697, 190 N. W. 2d 890, and Hughes v. State (1965), 28 Wis. 2d 665, 137 N. W. 2d 439. Probation was revoked not just because defendant failed to pay court costs, disbursements or make restitution, but also because he failed to support his family, report to his probation officer, would not notify the department when he changed his address, and failed to keep any employment.
At no time during the probationary period did defendant claim that he could not meet the terms and conditions of probation, nor that he did not have the ability to even make some payments. Violating one’s probation does not constitute involuntary servitude. Defendant is simply now serving out a sentence that was previously imposed and stayed upon conditions which he violated.
On December 10, 1971, at a hearing on the post-conviction motion, the defendant for the first time objected to the probation condition of restitution of $30,000. He complains that several others were involved in the various crimes that resulted in the loss of $30,000 to the victims and that he cannot pay back the $30,000.
The defendant participated in all of the more than 20 crimes in which property in excess of $30,000 was stolen or illegally obtained. As a participant he was a principal and can be rightfully charged with responsibility for the entire loss. Further, if it was his intention to make an equitable argument he did not give the *625trial court any factual basis to determine how much of the money or property he, personally, or any of the others received.
His complaint that he cannot repay the $30,000 as a probation condition is premature for the reason that he is not now on probation — he is incarcerated, serving a part of his sentence.
A portion of the statute quoted above provides: “Prior to the expiration of any probation period, the court may for cause by order . . . modify the terms and conditions thereof.” 3
The condition of probation imposed here is that the defendant pay the sum of $150 per month toward restitution. After the defendant regains his probationary status, if he can show cause why he should not be required to comply with the condition, the court can for cause shown exercise its discretion and modify or relieve him from it. Further, the court can, at any subsequent probation revocation hearing, if such comes to pass, reconsider the provision for restitution and within the exercise of proper discretion modify it and its effect on the revocation of probation. We believe that the “cause” contemplated by the statute includes impossibility, undue hardship and probably other causes.
Counsel for the defendant contends that a condition of probation requiring the repayment of attorney’s fees paid by the county on behalf of an indigent in the defense of a criminal case is unconstitutional under the fifth and sixth amendments of the United States Constitution.
There is no question but that an indigent defendant is entitled to appointed counsel at all significant stages of the criminal trial process.4 The defendant does not *626claim that he has been denied the right to counsel — ■ the record reveals that he has been represented by court-appointed counsel at all stages. His claim is that knowledge that he might be required to repay the fees allowed to appointed counsel 5 may have a chilling effect upon his exercise of his right to counsel and his waiver of a jury trial because of the possibility of repayment of attorney’s fees. He does not claim this possibility had any chilling effect upon him, but as a constitutional defense it might have a chilling effect upon others who in the future will face similar situations.
We are not here dealing with cases that result in findings of not guilty or determinations of guilty where sentence is imposed, incarceration ordered, and payment of attorney’s fees is not imposed,6 but only those cases where as a condition of probation a sentencing court may, as a matter of discretion, require the repayment of attorney’s fees as a condition of probation.
Not only is the repayment of counsel fees as a probation condition discretionary in the first instance, but it can be re-examined during the term of probation or at a revocation hearing in the same manner as a condition of restitution discussed above.
If the repayment of counsel fees is relied upon as the sole basis or a principal basis for revocation of probation, and it is shown that such payment is impossible or constitutes an undue hardship, the condition should be modified or completely withdrawn. If, on the other hand, the probationer is employed at a wage where repayment of counsel fees will not constitute an undue hardship and he refuses or makes little or no effort to pay, this failure can be regarded as contumacious and enforced.
We are of the opinion that our statutory provision for repayment of costs, including counsel fees with its *627discretionary provisions, is not unconstitutional, nor is its application if administered in the manner indicated above.
By the Court. — Order affirmed.
The ABA Standards Relating to Probation which this court adopted in Garner, supra, state in standard 3.2(c) that, “Conditions may appropriately deal with matters such as the following: . . . (viii) making restitution of the fruits of the crime or reparation for loss or damage caused thereby.” And “(d) Conditions requiring payment of fines, restitution, . .
State v. Welkos (1961), 14 Wis. 2d 186, 109 N. W. 2d 889.
Sec. 973.09 (3), Stats.
Gideon v. Wainwright (1963), 372 U. S. 335, 83 Sup. Ct. 792, 9 L. Ed. 2d 799, 93 A. L. R. 2d 733; Miranda v. Arizona (1966), 384 U. S. 436, 86 Sup. Ct. 1602, 16 L. Ed. 2d 694; sec. 970.02 (6), Stats.
See secs. 973.09, 973.06 and 973.07, Stats.
But see sec. 256.66, Stats.

=== CASE 9740332 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:32:34.745182+00 ===

Wilkie, J.
(concurring). My disagreement with the majority is limited to the question of whether it is constitutional to require a convicted indigent defendant, as a condition of his probation, to make reimbursement of the cost of attorney’s fees where legal services have been furnished to him because of his indigency and as guaranteed by both state 1 and federal 2 constitutions.
Here, this condition was imposed pursuant to sec. 973.09 (1), Stats., which authorizes the imposition of “any conditions which appear to be reasonable and appropriate” as terms of probation; 3 sec. 973.06 (1) (e), which includes as costs taxable to a criminal defendant “[a]ttorney fees payable to the defense attorney by the county; ” 4 and this court’s decision in State v. Welkos,5 *628which held that the “costs of prosecution” are chargeable under the latter costs statute (then sec. 959.055) as a probationary condition under then sec. 57.01 (1). The majority hold the Wisconsin statutes authorizing this practice constitutional. I would not.
The Wisconsin requirement for providing charged indigent criminal defendants with counsel at public expense, was effectuated by enabling legislation in the late 1850’s,6 and this court was one of the earliest in the United States7 “to recognize the necessity for compensating attorneys who represented indigents in criminal proceedings in order to guarantee the defendant fully adequate representation.” 8 The federal constitutional right to legal counsel under the sixth amendment was not recognized by the United States Supreme Court until Powell v. Alabama.9 That right was made applicable to states by the fourteenth amendment in Gideon v. Wainwright 10 and applied to felonies (crimes with sentences of one year or more). In Argersinger v. Hamlin 11 the right was extended in 1972 to indigent persons charged with misdemeanors (crimes with sentences of less than one year).
Nearly four years ago the Supreme Court of California considered the constitutionality of imposing as a condition of probation the requirement that a convicted indigent criminal defendant reimburse the California county which had furnished him with court-appointed counsel *629in his criminal proceedings.12 The supreme court speaking through Mr. Justice Louis H. Burke in a unanimous decision declared this practice unconstitutional, saying:
“. . . The government is without constitutional authority to impose a predetermined condition on the exercise of a constitutional right or penalize in some manner its use.” 13
There, as here, there was no indication in the record that the defendant was discouraged from exercising her constitutional right to counsel because there, as here, the defendant requested and received counsel. Yet the California Supreme Court declared “[t] he fact that such knowledge might have deterred her, and could well deter others, gives rise to our concern as to the validity of such a condition of probation.” 14
In other words the practice is invalid because of the chilling effect it has upon the exercise of a constitutional right. This is a well-established doctrine that is traceable to the United States Supreme Court decision in United States v. Jackson, wherein the high court invalidated as an unconstitutional infringement of the fifth amendment right to plead not guilty, and the sixth amendment right to demand a jury trial, a federal statute which provided the death penalty under the Federal Kidnaping Act could only be imposed by jury verdict.15 The court stated:
. . If the provision had no other purpose or effect than to chill the assertion of constitutional rights by penalizing those who choose to exercise them, then it would be patently unconstitutional.” 16
*630That the motives of Congress may have been to lessen the number of instances wherein capital punishment was imposed was irrelevant. The court stated:
“. . . Whatever might be said of Congress’ objectives, they cannot be pursued by means that needlessly chill the exercise of basic constitutional rights. . . . The question is not whether the chilling effect is ‘incidental’ rather than intentional; the question is whether that effect is unnecessary and therefore excessive.” 17
A further constitutional objection I would find in this practice of imposing payment of defense attorney fees paid by the county as a condition of probation, involves the adequacy of waiver of one’s right to counsel. There was no waiver here since defendant requested and received service of counsel.
In Johnson v. Zerbst 18 it was held:
“The constitutional right of an accused to be represented by counsel invokes, of itself, the protection of a trial court, in which the accused — whose life or liberty is at stake — is without counsel. This protecting duty imposes the serious and weighty responsibility upon the trial judge of determining whether there is an intelligent and competent waiver by the accused.”
I seriously question whether there has been a valid waiver of the right to counsel in an attempted waiver by an indigent adult of his right to counsel solely on the grounds that he did not want to be later forced to reimburse the county for such expenses out of already distressed family resources. Indeed, it was recently held by the Supreme Court of California in In re H., that juvenile courts should not permit minors of indigent *631parents to waive their right to appointed counsel “if the circumstances indicate to the court that such extraneous and improper factors are substantially influencing the minor’s decision.” 19
I see other constitutional objections to the practice which the majority approve.
Parolees, as distinguished from probationers, are not required, under pain of parole revocation, to reimburse the county for the costs of providing defense services.20 Since no indigent convicted defendant obviously can start to repay the costs of counsel fees until he is out of prison, on parole or probation, it does not appear that the minimal requirements of the equal protection clause have been met. In State ex rel. Garner v. Gray,21 this court held that where there is a distinction between classes, that distinction must have some reasonable basis in order not to violate the constitutional right of equal protection. I can find no rational basis for requiring probationers to repay the costs of their defense and yet not require such repayment of parolees.
I have spelled out some of the constitutional infirmities with the reimbursement for counsel fees which this court today validates.22 These reasons underlie the *632American Bar Association’s refusal to countenance such practice. The Minimum Standards for Criminal Justice Relating to Providing Defense Services provide:
“6.4 Reimbursement.
“Reimbursement of counsel or the organization or governmental unit providing counsel should not be required, except on the ground of fraud in obtaining the determination of eligibility.” 23
A similar recommendation was very recently made in Wisconsin by the Citizens Study Committee on Judicial Organization. As well as pointing to constitutional objections, the report suggests such reimbursement probably hinders rehabilitation. The committee recommendation is as follows:
“Wisconsin Statute Sec. 973.09, permitting the judge to impose any ‘reasonable and appropriate’ conditions as part of probation/should be amended to clearly prohibit the repayment of attorney’s fees as a condition of probation for indigent defendants.” 24
Interestingly, the committee also recommends the repeal of sec. 256.66, Stats., which permits a county to bring civil action against an indigent defendant to recover counsel costs, and also the amending of sec. 973.06, to prohibit the imposition of those costs against qualified indigents.25
I would modify the order appealed from only insofar as the probation revocation was based on the violation of the one condition of defendant’s probation which in*633validly imposed on defendant the obligation to reimburse the county for counsel fees. This condition is severable from and does not affect the other (valid) conditions of the probation.
I am authorized to state that Mr. Chief Justice Hallows and Mr. Justice Heffernan join in this opinion.
Wis. Const., art. I, sec. 7.
U. S. Const., sixth amendment, made applicable to states by the fourteenth amendment, see Gideon v. Wainwright, infra, footnote 10.
Sec. 973.09 (1), Stats., provides: “(1) When a person is convicted of a crime, the court may, by order, withhold sentence or impose sentence and stay its execution, and in either case place him on probation to the department for a stated period, stating in the order the reasons therefor, and may impose any conditions which appear to be reasonable and appropriate. The period of probation may he made consecutive to a sentence on a different charge, whether imposed at the same time or previously.” (Emphasis supplied.)
Sec. 973.06 (1) (e), Stats., provides: “(1) The costs taxable against the defendant shall consist of the following items and no others: ... (e) Attorney fees payable to the defense attorney by the county.”
(1961), 14 Wis. 2d 186, 192, 109 N. W. 2d 889: “We, therefore, determine that there existed no statutory bar to the circuit court’s requiring the defendant to pay as costs of prosecution the expense of the special prosecutor’s fees and the costs of the audit as a condition to the defendant’s probation.”
Revised Stats. 1858, eh. 163, sec. 2. See also: State v. Beals (1971), 52 Wis. 2d 599, 610, 191 N. W. 2d 221.
See: Annot. (1941), 130 A. L. R. 1439, 1450; Carpenter v. Dane County (1859), 9 Wis. 249 (*274).
State v. Beals, supra, footnote 6, at page 610, citing Carpenter v. Dane County, supra, footnote 7.
(1932), 287 U. S. 45, 53 Sup. Ct. 55, 77 L. Ed. 158.
(1963), 372 U. S. 335, 83 Sup. Ct. 792, 9 L. Ed. 2d 799.
(1972), 407 U. S. 25, 92 Sup. Ct. 2006, 32 L. Ed. 2d 530.
In re Allen (1969), 71 Cal. 2d 388, 78 Cal. Rptr. 207, 455 Pac. 2d 143.
Id. at page 391.
Id.
(1968), 390 U. S. 570, 88 Sup. Ct. 1209, 20 L. Ed. 2d 138. See also: 18 U. S. Code, sec. 1201 (a) (1964).
United States v. Jackson, supra, footnote 15, at page 581.
Id. at page 582. See also: Strange v. James (D. C. Kansas 1971), 828 Fed. Supp. 1230, 1232, 1233.
(1938), 304 U. S. 458, 465, 58 Sup. Ct. 1019, 82 L. Ed. 1461. See also: Comment, Reimbursement of Defense Costs as a Condition of Probation for Indigents, 67 Mich. L. Rev. (1969), 1404, 1415, 1416.
(1970), 2 Cal. 3d 513, 525, 86 Cal. Rptr. 76, 83, 468 Pac. 2d 204.
Compare see. 57.06, Stats. (Paroles from state prisons and house of correction), with sec. 973.06 (1) (e) (Costs of attorney’s fees), and sec. 973.09 (1) (Probation), along with State v. Welkos, supra, footnote 5 and text.
(1972), 55 Wis. 2d 574, 586, 587, 201 N. W. 2d 163. See also: Baxstrom v. Herold (1966), 383 U. S. 107, 111, 86 Sup. Ct. 760, 15 L. Ed. 2d 620; Humphrey v. Cady (1972), 405 U. S. 504, 512, 92 Sup. Ct. 1048, 31 L. Ed. 2d 394.
Whether a violation of the thirteenth amendment (prohibiting imprisonment which is not punishment for a crime) is involved by imprisonment for the nonpayment of defense attorney’s fees in a criminal case has been commented upon recently by one appellate court. In Wright v. Matthews (1968), 209 Va. 246, 163 S. E. 2d 158, the Supreme Court of Appeals of Virginia held *632that payment of court costs is not punishment for a crime as is, for example, a fine, and therefore violates the thirteenth amendment.
American Bar Association Project on Minimum Standards for Criminal Justice, Standards Relating to Providing Defense Services, sec. 6.4 (Approved draft, 1968).
Report of Citizens Study Committee on Judicial Organization, see. 6, at page 167 (1973).
Id., sec. 5, at pages 166, 167.

=== CASE 2222955 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:50.813902+00 ===

726 N.E.2d 384 (2000)
Dale R. HANNA, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 33A01-9910-CR-344.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
April 11, 2000.
*386 Tommy L. Strunk, Indianapolis, Indiana, Attorney for Appellant.
Jeffrey A. Modisett, Attorney General of Indiana, J.T. Whitehead, Deputy Attorney General, Indianapolis, Indiana, Attorneys for Appellee.
*385 OPINION
ROBB, Judge
Dale R. Hanna brings an interlocutory appeal of the trial court's denial of his motion to suppress evidence obtained by a warrantless search of a residence.
We reverse.
Issue
Hanna raises one issue for our review, which we restate as: whether the trial court erred in denying his motion to suppress evidence obtained by a warrantless search of a residence where Hanna was an invited overnight guest.
Facts and Procedural History
On July 26, 1997, at approximately 12:57 a.m., Middletown Police Officer David K. Angell responded to a loud music complaint at 186 N. 5th Street. Upon arrival, Officer Angell determined that the loud music was emanating from a ground floor *387 apartment leased by Kevin Hunt. Thereafter, Officer Angell forcefully knocked on the door of Hunt's apartment several times, receiving no response from within. Officer Angell then proceeded to the side of the building and attempted to look into the windows of the apartment, but his view was obstructed by drawn curtains and window blinds. Officer Angell returned to the front door of the apartment and continued to forcefully knock until he broke both the trim around the door and the security chain. From his vantage point outside the now open door, Officer Angell could see no one inside the apartment. Officer Angell then proceeded into and through the residence to the bedroom, where he saw Hunt and Hanna with a white powdery substance, later determined to be cocaine.
Subsequently, the State charged Hanna with possession of cocaine, a Class D felony,[1] possession of marijuana, a Class A misdemeanor,[2] and possession of drug paraphernalia, a Class A misdemeanor.[3] Thereafter, Hanna filed a motion to suppress the evidence gathered during the warrantless search of Hunt's apartment. After a hearing was held on the motion, the trial court denied Hanna's motion to suppress on May 28, 1998. Soon afterward, Hanna filed a motion to reconsider the trial court's order denying the motion to suppress, which the court denied on August 24, 1999. The trial court certified this case for interlocutory appeal on October 1, 1999. Additional facts will be provided as necessary.
Discussion and Decision
I. Standard of Review for Admission of Evidence
When ruling on the admissibility of evidence, the trial court is afforded broad discretion, and Indiana appellate courts will only reverse the ruling upon a showing of abuse of discretion. Smoote v. State, 708 N.E.2d 1, 3 (Ind.1999). An abuse of discretion involves a decision that is clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and circumstances before the court. Stone v. State, 536 N.E.2d 534, 538 (Ind. Ct.App.1989), trans. denied. When reviewing the trial court's ruling on the validity of the search, we consider the evidence most favorable to the trial court's ruling and any uncontradicted evidence to the contrary to determine whether there is sufficient evidence to support the ruling. Rook v. State, 679 N.E.2d 997, 999 (Ind.Ct. App.1997) (citing Peterson v. State, 674 N.E.2d 528, 532 (Ind.1996), cert. denied, 522 U.S. 1078, 118 S.Ct. 858, 139 L.Ed.2d 757 (1998)).
II. Warrantless Search and Seizure of a Residence
Hanna contends that the trial court erred when it denied his motion to suppress because the warrantless search of the apartment in which Hanna was an overnight guest was in violation of his constitutional rights as set forth in the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution and Article I, Section 11, of the Indiana State Constitution. The State contends that the evidence is admissible because Officer Angell's initial entry was justified by exigent circumstances and because upon entry, the contraband fell under the plain view doctrine. The State concedes that Hanna has standing to challenge the evidence gathered during the warrantless search.[4] Brief of Appellee at *388 5. We hold that the trial court erred in denying Hanna's motion to suppress evidence because the warrantless search was clearly illegal.
A. Probable Cause
Hanna contends that the warrantless search of the apartment was illegal. Initially, we note our standard of review when reviewing a trial court's ruling on the validity of a search and seizure: we consider the evidence most favorable to the ruling and any uncontradicted evidence to the contrary to determine whether there is sufficient evidence to support the ruling. Rook, 679 N.E.2d at 999. If the evidence is conflicting, we consider only the evidence favorable to the ruling and will affirm if the ruling is supported by substantial probative evidence. Id.
The Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution protects both privacy and possessory interests by prohibiting unreasonable searches and seizures. Sloane v. State, 686 N.E.2d 1287, 1290 (Ind.Ct.App.1997), trans. denied, (citing Culpepper v. State, 662 N.E.2d 670, 675 (Ind.Ct.App.1996), trans. denied). Under the Fourth Amendment, a warrantless search can only be justified by probable cause and one of the few, well-delineated exceptions to the warrant requirements, and the State carries the burden of proving that the action fell within one of the exceptions. Lomax v. State, 510 N.E.2d 215, 220 (Ind.Ct.App.1987). Although an exception may justify proceeding without a warrant, it does not eliminate the need for probable cause. Culpepper, 662 N.E.2d at 675.
Hanna first argues that the State failed to prove that Officer Angell had probable cause to engage in a warrantless search of Hunt's apartment. In response, the State asserts that Officer Angell had probable cause to enter Hunt's apartment because of the possibility that a crime was being committed due to the volume of the noise emitting from the apartment, and the apparent absence of residents inside the dwelling which could indicate that the occupants were either hurt or injured. However, Officer Angell testified at the suppression hearing that, before entering the apartment, he did not believe or suspect that the occupants of the apartment were committing any type of criminal activity, besides violating the noise ordinance of the town of Middletown. R. 74. Thus, it is clearly evident that Officer Angell did not have facts upon which he could reasonably conclude that the occupants were engaging in or were the victims of criminal activity.
Second, the State argues that Officer Angell had probable cause to enter the residence because he "entered the premises in order to investigate and abate the noise disturbance, and the disturbance was a potential violation of Indiana Code § 35-45-1-3." Brief of Appellee at 5. Officer Angell testified at the suppression hearing that the loud noise emitting from Hunt's apartment violated the Middletown noise ordinance. R. 71. He further testified that a violation of the civil ordinance resulted in a fine of ten or fifteen dollars, but that a warning normally sufficed to reduce the noise. Id.
The State, however, does not argue the municipal noise ordinance on appeal, but rather asserts that the disorderly conduct statute, codified at Indiana Code section 35-45-1-3, gave Officer Angell probable cause to enter the apartment. However, the disorderly conduct statute is *389 violated only after a person continues to make unreasonable noise "after being asked to stop." Price v. State, 622 N.E.2d 954, 967 (Ind.1993). This warning requirement provides special protection to persons unaware that their noise level has become unreasonable. Id. Officer Angell did not confront the occupants until after he had entered the inner sanctum of the apartment. Thus, we cannot envision any articulable facts which would provide Officer Angell probable cause to enter Hunt's apartment without a warrant.[5]
B. "Fruit of the Poisonous Tree"
Because we have determined that Officer Angell did not have probable cause to enter the residence, we must now determine whether the evidence obtained from the search of the apartment should be excluded as the "fruit of the poisonous tree." The "fruit of the poisonous tree" doctrine is one facet of the exclusionary rule of evidence which bars the admissibility in a criminal proceeding of evidence obtained in the course of unlawful searches and seizures. See C.D.T. v. State, 653 N.E.2d 1041, 1044-45 (Ind.Ct.App.1995) (quoting Mapp v. Ohio, 367 U.S. 643, 81 S.Ct. 1684, 6 L.Ed.2d 1081 (1961)); Mundt v. State, 612 N.E.2d 566, 567, n. 1 (Ind.Ct. App.1993), trans. denied. When applied, the doctrine operates to bar not only evidence directly obtained, but also evidence derivatively gained as a result of information learned or leads obtained during an unlawful search or seizure. Wong Sun v. United States, 371 U.S. 471, 484-85, 83 S.Ct. 407, 9 L.Ed.2d 441 (1963); Jackson v. State, 669 N.E.2d 744, 750 (Ind.Ct.App. 1996); Herald v. State, 511 N.E.2d 5, 8 (Ind.Ct.App.1987), trans. denied. To invoke the doctrine, a defendant must show that challenged evidence was obtained by the State in violation of the defendant's Fourth Amendment rights. New York v. Harris, 495 U.S. 14, 19, 110 S.Ct. 1640, 109 L.Ed.2d 13 (1990). Stated differently, the defendant must show that the search or seizure was illegal in the first instance. Where there is no illegal search or seizure, there can be no "fruit of the poisonous tree." Deckard v. State, 670 N.E.2d 1, 6 (Ind.1996); Troyer v. State, 605 N.E.2d 1183, 1185 (Ind.Ct.App.1993), trans. denied.
However, the "fruit of the poisonous tree" doctrine has no application when the derivative evidence has an "independent source," Silverthorne Lumber Co. v. United States, 251 U.S. 385, 392, 40 S.Ct. 182, 64 L.Ed. 319 (1920), when the "connection between the lawless conduct of the police and the discovery of the challenged evidence has `become so attenuated as to dissipate the taint,'" Wong Sun, 371 U.S. at 487, 83 S.Ct. 407, and when the challenged evidence would inevitably have been properly obtained. Nix v. Williams, 467 U.S. 431, 104 S.Ct. 2501, 81 L.Ed.2d 377 (1984).
In the present case, we believe that Hanna has shown that the drugs obtained during the search of Hunt's apartment were in violation of Hanna's Fourth Amendment rights. Because Officer Angell did not have probable cause to make the initial entry into the residence, all of the drugs obtained in the apartment were the fruits of an illegal search. Moreover, we believe that the illegal drugs obtained from the search were directly connected to the illegal entry by Officer Angell, and thus, they have no independent source. Therefore, the "fruit of the poisonous tree doctrine" bars the admission of the drugs into evidence, and the trial court erred in denying Hanna's motion to suppress.
Conclusion
Based on the foregoing, we hold that the police did not have probable cause to enter the residence without a warrant, and thus, all evidence obtained from the illegal *390 search should have been excluded pursuant to Hanna's motion to suppress.
Reversed.
BROOK, J., and NAJAM, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Ind.Code § 35-48-21-6.
[2]  Ind.Code § 35-48-4-11-(1).
[3]  Ind.Code § 35-48-4-8-3(a)(1).
[4]  We believe that the police intruded upon an area in which Hanna had a reasonable expectation of privacy protected under the United States and Indiana Constitutions. See U.S. Const. Amend. IV; Ind. Const. Art. I § 11. An overnight guest has a legitimate expectation of privacy in his host's home and may claim the protection of the Fourth Amendment, but one who is merely present with the consent of the householder may not. Minnesota v. Olson, 495 U.S. 91, 110 S.Ct. 1684, 109 L.Ed.2d 85 (1990). More recently, the United States Supreme Court in Minnesota v. Carter, 525 U.S. 83, 119 S.Ct. 469, 142 L.Ed.2d 373 (1998), held that defendants, who were in another person's apartment for a short time solely for the purpose of packaging cocaine, had no legitimate expectation of privacy in the apartment, and thus, any search which may have occurred did not violate their Fourth Amendment rights. In the present case, a previous relationship existed between Hanna and Hunt; they had been friends for five years. R. 78. Hanna had stayed overnight at Hunt's apartment over twenty times within the few months before July 26, 1997. R. 80. Therefore, Hanna, as Hunt's overnight guest, had a reasonable expectation of privacy in Hunt's apartment and is entitled to the protection of the Fourth Amendment.
[5]  We note that the State did not charge Hanna with disorderly conduct.

=== CASE 9740333 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:32:35.442997+00 ===

OPINION
STATON, Sr. Judge
Troy Metcalf appeals the order of the trial court dismissing his action for failure to prosecute. Metcalf raises one issue for our review, which we restate as: whether the trial court abused its discretion by granting the Estate of Hastings’s (“Estate”) motion to dismiss for failure to prosecute pursuant to Indiana Trial Rule 41(E).
We affirm.
Metcalf was injured in an automobile accident involving Barbara Hastings. Metcalf filed a personal injury suit against Hastings in Montgomery Circuit Court, and a trial was scheduled for April 8, 1997. Hastings died the week prior to trial and the trial was cancelled. On April 23, 1997, Hastings’s estate was opened in the Montgomery Superior Court. Metcalf filed a claim against the Estate on August 4, 1997. On October 29, 1997, Metcalf filed a petition for a pre-trial conference in the Superior Court. The Superior Court judge denied his petition, stating that the Circuit Court retained jurisdiction over the personal injury action. Metcalf took no further action on the suit in Circuit Court, and on April 28, 1998, the Estate filed a motion to dismiss for failure to prosecute pursuant to T.R. 41(E). After the motion to dismiss was filed, Metcalf requested a pre-trial conference in Circuit Court. A pre-trial conference and a hearing on the T.R. 41(E) motion were scheduled for May 26, 1998. On May 19, 1998, the Estate filed a renewal of its T.R. 41(E) motion, and requested that the May 26 hearing be continued. It was reset for June 26, 1998. Metcalf then filed a motion for continuance, and the hearing was rescheduled for August 14, 1998. Metcalf filed another motion to continue the hearing. The trial court denied that motion, but agreed to conduct the hearing on the motion to dismiss by telephone.
On August 14, 1998, the telephone conference was initiated at 1:00 p.m., but Met-calfs counsel was unable to reach a telephone until around 1:30. By that time, the trial judge was unavailable to participate in the conference call. Metcalf made no attempt to reschedule the hearing. Thereafter, on October 14, 1998, the trial court granted the Estate’s T.R. 41(E) motion to dismiss for failure to prosecute. Metcalf filed a motion to correct error, which was denied after a hearing.
Metcalf contends that the trial court abused its discretion by granting the Estate’s motion to dismiss for failure to prosecute. Specifically, he argues that the trial court erred by granting the motion without holding a hearing, and by failing to attribute a portion of the delay to the initiation and execution of probate proceedings.
The authority of a trial court to dismiss an action for failure to prosecute is grounded in T.R. 41(E), which provides:
Whenever there has been a failure to comply with these rules or when no action has been taken in a civil case for a period of sixty (60) days, the court, on motion of a party or on its own motion shall order a hearing for the purpose of dismissing such case. The court shall enter an order of dismissal at plaintiffs costs if the plaintiff shall not show sufficient cause at or before such hearing. Dismissal may be withheld or reinstatement of dismissal may be made subject to the condition that the plaintiff comply with these rules and diligently prosecute the action and upon such terms that the court in its discretion determines to be necessary to assure such diligent prosecution.
We will reverse a dismissal for failure to prosecute only in the event of an abuse of *374discretion, which occurs only if the decision of the trial court is against the logic and effect of the facts and circumstances before it. Lee v. Friedman, 637 N.E.2d 1318, 1320 (Ind.Ct.App.1994). We will affirm if there is any evidence that supports the decision of the trial court. Id.
The plain language of T.R. 41(E) requires the trial court to order a hearing once a party has moved to dismiss a case for failure to prosecute. See Rumfelt v. Himes, 438 N.E.2d 980, 983 (Ind.1982). However, when the court orders a hearing and notice of the hearing date is sent to the plaintiff, the hearing requirement of T.R. 41(E) is satisfied, regardless of whether the plaintiff or his counsel attends the hearing. Lake County Trust v. Highland Plan Com’n, 674 N.E.2d 626, 629 (Ind.Ct.App.1996), trans. denied.
Here, the court ordered a hearing on the Estate’s T.R. 41(E) motion, and Metcalf received notice of that scheduled hearing date. Metcalfs attorney made arrangements to hold the hearing by telephone. However, he was unable to take part in the telephone conference at the time that had been arranged. Despite the attorney’s failure to participate in the hearing, he made no effort to reschedule the hearing. After sixty days had passed following the date of the scheduled telephone hearing, the trial court entered an order granting the Estate’s motion to dismiss.
Metcalf argues that the trial court erred by ruling on the Estate’s motion without holding a hearing. However, the trial court ordered a hearing on the T.R. 41(E) motion to dismiss and Metcalf had an opportunity to respond; this was sufficient to satisfy the hearing requirement of T.R. 41(E). See Lake County, 674 N.E.2d at 629. Therefore, we hold that the trial court did not err by dismissing the case without holding an adversarial hearing.
Metcalf also contends that the trial court erred by not attributing some delay to the probate proceedings. Specifically; Metcalf argues that part of the reason for his delay in prosecuting the case was that he was waiting for the personal representative to allow or disallow the claim he filed against the Estate. Thus, he argues, that delay should not be attributed to him. We disagree.
First, we note that the burden was on Metcalf to prove, at or before the hearing, that there was sufficient cause or excuse for his delay. See Gibbs v. Douglas M. Grimes, P.C., 489 N.E.2d 638, 642 (Ind.Ct.App.1986), reh. granted on other grounds, 491 N.E.2d 1004 (Ind.Ct.App.1986). Due to his failure to participate in the hearing, Metcalf did not meet this burden. Too, Metcalf acknowledges that the Superior Court judge, who was handling the probate matter, advised him on November 7, 1997 that the action against the Estate was to proceed in Circuit Court. Because Met-calf took no action to prosecute the case from November 7, 1997 until the Estate filed its T.R. 41(E) motion, we hold that the trial court did not abuse its discretion by dismissing Metcalfs claim.
Affirmed.
BAKER, J., concur.
SULLIVAN, J., dissents with opinion.

=== CASE 9740334 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:32:35.44721+00 ===

SULLIVAN, Judge,
dissenting
Notwithstanding the implication drawn from Lake County Trust No. 3190 v. Highland Plan Comm’n (1996) Ind.App., 674 N.E.2d 626, that a dismissal hearing is not required by T.R. 41(E), I would note that in that case the appellant was arguing that “the healing on dismissal held by the trial court did not meet the requirements of [T.R. 41(E) ].” Id. at 629. It is therefore clear that, unlike the case before us, a hearing on dismissal was in fact held.
I agree that Metcalf was guilty of inordinate delay in prosecuting his claim in the Montgomery Circuit Court. The most culpable delay occurred when, after the failed telephone conference of August 14, 1998, he made no attempt to reschedule the hearing during the ensuing two months.
*375However, I read T.R. 41(E) to clearly contemplate that a hearing not only be scheduled, but that it be conducted unless, and only unless the plaintiff has, prior to the hearing, been afforded opportunity to demonstrate sufficient good cause for the delay and has in fact done so.
Here, there was never a hearing upon the T.R. 41(E) motion, as required by the rule itself. Therefore, despite Metcalfs delay, I would reverse and remand for further proceedings.

=== CASE 9740338 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:32:41.069331+00 ===

Robert W. Hansen, J.
(concurring). A garbage can is not a safety-deposit box. It is not an alternative place of safekeeping. Rather, it is a place for discarding waste materials. Abandonment derives from the owner’s knowledge that the discarded materials may be picked up by trash collectors five minutes later — or five hours or five days. The writer would see the test, not where on the property the garbage container awaits the trash collector’s visit, but whether it is placed so as to be available for pickup. That the trash barrel here was at the rear of the home does not place it beyond the trash collector’s pickup servicé, unless it is established that garbage and trash collectors in the community involved made only curbside pickups. In the case before' us, the trash collectors surely had the right to entry on the premises to remove the contents of garbage and trash containers standing to the rear of the house. On this record, as to the search of the trash barrel, the writer would find no *669“reasonable expectation of privacy” reached, much less disturbed. Where, as to such search, the majority finds harmless error, the writer would find no error at all.

=== CASE 2222972 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:51.340023+00 ===

205 N.W.2d 523 (1973)
189 Neb. 792
LIBBEY-OWENS FORD GLASS COMPANY, a foreign corporation, Appellee,
v.
L & M PAPER COMPANY, a corporation, et al., Appellants.
O. J. MILLER, Appellee,
v.
L & M PAPER COMPANY, a corporation, et al., Appellants.
HENNINGSEN FOODS, INC., a corporation, Appellee,
v.
L & M PAPER COMPANY, a corporation, et al., Appellants.
Nos. 38552-38554.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
March 23, 1973.
*525 John R. Douglas of Cassem, Tierney, Adams & Henatsch, Harry B. Otis of Gaines, Spittler & Otis Gross, Welch, Vinardi, Kauffman, Schatz & Day, Lee A. Larson, Omaha, for appellants.
Robert W. Haney, Haney, Wintroub & Haney, Omaha, for appellee.
Heard before WHITE, C. J., and SPENCER, BOSLAUGH, SMITH, McCOWN, NEWTON, and CLINTON, JJ.
*526 SPENCER, Justice.
This appeal involves three consolidated cases to recover for fire losses sustained at Miller's Industrial Center in Omaha, Nebraska. The alleged cause of the fire was a forklift truck manufactured by Yale & Towne, Inc., and sold by Phil D. Fitzwater and Gerald E. Gathmann, doing business as All Makes Forklift Service, to L & M Paper Company, a corporation, the user of the forklift at the time of the fire. Yale & Towne cross-petitioned against All Makes and L & M, and All Makes cross-petitioned against Yale & Towne and L & M. By stipulation of the defendants, the cross-claims were submitted to the court and not decided by the jury. The jury returned a verdict for all the plaintiffs against all the defendants, and the trial court denied all the cross-petitions. We affirm.
Miller's Industrial Center consisted of three adjoining buildings. The fire, which occurred on March 2, 1965, originated in building No. 2, which was leased to L & M. The other two plaintiffs leased the adjoining buildings. All the buildings are owned by Miller. L & M processed used paper, primarily tabulation cards, which were chopped into small pieces and compressed into bales up to 1,000 pounds. The forklift was used to move the bales from the baling machine to a place of storage, and eventually to load them on railroad cars. L & M had been using a propane-operated forklift truck, also purchased from All Makes. This truck proved inadequate, and was returned. On the recommendation of Fitzwater of All Makes, L & M purchased the Yale & Towne electric forklift truck involved herein. It was received in late November or early December of 1964.
The order for the forklift, as printed, provided for: "dust covers on lift and drive motors." This was crossed out, and the notation made, "enclosed motors." The motors were enclosed. All Makes was well aware of the nature of the business where the truck was to be used, but did not communicate this information to Yale & Towne other than might be inferred from the statement, "enclosed motors."
The forklift was manufactured with a resistor coil located underneath the forklift, within a few inches of the floor, toward the front. It had a V-shaped trough approximately 8 inches in length, located underneath the coil, within 1 to 1½ inches from the coil itself. The purpose of the trough was to protect the coil from damage from being struck by some foreign object on the floor. There was no covering placed over the coil. It was unprotected and exposed from above.
One of Yale & Towne's design engineers testified the coil was designed to heat to 1,200 degrees Fahrenheit. The evidence is undisputed that this information was never communicated to All Makes, the local distributor, nor to L & M, the purchaser. This information was not to be found in any of the written material furnished to the parties, nor was there any warning of this propensity on the forklift itself. Yale & Towne's design engineer testified the use of a forklift with an exposed coil was dangerous in an atmosphere containing combustible material. The room used by L & M was not provided with automatic sprinklers. They were not aware of the ordinance pertaining to sprinklers. Flammable material was stored in the basement. After paper had been baled, L & M personnel would stack the bales on the north and south of a center aisle awaiting shipment.
Plaintiffs' expert was asked if this type of truck was a proper and safe design for use in a warehouse, i. e., a paper baling warehouse. His response is as follows: "The design for the E type, in this Automatic truck permits dust to collect in a trough underneath the resistor coil, which in a sense is a heater coil during the operation of the unit and therefore is unsafe from a design standpoint, because it can collect an amount of dust in the shield that is protecting it mechanically, and it rests *527 the dust against the resistor which is heated during the operation."
Plaintiffs' expert witness further testified that the paper that could collect in the collector underneath the coil would not necessarily have to be paper that fell on the coil and into the shield, but could be paper that had been brought up from the floor by reason of the draft reaction of the heat. The heat would have a stack effect and would pick up dust and small bits of paper, depending on the amount of the heat and the weight of the paper. If the resistor coil was covered, there would be no way for this accumulation to touch the coil itself.
During the 3 months the forklift was in the possession of L & M, their employees experienced difficulty with it. Various electrical points on the truck broke down or went bad, and the exposed resistor coil would heat up. The resistor coil would get hot enough for the coil to have a red glow. On occasion, it would even become cherry red. When the coil became cherry red, the employees were instructed not to operate the machine. On other occasions they were instructed to take the forklift over to the air compressor every 2 hours to blow the accumulation off the coil and to keep it and the rest of the machine clean.
All Makes was kept advised of the trouble, and on occasion the truck was taken back to the All Makes shop. The All Makes forklift serviceman thought the cherry red condition was caused by a malfunction of the machine. Neither he nor his employers knew that the machine was designed so that the coil would reach 1,200 degrees Fahrenheit. He believed something mechanical was causing the supposed malfunction and in each instance attempted to repair it. Whenever he returned the forklift to L & M he was under the impression that he had corrected the problem.
The forklift was accelerated by the operator turning the handle through three points. The first of the three points caused the machine to move at a low speed. Most of the electrical energy at this speed would be dissipated through the resistor coil in the form of heat. The handle turned to the second speed allowed additional acceleration, with only half the electrical energy passing through the resistor coil. Upon the handle being turned to the third point, all the electrical energy was applied to the motor and the resistor coil was entirely bypassed.
On the day of the fire, All Makes forklift serviceman was called to L & M's place of business because the truck was again heating up. He replaced the points which were broken. He also took a wire from third, or low speed, so that it would break down the heat resistance. The truck then operated in second and high. What he did had the effect of cutting the heat resistance.
Loose paper was on the floor when the machine was put back into operation. The serviceman told Trachtenbarg, one of the owners of L & M, to keep the machine clean by blowing it off to prevent a fire. It would keep the paper from building up around the resistor coil. He also advised Trachtenbarg to sweep the aisles and the area where the truck would run.
The fire occurred about 7 p. m. Only one employee was on the premises. He was operating the forklift when a bale broke and scraps of confetti-like paper fell on the resistor coil, ignited, and set fire to the building. He was going to run the broken bale back through the chopper. The chopper has a hydraulic ram which compresses the chopped paper into a bale. He had taken one piece of the broken bale over to the chopper and was going back to get another piece when he noticed smoke coming from the front of the forklift.
The employee observed the smoke coming from between the forks, and got down on his hands and knees to see exactly where the smoke was coming from. He could see a coil of wire with paper around it that was smoking. He tried to put the fire out by smothering it with his hands, *528 but was unsuccessful. The flame was only an inch or 2 high. He then got his old jacket, which was on top of the baler, and tried to smother the fire with the jacket, but was unsuccessful. He then took a fire extinguisher off a nearby post, turned it upside down, but nothing came out. He then read the directions and followed them, but again nothing came out. He shook the fire extinguisher and dropped it on the floor, but still nothing came out. Although the fire extinguisher was not as heavy as he thought it should be, he could hear liquid inside it. When the fire extinguisher would not work, he ran and called the fire department. He believes about 5 minutes transpired from the time he first saw the fire until he called the fire department. The testimony is undisputed there were seven fire extinguishers on the premises which had last been serviced approximately 8 months before the fire.
Yale & Towne's possible liability is premised on three theories of negligence: (1) Negligent construction; (2) negligent design; and (3) failure to warn the distributor and consumer of the design propensity of the coil to heat to 1,200 degrees Fahrenheit.
We assume negligent construction to include a malfunction in a perfectly-designed product. On this assumption we conclude that no evidence was adduced to sustain this theory of negligence. Yale & Towne's design engineer testified the coil was designed to heat to 1,200 degrees Fahrenheit. If a malfunction was responsible for the fire, that fact is not apparent from the record.
We interpret negligent design as used herein to mean a forklift which is functioning properly but is dangerous due to a faulty design. Yale & Towne's design engineer admitted that the use of a forklift with an exposed coil was dangerous in an atmosphere containing combustible material. Plaintiffs' expert specifically testified that the unit was unsafe from a design standpoint for the use to which it was put.
The third theory of negligence is for failure to warn that the unit could be dangerous for its intended use. In this regard, Yale & Towne argues that the forklift was not defective when sold, but became so only because of its use in a place for which it was not intended. The difficulty with this argument is that the heating range of the resistor was known only to Yale & Towne. It was in no way made evident to the distributor or user, either by printed material or other warning. Unaware of the design propensity of the resistor coil to heat to 1,200 degrees Fahrenheit, All Makes recommended it for use in a paper shredding and baling plant.
Can Yale & Towne avoid liability when it is obvious that because of its failure to warn it was impossible for All Makes or L & M to properly evaluate the functioning of the forklift? The Yale & Towne forklift literature contained warnings in other respects where the danger was not quite so great. The jury could reasonably assume that Yale & Towne's design engineers should have realized that if all motors were to be enclosed, the forklift was to be used in an area where the atmosphere would include dust and possibly flammable fibers. Without a warning of some nature, Yale & Towne should have known that the distributor and purchaser of its forklift would not realize its dangerous condition.
Yale & Towne further argues that the plaintiffs cannot recover from it because after the defect became obvious, L & M continued to use the product and this relieves the manufacturer from liability. It argues in substance that its negligence could not be the proximate cause of any injury sustained by the plaintiffs but at most any negligence with which it could be charged furnished only a condition by which the injury was made possible.
Yale & Towne relies on the line of cases such as Lock v. Packard Flying Service, Inc. (1970), 185 Neb. 71, 173 N.W.2d 516, 41 A.L.R. 3d 1313, in which we said: "The *529 causal connection is broken if between the defendant's negligent act and the plaintiff's injury `there has intervened the negligence of a third person who had full control of the situation and whose negligence was such as the defendant was not bound to anticipate and could not be said to have contemplated, which later negligence resulted directly in the injury to the plaintiff.'"
The fallacy with Yale & Towne's contention is that it has not met the conditions of the cases on which it places its reliance. Because of Yale & Towne's failure to inform its distributor and purchaser, no one knew the heating of the resistor was a design characteristic and was to be expected. All persons associated with the distributor and the purchaser believed the resistor coil to be heating up because of a malfunction.
Fitzwater testified that he did not realize the forklift was not suitable for use in certain areas, such as L & M Paper Company. All Makes forklift serviceman testified he had been servicing forklifts for approximately 1 to 1½ years prior to the fire, and he had never been advised that the coil would heat to 1,200 degrees. He felt when the coil got hot something was wrong. This was the first time he had run into a heating resistor so he checked the manual furnished by Yale & Towne for reference to a hot coil, but did not find anything to indicate or cover the problem.
In Driekosen v. Black, Sivalls & Bryson, Inc. (1954), 158 Neb. 531, 64 N.W.2d 88, a case involving a propane gas system, we adopted the language of Restatement, Torts, s. 388, p. 1039, as follows: "`One who supplies directly or through a third person a chattel for another to use, is subject to liability to those whom the supplier should expect to use the chattel with the consent of the other or to be in the vicinity of its probable use, for bodily harm caused by the use of the chattel in the manner for which and by a person for whose use it is supplied, if the supplier (a) knows, or from facts known to him should realize, that the chattel is or is likely to be dangerous for the use for which it is supplied; (b) and has no reason to believe that those for whose use the chattel is supplied will realize its dangerous condition; and (c) fails to exercise reasonable care to inform them of its dangerous condition or of the facts which make it likely to be so.'"
The jury could have found that in the absence of instructions or warnings from Yale & Towne, both All Makes and L & M could reasonably assume the heating up of the resistor coil was a malfunction which was repairable. The distributor's serviceman testified that on the very morning of the fire he repaired the forklift and told L & M that it was working satisfactorily. The evidence presented, including the testimony of Yale & Towne's products reliability manager, leaves no doubt that the forklift in question was defective for its use at the L & M Paper Company. We find Yale & Towne had a duty to warn its distributors and users of the heating propensity of the exposed resistor coil.
It is not every intervening act or occurrence which will break the necessary causal connection and insulate the manufacturer from liability from his original negligent act or omission. The rule is very clearly stated in Comstock v. General Motors Corp. (1959), 358 Mich. 163, 99 N.W.2d 627, 78 A.L.R. 2d 449. Generally, the effect of an intervening negligent act is tested by determining whether it was such as might reasonably have been foreseen as a consequence of the claimed negligence of the original actor. We are dealing with such an act here. The law does not require precision in foreseeing the exact hazard or consequence which happens. It is sufficient if what occurs is one of the kind of consequences which might reasonably be foreseen. The question whether negligence is, in view of the intervening negligence of a third person, such a continuing and substantial factor in producing an accident as to be a proximate cause of the injury, is a question of fact, rather than a question of law.
*530 The considerations to be determined in deciding whether an intervening force is a superseding cause are well stated in Restatement, Torts 2d, s. 442, p. 467, as follows: "The following considerations are of importance in determining whether an intervening force is a superseding cause of harm to another:
"(a) the fact that its intervention brings about harm different in kind from that which would otherwise have resulted from the actor's negligence;
"(b) the fact that its operation or the consequences thereof appear after the event to be extraordinary rather than normal in view of the circumstances existing at the time of its operation;
"(c) the fact that the intervening force is operating independently of any situation created by the actor's negligence, or, on the other hand, is or is not a normal result of such a situation;
"(d) the fact that the operation of the intervening force is due to a third person's act or to his failure to act;
"(e) the fact that intervening force is due to an act of a third person which is wrongful toward the other and as such subjects the third person to liability to him;
"(f) the degree of culpability of a wrongful act of a third person which sets the intervening force in motion."
We said in Driekosen v. Black, Sivalls & Bryson, Inc. (1954), 158 Neb. 531, 64 N.W.2d 88: "If the original negligence is of a character which, according to the usual experience of mankind, is liable to invite or induce the intervention of some subsequent cause, the intervening cause will not excuse it, and the subsequent mischief will be held to be a result of the original negligence."
In an action based on negligence, the question of whether or not there was an intervening cause which removed the negligence of the defendant as the proximate cause is usually one for a jury. Wax v. Co-Operative Refinery Assn. (1951), 154 Neb. 42, 46 N.W.2d 769.
When separate and independent acts of negligence by different persons combine to produce a single injury, each participant is liable for the damage although one of them alone would not have caused the result. Umberger v. Sankey (1949), 151 Neb. 488, 38 N.W.2d 21.
There is no evidence that All Makes actually was aware that the resistor coil was designed to heat to 1,200 degrees Fahrenheit. However, there is evidence from which the jury could conclude that All Makes should have realized the design propensity. All Makes had recommended the forklift for use by L & M, knowing the exact nature of their business. As a distributor All Makes would be presumed to know the characteristic of the equipment it sold. It was well aware that the resistor coil was heating cherry red for a considerable period before the fire. It made no attempt to communicate with the factory to ascertain if this condition was actually a malfunction.
All Makes forklift serviceman made several attempts to correct the supposed malfunction. On each occasion he thought he had done so. Yet, the fact that the condition continued to exist raises a serious question in view of the location where the equipment was operating. All Makes may not have realized the danger, but its frequent occurrence should have alerted All Makes to the danger. If All Makes had consulted with Yale & Towne about the difficulty it was encountering with the forklift, it undoubtedly would have learned the condition was a design propensity rather than a malfunction. We cannot say that the jury was wrong in finding All Makes to be negligent.
L & M had been experiencing difficulties with the lift. They were well aware of its heating propensity. The certainly *531 should have appreciated the possibility of fire. It is true they expected All Makes to repair the malfunction. It is also true that they relied on the recommendation of All Makes that the lift was suitable for their work. However, the problems encountered were sufficient to put them on notice of the danger involved. The fact that they instructed their employees to blow the machine off with compressed air every 2 hours indicated they were aware of the danger. The nature of their business was such that fire would be a constant hazard.
Prior to starting business, L & M purchased six fire extinguishers and had a fire equipment company service and charge them on June 10, 1964. On July 24, 1964, one of them was recharged and another extinguisher was purchased. There is no testimony that the extinguishers were checked after July 24, 1964. It is evident when the fire broke out on the evening of March 2, 1965, 8 months later, that the fire extinguisher used by the employee was inoperative. On the record, the evidence was sufficient to permit the jury to find negligence on the part of L & M which concurred with the negligence of All Makes and Yale & Towne to produce the fire which caused the plaintiffs' damage.
The cross-claims filed by Yale & Towne and All Makes were denied by the court. Each of the defendants seek to avoid liability by blaming the others for the plaintiffs' damage. The record shows negligence on the part of all three defendants sufficient to sustain the verdict of the jury. Where evidence is conflicting, or where reasonable minds may draw different inferences or conclusions from the evidence, it is within the province of the jury or the court, when the case is tried without a jury, to decide the issues of fact, and the Supreme Court may not set aside or direct a verdict in such situation. See Mustard v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co. (1968), 183 Neb. 15, 157 N.W.2d 865.
L & M asserts error in the jury instructions. If there was any error in instructions it was waived by the parties. The instructions were submitted to all counsel for comment and objection prior to submission to the jury. No objection is reflected in the record as to the alleged erroneous instructions. The failure to object to instructions after they have been submitted to counsel for review will preclude raising an objection on appeal. Beveridge v. State (1968), 183 Neb. 406, 160 N.W.2d 229.
The defendants argue that Henningsen Foods is not the real party in interest because the eggs destroyed by the fire were pledged to certain banks. Defendants assert the warehouse receipts issued to the banks pursuant to said pledges gave the banks title to the eggs and the banks therefore were the real parties in interest.
Henningsen pledged its inventory of dried eggs as collateral to the banks. The banks in turn loaned Henningsen 80 percent of the value of the pledged goods. There was no agreement to sell the eggs to the banks. Henningsen did not need to obtain the approval of the banks before selling the eggs. The arrangement was a credit arrangement only.
Section 88-142, R.R.S.1943, which was effective until September 1, 1965, provided: "A person to whom a receipt has been transferred, but not negotiated, acquires thereby, as against the transferor, the title to the goods subject to the terms of any agreement with the transferor." (Italics supplied.) The question presented to the jury was: Did the loan agreement between Henningsen and the banks call for transfer of the title to the eggs to the banks? The jury found there was no intention to transfer ownership of the eggs, and we cannot say that it was wrong on the record. The identical question was presented in Mount Tivy Winery, Inc. v. Lewis (9 Cir., 1943), 134 F.2d 120. There *532 the court held: "Under the phrase * * * `subject to the terms of any agreement with the transferor,' title to [the] goods would not pass by the transfer of a warehouse receipt if the parties expressly agreed that it would not. Here the parties in the collateral agreement, * * * made an agreement for security." See, also, King Cattle Co. v. Joseph (1924), 158 Minn. 481, 198 N.W. 798; Hodges v. Lake Summit Co. (1930), 155 S.C. 436, 152 S.E. 658. Henningsen Foods, being the owner of the eggs at the time of the fire, could maintain an action for damages against third persons for their injury or conversion.
The judgment is accordingly affirmed.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 2222985 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:51.819671+00 ===

44 Mich. App. 390 (1973)
205 N.W.2d 299
DAWSON
v.
SECRETARY OF STATE.
Docket No. 13167.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided January 17, 1973.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Robert A. Derengoski, Solicitor General, and Theresa Doss, Assistant Attorney General, for defendant Secretary of State.
Before: V.J. BRENNAN, P.J., and LEVIN and O'HARA,[*] JJ.
V.J. BRENNAN, P.J.
On July 2, 1970, an officer *391 of the Detroit Police Department placed the plaintiff, Herman Jean Dawson, under arrest for drunken driving following the officer's investigation of a traffic accident. Mr. Dawson, the plaintiff herein, refused to take a breath test after being informed of the consequences of such refusal. The arresting officer then filled out a report on a form furnished by the Department of State for this purpose. (See MCLA 257.625d; MSA 9.2325[4].) The officer signed the report and handed it to a Detroit police sergeant who signed it as "clerk of record". The officer did not, however, raise his right hand and swear to the authenticity of the information in the report.
The report of the plaintiff's refusal to take the breath test was then forwarded to the Secretary of State who promptly began to take the steps necessary to suspend the plaintiff's operator's license. Plaintiff requested and was granted a hearing before the License Appeal Board, at which time it was determined that plaintiff's license should be suspended for 90 days.
Plaintiff appealed to the Wayne County Circuit Court, and a judge thereof held that the fact that the police officer did not swear to the report renders the entire proceeding before the License Appeal Board invalid. Defendant Secretary of State now appeals to this Court and raises only one issue: Does the failure of the police officer to raise his right hand and "solemnly swear" render the suspension of the plaintiff's license by the License Appeal Board invalid?
As the trial court observed in its well-reasoned opinion, the statutes involved herein clearly and unequivocally require the police officer's report to be sworn.
"A person under arrest shall be advised of his right *392 to refuse to submit to chemical tests; and if he refuses the request of a law enforcement officer to submit to chemical tests, no test shall be given. A sworn report shall be forwarded to the department by the law enforcement officer * * *." (Emphasis added.) MCLA 257.625d; MSA 9.2325(4).
"Upon receipt of the sworn statement, the department shall immediately notify the person in writing, mailed to his last known address, that the sworn statement has been received and that within 14 days of the date of the notice he may request a hearing * * *." (Emphasis added.) MCLA 257.625e; MSA 9.2325(5).
The court also noted that the proper form for taking the necessary oath is prescribed by statute:
"The usual mode of administrating oaths now practiced in this state, by the person who swears holding up the right hand, shall be observed in all cases in which an oath may be administered by law except in the cases herein otherwise provided. The oath should commence, `You do solemnly swear or affirm'." MCLA 600.1432; MSA 27A.1432.
The Supreme Court of Kansas was presented with an almost identical case and reasoned that the statute therein involved was mandatory and not merely directory, and that therefore the failure of the police officer to formally "swear" rendered the proceedings invalid. Wilcox v Billings, 200 Kan 654; 438 P2d 108 (1968). That Court reasoned that the statute was mandatory on the following basis: (1) If the licensee takes no action after the submission of the police officer's report, the consequences to the licensee's driving privileges could be serious; (2) false swearing in such matters is made criminal by state statutes (such is also the case in Michigan, see MCLA 257.903; MSA 9.2603); (3) by requiring the police officer's report to be sworn, the statute assures a measure of reliability; (4) the *393 Court doubted that the Legislature intended drastic action to be taken on the basis of an unsworn assertion; (5) the Court therefore concluded that the statute mandates that the report be sworn, and failure to so swear invalidates subsequent proceedings.
We concur with the rationale of the Kansas Court, and affirm the trial court.
Affirmed.
All concurred.
NOTES
[*]  Former Supreme Court Justice, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment pursuant to Const 1963, art 6 § 23 as amended in 1968.

=== CASE 2222986 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:51.850632+00 ===

45 Mich. App. 127 (1973)
205 N.W.2d 831
PEOPLE
v.
BENNETT.
Docket No. 13199.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided February 22, 1973.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Robert A. Derengoski, Solicitor General, and David A. Dimmers, Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
Daniel A. Seikaly, Assistant State Appellate Defender, for defendant.
Before: T.M. BURNS, P.J., and HOLBROOK and VAN VALKENBURG,[*] JJ.
Leave to appeal denied. 389 Mich. 816.
*128 VAN VALKENBURG, J.
The defendant was convicted by a jury of taking indecent liberties with a 14-year-old boy contrary to MCLA 750.336; MSA 28.568, was sentenced to a prison term of from 2 to 10 years, and appeals as of right. He testified in his own behalf and interposed the defense of alibi.
Defendant asserts that in order to sustain a conviction under MCLA 750.336, supra, there must be proof of an assault which necessarily occasions the taking of indecent liberties. This precise question was before this Court in People v Osborn, 31 Mich. App. 156 (1971), wherein this Court held that the assault which necessarily is involved in taking indecent liberties with a child under the age of 16 is sufficient to constitute an assault within the meaning of the statute. An assault separate and apart from the act itself need not be proven.
Defendant further asserts that there could be no assault since the act was committed with the complainant's consent. This Court in People v Doyle, 16 Mich. App. 242 (1969), impliedly recognized that a child under the age of 16 years is legally incapable of giving consent to the taking of indecent liberties, applying the same rationale that applies to statutory rape. While complainant herein was a male under the age of 16, we can see no reason for applying a different rule merely because of gender. Obviously, the sex of the child does not render him any more capable in the eyes of the law to give his consent to such acts. Accordingly, we hold that this 14-year-old boy was legally incapable of giving consent.
Defendant's contention that the statute herein challenged is unconstitutional is without merit. See People v Hicks, 98 Mich. 86 (1893); Armstrong v Bannan, 272 F2d 577 (CA 6, 1959); People v Kranz, 39 Mich. App. 69 (1972).
*129 Although defendant's remaining allegations of error were not properly preserved for appellate review, they have been carefully considered and found lacking in merit.
Affirmed.
All concurred.
NOTES
[*]  Former circuit judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment pursuant to Const 1963, art 6, § 23 as amended in 1968.

=== CASE 9740339 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:32:47.157307+00 ===

Danhof, J.
Defendant was convicted by jury verdict of second-degree murder. MCLA 750.317; MSA 28.549. He appeals, raising three allegations of error predicated upon the trial judge’s rulings. Reversible error is claimed by these rulings which (1) admitted into evidence defendant’s statement made to the police after his arrest because the motion made at trial to suppress was untimely, (2) permitted the prosecution to rebut defendant’s claim that he was homosexually assaulted by the deceased with testimony regarding defendant’s solicitation of homosexual relations with a third *681party, and (3) denied defendant’s request for a second continuance to produce an additional surre-buttal witness.
At the time the sequence of events leading up to the homicide were set in motion, defendant was on parole. On November 13, 1970, defendant’s parole officer received a letter from defendant relating the following story: On Sunday evening, November 8, defendant stopped at the Hillside Tavern located on highway M-24. Near closing time defendant met the deceased, Donald Guthrie, whom he asked for a ride to Lapeer. The deceased invited defendant to spend the night with him and he accepted. When defendant awoke the following morning, deceased was drinking beer at the kitchen table. The deceased offered defendant an "eye-opener” and they drank a quantity of beer and whiskey. Defendant became ill and the deceased told him to lie down in the back bedroom. Defendant was awakened by deceased tugging at his pants with "real big” eyes. He grabbed defendant’s penis and defendant reacted by hitting him five or six times. The deceased stepped backwards, reached behind him, and produced a knife. A struggle ensued during which defendant secured possession of the knife and stabbed the deceased in the chest.
Overcome by panic, defendant took the deceased’s car keys and fled in his vehicle. Defendant "drove around” for a few days attempting to decide whether or not to surrender to authorities. He wanted to surrender but was afraid he would be convicted since he was an ex-convict and his claim of self-defense would not be believed. He gave the name and location of the deceased and concluded the letter by . requesting that someone be notified since he did not know whether the man was dead.
This letter was forwarded to the Lapeer State *682Police post which dispatched an officer to the given address. The officer subsequently confirmed the homicide. Defendant was in an automobile which was stopped by Vassar city police officers for speeding in the early morning hours of November 14, 1970. After his identity failed to match the registration certificate listing Donald Guthrie as owner, the officers contacted the Lapeer State Police post for an "identification check” of the vehicle’s license plates. Upon being informed of the homicide, they arrested defendant and transported him to the Vassar City Police Department. Custody of defendant was subsequently transferred to Lapeer State Police officers. After they advised defendant of his Miranda1 rights, he offered a statement in substantial compliance with the letter. On November 20, 1970, defendant gave the police a slightly more elaborate statement which conformed to his earlier statement and letter.
At trial defendant’s letter and two statements were offered and received into evidence. The defendant objected to the admission of the statement of November 20, 1970, contending that it was involuntarily procured. The trial judge denied defendant’s motion to suppress, finding it untimely. Since the November 20th statement contained ambiguous references to defendant’s involvement in homosexual conduct, defendant, upon taking the stand, testified that he had never solicited such relations. The prosecution offered one of defendant’s three cellmates during his pretrial confinement as a rebuttal witness to testify to defendant’s solicitation of homosexual relations. Defendant responded by requesting and obtaining a continuance and offering one of the remaining cellmates *683as a surrebuttal witness. Defendant requested a second continuance to secure the attendance of the final cellmate for surrebuttal. Believing further delay to be unjustified, the trial judge denied the motion. At the conclusion of trial, the jury returned a verdict of guilty.
Defendant first challenges the trial judge’s denial of his motion to suppress the allegedly involuntary statement of November 20, 1970, submitted at trial. The procedure followed by the courts of this state to test the voluntariness of statements and confessions elicited from defendants during police interrogation is found in People v Walker, 374 Mich 331 (On Rehearing, 1965). A Walker hearing, contemplating a pretrial motion, conforms with the general rule which requires a pretrial motion to suppress evidence upon pain of waiver. People v Ferguson, 376 Mich 90 (1965); People v Smith, 19 Mich App 359 (1969); People v Childers, 20 Mich App 639 (1969); People v Paffhousen, 20 Mich App 346 (1969). People v Willie Williams #1, 23 Mich App 129 (1970). This rule is not without exception since the authorities permit the trial judge within his discretion to entertain a motion to suppress at trial. Whether a trial judge abuses his discretion by not turning aside from a criminal case to conduct a separate hearing upon the admissibility of evidence may be tested by the existence of "special circumstances”2 justifying the delay. Although this concept has not been fully defined, the primary example is offered in People v Ferguson, supra, a case where the factual circumstances constituting the illegality are not known prior to trial.
In the present case, defense counsel, when questioned by thé trial judge regarding the delay in *684submitting the motion to suppress, answered that it was a matter of strategy. He argued that certain portions of the statement not originally considered harmful subsequently became prejudicial. The precise nature of this prejudice was neither revealed to the trial judge nor appears in defendant’s appellate brief. An application of the cited authorities fails to reveal an abuse of discretion. Further, based upon the record before us, we cannot conclude that the statement, even if improperly admitted, caused a miscarriage of justice requiring us to consider the merits of an unpreserved issue.3
The record shows no abuse of discretion in refusing to allow a second continuance.
The significant issue before us is raised by defendant’s challenge to the admission of evidence regarding his alleged homosexual conduct with others. The issue of homosexuality was interjected into the case by defendant’s reliance upon a claim of self-defense precipitated by the deceased’s alleged homosexual assault. The defendant also testified that he had never made homosexual advances. When the defendant did these things he placed his character in issue insofar as it involves homosexuality. By placing his character in issue he rendered it proper for the prosecution to introduce evidence that his character was not as he said it was. Wigmore, Evidence (3d ed), § 58, pp 457-458.
Finding no Michigan authority that is in point on the question of proving bad character by proof of other bad acts, in a case similar to the one at bar, we turn to a line of California cases which we find highly persuasive. People v Westek, 31 Cal 2d 469; 190 P2d 9 (1948), was a prosecution for sodomy and lewd and lascivious conduct. On direct *685examination the defendant testified that he had never committed any acts of sodomy or lewdness. The prosecution then produced several witnesses who testified that he had performed such acts on them. The Supreme Court of California found such evidence to be admissible. The Court reasoned that unless the prosecutor was allowed to use such evidence the defendant would be able to place himself in an especially favorable light before the jury, and the prosecution would not be allowed to rebut the false impression thus conveyed. We agree with the reasoning of the California Court.
Subsequent California cases have applied the, same reasoning. People v Goff, 100 Cal App 2d 166; 223 P2d 27 (1950), applied the rule in another lewdness case. People v LeBeau, 235 P2d 850 (Cal App, 1951), was a narcotics case. People v Hughes, 123 Cal App 2d 767; 267 P2d 376 (1954), was an assault case. We are convinced that the rule should be applied to the case at bar.
We are not impressed by the argument that evidence of homosexuality should be limited to proof of a reputation for homosexuality. To adopt such a rule would be to reject the more reliable of two types of proof. A homosexual will often have no reputation as such, and a reputation for homosexuality will all too often be based on the rankest of speculation. Proof of specific acts is by far the most reliable means of proof.
Affirmed.
Van Valkenburg, J., concurred.
Miranda v Arizona, 384 US 436; 86 S Ct 1602; 16 L Ed 2d 694 (1966).
People v Ferguson, 376 Mich 90, 94 (1965).
People v Degraffenreid, 19 Mich App 702 (1969).

=== CASE 9740340 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:32:47.164222+00 ===

Bronson, P. J.
(dissenting). The use of character evidence, like prior convictions, for purposes of impeaching a defendant’s credibility while contradicting a proffered defense may well become the determinative factor in a criminal trial. The juris*686prudence of this state rejects the proposition that other crimes and misconduct are admissible to prove a defendant’s criminal disposition or propensity to commit the crime charged. Evidentiary exceptions which permit the admission of prior convictions and misconduct for limited purposes tread closely to the edge of this proposition. The courts of this state must be sensitive to the very real possibility that a defendant may be convicted by a jury for past crimes and guard against such injustice by carefully evaluating the propriety and permissible scope of the exceptions employed. I cannot agree with the majority opinion since the type of rebuttal evidence challenged neither falls within nor should fall within currently recognized exceptions.
The present appeal is based upon the following sequence of events. The prosecution, during its case in chief, offered defendant’s letter to his probation officer and two pretrial statements describing the altercation and homicide. Since the statement of November 20, 1970, contained ambiguous references to defendant’s involvement in homosexual conduct, defendant upon taking the stand denied being the solicitor and claimed to have been the victim on such occasions. During cross-examination, the prosecutor questioned defendant upon his alleged solicitation of homosexual relations with prison cellmates, which he denied. The prosecutor proceeded to offer the testimony of Kenneth Maxwell, one of defendant’s three cellmates during his pretrial confinement, for purposes of rebutting this denial and the defense that defendant did not initiate or solicit the deceased’s homosexual advance. The trial judge permitted defendant to secure the attendance of Leo Baker, one of the remaining cellmates during *687the same time, as a surrebuttal witness. The specific issue created by the prosecution’s proffered evidence may be stated as follows:
Are speciñc acts of homosexual conduct between defendant and a third person portraying defendant as the solicitor admissible to rebut a claim of self-defense portraying the deceased as the sexual aggressor?
My analysis of this complex evidentiary issue begins with a recognition of the general underlying evidentiary proposition that misconduct on other occasions is inadmissible to show that a person had a greater propensity to commit the crime charged. People v Wright, 294 Mich 20 (1940); People v Riddle, 322 Mich 199 (1948); People v Askar, 8 Mich App 95 (1967); People v Heiss, 30 Mich App 126 (1971); People v Insley, 36 Mich App 593 (1971).1 A number of limited exceptions have been created by the Legislature and judiciary. I have carefully scrutinized each exception in an attempt to place the issue raised in the appropriate category for disposition. Since the prosecution’s rebuttal evidence was clearly offered to discredit defendant’s allegations, it appears to fall within the general concept of impeachment. Not finding one of the traditionally recognized impeachment procedures2 applicable, I have employed the analogous concept of impeachment by "contradiction”.
Impeachment by "contradiction” is described by McCormick, in his treatise on evidence, to be a process where a witness’ statements on a specific *688matter are contradicted by the contrary testimony of a second witness.3 The impeaching value of this approach is that:
"It merely tends to show—for Witness One may be right and Witness Two may be mistaken—that Witness One has erred or falsified as to certain particular facts, and therefore is capable of error or lying, and this should be considered negatively in weighing his other statements.”4
To prevent prejudicial misuse a safeguarding corollary should be employed which precludes contradiction upon collateral matters. McCormick delineates two kinds of facts not considered collateral which are relevant to our problem: (1) facts relevant to the substantive issue in the case and (2) facts used "to pull out the linchpin of the [witness’s] story”. This latter concept is defined as "the contradiction of any part of the witness’s account of the background and circumstances of a material transaction”.5 (Emphasis added.) This test is neces*689sarily vague since "it must meet an indefinite variety of situations”. Although the evidence at issue satisfies the contradiction concept, its admissibility depends upon the scope of these two approaches used to determine whether it involves a "collateral” issue.
This question may be answered by reference to two analogies. The first analogy is provided by rape cases in which the prosecutrix’ consent is at issue. The type of evidence which is admissible to contradict the claim of no consent by impeaching the character of the prosecutrix has been delineated by our courts. In People v McLean, 71 Mich 309, 312 (1888), the Court was confronted with an attempt to impeach the prosecutrix by evidence of her prior sexual relations with a third person. The McLean Court recognized the general rule permitting the character of the prosecutrix for chastity to be impeached, stating:
"Evidence that the prosecutrix is a common prostitute, or that her character for chastity is bad, is admissible, and particular acts of unchastity or sexual intercourse with the defendant may be shown; but evidence of such acts with a third person is not admissible.” (Citation omitted.) (Emphasis added.)
This admission of evidence of prior sexual relations between the parties is relevant to the issue of consent and should not be deemed collateral.6 Such acts showing "opportunity, disposition of the parties and intimate relations tending to break down self-respect”7 have a higher degree of reliability *690enabling the balance to shift from a prejudicial effect to probative value.
The McLean Court’s exclusion of specific acts of misconduct with third persons represents a realistic appraisal of the reliability of the proffered evidence. There are an unspecified number of reasons why the prosecutrix may consent to sexual relations with a third person but refuse defendant. The totality of the circumstances becomes significantly dissimilar so that a continuance of consensual behavior becomes unreliable. For this reason the misconduct with others may be deemed to raise a collateral issue.*8 General reputation evidence of misconduct may be admitted as being consistent with a policy permitting the impeachment of character. People v Ryno, 148 Mich 137 (1907).9
The second analogy is provided by homicide and assault cases in which self-defense is at issue. The admissibility of a party’s violent conduct on prior occasions to contradict his defense that he was not the aggressor has been determined by our courts. Similar to sex offenses, testimony regarding the prior relations between the parties, including threats, has been admitted for this purpose. Brownell v People, 38 Mich 732 (1878); People v Durham, 170 Mich 598 (1912); People v Griner, 30 Mich App 612 (1971).10 Likewise, the Brownell *691Court excluded evidence of defendant’s act of violence upon another person at a different time and place.11 The Court in People v Farrell, 137 Mich 127 (1904), affirmed this approach but found the deceased’s general reputation for violence to be admissible.12 This rationale is equally applicable to defendant’s general reputation for violence. Whether or not the acts of misconduct constitute a separate crime, their inadmissibility is based upon the conclusion that they are collateral matters.13
In the present case defendant relied upon the claim of self-defense and injected the issue of homosexuality by imputing sexually aggressive conduct to the deceased. Applying the above analogies to the prosecution’s rebuttal evidence, I cannot conclude that it falls within the purview of either category of facts not considered collateral by McCormick. The question of who initiated or solicited the homosexual relations between the parties is a substantive issue in the case. The question of whether defendant or his cellmate solicited the homosexual relations at a time subsequent to the crime charged embodies a distinct issue which is insubstantial by comparison. Neither can this evidence "pull out the linchpin of the story” because it presents a number of inferences upon which the jury must speculate. The jury must accept defendant’s involvement in homosexual conduct, find him to be the solicitor on prior or subsequent occasions, and conclude that he was the solicitor on the day in question.
*692Similar to rape cases involving the issue of consent, evidence of homosexual conduct with third persons is not sufficiently reliable to counterbalance its prejudicial effect. The same conclusion is reached by a comparison with homicide and assault cases excluding acts of violence upon third persons. Since the alleged conduct between defendant and his cellmate is an indictable offense,14 the admission of separate offenses for which defendant has not been tried, even though similar, causes me grave concern.15
The majority opinion reaches a contrary conclusion by adopting California decisions permitting the prosecution to prove defendant’s bad character by proof of other bad acts. People v Westek, 31 Cal 2d 469; 190 P2d 9 (1948), and its progeny represent several limited exceptions to California’s adherence to the principle that prior misconduct is not admissible to prove defendant’s criminal disposition or propensity to commit the crime charged. In Westek, defendant was charged with lewd and lascivious conduct with several young boys, and upon taking the stand, testified that he had never "at any time” committed any act of sodomy, or any lewdness "in any other county” upon any boy. The Westek Court found that such a complete denial upon direct examination which tended to place defendant in an especially favorable light with the jury opened the door for the admission of the rebuttal testimony of other persons. The Wes-tek Court distinguished its case from cases rejecting the admission of evidence when presented affirmatively by the' prosecution during its case in chief.
*693A secondary basis for admitting the rebuttal evidence at issue was found by the Westek Court. Since defendant admitted touching the complainant but denied a lewd intent, this Court found that he injected the issue of intent into the case and the challenged testimony was admissible for the limited purpose of proving such intent. Upon this background California courts have established the following exceptions justifying the admissibility of defendant’s misconduct with third persons: (1) defendant opened the door for rebuttal evidence by an all-inclusive denial16 or (2) the evidence establishes the defendant’s identity, intent, motive, common plan, or scheme.17
I cannot agree that these cases justify the admission of the rebuttal evidence at issue or that the proffered defense opened the door as wide as the majority believes. The defense that the deceased was the sexual aggressor, at best, opened the door for the admission of prior acts involving the parties. Unlike Westek, defendant did not offer an all-inclusive denial regarding his solicitation of homosexual relations on direct examination. The references to defendant’s homosexual conduct with others was initiated by the prosecutor’s admission of defendant’s pre-trial statement. The prosecutor should not be permitted to broaden the scope of defendant’s denials in this matter so as to create a need for rebuttal evidence. I have difficulty applying the California cases to the present situation since they rely in part on the principle that de*694fendant’s conduct with third persons is admissible to prove intent, motive, common plan, or scheme. Michigan’s expressed rejection of this principle18 vis-a-vis sex-related offenses renders their application dubious.
Assuming arguendo the California cases are directly applicable, I would challenge their adoption as unsound. Unlike the majority of California decisions in which the admitted offenses are similar to the charged offense, the present charge of murder is completely dissimilar from defendant’s alleged solicitation of homosexual conduct with a cellmate. This difference is critical since defendant was forced to defend two trials simultaneously: one for murder and one for homosexual misconduct. The disruption of the primary trial by the submission of rebuttal and surrebuttal witnesses on this secondary issue for the avowed purpose of proving that defendant was a liar undermines the orderly administration of justice and was highly prejudicial. The single related and relevant issue created by the proffered defense was the prior relationship between the parties, if any.
The prosecution is not left defenseless and precluded from exposing defendants who attempt to hide behind fabrications. The technique of cross-examination offers a tool which may be skillfully used to expose hesitation, indifference, improbability, and the telltale contradictions in defendant’s story. The prosecutor may similarly challenge defendant’s general reputation. However, the admission of defendant’s misconduct with third persons *695creates an inquisition into his character which is inconsistent with the precedent governing the scope of rebuttal evidence and analogous areas of the law.19 The guarantee that a defendant will be provided with a fair and impartial trial upon the offense charged cannot be fulfilled by the admission of evidence upon collateral issues. Upon the foregoing analysis I would reverse defendant’s conviction.
See 1 Gillespie, Michigan Criminal Law & Procedure (2d ed), § 446, p 549; McCormick, Evidence (2d ed), § 42, p 82.
See 1 Gillespie, Michigan Criminal Law & Procedure (2d ed), §§436, 437, and 438, pp 534-542; MCLA 600.2158; MSA 27A.2158; People v Dellabonda, 265 Mich 486 (1933).
McCormick, Evidence (2d ed), § 47, pp 97-100.
Id, pp 97-98.
Acceptance of this approach is found in Michigan authorities under the label "rebuttal evidence”. This case law is limited to evidence employed to rebut certain facts involving the crime which were relied upon by defendant and does not include evidence of other offenses or misconduct. See, e.g., People v DeFrance, 104 Mich 563 (1895) (where the Court admitted the testimony of a witness that defendant was in St. Paul on April 11, 1892, to rebut defendant’s claim that he was elsewhere on that date indorsing a promissory note); People v Row, 135 Mich 505 (1904) (where the Court found error in the trial judge’s exclusion of a witness’ testimony offered to rebut the testimony of defendant’s doctor and support defendant’s alibi); Strudgeon v Village of Sand Beach, 107 Mich 496 (1895) (where the Court permitted a witness’ denial of his conversation with a third person regarding the cause of plaintiffs injury to be rebutted by the testimony of that person); People v Weems, 15 Mich App 22 (1968) (where the Court admitted the testimony of a witness’ mother to rebut the witness’ denial of a conversation in which she admitted being uncertain of her identification of defendant). Contrast People v Joseph Barbara, Jr., 23 Mich App 540 (1970). The extension of this approach to include the evidence at issue is rejected for the reasons stated herein.
Cf. People v Ayres, 195 Mich 274 (1917).
This standard providing an exception for admissibility is found primarily in cases involving statutory rape. People v Davis, 175 Mich 594 (1913); People v Gengels, 218 Mich 632 (1922); People v Trzil, 235 Mich 469 (1926); People v DerMartzex, 29 Mich App 213 (1970), leave granted 387 Mich 759 (1972). See People v Thomas Smith, 388 Mich 93 (1972) (where the Court discusses these cases and finds admission *690of subsequent acts of intercourse between the parties justified upon the statutory exception of intent, motive, plan, or scheme).
Recently this standard has been extended to cases involving sodomy, gross indecency, and indecent liberties and is equally applicable to the remaining types of sexual offenses. People v Askar, 8 Mich App 95 (1967); People v Oaks, 24 Mich App 7 (1970); People v Heiss, 30 Mich App 126 (1971).
Cf. People v Knapp, 42 Mich 267 (1879).
Cf. Harris v Neal, 153 Mich 57 (1908).
Cf. People v Mulvaney, 171 Mich 272 (1912); People v Reycraft, 156 Mich 451 (1908).
Accord, People v Kenyon, 93 Mich 19 (1892); People v Cellura, 288 Mich 54 (1939); People v Wright, 294 Mich 20 (1940).
Accord, People v Cellura, supra; People v Stallworth, 364 Mich 528 (1961); People v Burks, 30 Mich App 102 (1971); People v Redmond, 30 Mich App 117 (1971); People v Rapier, 43 Mich App 297 (1972).
See People v Griffen, 36 Mich App 368, 379 (1971) (dissenting opinion by Judge Levin).
MCLA 750.338; MSA 28.570 or MCLA 750.340; MSA 28.572.
This reasoning has been utilized in cases involving sexual offenses to exclude defendant’s acts of sexual intercourse with another. People v Coston, 187 Mich 538, 545 (1915); People v Nelson, 227 Mich 552 (1924). But see People v Geanakopoulos, 320 Mich 430 (1948).
People v Smith, 144 Cal App 2d 745; 301 P2d 609 (1956); People v Sylvia, 54 Cal 2d 115; 351 P2d 781; 4 Cal Rptr 509 (1960). Contrast, People v Baskett, 237 Cal App 2d 712; 47 Cal Rptr 274 (1965).
People v Kelley, 66 Cal 2d 232; 424 P2d 947; 57 Cal Rptr 363 (1967); People v Cramer, 67 Cal 2d 126; 429 P2d 582; 60 Cal Rptr 230 (1967); People v Pierce, 269 Cal App 2d 193; 75 Cal Rptr 257 (1969); People v Wells, 13 Cal App 3d 265; 91 Cal Rptr 460 (1970).
See, e.g., People v Askar, 8 Mich App 95 (1967) (sodomy case); People v Oaks, 24 Mich App 7 (1970) (indecent liberties case); People v Heiss, 30 Mich App 126 (1971) (gross indecency case). But see, People v Thomas Smith, 388 Mich 93 (1972) (where the Court admits subsequent acts between the parties as tending to prove defendant’s common plan, scheme, or system).
See, e.g., People v Guzanich, 13 Mich App 634 (1968) (where the Court, speaking through a per curiam opinion, concluded that the cross-examination of defendant regarding a prior charge of sodomy in a judge trial upon a charge of indecent liberties with a minor male was error).

=== CASE 2222989 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:51.978417+00 ===

205 N.W.2d 699 (1973)
STATE of Iowa, Appellee,
v.
Jerry Gerald DeVAN, Appellant.
No. 55797.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
March 28, 1973.
Nicholas M. Norden and Gordon E. Allen, Des Moines, for appellant.
Richard C. Turner, Atty. Gen., Raymond Sullins, Asst. Atty. Gen., and Ray Fenton, County Atty., for appellee.
Submitted to MOORE, C. J., and MASON, LeGRAND, UHLENHOPP and HARRIS, JJ.
*700 PER CURIAM:
Defendant, Jerry Gerald DeVan, was charged, tried, convicted and sentenced to a term not to exceed ten years in the men's penitentiary for breaking and entering in violation of Code section 708.8. He appeals contending the trial court abused its discretion by imposing overly severe punishment and refusing to grant probation.
In considering a like contention in State v. Carncross, Iowa, 215 N.W.2d 698, filed simultaneously herewith, supported by citation of our recent holdings, the following legal principles are recognized. It is our duty to carefully consider whether the punishment is too severe. Where the judgment does not exceed the statutory maximum, it is only where an abuse of the trial court's discretion is shown that we will interfere. The determination of whether to sentence a defendant to jail and assess a fine rather than to the penitentiary, as permitted under section 708.8, is addressed to the sound discretion of the trial court as is the question of any probation.
Defendant, age 31, was arrested by two Des Moines patrol car police officers about 2:00 a.m., April 17, 1971 at the rear of Weyers Beauty Equipment Company in the 200 block of Third Street in Des Moines. The officers observed defendant had his arm in the window of the loading dock door. The glass had been broken out. Defendant testified he was just walking through the alley.
The presentence report showed defendant's lengthy arrest record dating back to 1957, totaling at least five convictions and two parole revocations. He had been convicted of forgery in 1970 and was on parole at the time of his arrest in this case.
We find no abuse of the trial court's discretion or any justification for modifying or reducing the penalty imposed.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9740341 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:32:49.363825+00 ===

Quinn, P. J.
September 17, 1969, plaintiffs filed this action to have a warranty deed from them to defendants and dated September 23, 1960, declared a mortgage and for other relief. In addition to traversing the allegations of plaintiffs’ complaint, defendants’ answer affirmatively pleaded defenses of laches and clean hands. The cause was tried before the judge with an advisory jury and the result was judgment for defendants. Plaintiffs appeal.
Prior to September 23, 1960, plaintiffs owned approximately 70 acres of land in Washtenaw County on which they had built their home. The *57property was subject to four mortgages, two of which had been foreclosed and sold on foreclosure sale; plaintiffs’ right to redeem from these mortgage sales expired October 26, 1960, on one and January 22, 1961, on the other. The other two mortgages were in default. On September 23, 1960, the mortgage obligations of plaintiffs totaled $34,534.79. In 1959, plaintiffs were having financial difficulty and planned to sell 60 acres of the land. They met G. Cameron Buchanan through Edgar F. Mansfield, a lawyer and brother-in-law of Buchanan. November 7, 1959, Mr. Buchanan executed an offer to purchase plaintiffs’ property, except the house and 2.49 acres for $30,000. January 22, 1960, this offer was withdrawn and the deposit was forfeited because Mrs. Buchanan decided not to move from Franklin, Michigan.
In August 1960, William Staebler went to Mr. Buchanan and inquired if the latter would loan him enough money to pay off the mortgages. Mr. Buchanan said he would not loan the money. A few weeks later, Mr. Staebler returned to Mr. Buchanan and inquired if the latter would buy the farm. Mr. Buchanan said that he and his wife would visit the premises and they did. On this visit, Mr. Buchanan advised the plaintiffs that after Mr. Buchanan knew how much the plaintiffs owed, the status of the mortgages and how much it would cost and if it could be worked out, Mr. Buchanan would buy the farm and sell the house and some acreage to the plaintiffs on a land contract.
September 23, 1960, plaintiffs executed the warranty deed involved conveying the entire farm to defendants. The same day defendants, as sellers, and plaintiffs, as purchasers, executed a land contract in the amount of $21,000 which recited a *58down payment of $1,000 and which covered the house and 2.49 acres. The contract required payments of $200 per month commencing October 19, 1960. Plaintiffs paid as required by the contract in October and November 1960, and they made a further payment in January 1961. When no payment was made in February or March 1961, Mr. Buchanan requested the plaintiffs to come to the former’s office and they did March 21, 1961.
On the latter date, the plaintiffs assigned their interest in the land contract to the defendants. The same day the defendants, as lessors, and plaintiffs, as lessees, executed a lease of the house and 1.69 acres of land for a term commencing December 19, 1960* and ending May 31, 1962. The rent was one dollar and the lease contained the following option:
"Upon election to purchase by the tenant in writing on or before March 1, 1962 and upon proof of financial ability to so perform, lessors agree to sell the within described premises to the lessees on land contract providing for a total purchase price of $23,300; a down payment of $5,100 and monthly payments of not less than $200 per month to be applied first upon interest and balance on principal and in addition thereto an additionál monthly payment of $40 per month to be accumulated by the sellers for payment of taxes, said contract to be paid in full within five years. Said contract shall further provide that in the event the purchaser obtains a bona fide purchase, seller shall have the option to purchase said premises under identical provisions.”
This option was never exercised and the lease expired. Plaintiffs requested an extension of right of occupancy until they could locate a place to live. This request was granted, and when plaintiffs *59located a house about July 1, 1962, they moved, except for some personal property, and surrendered the keys to Mr. Buchanan. Plaintiffs returned some time later and removed the personal property.
After receiving the deed of September 23, 1960, and up until time of trial, defendants paid the 1959 taxes in the amount of $376.28, 1960 and 1961 taxes in amounts not disclosed by the record, and taxes from 1962 through 1970 in the aggregate amount of $9,698.60. Defendants paid all of plaintiffs’ mortgage indebtedness and made extensive repairs and improvements to the property. The aggregate amount paid by defendants on the mortgages and for repairs and improvements was approximately $60,000.
Until this action was started September 17, 1969, defendants were never aware that plaintiffs claimed that the deed of September 23, 1960, was a mortgage.
The following special question was submitted to the advisory jury:
"Did plaintiffs, that’s Mr. and Mrs. Staebler, did plaintiffs sustain their burden of proving that the instrument signed by the parties on September 23, 1960, was intended by both parties to be a mortgage rather than a deed as stated on the face of the instrument?”
The jury’s answer was no.
In his written opinion, the trial judge found:
"The court finds that the plaintiffs did not sustain their burden of proving that the deed signed by plaintiffs and running to the defendants on September 23, 1960, was intended by the parties to be a mortgage. The court finds that the jury verdict was proper and that the evidence sustained said verdict. The evidence established the fact that the warranty deed was in the usual *60statutory form and that it was, at the time it was signed, the intent of the parties to convey the property to the defendants subject to the existing mortgages of record.”
The action being equitable in nature, we review de novo on the whole record, but we do not reverse the trial court unless we find from a reading of the entire record that we would have reached a different conclusion, Stacey v Mikolowski, 367 Mich 550, 556 (1962). Plaintiffs bore the burden of establishing by clear and convincing proof that the warranty deed of September 23, 1960, was not what it purported to be, but, in reality, it was security for a loan, Ellis v Wayne Real Estate Co, 357 Mich 115 (1959). That burden of plaintiffs is the same in this Court as it was in the trial court. They failed to meet it in the trial court, and they have failed to meet it on the record before us for the following reasons of record:
1. To extricate themselves from, financial difficulties, plaintiffs first wanted to sell the farm, except for the house and a few acres.
2. Defendants’ first contact with plaintiffs was an offer to buy what plaintiffs wanted to sell.
3. Defendants declined to loan plaintiffs the money to re-finance the mortgages.
4. The proposal which defendants finally made to plaintiffs as a method of saving their property was accepted by plaintiffs and partially performed by them.
5. When plaintiffs defaulted on the land contract, they accepted the lease-option arrangement of March 21, 1961, a clear indication they claimed no title at that time.
6. Request for extension of right to occupy the premises until plaintiffs could find another place *61to live. Voluntary relinquishment of the premises about July 1, 1962, and no assertion of any claim of title until September 17, 1969, when this action was filed.
Additionally, all of the facts presently relied ón for relief were known to plaintiffs in July of 1962. They did nothing for over seven years, during which time defendants made extensive repairs and improvements to the property. Contrary to the findings of the advisory jury and the trial judge, in our opinion, plaintiffs are guilty of laches.
Affirmed with costs to defendants.
J. H. Gillis, J., concurred.
Due date of the last payment by plaintiffs on the land contract.

=== CASE 9740342 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:32:49.368689+00 ===

T. M. Burns, J.
(dissenting). I am persuaded that the plaintiffs have demonstrated by clear and convincing evidence that the warranty deed executed on September 30, 1960, was intended by the parties to operate as a mortgage on the 2.49 acres and dwelling covered by the land contract.
The determination of whether a deed should be construed as a mortgage depends upon the intention of the parties at the time the deed was executed. In order to uncover the parties’ intent all of the surrounding circumstances are taken into account including the inadequacy of consideration, the pecuniary embarrassment of the grantor, and the grantor’s indebtedness to the grantee. Sheets v Huben, 354 Mich 536 (1958); Ellis v Wayne Beal Estate Co, 357 Mich 115 (1959); Taines v Munson, 19 Mich App 29 (1969).
The evidence adduced at trial which shows that the deed was treated by the parties as a mortgage and not as a conveyance of absolute title may be briefly summarized as follows: The plaintiffs were in dire financial circumstances. The Federal reve*62nue stamps purchased and attached to the deed by the defendants covered only the vacant land and did not include the dwelling and the surrounding 2.49 acres. Several weeks after the deed and land contract were executed, defendant G. Cameron Buchanan wrote a letter to the Lawyers Title Company of Ann Arbor and requested a title policy only on the plaintiffs’ vacant farm land. The house and 2.49 acres were expressly eliminated from the request. Moreover, on the second page of this correspondence, the defendant expressly admitted that the plaintiffs enjoyed an equitable mortgage in the property. Finally the consideration involved was woefully inadequate. At trial plaintiffs’ entire farm was valued at between $58,-000 and $76,000. Assuming for the moment that the transaction in question was a sale then the defendants, by assuming and paying the mortgages on the property, paid a purchase price of $35,000. Or in other words the defendants obtained title to the property for at least $20,000 less than the fair market value. This inadequate consideration in and of itself strongly militates against the conclusion that a deed was intended to operate as an absolute conveyance. Sheets v Huben, supra; Ellis v Wayne Real Estate Co, supra; Taines v Munson, supra.
The inadequate consideration coupled with the plaintiffs’ financial plight together with the actions and admissions of the defendants in procuring the Federal revenue stamps and title insurance compels me to conclude that in keeping with the parties’ apparent intentions, the deed should be construed as a mortgage on the dwelling and 2.49 acres described in the land contract.
Finally, the majority concludes that in any event plaintiffs were guilty of laches. I cannot agree.
*63Before the doctrine of laches can be invoked, it must be shown that there was a prejudicial delay. Mere delay without more will not constitute laches. Moreover, laches will not be applied to defeat a claim where it would be inequitable to do so. Kelley v Hoogerhyde, 314 Mich 37 (1946); Plasger v Leonard, 316 Mich 174 (1946); Taines v Munson, supra.
Under the circumstances of this case it is patent that the defendants either knew or should have known that the deed was in fact considered by all concerned to be a mortgage. Therefore before embarking upon any extensive repairs or improvements, the defendants should have sought foreclosure of the equitable mortgage. They cannot now be heard to complain that they have been prejudiced by the fact that plaintiffs have elected to exercise their concurrent right of redemption.
Accordingly, I would remand the case for an accounting in order to allow the plaintiffs to redeem the dwelling and 2.49 acres from the equitable mortgage.

=== CASE 2222994 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:52.176477+00 ===

44 Mich. App. 336 (1973)
205 N.W.2d 185
PEOPLE
v.
BLALOCK.
Docket No. 12474.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided January 16, 1973.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Robert A. Derengoski, Solicitor General, William L. Cahalan, Prosecuting Attorney, Dominick R. Carnovale, Chief, Appellate Department, and Robert A. Reuther, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
Markus S. Simon, for defendant on appeal.
*337 Before: V.J. BRENNAN, P.J., and LEVIN and O'HARA,[*] JJ.
V.J. BRENNAN, P.J.
Defendant was convicted by a jury in the Wayne County Circuit Court of carrying a concealed weapon in a motor vehicle (MCLA 750.227; MSA 28.424).
Defendant's first argument is that the evidence was insufficient to sustain a finding that he carried a dangerous weapon. The record reveals sufficient evidence from which the jury could reasonably determine that defendant had knowledge that a pistol was present and he participated in carrying it. People v Moceri, 294 Mich. 483 (1940); People v Cunningham, 20 Mich. App. 699 (1969).
Defendant's second contention is that the prosecutor's opening statement incorrectly apprised the jury of the applicable law. A reading of the entire opening statement, rather than portions thereof, reveals that this was not in fact the case. Furthermore, no objection on this ground was made by defense counsel. We are of the opinion, having read the record, that the defendant's allegations of error in this regard do not reflect a clear injustice which merits review despite the absence of a contemporaneous objection. People v Wesley Brown, 35 Mich. App. 153 (1971).
Defendant's final allegation of error concerns the rereading of portions of the testimony of one witness to the jury. The jurors themselves indicated which portions of the witness's testimony they wished to hear again; defense counsel made no objection once a poll of the jury revealed that they desired no further reading of testimony. It is a general rule of long standing that the entire testimony of a witness need not be read back to *338 the jury, and that both the reading and the extent of reading are matters confided to the sound discretion of the trial judge. People v Gregory Turner, 37 Mich. App. 162 (1971). There was no abuse of such discretion in this case.
Affirmed.
All concurred.
NOTES
[*]  Former Supreme Court Justice, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment pursuant to Const 1963, art 6, § 23 as amended in 1968.

=== CASE 9740343 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:32:55.325517+00 ===

JUSTICE SOUTH delivered the opinion of the court: Plaintiffs, Tem Horwitz and Horwitz Matthews, Inc., brought action against defendant Sabo & Zahn, a law firm (not a part of this appeal), and its clients, defendants Holabird & Root, Jeffrey Case, Gerald Horn, and James W. Baird (Holabird & Root defendants), to recover damages occasioned by defendants’ tortious interference with plaintiffs’ business relationships. The court granted the motion for summary judgment for the Holabird & Root defendants ruling that they are not liable under an agency theory of law for the actions of their attorneys. Plaintiffs appeal. Plaintiff Horwitz Matthews, Inc., is an Illinois corporation. An integral part of its business is procuring investors with whom it forms limited partnerships for the purpose of developing real estate. Tem Horwitz is Horwitz Matthews’ president. The Holabird & Root defendants retained the law firm of Sabo & Zahn to collect a debt incurred by Horowitz Matthews for architectural services. Holabird & Root, through its partners, defendants Gerald Horn, James Baird, and Jeffrey Case, initiated contact with attorney James Zahn. Zahn was once an architect with Holabird & Root. Sabo & Zahn and Holabird & Root entered into a written agreement for representation which specified a one-third contingency fee to be paid to the law firm without any other directions. Sabo & Zahn filed suit and obtained a judgment in the name of Holabird & Root against Horwitz Matthews, the corporate entity only. Sabo & Zahn made Holabird & Root aware of the judgment and kept it aware of the progress of the case. Sabo & Zahn filed and served a citation to discover assets upon Tem Horwitz for Horwitz Matthews. Mr. Horwitz answered questions at the citation as a corporate representative. Horwitz Matthews produced business and financial records in response to the citation. In the process, Sabo & Zahn learned the identity of the business associates and investors of Horwitz Matthews. In response to the citation, Horwitz Matthews also provided Sabo & Zahn with tax returns for third parties, limited partners in the limited partnerships, which Sabo & Zahn agreed to keep confidential and not disclose to parties other than Sabo & Zahn and its accountant. Sabo & Zahn contacted at least 40 of these business associates and investors in such partnerships by letter in May 1997. The letters stated that Horwitz Matthews had apportioned to itself more of the business loss from the partnership than it was entitled to on its tax returns. The letters were written on Sabo & Zahn’s legal stationery and stated, “we represent Holabird & Root who have a judgment against Horwitz Matthews.” In each letter, Sabo & Zahn further stated that Horwitz Matthews had reported partnership losses to the Internal Revenue Service in an amount greater than that to which it was entitled and that Tern Horwitz, individually, reported no loss. The letters also stated that the partnership’s tax filing showed that the investor’s share of the loss was underreported and that he or she “may wish to consult a tax advisor about any possible tax ramifications of these potential changes.” Attached to each letter was a copy of the tax return for that partner along with one for Tern Horwitz and Horwitz Matthews. Sabo & Zahn indicated that it generally notified Holabird & Root of the contents of the letter but that it did not recall showing each letter to it. The law firm did not recall whether it showed Holabird & Root a copy of the letter prior to its transmission, but Holabird & Root may have been shown one or two sample letters. Defendant Jeffrey Case, a general partner of Holabird & Root, stated in his amended answers to interrogatories that there were no discussions concerning the letters prior to their publication and distribution. Holabird & Root does not know who reviewed the letter prior to its transmission. Defendant James Baird, another general partner of Holabird & Root, recalls being shown a stack of these letters, about a month after the letters had been sent, at a meeting with his partners present wherein the law firm discussed its collection efforts on behalf of Holabird & Root. The letters were meant to benefit Holabird & Root as well as the law firm. Sabo & Zahn believed that it was acting within the scope of its authority when it published the letters. The trial court dismissed counts I through IV against all defendants for defamation. Count V seeks relief against Sabo & Zahn. Count VI seeks relief for tortious interference with business relationships against Holabird & Root as principals who acted by and through its attorneys Sabo & Zahn. The lower court granted Holabird & Root’s motion for summary judgment and ruled as a matter of law that it could not be liable for its attorney’s actions. This court has jurisdiction under Supreme Court Rule 304(a). 155 Ill. 2d R. 304(a). Plaintiffs raise three issues on appeal: (1) whether the attorney/ client relationship between defendants is governed by principles of agency law; (2) whether a genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether Sabo & Zahn was acting within the scope of its authority when it sent out the letters at issue for Holabird & Root; and (3) even if Sabo & Zahn initially acted outside its scope of authority, whether the subsequent conduct of Holabird & Root ratified its attorneys’ actions. Summary judgment is appropriate when the pleadings, depositions, and admissions, together with any affidavits, show there is no genuine issue of material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Champaign National Bank v. Babcock, 273 Ill. App. 3d 292, 299, 652 N.E.2d 848, 853 (1995). When ruling on a motion for summary judgment, a trial court must view all evidence in the light most favorable to the nonmovant. Rotzoll v. Overhead Door Corp., 289 Ill. App. 3d 410, 413, 681 N.E.2d 156, 158 (1997). We review de novo grants of summary judgment. Malone v. American Cyanamid Co., 271 Ill. App. 3d 843, 845, 649 N.E.2d 493, 495 (1995). Plaintiffs argue first that the lower court erred in ruling that Holabird & Root could not be held liable for the actions of its attorneys in sending letters to more than 40 of plaintiffs’ business associates accusing them of misreporting their taxes. Defendant Holabird & Root respond that since it had no control over and knowledge of its attorney’s conduct, it cannot be held hable for its actions.  An agency relationship engenders a type of fiduciary affiliation in which the principal has the right to control the conduct of the agent and the agent has the power to act on behalf of the principal. Letsos v. Century 21-New West Realty, 285 Ill. App. 3d 1056, 1064, 675 N.E.2d 217, 224 (1996). A client is bound according to ordinary rules of agency by acts or omissions of his attorney within the apparent scope of his authority. Flight Kitchen, Inc. v. Chicago Seven-Up Bottling Co., 22 Ill. App. 3d 558, 562, 317 N.E.2d 663, 667 (1974); In re Marriage of Marr, 264 Ill. App. 3d 932, 935, 638 N.E.2d 303, 306 (1994). Under Illinois law, an attorney’s errors and misconduct are attributed to his clients; clients are principals, the attorney is an agent, and under the law of agency, the principal is bound by his chosen agent’s deeds. Diersen v. Chicago Car Exchange, 110 F.3d 481 (7th Cir. 1997).  While the Holabird & Root defendants argue that they had no control over the actions taken by their attorneys, it is clear that Illinois law finds that an agency relationship exists between attorney and client. Generally, an attorney is an agent of the client, even though as to his physical activities he is an independent contractor. Washington v. Caseyville Health Care Ass’n, 284 Ill. App. 3d 97, 101, 672 N.E.2d 34, 36 (1996). Attorney, broker, auctioneer and similar persons employed for a single transaction or a series of transactions are “agents,” although as to their physical activities they are “independent contractors.” Kouba v. East Joliet Bank, 135 Ill. App. 3d 264, 267, 481 N.E.2d 325, 328 (1985). The case at bar does not allege any physical activities undertaken by Sabo & Zahn; therefore, it would not be an independent contractor in its relationship with the Holabird & Root defendants. Thus, an agency relationship exists with the Holabird & Root defendants as the principals having the right to control the conduct of their agent, Sabo & Zahn, and Sabo & Zahn as agent, having the power to act on behalf of the Holabird & Root defendants.  Plaintiffs next argue that a genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether Sabo & Zahn was acting within the scope of its authority when it sent out the letters. In opposition to the Holabird & Root defendants’ motion for summary judgment, plaintiff cited the discovery depositions of Werner Sabo and James Zahn, who both acknowledged that they were doing what they were hired to do, and the discovery deposition of defendant James W. Baird in which he states that the letters sent by Sabo & Zahn indicated to him that the law firm was pursuing the fee in an “aggressive way” and that the firm was “serving them as their clients.” In addition, plaintiffs cited the assertions made in the Holabird & Root defendants’ motion for summary judgment in which they affirm that the letters were a discovery tool in litigation. The actual letters at issue also state that Sabo & Zahn represented Holabird & Root. Both Sabo & Zahn and the Holabird & Root defendants agree that the law firm was using the letters as a discovery tool in attempting to collect the judgment that Holabird & Root had against Horwitz Matthews, Inc. While the Holabird & Root defendants argue they had no notice that these letters were going out and, therefore, no input into whether or not the letters were sent, that appears to be in conflict with the partners’ deposition testimonies in which they acknowledge that the firm was doing what it was hired to do in an “aggressive way, serving them as clients.” Under Illinois law, it does not matter whether the principals were aware of the contents of the letter, as long as the attorney was acting within the scope of his authority. Thus, we find that there is a material issue of fact as to whether Sabo & Zahn acted within its scope of authority in sending the letters to the various partners of plaintiffs. Plaintiffs’ final argument is that even if Sabo & Zahn’s actions were beyond the scope of its authority, the Holabird & Root defendants’ acquiescence render them liable under agency law. The Holabird & Root defendants respond that the elements necessary for ratification under Illinois law are not satisfied by plaintiffs. Ratification may be express or inferred and occurs where the principal, with knowledge of material facts of the unauthorized transaction by the agent, takes a position inconsistent with nonaffirmation of the transaction. Hofner v. Glenn Ingram & Co., 140 Ill. App. 3d 874, 883, 489 N.E.2d 311, 316 (1985). Ratification of an unauthorized act is equivalent to the original authorization and confirms that which was originally unauthorized. Jones v. Beker, 260 Ill. App. 3d 481, 485, 632 N.E.2d 273, 277 (1994). It is not clear from the record when the Holabird & Root defendants became aware of the letters, and when they did, if they ever disapproved of the letters being mailed or if by their silence and conduct they approved the letters. Whether the Holabird & Root defendants’ actions or lack thereof constituted a ratification is a question of fact. For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court granting summary judgment to the Holabird & Root defendants is reversed and this case is remanded for trial. Reversed and remanded. HALL, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9740344 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:32:55.331302+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE HOFFMAN, dissenting: I dissent from the result reached by the majority because I believe that the trial court correctly found that Sabo & Zahn acted outside of the scope of its authority as Holabird & Root’s attorney if it committed an intentional tort by sending letters to the business associates and investors of Horwitz Matthews. At the heart of this case, however, is an issue of first impression in Illinois, namely: whether a client can be held vicariously liable for an intentional tort committed by its attorneys while discharging their duties under circumstances where the client did not authorize or direct or have any prior knowledge of the tortious conduct. There can be no dispute on the proposition that a principal is vicariously liable for the tortious conduct of an agent committed while acting within the scope of his authority. Gomien v. Wear-Ever Aluminum, Inc., 50 Ill. 2d 19, 21, 276 N.E.2d 336 (1971). The majority finds that the attorney/client relationship is one of principal/agent and, based on that finding, seemingly concludes that a client may be held vicariously liable for the intentional torts of its attorney. It supports this conclusion by reference to a number of Illinois cases in which a client was held to be bound by agreements made by his or her attorney acting within the apparent scope of his authority (see In re Marriage of Marr, 264 Ill. App. 3d 932, 935, 638 N.E.2d 303 (1994)), cases having nothing to do with an attorney/client relationship (see Letsos v. Century 21-New West Realty, 285 Ill. App. 3d 1056, 675 N.E.2d 217 (1996); Kouba v. East Joliet Bank, 135 Ill. App. 3d 264, 481 N.E.2d 325 (1985)), and a case in which the tortious conduct of the attorney was committed with the full knowledge and direction of the client (see Flight Kitchen, Inc. v. Chicago Seven-Up Bottling Co., 22 Ill. App. 3d 558, 563, 317 N.E.2d 663 (1974)). Since the facts of this case are so easily distinguishable, I find the cases cited by the majority to be of little or no value in resolving the issue present here. Courts in other jurisdictions are divided. Like the majority, some jurisdictions favor liability, finding that the attorney/client relationship is one of principal/agent (see Peterson v. Worthen Bank & Trust Co., N.A., 296 Ark. 201, 753 S.W.2d 278 (1988); Grenwelge v. Shamrock Reconstructors, Inc., 705 S.W.2d 693 (Tex. 1986); Continental Insurance Co. v. Bayless & Roberts, Inc., 608 P.2d 281 (Alaska 1980); Nyer v. Carter, 367 A.2d 1375 (Me. 1977); Stumpf v. Continental Casualty Co., 102 Or. App. 302, 794 P.2d 1228 (1990); Southwestern Bell Telephone Co. v. Wilson, 768 S.W.2d 755 (Tex. App. 1988); United Farm Bureau Mutual Insurance Co. v. Groen, 486 N.E.2d 571 (Ind. App. 1985)); others find no liability, holding that an attorney is an independent contractor (see Baldasarre v. Butler, 132 N.J. 278, 625 A.2d 458 (1993); Feliberty v. Damon, 72 N.Y.2d 112, 527 N.E.2d 261 (1998); Aetna Casualty & Surety Co. v. Protective National Insurance Co., 631 So. 2d 305 (Fla. App. 1993); Brown v. Lumbermens Mutual Casualty Co., 90 N.C. App. 464, 369 S.E.2d 367 (1988), aff’d, 326 N.C. 387, 390 S.E.2d 150 (1990); Plant v. Trust Co., 168 Ga. App. 909, 310 S.E.2d 745 (1983); Lynn v. Superior Court, 180 Cal. App. 3d 346, 225 Cal. Rptr. 427 (1986); Merritt v. Reserve Insurance Co., 34 Cal. App. 3d 858, 110 Cal. Rptr. 511 (1973)). I favor the reasoning of the latter cases, which hold that attorneys are independent contractors, at least when, as in this case, they are engaged to pursue a claim without further direction. An independent contractor is one who undertakes to produce a given result, without being controlled by his principal as to the means or methods by which he attains that result. Fut another way, an independent contractor represents the will of his principal only as to the result, not the means by which that result is accomplished. Alexander v. Industrial Comm’n, 72 Ill. 2d 444, 449-50, 381 N.E.2d 669 (1978). This definition fits the status of an attorney merely retained to pursue a claim or defense without further direction from the client. Under such circumstances, attorneys are not subject to their client’s control in a traditional sense. Rather, they are engaged by clients who, in the main, are totally unfamiliar with the means or methods to be employed in achieving their desired result. Further, attorneys are responsible for their own acts and can be disciplined if they fail to conduct themselves in accordance with the Rules of Professional Conduct. One who employs an independent contractor is not vicariously liable for the tortious conduct of the contractor, primarily because the employer has no right of control over the manner in which the contractor performs his work. Hartley v. Red Ball Transit Co., 344 Ill. 534, 538-39, 176 N.E. 751 (1931). An exception to this rule exists when the act or omission of the independent contractor that caused harm to a third party was pursuant to the order or direction of the employer. Gomien, 50 Ill. 2d at 21. I can conceive of no logical reason to alter this rule when the independent contractor is an attorney. In this case, there is no evidence that the alleged tortious content of the letters sent to the business associates and investors of Horwitz Matthews was ordered or directed by Holabird & Root, nor do I believe that there is any evidentiary material in the record that creates a genuine issue of fact on the question of whether the Holabird & Root defendants knew of the contents of the letters before they were sent by Sabo & Zahn. Case and Baird, both Holabird & Root partners, denied seeing the letters before they were sent. Their testimony constitutes the only competent evidentiary material of record on the issue since, as the majority points out, the most that Sabo & Zahn is able to say is that no one at the firm can recall whether the letters were shown to anyone at Holabird & Root before they were sent. If Sabo & Zahn was acting as an independent contractor, as I believe that it was, then the trial court correctly entered summary judgment in favor of the Holabird & Root defendants. However, even if Sabo & Zahn is deemed to be Holabird & Root’s agent, I still find summary judgment to be appropriate. I believe that the general retention of an attorney to do all things necessary to pursue a claim should, as a matter of law, be interpreted as authorizing the attorney only to do all things legal and proper to pursue the claim and should not be construed, without more, as giving the attorney direction or permission to commit a tortious act. Where there is no evidence that the client expressly or impliedly authorized, directed, knew of, or ratified the alleged tortious conduct of its attorney, it should not be presumed that, merely because the parties stand in the relationship of attorney/client, the client intended or authorized the tortious conduct or that the conduct was within the scope of the attorney’s duties. The undesirable implications of a contrary position seem rather obvious. Clients who in good faith employ an attorney will be exposed to vicarious liability for the attorney’s tortious conduct when, as a practical matter, the client is in no position to control the attorney’s conduct. As a final point, the majority suggests that a question of fact exists on the issue of whether Holabird & Root ratified Sabo & Zahn’s conduct. I disagree. Ratification of an unauthorized act is equivalent to an original authorization and confirms that which was originally unauthorized. Illinois Armored Car Corp. v. Industrial Comm’n, 205 Ill. App. 3d 993, 998, 563 N.E.2d 951 (1990). The rationale behind the doctrine is that the person ratifying obtains a benefit through the actions of someone who is acting in his behalf with apparent authority. Swader v. Golden Rule Insurance Co., 203 Ill. App. 3d 697, 704-05, 561 N.E.2d 99 (1990). Absent a benefit, ratification will not be implied. Jones v. Beker, 260 Ill. App. 3d 481, 485, 632 N.E.2d 273 (1994). There is simply nothing in this record that could support an inference that Holabird & Root benefitted in any way by Sabo & Zahn’s alleged interference with the business relationships of Horwitz Matthews.

=== CASE 9740345 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:32:56.335788+00 ===

Williams, J.
There are three controlling issues. First, is that part of the Michigan kidnapping statute, MCLA 750.349; MSA 28.581, reading "[a]ny person who wilfully, maliciously and without lawful authority shall forcibly * * * confine or imprison any other person within this state against his will * * * shall be guilty of a felony,” constitutionally viable without interpolating asportation or some similar element? Second, could the jury lawfully find asportation under the facts of this case? Third, was the jury lawfully charged?
I. FACTS
It is necessary to detail the facts quite thoroughly in order that the elements of the kidnapping statute can be better examined and applied to this case. We adopt the statement of facts in the Court of Appeals’ majority opinion which found them inadequate to sustain asportation:
"On the morning of October 18, 1965, Adams consumed substantial quantities of alcohol and barbiturates in the company of several other inmates of Jackson Prison. Their conversation turned to the grievances —real or imagined — which they felt against the prison administration.
"Shortly after 11 a.m., Adams and inmate Edward Whitehead went to the main dining hall of the prison where lunch was being served. Adams cut into the serving line ahead of other inmates and was told by a guard to go to the end of the line. Adams directed some verbal abuse at the guard, then proceeded with Whitehead to the prison’s 4-block, a cell block in the northwest portion of the prison. Adams’ conduct aroused the *227attention of two unarmed prison guards who followed him to 4-block.
"Because this was the lunch hour, several hundred prisoners were milling about 4-block. The presence of Adams and Whitehead, plus a third inmate, Alvin Shaw, all of whom were highly agitated, as well as the two guards and the hundreds of milling prisoners, led to ¿ disturbance of uncertain proportions.
"At this time Inspector Joseph Dembosky, the highest ranking uniformed prison officer, was notified of the disturbance in 4-block. He immediately proceeded to the area and thrust himself into the center of the milling crowd.
"Before Inspector Dembosky could take any action, he was seized from behind by inmate Whitehead, who held a knife to his throat. Adams also produced a knife which he used to wave back the prisoners pressing in on Inspector Dembosky and Whitehead. At the trial Inspector Dembosky testified that at this point he said, 'Can’t we talk about this?’ Another witness testified that Dembosky said, 'Can’t we go somewhere and talk about this?’ Adams, Whitehead, and Shaw, all of whom had knives, then accompanied Dembosky at knifepoint out of 4-block into the prison yard.
"There were approximately one thousand inmates in the yard as Dembosky, Whitehead, Shaw, and Adams left 4-block. Inspector Dembosky testified that he felt that there was danger of a riot if the party remained in the yard. He suggested that they go to the prison gymnasium to talk things over. Instead, he was forced to accompany Whitehead, Shaw, and Adams to the prison hospital, which was roughly 1500 feet from the entrance to 4-block. During their journey to the hospital, the armed inmates repeatedly shouted warnings to the heavily-armed tower guards that Inspector Dembosky would be killed if they were fired upon.
"Shortly before reaching the hospital building, the group was joined by another inmate, Milton Thomas, who was also armed. Together, immediately after entering the hospital, they seized two guards, a prison doctor, and an inmate elevator operator named Hubbard. Shaw, Whitehead, Thomas, and Adams, together with *228Inspector Dembosky and the other victims, then proceeded to the doctor’s lounge on the fifth floor of the hospital.
"Adams and his cohorts erected barricades around the lounge. Over an intercom, they repeatedly demanded to see various prison officials, as well as the warden, to air their grievances. They also demanded to see a newspaper reporter. There were repeated warnings that Inspector Dembosky would be killed if they were fired upon.
"During the hours that followed, the armed inmates displayed contradictory behavior toward their captives. The physician was released when Adams ascertained that he had a heart condition. Thomas told the warden to notify the pregnant wife of one of the captive guards that he would not be harmed. Contrastingly, inmate Hubbard was severely beaten by Adams, then released as an example of Adams’ serious intentions.
"A number of prison officials visited the fifth floor landing to discuss grievances. A newspaper reporter summoned to the scene was occupied for almost three hours in recording these grievances. Adams repeatedly expressed his fear of being shot by guards when he left the fifth floor.
"After about 5-1/2 hours, Shaw, Whitehead, Thomas, and Adams were persuaded to abandon their barricaded position. Upon being given assurances that they would not be shot, they released their captives unharmed. They then proceeded to the deputy warden’s office, where they surrendered their weapons.” 34 Mich App 546,552-554.
The portion of the statute we are called on to construe is that set forth in the information. Defendant Adams was tried on charges of: "wilfully, maliciously, and without lawful authority forcibly confining and imprisoning another person * * * within this state and against his will.”
At trial the jury returned a verdict of guilty and in a split decision the Court of Appeals reversed. *229Judge Levin for a divided Court held the statute unconstitutionally overbroad unless limitations were interpolated to confine its operative effect. He added this limitation by construing the statute to require an asportation so as to differentiate the offense from false imprisonment. This asportation, he held, must have a significance independent of the underlying crime (i.e., assault) and also must remove the victim from the environment in which he is found and expose him to an increased risk of harm. He held that as a matter of law the instant facts did not constitute such asportation and hence there was no kidnapping. Judge Gillis dissented saying the facts constituted a typical kidnapping.
II. THE STATUTE AND ITS CONSTRUCTION
The text of the statute involved, MCLA 750.349; MSA 28.581, with the part charged in the information in italics reads as follows:
"Any person who wilfully, maliciously and without lawful authority shall forcibly or secretly confíne or imprison any other person within this state against his will, or shall forcibly carry or send such person out of this state, or shall forcibly seize or confine, or shall inveigle or kidnap any other person with intent to extort money or other valuable thing thereby or with intent either to cause such person to be secretly confined or imprisoned in this state against his will, or in any way held to service against his will, shall be guilty of a felony, punishable by imprisonment in the state prison for life or for any term of years.” (Emphasis added.)
Since this statute is not a model of clarity it is our constitutional duty to give a reasonable construction to it. The cases under the statute provide little guidance, however.1
*230We agree with Judge Levin’s thoughtful and careful analysis that the sweep of this part of the statute is so broad that it requires the interpolation of the historical concept of asportation to render it constitutional, and it is our duty to do so. See Michigan Towing Association, Inc, v Detroit, 370 Mich 440, 456 (1963); State Bar of Michigan v Lansing, 361 Mich 185, 195 (1960). Failure to do so would result in denial of due process, Giaccio v Pennsylvania, 382 US 399; 86 S Ct 518; 15 L Ed 2d 447 (1965).
Where a kidnapping statute does not in terms require asportation or its equivalent, such a requirement has not infrequently been judicially read into and made a part of the definition of the crime.1 2
III. THE ASPORTATION REQUIREMENT
At common law, kidnapping was a misdemeanor with well defined elements; first, the forcible abduction of a person from his own country, and second, sending him to another country. This was *231considered more than false imprisonment, since kidnapping included all the elements of false imprisonment with the additional element of asportation of the victim outside his own country and beyond the protection of its laws.3
Statutory law, in modifying common-law kidnapping, has abolished the requirement that a national or regional boundary be breached.4 However, with the abolition of the breached boundary requirement, a lack of precision was created in the law as to the degree of asportation required to transform a lesser crime into kidnapping.5
Torn between the common-law rule that a most significant asportation was required, and the obvious legislative intention to broaden the scope of the offense, the courts, virtually without exception, began by endorsing the idea-that any movement, however slight, was sufficient to constitute the asportation element of kidnapping.6
*232Representative of this formulation were the opinions of the California Supreme Court in People v Chessman, 38 Cal 2d 166, 192; 238 P2d 1001, 1017 (1951) and People v Wein, 50 Cal 2d 383, 399-400; 326 P2d 457, 466 (1958). In Chessman, the defendant forced his victim to move 22 feet to his automobile, where he sexually assaulted her. The Court held that, "It is. the fact, not the distance, of forcible removal which constitutes kidnapping in this state.” In Wein, the Court applied the Chessman standard to uphold the kidnapping confession of a defendant who forced his victims to move from room to room in their own homes during a series of robberies and rapes. The Court stated:
"If the section, as interpreted by this court is regarded as too harsh, the remedy is for the Legislature to redefine kidnapping, and not for this court to engraft some uncertain distance limitation. into the plain language of the section.” Id.
However, after a time representative courts perceived that unrestrained recognition of any movement at all as adequate to support kidnapping was letting the pendulum swing to absurd and unconscionable results. The New York Court of Appeals in People v Miles, 23 NY2d 527; 297 NYS2d 913, 922; 245 NE2d 688, 695 (1969) in referring to two cases that checked this wide swing said:
"In short, the Levy-Lombardi rule was designed to prevent gross distortion of lesser crimes into a much more serious crime by excess of prosecutorial zeal.”
Speaking to this point Judge Levin for the Court of Appeals majority well said of that part of our kidnapping statute which concerns us here:
"It is obvious that virtually any assault, any battery, any rape, or any robbery involves some 'intentional *233confinement’ of the person of the victim. To read the kidnapping statute literally is to convert a misdemeanor, for example, assault and battery, into a capital offense. A literal reading of the kidnapping statute would permit a prosecutor to aggravate the charges against any assailant, robber, of rapist by charging the literal violation of the kidnapping statute which must inevitably accompany each of those offenses.” 34 Mich App 546, 560 (1971).
In 1969, the California Supreme Court overruled its prior constructions in the Chessman-Wein line of cases. People v Daniels, 71 Cal 2d 1119, 1139; 459 P2d 225, 238; 80 Cal Rptr 897, 910 (1969) clearly repudiates the doctrine that any movement at all of the victim is sufficient to constitute the asportation element of kidnapping. There the victims had been forced to move about in their apartments during the commission of crimes of robbery and rape. The Court declared:
"[W]e hold that the intent of the Legislature * * * was to exclude from [the statute’s] reach not only 'standstill’ robberies * * * but also those in which the movements of the victim are merely incidental to the commission of the robbery and do not substantially increase the risk of harm over and above that necessarily present in the crime of robbery itself.” Id. (Emphasis added.)
And in People v Timmons, 4 Cal 3d 411, 415; 482 P2d 648, 651; 93 Cal Rptr 736, 739 (1971), the Court elaborated on the Daniels standard by finding that forcing a robbery victim to drive five city blocks in order to facilitate the robbery, did not constitute kidnapping. The Court stated:
"The true test is not mere mileage but whether the movements of the victims 'substantially increase the risk of harm’ beyond that inherent in the crime of robbery itself.” Id.
*234To summarize the two-fold California test, the type of asportation necessary to buttress a kidnapping conviction is that:
1. The movement element must not be "merely incidental” to the commission of another underlying lesser crime.
2. The movement must "substantially increase the risk of harm” beyond that inherent in the underlying lesser crime.
New York, which in People v Florio, 301 NY 46; 92 NE2d 881 (1950) had adopted the any movement rule, had previous to the above cited California cases written a standard similar to the movement "merely incidental” to a lesser crime rule in California in three cases: People v Levy, 15 NY2d 159; 256 NYS2d 793; 204 NE2d 842 (1965); People v Lombardi, 20 NY2d 266; 282 NYS2d 519; 229 NE2d 206 (1967); People v Miles, 23 NY2d 527; 297 NYS2d 913; 245 NE2d 688 (1969). In the last case, the Court described the limitation of the rule:
"The more complicated nature of the asportation, with changes in purpose and direction, first to a place in New Jersey, and then to New York, for purposes connected with but not directly instrumental to the attempt to kill Brooks, removes this case from the exception of the Levy-Lombardi rule.
"In the Levy and Lombardi cases, * * * , the restraint and asportation were parts of the crimes ultimately committed. * * * It is this kind of factual merger with the ultimate crime of the preliminary, preparatory, or concurrent action that the rule is designed to recognize, and thus prevent unnatural elevation of the 'true crime’ to be charged.
"Moreover, the rule has no purpose of ignoring as independent crimes alternative or optional means used in committing another crime, which, * * * , constitute and should constitute a separately cognizable offense. Nor was the Levy-Lombardi rule intended to exclude *235from the 'traditional’ or ’conventional' kidnapping abductions designed to effect extortions or accomplish murder. ” (Emphasis added.) Id, 23 NY2d 527, 539-540; 297 NYS2d 913, 921-922; 245 NE2d 688, 694.
New York established three rules:
1. The movement element must not be "merely incidental” to the commission of another underlying lesser crime.
2. The movement of a "more complicated nature” may sustain a kidnapping charge.
3. Statutory kidnapping continues to include "traditional” or "conventional” kidnapping abductions designed to effect extortions or accomplish murder.
The first or "merely incidental” rule is common to New York and California', namely if the movement is merely incidental to the commission of another underlying lesser crime, it will not sustain kidnapping. We feel that this is the critical and significant criterion and regard the other two criteria illustrative and not controlling.
IV. A MICHIGAN ASPORTATION STANDARD
In formulating its asportation standard, the Michigan Court of Appeals held that, as in the California cases of Daniels and Timmons, to constitute kidnapping the asportation must "substantially” increase "the risk that the victim may suffer significant physical injuries over and above those to which a victim of the underlying crime is normally exposed” and also devised its own "change of environment” rule. 34 Mich App 567. We hold that these are not determinative criteria to be applied in deciding the sufficiency of the asportation. We hold that it is sufficient that the *236confinement and asportation are not merely incidental to the lesser underlying crime.
Judge Levin for the Court of Appeals in an otherwise exemplary opinion adopted a two sentence standard for movement to constitute asportation sufficient to sustain kidnapping in the instant case. We agree with the first sentence although we stated it differently above. We do not agree with the second sentence nor believe it supported by the cases or reason. Part of the problem is a definition of "environment” — in one sense you can change the environment of the smallest room by intruding a criminal with a weapon, although in another sense it is still the same room. The two sentence standard established by Judge Levin is:
"We have concluded that under the kidnapping statute a movement of the victim does not constitute an asportation unless it has significance independent of the assault. And, unless the victim is removed from the environment where he is found, the consequences of the movement itself to the victim are not independently significant from the assault — the movement does not manifest the commission of a separate crime — and punishment for injury to the victim must be founded upon crimes other than kidnapping.” Id, 34 Mich App 568.
As above indicated we hold the movement element must not be merely incidental to the commission of a lesser underlying crime, i.e., it must be incidental to the commission of the kidnapping.
What is a kidnapping? This concept is not always too well defined but two New York cases at least specify some things that are kidnapping, as does the second half of the Michigan statute. We have already quoted the following from People v Miles, supra:
"Nor was the Levy-Lombardi rule intended to exclude *237from the 'traditional’ or 'conventional’ kidnapping abductions designed to effect extortions or accomplish murder.”
The second pertinent quotation is from People v Levy, supra, and reads as follows:
'!People v Black, 18 AD 2d 719 [; 236 NYS2d 240 (1962)], is an illustration of separately established crimes of robbery and kidnapping: One of the victims of the robbery was taken along as a hostage to another State and held for considerable time, long after the robbery had been completed.” Id. (Emphasis added.)
In other words, whatever else kidnapping may or may not include, these two New York cases focus on extortions, murder, and taking a hostage. Murder is not pertinent to this case but extortion and taking a hostage may be.
At this point the Michigan kidnapping statute in full is instructive although it is recognized that the latter half relative to extortion and holding "to service against his will” were not specifically pled. The statutory language is:
"Any person who wilfully, maliciously and without lawful authority shall forcibly or secretly confine or imprison any other person within this state against his will, or shall forcibly carry or send such person out of this state, or shall forcibly, seize or confine, or shall inveigle or kidnap any other person with intent to extort money or other valuable thing thereby or with intent either to cause such person to be secretly confined or imprisoned in this state against his will, or in any way held to service against his will, shall be guilty of a felony, punishable by imprisonment in the state prison for life or for any term of years.” MCLA 750.349; MSA 28.581.
In interpreting the first part of the Michigan *238kidnapping statute to avoid constitutional over-breadth the following factors are to be considered:
1. Since the language of the first part of the kidnapping statute by itself is so general as to be susceptible of defining minor crimes as well as kidnapping, where appropriate, asportation must be interpolated to achieve the Legislature’s intention to define the major crime of kidnapping.
2. The movement element is not sufficient if it is "merely incidental” to the commission of another underlying lesser crime.
3. If the underlying crime involves murder, extortion or taking a hostage, movement incidental thereto is generally sufficient to establish a valid statutory kidnapping.
4. If the movement adds either a greater danger or threat thereof, that is a factor in considering whether the movement adequately constitutes the necessary legal asportation, but there could be asportation without this element of additional danger so long as the movement was incidental to a kidnapping and not a lesser crime.
5. Where appropriate, secret confinement or some other non-movement factor may supply a necessary alternative to asportation to complete stat- • utory kidnapping.
6. Whether or not a particular movement constitutes statutory asportation or whether there is an appropriate alternative element must be determined from all the circumstances under the standards set out above and is a question of fact for the jury.
"Jurors are the sole judges of the facts and neither the trial court nor this court can interfere with their exercise of that right.” People v Miller, *239301 Mich 93, 100 (1942). And in People v Putnam, 323 Mich 374, 379 (1948), Justice Boyles stated, "It is not the province of the Court to usurp the proper functions of the jury in determining issues of fact. It is not for the Court to say that the jury would have so found, if the issue had been submitted to it.”
V. THE STANDARDS APPLIED TO THE FACTS OF THIS CASE
As indicated above, the factual circumstances of the case present a jury question under proper instructions based on the standards set forth above.
Judge Levin was in his opinion, as we now are, faced with the dilemma of analyzing how the known facts in this case fit into the legal standards just established for the benefit of judicial review without presuming upon the jury’s function. Judge Levin seized one horn of the dilemma and concluded:
"Under the circumstances we are satisfied that the evidence does not support a finding that the movement had significance adverse to Inspector Dembosky independent of the continuing assault.” 34 Mich App 571.
Unfortunately since we disagree with this mixed law and fact conclusion, we are compelled to make analysis of the facts beyond what we would have wished giving due respect to the jury’s function.
Judge Levin assumed, or found, that the lesser underlying crime was a "continuing assault” and that the movement was not "independent” of it. We can visualize at least three different possible underlying crimes to which the movement might relate rather than just this one. These three possi*240bilities are: assault, common-law confinement or false imprisonment, and kidnapping.
As to assault Judge Levin has written to that. If the jury had been properly instructed, it might or might not have chosen to regard this as the real crime involved. Depending upon the jury’s view of what the assault really was, the asportation might or might not be incidental to it rather than to a kidnapping, if any.
As to common-law unlawful confinement or false imprisonment, the jury might well find that the real crime had these earmarks more than an assault, for it might be difficult for the jury to find that the assault element constituted the real crime as there was no apparent motive for the assault in the sense of acting to harm Inspector Dembosky, as, if that were the motive, no direct physical harm was actually inflicted although there was ample opportunity to do so. If confinement or false imprisonment appeared to be the real underlying crime, then the question for the jury would be, was the movement such as to constitute the crime of kidnapping. Since kidnapping and unlawful confinement and false imprisonment have essentially common elements the character of the movement might be determinative as to whether a kidnapping existed. Because of the common elements it is difficult to clarify the situation by reliance on whether the movement was incidental to the lesser underlying crime or to kidnapping and the character and purpose of the movement might be vitally important. What this factor might be we shall consider as we turn to the third possibility, kidnapping.
As we describe the kidnapping possibility, it is useful to bear in mind the New York Court of Appeals’ definition of "traditional” or "conven*241tional” kidnapping focusing on extortion, murder or taking hostage. Did the charged confinement here relate more to confinement for the sake of confinement or for the sake of assault or more to the idea of extortion, murder or taking hostage? A jury would not easily find murder in the picture, but might find that extortion or taking hostage was clearly in the picture more so than assault or confinement for confinement. The scenario opens with the defendant complaining about grievances and ends with his discussing them with the warden, the press and others. Grievances might be found by a jury to be the reason for the charged confinement and actual movement.
Was Dembosky taken hostage and was his body’s safety used as a fulcrum to attempt to lever a hearing and hopefully redress of grievances? Was Inspector Dembosky moved to the hospital room insulated from sniper fire, where ingress and egress of officials and press could be controlled by defendant and where there was a telephone with which defendant could communicate safely with prison officials and the outside world to attempt to extort redress of grievances? If these questions were answered affirmatively on the facts by the jurors under proper instructions, the underlying crime might be a kidnapping of taking Inspector Dembosky as a hostage to extort more favorable conditions and the movement to the secluded telephone-supplied room as incidental not to any lesser crime but to a kidnapping.
It would be the function of the jury to weigh the evidence presented to it in the light of the court’s charge in order to determine whether the real crime herein involved was a minor one and the movement incidental thereto, or whether the real crime did indeed involve the taking of a hostage in *242order to extort something of value and that the movement was an asportation incidental to committing a kidnapping.
VI. SUFFICIENCY OF THE INFORMATION
Having determined that in this case in addition to confinement there must be asportation, we turn to the question of the sufficiency of the information. Was the information incomplete in that it did not specifically charge asportation?
The New York case of People v Weiss, 252 App Div 463, 467-468; 300 NYS 249, 254-255 (1937) reversed on other grounds 276 NY 384; 12 NE2d 514 (1938) is instructive.* ***7 Appellants were convicted of the crime of kidnapping under New York law.8 In discussing the appellants’ attack on the indictment, the Court stated:
"Appellants attack the sufficiency of the indictment and contend that under the statute a specific criminal intent to cause the victim to be confined is an essential element of the crime of kidnapping and must be pleaded. They urge that since the indictment fails to allege such specific intent it is insufficient in law. There can be no doubt that, when a particular intent accompanying an act is requisite to constitute a crime, it should be alleged. It is likewise true that, under the statute, to constitute the crime of kidnapping there *243must be the willful and unlawful seizing of a person against his will with intent to cause him to be confined, imprisoned, or detained within the state. People v. Hope, 257 N.Y. 147-150, 152, 177 N.E. 402, 403 [1931]; Hadden v. People, 25 N.Y. 373 [1862]. In People v. Hope, supra, there are dicta to the effect that the intent with which the victim was seized and confined must be pleaded. I believe the absence of such an allegation is not fatal where, as here, it is alleged that on February 14th Wendel was seized against his will and without authority of law and actually confined and detained against his will and without authority of láw until February 24th. The statute requires seizure with intent to confine. Seizure alone is not sufficient. But where seizure and actual confinement against the victim’s will and without authority of law are alleged, the unlawful intent appears, it is implicit in the indictment, and the crime defined by the statute is sufficiently pleaded; and if those facts are established the crime is proven. In determining the sufficiency of an indictment the test is: Does it identify the charge against the defendant so that his conviction or acquittal will bar a subsequent charge for the same offense; does it notify him of the nature and character of the crime with which he is charged so as to enable him to prepare his defense and to permit the court to pronounce judgment according to the right of the case? People v. Farson, 244 N.Y. 413, 155 N.E. 724 [1927]; People v. Williams, 243 N.Y. 162, 153 N.E. 35 [1926], In applying this test courts should be liberal, not technical. Thus construed, the indictment is sufficient and the defendants were not prejudiced by the failure to plead the crime charged in the identical words of the statute. To hold otherwise would be to sacrifice substance to form and 'abandon much that has been accomplished to simplify procedure upon criminal trials.’ People v. Marcus, 235 App. Div. 397, 400; 257 N.Y.S. 424, 428 [1932].” (Emphasis added.)
In applying the Weiss test, we hold that the information was sufficient but not exactly a standard for emulation. The charge against defendant was based on the wording of the kidnapping stat*244ute. The exact language of the statute was used. Defendant knew of the nature and character of the crime he was charged with. If the Court of Appeals’ reversal of conviction is affirmed by this Court, he will not be able to be again charged with this crime of kidnapping.
There is no contradiction between the Weiss test and 1963 Const, art 1, § 20 which provides in part:
"In every criminal prosecution, the accused shall have the right * * * ; to be informed of the nature of the accusation; * * * .”
See Haskins v Ralston, 69 Mich 63, 67 (1888). Indeed Weiss merely fleshes out the skeletal constitutional minimum. Since defendant’s constitutional rights were not violated, any other minor defects in the information were waived by the pleadings. People v Collins, 380 Mich 131 (1968); In re Hoffman, 326 Mich 368 (1949). As was stated by justice Brennan in Collins:
"[T]his Court will not regard as the basis for a new trial or reversal of a conviction any procedural error which does not result in a miscarriage of justice. GCR 1963, 529; CL 1948, § 769.26.” 380 Mich 135. (Emphasis added.)9
VII. SUFFICIENCY OF THE CHARGE
The purpose of the court’s charge to the jury is to explain the issues and the legal principles applicable to the facts in issue. The trial judge did not allude to asportation in his charge. He charged the jury:_
*245"While the testimony in this case has covered a wide range of facts and circumstances, the real issues for your determination are rather narrow ones and they may be stated briefly as follows:
"Did the defendant wilfully, maliciously and without lawful authority forcibly confine or imprison Inspector Dembosky against his will?
"Or did the defendant aid and abet others in wilfully, maliciously and without lawful authority forcibly confining or imprisoning Inspector Dembosky against his will?”
As decided above, asportation is a question of fact. It is also an essential element of the crime. "It is the duty of a trial court in charging a jury as to the elements of an offense, and what must be proved in order to establish such elements, to do so accurately.” People v Tolewitzke, 332 Mich 455, 458 (1952).
Considering the charge as an entity, it was inadequate. The jury charge should have included the question of whether the necessary asportation was present.
The trial court is reversed, the Court of Appeals is affirmed in part and reversed in part. The case is remanded for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
T. M. Kavanagh, C. J., and T. G. Kavanagh and Swainson, JJ., concurred with Williams, J.
The cases dealing with prosecutions under this statute involve little or no construction of the statute. People v Congdon, 77 Mich 351 (1889); People v Minchella, 268 Mich 123; 93 ALR 805, cert den, 293 US 619; 55 S Ct 217; reh den 55 S Ct 345; 79 L Ed 707 (1934); People v Burk, 7 Mich App 692 (1967); People v Morris, 10 Mich App 526 (1968); People v Shaw, 11 Mich App 255 (1968); People v Emery, 13 Mich App 616 (1968); People v Curtis, 17 Mich App 720 (1969); People v Kildow, 19 Mich App 194 (1969); People v Markham, 19 Mich App 616 (1969); People v Glenn, 20 Mich App 537 (1969); People v Haurgabook, 23 Mich App 356 (1970); People v Dickerson, 23 Mich App 621 (1970); People v Cook, 24 Mich App 401 (1970); People v Ruppuhn, 25 Mich App 62 (1970); People v Leon Morgan, 27 Mich App 388 (1970); People v Walker, 28 Mich App 650 (1970); People v Washington, 30 Mich App 435 (1971); People v Shuck, 31 Mich App 70 (1971); People v Rolston, 31 Mich App 200 (1971); People v Otis Adams, 34 Mich App 546 (1971) (the instant case); People v Warren, 34 Mich App 622 (1971) ; People v Nodine, 36 Mich App 80 (1971).
Perkins, Criminal Law (2d ed), p 177.
Note, A Rationale of the Law of Kidnapping, 53 Colum L Rev 540 (1953).
Id. See also Model Penal Code Tentative Draft No. 11, p 11 et seq.
California specifically includes the concept of movement in its kidnapping statute and the California courts have been concerned to determine what kind of movement is necessary to constitute asportation. The California statute reads:
"Every person who forcibly steals, takes, or arrests any person in this state, and carries him into another country, state, or county, or into another part of the same county, or forcibly takes or arrests any person with a design to take him out of this state * * * .” California West Annotated Statutes, § 207.
Both New York and Michigan have statutes which do not specifically use words which connote movement. The penal laws of New York, § 135.20, entitled Kidnapping in the Second Degree states as follows:
“A person is guilty of kidnapping in the second degree when he abducts another person.”
The definition of "abduct” is defined in § 135.00:
" 'Abduct’ means to restrain a person with intent to prevent his liberation by either (a) secreting or holding him in a place where he is not likely to be found, or (b) using or threatening to use deadly physical force.”
See for example People v Florio, 301 NY 46; 92 NE2d 881 (1950); State v Lowry, 263 NC 536; 139 SE2d 870 (1965); State v Kress, 105 NJ Super 514; 253 A2d 481 (1969).
In reversing the conviction and remanding for a new trial, the New York Court of Appeals did not concern itself with the sufficiency of the indictment. Rather, it reversed on the fact that defendants did not have an opportunity to testify as to whether they believed in good faith that they were acting under the authority of law.
The statute (§ 1250, Penal Law) so far as material provides:
"A person who wilfully:
"1. Seizes, confines, inveigles, or kidnaps another, with intent to cause him, without authority of law, to be confined or imprisoned within this state, or to be sent out of the state or to be sold as a slave, or in any way held to service or kept or detained, against his will;
"3. * * * Is guilty of kidnapping.”
MCLA 769.26; MSA 28.1096 provides:
"No judgment or verdict shall be set aside or reversed or a new trial be granted by any court of this state in any criminal case, on the ground of misdirection of the jury, or the improper admission or rejection of evidence, or for error as to any matter of pleading or procedure, unless in the opinion of the court, after an examination of the entire cause, it shall affirmatively appear that the error complained of has resulted in a miscarriage of justice.”

=== CASE 9740346 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:32:56.341784+00 ===

T. E. Brennan, J.
(dissenting). This case is simply not an appropriate vehicle to carry the rule of law which the Court of Appeals, and now this Court, has decided to promulgate.
There was no discussion of asportation at the trial of this cause. Otis Adams defended on the ground that he had nothing to do with the original *246assault, and participated in the event only out of fear and under duress.
The information was drawn and the jury was charged in the language of the statute. No objection to the charge was made by defense counsel with reference to the question of asportation.
On appeal, five errors were assigned:
"I. Did the trial court commit prejudicial error in allowing the prosecutor to display to the jury certain knives before said knives were introduced into evidence?
"II. Did the trial court commit prejudicial error in allowing into evidence knives surrendered by inmates other than the Defendant?
"HI. Did the trial court commit prejudicial error in admitting into evidence testimony of one Robert Hubbard relating to an alleged beating administered to Robert Hubbard by the Defendant?
"IV. Did the trial court commit prejudicial error in refusing to give a requested instruction on intoxication as a defense?
"V. Did the trial court commit prejudicial error in refusing to give a requested instruction on a lesser includable offense?
The Court of Appeals, on its own motion, requested briefing of two additional issues:
"1. Whether, under MCLA §750.349 [MSA 28.581], kidnapping can be committed without either an asportation or secret confinement of the victim.
"2. If an asportation is required, do the facts in the instant case constitute an asportation sufficient to es*247tablish the offense of kidnapping? See People v Levy (1965), 15 NY2d 159 (256 NYS2d 793); and People v Daniels (1969), 71 AC 1165 (80 Cal Rptr 897).”
In response to the requested briefing, defendant filed a supplemental brief, which concluded as follows:
"It is the contention of the defendant-appellant that the facts in the instant case do not constitute asportation necessary to establish the offense.
"The defendant-appellant does admit that the facts in the case at bar would not support a Levy-Daniels argument. The assignment of error that the trial judge refused to grant instructions as to a lesser included offense is herein reiterated; but the defendant-appellant does not argue that the real crime committed in this case was felonious assault and not kidnapping. Defendant-appellant has no argument with the People’s opinion that if a reversal of this conviction is in order that People v. Shaw (1968), 11 Mich. App. 255, 160 N.W. 2d 761 should also be reconsidered and overruled. The facts upon which Shaws’ plea was affirmed are the same which buttress Adams’ conviction.
"The reason cited by defendant-appellant for the reversal of both cases is this: The asportation necessary to convict in a kidnapping situation cannot possibly be present where all movement of the victim by the kidnapper had its origin and terminus wholly within the confines of a walled enclosure. The facts in the instant case are indisputed. Inspector Dembosky’s movements initiated by Adams, et al. began and ended all within the confines of the State Prison of Southern Michigan. Defendant-appellant cites no cases for this proposition, but can put forward no better argument after an exhaustive review of the Levy-Daniels and related cases.”
Despite defendant’s lack of enthusiasm for the bench-suggested line of argument, the Court of Appeals concluded that the facts did not support an asportation sufficient to warrant conviction of kidnapping.
*248Now this Court injects still another unsolicited dimension to the lawsuit. We reverse for new trial upon a claimed omission from the trial court’s instruction never brought to the attention of the trial judge either by requested instruction or objection to the charge; never briefed nor argued in the Court of Appeals by the litigants either before or after the enlargement of the issues by that Court, sua sponte; and never argued nor briefed in this Court.
The issue of asportation was not before the Court of Appeals. The sufficiency of the trial court’s instruction is not before us.
Perhaps the reason why no such issues were made at trial was the simple fact that no one connected with the case doubted that the seizure of the prison official, his forced march at knife point for over a quarter of a mile, and his confinement under guard as a hostage for several hours, constituted kidnapping.
The disputed issue in this case was not whether Inspector Dembosky was kidnapped. It was whether Otis Adams was one of those who kidnapped him.
By attempting to use this lawsuit as a vehicle to pronounce a new definition of the crime, we force a square peg into a round hole.
By sending it báck for new trial, we impose upon able counsel on both sides and upon the trial court a brand new lawsuit, to be tried upon a brand new theory.
I would affirm the conviction.
Levin and M. S. Coleman, JJ., did not sit in this case.

=== CASE 2223017 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:52.681457+00 ===

44 Mich. App. 567 (1973)
205 N.W.2d 599
PEOPLE
v.
WARREN.
Docket No. 11337.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided February 20, 1973.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Robert A. Derengoski, Solicitor General, Robert F. Leonard, Prosecuting Attorney, Donald A. Kuebler, Chief, Appellate Division, and Martin F. Palus, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
Bruce E. Doll, for defendant on appeal.
Before: BRONSON, P.J., and McGREGOR and DANHOF, JJ.
DANHOF, J.
This is an appeal of a first-degree-murder conviction. MCLA 750.316; MSA 28.548. *568 The defendant was convicted under a felony-murder theory and on appeal he contends that the felony-murder rule can have no application to the facts of this case. We affirm the conviction.
On April 21, 1970, the defendant and two others went to the home of a third party ostensibly to purchase a bottle of cough syrup. After the defendant entered the house he announced, "This is a stick-up." The intended victim and one of the defendant's companions began to struggle, and the defendant produced a revolver and fired a number of shots at the two men. The defendant's companion died as a result of the wounds suffered in this incident.
On appeal the defendant contends that the felony-murder rule has no application to a case where the deceased is a co-felon, relying on Commonwealth v Redline, 391 Pa 486; 137 A2d 472 (1958), and People v Austin, 370 Mich. 12 (1963). Redline was a case where a co-felon was killed by a policeman's bullet. In Austin a co-felon was killed by the intended victim. The distinction between those cases and the case at bar is immediately apparent. In the case at bar the killing was done by the defendant.
The cases that have expanded and refined the Redline doctrine have made it clear that the doctrine has no application when the actual killing is done by the defendant. Commonwealth ex rel Smith v Myers, 438 Pa 218; 261 A2d 550 (1970), People v Washington, 62 Cal 2d 777; 44 Cal Rptr 442; 402 P2d 130 (1965). See also LaFave & Scott, Criminal Law, § 71, pp 545-561. In Robbins v People, 142 Colo 254; 350 P2d 818 (1960), the Supreme Court of Colorado was confronted with the same issue presented by this case, and the *569 Court held the felony-murder rule to be applicable. We also do so.
Affirmed.
All concurred.

=== CASE 9740349 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:33:00.581658+00 ===

OPINION
MATTINGLY, Judge
Johnny L. Downey appeals his conviction after a trial by jury of child molesting, *796a Class A felony.1 He presents for our review whether the evidence at trial was sufficient to support the jury’s verdict. Additionally, the State asks we order a modification of the judgment to that of a lesser included offense should we find the evidence insufficient to sustain Downey’s original conviction.
We reverse and vacate the conviction.
Facts And Procedural HistoRY
On the evening of April 5, 1998, twenty-five-year-old Downey was home babysitting his wife’s three children. After sending all three children upstairs to bed, Dow-ney called for his eleven-year-old stepdaughter, C.C., to return downstairs. Once she was downstairs, Downey told C.C. to come over to the couch and sit on his lap. While she was on his lap, Downey rubbed her breasts until he became aroused. Downey, apparently concerned that the couch could be seen from the stairway, moved with C.C. to another couch where he exposed his penis and made C.C. rub it. Downey then directed C.C. to pull down her pants and underwear and lay on the couch on her stomach. With C.C. bare from the waist down and on her stomach, Downey rubbed his penis between her buttocks until orgasm.
Discussion and Decision
A. Sufficiency of the Evidence
Downey argues the evidence presented at trial was insufficient to support his conviction of child molesting, a Class A felony. In sufficiency of the evidence claims, we neither reweigh the evidence nor judge the credibility of the witnesses. Perry v. State, 638 N.E.2d 1236, 1242 (Ind.1994); Byrd v. State, 707 N.E.2d 308, 312 (Ind.Ct.App.1999). Rather, we look to the evidence that supports the verdict and all reasonable inferences that can be drawn therefrom. Taylor v. State, 681 N.E.2d 1105, 1110 (Ind.1997); Chissell v. State, 705 N.E.2d 501, 505 (Ind.Ct.App.1999). We will affirm a conviction if there is probative evidence from which a reasonable jury could have found the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. Taylor, 681 N.E.2d at 1110. The uncorroborated testimony of a child victim is sufficient to support a conviction of child molesting. Link v. State, 648 N.E.2d 709, 713 (Ind.Ct.App.1995).
Child molesting under Ind.Code § 35-42-4-32 is divided into two subsections and encompasses the acts of sexual intercourse, deviate sexual conduct, and fondling or touching with the intent to arouse sexual desires. Buck v. State, 453 N.E.2d 993, 997 (Ind.1983). Of these acts, Downey was charged with and convicted of only child molesting by deviate sexual conduct under subsection (a). On this charge, the State was required to prove Downey (1) performed or submitted to (2) deviate sexual conduct (3) with a child under the age of fourteen. Ind.Code § 35^42-4-3(a). Deviate sexual conduct is “an act involving: (1) a sex organ of one person and the mouth or anus of another person; or (2) the penetration of the mouth or anus of a person by an object.”3 § 35-41-1-9.
Downey argues his conviction must be vacated because there was insufficient evidence of an act involving his sex organ and the victim’s anus or mouth. The evidence adduced by the State, he continues, established that Downey rubbed his penis between C.C.’s buttocks, not that he made *797contact with her anus. The distinction between an act involving the anus or mouth and an act involving only the buttocks, he argues, requires reversal. We agree.
Conviction of child molesting by deviate sexual conduct explicitly requires an act involving the sex organ of one and the mouth or anus of another. The legislature has not given any special meaning to the term “anus” and it is not this court’s role to give statutory language any meaning other than its plain, ordinary, and usual meaning. JKB, Sr. v. Armour Pharm. Co., 660 N.E.2d 602, 605 (Ind.Ct.App.1996). The plain and ordinary meaning of “anus,” or anal orifice, is “the lower opening of the digestive tract, lying in the fold between the nates [buttocks], through which fecal matter is extruded.” Steelman's Medical Dictionary 95 (4th ed.1976). The “buttocks,” or nates, are “the prominence formed by the gluteal muscles,” id. at 923, or “the two rounded prominences separated by a median cleft that form the lower part of the back ... and consist largely of the gluteus muscles.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 305 (1976). The words are not synonyms as they describe entirely different parts of the anatomy. Had the legislature intended for Ind.Code § 35-41-1-9 to encompass acts involving body parts other than the mouth or anus, it was free to so specify its intent. Since it did not so specify, we must read the statute as written and strictly construe it against the State. Becker v. State, 703 N.E.2d 696, 698 (Ind.Ct.App.1998).
The evidence presented by the State at trial was that Downey rubbed his erect penis between his eleven-year-old stepdaughter’s buttocks. During questioning by the State, C.C. testified:
A. He rubbed his penis in the back of me.
Q. Okay. When you say in the back of me, what part of you?
A. My butt cheeks.
Q. Your butt cheek. Okay. And how was he rubbing his penis in your butt cheeks?
A. Up and down.
(R. at 181-82.) Detective Hochstetler, who elicited admissions from Downey, testified:
A. [H]e told me that he had - either he pulled [C.C.’s] pants and underwear down or had her pull them down - uh - rolled her over on the couch onto her stomach, and then he got on top of her. And then he told me that her [sic] inserted - or he put his penis between her cheeks of her bottom - or the cheeks of her butt and started pumping her, or humping her.
A. John told me that - uh - first of all he was - he wanted to make it clear to me that all he did was put his penis between the cheeks of her butt, that he did not penetrate her anus with his - with his penis. It was just - he was just rubbing it between her cheeks.
(R. at 240-42.) Downey’s own confession indicates that:
She rubbed me with her hand and I rubbed her brest [sic]. Then I pulled down her pants and had her lay on her stomach while I humped her but [sic]. I did not put it in just rubbed it against her.
(R. at 246.) Similar testimony was given by Ed Pereira, a child sexual abuse counselor to whom Downey admitted that “he had fondled her chest area; that he had rubbed his penis on her butt; and that she also had fondled his penis.” (R. at 294.) The State never offered specific evidence or argued that any contact had been made between C.C.’s anus and Downey’s penis. The only evidence presented was that Downey’s penis rubbed against or between C.C.’s buttocks.
The State argues there was sufficient evidence to support conviction despite the lack of direct evidence showing actual contact between C.C.’s anus and *798Downey’s penis because it did not need to prove penetration. While proof of anal penetration may not be required to convict of child molesting by deviate sexual conduct, Crabtree v. State, 547 N.E.2d 286, 291 (Ind.Ct.App.1989), for an act to “involve” the anus there must be contact with the anus. Cf. Knowlton v. State, 178 Ind. App. 420, 427 n. 4, 382 N.E.2d 1004, 1009 n. 4 (1978) (acknowledging in dicta that the act of fellatio did not require penetration and could be accomplished by a touching). In this case, there was evidence of contact only with the buttocks — not with the anus. To hold that a person could commit deviate sexual conduct without contact with the anus would yield a result surely not intended by the legislature.
Additionally, the State argues because the anus lies between the buttocks, a jury could reasonably infer an act involving the anus. Although it may be undesirable to require the child witness to articulate with anatomical precision the nature of the contact in a trial for child molesting by deviate sexual conduct, cf. Spurlock v. State, 675 N.E.2d 312, 315 (Ind.1996) (discussing why a detailed anatomical description of penetration for purposes of supporting a conviction of child molesting by sexual intercourse was both unnecessary and undesirable), it remains necessary that the State prove all the elements of the offense. In this case, an act involving the anus is an element. Certainly, upon questioning, a child C.C.’s age could differentiate between her buttocks and her anus; and here, all who testified on the subject, including the victim, stated only that Downey rubbed his penis against or between her buttocks. We find the evidence insufficient to permit a jury to infer beyond a reasonable doubt that Downey engaged in an act involving his penis and C.C.’s anus when the only evidence presented at trial was that Downey rubbed his penis against or between her buttocks.
In Shackelford v. State, 622 N.E.2d 1340, 1344 (Ind.Ct.App.1993), we reversed a conviction of child molesting by deviate sexual conduct because the victim’s testimony made it impossible for the jury to make a finding beyond a reasonable doubt. The victim testified Shackelford had touched one of her “private parts” with his penis, that he had kissed her private parts, and that she had kissed his private parts. In describing her private parts, the victim included her breasts. She was never asked to define what she meant when she referred to Shackelford’s private parts. Though it was clear that an inappropriate touching or fondling took place, the evidence was not sufficient to permit a jury to infer beyond a reasonable doubt that Shackelford had engaged in an act involving his penis and her mouth or anus or her sex organ and his mouth.
Similarly, in this case, while clearly an inappropriate touching took place, the evidence was insufficient to permit a jury to infer beyond a reasonable doubt that Downey engaged in an act involving his penis and C.C.’s anus. Despite their proximity, the buttocks and anus are not the same, and an inference that contact with the buttocks necessarily includes contact with the anus cannot be made beyond a reasonable doubt in this case. Therefore, the evidence was insufficient to convict Downey as charged.
B. Modification of Judgment
The State argues if we find insufficient evidence to sustain Downey’s conviction, we should remand and order a modification of the judgment to reflect conviction of a lesser included offense.4 It correctly notes that, on appeal, this court may remand to the trial court with instructions to vacate the judgment and sentence *799as to one offense and to enter judgment on a lesser included offense when there has been an insufficiency of evidence on a particular element of the convicted offense. Nunn v. State, 601 N.E.2d 334, 339 (Ind.1992). We are, however, unable to modify the conviction in this case to the lesser offense of child molesting by fondling or touching as the State suggests we do. While child molesting by fondling or touching is a lesser offense than child molesting by deviate sexual conduct in terms of sentencing, it is neither inherently nor factually included in the greater offense and is in fact an entirely separate offense.
As the State concedes, child molesting by deviate sexual conduct and child molesting by fondling or touching are separate and distinct offenses and are not inherently included in one another. § 35-42-4-3. See also Buck, 453 N.E.2d at 997 (“[D]eviate sexual conduct under subsection (a) and touching or fondling with intent to arouse sexual desires under subsection (b) are two separate and distinct crimes, neither of which would be a lesser included offense of the other.”). Each offense contains an element not required by the other. Child molesting by deviate sexual conduct requires an act involving the sex organ of one person and the mouth or anus of another while child molesting by fondling or touching requires an intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desires of either party.
That an offense is not inherently included in another does not, however, end the inquiry. If an offense is not inherently included in a greater offense, the lesser offense may nonetheless be included if the factual allegations in the charging instrument satisfy all the statutory elements necessary for conviction of the lesser offense. McGowan v. State, 671 N.E.2d 1210, 1212 (Ind.Ct.App.1996) (citing Wright v. State, 658 N.E.2d 563, 567 (Ind.1995)). The State, however, can foreclose instruction on an offense that is not inherently included but potentially factually included “by omitting from a charging instrument factual allegations sufficient to charge the lesser offense.” Wright, 658 N.E.2d at 570. Such an omission from the charging instrument took place when the State charged Downey.
Downey was charged in a single count: On or about April 5,1998, ... Johnny L. Downey, then twenty-five (25) years of age, performed or submitted to deviate sexual conduct with a child under the age of fourteen (14) years of age, to wit: 11 years old, DOB: 1-3-87.
(R. at 25.) This charging information fails to allege the intent to arouse or satisfy sexual desires — an element of child molesting by fondling or touching. In a similar case, Phillips v. State, 518 N.E.2d 1129 (Ind.Ct.App.1988), we held that where an information charged the offense of child molesting by sexual deviate conduct but did not allege an intent to arouse or satisfy sexual desires, it failed to provide notice of the offense of child molesting by fondling or touching so as to provide the defendant the opportunity to “prepare his defense and be protected from double jeopardy.” Id. at 1131 (citing Blackburn v. State, 260 Ind. 5, 11, 291 N.E.2d 686, 690 (1973)). “That the necessary intent may be inferred from the form of touching or other circumstances does not at all alter the necessity of intent as an element of the offense.” Id. at 1131 n. 2. Even if the jury could infer intent based on the defendant’s conduct, this court cannot make that inference in its place when Downey was not on notice of intent as an element to be defended against and the jury was never so instructed.
We can only speculate as to the State’s reasoning behind charging Downey only with deviate sexual conduct. Their ill-considered, decision not to charge Downey with the offense of child molesting by fondling or touching leaves us with no option but to reluctantly vacate his conviction.
Conclusion
The evidence is insufficient to support conviction of child molesting by deviate *800sexual conduct and the conviction must be vacated. Additionally, we cannot order modification to child molesting by fondling or touching because that offense is not inherently included in the offense of child molesting by deviate sexual conduct and is foreclosed by the charging information as a factually included offense.
Vacated.
KIRSCH, J., concurs.
BAILEY, J., dissenting with opinion.
. Ind.Code § 35-42-4-3(a).
. Ind.Code § 35-42-4-3 states:
(a) A person who, with a child under fourteen (14) years of age, performs or submits to sexual intercourse or deviate sexual conduct commits child molesting....
(b) A person who, with a child under fourteen (14) years of age, performs or sub-mils to any fondling or touching, of either the child or the older person, with intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desires of either the child or the older person, commits child molesting.
.The jury was instructed only on the first definition of deviate sexual conduct.
. The State does not specify to which offense the judgment should be modified. From its argument, we surmise it to be child molesting by fondling or touching under § 35-42-4-3(b) as the elements of proof for that offense most nearly track those of child molesting by deviate sexual conduct under subsection (a).

=== CASE 9740350 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:33:00.587278+00 ===

BAILEY, Judge
dissenting
I respectfully dissent. Given that evidence of contact between Downey’s penis and C.C.’s anus is sufficient evidence to support the act of deviate sexual conduct as charged, and that the specific testimony of C.C. is distinguishable from the testimony presented by the victim in Shackelford v. State, 622 N.E.2d at 1344 (see majority opinion at 798), I conclude that the jury was presented with sufficient evidence from which to find beyond a reasonable doubt that Downey’s penis came into contact with C.C.’s anus.
Moreover, I believe that our supreme court’s ruling in Spurlock v. State, 675 N.E.2d 312 (Ind.1996), is due weightier consideration in our current analysis. In Spurlock, our supreme court concluded that a “jury had no evidence from which it could find Spurlock guilty beyond a reasonable doubt of the count of child molesting that was based upon an alleged act of intercourse.” Id. at 315. However, before holding such, our supreme court warned against “unwarranted questioning and cross-examination regarding the details and extent of penetration.” Id. The at-issue victim testimony in Spurlock was as follows:
Q: When you say he tried to have sex with you, what do you mean?
A: Have sex with me.
Q: Okay ... He was trying to put his penis inside you?
A: Yes.
Q: Did he do that or do you know?
A: I don’t know.
Id. Here, C.C. testified as follows:
A: He rubbed his penis in the back of me.
Q: Okay. When you say in the back of me, what part of you?
A: My butt cheeks.
Q: .. .And how was he rubbing his penis in your butt cheeks.
A: Up and down.
(R. 181-82.) Unlike the void in testimony regarding penetration in Spurlock, here, testimony revealed that Downey’s erect penis was moving “up and down” (or as Downey described it “humpfing]”) between the nates of eleven-year-old C.C., and the jury concluded that contact (in whatever fashion and however limited or short in duration) was made between some portion of Downey’s penis, as that part of the human anatomy is defined in Stedman’s Medical Dictionary 1049 (4th ed.1976), and C.C.’s anus. Under these circumstances, it is “unnecessary and undesirable” to demand more explicit testimony. Spurlock v. State, 675 N.E.2d at 315.
Additionally, we need not invade the province of the jury in any assessment it may have made regarding the physical characteristics of both the victim and the defendant, and the role any such assessment may have played in the jury’s determination of guilt. Clearly, the jury was in the best position to consider the likelihood of contact between this adult male’s penis, which was erect and moving in a “hump[ing]” motion, with that of the anus of this eleven-year-old. The jury’s conclusion that some part of Downey’s penis came into contact with C.C.’s anus while he “humped” her is, if not explicit from the testimony, an inference that may be reached beyond reasonable doubt.
Accordingly, C.C.’s specific testimony, our supreme court’s warning language in Spurlock, and the role the jury assumes in weighing the evidence, when considered *801against the necessity of strictly construing penal statutes against the State, see Becker v. State, 703 N.E.2d at 698, can only result in an affirmance of the jury’s conviction. For these reasons, I dissent.

=== CASE 9740351 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:33:00.875175+00 ===

T. M. Burns, P. J.
In August, 1969, the First Michigan Bank & Trust Company, a Michigan banking corporation with its principal office in Zeeland, Michigan (hereinafter denominated applicant) filed an application with the Michigan Department of Commerce, Financial Institutions Bureau, requesting permission to establish a branch bank in Georgetown Township, Ottawa County, Michigan. The applicant proposed to locate the branch bank in a shopping center within the unincorporated community of Jenison.
Notice of the applicant’s request to open a new branch was given to other area banks, and objections to the proposed branch were received from the Union Bank & Trust Company of Grand Rapids (hereinafter referred to as objector), and from the State Bank of Michigan at Cooperstown. The objector presently operates a branch bank in Georgetown Township approximately six-tenths of a mile east of the applicant’s proposed location.
A full adversary-type hearing was held on the matter before the Commissioner of Financial Insti*86tutions on February 16, 17, and 26, 1970.1 The applicant and both objecting banks appeared, produced witnesses, introduced exhibits, and offered testimony in support of their respective positions. On June 19, 1970, a written opinion filed by the commissioner found that the statutory requirements2 for the establishment of the applicant’s branch bank had been met since:
"[t]he proposed branch site is within a village within 25 miles of applicant’s parent bank in which no other state or national bank or branch thereof, is in operation * * * .”
Subsequently, on June 26, 1970, the objector filed a petition in Kent County Circuit Court for a review of the commissioner’s decision. This petition averred that the commissioner erred in approving the applicant’s request, inasmuch as the proposed branch bank would be in a "village” where the objector already had a branch bank in operation. The objector also maintained that the commissioner’s decision was not supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence on the whole record. Thereafter the circuit court in an opinion dated July 2, 1971, determined that there was not substantial evidence to support the commissioner’s finding of a separate and distinct village for the establishment of the applicant’s branch bank. Consequently, a judgment reversing the commissioner was entered July 23, 1971, and applicant appeals therefrom as of right.
The judicial yardstick for assessing the validity of an administrative decision is whether or not the *87decision was supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence on the whole record. Const 1963, art 6, § 28; Viculin v Department of Civil Service, 386 Mich 375 (1971); Diepenhorst v General Electric Co, 29 Mich App 651 (1971).
Therefore, we are confronted with the identical question which faced the circuit court, namely, whether there was competent, material, and substantial evidence on the whole record to support the commissioner’s finding that applicant’s proposed branch bank would be located in a "village” in which no other state or national bank or branch was in operation.
The term "village” contained in the branch-banking statute3 has been defined as an unincorporated assemblage or community of people gathered together in a nucleus or cluster for residential and business purposes. Wyandotte Savings Bank v State Banking Commissioner, 347 Mich 33 (1956). In addition, the Michigan Supreme Court indicated that in delineating a village for branch-banking purposes economic criteria rather than governmental, geographical, or physical boundaries would be controlling. Bank of Dearborn v State Banking Commissioner, 365 Mich 567 (1962).
In an attempt to impugn the competency and materiality of the applicant’s evidence, the objector asserts that the applicant was preoccupied solely with physical factors and not the requisite economic factors in defining its banking village. A close examination of the testimony before the commissioner, however, belies this contention and indicates that the applicant did indeed consider economic and commercial factors in defining the banking village.
The applicant’s president, for example, testified *88that among other things population growth, shifts in trading patterns, the amount of business the applicant transacted in the area, and the number of residences in the area were taken into consideration before submitting the application for the branch bank to the Financial Institutions Bureau.
Next, the planning director for Kent County testified in terms of neighborhood planning units used by regional planners in their planning activities. He stated that in his opinion the applicant’s proposed branch bank and the objector’s bank would be in separate planning units. On direct examination, he was asked what indicia were used in defining a neighborhood planning unit and the following dialogue developed:
”Q. What factors do you consider in determining what constitutes a neighborhood planning unit?
"A. In looking at a neighborhood planning unit, we look for relative compactness of size, definition of the area by major arterial streets or other physical factors, homogeneity in terms of land use. * * *
"Q. Do you also consider commercial activity?
”A. We consider these as ancillary to and serving the neighborhood planning units.
”Q. And it is a factor, as to the type of commercial activity, a factor that you consider?
'A. Yes * * * we’ve tried to effect shopping areas that meet the demands and needs of the community. ” (Emphasis supplied.)
Next the applicant called Dr. Carl Bajema, a long-time resident of the Jenison area, to the stand. During cross-examination, the following colloquy occurred between the witness and objector’s counsel.
"Q. "What does it [the unincorporated village of Jeni-son] mean to you * * * 9
'A. Well, Jenison means what is covered by the post *89office, because I have students who say they live in Jenison who I, according to my definition, would put them in Allendale, but they happen to be in Georgetown Township. To my, my own personal use, I prefer the term Georgetown.
"Q. But Jenison, to you, today, means basically what is covered by the post office district; is that fair? Is that what Jenison means to you?
"A. Well, if you want to talk about something amorphous and having to pin it down, I really can’t say that, because Jenison sometimes means a school district; in terms of taxes, it means where a shopping center has been constructed and you’ve given the name of 'Jenison Plaza’ * * * .” (Emphasis supplied.)
Although the applicant used streets and the like to define the area covered by the bankinjg village, an examination of the record discloses that for the most part they were used as a matter of convenience for defining the perimeters of the village after an analysis of the economic factors within the territory bounded by these physical markers had been completed. It is neither impermissible nor unusual to define the area contained within a banking village by reference to physical boundaries. See, for example, National Bank of Wyandotte v Detroit Bank and Trust Co, 19 Mich App 439 (1969); Wyandotte Savings Bank v State Banking Commissioner, supra.
We hold, therefore, that since the applicant used commercial and economic criteria to define its banking village, the evidence presented by the applicant was both competent and material.
A proper review, however, necessitates a comparison of the applicant’s banking-village evidence with that produced by the objector.
Three Georgetown Township officers4 testified for the objector via deposition. All opined that given *90the definition of "village” as set forth in Bank of Dearborn v State Banking Commissioner, supra, the objector’s present branch bank and the applicant’s proposed branch bank would be in the same village.
Finally, a professor of urban planning from Michigan State University who had assisted in preparing the Georgetown Township development plan and the township’s zoning ordinance was also of the opinion that the objector and applicant’s proposed branch would be in the same community trading area.
After comparing the testimony and the numerous exhibits presented by the parties, we conclude that the evidence, albeit conflicting, was competent, material, and substantial on the whole record to support the commissioner’s finding that the applicant’s proposed branch bank would be located in a "village” wherein no other state or national bank or branch was in operation.
Admittedly, the question is close and although had we been sitting as the commissioner we may have reached a different result, we will not substitute our opinion for that of an administrative agency where, as here, there is the requisite evidence to support the administrative decision. Sak-sey’s Lounge, Inc v Liquor Control Commission, 29 Mich App 656 (1971).
Accordingly, the commissioner’s decision permitting the establishment of the applicant’s branch bank is affirmed and the circuit court’s decision overruling the commissioner is reversed.
Holbrook, J., concurred.
The hearing was held pursuant to MCLA 487.330; MSA 23.710(30).
MCLA 487.471(1); MSA 23.710(171)(1). The other requirements of the statute as to the sufficiency of the applicant’s capital and surplus, necessity for the proposed branch, and prospects of successful operation if established are not in issue here.
Ibid.
The officers were the township’s supervisor, clerk, and treasurer.

=== CASE 9740352 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:33:00.880695+00 ===

Borradaile, J.
(dissenting). First Michigan Bank & Trust Company, a Michigan banking corporation with its principal offices at Zeeland, Ottawa *91County, Michigan, filed an application, as amended, with the Michigan Department of Commerce, Financial Institutions Bureau, requesting permission to establish a branch bank in Georgetown Township, Ottawa County, Michigan.
Objections to the proposed branch were received from the Union Bank and Trust Company of Grand Rapids and The State Bank of Michigan at Coopersville. A hearing was held before the Commissioner of the Michigan Financial Institutions Bureau. The commissioner in a written opinion approved applicant’s request to operate a branch bank. Union Bank filed a petition for review of the commissioner’s decision in the Kent County Circuit Court. The circuit court judge in a written opinion reversed the commissioner’s decision. Applicant appeals as of right from the judgment of the circuit court.
Applicant defined the unincorporated village within which it proposed to locate as an area in Georgetown Township bounded on the west by 12th Avenue extended north, bounded on the south by the C & O Railroad, bounded on the east by School Street, and bounded on the north by Cottonwood Drive. Georgetown Township, located in the easterly part of Ottawa County, lies approximately six miles southwest of the City of Grand Rapids and is adjacent to the Cities of Grandville and Wyoming, which lie generally to the east.
Applicant proposed to locate its branch in a regional shopping center which lies just west of School Street. The "village” applicant proposed to serve consists of a residential area west of the shopping center.
Union Bank presently operates a branch at 7451 Union Street in Georgetown Township. This branch is approximately six-tenths of a mile east *92of applicant’s proposed location. Union Bank presented evidence which indicated that the "village” applicant’s bank would serve is a part of the same economic community which is now served by Union Bank. Applicant maintained that the area was distinct from that serviced by Union Bank. Old Kent Bank and Trust Company had also attempted to establish a branch bank 1.8 miles west of applicant’s proposed location in order to service this same area. The Commissioner of Financial Institutions had approved Old Kent’s request prior to approval of applicant’s request. However, because of an injunction issued by a Federal court, the branch bank was not in operation at the time of this hearing before the commissioner.
In his written opinion approving applicant’s request for a branch bank, the commissioner determined that the requirement of MCLA 487.471(1); MSA 23.710(171)(1), had been met in that:
"(1) The proposed branch site is within a village within 25 miles of applicant’s parent bank in which no other state or national bank or branch thereof, is in operation; and
"(2) He is satisfied as to the sufficiency of capital and surplus of the First Michigan Bank & Trust Company and as to the necessity for the establishment of such branch and the prospects of successful operation if established.”
In reversing the commissioner, the Kent County Circuit Court found that:
"[t]he applicant has not shown that there is a separate village dividing its area from that being served by Union Bank and Trust Company.”
The judicial review of administrative decisions is constitutionally delineated by Const 1963, art 6, § 28, as follows:
*93"All final decisions, findings, rulings and orders of any administrative officer or agency existing under the Constitution or by law, which are judicial or quasi-judicial and affect private rights or licenses, shall be subject to direct review by the courts as provided by law. This review shall include, as a minimum, the determination whether such final decisions, findings, rtxlings and orders are authorized by law; and, in cases in which a hearing is required, whether the same are supported by competent, material and substantial evidence on the whole record.” (Emphasis supplied.)
The specific section of the Banking Code of 1969 which controls the case is § 171(1) (MCLA 487.471[1]; MSA 23.710[171][1]), which provides as follows:
"With the written approval of the commissioner, any bank may establish and operate a branch or branches within a village or city other than that in which it was originally chartered if the village or city in which it is proposed to establish and operate a branch is located in the same county in which the parent bank has its principal office , or, if not in the county, then within 25 miles of the parent bank or in a contiguous county at a point more than 25 miles from the parent bank, if the county has no bank. A branch shall not be established in a city or village in which a state or national bank or branch thereof is then in operation. The commissioner shall not grant such approval unless he is satisfied as to the sufficiency of the capital and surplus of the bank, the necessity for the establishment of such branch or branches and the prospects of successful operation if established.” (Emphasis supplied.)
Though the briefs raise other questions and testimony covered other areas, the emphasis of counsel for applicant and the objectors was as to whether a "village” existed in which no other state or national bank or branch thereof is located.
Counsel for applicant during examination of its witness Den Herder said that objector Union Bank *94was not in applicant’s village but where its village was located they didn’t know. Witness Den Herder said a bank at 20th and Baldwin, the pending branch for Old Kent, was not considered in determining deposit growth.
Applicant’s witness Fendt said that the areas east and west of the east boundary line of applicant’s "village” could be divided into planning units but that would not mean that each of them was economically independent or governmentally independent from each other.
Fendt, who had been director of the Kent-Ottawa Regional Planning Commission, on cross-examination further testified that:
"We talk about shopping centers as well as specialized strip commercial areas. I think we have a strip commercial area of free-standing uses along M-21, Chicago Drive, and we have an identifiable shopping center in terms of the Meijers Thrifty Acres complex [where applicant’s branch was proposed], and those uses adjacent to this, right around this intersection. I think there are both of the kind that we talk about present at this location.
”Q. And are you saying that together, collectively, they are intended to serve this community; they complement each other?
"A. Right, they complement each other in that one serves this free-standing function, the other one is more the integrated shopping center type of development.”
Applicant’s witness Bajema, a sociologist, said that the Jenison area, since it has no legal entity in the sense of an incorporated area, is referred to by some as the area covered by the post office while others would consider it as the area covered by the Jenison public school system.
It might be noted that proofs showed both the outline of the post office area and the public school *95area as much larger than the area submitted by applicant as its "village”.
Applicant’s attorney during cross-examination of witness Rusk, a research director for a Detroit bank, argued that the witness presented by applicant was unable to define the primary service area of Union Bank. The witness in answer to a cross-examination question as to the service area of objector Union Bank said:
"I would say it would have to encompass a broader area, a — in the secondary area, we have three branch offices. This is where we’re going to generate our deposits from, a total area. We have a primary and a secondary service area. All three banks, four banks, are included in that secondary service area, so they’re all drawing from that same area.
”Q. In other words, it’s your testimony that the Union Bank located right here is drawing from the same service area that is the primary service area of the applicant bank?
"A. That’s true.”
Applicant’s Dr. Lanzillotti, evidently well known nationally as an author and expert on branch banking, said that if applicant were permitted to establish a branch at its proposed location, it would compete with other banks in the area for the same customers.
He further said:
"I would have said that their [Union Bank] primary service area would probably have been the area immediately to the south of the proposed location and probably east, because that is the area where you had the developed population, and not to the west. As of today, they are servicing this area, of this I am confident, but I would make the distinction between the primary service area as of the time of application and the areas that they are now serving.”
*96The Commissioner of the Financial Institutions Bureau in his finding of facts found that west of the shopping center in which applicant was to locate residential development is in evidence. He noted that because the Jenison area was unincorporated its residents looked to the township for community services. He also noted that a school district incorporates an area much in excess of that delineated by applicant in the development of its village concept.
In his conclusions of law, the commissioner cited Wyandotte Savings Bank v State Banking Commissioner, 347 Mich 33 (1956), and Bank of Dearborn v State Banking Commissioner, 365 Mich 567 (1962), for construction of the term "village”, correctly quoting Wyandotte Savings Bank, supra, in defining an unincorporated village as:
"an assembly or community of people, a nucleus or cluster for residential and business purposes, a collective body of inhabitants gathering together in one group.”
He further correctly quotes Bank of Dearborn, supra, in defining "village” as:
"a settlement, a centralized populace area having a general common residential and business activity serving the particular area or district. It does not have to be a separate political entity or corporation. It is a 'locality’ or 'area to be served’. It has been analyzed as a 'trading area’ distinct from that assigned to 'municipality’.”
The commissioner found that the facts in the instant case placed the matter between the factual and legal considerations applied in the Dearborn case, supra, and American Bank & Trust Co v *97Saxon, 373 F2d 283 (CA 6, 1967), a case in which the Federal Court found that an applicant’s proposal would split the village of Holt down the middle. The hearing commissioner concludes that the record supports the finding of a "village” as that statutory term has been defined by the courts.
I cannot conclude that the commissioner applied the proper law in making his findings of law. Though the 1969 Banking Code has not been previously applied, the statutory language applicable in this case is identical to language already interpreted by the courts which was contained in the preceding statute, the Financial Institutions Act.
In the Bank of Dearborn case, supra, p 572, the Supreme Court dealt with a case where both branch banks were at major intersections. The Court said that "economic rather than governmental, or geographical or physical boundaries are the controlling factor” in determining whether an area constitutes a village. The Court concluded that each branch constituted a separate trading area and each had its own potential for growth.
Nowhere does the commissioner apply the rule required by the Bank of Dearborn case, supra, in determining whether the "villages” of the applicant and objecting banks were the same "villages”. In his findings of facts, he deals solely with the area that applicant delineated in its amended application. Objectors submitted much testimony relative to "villages” as served by Union Bank and to be served by Old Kent Bank, whose application had been previously approved by the Financial Institutions Bureau.
As indicated in Const 1963, art 6, § 28, the "review [by the courts] shall include, as a minimum, the determination whether such final deci*98sions, findings, rulings and orders are authorized by law”.
Review of administrative-agency actions is not the "clearly erroneous” test applied to review of lower-court decisions, Diepenhorst v General Electric Co, 29 Mich App 651 (1971), but rather whether an agency has abused its discretion by arbitrary action. Caddell v Ecorse Board of Education, 17 Mich App 632 (1969). However, both cases dealt with the next clause of the constitutional provision relating to whether the decisions, findings, rulings, and orders are supported, if a hearing is required, by "competent, material and substantial evidence on the whole record”.
I do not believe the "competent, material, and substantial evidence” cases are applicable in this case, because the administrative agency has not been authorized by law to determine whether a "village” exists without specifically determining if other branches are in operation in "villages” which in any way surround or infringe upon the "village” proposed by an applicant desiring to establish a branch bank.
No matter how much professors of banking may testify that competition in banking is good for the customers, the Legislature has said that "[no other] state or national bank or branch thereof” may be in operation in the same "village” where an applicant seeks to open a branch.
Though counsel briefed the questions of sufficiency of capital and surplus of applicant bank and the prospects of successful operation of a branch if established, I deem the question of finding of "village” to be controlling.
I would affirm the judgment of the circuit court reversing the decision of the Financial Institutions Bureau hearing commissioner.

=== CASE 2223024 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:52.887003+00 ===

44 Mich. App. 410 (1973)
205 N.W.2d 293
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF HAMTRAMCK
v.
PITLOCK.
Docket No. 13276.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided January 17, 1973.
Edmund E. Torcellini and James F. Nowicki, for plaintiff.
Carl Ziemba, for defendant.
Before: DANHOF, P.J., and LEVIN and BORRADAILE,[*] JJ.
LEVIN, J.
The defendant, Robert Pitlock, was dismissed from his employment by the City of Hamtramck. The dismissal was affirmed, after a hearing, by the city's civil service commission and, on appeal from its decision, by the circuit court. We reverse, holding that the civil service commission exceeded its authority in formulating the "rule" which Pitlock was accused of violating.
Pitlock was first employed by the City of Hamtramck in 1955. At the time of his dismissal he held the position of equipment operator.
He was arrested on a drunk-driving charge in January, 1970. He refused to take a breathalyzer test, and his license was suspended for the period *412 from March 2, 1970 to June 2, 1970.[1]
On May 20, 1970, a Hamtramck police officer called Pitlock's supervisor and informed him of the suspension. The two men went to the area where Pitlock was operating a city truck. The officer stopped Pitlock and arrested him for driving while his license was suspended.
On October 30, 1970, Pitlock was informed by letter that his employment with the city had been terminated because he had violated Rule XII, § 5 of the civil service rules and regulations in that, by driving a city truck at a time when his driver's license had been suspended, he had been guilty of "conduct unbecoming an officer or employee of the city".[2]
Pitlock argues that § 5(e) of Rule XII is unconstitutionally vague. While it does appear that vagueness is the underlying problem, we see no need to reach the constitutional issue.
In this case we consider an administrative regulation rather than a statute. Administrative bodies derive their authority solely through the act of the Legislature by which they are established. An administrative body which proceeds in an unauthorized manner acts illegally.[3]
The Hamtramck Civil Service Commission is an *413 administrative body operating under the authority of ch IX-A of the city charter. Section 11 of that chapter provides that appointments and removals alike "shall be made under and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and the rules and regulations adopted by the civil service commission". (Emphasis supplied.) Section 12(c) of ch IX-A provides that it is "the duty of the civil service commission * * * to adopt and amend rules and regulations for the administration of this chapter of the city charter".[4]
Hamtramck's charter clearly imposes upon its civil service commission the duty to act by establishing rules and regulations for the guidance of civil service personnel. Section 5(e) prohibiting conduct "unbecoming an officer or employee of the city" does not comport with this mandate.
It is not enough for an administrative body to label a purported standard a rule. A direct attempt to authorize ad hoc determinations would be quickly recognized as unauthorized. We should reach the same result when an administrative body seeks to usurp authority covertly under the guise of its rule-making power.
A rule proscribing "conduct unbecoming an officer or employee of the city" presents a standard or *414 guide so impalpable as to be no standard at all.[5] It subverts the clear policy of the charter because it does not provide meaningful guidance concerning the required mode of conduct. It does not serve the rule-making function. Rather, it serves only to lodge unbridled ad hoc, ad hominem discretion in the civil service commission.
We need not consider or decide whether such broad-ranging unstructured discretion could be constitutionally delegated to this body. We hold only that this rule is no rule at all and, therefore, does not comply with the express requirements of Hamtramck's charter.[6]
We are not unmindful of the doctrine that "in many cases, agencies have a choice (except as limited by judicial restraints or by statutory mandates) whether to proceed by general rule making or by ad hoc, case-to-case adjudication".[7] This doctrine has no application in a case, such as the one here presented, where the legislative policy is to require the administrative body to promulgate rules and to proceed in accordance with rules of general application.[8]
We conclude that Pitlock was illegally discharged and is entitled to immediate reinstatement. He is further entitled to back pay for the *415 entire period of wrongful discharge, amounting to normal wages which he would have received while working in his regular employment, less wages actually earned during that period.[9]
Reversed and remanded.
All concurred.
NOTES
[*]  Former circuit judge and now probate judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.
[1]  MCLA 257.625f; MSA 9.2325(6).
[2]  "Section 5. Cause for Discharge or Reduction:
"The following are declared to be cause for removal or discharge from the Classified Service (Class "B" & "C", inclusive) of the City of Hamtramck, though charges may be based upon causes other than those enumerated; viz., that any officer or employee who: * * *
"(e) Has been guilty of conduct unbecoming an officer or employee of the City; * * * shall forthwith be removed from City employment, and any rights or privileges due such employee under the Civil Service Law and the Rules of this Commission shall be cancelled and nullified."
[3]  Cf. Coffman v State Board of Examiners in Optometry, 331 Mich 582, 589 (1951); Ranke v Corporation & Securities Commission, 317 Mich 304, 309 (1947); Sterling Secret Service, Inc v Department of State Police, 20 Mich App 502, 513 (1969).
[4]  "Sec. 11 Classified service; subject to civil service; unclassified service, exemption.  All offices and positions included in the classified service and in the police and fire departments and police signal and fire alarm system shall, unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, be subject to the provisions of the chapter as to civil service, as well as all rules and regulations adopted by the civil service commission; and all appointments to any such positions or offices, as well as all removals, lay-offs, promotions, increases or decreases in salary or compensation of and for such positions or offices shall be made under and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and the rules and regulations adopted by the civil service commission.
"Sec. 12 Civil service commission; powers and duties.  It shall be the duty of the civil service commission, as a body: * * *
"(c) To adopt and amend rules and regulations for the administration of this chapter of the city charter." Hamtramck Charter, ch IX-A, §§ 11-12.
[5]  Cf. State ex rel Villines v Freeman, 370 P2d 307, 309 (Okla, 1962): a rule is "a prescribed * * * guide for conduct or action: a regulation or principle". See, also, South Florida R Co v Rhodes, 25 Fla 40, 46; 5 So 633, 635 (1889).
[6]  Cf. Sanders v State Department of Public Welfare, 472 SW2d 179 (Tex Civ App, 1971); Boller Beverages, Inc v Davis, 38 NJ 138, 152; 183 A2d 64, 71 (1962).
[7]  1 Cooper, State Administrative Law 177; Securities & Exchange Commission v Chenery Corp, 332 US 194, 203; 67 S Ct 1575, 1580-1581; 91 L Ed 1995, 2002-2003 (1947).
[8]  1 Cooper, State Administrative Law 180-185; Cf. Boller Beverages, Inc v Davis, supra, 38 NJ at 155; 183 A2d at 73; Securities & Exchange Commission v Chenery Corp, supra, 332 US at 202; 67 S Ct at 1580; 91 L Ed at 2002.
[9]  Cf. Ramsey v Hopkins, 447 F2d 128 (CA 5, 1971).

=== CASE 9740353 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:33:10.448819+00 ===

JUSTICE KNECHT delivered the opinion of the court: Plaintiff, Mark Oliveira, appeals the dismissal of his complaint based on the Illinois Consumer Fraud and Deceptive Business Practices Act (Act) (815 ILCS 505/1 et seq. (West 1996)) against defendant, Amoco Oil Company, and also appeals from the denial of class certification. Plaintiff contends (1) the trial court erred in dismissing his complaint because it failed to state a cause of action by finding he failed to allege proximate cause under the Act; and (2) the trial court erred and abused its discretion in denying class certification to his cause of action by ruling the Act did not apply to consumers outside Illinois, by not finding Illinois law applied, and failing to find common issues of fact or law predominated. We affirm in part and reverse in part. I. BACKGROUND Plaintiff is an Illinois consumer who first brought a complaint against defendant in November 1996 seeking certification as a class action on behalf of a nationwide class of all purchases of “Amoco Silver and/or Amoco Ultimate gasoline” (Amoco premium gasolines). This complaint alleged defendant’s advertisements for its premium gasolines were false and plaintiff and others had purchased those premium brands because of the ads. Defendant asserted four causes of action: (1) breach of express warranty; (2) breach of implied warranty; (3) fraudulent misrepresentation; and (4) a violation of the Act. At an evidentiary hearing in March 1997, the trial court denied class certification because, whether Illinois’ or another state’s law was applicable, the cause of action based upon reliance on advertisements required separate factual findings as to each class member’s reasons for purchasing gasoline. Plaintiff filed an amended complaint in May 1997, in which he dropped all claims except consumer fraud under the Act. The amended complaint alleges plaintiff and the class he claims to represent have a claim under the Act and were damaged simply by purchasing Amoco premium gasolines regardless of whether they saw the advertisements plaintiff alleges were misrepresentations. Plaintiff requested certification of a class he defined as “[a] 11 retail purchasers in the United, States who purchased Amoco Ultimate and/or Amoco Silver gasoline during the class period, November 6, 1991, through January 2, 1996.” The amended complaint alleged defendant began a multistate advertising campaign on November 6, 1991, which falsely represented: “(A) Amoco Ultimate gasoline is superior to all other brands of premium gasoline with respect to engine performance or environmental benefits because it is refined more than all other such brands; (B) The clear color of Amoco Ultimate gasoline demonstrates the superior engine performance and environmental benefits Amoco Ultimate provides compared to other premium brands of gasolines that are not clear in color; (C) A single tankful of Amoco Silver or Ultimate gasoline will make dirty or clogged fuel injectors clean; (D) Amoco Silver or Ultimate gasoline provides superior fuel injector cleaning compared to other brands of gasoline; and (E) Automobiles driven more than 15,000 miles with regular gasoline generally suffer from lost engine power or acceleration which will be restored by the higher octane of Amoco Silver gasoline.” The complaint alleges defendant knew these statements were untrue. While not included as an allegation in the complaint, the end date chosen for the class period, January 2, 1996, was the effective date of a consent decree between defendant and the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) as a result of which defendant stopped its advertising. The consent decree settled an action filed against defendant by the FTC based upon the same alleged deceptive advertising campaign. Plaintiff alleges the result of defendant’s deceptive advertising campaign was to increase demand for its premium gasoline thereby enabling it to command an inflated and otherwise unsustainable price for the premium gasolines that all consumers of the gasoline paid whether or not they had relied upon or seen the advertising campaign. Thus, plaintiff argues all consumers who purchased defendant’s premium gasolines during the class period were damaged by defendant’s misrepresentations in its advertising campaign. In support of his motion to certify a class action, plaintiff submitted the affidavit of Dr. William R. Latham III, professor of economics at the University of Delaware, and Dr. James E. Haefner, professor of advertising at the University of Illinois. Dr. Haefner’s affidavit had to do with the effects of advertising on consumer demand. In Dr. Latham’s initial and second affidavit, he assumed (1) defendant’s premium gasoline did not provide the benefits touted by its advertising campaign and (2) the ad campaign had an effect on consumers and influenced their choices. He then stated, due to the increased demand created by the advertising, defendant was able to charge a higher rate for its premium gasolines than without the advertising. This higher rate was paid by all consumers and not just those who heard and relied upon defendant’s advertising. Dr. Latham stated it can be determined, using econometric analysis, the precise extent of the inflated price attributable to defendant’s advertising. Defendant filed a motion to strike the affidavits of both Latham and Haefner. Defendant argued Latham’s opinions were premised on assumptions contrary to undisputed facts; his theory of liability was novel and contrary to Illinois law; and his opinions were speculative, unsupported by evidence and lacking foundation for admissibility. Defendant provided affidavits from experts of its own that criticized Latham’s theories as not supported by the facts, which showed that during the class period demand for defendant’s premium gasolines actually decreased, as did prices charged. Defendant argued Latham’s theory did not comply with the requirements of the Act and was both (1) too speculative and (2) an example of “fraud on the market” theory, which has been adopted only in securities fraud cases and not in cases of consumer fraud. As Dr. Latham’s second affidavit pointed out, however, he was not contending demand for defendant’s premium gasoline actually increased as compared to previous time periods or that the prices it charged increased from previous periods. Instead, Latham’s contention is defendant’s apparently deceptive advertising kept demand and prices higher during the class period than they would have been otherwise. He does not disagree other factors also influence demand and prices charged but maintains an econometric analysis can be designed to isolate the effect of defendant’s advertising on the actual demand levels and prices during the relevant time period. Defendant also filed motions to dismiss plaintiffs complaint pursuant to section 2 — 615 of the Civil Practice Law (Law) (735 ILCS 5/2 — 615 (West 1996)) and section 2 — 619 of the same Law. Defendant also contested plaintiffs second motion to certify the class. The trial court denied defendant’s motion to strike the affidavits of Drs. Latham and Haefner and the section 2 — 619 motion. The court found plaintiff had no cause as to Amoco Silver gasoline because he did not actually purchase it but stated the case was not being dismissed on that ground. Instead, the trial court granted defendant’s section 2 — 615 motion because plaintiffs complaint did not plead proximate causation adequately under the Act. The court rejected the marketing theory pleaded by plaintiff, i.e., defendant’s misleading advertising caused inflated prices for its gasoline. The trial court also denied certification of a class action stating again it rejected the “marketing scheme theory” proposed by plaintiff. The court noted a lack of predominance of common issues of fact because of the variables that would cause a consumer to purchase gasoline, including whether a consumer believed defendant’s advertising claims. The court also found no common questions of law existed because the Act did not extend to consumers outside Illinois. This appeal followed. II. ANALYSIS A. Motion To Strike Portions of Reply Brief We first address defendant’s motion to strike portions of plaintiffs reply brief. Defendant contends in its opening brief plaintiff claimed the trial court’s denial of class certification and dismissal of the complaint were erroneous for three reasons. However, defendant argues plaintiff, by reply brief, raised several arguments originally raised in the trial court but not in plaintiffs opening brief. Defendant notes Supreme Court Rule 341(e)(7) provides any points not argued in an appellant’s opening brief “are waived and shall not be raised in the reply brief.” 155 Ill. 2d R. 341(e)(7). Defendant argues that by raising these new points for the first time in his reply brief plaintiff is attempting to preclude it from responding to those arguments. .  We believe the arguments raised by plaintiff in his reply brief were in response to arguments raised by defendant in its opening brief. Defendant was not precluded from responding to arguments raised only in reply but actually invited them itself. Supreme Court Rule 341(g) provides an appellant may respond to arguments presented in the appellee’s brief. 155 Ill. 2d R. 341(g). An appellee may argue any point supported by the record but an appellant is under no obligation to anticipate every argument an appellee might raise and address it in his opening brief. Rome v. Commonwealth Edison Co., 81 Ill. App. 3d 776, 780, 401 N.E.2d 1032, 1034-35 (1980). Therefore, defendant’s motion to dismiss portions of plaintiff’s reply brief is denied. B. Propriety of the Section 2 — 615 Dismissal Plaintiff appeals the dismissal of his cause of action and the denial of the class certification. Plaintiff argues, first, the trial court erred in finding he did not state a cause of action under the Act. On appeal from a motion to dismiss a complaint under section 2 — 615, the standard of review is whether the complaint alleged sufficient facts which, if proved, would entitle the plaintiff to relief. Charles v. Seigfried, 165 Ill. 2d 482, 485-86, 651 N.E.2d 154, 156 (1995).  Section 2 of the Act delineates an unlawful practice as follows: “Unfair methods of competition and unfair or deceptive acts or practices, including but not limited to the use or employment of any deception, fraud, false pretense, false promise, misrepresentation or the concealment, suppression or omission of any material fact, with intent that others rely upon the concealment, suppression or omission of such material fact, *** in the conduct of any trade or commerce are hereby declared unlawful whether any person has in fact been misled, deceived or damaged thereby.” 815 ILCS 505/2 (West 1996).  An action for damages under the Act may be brought pursuant to section 10a(a). “Any person who suffers actual damage as a result of a violation of this Act committed by any other person may bring an action against such person.” 815 ILCS 505/10a(a) (West 1996). The definition of “person” under the Act includes a corporation, company, or other business entity. 815 ILCS 505/1(c) (West 1996). Thus, defendant is included as a person who could commit a violation of the Act. The Act has been construed liberally to give effect to the legislative goals behind its enactment. Eshaghi v. Hanley Dawson Cadillac Co., 214 Ill. App. 3d 995, 1001-02, 574 N.E.2d 760, 764 (1991). The Act’s policy is to give broader protection than common law fraud by prohibiting any “deception, fraud, false pretense, false promise, misrepresentation or the concealment, suppression or omission of any material fact, with intent that others rely upon the concealment *** in the conduct of any trade or commerce.” 815 ILCS 505/2 (West 1996); Eshaghi, 214 Ill. App. 3d at 1001-02, 574 N.E.2d at 764. The standard of proof for a violation of the Act is lenient as it does not require “any person has in fact been misled, deceived or damaged thereby.” 815 ILCS 505/2 (West 1996); Eshaghi, 214 Ill. App. 3d at 1002, 574 N.E.2d at 764.  A cause of action under section 2 of the Act has three elements: (1) a deceptive act or practice by the defendant, (2) the defendant’s intent that plaintiff rely on the deception, and (3) the deception occurred during a course of conduct involving trade or commerce. Zekman v. Direct American Marketers, Inc., 182 Ill. 2d 359, 373, 695 N.E.2d 853, 860 (1998); Connick v. Suzuki Motor Co., 174 Ill. 2d 482, 501, 675 N.E.2d 584, 593 (1996); Martin v. Heinold Commodities, Inc., 163 Ill. 2d 33, 75, 643 N.E.2d 734, 754 (1994) (hereinafter Martin II). Although the defendant’s intent that its deception be relied on is an element of the offense, the Supreme Court of Illinois has stated no actual reliance is required to state a cause of action under the Act. Connick, 174 Ill. 2d at 501, 675 N.E.2d at 593; Martin II, 163 Ill. 2d at 76, 643 N.E.2d at 754; Siegel v. Levy Organization Development Co., 153 Ill. 2d 534, 542, 607 N.E.2d 194, 198 (1992). Duran v. Leslie Oldsmobile, Inc., 229 Ill. App. 3d 1032, 1041, 594 N.E.2d l355, 1362 (1992), holds reliance is required for a private cause of action as opposed to those brought under the Act by the Attorney General. In support of its ruling, however, the Duran court relied on language in section 10a of the Act that deals with proximate causation: “Any person who suffers damage as a result of a violation of this Act *** may bring an action ***.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 121V2, par. 270a(a) (now 815 ILCS 505/10a(a) (West 1996)). While reliance is not required under the Act, a plaintiff must demonstrate the defendant’s consumer fraud proximately caused his injuries. Zekman, 182 Ill. 2d at 373, 695 N.E.2d at 860-61; Connick, 174 Ill. 2d at 501, 675 N.E.2d at 593. The required allegation of proximate causation has been termed minimal, however, as that determination is best left to the trier of fact. Connick, 174 Ill. 2d at 504, 675 N.E.2d at 595. Defendant contends Illinois law under the Act requires a plaintiff to allege two components of causation: (1) “direct” or “proximate” causation and (2) “but for” or “transactional” causation. These two types of causation apparently originated in federal securities fraud cases. See Martin II, 163 Ill. 2d at 60, 68-69, 643 N.E.2d at 747, 751; Adler v. William Blair & Co., 271 Ill. App. 3d 117, 128-29, 648 N.E.2d 226, 234 (1995); Bastian v. Petren Resources Corp., 271 Ill. App. 3d 232, 235, 648 N.E.2d 165, 167 (1995). The court in Bastian defined “transaction causation” as occurring when defendant’s conduct caused plaintiff to enter into the transaction and “loss causation” as the reasons for the transaction’s (investment’s) decline in value or the proximate cause of plaintiffs loss. Bastían, 271 Ill. App. 3d at 235, 648 N.E.2d at 167. These two types of causation are only cited in securities fraud cases and not in Zekman and Connick, where only the issue of proximate cause is discussed as required under the Act. Defendant’s argument concerning the necessity of “but for” causation appears to be a reference to reliance, which the supreme court has repeatedly stated is not required under the Act. Reliance was an important part of a common law fraud cause of action, but the elements of common law fraud need not be proved to recover under the Act as the definition of fraudulent practice is in the Act itself. People ex rel. Fahner v. American Buyers Club, Inc., 115 Ill. App. 3d 759, 761, 450 N.E.2d 904, 906 (1983). Since “but for” causation is not necessary because actual reliance is not necessary, the question under plaintiffs theory becomes whether defendant made misleading statements in its advertising that led to an increase in demand and inflated prices that were paid by all. Defendant argues, even if the advertising was misleading, it did not proximately cause any damage to plaintiff. Defendant contends it provided affidavits to counter those supplied by plaintiff and which provide evidence the overall demand for its premium gasolines went down, as did prices during the relevant period; therefore, its advertising did not proximately cause any damages to plaintiff. As Dr. Latham stated in his second affidavit filed by plaintiff, however, the question is not whether demand for the premium gasolines went down but whether demand and prices were artificially high for the relevant time period due to misleading advertising. In other words, without the advertising, would the demand and prices of defendant’s premium gasolines have been even lower during the relevant time period? Dr. Latham contends he can isolate the variables that go into fueling the demand, calculate the amount of the artificially high prices during the relevant period attributable to the advertising, and then calculate the amount plaintiff overpaid, therefore showing defendant’s misleading advertising proximately caused plaintiff and anyone else who bought defendant’s premium gasoline to pay inflated prices. Defendant further argues the Act requires a plaintiff to allege with specificity misrepresentations were made and to whom they were made. Defendant cites Connick for this proposition. Review of Con-nick, however, shows its reference to allegations, including to whom specific misrepresentations were made, was in relation to pleading a cause of action for common law fraud, which requires allegations of misrepresentations, as well as when they were made, who made them, and to whom they were made. Connick, 174 Ill. 2d at 496-97, 675 N.E.2d at 591. As we noted, it is not necessary to prove the elements of common law fraud to recover under the Act (American Buyers Club, 115 Ill. App. 3d at 761, 450 N.E.2d at 906) because the elements of a claim under the Act are as set forth above and stated in Zekman, 182 Ill. 2d at 373, 695 N.E.2d at 860. See also Connick, 174 Ill. 2d at 501, 675 N.E.2d at 593; Martin II, 163 Ill. 2d at 75, 643 N.E.2d at 754. Defendant next contends plaintiff’s cause of action does not fit under the Act since, pursuant to its provisions, only material misrepresentations are actionable. Defendant cites Bass v. Prime Cable of Chicago, Inc., 284 Ill. App. 3d 116, 127, 674 N.E.2d 43, 51 (1996), and Mackinac v. Arcadia National Life Insurance Co., 271 Ill. App. 3d 138, 141, 648 N.E.2d 237, 239 (1995). These cases list “material fact” as an element of a cause of action under the Act based on its inclusion in the definition of deceptive act or practice under section 2 of the Act. 815 ILCS 505/2 (West 1996). The materiality discussion centers on whether the misrepresentations actually caused damages to the plaintiff. In Bass, plaintiff continued to use the cable services provided by defendant after actual knowledge of the alleged misrepresentations over the cost of the services and an agreement on the part of plaintiff to pay the additional costs. Bass, 284 Ill. App. 3d at 127, 674 N.E.2d at 51-52. In Mackinac, defendant had to know plaintiff had a preexisting condition that would form the basis of a requirement to inform her of the preexisting restriction in its insurance policy; without a reason to disclose the restriction, defendant did not mislead plaintiff by failing to disclose. Mackinac, 271 Ill. App. 3d at 143, 648 N.E.2d at 240.  A “material fact” exists where (1) a plaintiff would have acted differently had he or she been aware of the information, or (2) it concerned the type of information upon which he or she would be expected to rely in making a decision to act. Connick, 174 Ill. 2d at 505, 675 N.E.2d at 595; Mackinac, 271 Ill. App. 3d at 141, 648 N.E.2d at 239. Defendant’s advertised assertions that its premium gasolines were better for the environment and a consumer’s car are material facts because consumers would be expected to rely on those facts when deciding whether to purchase gasoline. It is not necessary under the Act that plaintiff actually relied on those asserted facts. In reviewing the legal adequacy of a complaint, we must interpret the allegations of the complaint in the light most favorable to plaintiff. DiBenedetto v. Flora Township, 153 Ill. 2d 66, 69-70, 605 N.E.2d 571, 573 (1992). The complaint must allege facts which, if proved, would entitle plaintiff to relief. Charles, 165 Ill. 2d at 485-86, 651 N.E.2d at 156. We do not decide the likelihood of plaintiff proving his case but only that he is entitled to relief upon proving the facts alleged.  We find plaintiffs complaint adequately stated a cause of action for consumer fraud under the Act. First, plaintiff’s complaint adequately pled a deceptive act or practice by defendant. Specifically, plaintiff alleged defendant represented in its advertising that its premium gasolines had special features that would produce increased performance in automobiles and had environmental benefits and that this information was false. Second, plaintiff alleged defendant intended purchasers to rely on these statements, which he claims is evident due to the representations themselves and the fact they were in radio, television, and print ads. Third, plaintiff alleged these statements were made in trade or commerce. Fourth, plaintiff has alleged proximate cause. Plaintiffs purchases are alleged to have been made after the alleged fraudulent statements were made and the statements caused higher prices than what would have occurred for the period in question for defendant’s premium gasolines but for the advertisements. C. Propriety of Class Certification Denial We next consider whether class certification was improperly denied. Whether to certify a class action is a matter within the sound discretion of the trial court, and its decision will be reversed only upon a showing of a clear abuse of discretion or the application of impermissible legal criteria. Schlenz v. Castle, 84 Ill. 2d 196, 203, 417 N.E.2d 1336, 1339 (1981).  A class action may not be certified unless the trial court finds: “(1) The class is so numerous that joinder of all members is impracticable. (2) There are questions of fact or law common to the class, which common questions predominate over any questions affecting only individual members. (3) The representative parties will fairly and adequately protect the interest of the class. (4) The class action is an appropriate method for the fair and efficient adjudication of the controversy.” 735 ILCS 5/2 — 801 (West 1996).  In this case the trial court denied class certification because it rejected plaintiffs “marketing scheme theory.” The court found a lack of predominating common issues of fact' or law because even Dr. Latham admitted a number of determinants exist, such as income, location of service stations, or prices of other goods and services, that would impact a consumer’s decision to buy gasoline in addition to whether the consumer believed defendant’s advertising. The court found too many variables existed to find questions of fact common to the class or that the common questions would predominate over other questions affecting individual members. The court also found the Act did not extend to persons who were not Illinois consumers; therefore, there could be no common questions of law. Plaintiff contends, first, the trial court erred in finding the Act did not apply to consumers outside Illinois. He claims the language in the Act makes no distinction between Illinois residents and nonresidents. 815 ILCS 505/2 (West 1996). He notes the Act’s definition of “person[sj” covered includes “any natural person or his legal representative, partnership, corporation (domestic and foreign), company, trust, business entity or association.” (Emphasis added.) 815 ILCS 505/l(c) (West 1996). Finally, he notes section 1(f), defining “trade” and “commerce,” refers to trade or commerce directly or indirectly affecting the people of Illinois. 815 ILCS 505/Kf) (West 1996). The Supreme Court of Illinois has not ruled specifically on this issue. It has noted the Act’s purpose is to protect Illinois consumers, borrowers, and businessmen. Scott v. Association for Childbirth at Home, International, 88 Ill. 2d 279, 288, 430 N.E.2d 1012, 1017 (1981). Plaintiff cites Miner v. Gillette Co., 87 Ill. 2d 7, 428 N.E.2d 478 (1981), where a class action was certified that included nonresidents of Illinois and involved several counts including one based on the Act. Whether the Act applied to nonresident consumers was not an issue in the case, however, and the court made no ruling on the subject. Plaintiff also cites Gordon v. Boden, 224 Ill. App. 3d 195, 202, 586 N.E.2d 461, 466 (1991), where a class action based on the Act was certified at the appellate court level. Finally, plaintiff cites Martin v. Heinold Commodities, Inc., 117 Ill. 2d 67, 510 N.E.2d 840 (1987) (hereinafter Martin I), where the supreme court certified a class action under the Act that included non-Illinois plaintiffs but its decision was based on the following: (1) the contracts containing the deceptive statements were all executed in Illinois; (2) the contract contained express choice of law and forum selection clauses specifying any litigation would be conducted in Illinois under Illinois law; and (3) complaints regarding the defendant’s performance were to be directed to its Chicago office. Martin I, 117 Ill. 2d at 82-83, 510 N.E.2d at 847. Both plaintiff and defendant refer to “Illinois cases” that have ruled on the issue but they are actually federal district court cases that applied Illinois law and attempted to divine how the Supreme Court of Illinois would rule if confronted with the issue. Of these cases, more of them found the supreme court would not apply the Act to nonresident consumers (see Hastings v. Fidelity Mortgage Decisions Corp., 984 F. Supp. 600, 615 (N.D. Ill. 1997); Rohlfing v. Manor Care, Inc., 172 F.R.D. 330, 340 (N.D. Ill. 1997); Swartz v. Schaub, 818 F. Supp. 1214, 1214 (N.D. Ill. 1993); Seaboard Seed Co. v. Bemis Co., 632 F. Supp. 1133, 1140 (N.D. Ill. 1986)) than found the court would apply the Act to nonresident consumers (see Nichols Motorcycle Supply Inc. v. Dunlop Tire Corp., 913 F. Supp. 1088, 1140 (N.D. Ill. 1995); Fry v. UAL Corp., 136 F.R.D. 626, 637 (N.D. Ill. 1991)). Language in Scott refers to the Act’s purpose as protecting Illinois consumers (Scott, 88 Ill. 2d at 288, 430 N.E.2d at 1017). The language of the Act itself refers to trade or commerce under the Act as “directly or indirectly affecting the people of this State.” 815 ILCS 505/l(f) (West 1996). In the case of an out-of-state consumer, the trade or commerce referred to by the Act occurred outside Illinois where the putative class members lived, purchased gasoline, and were allegedly harmed. They had no contact with Illinois. Plaintiff argues the idea for the deceptive advertising campaign originated in Illinois, where defendant had its corporate headquarters. However, the suggestion defendant’s fraud scheme “emanated” from employees of defendant in Illinois does not constitute trade or commerce affecting Illinois consumers. The Act does not seek to punish evil thoughts but actual deceptive acts and practices. Absent a specific ruling from the supreme court that the Act applies to out-of-state consumers, we decline to find it applies as the court has stated the Act’s purpose is to protect Illinois consumers. Scott, 88 Ill. 2d at 288, 430 N.E.2d at 1017. Plaintiff next argues the trial court improperly concluded Illinois law may not be applied to non-Illinois class members’ claims. Illinois law may be applied to the nationwide class only if Illinois has significant contact or aggregation of contacts to the claims asserted by each member of the class. Phillips Petroleum Co. v. Shutts, 472 U.S. 797, 821-22, 86 L. Ed. 2d 628, 648, 105 S. Ct. 2965, 2979 (1985). Plaintiff argues defendant is headquartered in Illinois, the advertising campaign was conceived of and approved and disseminated in Illinois. He argues no other state has more significant contacts and Illinois has more than sufficient contacts to ensure application of its law is neither arbitrary nor capricious. However, contrary to plaintiffs assertions, defendant’s contacts alone do not determine whether Illinois law will be applied. Illinois has no authority to regulate out-of-state transactions affecting non-Illinois citizens, such as the purchase of gasoline, and has no interest in doing so. Further, while Illinois has an interest in seeing Illinois corporations do not engage in deceptive practices, its Consumer Fraud Act does not apply to consumers outside Illinois or business conducted outside Illinois. While the Act does not require reliance, other states’ courts may have found their consumer fraud acts require reliance as an element of a claim. See, e.g., Gross v. Johnson & Johnson-Merck Consumer Pharmaceuticals Co., 303 N.J. Super. 336, 344-46, 696 A.2d 793, 796-98 (1997). Further, in states without a consumer fraud act, a plaintiff would need to rely on common law fraud, which does require reliance to state a cause of action. Where another state’s consumer fraud act requires reliance to state a claim, what is unlawful in Illinois — false or misleading advertising whether or not it was relied upon by a given consumer — may not be unlawful in another state. Illinois may not impose sanctions on violators of its law with the intent of changing the violator’s conduct in other states if it was lawful where it occurred and had no impact on Illinois or its residents. BMW of North America, Inc. v. Gore, 517 U.S. 559, 572-73, 134 L. Ed. 2d 809, 824-25, 116 S. Ct. 1589, 1597 (1996). As the purchase of gasoline in his or her respective state and the determinants of the price paid for it were what triggered each potential plaintiffs cause of action, something that does not affect Illinois commerce or consumers, no significant connection to Illinois justifies the use of Illinois law. The trial court did not abuse its discretion in finding Illinois law did not apply to nonresident consumers. Without the use of Illinois law to govern the class action, the claims of each putative plaintiff would be governed by the laws of each state where the gasoline was purchased. There is no common law to apply. As to predominance of common facts, the trial court found the question of each individual plaintiffs reliance on defendant’s advertising would govern the claims. As we noted, individual reliance is unnecessary under the Act. However, without the Act governing claims from out-of-state plaintiffs, reliance may very well be an issue either under another state’s consumer fraud act or under common law fraud. The claims of out-of-state plaintiffs would require individual fact finding and no predominance of common facts exists. The trial court did not abuse its discretion in finding no predominance of common issues of fact or law. III. CONCLUSION We reverse the trial court’s dismissal of plaintiffs cause of action but affirm its refusal to certify the nationwide class action requested by plaintiff. Affirmed in part and reversed in part. MYERSCOUGH, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9740355 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:33:11.146462+00 ===

Todd, Justice.
The widow of decedent seeks review of an order of the Workmen’s Compensation Commission denying her benefits because her husband committed suicide. The decedent was injured prior *358to the adoption of a statute making suicide noncompensable, but committed suicide thereafter. We affirm.
On September 12, 1966, the decedent, Neil L. Schwartz, sustained a personal injury to his back and spine arising out of and during the course of his employment with Warren Taimo, d.b.a. Warren’s Masonry. Compensation was paid by the employer through January 30, 1967, at which time it was discontinued. On July 27, 1967, the employee filed a claim petition for additional compensation. Prior to the hearing of this claim, an amendment to Minn. St. 176.021, subd. I,1 became effective on September 1, 1967, adding to the statute the following words: “[Sjuicides are not compensable.”
In January 1968 a hearing was held on the employee’s claim petition, and he was awarded additional continuing temporary total disability benefits. These benefits were paid by the employer’s insurance company to the date of decedent’s death on May 3, 1968. The decedent was extremely depressed following his injury and his inability to regain full health. He became deranged and confused and was confined for a while at Rochester State Hospital for treatment. His condition appeared to improve and he was released from the hospital. Upon returning home, he again became depressed and remained in such a state to the time of his suicide. The compensation judge found that the suicide arose out of and in the course of his employment in that it was a direct and proximate result of his personal injury on September 12, 1966. He determined that the emotional reaction evoked by that injury, the incapacity caused by it, and the traumatic neurosis and psychosis flowing from it all contributed to the psychotic condition of the decedent at the time he took his own life. The evidence in the record sustains such a finding. Absent the passage of the statute in question, the relator-widow and dependent children would be entitled to death benefits under our workmen’s compensation statute.
The relator raises two issues upon this appeal: (1) Under the *359circumstances and facts of this case, does the amendment to § 176.021, subd. 1, have the effect of cutting off dependents’ rights to death benefits? (2) Under the circumstances and facts of this case, does the amendment to the statute deprive relator of her constitutional rights under Minn. Const, art. 1, § 2, and art. 4, §§ 33 and 34, and under the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution?
In reviewing decisions relating to the Workmen’s Compensation Act, this court is guided by certain general principles. Historically, the Workmen’s Compensation Act gave employees rights of recovery against the employer and eliminated certain common-law defenses, such as contributory negligence, assumption of risk, and the fellow-servant doctrine. In balancing this off, the employee was denied the right to file a common-law action against his employer for those injuries covered in the Workmen’s Compensation Act. The Workmen’s Compensation Act should be liberally construed so as to give effect to its full purpose. As we stated in Kolbeck v. Myhra, 255 Minn. 341, 344, 96 N. W. 2d 633, 635 (1959):
“* * * Since workmen’s compensation statutes are highly remedial and humanitarian in purpose, they must be given a broad, liberal construction in the interests of the workmen.”
However, even though the court will liberally construe the language of the Workmen’s Compensation Act, it cannot and will not legislate or depart from the clear and accepted meaning of words used in the statute.
The rights of the decedent were fixed at the time of the accident. Schmahl v. School District No. 12, 200 Minn. 294, 274 N. W. 168 (1937). Rights of dependents are derivative from the employee’s claim and proceedings by dependents after the death of the employee are merely a continuation of the proceedings commenced prior to death. Nyberg v. Little Falls Black Granite Co. 202 Minn. 86, 277 N. W. 536 (1938); Susnik v. Oliver Iron Min. Co. 205 Minn. 325, 286 N. W. 249 (1939); Johnson v. Pillsbury Flour Mills Co. 203 Minn. 347, 281 N. W. 290 (1938).
*360Minnesota has clearly determined that the rights of the dependents are separate, inchoate rights which become effective at the date of death and are governed by any intervening statutes passed and becoming effective between the date of injury and the date of death. In State ex rel. Carlson v. District Court, 131 Minn. 96, 97, 154 N. W. 661 (1915), we said:
“* * * The claim of plaintiff for compensation does not arise from the injury to her husband, but is a new and distinct right of action created by his death.”
In Lewis v. Connolly Contracting Co. 196 Minn. 108, 115, 264 N. W. 581, 584 (1936), this court held that the compensation to dependents for the death of a workman is a “different, distinct, and independent statutory right,” and the cause of action given to the dependent arises at the time of death.
In Warner v. Zaiser, 184 Minn. 598, 239 N. W. 761 (1931), we held that the benefits and liabilities arising because of the employee’s death are fixed at the time of death, and said (184 Minn. 601, 239 N. W. 762) :
"* * * The legislature may change the scale of weekly or other benefits prior to the occurrence of the accident; it may change the benefits to be received by the widow of an employe prior to the death.”
The position of this court was summarized in Carroll v. State, 242 Minn. 70, 78, 64 N. W. 2d 166, 172 (1954), where we said:
“We have held on a number of occasions that the rights of dependents to recover death benefits are separate and distinct from the rights of an employee to recover compensation or medical or hospital benefits during his lifetime. * * *
% sfs sj:
“We also hold that the law in effect at the time of the employee’s death governs the rights of the dependents. State ex rel. Carlson v. District Court, [131 Minn. 96, 154 N. W. 661 (1915)] ; State ex rel. Globe Ind. Co. v. District Court, 132 Minn. 249, 156 N. W. 120 [1916] ; Soderstrom v. Curry & Whyte, Inc. 143 Minn. *361154, 173 N. W. 649 [1919] ; Warner v. Zaiser, 184 Minn. 598, 239 N. W. 761 [1931]; Ogren v. City of Duluth, 219 Minn. 555, 18 N. W. (2d) 535 [1945]; Pittman v. Pillsbury Flour Mills, Inc. 234 Minn. 517, 48 N. W. (2d) 735 [1951].
“We realize that the authorities are not in accord on this question. While decisions from foreign jurisdictions are often of little value unless the statutory provisions upon which the decision is based are the same or similar to ours, it does seem that we follow what might well be designated the minority view. For an annotation on the subject, see 82 A. L. R. 1244.”
The relator asserts that the language of the statute regarding suicide is silent as to the proceedings to which it applies, and argues that since the accident in question occurred prior to the adoption of the statute, it is not covered thereby. She further argues that since the compensation hearing had been commenced and compensation was being paid, her claim was merely a continuation of an existing hearing; that there is only one proceeding for one casualty under the workmen’s compensation law. She further argues that we should distinguish State ex rel. Carlson v. District Court, supra, and other similar cases on the basis that they deal with the payment of additional compensation and statutes governing the quantum of payments and not with the merits of the. right to recover.
To adopt the argument of relator in whole or in part would require a reversal of our prior holdings, and we are not prepared to so do. The language of the statute is clear and explicit and makes suicides which occur after September 1, 1967, noncompensable. This is what occurred under the facts of this case, and we are bound by our prior holdings to apply the law in effect at the date of death.
Relator also attacks the constitutionality of the statute as applied to decedent’s dependents. She contends that it is violative of due process since it destroys existing rights. However, this argument is based on an assumption that there was an existing right under the laws of the State of Minnesota, and as stated *362above, we have consistently held that all of the rights of the dependents are fixed as of the date of death. Therefore, there can be no destruction of rights since none existed at the time of the passage of the statute.
Relator also argues that the statute is violative of equal protection. This poses a narrower and more difficult question. In considering any legislation which is attacked as a denial of equal protection, we apply certain guiding principles which have evolved from many of our cases. The rule is that legislative classification will be held to be constitutionally valid if—
(1) the classification uniformly, without discrimination, applies to and embraces all who are similarly situated with respect to conditions or wants justifying appropriate legislation;
(2) the distinctions which separate those who are included within the classifications from those who are excluded are not manifestly arbitrary or fanciful, but are genuine and substantial so as to provide a natural and reasonable basis in the necessity or circumstances of the members of the classification to justify different legislation adapted to their peculiar conditions and needs; and
(3) the classification is germane or relevant to the purpose of the law; that is, there must be an evident connection between the distinctive needs peculiar to the class and the remedy or regulations therefor which the law purports to provide.2
Another fundamental principle frequently stated is that one alone may constitute a class as well as a thousand, but the fewer there are in a class, the more closely the courts will scrutinize the act to see if its classification constitutes an evasion of the *363constitution. Hamlin v. Ladd, 217 Minn. 249, 14 N. W. 2d 396 (1944); Loew v. Hagerle Brothers, 226 Minn. 485, 33 N. W. 2d 598 (1948).
Class legislation discriminating against some and favoring others is not unconstitutional where it affects all persons similarly situated and the classification is not arbitrary. Grounds for the discrimination between the persons similarly situated may be slight, the question being primarily for the legislature, and unless it is manifestly arbitrary and unreasonable, it will be sustained. State v. International Harvester Co. 241 Minn. 367, 63 N. W. 2d 547, appeal dismissed, 348 U. S. 853, 75 S. Ct. 78, 99 L. ed. 672 (1954).
The general rule to be followed by the court is set forth in 3B Dunnell, Dig. (3 ed.) § 1669:
“* * * When the legislature has determined that a sufficient distinction exists between two classes of persons to justify applying rules to one class which do not apply to the other, such determination is binding upon the courts, unless they can point out that the distinction is purely fanciful and arbitrary, and that no substantial or logical basis exists therefor.”
Further, 17B Dunnell, Dig. (3 ed.) § 8931, sets forth additional rules to be considered by the court:
“A law is not to be declared unconstitutional by the courts unless palpably so. The power of the courts in this regard is to be exercised only when absolutely necessary, and then with extreme caution. Unless a law is unconstitutional beyond a reasonable doubt it must be sustained.
“Every presumption is invoked in favor of the constitutionality of an act of the legislature, and the courts should not declare it unconstitutional except when satisfied, after careful consideration, that it conflicts with some provision of the state or federal constitution.
‡ ‡ ‡ $
“A law is not to be declared unconstitutional merely because the court deems it bad policy or bad economics.”
*364While recent decisions suggest that the United States Supreme Court is scrutinizing challenged statutes more closely than formerly in determining whether a statutory classification bears some rational relationship to a legitimate state purpose,3 it was stated in Weber v. Aetna Cas. & Surety Co. 406 U. S. 164, 174, 92 S. Ct. 1400, 1406, 31 L. ed. 2d 768, 778 (1972):
“Finally, we are mindful that States have frequently drawn arbitrary lines in workmen’s compensation and wrongful-death statutes to facilitate potentially difficult problems of proof. Nothing in our decision would impose on state court systems a greater burden in this regard.”
Applying these principles to the facts of this case, we cannot hold that the statute in question is unconstitutional and a denial of equal protection. While this court may regard this legislation as harsh and regressive because of the fact that Minnesota is the only state to single out suicide as noncompensable, we are compelled by our former decisions to regard the rights of recovery under the Workmen’s Compensation Act as purely creatures of statute, properly subject to legislative action only.
We affirm the decision of the Workmen’s Compensation Commission. Neither party is allowed costs on this appeal.
Affirmed.
Ex. Sess. L. 1967, c. 40, § 3.
Loew v. Hagerle Brothers, 226 Minn. 485, 33 N. W. 2d 598 (1948); Hamlin v. Ladd, 217 Minn. 249, 14 N. W. 2d 396 (1944); Eldred v. Division of Employment & Security, 209 Minn. 58, 295 N. W. 412 (1940); Arens v. Village of Rogers, 240 Minn. 386, 61 N. W. 2d 508 (1953), appeal dismissed, 347 U. S. 949, 74 S. Ct. 680, 98 L. ed. 1096 (1954); Kellerman v. City of St. Paul, 211 Minn. 351, 1 N. W. 2d 378 (1941); Gardner v. County of Itasca, 280 Minn. 51, 157 N. W. 2d 753 (1968).
See, James v. Strange, 407 U. S. 128, 92 S. Ct. 2027, 32 L. ed. 2d 600 (1972); Weber v. Aetna Cas. & Surety Co. 406 U. S. 164, 92 S. Ct. 1400, 31 L. ed. 2d 768 (1972); Eisenstadt v. Baird, 405 U. S. 438, 92 S. Ct. 1029, 31 L. ed. 2d 349 (1972); Reed v. Reed, 404 U. S. 71, 92 S. Ct. 251, 30 L. ed. 2d 225 (1971).

=== CASE 9740356 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:33:11.151098+00 ===

MacLaughlin, Justice
(dissenting).
I believe that the 1967 amendment to Minn. St. 176.021, subd. 1, stating that “suicides are not compensable,” denies plaintiff the equal protection of the laws guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution and should be declared by this court to be unconstitutional.
The perplexing problem of work-related suicides has led to *365the adoption of varying rules for recovery in other jurisdictions. See, e.g., Scanlon, Suicide under Workmen’s Compensation Laws, 12 Clev.-Mar. L. Rev. 26; Note, The Minnesota Workmen’s Compensation Act: Recent Interpretations, 46 Minn. L. Rev. 199, 204; 1A Larson, Workmen’s Compensation Law, § 36 ff.; Annotation, Suicide as Compensable under Workmen’s Compensation Act, 15 A. L. R. 3d 616. These rules demonstrate differing judicial responses to the problems of proof in demonstrating the causal link between a work-related injury and death by suicide.1 As cited in the majority opinion, the United States Supreme Court in Weber v. Aetna Cas. & Surety Co. 406 U. S. 164, 174, 92 S. Ct. 1400, 1406, 31 L. ed. 2d 768, 778 (1972), has stated that—
“* * * the States have frequently drawn arbitrary lines in workmen’s compensation and wrongful-death statutes to facilitate potentially difficult problems of proof. Nothing in our decision would impose on state court systems a greater burden in this regard.”
However, in its 1967 amendment to § 176.021, subd. 1, the legislature went far beyond attempting “to facilitate potentially difficult problems of proof.” Rather, the legislature apparently sought to resolve the problems of proof by excluding all suicides from the coverage of the Workmen’s Compensation Act. Neither *366party has called to our attention, nor does our research disclose, any other state which has a similar provision in its workmen’s compensation act.
1 believe that the absolute prohibition against compensation for suicides is unconstitutional under the standards enunciated by the majority. I also believe the renewed vigor given by the United States Supreme Court to “traditional” equal-protection review compels a stricter review of nonsuspect classifications and nonfundamental interests than has been granted in the past. In the 1971 term, there were at least four cases2 in which the United States Supreme Court struck down legislation on equal-protection grounds while explicitly applying the “traditional” or “restrained” level of review which had previously been considered “virtual judicial abdication.” 3 Professor Gerald Gunther commented as follows about the trend indicated by these recent decisions of the United States Supreme Court (Gunther, The Supreme Court, 1971 Term, Foreword: In Search of Evolving Doctrine on a Changing Court: A Model for a Newer Equal Protection, 86 Harv. L. Rev. 1, 20):
“* * * Judicial deference to a broad range of conceivable legislative purposes and to imaginable facts that might justify classifications is strikingly diminished. Judicial tolerance of *367overinclusive and underinclusive classifications is notably reduced. Legislative leeway for unexplained pragmatic experimentations is substantially narrowed.” (Italics supplied.)
The case of Reed v. Reed, 404 U. S. 71, 92 S. Ct. 251, 30 L. ed. 2d 225 (1971), is a good example of the renewed power given traditional equal-protection review. That case dealt with an Idaho probate statute which provided that where several persons are equally qualified to administer an estate, the appointing court must prefer males over females. The court did not treat classifications on the basis of sex to be “suspect,” but stated the relevant test under restrained review (404 U. S. 75, 92 S. Ct. 253, 30 L. ed. 2d 229):
“* * * [T]his Court has consistently recognized that the Fourteenth Amendment does not deny to States the power to treat different classes of persons in different ways. [Citations omitted.] The Equal Protection Clause of that amendment does, however, deny to States the power to legislate that different treatment be accorded to persons placed by a statute into different classes on the basis of criteria wholly unrelated to the objective of that statute. A classification ‘must be reasonable, not arbitrary, and must rest upon some ground of difference having a fair and substantial relation to the object of the legislation, so that all persons similarly circumstanced shall be treated alike.’ ” (Italics supplied.)
In upholding the statute below, the Idaho Supreme Court had pointed out its value as eliminating one area of controversy which would otherwise require a hearing as to which of two or more petitioners was better qualified to administer the estate. Reed v. Reed, 93 Idaho 511, 465 P. 2d 635 (1970). It also found the classification was not arbitrary because the legislature “evidently concluded that in general men are better qualified to act as an administrator than are women.” 93 Idaho 514, 465 P. 2d 638. Although the court recognized that there are exceptions to this generalization, it did not find the classification “so com*368pletely without a basis in fact as to be irrational and arbitrary.” Id.
The Supreme Court summarily swept away these purported justifications (404 U. S. 76, 92 S. Ct. 254, 30 L. ed. 2d 230):
“Clearly the objective of reducing the workload on probate courts by eliminating one class of contests is not without some legitimacy. The crucial question, however, is whether § 15-314 advances that objective in a manner consistent with the command of the Equal Protection Clause. We hold that it does not. To give a mandatory preference to members of either sex over members of the other, merely to accomplish the elimination of hearings on the merits, is to make the very kind of arbitrary legislative choice forbidden by the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment; and whatever may be said as to the positive values of avoiding intrafamily controversy, the choice in this context may not lawfully be mandated solely on the basis of sex.”
This analysis is applicable to the statute before us. The legislature apparently felt that the problems of proof and the need for a hearing in workmen’s compensation cases involving suicide placed an unnecessary burden on the employer. Yet, the petitioner, a widow whose husband’s suicide was explicitly found to have arisen out of and in the course of employment, is in precisely the same position as others whose spouses have died from work-related injuries. I do not believe it is a reasonable classification, or that it furthers a legitimate state interest, to deny benefits to the widow and children of a workman whose death is caused by suicide arising as a direct result of a work-related injury while allowing those benefits to the widow and children of a workman whose death is caused by, for example, an infectious disease arising as a direct result of a work-related injury.4 *369If, following Reed, we refuse to accept classifications which are based solely on legislative generalizations intended to ease administrative burdens, we must find another justification for the statute in order to uphold its constitutionality. I can find no such justification.
The legislature could properly have sought to directly confront the difficulty of proof which evidently was the motivation behind the 1967 amendment. However, in my judgment, it could not constitutionally bar all recovery simply to avoid those problems.
As stated by Mr. Justice Jackson in a concurring opinion in Railway Express Agency, Inc. v. New York, 336 U. S. 106, 112, 69 S. Ct. 463, 466, 93 L. ed. 533, 540 (1949):
“Invocation of the equal protection clause * * * does not disable any governmental body from dealing with the subject at hand. It merely means that the prohibition or regulation must have a broader impact. I regard it as a salutary doctrine that cities, states and the Federal Government must exercise their power so as not to discriminate between their inhabitants except upon some reasonable differentiation fairly related to the object of regulation.”
I would reverse the commission and grant recovery of benefits where, as here, the suicide arose out of and in the course of the employment and was a direct and proximate result of the employee’s personal injury.
See, e.g., Mercer v. Department of Labor & Industries, 74 Wash. 2d 96, 442 P. 2d 1000 (1968) (death compensable only if decedent acted under an uncontrollable impulse or while in delirium); Matter of Franzoni v. Loew’s Theatre & Realty Corp. 22 App. Div. 2d 741, 253 N. Y. S. 2d 505 (1964); Id. 25 App. Div. 2d 453, 265 N. Y. S. 2d 751, appeal denied, 17 N. Y. 2d 666, 269 N. Y. S. 2d 444, 216 N. E. 2d 605 (death compensable when caused by brain derangement or psychosis rather than “mere” depression); Petty v. Associated Transport, Inc. 276 N. C. 417, 173 S. E. 2d 321 (1970) (death compensable if “chain of causation” such that the deprivation of normal judgment which leads to suicide is result of compensable accident).
James v. Strange, 407 U. S. 128, 92 S. Ct. 2027, 32 L. ed. 2d 600 (1972); Weber v. Aetna Cas. & Surety Co. 406 U. S. 164, 92 S. Ct. 1400, 31 L. ed. 2d 768 (1972); Eisenstadt v. Baird, 405 U. S. 438, 92 S. Ct. 1029, 31 L. ed. 2d 349 (1972); Reed v. Reed, 404 U. S. 71, 92 S. Ct. 251, 30 L. ed. 2d 225 (1971). Professor Gerald Gunther concluded that a total of seven cases used the traditional minimal-scrutiny equal protection standard to strike down legislation, citing, in addition to the above cases, Jackson v. Indiana, 406 U. S. 715, 92 S. Ct. 1845, 32 L. ed. 2d 435 (1972); Stanley v. Illinois, 405 U. S. 645, 92 S. Ct. 1208, 31 L. ed. 2d 551 (1972); Humphrey v. Cady, 405 U. S. 504, 92 S. Ct. 1048, 31 L. ed. 2d 394 (1972). Gunther, The Supreme Court, 1971 Term, Foreward: In Search of Evolving Doctrine on a Changing Court: A Model for a Newer Equal Protection, 86 Harv. L. Rev. 1, 18, and note 88.
Gunther, footnote 2, supra, p. 19.
The employer and insurer have not sought review of the determination that the suicide arose out of and in the course of the employment and was a direct and proximate result of the employee’s personal injury of September 12,1966.

=== CASE 9740358 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:33:11.158267+00 ===

Kelly, Justice
(dissenting).
I join in the dissent of Mr. Justice MacLaughlin for the reasons stated therein and herein. Assuming arguendo that this state provided in a wrongful-death statute that all dependents might recover for the death of a husband or father, we would not find it difficult to conclude that a proviso in such a statute that would prohibit an employee’s dependents from recovering from an employer would be an unreasonable classification with*370out any legitimate state interest. However, if the state provided a reasonable substitute to an action for wrongful death by the employee’s dependents, the exception in the wrongful-death statute might then serve a legitimate state interest if considered together with the reasonable substitute. A statute permitting recovery of an assured amount for dependents of an employee from the employer for his work-related death under the Workmen’s Compensation Act could be a reasonable substitute as compared to the uncertainty of a wrongful-death action.
Under the workmen’s compensation law of this state, an employer may not be held liable for the death of an employee arising out of his employment to the employee’s dependents except under the Workmen’s Compensation Act. The majority opinion concludes that an employee’s dependents cannot recover under that act for death by suicide though arising out of his employment. Thus, there is no reasonable substitute for the statutory right to an action for wrongful death by an employee’s dependents under the circumstances of this case — a fact which, in my opinion results in an unreasonable classification.1
This unreasonable classification smacks of unconstitutionality not only on the ground that it violates the constitutional provisions of equal protection of the law, but also on the ground that it violates the due process clauses of the State and Federal Constitutions. The mischief is caused by the workmen’s compensation statute which prohibits any action against the employer except under that act and the provision declaring that suicide is not compensable. Their combined effect is that under the Workmen’s Compensation Act there is no reasonable substitute for the statutory right to an action for wrongful death. The remedy could be that of declaring unconstitutional either the provision prohibiting actions by employees’ dependents against employers *371except as permitted under the Workmen’s Compensation Act, or the provision in that act prohibiting an employee’s dependents from any recovery for death by suicide.
My choice of remedies would be that of voiding the amendment to Minn. St. 176.021, subd. 1, which added that “suicides are not compensable,” not only because the act was constitutional before that amendment was added, but because of the problems that would otherwise follow. Here the employee sought and obtained compensation under the act for a period up to the date of his death, which occurred after the amendment was adopted. Fairness would dictate that a recovery under the Workmen’s Compensation Act should be exclusive and thus avoid the possible doubling effect of a partial recovery under that act and an additional recovery under the death-by-wrongful-act statute. I am aware that there is no evidence before us that a recovery might be had under the death-by-wrongful-act statute but, in my opinion, depriving a class of persons, namely employees’ dependents, of the right to sue should be a sufficient loss to bring into play the constitutional forces of due process and equal protection of the laws. Due process because dependents of employees are deprived of their right to sue for the wrongful death of the employee or in the alternative to the reasonable substitute provided by the Workmen’s Compensation Act but for the amendment.2 An employee’s dependents are denied the equal protection of the laws as they may not sue the employer for wrongful death as others might do and are deprived by the amendment from any reasonable substitute for such right.
1 perceive no rational purpose in distinguishing between rights under the common law and statutory rights under the facts of this case, nor any particular legislative purpose to be served. It might be argued that the difficulties in establishing the causal connection between the suicide and the work-connected injuries *372is a sufficient legislative purpose. Such an argument has little or no merit in the light of the same difficulties present in a number of other cases under the Workmen’s Compensation Act.
A recovery may be had under wrongful-death statutes for death by suicide under some circumstances. See, Annotation, 11 A. L. R. 2d 751, § 4. Compare, Sworski v. Coleman, 208 Minn. 43, 50, 293 N. W. 297, 300 (1940).
For a discussion of due process in a different setting, see, Haney v. International Harvester Co. 294 Minn. 375, 201 N. W. 2d 140 (1972).

=== CASE 2223049 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:53.523331+00 ===

44 Mich. App. 458 (1973)
205 N.W.2d 276
BROWN
v.
WARREN IRON & METAL COMPANY.
Docket No. 14081.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided January 18, 1973.
Levine & Benjamin, P.C., for plaintiff.
Lacey & Jones (by Hayim I. Gross), for defendants.
*459 Before: LESINSKI, C.J., and J.H. GILLIS and PETERSON,[*] JJ.
Leave to appeal applied for.
J.H. GILLIS, J.
On July 31, 1962, while employed by defendant firm, plaintiff suffered amputation of the middle, ring, and little fingers when his right hand was caught in a metal-shearing machine. He returned to work September 26, 1962, but was paid specific-loss benefits for 71 weeks by the State Accident Fund. Plaintiff continued to do the same work until he retired in 1966 at the age of 62. Thereafter, he filed a petition claiming total disability on the basis of the hand-injury residuals, an old ankle fracture, back problems, and respiratory problems. The hearing referee denied compensation.
The Workmen's Compensation Appeal Board concluded that plaintiff did suffer total disability. The majority found that the disability resulted solely from the hand-injury residuals, and awarded compensation to the plaintiff commencing July 31, 1962, the date of the specific loss. The minority concluded that disability resulted both from the hand-injury residuals and the back injury, and would have awarded compensation from the date of retirement, December 16, 1966.
The sole issue raised on appeal is whether the Workmen's Compensation Appeal Board erred in awarding compensation for total disability from July 31, 1962, instead of from December 16, 1966.
The applicable section of the statute which was in effect at the time of this accident read as follows:
"While the incapacity for work resulting from the injury is total, the employer shall pay * * * to the injured employee, a weekly compensation * * * and in *460 no case shall the period covered by such compensation be greater than 500 weeks from the date of injury * * *." (Emphasis supplied.) MCLA 412.9(a); MSA 17.159.
The "date of injury" specified in the statute means the date of the original accident, not the date of subsequent disablement. Kiviniemi v Quincy Mining Co, 286 Mich 680 (1938); Grodzicki v Revere Copper & Brass, Inc, 268 Mich 143 (1934); Lakso v Munro Iron Mining Co, 243 Mich 261 (1928); Bullard v Mult-A-Frame Co, 33 Mich App 678 (1971).
Plaintiff's theory is essentially the same as that asserted by the plaintiffs in the Bullard case. As we stated there, p 684:
"A careful reading of MCLA § 412.15 (Stat Ann 1968 Rev § 17.165) pursuades [sic] the Legislature equated `personal injury' with `original accident' and distinguished personal injury from subsequent disability or incapacity.
"Plaintiffs, however, point to the words in MCLA § 417.2 (Stat Ann 1968 Rev § 17.221)[9] equating `personal injury' with `disability' and contend that since their personal losses disabled them they were personally injured at the date of disablement. After careful analysis of the section we cannot agree. When it equates personal injury with `such' disability it is referring to disability as defined in the section immediately preceding it.[10] The preceding section refers to a situation where a worker first becomes unable to pursue his occupation for wages because of some physical impairment. It is not authority for the proposition that a worker may be disabled twice from the same accident. The section was meant to apply to a disability where the exact date of its causes was difficult, if not impossible, to ascertain. The solution was to make the date of disability the date of personal injury for purposes of applying the procedures and practices of the Workmen's Compensation Act. There is no problem in determining *461 the dates of the causes of plaintiffs' disabilities. Plaintiffs were in the `state of being disabled' when they were first injured and the subsequent physical losses were only further complications of their disablement.[11]
"[9] `The disablement of an employe resulting from such disease or disability shall be treated as the happening of a personal injury within the meaning of this act * * *.'
"[10] MCLA § 417.1(a) (Stat Ann 1968 Rev § 17.220[a]) which defines disability as `the state of being disabled from earning full wages at the work in which the employe was last subjected to the conditions resulting in disability.'
"[11] Disablement is defined as the `event of becoming * * * disabled.' MCLA § 417.1(b) (Stat Ann 1968 Rev § 17.220[b])."
The cases cited by plaintiff in urging that the "date of injury" should be the last day of work are inapposite, as they are all concerned with diseases or injuries not attributable to a single event. MCLA 412.1; MSA 17.151. Such is not the case here, where the injury is attributable to a single event, and the subsequent worsening of plaintiff's physical condition, while entitling him to further compensation, did not constitute another injury.
The decision of the Workmen's Compensation Appeal Board is affirmed. Costs to appellees.
All concurred.
NOTES
[*]  Circuit judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.

=== CASE 2223050 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:53.552914+00 ===

205 N.W.2d 727 (1973)
STATE of Iowa, Appellee,
v.
Layton W. VICK, Appellant.
No. 55310.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
March 28, 1973.
*728 Donald E. O'Brien, of O'Brien, Galvin & O'Brien, Sioux City, for appellant.
Richard C. Turner, Atty. Gen., Robert D. Jacobson, Asst. Atty. Gen., Walter W. Barbee, County Atty., for appellee.
Submitted to MOORE, C. J., and MASON, RAWLINGS, HARRIS and McCORMICK, JJ.
MASON, Justice.
Defendant, Layton W. Vick, was tried in a Spirit Lake police court for the offense of assault (with a rifle), found guilty and fined $100. He subsequently appealed to the Dickinson district court, trial was had to a jury and a verdict convicting defendant of assault in violation of section 694.1 was returned. He has appealed from the judgment entered thereon.
The statute involved provides:
"Assault and battery. Whoever is convicted of an assault, or an assault and battery, where no other punishment is prescribed, shall be imprisoned in the county jail not exceeding thirty days, or be fined not exceeding one hundred dollars."
The charge arose out of an incident involving defendant and several men working *729 for the state highway department on a construction project approximately five miles west of Spirit Lake. Defendant owned and operated a service station located at the northwest corner of the intersection of east-west highway 9 and northsouth highway 32. A public trapshooting range was located north of the station on defendant's property. At about 4:00 p. m. August 2, 1971, defendant erected a target on his property directly west of his station at a distance of some 300 feet. He returned to a point near the station and fired approximately 15 rounds at the target within a period of 15 to 20 minutes. Defendant testified he was shooting in a south-westerly direction, i. e., slightly toward highway 9.
In the morning of August 2 defendant had confronted construction workers attempting to place a fence across highway 32, informing them he would remove it if they continued. He then returned to his station, the men completed their work and the construction work on highway 9, which runs in a westerly direction parallel with defendant's south property line, continued throughout the day. Although suspicious of defendant's motive and purpose in firing his rifle in a path along highway 9, the men proceeded with their work despite the potential danger. Mr. Gary Woltman, an inspector for the state highway commission, testified that while standing some 400 feet west of defendant's station on the north side of highway 9 four shots struck the ground a few feet behind him. Another witness, Gary Classen, observed this incident. Defendant testified his conduct posed no danger to the men working on highway 9 and denied the allegation that he attempted to intimidate them.
Defendant assigns two errors relied on for reversal:
(1) The court erred in overruling defendant's motion to dismiss the cause for the reason chapter 694.1, The Code, 1971, is unconstitutional in that it violates due process as required by article I, section 9, of the Bill of Rights of the Iowa constitution and Amendment 5 of the United States Constitution, more specifically, it does not say it is unlawful to assault anyone, nor does this section define the offense of assault.
(2) The court erred in overruling defendant's motion to dismiss for the reason the State did not meet its burden of showing defendant did not act in self-defense.
I. At the close of the State's evidence and again at the close of all evidence defendant moved to dismiss the charge against him asserting as grounds therefor that section 694.1, The Code, does not say that it is unlawful to assault anybody, doesn't describe the offense and it is in violation of the constitution of Iowa, Constitution of the United States in that it doesn't set out the supposed crime.
The court's ruling on this motion serves as a basis for defendant's first assignment.
Defendant asserts section 694.1 is so vague and standardless that it leaves an individual uncertain as to the particular conduct it prohibits and is therefore unconstitutional.
Ordinarily, statutes, with notable exceptions, regularly enacted by legislatures will be accorded a strong presumption of constitutionality. Where the constitutionality of a statute is merely doubtful or fairly debatable the courts will not interfere. The burden of proving a legislative enactment to be violative of the constitution rests upon those so asserting to the degree of negativing every reasonable basis of support therefor. A constitutional challenge must specify constitutional provisions invoked and state with precision the details of a claimed defect. Farrell v. State Board of Regents, 179 N.W.2d 533, 537-538 (Iowa 1970); Iron Workers Local No. 67 v. Hart, 191 N.W.2d 758, 771, 773 (Iowa 1971); Brown Enterprises, Inc. v. Fulton, 192 N.W.2d 773, 776 (Iowa 1971).
*730 The essential theme of those cases cited by defendant is that a penal statute must define the crime in a manner that permits a reasonable man of common intelligence to comprehend the type of activity proscribed by the statute.
More specifically, defendant claims section 694.1 is unconstitutional because it fails to expressly state "that it is unlawful to assault anyone, nor does said section define the offense of assault." The identical arguments, however, were considered by this court over a century ago in The State of Iowa v. Twogood, 7 Iowa 252, 253-254 (Cole's Ed.), wherein it was held:
"* * * The argument is, that the offense charged has not been declared criminal by the Code, and that common law offenses, without a statutory declaration, are not punishable in this State. * * *
"* * * Our Code provides that whoever is convicted of an assault, or an assault and battery, shall be punished by imprisonment, etc. Section 2597. [Original Code section from which section 694.1 is derived. See Code]. The offense, then, is declared criminal. For the description of itor in order to ascertain what would amount to an assault, or an assault and batterywe are left to the common law definition.
"* * * Its criminality [assault] is expressly declared, the statute adopting the definition of it, as known and clearly fixed by the common law."
While not binding on this court, the United States Courts of Appeal for the tenth circuit recently determined the constitutionality of 18 U.S.C.A. section 111, which reads in part as follows:
"Assaulting, resisting, or impeding certain officers or employees. Whoever forcibly assaults, resists, opposes, impedes, intimidates, or interferes with any person designated in section 1114 of this title while engaged in or on account of the performance of his official duties, shall be fined not more than $5,000 or imprisoned not more than three years, or both."
In United States v. Linn, 438 F.2d 456, 458 (10 Cir. 1971), the court summarily held section 111 was not unconstitutionally vague, indefinite or ambiguous, concluding that "§ 111 clearly gives a person of ordinary intelligence fair notice of what conduct is proscribed and meets the test of definiteness set out in United States v. Harriss, 347 U.S. 612, 74 S.Ct. 808, 98 L. Ed. 989 (1954)."
It would seem section 694.1 also satisfies the constitutional requirement of definiteness when considered in light of the test pronounced by the United States Supreme Court. See Palmer v. City of Euclid, Ohio, 402 U.S. 544, 545-546, 91 S. Ct. 1563, 1564, 29 L.Ed.2d 98; United States v. Harriss, supra; and Winters v. New York, 333 U.S. 507, 515-516, 68 S.Ct. 665, 670, 92 L.Ed. 840, where the Court said: "* * * The standards of certainty in statutes punishing for offenses is higher than in those depending primarily upon civil sanction for enforcement. The crime `must be defined with appropriate definiteness.' * * * [citing authorities] There must be ascertainable standards of guilt. Men of common intelligence cannot be required to guess at the meaning of the enactment. The vagueness may be from uncertainty in regard to persons within the scope of the act, * * * [citing authorities] or in regard to the applicable tests to ascertain guilt."
This statement of law in State v. Flory, 203 Iowa 918, 924, 210 N.W. 961, 964, is pertinent to a consideration of defendant's contention as urged in this assignment:
"The Legislature, in creating an offense, may define it by a particular description of the [act] or acts constituting it, or it may define it as any act which produces, or is reasonably calculated to produce, a certain defined or described result * * *. In the absence of a provision to the contrary, *731 a statute may punish the offense by giving it a name known to the common law without further defining it, and the common-law definition will be applied."
See State v. Lavin, 204 N.W.2d 844, (Iowa, 1973), where the constitutionality of another Iowa statute was challenged on the ground of vagueness.
Defendant's first assignment is without merit. Section 694.1 is not constitutionally defective in the respect urged.
II. Defendant's second assignment involves the defense of self-defense.
We set out the relevant statutes:
"691.1. Lawful resistance in self-defense. Lawful resistance to the commission of a public offense may be made by the party about to be injured, or by others."
"691.2. Cases in which permitted. Resistance sufficient to prevent the offense may be made by the party about to be injured:
"1. To prevent an offense against his person.
"2. To prevent an illegal attempt by force to take or injure property in his lawful possession."
In support of this assignment defendant argues there was a complete failure in the State's evidence which would show or tend to show or sustain its burden that defendant did not act in self-defense.
When the accused interposes the defense of self-defense, the burden is upon the State to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that defendant was not acting in self-defense. State v. Wilson, 234 Iowa 60, 87, 11 N.W.2d 737, 750 and authorities cited.
The question here is whether the issue of self-defense was raised or interposed.
Under a plea of not guilty an accused may avail himself of the defense of self-defense without being required to specially plead this defense. Section 777.17, The Code, provides:
"Plea of not guiltyevidence admissible. The plea of not guilty is a denial of every material allegation in the indictment, and all matters of fact may be given in evidence under it, except a former conviction or acquittal."
Unlike an accused who pleads not guilty and proposes to show insanity as a defense or that he relies on an alibi, one relying upon self-defense is not required to give notice of this special defense. Section 777.18, The Code.
As a witness in his own behalf defendant admitted shooting his rifle but never intimated that in doing so he acted in self-defense. On the contrary, he asserted he was merely taking some target practice "because on that day [he] had no business, and there wasn't much else to do." There is not the slightest hint defendant was ever threatened or felt intimidated.
In the case before us there was no evidence which brought into issue the question of whether defendant acted in self-defense. The evidence is entirely inconsistent with any conceivable theory defendant was shooting the rifle "to prevent an offense against his person [or] to prevent an illegal attempt by force to take or injure property in his lawful possession." Section 691.2.
The question of burden of proof is not involved.
The case is thereforeAffirmed.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 2223053 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:53.645802+00 ===

205 N.W.2d 742 (1973)
STATE of Iowa, Appellee,
v.
John Arthur STREIT, Appellant.
No. 54503.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
March 28, 1973.
*743 Stephen M. Peterson, Waterloo, for appellant.
Richard C. Turner, Atty. Gen., Ray Sullins, Asst. Atty. Gen., and Wallace Reed, Asst. Black Hawk County Atty., for appellee.
Heard before MOORE, C. J., and MASON, LeGRAND, UHLENHOPP and HARRIS, JJ.
LeGRAND, Justice.
Defendant was charged under section 707.2, The Code, 1966, with having set fire to his father's restaurant in Waterloo, Iowa. A jury returned a verdict of guilty; defendant appeals, claiming he was entitled to a directed verdict on a motion made at the end of the State's evidence and renewed after both sides had rested. We reverse and remand the case with directions that a judgment of not guilty be entered.
Although defendant has alleged several errors, we consider only the one which asserts his right to a directed verdict since our ruling on that issue disposes of the case.
The State's evidence was entirely circumstantial. We have said such evidence may be equal to, and sometimes more reliable than, direct evidence. We have also held a conviction may rest entirely on circumstantial evidence. When it does, however, it must pass the test of being not only consistent with defendant's guilt but inconsistent with any rational hypothesis of innocence. State v. Stamper, 195 N.W.2d 110, 111 (Iowa 1972); State v. Patman, 189 N.W.2d 620, 622 (Iowa 1971); State v. Daves, 259 Iowa 584, 586, 144 N.W.2d 879, 881 (1966); State v. Estrella, 257 Iowa 462, 467, 133 N.W.2d 97, 100 (1965); State v. Whisler, 231 Iowa 1216, 1219, 3 N.W.2d 525, 530 (1942).
With these rules in mind, we review the evidence upon which the conviction rests. Since defendant is challenging the sufficiency of the testimony to warrant submission of the case to the jury, we consider only that evidence which tends to establish guilt, viewing it as favorably as possible for the State. State v. Hinsey, 200 N.W.2d 810, 813 (Iowa 1972); State v. Youngbear, 203 N.W.2d 274, 279 (Iowa 1972).
The State's theory rested on the premise defendant had stolen money from his father's restaurant and had then set fire to the property to conceal the theft. We find ample circumstantial evidence in the record to justify a conclusion defendant was guilty of larceny. We find more than enough evidence, too, to permit a finding that someone feloniously burned the property.
This brings us to the sole issue on this appeal: Does the evidence make out a jury question on defendant's involvement in the crime? We say no, and we recite all the evidence favorable to the State to demonstrate why we conclude defendant was entitled to a directed verdict.
Defendant, unemployed and impecunious, helped his father from time to time in the *744 operation of a restaurant known as Jack's Cafe. He was not paid a regular salary but his father "helped him out a little bit" to keep him going. There were only two keys to the restaurant; defendant had one and his father the other. On the night of the fire defendant and his father left the building together at 9:00 P.M. Both front and back doors were locked, as was a basement entryway. Defendant stayed with his father until 11:00 o'clock that evening. The two then went their separate ways.
Before leaving the restaurant defendant's father, as was his custom, put approximately $90.00 in bills, plus some change, in a money bag as "starting money" for the next day's business. He secreted this in a cabinet behind the linen supply. Defendant knew of this custom and knew where the hiding place was.
From 11:00 P.M. to approximately 1:00 A.M. defendant's whereabouts are unaccounted for. At approximately 1:00 o'clock he appeared in the Old Town Inn, a restaurant and bar near Jack's Cafe, and attempted to borrow money from a bartender there. He was unsuccessful. About 1:30 A.M. he left this establishment and returned twenty minutes later, just as the employees were getting ready to close. Upon his returnabout 1:50 A.M.defendant had a rather large quantity of money, which he displayed to several employees. He wanted a drink, and announced he now had money to pay for it. He left the Old Town Inn at 2:15 A.M. and within a few minutes appeared at Jake's Steak House, another restaurant-tavern in Waterloo. He stayed for approximately twenty minutes during which time he paid off a debt of $45.00 to Robert Bird, an employee at Jake's Steak House. Again witnesses testified he had a substantial amount of money, although no one is able to estimate how much. At 2:35 A.M. he left Jake's Steak House, turning up next at Hummell's, an eating establishment just one block from his father's restaurant. It was then 2:45 A.M. and Hummell's is a "five or ten minute drive" from Jake's Steak House. At Hummell's he lost $23.00 to LaVern Schares matching coins. At 3:00 o'clock Mr. Schares left. Defendant was then just beginning to eat a sandwich he had ordered.
The alarm for the fire at Jack's Cafe was turned in at 3:05 A.M. The fire department arrived at 3:07 and the fire was extinguished almost immediately. When the firemen arrived, the restaurant was still locked, both front and back, and it was necessary to break a window in order to gain entry to fight the blaze.
Both Eugene D. Fortune, the city fire marshal, and Robert Smith, the state fire marshal, testified the fire could not have burned more than ten minutes from the moment it was started until the time it was extinguished. They based this upon the type of fire, the negligible damage done, and the fact that the gas jets on the stove were open which would have caused an explosion if the fire had burned for any length of time. These same witnessesthe city and state fire marshalstestified that in their opinion the fire had been started by lighting a match or a cigarette lighter to some guest checks. There was no evidence a delayed timing mechanism had been used by which a fire could have been ignited sometime after it had been actually set.
Captain Fortune testified concerning factors important in determining how long the fire had burned. He then expressed this opinion:
"Q. That would mean that the fire was started sometime between 2:55 and 3:05 on that morning? A. This would be the approximate time."
On the same subject the state fire marshal testified as follows:
"Q. Based on your experience and the timing that you have done on other fires, what's your best estimate on how long these fires had been burning? A. I would say that in the area of these *745 fires it would be possibly five minutes, ten minutes, somewhere in this area. Any closer than that I couldn't say.
"Q. Then that would be from when to when? A. That would be from the time that the fire was ignited or lit until the fire department put it out and that's the time it burns."
At another place he testified:
"I would say again [the fire burned] five to ten minutes. There's a variance in there. I know of no one that can put down a specific time in this."
If, as the State's expert witnesses say, this fire was set between 2:55 A.M. and 3:05 A.M., the State has failed to establish a circumstantial case against defendant. His time is fully accounted for during that period, not by his witnesses but by the State's witnesses.
There is a strong circumstantial case against defendant on the theft of the money but, if defendant is guilty of that offense, it must have occurred before 1:50 A.M. That is the time defendant showed sudden affluence and began spending money freely. This was more than an hour before the setting of the fire.
The State has the burden of proving its circumstantial case. Yet it is the State's witnesses who provide defendant with a time table making it impossible for him to have started a fire at his father's place of business at the time this one was set. We do not have here the option of choosing from several versions that testimony which is favorable to the State. All the evidence places defendant somewhere else at the time he must have been at Jack's Cafe if he committed this crime.
There are several bizarre circumstances about this case. There is the nagging question of who did start the fire if defendant didn't. Then, too, the long and detailed testimony about a fire at defendant's home that same night (which went in without objection) is an almost unbelievable coincidence.
We can speculate on these things; but a conviction must rest on more than that. We are limited to what the evidence shows. On this record, it showsfrom the State's witnessesdefendant wasn't there when the crime was committed.
It is uncontroverted that from 2:45 to 3:00 A.M. defendant was in Hummell's with LaVern Schares. At 3:00 A.M. he was just starting to eat a sandwich. No one testifies he left suddenly or hurriedly. To fit into this jigsaw puzzle, defendant would have had to leave Hummell's after 3:00 o'clock, rush to Jack's Cafe, start a fire in time to have an alarm turned in at 3:05 A.M. Such a sequence of events is not only lacking support in the record, but the time element makes it virtually impossible to have occurred.
The statement made in State v. Daves, supra, 259 Iowa at 591, 144 N.W.2d at 884, is applicable here:
"The evidence is circumstantial. Can we say it is sufficient to allow the jury to find every rational hypothesis of innocence has been negatived as required by the cases?"
We believe the answer must be in the negative and that defendant's motion for a directed verdict should have been sustained.
We therefore reverse the judgment of the trial court and remand with instructions that a judgment of not guilty be entered.
Reversed and remanded with instructions.

=== CASE 2223054 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:53.674386+00 ===

45 Mich. App. 33 (1973)
205 N.W.2d 869
GRUBER
v.
DODGE.
Docket No. 12624.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided February 21, 1973.
Mihelich, Carlson, Swick & Purdo, for plaintiff.
Dell, Shantz, Booker & Schulte, for defendant.
Before: FITZGERALD, P.J., and McGREGOR and TARGONSKI,[*] JJ.
Leave to appeal denied, 389 Mich 794.
McGREGOR, J.
Defendant is seeking the dissolution of restraining orders in the March 24, 1969 judgment of the trial court, enjoining his utilizing an airstrip on his property for any purposes other than his own personal use.
On October 3, 1966, Peter Gruber filed a complaint against the defendant, seeking to enjoin the defendant from using any airstrip on his property for the landing and taking off of aircraft. In a supplemental complaint filed July 11, 1968, Mr. Gruber alleged that he owned 130 acres in Macomb County upon which he annually raised 50 to 100 black Angus beef cattle; that he had been *35 raising cattle in this manner for over 25 years and it was his principal means of livelihood; that the defendant owned property immediately adjacent to plaintiff's farm that was perpendicular to it; that some seven years before, the defendant had begun flying and used his land as an airstrip; that the great noise and vibrations of the plane stampeded plaintiff's cattle, causing damage to them and surrounding animals and property; that at the time he objected to the defendant's activities, and the defendant ceased such activities; that he was presently again using his property as an airstrip; that after plaintiff filed suit on October 3, 1966, a hearing was held, on October 17, 1966; and that since the hearing the defendant had greatly enlarged his activities by permitting various and sundry numbers of aircraft to use his airstrip for takeoff and landing, by accepting charter flights and hauling freight, and by advertising a flying service and lessons, all in violation of the "personal use" concept, permitted by MCLA 259.89; MSA 10.189, and without certificates from the Department of Aeronautics pursuant to MCLA 259.86-259.88; MSA 10.186-10.188. Mr. Gruber also alleged that the defendant's activities constituted a nuisance and he asked for a permanent injunction.
A five-day trial was held in October, 1968, and an opinion issued on October 30, 1968, which held that the proof did not demonstrate a public nuisance against the defendant for his individual operation of a plane at this time, but that larger airplanes and the increase of smaller planes other than the defendant's had created a nuisance because of noise and general disturbance which deprived the plaintiff of the peaceful use and quiet enjoyment of his property. The use of the Dodge *36 airstrip was limited to the defendant's personal use.
The judgment, entered March 24, 1969, enjoined the defendant from permitting anyone else to use his airstrip, from enlarging it, and from giving flying lessons and hauling passengers. He was also clearly to mark his airstrip warning aircraft not to land there. No appeal was taken from that decision. No transcript of the trial was filed in this Court, presumably because the case was not appealed and, therefore, the judgment of the trial court was binding on the parties.
On June 3, 1970, the defendant filed a motion, seeking to have Leona Gruber substituted as plaintiff, because she was now the owner of the Gruber farm, her husband having died, and seeking a dissolution of the permanent injunction. The motion alleged that there had been a material change of circumstances and that it was no longer equitable to limit the use of the defendant's airstrip to "personal use". The alleged material changes were (1) the airstrip had been reclassified by the State of Michigan for use as a "Class D" airport, which provides for much broader use than "personal use", and (2) the Federal Aviation Administration had reclassified the defendant's airstrip from "personal use" to "private use" which permits a greatly expanded usage. By supporting affidavit, the defendant alleged that he had totally discontinued the use of the airstrip which was the subject of this lawsuit and, in June, 1969, he had constructed a totally new landing strip which now has an approach path which avoided the plaintiff's property.
Plaintiff's answer to the above motion included the allegation that the defendant had violated the terms of the judgment by (1) permitting other *37 planes to land on the airstrip, (2) by installing a new and larger runway, and (3) by using an approach pattern closer to the residence of the plaintiff.
Defendant's reply to those allegations was that he had not violated the provisions of the judgment, because it did not restrict him from installing a new runway; further, defendant stated that the plaintiff had no standing to complain of the new runway because Peter Gruber, in violation of state and Federal law, and in a wilful attempt to cause physical harm to the defendant, installed wooden poles on the east end of the defendant's original east-west runway of such height as to cause the defendant serious concern for his safety through the continued use of that runway to such an extent that he abandoned the runway and constructed his present north-east, south-west runway. The defendant had not sought judicial relief at the time the plaintiff installed the wooden poles.
A hearing on the motion was held, commencing June 29, 1970. Due to its length and the busy court docket, the hearing was not completed until June 28, 1971. In an opinion dated August 9, 1971, the court ordered the substitution of Leona Gruber as plaintiff, and the removal by her of the wooden poles on the west end of the Gruber boundary which bordered the east-west landing strip. The court denied the defendant's motion to dissolve the restraining order, saying that to allow the defendant to increase air traffic by others on his new runway would create a greater nuisance to the plaintiff than ever existed before.
Defendant appeals this decision.
The first issue on appeal is whether the trial court erred in denying a motion by the defendant *38 to dissolve the permanent injunction, limiting the use of his airstrip, after greater use had been permitted by state and Federal regulatory agencies.
Defendant contends that, since his airport has been reclassified from a "personal use" airport to a "private use" airport by the Federal Aviation Administration and the Michigan Aeronautics Commission, the injunction prohibiting the use of his airport by others should be dissolved.
The plaintiff maintains that otherwise lawful activity can still be a nuisance where the activity is permissive only. In Rockenbach v Apostle, 330 Mich 338, 343, 344 (1951), the Court stated:
"This case presents one circumstance which apparently has not been before the Court for consideration, in determining whether an undertaking establishment may be maintained in a district claimed to be residential. A zoning ordinance of Muskegon Heights classifying block 94 as "B" residential and defining the use which might be made of lots in that block, permits funeral homes, provided that consent of five-sevenths of the council be obtained and that certain off-street parking be provided. It is conceded that the defendants have obtained the requisite consent of the council, and have made the necessary provisions for off-street parking. The precise question is, what bearing does this have upon the outcome of a case where the residents of this district seek to enjoin the use of lots in block 94 for a funeral home, on the ground of nuisance? Decisions from other jurisdictions involving undertaking establishments permitted by zoning ordinances in residential districts are at such variance as to facts and circumstances that none can be said to be squarely in point. Nor are such cases in agreement as to the law. (Citations omitted.)
"The weight of authority is to the effect that an ordinance which allows the establishment or maintenance of a funeral home or undertaking establishment in a district zoned either for residential or commercial *39 purposes is permissive only, and not controlling as to whether such undertaking establishment would constitute a nuisance which might be enjoined by an equity court. However, proof of the existence of such a zoning ordinance is admissible as evidence of the character of the district, and bearing on the question of nuisance. A nuisance will not be upheld solely on the ground that it has been permitted by municipal ordinance." (Citations omitted.)
See also Smith v Western Wayne County Conservation Association, 380 Mich 526, 537 (1968).
Here, the fact that that type of use is permitted would not prevent the use from being a nuisance under certain circumstances. This is particularly emphasized in the present case, where the defendant has not even alleged that he notified the state and Federal regulatory agencies that his airstrip had been determined by a state circuit court to be a nuisance before obtaining reclassification of his airstrip by those agencies.
The airport regulatory agencies considered services and safety aspects of the defendant's airstrip when considering reclassification, and the fact that it might constitute a private nuisance was not known to them when they granted the reclassification. There was no adversary proceeding at which plaintiff was invited to present evidence of the nuisance character of the airstrip.
Further, there was testimony that an airport owner does not have to notify the Federal Aeronautics Administration or be licensed by the state, in order to change the classification of his airport from "personal" to "private use". It is the opinion of this Court that the mere fact that the defendant's airport was reclassified to "private use" was not such a material change in circumstances as to require the trial court to dissolve the permanent injunction limiting use of the defendant's airstrip *40 to personal use, since the injunction was based on the determination that greater use than "personal use" had, in the past, created a nuisance.
The second issue on appeal is whether the trial court erred in holding that use of the defendant's airport by others constituted a nuisance.
The defendant contends that the trial court held that use of his airstrip for "private" rather than "personal" use created a nuisance per se, and that this was error. However, the issue of whether the defendant's use of his airstrip constituted a nuisance per se was never before the trial court, and the trial court made no such determination. Rather, after a lengthy hearing and a personal viewing of the real estate involved, the court found that the defendant's runway ended in close proximity to the plaintiff's property, that if a plane took off when the surface was dry, dust and gravel were thrown in a substantial amount on to the plaintiff's property, that a house on the plaintiff's property was in close proximity to the runway, and that large airplanes and a number of small airplanes using the runway created a nuisance because of the noise and general disturbances, which deprived the plaintiff of the peaceful use and quiet enjoyment of the property. The court also specifically stated that some of the interferences related to cattle on plaintiff's property and a house occupied by tenants.
"On the other hand, even though an airport is not a nuisance per se, it may become a nuisance or be responsible for one if the airplanes using it cause a nuisance or a continuing trespass.
* * *
"Airplanes may be flown at proper heights over the land below and even though there may be noises and annoyances caused thereby, they will be considered *41 `damnum absque injuria'. If planes are flown at such heights as are prescribed by the authorities, as a rule they will not be enjoined. However, airplanes may not land or take off at low altitudes and in such close proximity to the property of others so as to cause a nuisance or a continuing trespass." Warren Township School Dist v Detroit, 308 Mich 460, 470, 478 (1944).
Here, the facts fully support the trial court's finding that defendant's greater use of his landing strip constituted a nuisance with respect to plaintiff. There was no error in the trial court's determination that the use of defendant's airport by others constituted a nuisance.
Affirmed.
All concurred.
NOTES
[*]  Former circuit judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment pursuant to Const 1963, art 6, § 23 as amended in 1968.

=== CASE 9740359 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:33:21.665282+00 ===

T. M. Burns, P. J.
This appeal involves two separate but subsequently consolidated suits which were brought by plaintiffs for injuries sustained in an automobile collision.
On June 30, 1968, a vehicle driven by defendant Sampson and containing defendants Skok, Ku-kulka, Miller, and Tucker swerved across the center line of the roadway and collided with the plaintiffs’ auto. As a result, plaintiff James Lover was injured and his wife, Beulah, was killed.
Plaintiffs filed suit against defendant Sampson on September 19, 1969. The complaint was amended June 12, 1970, adding defendants Skok, *176Kukulka, Miller, and Tucker. The plaintiffs’ claims against Sampson were settled January 15, 1971, and the suit as to Sampson was dismissed. The action, however, was continued against the remaining defendants.
In their complaints, plaintiffs alleged that the two adult defendants, Tucker and Miller, were negligent by furnishing alcoholic beverages to the other minor defendants without a doctor’s prescription contrary to MCLA 750.141a; MSA 28.336(1), and further that the minor defendants, Skok and Kukulka, were guilty of negligence when they opened a case of beer and handed an open can of beer to the driver of defendants’ vehicle in violation of MCLA 436.34; MSA 18.1005, which prohibits consumption of alcoholic beverages on public highways.
Subsequently, defendants filed motions for accelerated judgments in each case. The trial court granted the motions on October 13, 1971, on the grounds advanced by the defendants that: (1) the dramshop act1 was the plaintiffs’ exclusive remedy; (2) the plaintiffs had no remedy inasmuch as the statutes of limitation contained in the act had expired; (3) the statutes governing the furnishing and consuming of alcoholic beverages were not applicable to plaintiffs’ cause of action; and finally, (4) the act of handing a can of beer to the driver of a motor vehicle could not be the proximate cause of an automobile collision.
Plaintiffs appeal all of the bases upon which the trial court relied in granting the accelerated judgments. We will discuss the issues in the order presented below.
1. Are the provisions of the dramshop act which impose civil liability upon tavern owners likewise *177applicable to private individuals who are not tavern owners?
Although none of the defendants herein are tavern owners, they argued both at trial and on appeal that the dramshop act provided the plaintiffs’ exclusive remedy and that the plaintiffs had no remedy inasmuch as the statute of limitations contained in the act had expired before suit was commenced. The trial court concurred. We disagree.
The dramshop act, MCLA 436.22; MSA 18.993, which is part of the Michigan Liquor Control Act,2 provides in pertinent part:
"Every wife, husband, child, parent, guardian or other persons who shall be injured in person or property, means of support or otherwise, by an intoxicated person by reason of the unlawful selling, giving or furnishing to any such persons any intoxicating liquor, shall have a right of action in his or her name against the person who shall by such selling or giving of any such liquor have caused or contributed to the intoxication of said person or persons, or who shall have caused or contributed to any such injury * * * .” (Emphasis supplied.)
Therefore, the first question we must decide is whether or not the word "person” contained in the phrase "against the person who shall by such selling or giving”, which has been construed to apply to tavern owners, is likewise applicable to private individuals who are not tavern owners.
At the outset it should be noted that we are obliged to construe any words or phrases as they are defined in the Liquor Control Act, unless the context in which they are used shall otherwise require. MCLA 436.2; MSA 18.972.
*178The word "person” is defined in the Liquor Control Act as "any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation”. MCLA 436.2k; MSA 18.972(11).
However, after an extensive review of the cases which have arisen under the dramshop act, we can find no authority which holds the dramshop act applicable to private individuals who are not tavern owners. On the contrary, in Behnke v Pierson, 21 Mich App 219, 221 (1970), plaintiff brought suit under the dramshop act against a partnership for the wrongful death of her husband which resulted when his automobile was struck by another driver who had been furnished alcoholic beverages by a partnership at a company party. This Court, in affirming a summary judgment of no cause of action in favor of the defendant, stated:
"The statute [dramshop act] makes no provision for holding private individuals liable for furnishing intoxicants without pecuniary gain for social courtesy or hospitality reasons.”
Similarly, in LeGault v Klebba, 7 Mich App 640 (1967), a tavern owner, who was being sued under the dramshop act for the death of plaintiff’s son caused through the sale of intoxicating beverages to a person already under the influence of intoxicants, attempted to bring in as third-party defendants private individuals who had furnished the tavern owner’s patron alcoholic beverages at a wedding reception earlier the same evening. Again this Court, in affirming the trial court’s summary judgment of no cause of action against the third-party defendants, concluded that the dramshop act did not impose any civil liability upon private individuals.3
*179Moreover, a close reading of the scope of the Liquor Control Act as set forth by the Legislature* 4 coupled with an examination of the provisions of the act itself persuades us that the Liquor Control Act, of which the dramshop act is part, was in*180tended to regulate the commercial manufacture, importation, possession, transportation, and sale of alcoholic beverages. In short, it was intended to regulate those in the business of manufacturing and distributing alcoholic beverages and not intended to regulate the private individual who furnished alcoholic beverages to another as a social courtesy.
Finally, the very term "dramshop act” which has been used over the years to describe the section of the Liquor Control Act here in question5 is further evidence that only tavern owners were sought to be held liable under its provisions.6
We hold, therefore, that the word "person” contained in the phrase "person who shall by such selling or giving” refers to any person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation engaged in the business of selling alcoholic beverages and does not include private individuals who are not so occupied. See 8 ALR3d, § 2, p 1413.
As part of the question of the applicability of the dramshop act, defendants contend that the dram-shop act was the plaintiffs’ exclusive remedy. Again we must disagree.
In the recent case of Manuel v Weitzman, 386 Mich 157, 164 (1971), the Michigan Supreme Court, quoting with approval from DeVillez v Schifano, 23 Mich App 72, 77 (1970), stated:
" 'We hold that the dramshop act affords the exclusive remedy for injuries arising out of an unlawful sale, giving away, or furnishing of intoxicants. King v Partridge (1968), 9 Mich App 540, 543.’ ”
*181However, inasmuch as the Manuel, DeVillez, and Partridge cases were concerned with the liability of tavern owners under the dramshop act, we interpret the language quoted above to mean that the dramshop act provides an injured party his exclusive remedy only against tavern owners. Here none of the defendants are tavern owners; therefore the holding of Manuel has no effect on the case at bar.
Therefore, since the dramshop act only applies to commercial vendors of alcoholic beverages, and since none of the defendants herein were so engaged, we conclude that the dramshop act, along with its statute of limitations and exclusive-remedy feature, is wholly inapplicable to the instant case.
In the absence of a dramshop action, plaintiffs must seek redress based upon common-law precepts. The defendants, citing a headnote in Corpus Juris Secundum,7 assert that "no remedy exists against the dispenser of liquor for injuries and damages resulting from the acts of intoxicated persons except to the extent provided for by statute”.
We cannot agree for the reason that the defendants have failed to recognize a more circumscribed rule recognized in the jurisdiction to the effect that it is not a tort to sell or give alcoholic beverages to a strong and able-bodied man. Manuel v Weitzman, supra; Hollerud v Malamis, 20 Mich App 748, 754-755 (1969).
Plaintiffs’ suit in the instant case is not predicated upon the defendants furnishing alcoholic beverages to a strong and able-bodied man. Rather, plaintiffs’ cause of action stems from the *182defendants’ actions of allegedly furnishing intoxicants to minors.
Therefore, the principle which would have barred plaintiffs’ suit had the alcohol been furnished to strong and able-bodied men is not in point with and is not controlling in the facts of the case at bar wherein alcohol was dispensed to minors.
2. Were the statutes governing the use and consumption of alcoholic beverages, relied upon by the plaintiffs, applicable to the present case?
It is the plaintiffs’ position that the adult defendants, Tucker and Miller, were negligent by furnishing intoxicants to the other minor defendants without a doctor’s prescription in violation of MCLA 750.141a; MSA 28.336(1), and further that the two minor defendants, Skok and Kukulka, were guilty of negligence by opening a case of beer and handing an open can of beer to the driver of the automobile while it was in motion contrary to MCLA 436.34; MSA 18.1005, which prohibits the consumption of alcoholic beverages on public highways. The trial court ruled both statutes were inapplicable to the plaintiffs’ cause of action. We disagree.
In Jones v Bourrie, 369 Mich 473 (1963), the Michigan Supreme Court recognized that where there is no liquor control act creating a civil cause of action, but where there are penal provisions governing alcoholic beverages, a common-law cause of action would arise upon a violation of the penal provisions.8
Although the Court did not elaborate upon its reasoning, apparently it felt that the penal statutes were enacted in an effort to protect the gen*183eral public from personal injuries. And further, in the absence of a dramshop action, a violation of these statutes would constitute negligence per se and give rise to a cause of action in much the same way, for example, as violations of the motor vehicle code, MCLA 257.1 et seq.; MSA 9.1801 et seq., which was enacted to protect the public from injury, constitute negligence per se and give rise to a cause of action for personal injuries resulting therefrom. See Krzeminski v Chuslo, 4 Mich App 310 (1966); Kalamazoo v Priest, 331 Mich 43 (1951); Garbacz v Grand Trunk WR Co, 323 Mich 7 (1948).
In the instant case, the dramshop act, a liquor-control measure, did not create a cause of action in favor of the plaintiffs (See Issue 1, supra). It follows, therefore, under the rationale of Jones, that the statutes governing the use and consumption of alcoholic beverages relied upon by the plaintiffs were not only pertinent, but also indis-pensible to the maintenance of the present action.
3. Did the trial court err by ñnding that handing an open can of beer to the driver of a vehicle while it is in motion could not be the proximate cause of a motor-vehicle collision?
Finally, plaintiffs assert that the minor defendants, Skok and Kukulka, were guilty of negligence when they handed an open container of beer to the driver of the automobile, in which they were riding, in such a manner as to cause the vehicle to swerve across the center line of the roadway and collide with the plaintiffs’ automobile. The trial court ruled on defendants’ motions for accelerated judgments that handing a can of beer to the driver of an automobile while it was in motion could not be the proximate cause of a motor-vehicle collision. This was error.
*184It is well settled that the question of proximate cause is ordinarily a question of fact for the jury "to be solved by the exercise of good common sense in consideration of each particular case”.9 See Comstock v General Motors Corp, 358 Mich 163 (1959); Barnebee v Spence Brothers, 367 Mich 46 (1962); Selmo v Baratono, 28 Mich App 217 (1970).
Under the facts of the present case, we are of the opinion that the plaintiffs’ claim of proximate causation was properly a question for the jury and not for the trial court.
In view of all the foregoing, we hold that the plaintiffs’ pleadings stated a valid cause of action against the defendants and that the trial court’s grant of the accelerated judgments was in error.
Reversed and remanded for a trial on the merits.
Holbrook, J., concurred.
MCLA 436.22; MSA 18.993.
MCLA 436.1 et seq.; MSA 18.971 et seq.
It should be cautioned at this juncture that even though the *179Behnke and LeGault decisions contain language which is helpful in ascertaining the class of persons to whom the dramshop act was intended to apply, their respective holdings affirming summary judgments of no cause of action are neither in point with nor controlling in the instant case.
In Behnke and LeGault, the private individuals who were not held liable under .the dramshop act for furnishing alcoholic beverages as a social courtesy, had not violated any statutes governing alcoholic beverages in so doing. Here the defendants had furnished alcoholic beverages as a social courtesy, albeit in defendant Sampson’s automobile; however, in so doing, plaintiffs alleged the defendants violated two penal statutes relating to the use and consumption of alcoholic beverages. Behnke and LeGault never dealt with this factual situation.
"Alcoholic liquors; regulation and control; enforcement, penalty.
"Sec. 1. Scope of Act. On and after the effective date of this act, it shall be lawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer for sale, keep for sale, possess and/or transport any alcoholic liquor, as hereinafter defined, including alcoholic liquor used for medicinal, mechanical, chemical or scientific purposes and wine for sacramental purposes, subject to the times, conditions, limitations and restrictions contained herein, and only as provided for in this act.
"Except as by this act otherwise provided, the commission shall have the sole right, power and duty to control the alcoholic beverage traffic and traffic in other alcoholic liquor within the state of Michigan, including the manufacture, importation, possession, transportation and sale thereof.
"No rule, regulation and/or order made by the commission shall unreasonably discriminate against Michigan manufacturers of alcoholic liquor.
"The sheriffs of the several counties and their deputies and the village marshals, constables, officers or members of the village or city police and members of the department of state police, and inspectors of the commission, are hereby empowered and it is hereby made their duty to see that the provisions of this act and the rules and regulations made or authorized by said commission are enforced within their respective jurisdictions. It shall be their special duty to use their utmost efforts to repress and prevent crime and the violation of any of the provisions of this act. Any officer within the above enumeration who shall wilfully neglect or refuse to perform the duties imposed upon him by this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not to exceed 500 dollars or imprisoned in the county jail not more than 90 days, or both.” MCLA 436.1; MSA 18.971.
MCLA 436.22; MSA 18.993.
"The term 'dramshop’ came to describe those establishments where liquor could be sold in measured quantities of less than a gallon.” Duncan v Beres, 15 Mich App 318, 320, fn 2 (1968).
48 CJS, Intoxicating Liquors, § 430, p 716.
In Jones, the plaintiff was denied relief under this theory since the suit was against a tavern owner and the dramshop act provided the exclusive remedy.
Prosser on Torts (3d ed), Functions of Court and Jury, § 52, p 330.

=== CASE 2223370 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:59.946655+00 ===

50 N.W.2d 103 (1951)
154 Neb. 872
SHIPLEY
v.
SHIPLEY.
No. 33033.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
November 23, 1951.
Burbridge & Burbridge, Omaha, for appellant.
Frost, Peasinger & Meyers, Omaha, for appellee.
Heard before SIMMONS, C. J., and CARTER, MESSMORE, YEAGER, CHAPPELL, WENKE, and BOSLAUGH, JJ.
MESSMORE, Justice.
The plaintiff filed a petition in the district court to modify a decree of divorce. The defendant, cross-petitioner, demurred to the petition. The demurrer was sustained. The plaintiff appeals.
The ruling on the demurrer was not followed by a judgment of dismissal nor any order showing final disposition of the case.
In Larson v. Sloan, 77 Neb. 438, 109 N.W. 752, this court held: "An order sustaining a general demurrer to a petition, not followed by a judgment of dismissal or other *104 final disposition of the case, is not a final order or judgment, and is not reviewable in this court." See, also, Miller v. Burlington & M. R. R. Co., 7 Neb. 227; State ex rel. Sorensen v. State Bank of Omaha, 131 Neb. 223, 267 N.W. 532; Cozad Ditch Co. v. Central Nebraska Public Power & Irrigation Dist., 132 Neb. 547, 272 N.W. 560; State ex rel. Johnson v. Consumers Public Power Dist., 142 Neb. 114, 5 N.W.2d 202; Section 25-1902, R.R.S.1943.
For the reason given herein, the plaintiff's appeal is dismissed.
Dismissed.

=== CASE 2223383 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:00.414439+00 ===

50 N.W.2d 573 (1951)
SCHWARTZ
v.
HELSELL et al.
No. 47985.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
December 14, 1951.
Joseph P. Hand, Emmetsburg, and S. R. Eller, and O. L. Dykstra, Des Moines, for appellant.
Cornwall & Cornwall, Spencer, and Kelly & Spies, Emmetsburg, for appellees.
THOMPSON, Justice.
The plaintiff is the administrator and sole heir of Mary Elizabeth Schwartz, his daughter. For the sake of brevity and clarity the decedent will hereafter be referred to as the plaintiff.
The tragic accident herein involved occurred about 2:50 p. m. on August 16, 1950, at the intersection of Palmer and 15th streets, in the city of Emmetsburg. Palmer street runs north and south, is paved and is twenty feet in width. It flares out at the intersection; that is to say, the intersection is wider than the street. Fifteenth street runs east and west, is surfaced with gravel, and is fifty-three feet wide. However, the traveled portion is only twentytwo feet in width. This part of the street had been freshly oiled just before the time of the collision. There is a house on the southeast corner of the intersection, the home of one Ernest Weise. This house sits back fifty-four feet from the center of 15th street and forty feet back from the center of Palmer street. There are two trees in the yard of this residence, but they do not materially affect the view of either street from the other. A photograph, plaintiff's Exhibit 14, taken on Palmer street at a point 100 feet south of the intersection, shows that 15th street to the east of the intersection is visible for at least an equal distance. The picture does not show the Weise house, so that we cannot say how much farther 15th street can be seen from this point, nor are we advised by the evidence as to where the house begins to obstruct the view. Of course, as a traveler on Palmer street approached nearer to the intersection, his ability to see down 15th street to the east would be progressively extended.
The accident occurred in broad daylight. The pavement on Palmer street was dry. There is some contention as to how much the new oiling on 15th street had affected the surface; but as we view the case this is not important.
The defendants' car, owned by Marijane F. Helsell and driven by her husband, Frank H. Helsell, approached the intersection from the east. Plaintiff was a young woman, unmarried, 21 years of age. She came from the south, placing her on the left of the defendants. The collision occurred in the northeast quarter of the intersection. *574 Defendants' car struck the one operated by plaintiff about the right rear fender, causing it to roll over. Plaintiff was thrown from the automobile and crushed under it. She was alone in the car, and there were no passengers other than the two defendants in their vehicle. Other facts will be referred to in the divisions of the opinion which follow.
At the close of all the evidence the trial court directed a verdict for defendants upon the ground that plaintiff had, as a matter of law, failed to establish her freedom from contributory negligence. Plaintiff assigns three errors, which will be discussed in order. In so doing, we keep in mind two rules so well established that it is perhaps a waste of time and space to persist in repeating them in negligence cases. The first is that the evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to plaintiff; the second, that the burden is upon the plaintiff to establish freedom from negligence contributing in any degree to the injuries and damage complained of. The latter rule has been criticized, but is too firmly established in the law of this state to be disregarded. Rickabaugh v. Wabash Railroad Company et al., Iowa, 44 N.W.2d 659.
I. The first assignment of error is that the trial court should have, and did not, give to plaintiff the benefit of the "no eyewitness" rule. It is lacking in merit. The issue is settled, adversely to plaintiff, by Rickabaugh v. Wabash Railroad Company, supra. The question was there thoroughly discussed and analyzed by Justice Smith, and is directly in point here. In fact, the claimed absence of eyewitnesses seems to have been an afterthought of plaintiff's counsel, for he told the jury, in his opening statement, that a witness had been found who saw the accident. This proved to be the fact. Plaintiff produced one William Wiwi who lived in a house on Palmer street about a block and one-half south of the intersection of 15th street, and who testified that from his window he watched plaintiff's car as it drove north for the last one-half block just before the collision. He told that he watched the automobile going north on the east one-half of the paved street; that it remained on the east side all the time and "went right on in a straight line right up to the actual collision." He said that it went to the point of the accident without turning or swerving, at a speed of about twenty miles per hour, without speeding up or slowing down. He said repeatedly that he was watching it during the entire interval.
This witness did not actually see the movements of the plaintiff except as he judged them by the operation of the car. In this, his testimony is comparable to that of the fireman in the Rickabaugh case. There was, in addition, the evidence given by the two defendants who testified that they saw the plaintiff's car a short distance back of the intersection, and gave testimony as to its speed. Nothing will be gained by a further elaboration of the evidence on this point. The question is thoroughly analyzed also in Mast v. Illinois Central Railroad Co., 79 F.Supp. 149, affirmed in 8 Cir., 176 F.2d 157, where Judge Henry Graven of the United States District Court for the Northern District of Iowa, in an able and exhaustive opinion, reached the same conclusion that we did in the Rickabaugh case. Supporting authorities are set out in each of the cited cases and it would serve no good purpose to refer to or attempt to analyze them here.
II. In the second assignment of error plaintiff contends that, even without the benefit of the no eyewitness rule, there is a jury question upon the issue of freedom from contributory negligence. This presents a more troublesome situation. The number of Iowa cases involving intersection collisions is legion, and an opinion which attempted to dissect and study all of them would necessarily extend to a length beyond all reason. Nor would it be helpful if we should make the effort. We think that there are apparent certain principles which, applied to the factual situation before us, require a holding that the trial court properly ruled at this point.
The plaintiff contends, and rightly, that it is not necessary that there be direct evidence of freedom from negligence contributing to the injury. Hittle v. Jones et al., 217 Iowa 598, 250 N.W. 689; Knowlton v. Des Moines Edison Light Co., 117 Iowa *575 451, 90 N.W. 818; Beach v. City of Des Moines, 238 Iowa 312, 322, 26 N.W.2d 81, 87. But in order to establish a proposition by circumstantial evidence the facts relied upon must be such that the claimed conclusion is reasonably probable, not merely possible, and more probable than any other hypothesis based on such evidence. Latham v. Des Moines Elec. L. Co., 229 Iowa 1199, 1207, 296 N.W. 372; Cable v. Fullerton Lbr. Co., Iowa, 49 N.W.2d 530, 534. Are there facts here which bring the plaintiff's case within the rule?
It is to be noted that defendants were upon the plaintiff's right hand, and so had the advantage of section 321.319, Code of 1950, I.C.A., which we set out herewith:
"Where two vehicles are approaching on any public street or highway so that their paths will intersect and there is danger of collision, the vehicle approaching the other from the right shall have the right of way.
"The foregoing rule is modified at through highways and otherwise as hereinafter stated in this chapter."
Plaintiff cites and relies upon section 321.288, which, so far as material here, is:
"The person operating a motor vehicle * * * shall have the same under control and shall reduce the speed to a reasonable and proper rate: * * * * * *
"3. When approaching and traversing a crossing or intersection of public highways, * * *."
In addition there is the duty of all parties to keep a proper lookout at all times, and in particular when approaching and crossing an intersection. This duty, as in all cases, is in proportion to the danger reasonably to be anticipated.
We find no circumstantial evidence of due care upon the part of the plaintiff which permits the inference that there is a jury question engendered in her behalf. The plaintiff's witness, Dorothy Carpenter, testified that the horn on defendants' car was sounded at some distance back of the intersection. The only eyewitness, except for the defendants, was William Wiwi, produced and offered by the plaintiff. We have set out in Division I his statements that she drove at a consistent speed of about twenty miles per hour for something over one-half of the block immediately south of the intersection, and into and across to the spot of the collision without accelerating or decreasing her momentum; and that she did not swerve or vary her course at any time. He also said:
"Q. Could you see the driver? A. Yes, I saw the driver.
"Q. Could you tell what she was doing from the place where you were sitting? A. I couldn't see that she was doing anything but driving straight ahead." (Italics supplied.)
The testimony of the driver of defendants' car is that plaintiff, as she approached the intersection and entered it, was driving at about forty miles per hour. There are no circumstances from which it can be said it was reasonably probable plaintiff exercised due care.
Perhaps plaintiff's chief opportunity for a favorable holding as to whether there was sufficient evidence to require a jury submission upon freedom from contributory negligence lies in the question of the speed with which defendants' automobile approached and entered the intersection. A witness for plaintiff, Mrs. Dorothy Carpenter, who lived in the house on the northeast corner of the intersection, testified that as she came out of the door of her house on the south side, facing 15th street, she saw the defendants approaching from the east, about 200 feet from the intersection. She had never driven a car, but she estimated the defendants' speed at about fifty miles per hour. She saw the car pass her, about seventy-five feet from the intersection, and did not further observe it until she heard the crash of the collision. She does not say at what speed it passed her, but for the purpose of the following discussion we shall assume that there is evidence that it entered the intersection without slowing down. Plaintiff's counsel think that the damage to the cars, the distance they were thrown, and other evidence, support the theory of excessive speed on the part of defendants.
*576 We are, of course, not here concerned with the negligence of the defendants, if any, except as it bears upon the question of the contributory negligence of the plaintiff. Plaintiff's case is aided by her right to presume that the driver of defendants' car would obey the law. Assuming that defendants' car approached and entered the intersection at an excessive speed, was the negligence of its driver in this respect sufficient to make a jury issue upon the question of whether plaintiff had proven freedom from contributory negligence? This, we think, is the important problem in the case.
We have held that when the driver on the left enters an intersection at a time when no one is approaching within sight, but a collision occurs with a car coming from the right which, because of the speed at which it traveled was not in view at the time the one on the left came into the crossing, that there is a jury question upon contributory negligence. We have also held that, at least under certain circumstances, the driver on the right who did not look before entering the intersection was not guilty of such negligence. Hutchins v. LaBarre et al., Iowa, 47 N.W. 269, 279, 280; Rogers v. Jefferson, 226 Iowa 1047, 285 N.W. 701; Rogers v. Jefferson, 224 Iowa 324, 275 N.W. 874; Roe v. Kurtz, 203 Iowa 906, 210 N.W. 550. This is said to be for the reason that the driver on the right had the directional right of way under the statute, and that even if he had looked he would have had the right to assume that the car on his left would yield it. The rule has been criticized, but has been followed in the cases above set forth. But we are not inclined to extend it so far as to hold that the driver on the left is equally free to enter an intersection without looking. Such driver is under the duty not only of keeping a proper lookout, but of yielding the right of way if the two cars are approaching at such distances and rates of speed that there is danger of a collision if both continue.
In the instant case the plaintiff was under a duty to keep both these rules in mind, and to obey them. Further, if she is not to be charged with contributory negligence as a matter of law, it must be shown in some manner that she did so. It is true that the intersection right of way statute is to some extent relative. But it has meaning. The question is not as to which car first entered the intersection, nor is it as to which car struck the other, nor at what point in the intersection or upon the car. It is not a race for the intersection; the law is intended to promote safety and to lay down a rule which motorists must follow for that purpose. If, at their respective distances and rates of speed the two cars will collide, it is the duty of the one on the left to give way.
Here, the record shows that plaintiff, as she approached the intersection, had a view down 15th street for a considerable distance. At the time she reached the crossing she could have seen down the level street for a block or more. Defendants' car must have been in plain sight, even if we take Mrs. Carpenter's version of its speed. Yet, according to plaintiff's witness Wiwi, she did not change her speed, did not swerve her car; "did nothing but drive straight ahead." If she looked, she must have seen; if she did not look, she should have done so. If she looked and saw, her peril must have been apparent, and we do not think that the speed of defendants' car excuses her. Particularly at intersections, the motorist must make many immediate estimates of speed, and of distances available to him. The Michigan supreme court, in Kerr v. Hayes et al., 250 Mich. 19, 229 N.W. 430, 431, used language applicable here when it said: "He is chargeable with having seen what he should have seen, that defendant's car was about twice the distance from the crossing as his own, approaching at about twice his own speed, without, at any time, giving any indication of according plaintiff the right of way, and that a collision was inevitable unless he took measures to avoid it."
In Davis v. Hoskinson, 228 Iowa 193, 202, 203, 204, 290 N.W. 497, 502 we had a similar situation. The plaintiff, on the right, saw the defendant coming at a speed of 65 to 68 miles per hour; yet she gambled with her safety by attempting to cross, and was struck. It is true that there the plaintiff herself estimated defendant's speed, but since any driver competent to operate a *577 motor vehicle must necessarily have a reasonably accurate idea of the time permitted to cross ahead of an oncoming car at an intersection, even though not always able to translate it into definite miles per hour, we think the case last cited is directly in point. There the court, speaking through Justice Bliss, held that a verdict should have been directed upon the ground of failure to show freedom from contributory negligence. He said: "She took a chance which a reasonably prudent person would not have taken. As this court has said, one cannot `indulge in nice calculations whether he may barely escape injury, nor may he take reckless chances and be free from contributory negligence.'" The quotation is from Burnett v. Chicago, M. & St. P. Railway Co., 172 Iowa 704, 712, 154 N.W. 919, 922.
The question of how far the negligence of one party to an accident may be considered in absolving the other from contributory negligence, under the rule that the second party had a right to assume that the other would obey the statutory law and the rules of due care, is a troublesome one. It is obvious that the two have some relation; it is equally obvious that, if carried to its logical conclusion, if the defendant is negligent the plaintiff can rarely be held to be contributorily negligent. It would establish a rule in many cases that, if both parties are negligent, neither is contributorily negligent. We think that the true rule is that laid down by Judge Graven in Mast v. Illinois Central Railroad, supra. There the able and learned federal judge, after pointing out that the failure of the operators of a train to give a signal of its approach, or the fact that the view of the crossing was obstructed, were each proper to be considered upon the question of contributory negligence of one injured when struck, said: * * * "they (the negligences of the railroad company) do not of themselves constitute affirmative evidence as to what precautions the injured person did or did not take for his own safety. The failure of a railroad company to give warning of the approach of one of its trains to a crossing does not excuse a person preparing to use the road over the tracks from taking reasonable precautions for his own safety." (Italics supplied.) 79 F.Supp. 174.
In Ballard v. Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific Railway Company, 193 Iowa 672, 676, 185 N.W. 993, 995, this court said: "No failure on the part of the railroad company to do its duty, if it so fails, will excuse a person from using his sense of sight and hearing upon approaching a railway crossing, especially so when the due use of either sense would have enabled him to avoid the danger."
In Arends v. DeBruyn, 217 Iowa 529, 533, 252 N.W. 249, 251, we said: "The recklessness of DeBruyn does not, of course, determine the question of contributory negligence on the part of appellant, * * *."
In Carlson v. Meusberger, 200 Iowa 65, 74, 204 N.W. 432, 436, is this language: "The duty to give the right of way was imposed by statute, and was not at all dependent on the other's neglect or failure to exercise due care, or to observe a statute applicable to him. * * * He was under the positive duty to yield the right of way, and of necessity was required to exercise reasonable diligence to ascertain if another with a right over the crossing superior to his was approaching."
We have pointed out that there is no affirmative evidence of any exercise of due care by the plaintiff. If there had been such, evidence of excessive speed on the part of defendants might be used to support it. But the showing of plaintiff's own witness is that she did nothing except to drive straight ahead into the intersection without change of speed or direction. Therefore the evidence of defendants' negligence, if there is such, does not aid her. She has failed to carry the burden of establishing freedom from negligence contributing to her injuries and damage.
III. Plaintiff's third specification of error deals with the action of the trial court in striking one of her specifications of negligence of which she alleged defendants were guilty. In view of our holdings in the two preceding divisions, this ruling becomes immaterial and need not be discussed.
We find no prejudicial error in the rulings and judgment from which this appeal is taken.
*578 WENNERSTRUM, SMITH and MANTZ, JJ., concur.
OLIVER, C. J., and BLISS, GARFIELD and HAYS, JJ., dissent.
MULRONEY, J., takes no part.
There being an even division of opinion among the members of the Court, as to affirmance or reversal of this case, the judgment of the lower court is affirmed by operation of law.

=== CASE 9740360 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:33:21.670237+00 ===

Borradaile, J.
(dissenting in part, concurring in part). I differ with the majority in that in my opinion MCLA 436.34; MSA 18.1005, has no application here because the plaintiffs did not allege that the defendants consumed alcoholic liquor on the public highways.
Again I differ with the majority in that in my opinion violation of a criminal statute should not always constitute negligence per se although it may. While many jurisdictions do consider violation of a criminal statute as negligence per se, 57 Am Jur 2d, Negligence, § 242, p 625, others have renounced the doctrine of negligence per se, undoubtedly on the ground that not all violations of the criminal law are unreasonable, and held that criminality is only evidence of negligence. Morris, *185The Role of Criminal Statutes in Negligence Actions, 49 Colum L Rev 21, 34 (1949).
Morris, supra, p 23 has stated some reasons why civil liabilities should not always follow violation of a criminal statute.
"Administration of the criminal law often tempers responsibility in ways unparalleled in civil courts. Enactment of statutes may be unpublicized and adequate warning of impending drastic change of the law of negligence may not be given. Criminal statutes may be unwisely severe. And, most important, potentially ruinous civü liability is often inappropriate for minor infraction of petty criminal regulations.”
I concur with the majority in reversing and remanding as to those defendants who allegedly violated MCLA 750.141a; MSA 28.336(1), which makes knowingly furnishing alcoholic beverage to a minor without a physician’s prescription a misdemeanor, because I think that under the circumstances of this case such statutory violation is sufficient evidence of negligence to make granting an accelerated judgment inappropriate.

=== CASE 9740361 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:33:23.645431+00 ===

HANSON, Justice.
Defendant was convicted of unlawfully and feloniously distributing a controlled drug. The only issue on appeal is whether or not the title to Chapter 229 of the 1970 Session Laws, under which defendant was convicted, is constitutionally adequate.
Chapter 229 originated in the 1970 Session of the Legislature as Senate Bill 192. It contained five sections relating to the following title: “For AN ACT ENTITLED, An Act establishing the office of the commissioner of dangerous substances control within the office of the attorney general of the state of South Dakota to meet the problems of narcotic and drug abuse’.’
Senate Bill 192 was amended to include Senate Bill 193 which was an act entitled “An Act defining and controlling dangerous substances.” As finally enacted Senate Bill 192 substantially retained its original title as follows:
“An Act Entitled, An Act establishing the office of the commissioner of drugs and substances control within the office of the attorney general of the state of South Dakota to meet the problem of narcotics, drugs and substances abuse.”
The body of the act retains the original five sections of Senate Bill 192. It also contains sections 6 to 17 which were added when the provisions of Senate Bill 193 were incorporated by amendment. These sections provide for a comprehensive drug control act including penal provisions for violations. It is referred to as the “State Drugs and Substances Control Act”. See Section 17, Chapter 229, Laws of 1970.
Defendant contends the title to Chapter 229, Laws of 1970 is fatally defective as it fails to conform to the provisions of Section *21821, Article III of our Constitution which requires that “No law shall embrace more than one subject, which shall be expressed in its title”.
This constitutional provision is mandatory, and not directory, in nature. Its meaning and effect was clearly expressed in the early case of State v. Morgan, 2 S.D. 32, 48 N.W. 314. The purpose of this provision was stated to be:
“First, to prevent ‘hodge-podge’ or ‘log-rolling’ legislation; second, to prevent surprise or fraud upon the legislature by means of provisions in bills of which the titles gave no intimation, and which might therefore be overlooked, and carelessly and unintentionally adopted; and, third, to fairly apprise the people, through such publication of legislative proceedings as is usually made, of the subjects of legislation that are being considered, in order that they may have opportunity of being heard thereon, by petition or otherwise, if they so desire.”
The Court further pointed out that:
“This constitutional requirement is addressed to the subject, not to the details, of the act. That subject must be expressed in the title. The subject must be single; the provisions to accomplish the object involved in that subject may be multifarious. It is not enough that the act embraces but one subject, and that all its parts are germane; but the title must express the subject, and comprehensively enough to include all the provisions in the body of the act. The title need not index all the details of the act. It is sufficient if the language used in the title, on a fair construction, indicates the purpose of the legislature, so that making every reasonable intendment in favor of the act it may be said that the subject of the law is expressed in the title.”
When Senate Bill 192 was amended to include the provisions of Senate Bill 193 its title was not correspondingly enlarged to conform to its broadened subject matter. The mandate of Section 21, Article III of our Constitution was thus violated as the *219addition of a comprehensive drug control act cannot reasonably be construed to be germane to the subject expressed in the title of the Amended Act. Metropolitan Casualty Ins. Co. v. Basford, 31 S.D. 149, 139 N.W. 795; Lemmon Independent School District No. 1 v. Rowbotham, 48 S.D. 641, 205 N.W. 706.
The title to Senate Bill 192 (Chapter 229, Laws of 1970) is restrictive in nature and gives “no intimation” of its actual scope. Its title does not “fairly apprise” that it contains a comprehensive drug control act. It merely advises that a commissioner of drugs and substances control is created, and nothing more. Chapman v. South Dakota Rural Credits Board, 46 S.D. 72, 190 N.W. 884. The phrase in the title “to meet the problem of narcotics, drugs and substances abuse” relates back to and modifies the establishment of an office of commissioner of drugs and substances control. It does not enlarge the subject of the act.
Chapter 14, S.L.1972 updated the South Dakota Compiled Laws of 1967 by incorporating laws subsequent to 1967 into the Code of this state. Chapter 229, Laws of 1970 is now codified as SDCL 39-17-44 to 39-17-155 inclusive. After a statute has been reenacted as part of the Code, “it is no longer subject to assault because of a claimed defect in the title to the original Act when it was enacted by the legislature’,’ Miles Laboratories, Inc. v. Owl Drug Company, 67 S.D. 523, 295 N.W. 292. Therefore, after Chapter 229, Laws of 1970 became part of our Code its defective title could not be challenged for any criminal offense committed on or after July 1, 1972. However, its invalidity could be asserted for an offense committed between July 1, 1970 and July 1, 1972. As the present offense was committed during the defective title period we are compelled to reverse the judgment of conviction appealed from.
Reversed.
BIEGELMEIER, C. J., and WINANS and DOYLE, JJ., concur.
WOLLMAN, J., dissents.

=== CASE 9740362 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:33:23.649582+00 ===

*220WOLLMAN, Justice
(dissenting).
If it were our function to conduct courses in legislative draftsmanship, then I might very well agree that the title to Chapter 229, Laws of 1970, is not that model of clarity and comprehensiveness one might desire. Because we deal with the real rather than with the hypothetical, however, we should recognize and make allowances for the exigent circumstances attendant upon the enactment of Chapter 229.
On January 23, 1970, this court held invalid a substantial portion of the then existing drug abuse control act, SDCL 39-17-21(4) (c), in the case of State v. Johnson, 84 S.D. 556, 173 N.W.2d 894. This was during the 30-day legislative session. South Dakota Constitution, Article III, Section 6. It is apparent that the members of the legislature did not have the opportunity for contemplative thought regarding the niceties of drafting the title to Chapter 229. They were faced with the need to enact a comprehensive drug act to meet the growing problem of drug abuse and they took such action as they thought was necessary to meet their responsibilities in this area.
Section 21, Article III must be interpreted and applied in accordance with the role of liberal construction announced in State v. Morgan, 2 S.D. 32, 48 N.W. 314, where the court wrote:
“* * * It is sufficient if the language used in the title, on a fair construction, indicates the purpose of the legislature, so that making every reasonable intendment in favor of the act it may be said that the subject of the law is expressed in the title.” 48 N.W. 314, 317.
To hold that the title to Chapter 229 is restrictive in nature, that it gives no intimation of its actual scope, and that it does not fairly apprise that it contains a comprehensive drug control act is to engage in strict construction with a vengeance.
It seems to me to be beyond question but that the title to Chapter 229 is valid under the reasoning of Garrey v. Schnider, 78 S.D. 596, 105 N.W.2d 860. The matter of public concern in *221the instant case was the problem of drug abuse. The language of the title to Chapter 229 clearly states the subject of the act — the establishment of the office of drugs and substances control to meet the problem of narcotics drugs and substances abuse— encompasses the subject of public concern which was the subject of the act, and places interested persons on inquiry as the regulations appearing in the body of the act. See also State v. Shearer, 86 S.D. 711, 201 N.W.2d 180.
I would affirm the trial court’s order overruling defendant’s demurrer.

=== CASE 2223094 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:54.402671+00 ===

905 N.E.2d 24 (2009)
Teresa TORRES, Appellant-Respondent,
v.
INDIANA FAMILY AND SOCIAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION, Appellee-Petitioner.
No. 49A04-0812-CV-719.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
April 28, 2009.
*25 Michael G. Moore, Indianapolis, IN, Attorney for Appellant.
Linda J. Cooley, Krieg DeVault LLP, Indianapolis, IN, Attorney for Appellee.
OPINION
BAKER, Chief Judge.
Today, we have the occasion to construe various provisions of the Workplace Violence Restraining Orders Act[1] (WVROA). Appellant-respondent Teresa Torres appeals the judgment entered in favor of appellee-petitioner Indiana Family and Social Services Administration (FSSA), claiming that the trial court erred in entering a workplace violence restraining order (restraining order) against her. Specifically, Torres alleges that the evidence was insufficient to establish that her actions could be construed as a credible threat of violence that would cause a reasonable person to fear for his or her safety within the meaning of the WVROA. Concluding that the trial court properly entered a restraining order against Torres, we affirm.
FACTS
Carol Baker is an employee of FSSA and serves as the assistant director of the Bureau of Rehabilitation Services. Baker's duties include overseeing Indiana's independent living centers and providing administrative support to the Indiana Council on Independent Living (ICOIL). ICOIL *26 is a federally-mandated state council that oversees independent living services for people with disabilities in Indiana and facilitates interactions between the disabled individuals, independent living centers, and state agencies. Baker, as a non-voting member of ICOIL, is required to attend the meetings and is the only FSSA employee permitted to attend.
Torres has attended ICOIL meetings since the 1990s, and is the director of Everybody Counts, Inc., an independent living center in northwestern Indiana. Torres was appointed by the Governor as an ICOIL member in 2005. Torres has a moderate hearing loss and cannot delineate sounds or hear people speaking under certain conditions unless she uses an assistive listening device. Baker has known Torres through ICOIL for approximately two years.
Baker and other ICOIL personnel have witnessed outbursts from Torres during various ICOIL meetings. Baker and several ICOIL members have seen Torres yell and curse at various attendees. On one occasion, Torres overturned a chair. Melissa Madill, an ICOIL member, witnessed Torres throw objects and engage in verbal outbursts during at least fifteen meetings prior to April 9, 2008. During several of the meetings, Baker had to have the Capitol Police intervene because she feared for her and others' safety in light of Torres's conduct.
At the ICOIL meeting that was conducted on April 9, 2008, Torres was provided with an assistive listening device but continued to have difficulty hearing. At this meeting, most of the ICOIL members including Bakerwere seated at a large elongated "U-shaped" table and Torres was seated in the first row of the audience facing the table. Tr. p. 24, 52-53, 55, 73, 110.
Throughout the meeting, Torres complained to ICOIL personnel that her listening device was not working. Torres eventually removed the hearing device and threw it at the table, stating "this piece of sh*t doesn't work and I'm tired of telling you." Tr. p. 47, 107-09. Torres stood up, continued to yell, and began pacing the room with clenched fists.
At some point, Torres picked up the end of an eight-foot table and dropped it to the floor. Thereafter, she threw or kicked a chair into the table to get everyone's attention. Madill, who was seated behind the table, left the room before the meeting adjourned because she was frightened of Torres and did not feel safe. Thereafter, Torres screamed, "damn every one of you to hell" and "f* * * every one of you motherfu* * * *g sons of b* * * *es, I hope you all die. Do you hear me. I hope you die." Id. at 21.
ICOIL personnel adjourned the meeting because it could not conduct business in light of Torres' constant interruptions, outbursts, and use of foul language. Immediately after the adjournment, Torres jumped from her seat, started to yell again, and approached the table. Torres threw the listening device and charged toward Baker. Torres then leaned toward Baker and screamed: "And, you. You sit there just staring at me and not blinking. At least I don't have your disability. I'm not ugly. I just can't hear well." Id. at 15, 21-22, 43. Thereafter, Torres jerked a microphone from the table and grabbed a computer out of the hands of ICOIL's president, who is legally blind, and demanded to know who had purchased the equipment. Baker then called the Capitol Police to intervene because she felt threatened.
On June 13, 2008, FSSA filed a petition requesting a workplace violence restraining *27 order for the benefit of Baker. In relevant part, the petition alleged that
c. Respondent regularly attends monthly meetings of the Council for Independent Living in Marion County.
5. Defendant has ... made a credible threat of violence against the employee by knowing or willing statements or a course of conduct that would place a reasonable person in fear for his or her safety, or the safety of his or her immediate family.
...
b. Describe what happened (including the dates, who did what to whom, and any injuries): Respondent Teresa Torres has become verbally abusive, thrown metal objects, and approached Petitioner's employee, Carol Baker in a physically violent and threatening manner during several meetings of the Council for Independent Living meetings. Carol Baker is required to attend the council meetings during the course of her employment. Employee Carol Baker has also witnessed Torres throw objects at individuals who are seated next to Carol Baker. Details, including dates, time, and persons involved, are continued on Attachment 5b.
6. Employee will suffer great and irreparable harm before this petition can be heard in court unless the court makes those orders requested below effective now and until the hearing. (Specify the harm and why it will occur before the hearing): Employee and Respondent will be attending the same meeting to be held on the second Wednesday of each calendar month at the Indiana State Government Building, Indianapolis, Indiana.
7. Defendant's conduct has been directed against employee and is knowing and willful, is not constitutionally protected, and does not constitute lawful acts of self-defense or defense of others.
Appellant's App. p. 18-20. Baker also submitted an affidavit in support of the petition, detailing the specific facts and circumstances of Torres's actions and conduct at the ICOIL meetings. Baker concluded that
due to Torres' verbal outbursts and acts of physical aggression directed towards me I am fearful for my safety. I am also concerned that Torres may commit a battery on me in the future if she is not restrained from coming near me while I am at work, going to and from work, and at home.
Id. at 25.
The trial court conducted hearings on the petition on June 27, 2008, and July 25, 2008. Thereafter, the trial court granted FSSA's request and issued the restraining order against Torres that is to expire on August 1, 2009. The trial court determined that
Although the court may not find the Respondent threatening, her conduct, including her words and actions at the April 9th meeting of ICOIL, caused the Petitioner's employee, Carol Baker, and at least one witness to fear for their safety. The fact that most people attending the meeting were handicapped and less able to defend themselves from physical assault is significant, and the Respondent's comments and actions were unacceptable, no matter how frustrated she became or how much she disagreed with the staff and members of ICOIL.
Ms. Torres has many rights, including to make a record of the meetings, to protest decisions she dislikes, and to report any failure to accommodate her physical needs to the proper authorities. She does not have the right to disrupt a *28 public meeting in a way that makes others fear for their safety.
Appellant's App. p. 6. The trial court also ordered that Torres
a. Shall not batter or stalk the employee and other protected persons
b. Shall not follow or stalk the employee and other protected persons to or from the place of work
c. Shall not follow the employee and other protected persons during hours of employment
d. Shall not telephone or send correspondence to the employee and other protected persons by any means including, but not limited to, the use of public or private mails, interoffice mail, fax, or computer email
e. Shall not enter the workplace of the employee and other protected hours of employment
f. Other (specify):
6. a. Defendant is ordered to stay at least ... 50 feet from Carol Baker
...
(2) Residence of Carol Baker.
(3) Office of Carol Baker.
Id. at 9. Torres now appeals.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
When reviewing Torres's claim challenging the sufficiency of the evidence, we consider only the evidence most favorable to the judgment and the reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom. Holliday v. Crooked Creek Villages Homeowners Assoc., Inc., 759 N.E.2d 1088, 1091 (Ind.Ct. App.2001). We do not reweigh the evidence or judge the credibility of the witnesses. Id. at 1092. The judgment will be affirmed unless the evidence points incontrovertibly to an opposite conclusion. Houchens v. Boschert, 758 N.E.2d 585, 588 (Ind.Ct.App.2001). Finally, questions of law are reviewed de novo without deference to a trial court's legal conclusions. Bourbon Mini-Mart, Inc. v. Comm'r, Ind. Dep't of Envtl. Mgmt, 806 N.E.2d 14, 20 (Ind.Ct.App.2004).
In 2002, the General Assembly enacted the WVROA. Pursuant to Indiana Code section 34-26-6-6:
An employer may seek a temporary restraining order or injunction on behalf of an employee to prohibit further violence or threats of violence by a person if:
(1) the employee has suffered unlawful violence or a credible threat of violence from the person; and
(2) the unlawful violence has been carried out at the employee's place of work or the credible threat of violence can reasonably be construed to be carried out at the employee's place of work by the person.
The statute defines a "credible threat of violence" as "a knowing and willful statement or course of conduct that does not serve a legitimate purpose and that causes a reasonable person to fear for the person's safety." I.C. § 34-26-6-2. Additionally, "Course of conduct" is "a pattern of conduct composed of a series of acts over a period of time, however short, indicating a continuity of purpose, that includes... (2) entering the employee's place of work...." I.C. § 34-26-6-1. Unlawful violence as used in the WVROA, "means battery ... or stalking." I.C. § 34-26-6-5. Finally, harassment, as referred to in the WVROA, means
Conduct directed towards a victim that includes but is not limited to repeated or continuing impermissible contact that would cause a reasonable person to suffer emotional distress and that actually causes the victim to suffer emotional distress ... but not statutorily or constitutionally protected activity such as lawful *29 picketing pursuant to labor disputes or lawful employer-related activity pursuant to labor disputes.
Ind.Code § 35-45-10-2.
Although we have found no case construing the WVROA, cases decided under companion legislationthe Indiana Civil Protection Order Act[2] (CPOA)provide a useful context for analyzing the legal parameters that are required to affirm an order that is issued in favor of a protected person. Pursuant to Indiana Code section 34-26-5-9(f), "[a] finding that domestic or family violence has occurred sufficient to justify the issuance of an order under this section means that a respondent represents a credible threat to the safety of the petitioner or a member of petitioner's household." In Tons v. Bley, 815 N.E.2d 508, 510-11 (Ind.Ct.App.2004), the evidence established that Travis Tons resided with his mother after she and Travis's father divorced. When Travis attended a rodeo against his father's wishes, the father called Travis's mother, threatening that he "would come over and beat Travis black and blue" if the mother took Travis to see counselors, tutors, or attorneys. Id. at 510. We affirmed the entry of a family violence protective order based upon evidence including (a) the father's recent threatening telephone call and (b) that the father previously struck Travis in November 2002 and on other occasions. Id. It was determined that the evidence warranted granting the order "necessary to bring about the cessation of the violence or the threat of violence." Id. at 510-11.
Similarly, in Aiken v. Stanley, 816 N.E.2d 427 (Ind.Ct.App.2004), we affirmed a CPOA order based upon a "credible threat to the safety of Petitioner," where a former boyfriend verbally harassed the petitioner, screamed expletives at her, and engaged in unwelcome physical contact, including trying to shake the petitioner's hand, pressing her against a bar, and pushing a car door against her arm. Id. at 428-29.
In affirming the protective order, we observed that there was some evidence of physical contact, and we rejected the boyfriend's assertion that a protective order was not appropriate because the evidence did not show that there was "actual physical violence." Id. at 431. In essence, we noted that the totality of the former boyfriend's actions placed the petitioner in "fear of physical harm," as required by Indiana law. Id. at 432.
In this case, Torres asserts that the restraining order must be set aside because there was no evidence establishing that her actions would cause a reasonable person to suffer emotional distress "and that actually caused the victim to suffer emotional distress" within the meaning of the WVROA. Appellant's Br. p. 7. However, it was shown at the hearing that Madill, the ICOIL member who had witnessed Torres's verbal and physical outbursts on at least fifteen occasions, left the April 9, 2008, meeting because she no longer felt safe. Tr. p. 49-50, 55-56, 64. Madill saw Torres's actions escalate from yelling and standing, to pacing with clenched fists, to throwing or kicking a chair towards her. Additionally, ICOIL personnel have called Capitol Police on a number of occasions, including the meeting in question, to intervene when Torres's behavior became disruptive. Id. at 19, 39. In light of these circumstances, it was reasonable for the trial court to conclude that reasonable persons in attendance at ICOIL meetings *30 would have sufferedand, in fact, sufferedemotional distress due to Torres's outbursts.
Additionally, the uncontradicted evidence established that Baker actually suffered emotional distress as a result of Torres's conduct. That distress included Baker's inability to eat, stomach trouble before ICOIL meetings, feeling "drained" after ICOIL meetings, and a fear of unpredictable confrontations with Torres as she performed her job. Id. at 19-24. Moreover, Baker feared that Torres's "out of control" behavior might extend to her home or office where she would not be able to protect herself from Torres's physical acts. Id.
Although Torres asserts that there was no "credible threat of violence" because of her mere "protests" or "advocacy" on behalf of herself and others, Torres cites to no legal authority in support of that contention. Moreover, no one at ICOIL including Bakerchallenges Torres's right to attend ICOIL meetings, speak her mind, or disagree with ICOIL's actions. However, yelling, threatening, using profanity, throwing metal devices, knocking over chairs, or charging people, constitute behavior far beyond mere protestations or any type of advocacy contemplated in the workplace.
In our view, the purpose of the WVRA, CPOA, and the relevant criminal laws, is to prohibit actions and behavior that cross the lines of civility and safety in the workplace, at home, and in the community. As a result, we can only conclude that the FSSA proved that Torres engaged in unlawful credible threats of violence against Baker.
Finally, we reject Torres's contention that the evidence did not sufficiently establish that a reasonable person would "fear" her conduct. Appellant's Br. p. 7-8. As discussed above, Madill testified that she was afraid of Torres because of the events that occurred at the April 9, 2008, ICOIL meeting. Tr. p. 55-56. Moreover, that meeting was not the first time that Torres's actions necessitated police presence. Additionally, the course of conduct between Baker and Torres increased in intensity and severity until April 9, 2008 the date on which Baker finally determined that Torres's conduct caused her to be frightened, intimidated, and threatened. Id. at 15, 33, 42-43, 71-72, 110-11.
In light of these circumstances, and when viewing the evidence most favorable to the trial court's judgment, we conclude that the trial court properly entered the protective order against Torres pursuant to the provisions of the WVROA. In essence, Torres is merely requesting that we reweigh the evidence, which we will not do.
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
MAY, J., and BARNES, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Ind.Code §§ 34-26-6-1 to -15.
[2]  The CPOA was added pursuant to P.L. 133-2002, SEC. 56, see Ind.Code § 34-26-5-1 et seq. (2008), and the WVROA was enacted under Section 57 of the same law. I.C. § 34-26-6-1 et seq.

=== CASE 2223096 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:54.422331+00 ===

58 Wis.2d 135 (1973)
205 N.W.2d 775
PONTOW, Plaintiff in error,
v.
STATE, Defendant in error.
No. State 29.
Supreme Court of Wisconsin.
Argued February 28, 1973.
Decided April 9, 1973.
*136 For the plaintiff in error there were briefs and oral argument by William R. Steinmetz of Milwaukee.
For the defendant in error the cause was argued by Michael R. Klos, assistant attorney general, with whom on the brief was Robert W. Warren, attorney general.
HEFFERNAN, J.
On March 23, 1971, Gary James Pontow pleaded guilty in the circuit court for Milwaukee county to the crime of burglary, in violation of sec. 943.10, Stats. The plea was accepted by the trial judge, and the defendant was sentenced to a term of imprisonment not to exceed ten years, with the sentence to run consecutively to another term which the defendant was serving.
*137 The appeal is brought pursuant to sec. 971.31 (10), Stats., which provides:
"An order denying a motion to suppress evidence on a motion challenging the admissibility of a statement of a defendant may be reviewed upon appeal from a judgment of conviction notwithstanding the fact that such judgment was entered upon a plea of guilty."
In the instant case the defendant gave a confession which implicated him not only in the burglary with which he was charged but in 17 other burglaries which were read into the record. He contends on this appeal that the confession was improperly induced and not voluntarily elicited. He claims that the plea of guilty came only because the trial court had improperly refused to suppress the confession. The defendant does not contend that any error occurred in the proceedings at which his plea of guilty was accepted. Accordingly, if we find that the confession was properly admitted into evidence, no other issues need be determined by this court.
We are satisfied that the trial judge properly ruled that the confession was admissible and that his denial of the motion to suppress was not error.
We said in State v. Hunt (1972), 53 Wis. 2d 734, 740, 193 N. W. 2d 858:
"The essential question, in determining the voluntariness of a confession, is whether the confession was coerced, or the product of improper pressures exercised by the police. To be admissible into evidence, a confession must be the voluntary product of a free and unconstrained will, reflecting deliberateness of choice." See also: State v. Hoyt (1964), 21 Wis. 2d 284, 294, 128 N. W. 2d 645.
The voluntariness of a confession is to be judged by examining all the facts surrounding the confession under the "totality-of-the-circumstances" test. State v. Hunt, supra, page 740; State v. Carter (1966), 33 Wis. *138 2d 80, 88, 146 N. W. 2d 466; Fikes v. Alabama (1957), 352 U. S. 191, 77 Sup. Ct. 281, 1 L. Ed. 2d 246.
In this case, the facts surrounding defendant's confession are contained in the undisputed testimony of the interrogating officers and of the assistant district attorney at the hearing on the motion to suppress the confession. This testimony reveals that upon his arrest defendant was given the prescribed Miranda warnings and that the warnings were repeated at subsequent stages of the questioning. It has been conceded that defendant voluntarily waived his right to have an attorney present during the questioning.
The testimony fails to reveal that defendant made any requests which were denied or that he was threatened or physically coerced. There is no evidence of the officers employing overbearing or oppressive inquisitorial techniques. Defendant's claim of involuntariness is predicated solely on the fact that he confessed to the burglaries only after he was given assurances that he would be charged with only one offense.
The totality of the circumstances here do not evidence any coercion nor support any inference that would lead to the conclusion that the confession was involuntary. It is true that only after he was promised by the district attorney that he would be charged with but one count did the defendant confess and agree that 17 other crimes of burglary could be read into the court proceedings. In order to vitiate this confession as being induced by the promise, he relies on Bram v. United States (1897), 168 U. S. 532, 542, 543, 18 Sup. Ct. 183, 42 L. Ed. 568, wherein appears the dictum:
"`But a confession, in order to be admissible, must be free and voluntary: that is, must not be extracted by any sort of threats or violence, nor obtained by any direct or implied promises, however slight, nor by the exertion of any improper influence.'"
*139 Bram has been quoted with approval in the recent case of Brady v. United States (1970), 397 U. S. 742, 753, 90 Sup. Ct. 1463, 25 L. Ed. 2d 747. However, Brady recognizes that a promise of leniency will not in itself invalidate a confession and that other surrounding circumstances must be considered. Brady accepted the defendant's confession even though it was induced by the implied promise of a lesser penalty if he waived a jury trial which could have resulted in the imposition of a death penalty. The Brady court distinguished Bram, in which the defendant had been interrogated in a foreign country without counsel and while nude. In Brady, at page 754, the court stated in respect to Bram:
"In such circumstances, even a mild promise of leniency was deemed sufficient to bar the confession, not because the promise was an illegal act as such, but because defendants at such times are too sensitive to inducement and the possible impact on them too great to ignore and too difficult to assess."
All other cases cited by the defendant reveal promises of leniency that were coupled with allegedly oppressive police conduct. The totality of those factors was found to have produced a coercive atmosphere. See, State v. Hoyt (1963), 21 Wis. 2d 310, 124 N. W. 2d 47, rehearing (1964), 21 Wis.2d 284, 128 N. W. 2d 645; Haynes v. Washington (1963), 373 U. S. 503, 83 Sup. Ct. 1336, 10 L. Ed. 2d 513; Lynumn v. Illinois (1963), 372 U. S. 528, 83 Sup. Ct. 917, 9 L. Ed. 2d 922.
In the instant case, there is no evidence to show any coercive police practices, nor was the defendant interrogated for any considerable length of time. His statement that he was interrogated by three teams of detectives and held in custody overnight is technically correct but grossly misleading. The record shows that the first team of interrogators was concerned only with establishing his identity, since he had given an assumed *140 name when arrested. One of the officers involved in the initial questioning testified that he had known the defendant as a friend for several years and that their conversation had involved personal matters and questions about the health of the defendant's family. This interview lasted no more than twenty-five minutes. The second team of detectives questioned him on the following morning for only five minutes. It was stipulated that nothing occurred at either of these two sessions that was relevant to the suppression of the confession which resulted from the third session.
The confession ultimately obtained resulted from a series of relatively short interrogations. There is no evidence whatsoever that the defendant was detained for an unreasonable period of time or subjected to lengthy or harassing questioning. See: Brown v. Allen (1953), 344 U. S. 443, 73 Sup. Ct. 397, 97 L. Ed. 469; Reimers v. State (1966), 31 Wis. 2d 457, 143 N. W. 2d 525. The testimony relating to the final period of questioning shows that the defendant had much experience in the criminal process and initiated hard-headed, arm's-length bargaining with the police to attempt to gain favorable treatment. It is conceded that the defendant volunteered the information that he had been involved in numerous unspecified burglaries. He refused to elucidate on these other crimes on the ground that he had received a "bum" deal from the police on a previous occasion. He indicated that he would be willing to cooperate if he were assured of fair treatment. Contrary to the finding of the trial judge, it appears that the interrogating detective responded to this suggestion of the defendant by suggesting that perhaps all the crimes could be resolved by a plea of guilty to the single charge. The officer, however, testified that he immediately told the defendant that only the district attorney had authority to make any promises in regard to the charges that would be brought. Defendant had previously stated *141 he wanted to talk to someone in authority. Pontow was then taken before Assistant District Attorney Theodore J. Hodan. Hodan testified that the defendant initiated that conversation by suggesting that he be charged with only one offense in return for confessing to several others. The detective who was present at this interview in the district attorney's office testified that the defendant maintained the bargaining initiative throughout the conference and attempted to secure the assistant district attorney's agreement for a recommendation for concurrent sentences. Hodan, however, refused to accede to this request. Pontow insisted that the agreement be in writing. As the result of Pontow's insistence, the confession to the crime and to the 17 other burglaries not charged contains the statement that it was conditioned upon the district attorney's promise that only a single charge be brought.
Under this state of the evidence, there is no support for the defendant's contention that his confession was not the product of a voluntary exercise of his own will. Certainly, there is nothing in the "totality of the circumstances" to show coercion or any other factors that would lead us to conclude that the defendant's statement was even arguably involuntary.
The question remains, however, of whether it is improper under any circumstances for the police and prosecutor to engage in confession bargaining with an unrepresented defendant. A similar but crucially different case is relied upon by the defendant to argue that a prejudicial impropriety occurred. In Grades v. Boles (4th Cir. 1968), 398 Fed. 2d 409, the defendant was extensively interrogated and was taken before the district attorney, who told him that he would be tried on only one count if he confessed to others. The court of appeals held that the resulting confession was inadmissible because the defendant had not been represented by an attorney. In Grades, however, the defendant had never been informed *142 of his right to counsel. In the instant case, the defendant was repeatedly given the full Miranda warnings by each of the teams of detectives and by the district attorney. It is conceded that the defendant knowledgeably and voluntarily waived his right to counsel after being fully informed of the extent of that right.
While we conclude that the defendant's motion to suppress the confession herein was properly denied, Grades v. Boles, supra, points out that confession bargaining between a prosecutor and a defendant should be looked upon with suspicion and should be carefully scrutinized. On the other hand, this state has recognized plea bargaining as a legitimate technique in expediting criminal prosecutions. State ex rel. White v. Gray (1973), 57 Wis. 2d 17, 20, 203 N. W. 2d 638; Armstrong v. State (1972), 55 Wis. 2d 282, 198 N. W. 2d 357. The United States Supreme Court has also approved plea bargaining. North Carolina v. Alford (1970), 400 U. S. 25, 91 Sup. Ct. 160, 27 L. Ed. 2d 162.
Plea bargaining has its critics, and the practice may be subjected to abuse and can tend to subvert the ends of justice rather than to advance them. Nevertheless, plea bargaining, as contrasted to confession bargaining herein, contains safeguards which tend to make it more consonant with the ends of justice. In the plea bargaining situation, the trial judge can determine by a colloquy with the defendant that the plea is knowledgeable and voluntary. In the plea bargaining situation, the judge is in a position to see to it that the defendant is represented by counsel or can determine that the waiver of counsel is made under constitutionally permissible circumstances. Nevertheless, we think it inappropriate to lay down a rule that forbids the prosecutor from discussing the disposition of charges with a defendant who manifestly prefers to negotiate on his own behalf. The confession bargain will be subjected to severe post hoc scrutiny.
*143 While, as we have pointed out, a promise of leniency does not in itself evince involuntariness, it is a factor which may be considered in making that determination. Moreover, where it is claimed that an unrepresented defendant made a confession, the state has the difficult burden of showing voluntariness. Miranda v. Arizona (1966), 384 U. S. 436, 475, 86 Sup. Ct. 1602, 16 L. Ed. 2d 694. Moreover, when the confession is challenged by a motion to suppress, under Wisconsin law voluntariness must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt. State ex rel. Goodchild v. Burke (1965), 27 Wis. 2d 244, 264, 133 N. W. 2d 753; Sharlow v. State (1970), 47 Wis. 2d 259, 265, 177 N. W. 2d 88. It would appear that these checks which trial courts and this court impose as conditions for the admission of the confession provide the defendant with substantial safeguards. In this case the state met its burden of proving that, beyond a reasonable doubt, the defendant voluntarily confessed to the crime charged and the other read-in crimes. The defendant initiated the negotiations to get the best possible deal for himself, and the state kept its bargain. We conclude that the motion to suppress the confession was properly denied and that the confession did not in any way contaminate the constitutionally proper procedure used in accepting the plea of guilty.
By the Court.Judgments affirmed.

=== CASE 2223099 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:54.462875+00 ===

905 N.E.2d 897 (2009)
329 Ill.Dec. 59
Elmore EDWARDS, Alan Garant, Belinda Johnson, Lizette Lozado, Sandra Mendiola-Kunis, Andre Reyes, Frank Sarabia, Gloria Thompson, and Steven Vrtis, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
The CITY OF CHICAGO, a Municipal Corporation, Defendant-Appellee.
No. 1-07-0741.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Second Division.
March 24, 2009.
Rehearing Denied April 17, 2009.
*898 Shawn A. Warner & Associates, Ltd., Chicago, for Appellants.
Mara S. Georges, Corporation Counsel of the City of Chicago, Chicago (Benna Ruth Solomon, Myriam Zreczny Kasper, and Robert L. Schultz, of counsel), for Appellee.
Justice CUNNINGHAM delivered the opinion of the court:
This is an interlocutory appeal, pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 304(a) (210 Ill.2d R. 304(a)), from a July 6, 2006 order of the circuit court of Cook County. That order granted partial summary judgment for the defendant-appellee, City of Chicago (the City), on one portion of the complaint by plaintiffs-appellants (certain Chicago police officers, as set out below). That part of the complaint alleged that the City committed the intentional tort of conversion of their property when, without proper authorization or legal authority, it filed liens to recover line-of-duty medical expenses paid on behalf of plaintiffs-appellants pursuant to municipal ordinances of the City.[1] These liens were filed against judgments obtained by the police officer plaintiffs from third parties who had injured them. The named plaintiffs are Chicago police officers Elmore Edwards, Alan Garant, Belinda Johnson, Lizette Lozada, Sandra Mendiola-Kunis, Andre Reyes, Frank Sarabia, Gloria Thompson, and Steven Vrtis. They are the class representatives for the court-certified class of all current and former Chicago police officers who were subject to medical-expense liens, excluding those whose claims concerning medical-expense liens that had already been adjudicated by a court. Following its order granting partial summary judgment for the plaintiffs, the circuit court[2] entered *899 the appropriate Rule 304(a) language and the plaintiffs brought this appeal. The plaintiffs contend that the City had no authority to file the liens against them. We affirm and remand for further proceedings.
BACKGROUND
The facts are not in dispute. The named plaintiffs are Chicago police officers injured in the line of duty by the wrongdoing of third parties. Since at least 1974, the City has filed liens seeking reimbursement of medical expenses which the City paid to Chicago police officers for line-of-duty injuries. These liens are only filed when the injured officer has recovered damages from a third party. Plaintiffs-appellants Sarabia, Johnson, and Thompson had only wage liens and not medical-expense liens filed against them as of the date this appeal was filed. The City has not challenged their status as appellants in this court. Accordingly we will not disturb that designation, but for simplicity will refer to all the plaintiffs-appellants as plaintiffs. Plaintiffs Edwards, Garant, Lozada, Mendiola-Kunis, Reyes, and Vrtis have all had money recovered by the City from damages due to them from third parties. The City recovered the money pursuant to liens which it filed for medical expenses the City paid to the plaintiffs. The money recovered by the City was paid voluntarily by the plaintiffs or their representatives. Plaintiff Garant's attorney paid the City the full lien amount of $1,895.30 in full settlement of that lien on December 2, 1994. Plaintiff Edwards' attorney negotiated a reduced payment of $4,752.82 from the City's lien of $16,399.57, and the City was paid on October 1, 1999. Plaintiff Vrtis' attorney also negotiated a lower payment to the City made on September 18, 2000, of $4,833.33 from a lien amount of $9,208.07. Plaintiffs Reyes and Lozado, through their attorney, after unsuccessful attempts to negotiate a lesser amount, on January 10, 2001, paid the City the full amount of their liens, $1,301.42 for Reyes and $1,336.20 for Lozado. Plaintiff Mendiola-Kunis' attorney obtained a release of the City's claim for reimbursement of medical expenses by paying the full amount requested, $4,519.05, on August 7, 2001.
This action was first filed on February 25, 1998. At issue here is the fourth amended complaint, which was filed on August 27, 2001, and which alleges in pertinent part that the City has converted the property of the plaintiffs. The conversion is alleged to have been carried out by issuing liens and collecting funds from the plaintiffs as reimbursement for medical expenses paid by the City in instances where the plaintiffs had obtained recoveries from the third parties who injured them. The circuit court granted summary judgment for the City, finding that the plaintiffs could not establish the necessary element of absolute, immediate and unconditional right to the property at issue, which they alleged was converted.
ANALYSIS
Summary judgment may be granted only when, upon consideration of all the relevant pleadings, depositions, affidavits, and admissions, the court finds that there is no genuine issue of material fact and that the party seeking the judgment is entitled to it as a matter of law. 735 ILCS 5/2-1005(c) (West 2006); Siklas v. Ecker Center for Mental Health, Inc., 248 Ill. App.3d 124, 129, 187 Ill.Dec. 299, 617 *900 N.E.2d 507, 510 (1993). We review an order of summary judgment de novo. Varela v. St. Elizabeth's Hospital of Chicago, Inc., 372 Ill.App.3d 714, 722, 310 Ill. Dec. 688, 867 N.E.2d 1, 8 (2006). As we have noted, the relevant portion of the complaint sounds in tort and was brought on a theory of conversion. To prove that tort, a plaintiff must prove the following elements: (1) his right to the property; (2) that this right includes the absolute, unconditional right to immediate possession of the property; (3) he has demanded possession of the property; and (4) the defendant took control or claimed ownership of the property wrongfully and without authorization. Cirrincione v. Johnson, 184 Ill.2d 109, 114, 234 Ill.Dec. 455, 703 N.E.2d 67, 70 (1998); Cruthis v. Firstar Bank, N.A., 354 Ill.App.3d 1122, 1131, 290 Ill. Dec. 869, 822 N.E.2d 454, 463 (2004).
The circuit court found that the plaintiffs, as a matter of law, could not establish that they had an immediate, absolute and unconditional right to possession of the property, specifically, the reimbursement funds recovered from them by the City. Because the plaintiffs could not establish this element of the tort of conversion, the circuit court granted summary judgment for the City.
It is undisputed that Chicago is a home rule municipality, with the constitutional right to "exercise any power and perform any function pertaining to its government." Ill. Const. 1970, art. VII, § 6(a). Pursuant to this authority, the Chicago City Council (the Council) has enacted municipal ordinances providing for immediate payment of the medical costs incurred by Chicago police officers injured in the line of duty as well as one method by which the City can recover those costs from the third parties who caused the injuries to the police officers. Sections 3-8-190 and 3-8-200 of the Chicago Municipal Code (Municipal Code) authorize the Council, as recommended by the committee on finance (the committee), to appropriate money to pay for the medical care and hospital treatment of a police officer injured in the line of duty. Chicago Municipal Code § 3-8-190 (amended March 31, 2004); § 3-8-200 (amended June 6, 2001). Specific responsibility to arrange for immediate medical care and to provide the committee with a report on the costs of this care, a recommendation as to payment, and the facts surrounding the injury is delegated to the Chicago superintendent of police. Chicago Municipal Code § 3-8-210 (2004). This same section requires the Chicago police department's chief physician to certify the reasonableness of the expenses and requires the committee to determine if the injury was caused by the negligence of a third party. If the committee so finds, it must notify the corporation counsel of the City, who has the duty to seek payment from the third party and to sue that party for recovery if necessary. Chicago Municipal Code § 3-8-220 (1999).
There is also an alternative method by which the City may obtain reimbursement for medical payments made to injured police officers. By order of the Council, the comptroller may pay the medical expenses of a police officer injured in the line of duty if that officer signs an agreement to reimburse the City in the event the officer recovers damages from a third party. This order does not apply if the officer is incapacitated. The existence and implementation of this order were verified in an affidavit by Susan L. Conley, the committee's director of police and fire claims.
The plaintiffs do not dispute the existence of this order, dating back to at least 1974, and the fact that they have all signed the agreement to reimburse the City for medical expenses in the event they recover funds from the third party who injured *901 them. But the plaintiffs assert that this order is effectively void because it is in contravention of the City's ordinances concerning the recovery of such funds. As we have noted, the applicable municipal ordinances only authorize the corporation counsel to seek reimbursement from third parties who caused the injuries. The plaintiffs cite Illinois cases which they contend hold that home rule municipalities do not have the power to violate their own ordinances. They rely heavily on Palella v. Leyden Family Service & Mental Health Center, 79 Ill.2d 493, 38 Ill.Dec. 804, 404 N.E.2d 228 (1980), and Beneficial Development Corp. v. City of Highland Park, 161 Ill.2d 321, 204 Ill.Dec. 211, 641 N.E.2d 435 (1994). Palella is far afield from the case at hand, as it merely held that a municipality may not use its home rule powers to instruct the judiciary on how to interpret a law. Palella, 79 Ill.2d at 499, 38 Ill.Dec. 804, 404 N.E.2d at 231. But we find that Beneficial actually provides strong support for the City in this case. In Beneficial the home rule municipality had enacted an ordinance establishing procedures for a builder to recapture that portion of the builder's expenses which directly benefited adjoining landowners. At issue in this case was whether the municipality could use an alternative method of recapture by entering into a recapture agreement with a particular builder rather than using the procedures set out in the municipality's recapture ordinance. Our supreme court invalidated as contrary to public policy those portions of the agreement permitting the recapture of expenses which it found had not been used for improvements benefitting adjoining landowners. Beneficial, 161 Ill.2d at 330-32, 204 Ill.Dec. 211, 641 N.E.2d at 439-40. But, directly on point to the issue before us, it also held that the municipality was not bound to utilize only the procedures set out in its recapture ordinance to recapture expenses benefitting adjoining landowners, but could utilize a more practical and efficient system such as an agreement made directly with the builder, where that method did not contravene the recapture ordinance. Beneficial, 161 Ill.2d at 329-30, 204 Ill.Dec. 211, 641 N.E.2d at 438.
What the Beneficial court implicitly found was that an ordinance establishing one method does not automatically invalidate the municipality's utilization of another method for accomplishing the same goal. This is precisely the situation in the case before us. As the City notes, obtaining reimbursement directly from a police officer who received third-party payment can mitigate litigation costs which the City would incur by intervening in the officer's lawsuit against the third party. Nothing in this substitute method of obtaining reimbursement for the City's payments of medical expenses, where the beneficiary obtains compensation from a third party, violates the City's ordinance provisions authorizing direct action by the City against the third party. Therefore the plaintiffs cannot establish that the City has violated its own ordinances. In our review of the elements of the action for conversion upon which the plaintiffs base their claims, it is clear that they cannot prove the element of having an immediate, absolute, and unconditional right to the funds recovered from the third-party tortfeasors and thus their conversion action fails.
We note that in their reply brief filed in this court, the plaintiffs assert for the first time that the reimbursement agreement with the City, which they all signed, did not establish a valid lien because it did not use the term "lien." We consider this contention to have been forfeited because it was not raised in the trial court or in plaintiffs' opening brief. Nor would we find this argument persuasive on *902 the merits, for a promise to reimburse another party may constitute a lien even in the absence of specifically being called a lien. Compton v. Country Mutual Insurance Co., 382 Ill.App.3d 323, 327, 320 Ill. Dec. 734, 887 N.E.2d 878, 883 (2008) (language of insurance policy asserting the company's interest in funds recovered by its policyholder from third parties was sufficient to create a lien, despite the absence of that term from the provision). In this case all of the named plaintiffs signed a reimbursement agreement with the City to reimburse it for medical expenses paid to the plaintiffs if the plaintiffs recovered damages from a third party. This language sufficed to create a lien.
Because of our determination of these issues, we do not reach the City's alternative contention that the claims of some of the named plaintiffs are barred by the statute of limitations. That contention would only eliminate some of the plaintiffs; it would not be fatal to the underlying claim. For the reasons set forth above, we affirm the judgment of the circuit court of Cook County and remand this cause for further proceedings.
Affirmed and remanded.
KARNEZIS, P.J., and SOUTH, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  A second portion of the complaint alleged that from 1997 to 2001 the City improperly filed similar liens against Chicago police officers for reimbursement of wages paid them by the City for lost work time caused by on-duty and off-duty injuries. That portion of the complaint is still pending in the circuit court of Cook County.
[2]  Judge Anthony Young presided over these proceedings through his issuance of the order of July 6, 2006, granting partial summary judgment for the City. The case was then heard by Judge James R. Epstein who, on February 26, 2007, denied the plaintiffs' motion for reconsideration and entered the Rule 304(a) finding rendering that judgment appealable.

=== CASE 2223103 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:54.529199+00 ===

44 Mich. App. 280 (1973)
205 N.W.2d 240
PODBIELSKI
v.
ARGYLE BOWL, INC.
Docket Nos. 11025, 11026.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided January 16, 1973.
*282 Irving Blum and Zemke, Lustig & Leikin, P.C., for plaintiff.
Sullivan, Sullivan, Ranger & Ward, for defendant.
Before: V.J. BRENNAN, P.J., and McGREGOR and BRONSON, JJ.
Leave to appeal granted, 389 Mich 791.
V.J. BRENNAN, P.J.
These two suits were brought under the dramshop act (MCLA 436.22; MSA 18.993) to recover damages stemming from the death of Mrs. Loretta Podina. Plaintiff Juanita Podbielski is the mother of the decedent and grandmother and guardian of the minor plaintiffs (decedent's children).
At the trial, Mr. Podina, decedent's husband, testified that at about 4 p.m. on November 25, 1967, he drank one "Seven and Seven" at defendant's bar, and that he then went shopping and returned to the defendant's bowling alley about 7 p.m. During the next two hours Podina said he had several drinks of "Seven and Seven", but that he did not feel intoxicated when he left at 9 p.m. to go home and pick up his wife. Podina said that he and his wife returned to the Argyle Bowling Alley about 10 p.m. Upon their arrival, Podina, who had not eaten all day, drank another "Seven and Seven" before going out to bowl. While he was bowling he had another drink. Then he fell down and hurt his leg because he had been drinking too much. Podina stopped bowling and went back into the bar where he had "quite a few" more "Seven and Sevens", possibly five or six more, while his *283 wife continued bowling. When she finished bowling, she joined him in the bar where Podina continued drinking. He lost count of how much more he drank but he remembered being served "last call". When they left the bar to go home, Mrs. Podina wanted to drive but her husband said no, he was all right. They did not go anywhere else to drink. The fatal accident was reported to the police about 2:10 a.m.
Mrs. Podbielski filed these two suits seeking compensation individually for the loss of the care, comfort, and companionship of her daughter, and for the funeral bills and other expenses. She also sued as guardian of the three minor plaintiffs seeking compensation on their behalf for the loss of the care, comfort, love, affection, and companionship of their mother.
The court limited the recovery to $27,622, the estimated cost of the services lost by the children, plus the funeral expenses. The court allowed plaintiffs to argue the loss of comfort, companionship and love, but would not allow recovery on these bases.
The jury returned a verdict of $1,730.70 for plaintiff individually, and $9,032 as guardian of Robert Podina, $7,838 as guardian of Florence Podina, and $3,412 as guardian of Michael Sanderson. Defendant filed a motion for judgment n.o.v., or in the alternative, for a new trial. That motion was denied and defendant appealed. Plaintiffs then filed a cross-appeal seeking a new trial on the issue of damages only.
Defendant raises a plethora of arguments on appeal; the first of these is that the trial court erred by failing to grant a mistrial after one of the jurors had, in a letter to the presiding judge of the circuit, requested to be discharged from jury duty. *284 The most pertinent portions of that letter are as follows:
"SUBJECT: Request to be excused from Jury Duty
"I humbly submit this request to be excused from jury duty on the following grounds:
"I am strongly opposed to being forced to serve on jury duty. I feel this decision should be one of the individual's choice based on his or her personal convictions.
"I don't feel that there is anything in life that renders me capable of determining the fate of another human being.
"The Holy Scriptures tell us, `Judge ye not that ye be not judged with the same measures.' Also, when the hostile crowd brought the woman before Christ who had been caught in the act of adultery and demanded she be stoned to death, He wrote upon the ground these words, `He that is without fault let him cast the first stone.' Not one stone was cast. Another question was asked of Jesus, `How many times should we forgive our adversaries, seven times?' He replied, `Not seven times, but seven times seventy times.'
"I don't feel that my conscious [sic] would allow me to render a verdict of guilty against another human being; especially a non-white, when I consider the many contributing factors in America's racist society. Also, I sincerely believe a great judgment [sic] day will come when the giver of all life will judge each of us according to our deeds.
* * *
"Further, I am of the firm opinion that no black person should be forced to serve on any jury, unless of course the individual on trial is black, then the primary aim should be to win an acquittal. How could we possibly agree to a verdict of guilty against a black brother or sister when we consider the oppressions, the intimidations, the persecutions and disrespect that black people have undergone in America.
* * *
"Finally, in view of my personal beliefs and feelings, *285 as set out in the foregoing statements, I would be a disservice rather than a service if I were forced to serve jury duty.
"Therefore, I beg that I be excused from jury duty now and that my name not be considered for subsequent duty in any court.
"Thank you very kindly for your consideration in this matter."
This letter was not received by the trial judge until the third day of this trial. Upon receipt of the letter, the trial judge, in chambers and on the record, showed the letter to counsel for both plaintiffs and defendant. Defendant's counsel immediately moved for a mistrial on the grounds that the attitude of this juror may have been communicated to the remainder of the jury and could possibly have resulted in incurable prejudice. This motion was denied by the trial court. Defense counsel refused to comment on the trial court's suggestion that the author of the letter be excused from the jury on the grounds that counsel did not want to prejudice his motion for a mistrial.
The court, before resuming the trial, interviewed a member of the jury to determine if there had been discussions among the jurors related to the substance of the letter. The judge's inquiries were designed to reveal whether or not the author of the letter had communicated his feelings to other jurors. The statements of the juror questioned indicated that this had not been the case.
The court then interviewed the author of the letter to determine whether he should be permitted to remain on the jury. During that interview, the following exchange took place:
"The Court: * * * [W]hat I want to know is whether you can eliminate your personal feelings and decide it *286 on the facts that come from the witness stand, and the law as I give it to you?
"Juror No. 5: Oh, yes. I wouldn't let my personal feelings enter in here. I would, to the best of my ability and knowledge, render a decision that I felt was fair."
Subsequently, the court resumed the trial without excluding this juror, or taking any other action in this regard.
Since there was an alternate chosen when the jury was empaneled, it may have been the wiser course to excuse this juror upon receipt of the letter. However, we feel the trial judge satisfied himself as to the juror's qualifications. We therefore conclude that defendant's first argument is without merit.
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred by failing to grant defendant's motions either for a directed verdict, or for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, on the basis that the plaintiffs had failed to establish a causal relationship between Mr. Podina's intoxication and the automobile accident. After a review of the record, we feel that the defendant's argument is without merit: to borrow language from the opinion of the Michigan Supreme Court in Fletcher v Flynn, 368 Mich 328, 334-335 (1962),
"An examination of the record discloses to us that there were sufficient facts and permissible inferences from facts from which the jury could conclude there was a causal connection between the accident which struck down [Loretta Podina] and the selling or serving of alcoholic liquor to [Mr. Podina] by [defendant] * * *."
The defendant argues also that the court below committed reversible error by permitting a doctor to read into the record a notation he had made on *287 Mr. Podina's emergency room chart. The notation was made shortly after the accident and stated that Mr. Podina was drunk. The record establishes that all the criteria for the reception of the statement into evidence on the basis of past recollection recorded were met. (See opinion of Justice T.E. BRENNAN in Jaxon v Detroit, 379 Mich 405 [1967].)
The defendant alleges that the trial court erred by limiting defendant's cross-examination of plaintiffs' expert witness. Defendant was attempting to elicit testimony regarding the approximate amount of payment the expert expected for his testimony. We do not feel the court committed reversible error since defendant was allowed to demonstrate that the witness was being paid for his services. The cross-examination of expert witnesses is within the discretion of the trial court (People v MacCullough, 281 Mich 15 [1937]) and we find no abuse of that discretion.
The defendant, in addition, argues that the plaintiffs' theory of damages, that the minor children had been deprived of the services of their mother, does not fall within the ambit of the relevant statute. The pertinent portion of the dramshop act, supra, provides:
"Every * * * child * * * who shall be injured in person or property, means of support or otherwise, by an intoxicated person * * * shall have a right of action in his or her name * * *."
Defendant's allegation is totally without merit. Damages for loss of an individual's services are recoverable in this state. Konieczka v Mt Clemens Metal Products Co, 360 Mich 500 (1960). The dramshop act is to be interpreted liberally in order to give effect to the intent of the Legislature. Elliot v Buchanan, 20 Mich App 567 (1969). A fair reading *288 of the statute leads us to conclude that the claims of the minor children were permissible thereunder.
Finally, each party raises an argument regarding the trial court's ruling on damages. The defendant's argument is that the trial court erred by permitting Mrs. Podbielski to testify regarding the debts incurred by her for her daughter's funeral. It objected below on the grounds that she was not entitled to an award on that basis as a matter of law.
It is well settled that a husband is bound to pay his wife's funeral expenses. In re La Freniere's Estate, 323 Mich 562 (1949). If such expenses are borne by another, they may be recovered from the person liable for such expenses, in this case the husband.[1] Mrs. Podbielski's cause of action to recoup any monies spent by her for her daughter's burial properly lies against Mr. Podina.
On cross appeal, plaintiffs argue that the trial court erred by refusing to allow the minor children to recover for the loss of their mother's love, affection, and companionship. While no case on point has arisen recently, the Michigan Dram Shop Act has been held to permit damages for mental anguish (Johnson v Grondin, 170 Mich 447 [1912]), shame, disgrace (Spray v Ayotte, 161 Mich 593 [1910]), mortification (Lucker v Liske, 111 Mich 683 [1897]), and injured feelings (Radley v Seider, 99 Mich 431 [1894]). If damages are permissible under the dramshop act for the infliction of such emotional suffering, we see no reason to prevent recovery of damages for the loss of a mother's love, affection, and companionship.
We therefore remand this case to the trial court *289 for retrial of the issue of damages alone and such other actions as are not inconsistent with this opinion.
Affirmed in part; reversed in part.
All concurred.
NOTES
[1]  7 Callaghan's Michigan Civil Jurisprudence, Corpses and Burial, § 5, p 7.

=== CASE 2223106 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:54.567171+00 ===

44 Mich. App. 308 (1973)
205 N.W.2d 267
PEOPLE
v.
HILL.
Docket No. 12101.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided January 16, 1973.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Robert A. Derengoski, Solicitor General, William L. Cahalan, Prosecuting Attorney, Dominick R. Carnovale, Chief, Appellate Department, and John L. Thompson, Jr., Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
Nussbaum, McEvoy & Moscow, P.C. (by John D. Lazar), for defendant on appeal.
Before: LESINSKI, C.J., and FITZGERALD and J.H. GILLIS, JJ.
J.H. GILLIS, J.
Defendant was convicted of armed robbery. MCLA 750.529; MSA 28.797. On appeal we affirm.
On May 14, 1968, two men entered a store owned by Robert Hamel, forced him, his employees, and customers to lie on the floor at gunpoint, took the money from the cash registers, and fled. Defendant was later identified by Mr. Hamel, apparently from a photograph, and police sought and obtained a warrant for his arrest.
The complaint[1] which provided the basis for the arrest contained a bare recitation of the crime in *310 the statutory language. It named the defendant as the perpetrator, and was signed by the police detective as the complaining witness. It was primarily stated in conclusory terms. None of the underlying facts which formed the basis for the conclusions were given. Although sworn to by the police detective, it contained no affirmative allegation that it was made on his personal knowledge. Indeed, the nature of the crime made it appear unlikely that it had been witnessed by a police detective, such that he could have had personal knowledge of the commission of the crime or the identity of the defendant.
The people admit in their brief that:
"The complaint in the instant case was made positively by the officer who signed as complainant, but was in fact made on information and belief of that officer from information received from the victim and res gestae witness to the armed robbery."
On appeal, defendant contends that that document could not support the independent judgment of a disinterested magistrate as to the existence of probable cause to believe the defendant guilty of the crime charged. Since that document was defective, his arrest under it constituted a violation of the rights guaranteed him by the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments. Furthermore, since his arrest was illegal, jurisdiction over his person never attached, and his conviction is void.
The requirements for a valid arrest warrant under the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments *311 have been set forth in Giordenello v United States, 357 US 480; 78 S Ct 1245; 2 L Ed 2d 1503 (1958), and most recently in Whiteley v Warden of Wyoming State Penitentiary, 401 US 560; 91 S Ct 1031; 28 L Ed 2d 306 (1971).
"The purpose of the complaint, then, is to enable the appropriate magistrate, here a commissioner, to determine whether the `probable cause' required to support a warrant exists. The commissioner must judge for himself the persuasiveness of the facts relied on by a complaining officer to show probable cause. He should not accept without question the complainant's mere conclusion that the person whose arrest is sought has committed a crime." Giordenello, supra, 357 US 480, 486; 78 S Ct 1245, 1250; 2 L Ed 2d 1503, 1509 (1958).
In order to accomplish this result, the magistrate must at the very least be supplied "the facts relied on by a complaining officer" and not merely his conclusions. It must appear that the affiant spoke with personal knowledge, or else the sources for his belief must be indicated. Where his belief is based on information from other persons, some basis for their credibility must be shown.
"Giordenello v United States, supra, and Aquilar v Texas, 378 US 108 [; 84 S Ct 1509; 12 L Ed 2d 723 (1964)], established that a magistrate is intended to make a neutral judgment that resort to further criminal process is justified. A complaint must provide a foundation for that judgment. It must provide the affiant's answer to the magistrate's hypothetical question, `What makes you think that the defendant committed the offense charged?' This does not reflect a requirement that the Commissioner ignore the credibility of the complaining witness. There is a difference between disbelieving the affiant and requiring him to indicate some basis for his allegations. Obviously any reliance upon factual allegations necessarily entails some degree of reliance upon the credibility of the source. See, e.g., *312 Johnson v United States, 333 US 10, 13 [; 68 S Ct 367, 368; 92 L Ed 436, 439 (1947)]. Nor does it indicate that each factual allegation which the affiant puts forth must be independently documented, or that each and every fact which contributed to his conclusions be spelled out in the complaint. Compare United States v Ventresca, 380 US 102 [; 85 S Ct 741; 13 L Ed 2d 684 (1965)]. It simply requires that enough information be presented to the Commissioner to enable him to make the judgment that the charges are not capricious and are sufficiently supported to justify bringing into play the further steps of the criminal process." Jaben v United States, 381 US 214, 224-225; 85 S Ct 1365, 1371; 14 L Ed 2d 345, 353 (1965).
These constitutional requirements of the Fourth Amendment are applicable to the states through the Fourteenth Amendment. Ker v State of California, 374 US 23; 83 S Ct 1623; 10 L Ed 2d 726 (1963). See People v Moreno, ___ Colo ___; 491 P2d 575 (1971); State v Saidel, 159 Conn 96; 267 A2d 449 (1970); State v Licari, 153 Conn 127; 214 A2d 900 (1965).
Michigan has not hesitated to acknowledge the binding effect of these requirements in cases involving search warrants. People v Dogans, 26 Mich App 411, 418-419 (1970); People v Zoder, 15 Mich App 118, 122-123 (1968). And when an arrest warrant is sought upon a complaint expressly made on information and belief, we have always required the magistrate to make further inquiry in order to satisfy himself that the probable cause required to support a warrant exists. People v Heffron, 53 Mich 527 (1884). See Brown v Hadwin, 182 Mich 491, 497 (1914); Curnow v Kessler, 110 Mich 10, 13 (1896).
Unfortunately, there has developed in Michigan a curious exception to that rule. Where a complaint purports to be made on personal knowledge, *313 then, no matter how conclusory the statements and absurd the presumption of personal knowledge, these minimum requirements are no longer enforced. At least, "* * * it is incompetent for a defendant, upon arraignment, to impeach the complaint by showing a lack of knowledge by the complaining witness". People v Mosley, 338 Mich 559, 564 (1953). See People v Davis, 343 Mich 348, 354, 355 (1955).
This long-standing rule has apparently never been challenged in light of Giordenello, supra, and cases interpreting it. It was acknowledged in People v Roney, 7 Mich App 678, 680-681 (1967) (where the distinction between the two types of complaints and the resulting disparate lines of cases are analyzed), without reference to any possible conflict with United States Supreme Court cases interpreting the Fourth Amendment.
The rule allows judicial activity which fails to comport with constitutional requirements. It encourages misleading complaints by police officers and ridiculous presumptions by magistrates. The Roney case provides a good example: there, the warrant was issued on the complaint of a Detroit policewoman who alleged the commission of the crime of statutory rape on her own knowledge and not on information and belief. We consider it extremely unlikely that the rape occurred in the presence of the policewoman. It is equally unlikely that the armed robbery perpetrated in the instant case occurred in the presence of the police detective who made the complaint purportedly on personal knowledge. Certainly it must have appeared unlikely to the magistrate who issued the warrant. Yet, under the Michigan case law, the magistrate was allowed to make the unreasonable assumption that the officer was swearing on personal knowledge. *314 He was thus relieved of the duty, required by constitution and statute,[2] to make further inquiry in order to satisfy himself as to the existence of probable cause based on his own conclusions, not the complainant's.
This state has never countenanced such exaltation of form over substance in the case of search warrants. In People v Zoder, supra, this Court reversed a conviction because evidence which had been seized under a defective search warrant was erroneously admitted at trial. The defect was an affidavit which
"did not state whether the affiant spoke with personal knowledge of the matters contained therein * * * Martha Cox's affidavit did not state the sources of her belief and failed to provide a basis for an independent finding of probable cause by the magistrate." People v Zoder, supra, pp 120-123.
The authority relied on by the Zoder Court for the principle that the source of an affiant's knowledge must be identified and the magistrate's decision must be independent was Giordenello v United States, supra, which involved a defective arrest warrant. Surely if these principles as articulated by the United States Supreme Court in an arrest warrant case apply in Michigan to search warrants, there is no rational basis for denying their application to arrest warrants.
It is axiomatic that the constitutional requirements as to probable cause which apply to search warrants apply as well to arrest warrants. Giordenello v United States, supra; Aguilar v Texas, 378 US 108, 112-113; 84 S Ct 1509, 1512-1513; 12 L Ed 2d 723, 727 (1964); Whiteley v Warden, supra. As *315 was noted by the Supreme Court of Errors of Connecticut:
"Indeed, it is obvious that the amendment's reference to `persons * * * to be seized' is inapt to refer to anything other than a seizure of the person, which certainly is inclusive of an arrest. And on principle there would be no reason for throwing stringent constitutional safeguards around the seizure of property, while providing no similar safeguards around the seizure, i.e., arrest, of persons." State v Licari, supra, 132.
At a minimum, those safeguards require that the information presented to the magistrate when the arrest warrant is requested contain:
1) the operative facts and circumstances relied on by the complaining witness to show probable cause, and not merely that witness' conclusions that the defendant committed a crime;
2) an indication of the sources of the information, i.e., personal knowledge and observation; reports from victims and eyewitnesses; police investigations; information from informers, etc.;
3) where the source is hearsay information from an informer (other than a victim-eyewitness), some substantial basis for crediting the hearsay must appear.[3]Giordenello v United States, supra; Aguilar v Texas, supra; Spinelli v United States, 393 US 410; 89 S Ct 584; 21 L Ed 2d 637 (1968).
The reasoning of cases typified by People v Mosley, supra, practically ensures that these minimum requirements will not be met. Those cases condone the magistrate's abdication of his decision-making responsibility by allowing unquestioning *316 reliance on conclusory complaints based on hearsay and other sources which are never identified, and, in any case, preclude the defendant from successfully challenging the legality of the warrant upon a timely objection. That such a practice is constitutionally impermissible is unequivocally stated in Coolidge v New Hampshire, 403 US 443, 450; 91 S Ct 2022, 2029; 29 L Ed 2d 564, 573 (1971); Whiteley v Warden, supra; Giordenello v United States, supra.
The warrant in the instant case was based on a complaint which was conclusory and which failed to identify sources of information. It was, therefore, unconstitutionally issued. We must next determine its effect on defendant's arrest and subsequent proceedings, and whether objection was timely made.
The validity of an arrest is immaterial to the validity of a subsequent conviction when the trial court had jurisdiction of the offense charged and acquired jurisdiction of defendant's person by the filing of an information and an appearance by defendant. People v Licavoli, 256 Mich 229 (1931); United States ex rel Penachio v Kropp, 448 F2d 110, 111 (CA 6, 1971).[4] See also People v Miller, 235 Mich 340 (1926); People v Henry Robinson, 37 Mich App 115 (1971); People v Nawrocki, 6 Mich App 46 (1967), holding that the legality of a defendant's *317 arrest cannot be considered at trial; however, all of these cases dealt with arrests without a warrant and, therefore, did not address the issue before us. Objection to the validity of the arrest warrant, to be timely, must come before the defendant submits to the jurisdiction of the court by pleading to the information.
An excellent discussion of the competing considerations involved in this issue is to be found in State v Raskin, 30 Wis 2d 39, 47; 139 NW2d 667, 671-672 (1966):
"By the time the preliminary examination has been completed (or waived) and there has been a bindover, probable cause has been found by an independent and neutral magistrate that the defendant has committed a crime. The reason a defendant should be permitted to raise the invalidity of his arrest under White [State ex rel White v Simpson, 28 Wis 2d 590; 137 NW2d 391 (1965)] when he appears in the trial court and prior to actual arraignment and entry of a plea, is to enforce the purpose of the White rule which is to assure that arrest warrants will be issued only on probable cause as determined by a neutral magistrate. If the state, at the first appearance (as distinguished from arraignment) following the bindover, could gain the dismissal of the motion attacking the validity of the arrest (on the grounds of White) by pointing to the results of the preliminary, the beneficial effect of the White ruling on prosecution practices would be almost completely negated." See State v Saidel, supra; State v Licari, supra.
In the instant case, defendant did not object to the validity of the arrest warrant until appeal. His objection comes too late. His appearance and plea to the information constituted a waiver of any defect in the complaint and warrant.[5]
*318 Defendant's second assignment of error relates to the prosecutor's elicitation of testimony that defendant had threatened a witness to keep him from testifying. The trial judge sustained defendant's objection and ordered the testimony stricken. Nevertheless, defendant alleges that the trial judge may have erroneously considered that testimony in reaching his verdict since it does not affirmatively appear in his findings of fact that he did not.
In fact, such evidence is admissible; thus even if the trial court considered the testimony, no error resulted. People v Falkner, 36 Mich App 101, 108 (1971). Furthermore,
"in the absence of proof to the contrary, it is presumed that the trial judge was not prejudiced and followed the law. People v Farmer, 30 Mich App 707 (1971)." People v Vasquez, 39 Mich App 573, 574 (1972).
Finally, defendant contends that there is a possibility that the trial judge looked at the preliminary examination transcript, thus requiring reversal of defendant's conviction. The assumption that the trial judge examined said transcript is unwarranted. The trial court's question, "Does anyone have a copy of it?" in referring to the preliminary examination transcript, and defense counsel's indication that he had the sole copy, tends to indicate that the trial court did not even have a copy of the preliminary examination transcript. In any case, there is nothing in the record to support defendant's claim. The burden of proof in this regard is *319 on the defendant. Absent proof, it is presumed that the trial court followed the law and refrained from reading the preliminary examination transcript. People v Farmer, supra.
Affirmed.
All concurred.
NOTES
[1]  "The complaint and Examination of the above-named COMPLAINING WITNESS taken and made before the undersigned Judge (or Acting Judge) of the above-named MUNICIPAL OR DISTRICT COURT, upon the date indicated below, who being duly sworn says that heretofore on the DATE OF OFFENSE listed above, at the LOCATION listed above in the County of Wayne, State of Michigan, the above-named Defendant(s), [Joseph Hill] late of the County of Wayne, did assault the above-named COMPLAINANT while armed with a dangerous weapon or an article used or fashioned in a manner to lead the person so assaulted to reasonably believe it to be a dangerous weapon, to-wit: a gun and did then and there feloniously rob, steal and take from the person of said COMPLAINANT, or in his presence, $150.00, contrary to Sec. 750.529, C.L. 1948 as amended by P.A. 1959, No 71."
[2]  US Const, Ams IV, XIV; Const 1963, art 1, § 11; MCLA 766.2; MSA 28.920.
[3]  Compare Aguilar v Texas, 378 US 108; 84 S Ct 1509; 12 L Ed 2d 723 (1964), and People v Zoder, 15 Mich App 118, 122-123 (1968), with United States v Bell, 457 F2d 1231, 1238-1239 (CA 5, 1972), for the rationale behind the distinction between information from victim-eyewitnesses and other informers.
[4]  See Lurie v District Attorney of Kings County, 56 Misc 2d 68; 288 NYS2d 256 (S Ct, 1968), for a thorough analysis of these issues. As it noted therein, we are not concerned with cases which hold that even illegally kidnapping a defendant to bring him within the jurisdiction does not prevent the court from acquiring personal jurisdiction. See Frisbie v Collins, 342 US 519; 72 S Ct 509; 96 L Ed 541 (1952); People v Eberspacher, 79 Hun 410; 29 NYS 796 (1894). In those cases, there existed a validly issued arrest warrant which, if properly executed within the county, would have resulted in jurisdiction of the person. Once brought within the jurisdiction, even forcibly, the validly issued warrant was effective to confer upon the court jurisdiction of defendant's person.
[5]  We call to the attention of the bar the proposed amendment to GCR 1963, 785, published on order of the Michigan Supreme Court, dated May 15, 1972, with comments to be made to the Chief Justice. The proposed rule reads, in pertinent part: "785.6(2) A plea of not guilty puts in issue every material allegation of the accusatory pleadings and shall be construed as a denial of every material allegation in the indictment or information and shall not be deemed a waiver of the rights of defendant to thereafter raise any factual, jurisdictional or legal defense." (Emphasis supplied.) 51 Michigan State Bar Journal 7, 437-439 (1972).