=== CASE 9738838 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:59.0651+00 ===

Otis, Justice
(dissenting).
I would reject all of the serially numbered ballots.
The purpose of requiring secrecy in balloting is not merely to protect the innocent elector from intrusions while he is voting. It is also to prevent the possibility of connivance between a corrupt elector and third persons who require evidence that a vote has been cast in a particular manner.1
While an elector should not be disfranchised because of identifying marks placed on his ballot after he has voted,2 I do not agree that he himself is without fault in using a ballot which is patently susceptible of identification when he receives it.
If we permit numbered ballots to be counted we cannot logically reject those which have been previously identified with the voter’s *457name and address. In either case a corrupt elector has an equal opportunity to prove to a dishonest pollwatcher how he voted.
We instinctively rebel against disfranchising a great number of persons who are unquestionably innocent of any wrongdoing. Nevertheless, the fact that Minnesota elections have been historically free from fraud is a tribute to our strict application of the rules safeguarding anonymity in voting. If the integrity of our election processes is to continue, it is not enough that we condone loose practices until there is tangible evidence of corruption. There is no better way to avoid a conflagration than “to keep the straw away from the fire.” Goodrich v. Northwestern Tel. Exch. Co. 161 Minn. 106, 111, 201 N. W. 290, 292.
Mr. Justice Sheran took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.
Elwell v. Comstock, 99 Minn. 261, 270, 109 N. W. 113, 698, 701, 7 L. R. A. (N. S.) 621.
Pennington v. Hare, 60 Minn. 146, 62 N. W. 116.

=== CASE 9738839 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:00.666935+00 ===

Nelson, Justice.
The grand jury of Ramsey County returned an indictment charging defendant, Jacob Joseph Smith, and Richard Robert Mitchell and *309Richard Thomas McCarty with having committed the crime of murder in the third degree contrary to Minn. St. 619.10.1 The indictment alleged that the act took place on August 12, 1959, and that the victim, Gordon Knopic, died on August 16, the result of an attempt to commit robbery in the first degree.
Defendant was tried separately and a jury verdict of guilty was returned. Thereafter he moved that the verdict be set aside and the indictment dismissed or a new trial be granted. He appeals from an order denying that motion.
The settled case consists of a synopsis of the testimony of 42 witnesses and a verbatim transcript of the testimony of McCarty and of the medical witnesses, which reveal the following facts: On the evening of August 11, 1959, defendant together with Mitchell, McCarty, and one Lawrence Liebgott happened to meet in Duane’s Lounge, a tavern in St. Paul. McCarty at the time was looking for one Richard Stone who owed him $4. Since Stone was not there, Liebgott suggested that they go to another bar where they might find him. The four men then went to Triviski’s Bar where they stayed a short time. About 11 o’clock they arrived at Harry Unise’s bar on Rice Street near University Avenue. Upon entering, they took places at the bar. Gordon Knopic, dressed in green, uniform-type clothing, was at the bar. McCarty testified that Liebgott went to the far end of the bar to talk with an acquaintance and Mitchell stood at the bar near Knopic. McCarty testified that Mitchell, having seen Knopic cash, a check, said that he “was going to get him.” Mitchell left the bar, and about a half hour later, Knopic left, followed by defendant. McCarty testified that he finished his drink, which took 3 or 4 minutes, and left the bar with the intention of going home.
*310McCarty stated that upon reaching the street he looked to his right and saw Smith running around the corner of the Johnson liquor store, which is about one-half block north of the Unise bar; that he ran after Smith to see what was happening; and that upon reaching the corner of the liquor store he saw Smith pulling a man out of the only car in the parking lot adjacent to the liquor store. The testimony shows that that man was Gordon Knopic and that the automobile was his. McCarty then testified:
“* * * The man Smith was pulling out of the car was dressed in green; Smith opened the door and pulled him out of the car and hit him and knocked him down; I think he hit the man in the head. The guy in the green pants I think opened the door first, and Smith pulled him out; the man was just getting into the car; from where I was standing I could not hear anything being said by either one of them. I think Smith only hit the man twice. I walked up behind Smith to see what he was going to do. I was going to try to stop him, and then Mitchell came running across the street * * * and into the parking lot; * * * without saying anything to anyone, Mitchell kicked the fellow in the head * * * Mitchell was running on a dead run and he kicked him on the run just like you would kick a football. * * * I did not touch the man at all. I hollered at him to leave him alone, and I hollered at Mitchell — he kicked him a couple of times, and I said, ‘For God’s sake, you’re going to kill the guy.’ ”
A woman living in an apartment nearby saw the scuffle and began screaming for the police. Six occupants of a car being driven past the parking lot also saw the attack take place and stopped to assist Knopic. McCarty testified that defendant, Mitchell, and he then ran from the scene and reentered the Unise bar through the back door. When they entered the bar, Liebgott was there. McCarty stated that Liebgott then asked defendant if “he got any money off of that guy.” Both defendant and Mitchell said that they had not. McCarty stated that Lieb-gott then threatened him that “if I said anything he’d get me for it.”
In the meantime the police had been called and upon their arrival found Knopic sitting on the curb, to which he had been helped by some of the witnesses of the attack. His face was badly beaten, and he *311was bleeding profusely from the nose and mouth. He was taken by ambulance to Ancker Hospital, where he died on August 16, 1959.
Upon initial examination it was impossible to determine the extent of Knopic’s injuries because of the extremely swollen condition of his face, his eyes being so swollen that they could not be opened at all. Blood transfusions were given and X rays taken which indicated a fractured nose; a fracture of the right jaw; a fracture of the left in-fraorbital ridge, which is a fracture of the bone immediately below the right eye; and rib fractures on the right side of the chest.
Dr. John Brainard, a surgery resident at Ancker Hospital, saw Knopic and testified that he was disoriented and confused, indicating something amiss in his central nervous system which Dr. Brainard suggested might be delirium tremens. In explanation, he stated:
“* * * Delirium tremens is a mental state of confusion and disorientation with hallucinations and gross tremor of the extremities. It is usually associated with alcoholic poisoning. Delirium tremens is not the result of only alcoholism and can be caused by other things, but it is usually caused by alcoholism.”
Dr. Brainard also stated that delirium tremens may result from cirrhosis of the liver, from arteriosclerosis, or from an acute inflammation of the brain.
Dr. William D. Smith, an intern at the hospital, testified that Knopic had fallen out of bed at approximately 11:30 on the night of August 14 and that the witness then conducted a routine neurological examination and determined that Knopic had sustained no further injuries as a result of this fall.
Dr. Frank W. Van De Water testified that he had Knopic under his care during his confinement in the hospital. On the death certificate, which he signed, the immediate cause of death is diagnosed as delirium tremens brought on by chronic alcoholism. “Cirrhosis of the liver; Head trauma including fractured maxilla, mandible, nasal bones; Chest trauma, fractured ribs 6, 7, 8 right” were also listed as other significant conditions contributing to death but not related to the immediate cause.
1-2. Defendant contends that the trial court erred in failing to *312grant his motion for dismissal at the close of the testimony on the ground that the evidence was not sufficient to support a conviction beyond a reasonable doubt. He claims that McCarty was an accomplice and that his testimony and a statement given by him to the police, which was admitted into evidence, constituted a “confession” which lacked the corroboration required by Minn. St. 634.04. That statute provides:
“A conviction cannot be had upon the testimony of an accomplice, unless it is corroborated by such other evidence as tends to convict the defendant of the commission of the offense, and the corroboration is not sufficient if it merely shows the commission of the offense or the circumstances thereof.”
What corroborative evidence is required was recently stated in State v. Armstrong, 257 Minn. 295, 307, 101 N. W. (2d) 398, 406, as follows:
“The reasons for requiring the testimony of an accomplice to be bolstered by corroborating testimony have been stated by this court in State v. Smith, 144 Minn. 348, 175 N. W. 689, and State v. Jackson, 198 Minn. Ill, 268 N. W. 924. The rule since the enactment of the statute is, however, that it does not require a case to be made out against a person accused of a crime sufficient for his conviction before the testimony of an accomplice can be considered, but the corroborating evidence must, independent of the testimony of the accomplice, tend in some degree to establish the guilt of the accused but need not be sufficiently weighty standing alone to justify a conviction. State v. Korsch, 168 Minn. 354, 210 N. W. 10; State v. Baker, 161 Minn. 1, 200 N. W. 815; State v. Whitman, 103 Minn. 92, 114 N. W. 363, Í4 Ann. Cas. 309; also see, 5 Dunnell, Dig. (3 ed.) § 2457.'Evidence relating exclusively to the fact of the commission of the crime and the circumstances thereof, as distinct from defendant’s connection therewith, would not be sufficient.”
See, State v. Rasmussen, 241 Minn. 310, 313, 63 N. W. (2d) 1, 3; State v. Lawlor, 28 Minn. 216, 9 N. W. 698.
The state takes the position that McCarty was not an accomplice *313and that he made no confession either by his written statement or his testimony. It contends also that if he was an accomplice his testimony was sufficiently corroborated.
In 5 Dunnell, Dig. (3 ed.) § 2462, a confession has been defined as follows:
“A confession involves the idea of criminality. It applies only to a direct or implied acknowledgment of guilt, after an offense committed, but does not extend to admissions of fact which in themselves are innocent and involve no criminal intent.”
It would be most difficult to interpret either the statement or McCarty’s testimony as confessions within the foregoing definition. They contain neither acknowledgments of guilt nor indication of any implication in the crime of which defendant was convicted.
3. Mr. Justice Mitchell, speaking for this cohrt, in State v. Durnam, 73 Minn. 150, 165, 75 N. W. 1127, 1131, defined an accomplice:
“* * * An accomplice, in legal signification, is one who co-operates, aids, or assists another in the commission of a crime, either, as principal or accessory. The general test to determine whether a witness is or is not an accomplice is, could he himself have been indicted for the offense either as principal or as accessory? If he could not, then he is not an accomplice.”
This definition was later considered and somewhat expanded in State v. Price, 135 Minn. 159, 160 N. W. 677. An issue in that case was whether a witness to a crime had actually aided or assisted in its commission. In its review, this court recognized the test stated in State v. Durnam, supra, but qualified that rule as follows (135 Minn. 164, 160 N. W. 679):
“***'*** The general test to determine whether a witness is or is not an accomplice is, could he himself have been indicted for the offense either as principal or as accessory? If he could not, then he is not an accomplice.’ The case of Com. v. Wood, 11 Gray, 85, cited by Mr. Justice Mitchell as authority for the statement last quoted, holds that a person who cannot be indicted for the offense charged, is not an accomplice, which is no doubt a correct statement so far as it goes. But *314this court has never held that a person who could be indicted, or was under indictment, for the crime in relation to which he testifies was, as a matter of law, an accomplice. To make a witness an accomplice, it seems logical that it should appear that a crime has been committed, that the person on trial committed the crime, either as principal or accessory and that the witness co-operated with, aided or assisted the person on trial in the commission of that crime either as principal or accessory.” (Italics supplied.)
4. In the early case of State v. Lawlor, 28 Minn. 216, 9 N. W. 698, this court said, “Whether a witness is an accomplice in the commission of the crime for which the defendant is on trial, is a question for the jury and not for the court.” Defendant here insists that McCarty was an accomplice, but the record does not conclusively establish this. McCarty upon direct examination by the state was asked where he had been and what he had done on the night the crime was committed. His statement given to the police and his testimony, if true, establish that he did not actively participate either in the planning or the execution of the crime. Nor does his testimony indicate that he had any expectation of sharing in the proceeds of the attempted robbery. Upon cross-examination McCarty explicitly denied any participation in the crime and any collusion with the police or law enforcement authorities in order to secure a conviction of the defendant or any favored treatment for himself.
Defendant offered no testimony concerning McCarty’s actions on the evening of the crime. He did not take the stand, and Liebgott and Mitchell refused to testify about the events of the evening on the ground of self-incrimination. Any substantiation of the claim that McCarty had participated in the crime would have to be found in the testimony of the seven witnesses who testified that they had seen, from some distance, three men — rather than two, as McCarty had testified — participating in the assault. Under these circumstances, who participated in the crime was a fact question for the jury’s determination under proper instructions from the trial court.
After stating the general test by which to determine whether or not a witness is an accomplice, the trial court charged the jury:
*315“If you find from the evidence that McCarty was not an accomplice you will disregard the instructions I am about to give you concerning the necessity of corroboration of the testimony of an accomplice. If you find from the evidence that McCarty was an accomplice you will apply the following instructions to the evidence.”
The court then read § 634.04 to the jury and explained, consistent with the decisions of this court, the reason for requiring the testimony of an accomplice to be corroborated — to aid in establishing the credibility of the testimony. In summary the court said:
“* * * If McCarty was not an accomplice then his testimony need not be corroborated and his testimony can be considered the same as the testimony of other witnesses. * * * If McCarty was an accomplice you will apply the instructions given to you with respect to the corroboration which is required of his testimony. If McCarty was an accomplice, then you cannot consider his testimony unless it was corroborated.”
The only fact proved, when the testimony is viewed as a whole, is that McCarty might have been a participant in the crime rather than standing by, as he testified. His role was correctly submitted to the jury with the instruction that whether McCarty was an accomplice was solely dependent upon the evidence and must be determined in accordance with the court’s instructions. These were full and complete, fairly stating the law applicable to the facts and circumstances disclosed by the record.
5. It is a settled rule of evidence that an accomplice, notwithstanding the turpitude of his conduct, is not on that account an incompetent witness; such turpitude only goes to the credibility of his testimony. United States v. Lancaster (S. D. Ga.) 44 F. 896, 10 L. R. A. 333.
6. An accomplice testifying for the state has no legal right, in the absence of statute, to demand clemency or exemption from prosecution. United States v. Ford, 99 U. S. (9 Otto) 594, 25 L. ed. 399; 1 Underhill, Criminal Evidence (5 ed.) § 180; Ingram v. Prescott, 111 Fla. 320, 149 So. 369; Henderson v. State, 135 Fla. 548, 185 So. 625,120 A. L. R. 742; Annotation, 120 A. L. R. 751.
In People v. Durand, 321 Ill. 526, 152 N. E. 569, two accomplices *316gave vital testimony which incriminated plaintiff in error. The character of the testimony indicated that inducements, might have been held out to one of the accomplice witnesses as a reward for his assistance to the prosecution. One of the principal grounds urged for reversal of the judgment was that cross-examination of the accomplices was unduly limited. With regard to this contention the Illinois Supreme Court said (321 Ill. 530, 152 N. E. 571):
“Where an accomplice is used as a witness for the prosecution, the widest latitude of cross-examination ought to be permitted. There is always the temptation for an accomplice to testify falsely, and the jury are entitled to know what inducements have been held out to him as a reward for his assistance to the prosecution, and anything else that in any way affects his credibility.”
However, the court held that the error was harmless because the testimony of the accomplices was fully corroborated by other facts and circumstances which pointed to the guilt of the plaintiff in error.
7. Defendant contends that the court erred in restricting his examination of Thomas Moore, counsel for McCarty, and of John P. Frank and Stephen L. Maxwell, assistant county attorneys who represented the state, who were called as witnesses by defendant’s counsel to elicit evidence that McCarty had received promises of clemency or immunity from prosecution. McCarty denied any such complicity during a cross-examination of the widest latitude. Mr. Moore was asked if he had consulted with anyone in the county attorney’s office about the case. An objection to this question, as violative of the attorney-client privilege, was sustained. Defense counsel then asked whether Mr. Moore had ever made a deal with the county attorney to obtain special privileges for McCarty. An objection on the ground of privilege was again sustained. A similar question was asked, whereupon the court warned defendant’s attorney not to repeat it. Defendant then called Mr. Frank, who was conducting the prosecution. He testified that he did not know which lawyers in the county attorney’s office had direct contact with the case but that a Mr. Maloney had appeared in court when McCarty’s bail was reduced. He also stated, “I believe I appeared the first time when Mr. McCarty was arraigned. I did not *317walk up to Mr. McCarty and shake his hand and say T think that something can be worked out here.’ ” Nor did questioning of Mr. Maxwell produce testimony supporting defendant’s claim that a “deal” had been made with McCarty.
In Freeman v. State, 93 Tex. Cr, 436, 249 S. W. 466, the defendant complained of the refusal of the trial court to compel the state to disclose to the jury what trade or agreement was made with an accomplice who testified at defendant’s trial. The court observed (93 Tex. Cr. 438, 249 S. W. 467):
“* * * We know of no authority upholding the contention of appellant in this matter. The court accorded appellant the fullest liberty of inquiry of said witness upon cross-examination, and it does not appear that any effort of his to ascertain the facts desired in this regard was in anywise interfered with or prevented by the court.”
However, the defense is entitled to show that an accomplice testifying for the state does so with the expectation of gain or immunity and it is immaterial whether there has been an actual agreement to that effect with the public prosecuting officer. 1 Underhill, Criminal Evidence (5 ed.) § 180.
It does not appear that defendant denies his participation in the crime, and from searching the record it is fair and reasonable to conclude that he did assault and attempt to rob Knopic. Since defendant was accorded the fullest liberty of inquiry on cross-examination of McCarty, we are unable to agree with him under the circumstances that as a matter of right he should have been permitted to compel the attorneys representing the state and McCarty to make disclosure with reference to any promise of clemency or immunity from prosecution without first making an offer of proof or laying a proper foundation for the admission of testimony to that effect, if such was in fact known to and available to defendant. We are unable to agree with the contention of defendant that the trial court committed prejudicial error under the foregoing circumstances. Moreover, a thorough consideration of the charge indicates that it was fair, complete, and made plain the necessity under § 634.04 of corroboration of McCarty’s testimony if the jury determined that he was an accomplice.
*3188. Defendant has assigned as error the trial court’s refusal to dismiss the indictment against him on the ground that there was no showing that the injuries inflicted upon Knopic were the proximate cause of his death. Defendant’s position is that the medical testimony indicated that Knopic died as the result of delirium tremens due to cirrhosis of the liver and chronic alcoholism. Defendant relies upon State v. Schaub, 231 Minn. 512, 44 N. W. (2d) 61, 62, wherein the court held:
“To sustain a conviction of manslaughter in the second degree, the state must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that defendant’s acts were a proximate cause of the victim’s death.”
The word “proximate” is generally used to designate the legal cause of an injury. 13B Dunnell, Dig. (3 ed.) § 7000. That authority also states:
“* * * Whoever does a wrongful act is answerable for all the consequences that may ensue in the ordinary and natural course of events, though such consequences are immediately and directly brought about by intervening causes, if such intervening causes are set in motion by the original wrongdoer.”
A superseding, intervening cause is defined as an act (13B Dun-nell, Dig. [3 ed.] § 7005[2] ):
“* * * of plaintiff or of a third person, in no way caused by defendant’s negligence, or a force of nature, occurring after defendant’s negligent act or omission and operating as an independent force to produce the injury. It breaks the chain of causation set in operation by defendant’s negligence, thereby insulating his negligence as a direct cause of the injury. * * * An intervening cause, to break the causal connection and free the original wrongdoer from liability must be one not produced by his wrongful act or omission, but independent of it, and adequate to effect the injury.”
With respect to the “intention test” of proximate cause, the rule is stated (Id. § 7000g):
“An act which in fact produces a result intended by the actor is a *319proximate cause of such result. A wrongdoer is liable for all the consequences which he intended to bring about by his wrongful act and which in fact resulted therefrom.”
In Mattfeld v. Nester, 226 Minn. 106, 124, 32 N. W. (2d) 291, 304, 3 A. L. R. (2d) 909, 924, this court stated:
“It may be generally stated that an injury is held to be the proximate cause of death where disease intervened, when it is shown that the injury caused the disease from which death resulted; or, if the injury did not cause the disease, that it concurred with the disease as a direct agent in producing death; and without which death would not then have resulted; provided, in either case, there was no intervening act or neglect of the decedent or a third person which contributed to the fatal result.”
The testimony of the medical witnesses indicates that, had the beating not occurred, Knopic might well be alive today. Dr. Van De Water testified:
“Cirrhosis of the liver is a progressive condition; one cause of an acute case would be an acute hepatitis, a viral disease, and a severe acute hepatitis caused by a virus can cause a severe injury to the liver which will eventually scar and form what is very similar to Laennec’s or portal cirrhosis, I believe; one with this cirrhosis or a progressive type could live for many, many years. * * * Another thing is also known, that in people exhibiting delirium tremens the addition of another injury their mortality is higher(Italics supplied.)
Dr. John F. Noble stated:
“* * * The diagnosis of delirium tremens clinically was made after consultation with Dr. Van De Water because we felt that this man’s injuries were insufficient to have caused his death alone. After a study of the clinical history of this man and the results of the autopsy, in my opinion the man would have been alive today except for the beating.” (Italics supplied.)
Dr. Noble added that cirrhosis, which is a progressive disease, may eventually have caused Knopic’s death and stated:
*320“* * * As to whether the injuries listed, together with the chronic alcoholism caused the death of this man, I would be of the opinion that is was possible but not likely. This opinion is based on the fact that cirrhotics as well as simply alcoholics are very susceptible to injury, and the chronic alcohol[ism] and the presence of the cirrhosis and these injuries might well have caused his death. * * * The amount of cirrhosis was well established, but in my opinion he had enough residual liver, enough liver remaining which was functioning, to have allowed him to live for a considerable time in all probability.” (Italics supplied.)
In Wharton, Homicide (3 ed.) § 27, the author states:
“* * * one whose wrongful act hastens or accelerates the death of another, or contributes to its cause, is guilty of homicide, though other causes co-operate. And he is guilty if his act was the cause of the cause of death * *
See, State v. Schaub, supra.
In State v. Francis, 152 S. C. 17, 59, 149 S. E. 348, 363, 70 A. L. R. 1133, 1156, the court held:
“One who inflicts an injury on another is deemed by the law to be guilty of homicide if the injury contributes mediately or immediately to the death of such other. The fact that other causes contribute to the death does not relieve the actor of responsibility. So the physical condition of the slain man at the time when the act was done, will not excuse or minimize its consequences, if the causal connection between it and the fact of death is made to appear.”
In State v. Rounds, 104 Vt. 442, 453, 160 A. 249, 252, a case somewhat similar factually to this one, the court said: *32155 A. L. R. 915. The rule is stated in 2 Bishop, Crim. Law, § 637, that ‘whenever a blow is inflicted under circumstances to render the person inflicting it criminally responsible if death follows, he will be deemed guilty of the homicide though the person beaten would have died from other causes, or would not have died from this one had not others operated with it; provided the blow contributed either medi-ately or immediately to the death, in a degree sufficient for the law’s notice. In other words, the blow or wound for which the defendant is responsible need not be the sole cause.’ Again, in section 639, Mr. Bishop says: ‘It (the wound) need not even be a concurrent cause; much less need it be the next proximate one; for if it is the cause of the cause, no more is required!.’ ” (Italics supplied.)
*320“The respondent’s unlawful acts need not be the sole cause of death; it is sufficient if they were a contributory cause. State v. Block, 87 Conn. 573, 89 Atl. 167, 49 L. R. A. (N. S.) 913. The respondent is responsible for the consequences, even where his acts were not the immediate cause of death, if an intervening cause was the natural result of his wrongful acts. Letner v. State, 156 Tenn. 68, 299 S. W. 1049,
*321It is immaterial that defendant did not know that the deceased was suffering from a condition which facilitated the killing and that he did not reasonably anticipate that his act would cause death. Responsibility attaches for an injury which causes or contributes to death although the condition from which the victim was suffering might itself have caused death in time. State v. Frazier, 339 Mo. 966, 98 S. W. (2d) 707; Griffin v. State, 40 Tex. Cr. 312, 50 S. W. 366; State v. O’Brien, 81 Iowa 88, 46 N. W. 752; People v. Moan, 65 Cal. 532, 4 P. 545; 40 C. J. S., Homicide, § lid. There can be little, if any, doubt under the facts here and the applicable law that defendant was guilty of an act of homicide and that such was the cause of Knopic’s death.
9. Defendant contends, however, that the trial court erred in charging the jury on the issue of proximate cause as follows:
“* * * Likewise, if the said beating, striking and kicking were material elements and substantial factors in the death, then the chain of causation is not broken by reason of the fact that another contributory cause would have been fatal even without the aid of said alleged beating, striking, and kicking.”
Counsel for the defense submitted the following requested instruction:
“To sustain a conviction of murder the State must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant’s acts were the proximate cause *322of the victim’s death. Proximate cause is defined as the direct, immediate, primary, responsible cause. The wrongful act, if any, must have been a substantial factor following in an unbroken sequence causing the death without an intervening efficient cause. An efficient intervening cause is a new and independent force which breaks causal connection between the original wrong and the death.”
Defendant contends that the trial court erred in refusing to give the requested instruction. He claims also that the court was required to instruct the jury on proximate cause in language like that approved in Lund v. Minneapolis St. Ry. Co. 250 Minn. 550, 86 N. W. (2d) 7.8.
We cannot agree with these contentions. The instructions given— although not using the words “proximate cause” — fully presented to the jury the question of causation2 and the sufficiency of the evidence thereon in language it could readily understand. This court in reviewing those issues has not always spoken in terms of proximate cause. In State v. James, 123 Minn. 487, 144 N. W. 216, this court reviewed a conviction of murder in the second degree. In that case the defendant had inflicted knife wounds on the victim, one penetrating his left lung. Forty-eight hours later he developed pneumonia, from which he died a week later. Although we pointed out the necessity of establishing a causal connection between the injuries and death, we did not use the words “proximate cause.” We have used the phrases “causal relation” and “causal connection” many times. See, e. g., Mitton v. Cargill Elev. Co. 124 Minn. 65, 71, 144 N. W. 434, 436.
In State v. Anderson, 261 Minn. 431, 435, 113 N. W. (2d) 4, 7, this court said:
*323“* * * it is elementary that the court’s charge must be read as a whole. .All that is said on one issue must be read together and if, when that is done, it correctly states the law on that issue in language that can be understood by the jury there is no reversible error.”
In the recent case of State v. Polk, 263 Minn. 209, 212, 116 N. W. (2d) 540, 542, we held that it was not error to refuse to give instructions in the form requested, stating:
“The court is not required to charge in the exact language requested if the instructions as given correctly set forth the applicable law.”
Since we find that the instant case was properly submitted to the jury under correct instructions, and no prejudicial error was committed in the rulings on evidence, the record before us brings it within the doctrine of State v. Nelson, 91 Minn. 143, 97 N. W. 652, quoted with approval in State v. Price, 135 Minn. 159, 167, 160 N. W. 677, 680, as follows:
“* * * ‘new trials should be granted only where the substantial rights of the accused have been so violated as to make it reasonably clear that a fair trial was not had,’ and * * * where, after examination of the record, there is no doubt of the guilt of the accused, ‘alleged errors not affecting his substantial or constitutional rights should be brushed aside, and in their place substituted the almighty force and power of truth.’ ”
Affirmed.
Section 619.10 defines murder in the third degree as follows: “Such killing of a human being, when perpetrated by act eminently dangerous to others, and evincing a depraved mind, regardless of human life, although without a premeditated design to effect the death of any individual, or without a design to effect death, by a person engaged in the commission of, or in an attempt to commit, any felony, except rape, assault with an attempt to commit rape, indecent assault, or sodomy, either upon or affecting the person killed or otherwise, is murder in the third degree * *
For definitions or explanations of proximate cause and causation, see Dellwo v. Pearson, 259 Minn. 452, 454, 107 N. W. (2d) 859, 861; Slotnick v. Cooley, 166 Tenn. 373, 375, 61 S. W. (2d) 462, 463; Davis v. Atlas Assur. Co. 112 Ohio St. 543, 550, 147 N. E. 913, 915; Pfeifer v. Standard Gateway Theater, Inc. 262 Wis. 229, 234, 55 N. W. (2d) 29, 32; Commonwealth v. Almeida, 362 Pa. 596, 68 A. (2d) 595, 12 A. L. R. (2d) 183; Cornovski v. St. Louis Transit Co. 207 Mo. 263, 275, 106 S. W. 51, 55; 34A Wd. & Phr. (Perm, ed.) p. 620; Prosser, The Minnesota Court on Proximate Cause, 21 Minn. L. Rev. 19.

=== CASE 9738954 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:06:02.108625+00 ===

LAROCQUE, J.
Attorney Robert I. Perina and his insurer, Northwestern National Insurance Company, appeal a judgment entered upon a legal malpractice verdict in favor of Perina's former client, Lyle Schlomer, d.o.b. 11/5/75. Lyle, through the efforts of another attorney, settled his underlying personal injury claim against a farm machinery manufacturer and its insurer. Lyle then pursued this malpractice action on the theory that Perina's three years of unjustified inactivity caused a lesser settlement and also caused Lyle the loss of use of the money from an earlier and larger settlement. A jury agreed, and the trial court, after deducting a hypothetical attorney fee, entered judgment on the verdict.
We conclude that allowance of recovery here opens the door to malpractice claims whereby there is no just or sensible stopping point. We therefore reverse the judgment and need not address the other issues raised by the parties.
Lyle fell into a silo auger on his family farm in 1977 when he was less than two years old and suffered permanent disabling injuries. Lyle's parents sought no legal advice in the belief that Lyle's father, Marvin Schlomer, was primarily responsible for the accident. Perina went to the farm in 1981 and solicited the potential products liability claim from Lyle's parents. He did some preliminary investigation and prepared a "Day in the Life" video demonstrating the impact of Lyle's injuries on his ability to function as a five-year-old. He had photos taken, gathered medical records and consulted with *711experts. According to Lyle's trial witnesses, however, Perina did little or nothing of consequence for three years thereafter. At the end of the three years, in December 1984, the Schlomers discharged Perina and retained attorney C.M. Bye, who promptly filed suit in federal court and, within a year, after discovery and negotiations, settled Lyle's claim against A.O. Smith and its insurer for $1,036,236.
Several years later, in 1988, Lyle filed this malpractice action. At trial, Lyle presented expert testimony including that of attorney Robert Weisel. According to Weisel, who reviewed Perina's pretrial deposition and affidavit, Perina essentially did nothing for a three-year period. Weisel testified that Perina gave four "excuses" for his behavior. First, Perina spent time traveling to agricultural shows and related activities to broaden his knowledge of farm machinery and observe developments in engineering safety; second, Perina was waiting for the decision in Korth v. American Family Ins. Co., 115 Wis. 2d 326, 340 N.W.2d 494 (1983), dealing with the statute of limitations upon parents' claims arising out of injuries to their child; third, Perina became disabled by illness; and fourth, Perina delayed further action due to "inflationary factors."
Weisel told the jury that none of these explanations was valid: Perina, an experienced farm accident attorney, had ample time to acquire all the necessary knowledge relevant to the claim before 1982; Korth had no bearing whatever upon Lyle's claim;1 Perina's illness did *712not occur until 1984 and was of short duration; and it is unheard of to delay a claim of such magnitude in expectation that inflation may increase the amount of settlement.
Weisel also testified that Perina's unjustified failure to act caused Lyle's personal injury claim to diminish in value. Specifically, the otherwise dramatic impact of the "Day in the Life" video was partially lost because it was an image of the past and no longer reflected Lyle's condition. On the issue of damages, Weisel testified that the claim had a prior value 20% higher than the amount the insurance company paid in 1985, while attorney Bye set the value of the case prior to the three-year delay at $1.5 million. The jury set the prior value of the claim at $1,270,000. It also awarded $406,000 for loss of use of the earlier and larger lost settlement. The trial court deducted an attorney fee from the award and approved the verdict as adjusted.
Generally, liability will follow a proper finding of causal negligence:
However, negligence plus an unbroken sequence of events establishing cause-in-fact does not necessarily lead to a determination that the defendant is liable for the plaintiffs injuries. The determination to not impose liability in instances where a negligent act has been committed and the act is a 'substantial factor' in causing the injury rests upon considerations of public policy.
Coffey v. City of Milwaukee, 74 Wis. 2d 526, 541, 247 N.W.2d 132, 140 (1976) (quoting Hass v. C&NW Ry. Co., 48 Wis. 2d 321, 326, 179 N.W.2d 885, 888 (1970)).
*713The application of these public policy considerations is solely a function of the court. Id. Thus, our supreme court has held that even where the chain of causation is complete and direct, recovery may be denied if: (1) The injury is too remote from the negligence; (2) the injury is too wholly out of proportion to the tortfeasor's culpability; (3) in retrospect it appears too highly extraordinary that the negligence should have brought about the harm; (4) because allowance of recovery would place too unreasonable a burden on the negligent tort-feasor; (5) because allowance of recovery would be too likely to open the way for fraudulent claims; or (6) allowance of recovery would enter a field that has no sensible or just stopping point. Id. The cases in which a causally negligent tort-feasor is relieved of liability are infrequent and present unusual and extreme considerations. Stewart v. Wulf, 85 Wis. 2d 461, 479, 271 N.W.2d 79, 88 (1978).
Among the various criteria set forth, the absence of a sensible or just stopping point has application here. The traditional elements of a cause of action in negligence are (1) duty and its breach (negligence), (2) a close connection between the conduct and the injury (cause in fact) and (3) actual loss (damages). Prosser & Keeton on the Law of Torts § 30 (5th ed. 1984). In rejecting the cause of action here for loss of an earlier and larger settlement, we will assume without deciding that Perina is wrong when he argues that Lyle has not proven either cause in fact or damages to the degree of proof required.
With regard first to negligence, if unjustified inactivity toward a file for a time less than the limitation period is actionable, an unjustified delay of three months may serve the purpose as well as one of three years. Countless busy law offices may be negligent for failing to *714hire additional help where caseloads are high and matters are temporarily set aside. While the Supreme Court Rules of Professional Conduct for Attorneys provide ethical duties that a lawyer make reasonable efforts to expedite litigation consistent with the interests of the client, SCR 20:3.2, repealed and recreated June 10,1987, effective January 1, 1988, no one argues that a violation of this rule is intended to give rise to a civil cause of action for negligence. We also point out that the decision in this case does not resolve the issue of negligence that arises when an attorney approves a settlement for less than reasonable value of the claim. In that situation, the negligence is not the delay in settlement but the failure to use reasonable care to determine settlement value.
Lyle's proof of causation, a connection between Per-ina's delay and the injury, is largely an inference drawn from the fact that because the insurance company settled later, with proper effort it would have settled earlier. The effect of that inference on malpractice claims is that the temporary delay may be causal whenever the plaintiffs pain and suffering diminishes, or his injuries heal or a witness' memory fades. Lyle's own expert, Weisel, had some difficulty with the question of whether the evidence established the connection between the negligence and the likelihood of an earlier settlement. When first asked if he had an opinion to a reasonable degree of certainty whether in the handling of this case an attorney exercising ordinary care would have reached an earlier settlement, Weisel stated: "I have a problem with the word 'settlement,' . . . because it takes two people to do it." Weisel went on to indicate that the case should have been "resolved” within a year of Perina's taking the case. It must be noted that the jury was not asked whether Perina should have tried the case to a successful conclu*715sion at an earlier date but merely whether he should have settled the case earlier.
With regard to damages, quite apart from the unavoidable fact that personal injury awards are never capable of determination with mathematical certainty, the question of the prior settlement value of a claim enters an area even more esoteric. Economic and legal factors that influence an insurance company to settle a claim for a given sum requires a jury to reach its verdict largely upon the opinion of experts rather than its own common knowledge. Every insurance claim for personal injuries, as even Lyle's expert acknowledged, has a settlement range rather than a fixed certain value. Recovery for failing to settle a claim at an earlier date for more money thus opens the door to malpractice claims immeasurably wider and resting largely on evidence of an abstract and hypothetical nature.
In conclusion, it is the concern for the absence of a sensible or just stopping point as to each of the three elements of Lyle's cause of action, negligence, causation and damages, rather than any one element that invokes considerations of public policy. Because we reverse the award for the loss of a larger settlement, it is not necessary to address the issues of the award of yet an additional sum for the loss of use of the larger settlement, or Lyle's cross-claim concerning the deduction of an attorney fee from the verdict.
By the Court. — Judgment reversed.
Korth dealt only with the parents' claims arising out of the child's injuries; Weisel also testified that Perina would have a conflict of interest if he pursued the claims of both Lyle and his parents, and that, in any case, the parents' claim here was dwarfed by the enormous injuries and damages suffered by the child.

=== CASE 9738955 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:06:02.113698+00 ===

CANE, P.J.
(dissenting). I would conclude that (1) the evidence is sufficient to sustain the verdict finding a loss of a larger settlement; (2) public policy does not bar the claim; and (3) a legal malpractice verdict does not provide an exception to the general rule that pre-verdict *716interest is not allowed in this state; the award for loss of use of a settlement amounts to prohibited pre-verdict interest.
SUFFICIENCY OF THE EVIDENCE AND EVIDEN-TIARY RULINGS
Perina does not directly challenge the jury's finding that his inaction was a form of negligence; rather, he argues that the evidence failed to prove that his negligence caused damage, in other words, that there was no basis to find that the farm machinery manufacturer, A.O. Smith, and its insurer would have settled the claim for more at an earlier date even if Perina had pursued the issue properly. In a legal malpractice action, the client has the burden of showing that the attorney's negligence caused injury. Lewandowski v. Continental Cas. Ins. Co., 88 Wis. 2d 271, 277, 276 N.W.2d 284, 287 (1979). A jury verdict cannot stand on conjecture, unproved assumptions or mere possibilities. Schwalbach v. Antigo Elec. & Gas, 27 Wis. 2d 651, 655, 135 N.W.2d 263, 265 (1965). Perina points to the absence of any evidence from A.O. Smith's insurer indicating that it would have consented to a larger settlement.
However, the jury's conclusion that the insurance company would have voluntarily agreed to settle for a larger sum, implicit in their finding of causal negligence, is not mere conjecture. Attorney Robert Weisel rendered an expert opinion of the prior value of the case based in part on his experience as a former field claims adjuster, branch office manager and home officer supervisor for an insurance company; his extensive work as an attorney in insurance defense work; and his experience in trial of either side of negligence cases, both as a judge and an attorney. The expert opinion of an attorney is a basis *717upon which a jury may set the value of a claim. See Milwaukee Auto. Mut. Ins. Co. v. National Farmers Union Prop. & Cas. Co., 23 Wis. 2d 662, 669, 128 N.W.2d 12, 15 (1964).
Credibility of witnesses and the weight to give to their testimony are left to the judgment of the jury, and where more than one reasonable inference can be drawn from the evidence, the reviewing court must accept the inference drawn by the jury. Shawver v. Roberts Corp., 90 Wis. 2d 672, 681, 280 N.W.2d 226, 230 (1979). Here, the jury was entitled to infer from Weisel's testimony, coupled with the evidence of an ultimate settlement that, but for Perina's failure to file his lawsuit, conduct discovery and pursue settlement while the evidence was fresh, the insurance company would have acceded to a higher figure in 1982.
Perina also complains that the court did not use the usual "trial within a trial" method to establish the probable outcome had the case been properly handled. The trial procedure used in this case may be attributable to the fact that the underlying claim was ultimately settled and not tried. Our supreme court has stated:
Regardless of the approach used to resolve the issue of liability and damages in a legal malpractice case the ultimate goal should be to determine what the outcome should have been if the issue had been properly presented in the first instance ....
The general rule should be adapted to the facts of the particular case . . .. Situations can be readily conceived where it would be difficult to determine the value of ah original action which could not be tried, but it is the duty of the courts to fashion a remedy as best they can.
Lewandowski, 88 Wis. 2d at 281, 276 N.W.2d at 289 (emphasis in original). This trial court fashioned an *718appropriate remedy to meet the circumstances presented.
Perina also argues that it was error to allow Weisel to express an opinion based upon his experience as a former circuit judge because a jury is inclined to give undue weight to the opinion of a judge on the question of the reasonableness of a settlement in a lawsuit. Perina cites Helmbrecht v. St. Paul Ins. Co., 122 Wis. 2d 94, 362 N.W.2d 118 (1985). Perina's challenge was not raised in the trial court and was therefore not preserved as an issue on appeal. See Wirth v. Ehly, 93 Wis. 2d 433, 443-44, 287 N.W.2d 140, 145-46 (1979). However, even had the issue been raised, Helmbrecht is not on point. The concern in Helmbrecht arose in an entirely different context. The jury was called upon in a legal malpractice action to assess the reasonableness of the settlement in an earlier divorce action. The attorney at trial called the judge who had presided over the divorce proceedings to testify to what he would have done had the case not been settled. The Helmbrecht court rejected the use of the divorce judge's testimony for two reasons: First, such a practice could force the judge as a witness for one of the original parties to have to defend his own actions in the original suit, thereby raising the potential for the appearance that the judge had not been impartial; second, the question for the malpractice jury is what a reasonable judge in a bench trial would have awarded, not what a particular judge would have done. Id. at 105-06, 362 N.W.2d at 125. In contrast, Weisel had no connection with the former proceedings in any capacity, and his opinion was properly phrased in terms of a reasonable value, not the value he would have set as the presiding judge.
Perina next argues that the court erred by excluding evidence that part of the structured settlement of *719$1,036,236 belonged not to Lyle but to his parents. The structured settlement included the purchase of an annuity that paid the sum of $1,500 per month to Lyle's mother until he reached the age of eighteen to be used for his care and treatment. While tort law permits a parent to claim expenses for care and treatment of an injured minor child, all of the parties to the original lawsuit, including the parents, treated the annuity as part of Lyle's settlement because the funds were to be used for his benefit. Lyle's attorney fee was calculated in part on the basis that the award belonged to Lyle. The parents ultimately withdrew any claim against Perina for their losses. This amounted to a stipulation that the settlement belonged to Lyle to be administered through his mother. The court did not abuse its discretion by excluding reference to this fact to the jury. The court noted that the evidence would open a whole line of inquiry with respect to the nature of structured settlements causing undue delay and confusion. This court will not set aside a trial court's ruling on admission of evidence where it has properly stated the reasons for its discretionary decision in a situation where the exercise of discretion is appropriate. Featherly v. Continental Ins. Co., 73 Wis. 2d 273, 282, 243 N.W.2d 806, 813 (1976).
PUBLIC POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
Perina next argues, and the majority agrees, that even if the plaintiff established causal negligence, public policy dictates that the claim be rejected. I disagree. Generally, liability will follow a proper finding of causal negligence:
However, negligence plus an unbroken sequence of events establishing cause-in-fact does not necessarily *720lead to a determination that the defendant is liable for the plaintiffs injuries. The determination to not impose liability in instances where a negligent act has been committed and the act is a 'substantial factor' in causing the injury rests upon considerations of public policy.
Coffey v. City of Milwaukee, 74 Wis. 2d 526, 541, 247 N.W.2d 132, 140 (1976) (citations omitted).
The majority correctly states that our supreme court has held that even where the chain of causation is complete and direct, recovery may be denied if: (1) The injury is too remote from the negligence; (2) the injury is too wholly out of proportion to the tort-feasor's culpability; (3) in retrospect it appears too highly extraordinary that the negligence should have brought about the harm; (4) because allowance of recovery would place too unreasonable a burden on the negligent tortfeasor; (5) because allowance of recovery would be too likely to open the way for fraudulent claims; or (6) allowance of recovery would enter a field that has no sensible or just stopping point. Id. The cases in which a causally negligent tortfeasor is relieved of liability are infrequent and present unusual and extreme considerations. Stewart v. Wulf, 85 Wis. 2d 461, 479, 271 N.W.2d 79, 88 (1978).
I also agree that among the various criteria set forth, only (6), the absence of a sensible or just stopping point, has application here. In respect to that criterion, the parties dispute the applicability of this court's holding in Bolte v. Joy, 150 Wis. 2d 744, 443 N.W.2d 23 (Ct. App. 1989), to the present circumstances. In Bolte, this court approved the trial court's dismissal of a legal malpractice action on policy grounds. In that case, the client, Bolte, had sued his fire insurer, but a jury found that the client had set the fire himself. When a new trial was ordered, the insurer settled the client's claim. The client then *721sued, his attorney, alleging negligence in failing to discover in the process of trial preparation that an eyewitness had given a description of the arsonist that excluded the client from suspicion. The client thus sought damages from his attorney for loss of business and professional reputation, and for mental anguish from the bad publicity engendered from the news stories about the trial and jury verdict. This court dismissed the claim and adopted the trial court's rationale:
If a party is permitted to sue his trial attorney for consequential damages even though he has received the remedy originally sought in the action, no legal check would remain on claims against trial lawyers by their clients. In a highly publicized case, one can imagine mental anguish or consequential damage claims based on counsel's failure to ask a question, failure to object to a question, failure to convince a judge that an objection was proper, failure to prevail on a motion in limine as to certain evidence . . . the list could go on and on.
Id. at 250-51, 443 N.W.2d at 25-26. Bolte is easily distinguished on its facts. The client there "received the remedy originally sought,” here he did not; the client there sought consequential damages arising out of the manner in which the desired result was reached, the client here seeks only the original result to which he was entitled from the start.
It is possible to hypothesize future malpractice actions arising out of attorneys' delay in settling claims where a much shorter delay is involved than was the case here, thereby subjecting attorneys to malpractice actions where there is no just or sensible stopping point. The negligence and causation found here, however, is not so unusual that we should invoke the drastic remedy of public policy to set aside the jury verdict and bar the *722claim. I recognize the majority's concern, but whether the delay was unreasonable can be determined through the inquiry of whether such action was causally negligent. We have not hesitated to impose a similar burden on the medical profession to act timely in order to avoid injury, and I see no reason to make an exception for the legal profession.
LOSS OF USE OF SETTLEMENT FUNDS
The jury awarded Lyle the sum of $406,000 for the loss of use of the larger settlement figure of $1,270,000 for the three years that Perina negligently failed to pursue the matter. Pre-verdict interest reflects the value of the use of money. Anderson v. LIRC, 111 Wis. 2d 245, 259, 330 N.W.2d 594, 601 (1983). The witness testified to the amount of simple interest a specified sum would have earned for the years 1983,1984 and 1985 if invested in certificates of deposit or United States treasury notes. Our supreme court has consistently, but certainly not unanimously, adhered to the general rule that pre-ver-dict interest is recoverable only on damages that are either liquidated or liquidable. Johnson v. Pearson Agri-Systems, 119 Wis. 2d 766, 783-87, 350 N.W.2d 127, 136-37 (1984) (Callow, J., Abrahamson, J. and Heffer-nan, C.J., dissenting). Justice Bablitch concurring with the majority stated:
The economics of the issues presented in this case have not been adequately explored by the parties, and may well be more appropriately addressed by the legislature. However, should the legislature fail to address the problems and issues raised in the dissent, I believe this court may have to address these issues again in an appropriate case.1
*723Id. at 783, 350 N.W.2d at 136. This court is bound by prior decisions of the supreme court. State v. Quiroz, 149 Wis. 2d 691, 695, 439 N.W.2d 621, 623 (Ct. App. 1989).
Lyle cites a decision of this court, Glamann v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 140 Wis. 2d 640, 412 N.W.2d 522 (Ct. App. 1987), overruled on other grounds, 144 Wis. 2d 865, 424 N.W.2d 924 (1988), for the proposition that in a legal malpractice action the general rule does not apply because the action is against a third party whose negligence delayed recovery of damages from the original tort-feasor. Glamann, however, grounded the award of pre-verdict interest on the unique legislative purposes of the Wisconsin Fair Employment Act (WFEA). Id. at 657-58, 412 N.W.2d at 529. Glamann relied upon Anderson v. LIRC, 111 Wis. 2d 245, award.3 Finally, Perina's challenges to the jury instructions were not raised in the trial court and cannot be raised on appeal. See Air Wisconsin v. North Central Airlines, 98 Wis. 2d 301, 311, 296 N.W.2d 749, 753 (1980).
In conclusion, I would affirm the judgment awarding damages for the lost larger settlement. I would *724reverse that portion of the judgment allowing an award for loss of use of the larger settlement.
The court in Johnson uses the term "pre-verdict" interest *723rather than the term "pre-judgment" interest because sec. 814.04(4), Stats., provides for interest from the time of the verdict until judgment is entered and thus is "pre-judgment" interest. Id. at 768 n.1, 350 N.W.2d at 129 n.1.
I note that neither party questions the deduction of the attorney fee from the loss of use award rather than from the award for the lost settlement. It would appear that if a fee is to be deducted from the client's damage award, it would come from the amount the case should have settled for and not from the amount awarded for loss of use of that award. In any case, the parties have not raised this issue and it is not preserved for appeal.

=== CASE 9738956 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:06:02.387997+00 ===

Grant, J.
Plaintiff, Mary Cline, appeals from a decision of the Nebraska Workers’ Compensation Court which awarded her temporary total disability benefits from September 21, 1986, through December 17,1986, due to a cervical strain, and which assigned her a subsequent 15-percent loss in earning capacity. The court denied compensability for a low back injury which was also alleged to have arisen out of and in the course of plaintiff’s employment and denied vocational rehabilitation benefits. We affirm.
The record shows the following: Larry and Mary Cline, husband and wife, opened the County Seat Lounge in Scottsbluff in 1978. The County Seat Lounge was a nightclub featuring noontime lunches and dancing in the evenings. The club seated approximately 425 people and employed 10 to 12 workers. Plaintiff and her husband were coowners and operators of the lounge. Plaintiff testified that her job duties included bookkeeping, doing payroll, ordering food, bartending, and assisting in managing employees. In 1985, defendant-appellee County Seat Lounge was incorporated. *44Plaintiff and her husband were sole shareholders. Plaintiff was secretary and received a salary of $250 per week. Her husband was president, with a salary of $500 per week. The corporation paid workers’ compensation premiums on behalf of all of its employees. At the time of the injury, defendant-appellee Tower Insurance Company, Inc. (Tower), was the workers’ compensation insurance carrier for the lounge.
Plaintiff testified that on September 20, 1986, she suffered an injury on the job while lifting two cardboard boxes of empty beer bottles. She stated that while lifting the bottles, she heard someone call her name and turned her head quickly. She testified that she immediately felt a pain which shot from her neck down into her arm. She continued to work that evening, although she continued to experience pain. She also worked the days following the injury.
Plaintiff first sought treatment for her injury on September 25, 1986. She went to a chiropractor and complained of pain in her neck, in her right arm, and between her shoulder blades, and of numbness in her right hand. She did not complain of low back pain in her initial visit with the chiropractor. The chiropractor took x rays of plaintiff’s upper and lower spine. An insurance form filled out by the chiropractor on October 29,1986, stated that plaintiff alleged injury to “her neck, upper back and right arm.” There was no mention of a low back injury in the report. A letter from the chiropractor addressed to plaintiff’s counsel dated August 25, 1988, stated that in addition to the above-mentioned complaints, plaintiff, at the time of her first visit, had complained of “a left hip and low back pain which periodically radiated into the left leg.”
Plaintiff testified that she saw the chiropractor three times a week for chiropractic treatments between her first visit and December 4, 1986. Treatment included “Chiropractic Manipulation, Trigger Point Therapy and Inter Segmental Traction.” Plaintiff was given a shoulder brace that she wore 24 hours a day.
After December 4, 1986, plaintiff’s treatments were discontinued. Plaintiff testified, over objection, that “[t]he insurance company said it . . . wouldn’t pay for any more chiropractic treatment.” No letter to that effect appears in the *45record. In his August 25, 1988, letter to plaintiff’s counsel, the chiropractor states that “Mrs. Cline discontinued treatment in this office due to a report issued by the Workmen’s Compensation Carrier orthopedic consultant . . . .” The orthopedic surgeon first examined the patient in February 1987.
On December 17, 1986, the chiropractor filled out a “Medical Status Report” form for Tower. The report described the plaintiff’s condition, as of her December 4, 1986, visit, as “intermittent tingling of the right arm and hand with nocturnal paresthesia and premature fatigue of the right arm with usage.” The typed answer to the question “Anticipated date of maximum medical improvement or discharge” stated “approximtely [sic] 2-1-87.” The chiropractor estimated 5 percent permanent partial disability to the “Cervical Thoracic Spine and Right Arm.” The report contained no mention of any low back injury. Plaintiff testified that at the time of her December 4 visit with the chiropractor, her back “was feeling pretty good.” Plaintiff did not seek or receive any medical treatment from December 1986 until December 1989.
On February 9, 1987, plaintiff was examined by defendants’ orthopedic consultant. His recommendation was that the plaintiff give her injury more time and try some home therapy. He said, “At this point, I see no evidence of [a] 5% disability rating.” Plaintiff testified that she did not mention anything about her lower back to the examining doctor because her back was not hurting at the time.
The evidence is sketchy concerning plaintiff’s work history during 1987. There were no timesheets or tax records introduced into evidence. Plaintiff testified that although she generally stayed home, once in a while she would “feel guilty” and “would go in and try to help Larry.” There is some evidence that plaintiff worked at the bar fairly regularly during the months of April and May. She testified that she discontinued going down to the bar after May because business was slow and she could not stand the pain of standing or sitting for too long. Plaintiff also continued to do the paperwork and recordkeeping at home for the business, until the business closed in August 1987 due to financial difficulties.
*46In May 1988, the Clines moved to California. They returned to Nebraska approximately 2 months later. For about 3 months after the Clines returned from California, plaintiff received unemployment compensation benefits from the State of Nebraska.
In the fall of 1988, plaintiff sold Avon cosmetics out of her home, but she soon discontinued this because she found it was not profitable. Plaintiff testified that she has not engaged in any other work, nor has she applied for any other j obs, since the County Seat Lounge closed in August 1987.
Plaintiff filed her petition in the Workers’ Compensation Court on November 23, 1988. The chiropractor saw plaintiff on December 29, 1988, for evaluation purposes. His report of January 9, 1989, stated that it was his opinion that due to the interruption in plaintiff’s care, her condition had deteriorated from an acute to a chronic condition. He recommended 50 to 70 chiropractic treatments over the next year at an estimated cost of $1,700 to $2,400. He found that impairment to the cervicothoracic spine and to the lumbar spine caused claimant to suffer a 15-percent whole body impairment.
In April 1989, plaintiff sought assistance from the Nebraska Division of Rehabilitation Services. A rehabilitation counselor with the division gave conflicting testimony as to plaintiff’s employability. On direct examination, he stated that he found that plaintiff was not employable in any type of employment and that she was not a candidate for rehabilitation services. On cross-examination, he stated that based on the work restrictions contained in her medical reports, plaintiff had a number of transferable job skills and was qualified for a number of jobs for which she had prior training and experience. He also testified that one of the principal obstacles to plaintiff’s returning to work was significant anxiety, frustration, and depression. He noted that he had forwarded a job lead to plaintiff that he felt she was qualified for, but that she took no action on it. A rehabilitation specialist hired by defendant testified that plaintiff was employable in a number of capacities and that several of her previous jobs fell within her capabilities.
On December 13, 1989, plaintiff was taken to a hospital emergency room after she experienced extreme pain. An *47appointment was scheduled with a neurosurgeon for December 20. This doctor treated plaintiff through January 15, 1990, for pain and numbness in her neck, upper back, lower back, right hand and arm, and left leg. This was the first medical treatment plaintiff had sought or received in more than 3 years. This doctor’s diagnosis was that plaintiff suffered from cervical strain syndrome, right carpal tunnel syndrome, and a disk lesion at L5-S1, all of which he believed were related to the September 1986 work accident.
Plaintiff then saw another neurosurgeon on a referral from the first. This doctor concluded that she suffered from carpal tunnel syndrome, a bulging disk at C5-6, and a degenerated disk at L5-S1, all of which required surgery. He concluded that plaintiff’s condition resulted from the September 1986 work accident and that she would be considered totally disabled without corrective surgery.
On October 29, 1990, the compensation court rendered its award on rehearing. The court found that plaintiff experienced temporary total disability due to a cervical strain from September 21, 1986, through December 17, 1986, and a subsequent 15-percent loss in earning capacity. The court stated that plaintiff “failed to meet her burden of proof that the present conditions to the low back from which she suffers are the result of the original accident and injury of September 25, [sic] 1986.” The court also denied vocational rehabilitation.
The court specifically found that the medical records of the chiropractor reflected that the original complaints given to him concerned the neck and shoulder areas, while the later complaints primarily concerned a low back injury. The court also specifically found that plaintiff was not entitled to vocational rehabilitation for the “reason that the plaintiff has had a demonstrated ability to return to work after the original injury and in fact did so return to work until unrelated financial difficulties closed the business.”
Plaintiff assigns 11 errors in this appeal. As summarized, plaintiff contends that the compensation court erred (1) in failing to find plaintiff was entitled to compensation for her low back injury, (2) in finding that plaintiff was released for work in December 1986, (3) in denying any medical expenses after *48December 1986, (4) in determining the degree of plaintiff’s disability, and (5) in denying vocational rehabilitation benefits.
We first note this court’s standard of review in workers’ compensation cases. Findings of fact by the Nebraska Workers’ Compensation Court after rehearing have the same force and effect as a jury verdict in a civil case and will not be set aside on appeal unless clearly wrong. Clobes v. Nebraska Boxed Beef, 238 Neb. 612, 472 N.W.2d 893 (1991); Knowlton v. Airport Transportation Co., 235 Neb. 96, 454 N.W.2d 278 (1990); Neb. Rev. Stat. § 48-185 (Reissue 1988). In testing the sufficiency of the evidence to support findings of fact made by the Nebraska Workers’ Compensation Court after rehearing, the evidence must be considered in the light most favorable to the successful party. Roan Eagle v. State, 237 Neb. 961, 468 N.W.2d 382 (1991). Every controverted fact must be resolved in favor of the successful party, and the successful party will have the benefit of every inference that is reasonably deducible from the evidence. S.N. Mart, Ltd. v. Maurices Inc., 234 Neb. 343, 451 N.W.2d 259 (1990). As the trier of fact, the Nebraska Workers’ Compensation Court is the sole judge of the credibility of the witnesses and the weight to be given testimony. Roan Eagle, supra.
Viewed in the light most favorable to the successful party, there is sufficient evidence to support the court’s finding that the plaintiff has “failed to meet her burden of proof that the present conditions to the low back from which she suffers are the result of the original accident and injury of September 25, [sic] 1986.” Neither of the reports filled out by the chiropractor in 1986 mentions the low back injury. Plaintiff did not testify at trial that she reported any such injury in her first visit with the chiropractor. She did testify that her low back was not troubling her at the. time of her December 4, 1986, visit with the chiropractor. She also testified that her back was not troubling her at the time of her February 9, 1987, visit with defendants’ examining physician. It was more than 3 years after plaintiff’s treatments with the chiropractor that she again sought any treatment. Under these facts, the court’s denial of compensation for the low back injury was not clearly wrong.
Plaintiff takes issue with the court’s finding that the *49chiropractor “treated the plaintiff through December 17,1986, at which time he released plaintiff to return to work.” The fact is that plaintiff worked during the entire time of her treatments with the chiropractor. It is true that he states that she would not reach maximum medical improvement until February 1, 1987, and that she would then have a 5-percent permanent partial disability. However, on February 9, 1987, the examining physician stated that he saw no necessity for further chiropractic treatments and stated that at that time he could find no evidence of permanent disability. The compensation court did not err in this regard.
Plaintiff next contends that the court erred in refusing to honor any medical expenses incurred after December 1986. Plaintiff did not seek any medical treatment until more than 3 years after that date. We cannot find that the evidence in the record is insufficient, as a matter of law, to support the compensation court’s finding that plaintiff did not meet her burden of proving causation for medical expenses incurred after December 1986.
Plaintiff also takes issue with the degree of disability determined by the court. We have noted that the court found that the plaintiff failed to prove causation as to the low back injury and as to treatment sought years after the work-related accident. As late as January 1989, and even after allowing for the low back injury, the chiropractor rates the plaintiff’s permanent disability at 15 percent. That was the percentage of disability determined by the compensation court. The court’s determination is adequately supported by the record.
Finally, plaintiff disputes the court’s denial of vocational rehabilitation. The court found that plaintiff continued to work at the County Seat Lounge after the accident. There was also testimony by both vocational rehabilitation specialists that plaintiff, in the condition she was in when seen by the specialists, could perform jobs for which she had previous training and experience. Whether an injured worker is entitled to vocational rehabilitation is ordinarily a question of fact to be determined by the Workers’ Compensation Court. Yager v. Bellco Midwest, 236 Neb. 888, 464 N.W.2d 335 (1991). Vocational rehabilitation may be denied where the injured *50worker is able to perform work for which the worker has previous training and experience. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 48-162.01(3) (Reissue 1988); Yager, supra; Martinez v. Nebraska Dupaco, 235 Neb. 720, 457 N.W.2d 285 (1990).
In passing, we note a problem which sometimes arises when medical evidence is submitted only on reports in the Workers’ Compensation Court. Plaintiff’s neurologist who first examined her in December 1989 said, in part, in his December 20, 1989, report: “It’s possible she may have a glass eye and a wooden leg so far as the upper extremtiy [sic] is concerned.” This phrase may convey information to another doctor, or to the esoteric few, but to a trier of fact, it is meaningless. If such phrases are to be used, counsel might well furnish a translation to the fact finder or the reviewing court.
The court did not err in any of the respects alleged by plaintiff. The award of the Nebraska Workers’ Compensation Court on rehearing is affirmed.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9738840 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:00.672326+00 ===

Rogosheske, Justice
(concurringspecially).
I agree with the result. However, in my opinion it was error for the court to restrict the examination of the prosecuting officers and the attorney appointed to represent McCarty by which defendant undertook to prove his contention that the favorable testimony of the claimed accomplice was induced by a promise of clemency or immunity. Upon a sufficient foundation, the existence, or the probability of the existence, of any such inducement is surely a proper subject of inquiry by the defense. The record does not support excluding this inquiry on the ground of privilege. Here the defense failed to disclose to the court by way of an offer of proof or otherwise that the attempted in*324quiry was founded upon little more than a mere suspicion or possibility. Under the circumstances it would be a recognition of defendant’s rights at the expense of fairness to both sides to hold the error prejudicial.
Otis, Justice (concurring specially).
I concur in the opinion of Mr. Justice Rogosheske.

=== CASE 2217883 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:36.573087+00 ===

355 Mass. 469 (1969)
245 N.E.2d 435
DOROTHY UTLEY
vs.
FRANCIS E. UTLEY.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
January 28, 1969.
March 10, 1969.
Present: WILKINS, C.J., SPALDING, CUTTER, SPIEGEL, & REARDON, JJ.
James F. McLaughlin & Michael J. Grealy for the petitioner.
A. Van C. Lanckton for the respondent.
Herbert P. Gleason, Corporation Counsel, & William H. Kerr for the Boston Retirement Board.
SPALDING, J.
The question for decision is the correctness of an order of the Probate Court allowing the respondent's motion to discharge precepts of attachment which had been previously issued by the court.
The allowance of the motion arose in these circumstances. The petitioner is the wife of the respondent. On November 21, 1960, on the wife's petition, a decree was entered in the Probate Court that she was living apart from her husband for justifiable cause. Custody of six minor children was awarded to the wife, and the husband was ordered to pay $45 weekly for the support of the wife and minor *470 children.[1] There have never been any modifications of this support order. The husband, an employee of the city of Boston, retired as of March 31, 1962. Upon retirement he became entitled to an accidental disability retirement allowance pursuant to the provisions of G.L.c. 32, § 7. This allowance amounted to $348.53 monthly. Successive special precepts of attachment were issued on petitions of the wife to reach the retirement allowances held by the Boston Retirement Board. "On August 24, 1967, after notice to the ... [husband], and it appearing that some $14,900 was in arrears, and that pension funds of the ... [husband] in the sum of $4088.76 were held by the City of Boston, execution for said amount ... was issued." Subsequently the husband made a motion to have the special precepts discharged, and the motion was allowed. The foregoing facts were found by the judge in his report of material facts which, together with the pleadings, are all that are before us. From the order allowing the motion the wife appealed.
There was no error.
Section 19 of G.L.c. 32 provides in part that "the rights of a member [of a retirement system established by §§ 1-28 of c. 32] to an annuity, pension or retirement allowance, such annuity, pension or retirement allowance itself, and all his rights in the funds of any [such] system ... shall be exempt from taxation ... and from the operation of any law relating to bankruptcy or insolvency and shall not be attached or taken upon execution or other process" (emphasis supplied). Since the husband's disability retirement allowance was granted to him under § 7 of c. 32 it was clothed with the protection afforded in the italicized words of § 19. These words are unambiguous and comprehensive. There can be no doubt that the attempt by his wife to reach his retirement allowance by means of a special precept was an "attachment" within the purview of § 19, and was not permissible.
*471 The wife earnestly argues that the immunity from attachment granted by § 19 was designed to protect the allowance from the claims of third parties, such as creditors, trustees in bankruptcy and the like. It was, she urges, not intended to shield the husband in matters relating to his duty to support his wife and children. In support of this contention she cites French v. McAnarney, 290 Mass. 544, 546, where it was said that the marriage relationship is not merely a contract between the parties, and when it comes into existence "certain rights and duties necessarily incident to that relation spring into being. One of these duties is the obligation imposed by law upon the husband to support his wife."[1a] This argument is appealing, but it is one that should be addressed to the Legislature rather than to the courts. To sustain the wife's contention we would have to write an exception into § 19. This we may not do.
Order affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  As of January 3, 1968, when the judge made his report of material facts, only one child (born December 13, 1947), was still a minor.
[1a]  In that case it was held that the antenuptial agreement in which the wife relinquished rights to support was unenforceable as contrary to public policy.

=== CASE 2217886 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:36.63042+00 ===

252 Ind. 54 (1969)
245 N.E.2d 334
LYNCH
v.
STATE OF INDIANA.
No. 867S65.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
Filed March 19, 1969.
Clifford M. DeWitt, of Indianapolis, for appellant.
John J. Dillon, Attorney General and Rex P. Killian, Deputy Attorney General, for appellee.
GIVAN, J.
This is an appeal from a conviction under an affidavit charging the appellant with the possession and control of marihuana in violation of the Indiana 1935 Narcotic Act, as amended. On his plea of not guilty the appellant was tried by the Court without a jury and found guilty as charged. Appellant was sentenced to a term of not less than two nor more than ten years.
The content of appellant's motion for new trial was as follows:
*55 "Comes now the defendant, by counsel, and moves the Court herein for a New Trial for the following reasons:
"1. The finding of the Court is not sustained by sufficient evidence.
"2. The finding of the Court is contrary to law.
"3. The Court erred in admitting into evidence State's Exhibit #1.
"WHEREFORE, defendant prays that he be granted a New Trial herein."
This motion for new trial was filed in court on the 14th day of April, 1967. Rule 1-14B of this Court, which was adopted on the 13th day of January, 1967, and became effective on the 1st day of March, 1967, requires that whenever a motion for new trial is requested on the ground that the verdict or decision is not sustained by sufficient evidence or is contrary to law the moving party shall file a memorandum stating specifically wherein such evidence is insufficient or the verdict or decision is contrary to law. No memorandum supporting the above motion for new trial was filed. Therefore, the first and second specifications in the motion for new trial were not properly presented to the Trial Court and will not be considered on appeal here.
In the third ground for new trial above stated, the appellant claims error in the admitting of State's Exhibit #1. However, under the procedural law of Indiana, the motion must contain a copy or the substance of the exhibit claimed to have been erroneously admitted, and must state the grounds of the objections to the evidence. Golden Guernsey Farms v. State (1945), 223 Ind. 606, 612, 63 N.E.2d 699.
The assignment of errors filed in this cause assigns only the overruling of appellant's motion for new trial. Therefore, all other matters which the appellant has attempted to raise in his brief which are not covered by the motion for new trial have been waived. Haddock v. State (1965), 246 Ind. 669, 671, 207 N.E.2d 813.
*56 The decision of the Trial Court is, therefore, affirmed.
DeBruler, C.J., and Arterburn, Hunter and Jackson, J.J., concur.
NOTE.  Reported in 245 N.E.2d 334.

=== CASE 9738841 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:04.413343+00 ===

Carr, C. J.
Plaintiff started this suit by declaration filed in the circuit court of Oakland county on October 6, 1960. He alleged in his pleading that defendant was indebted to him for work and labor performed and materials furnished pursuant to contractual relations. Defendant filed answer, pleading by way of set-off and recoupment that plaintiff was indebted to him on contractual obligations in an aggregate amount exceeding any claims that plaintiff might have. Further amended and supplemental *263pleadings were filed by each of the parties, tbe ultimate question submitted for determination being as to tbe validity and sufficiency of plaintiff’s claims and defendant’s counterclaims.
Tbe case was set for trial on May 23, 1961, before tbe circuit judge without a jury. Prior to actual commencement of the trial on said date the judge and counsel representing the parties met in the judge’s office and, as it is claimed, a pretrial conference was there held. It does not appear that any pretrial statement was filed or served on either party. Apparently the judge considered that counsel had waived such service. At preliminary proceedings in the courtroom, following the conference in question, both the judge and counsel for defendant made reference to the “pretrial conference.” Neither attorney raised any questions because of the failure to file and serve the pretrial statement contemplated by Buie No 35, Michigan Court Bules (1945),  then in force and effect, nor was any objection made to proceeding.
Following some preliminary discussion relating to the filing of the pleadings, counsel on each side made his opening statement, proofs were introduced, and the case submitted for determination. An opinion was filed in the cause on June 12, 1961, in which the judge, after referring to certain testimony and to the claims of the respective parties to the litigation, indicated his conclusion that plaintiff was entitled to recover judgment in the sum of $4,907.61. Judgment was entered accordingly. Defendant’s motion for a new trial was denied, and he has appealed, claiming that the judgment should be reversed and a new trial granted on the ground that the requirements of Court Buie No 35 with reference to pretrial procedure were not observed. It is fur*264ther asserted that defendant’s hearing was defective, that he failed to correctly understand and answer questions propounded to him as a witness on the trial of the case, and that, because of such situation, he did not have a fair trial.
Michigan Court Rule No 35, in force and effect at the time of the trial in the instant case, contemplated that in every contested civil action a pretrial conference should be had for the discussion and determination of the specific matters set forth in the rule, and that the judge conducting such conference should prepare, file, and cause to be served upon the attorneys of record a summary of the results of the conference, with specific reference to the various items mentioned in the rule. That the procedure contemplated was not fully complied with in the instant case is conceded. No summary of the conference was prepared and served. In substance it is appellant’s claim that a new trial should be granted because of such failure. On behalf of plaintiff it is insisted that counsel representing defendant waived strict compliance with the rule and that, having done so, appellant may not now claim prejudicial error.
At the time of the trial of this litigation no pretrial calendar was maintained in the Oakland circuit as authorized by the rule. It appears that the procedure here followed was in accordance with the usual practice in said circuit, and that a party insisting on a conference under the rule, prior to the date of the trial, with due service of a summary of the proceedings thereat was afforded such privilege. No claim is made in the instant case that a request of this character was made nor is it denied that counsel for defendant was at the time familiar with the local practice and conversant with his rights. It may not be assumed that defendant’s position would in any way have been prejudiced had there been insistence on compliance with the rule.
*265Similar questions involving alleged waiver of the right to question a matter of procedure by acquiescence or affirmative expression have frequently arisen in prior cases. In LeBeau v. Telephone & Telegraph Construction Co., 109 Mich 302, the trial judge answered a question of the jury, communicated through the court officer in charge, by a written statement which he caused to be delivered to the jury. This was done in the absence of counsel. Before a verdict was returned, however, the trial judge advised counsel on both sides as to what had occurred. Verdict having been returned for the defendant and judgment entered thereon, plaintiff on appeal raised the question as to the propriety of the method of answering the jury’s question. Commenting thereon, this Court said (p 305):
“At no time prior to the rendering of the verdict did counsel for plaintiff make any objection to said communication, nor to the rendering of the verdict, nor make any suggestion to the judge upon the facts connected therewith, and the verdict was received without objection from either party or their counsel. It is urged that this is error, and the cases of Fox v. Peninsular Color Works, 84 Mich 676, 682, and Hopkins v. Bishop, 91 Mich 328, 334 (30 Am St Rep 480), are cited by counsel. In the case at issue, counsel made no objection to the course taken by the circuit judge until the verdict was rendered. It seems to be pretty well settled that, after one has knowledge of an irregularity, he cannot remain silent, and take his chances of a favorable verdict, and afterwards, if the verdict goes against him, base error upon it. 2 Thompson, Trials, p. 1976. If the action of the trial court was irregular, the irregularity was waived by making no objection until after the verdict was rendered.”
Of like effect is Silverstone v. London Assurance Corporation, 187 Mich 333, 342.
*266If counsel for defendant in the instant case considered that the rights of his client might be prejudiced by nonobservance of the requirement of the court rule with reference to filing and serving a summary of the pretrial conference, it was his duty to raise the question at the time. He could not properly remain silent, proceed with the trial, and then claim prejudicial error if the result was unsatisfactory. Substituted counsel is obviously in no better position. He takes the record as he finds it and is bound by his predecessor’s waiver of the right to object to the procedural course. Likewise, defendant is bound by any such waiver on the part of the attorney representing him at the trial. He may not avoid the effect of such waiver by changing counsel.
This Court in prior decisions has repeatedly indicated its disapproval of attempts to claim prejudicial error based on some claimed irregularity to which no objection was made at the time. Among such decisions are: Mason v. Vogue Knitting Corporation, 365 Mich 552, and prior decisions there cited; In re Ernst Kern Company, 365 Mich 462; Riste v. Grand Trunk W. R. Co., 368 Mich 32, 36. We are in accord with the holding of the trial judge that the right to claim prejudicial error was waived by counsel for defendant in the case at bar. It may be noted further that it does not appear that defendant actually sustained prejudice in the course of the trial, or that he was denied a fair trial, because of the failure to completely follow the requirements of Michigan Court Rule No 35 (1945). The situation is somewhat analogous in this respect to that presented in A & A Asphalt Paving Company v. Pontiac Speedway, Inc., 363 Mich 634, in which this Court declined to reverse because of failure on the part of the trial court to follow the procedure contemplated by the rule.
*267It may be noted in passing that Michigan Court Rule No 35 has now been superseded by Rule 301 of Michigan General Court Rules, effective January 1, 1963. Under the rule now in force the pretrial summary is required to be served upon attorneys of record at least 10 days in advance of trial. Under Rule No 35 there was no specific requirement imposed as to the service of the summary within any prescribed period of time prior to trial. Thus, the present rule is more specific in this detail than was the prior requirement. The purpose of said rule is obvious. It is designed to facilitate the submission and trial of causes of action, particularly by clarifying and defining the material issues presented. Parties litigant, their counsel, and the court as well, are entitled to the full benefit of a proper application and observance of the rule which was adopted with the intention that it should be observed. The duty to see that it is consistently followed rests on court and counsel alike. The intent of the rule is not open to question.
The claim advanced on behalf of appellant that his hearing impairment affected the presentation of his case to his prejudice was rejected by the trial judge, and we think properly so. Prom the record before us it does not appear that defendant was aware at the time that his hearing was imperfect. His counsel had not discovered any such condition, and inferentially it was not apparent to the trial judge. Defendant’s testimony as set forth in the original record returned to this Court does not indicate that he had difficulty in understanding the questions propounded to him or that he made any specific misstatements because of the alleged failure to hear perfectly. The claim made in this respect is, we think, refuted by the record in the case.
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
*268Dethmers, Kelly, Black, Kavanagh, Souris, Otis M. Smith, and O’Hara, JJ., concurred with Carr, 0. J.

=== CASE 9738842 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:04.418097+00 ===

Black, J.
(concurring). I concur with the Chief Justice, yet would add a few words.
Speaking exclusively from experience at the lower level of our trial courtrooms, it is fair to observe that many suits and proceedings come daily to the attention of circuit judges with respect to which, by unanimous agreement of the trial judge and all contenders, no pretrial conference and no pretrial statement are needful for or essential to their due submission. Thus it seems to the writer that, if we are to hint or suggest that it is the duty of court and counsel to consistently follow pretrial procedure in all cases and proceedings, the result is bound to be compulsion — on too many occasions — of Sisyphean labor.
I would add, to our holding that one may waive his right to conference and statement under former (1945) Court Rule No 35 (now GRC 1963, 301), discreet corollary that court and counsel may agree to waive such procedure when all conclude that, to pursue it for the case or proceeding at hand, would simply lend grist to current criticism that lawyers and judges concern themselves too much with forms and too little with justice. An indispensable element of the latter is avoidance of needless motions and needless trips to the courthouse. All such cost money and waste time, as trial lawyers and their regular clients know pretty well.

=== CASE 2217891 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:36.726721+00 ===

119 N.W.2d 656 (1963)
Fred DUSEK, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
Sheldon F. REESE, Northwest Realty Company, a corporation, and Acme Company, a corporation, Defendants and Respondents.
Nos. 9970, 9990.
Supreme Court of South Dakota.
February 15, 1963.
*657 Bangs, McCullen, Butler & Foye, Rapid City, for plaintiff and appellant.
Morrill & Morrill, Sturgis, for defendants and respondents.
HANSON, Presiding Judge.
The plaintiff, Fred Dusek, seeks rescission of an alleged contract relating to the ownership and collection of certain accounts receivable. So far as material the trial court entered judgment (1) quieting title to the accounts in the defendant Northwest Realty Company subject to an interest of 10% therein in plaintiff, (2) ordering an accounting between the parties and appointing a referee for such purpose, and (3) dismissing the action against the defendants, Sheldon F. Reese and the Acme Company. Plaintiff has appealed from the whole of such judgment and the Northwest Realty Company appeals from that portion allowing plaintiff a 10% interest in the accounts and for an accounting.
In August 1960 the Internal Revenue Service of the United States levied upon all the assets of the Furniture Exchange, Inc., of Rapid City, South Dakota and a receiver was appointed to take charge of and sell the same. Dusek was president of Furniture Exchange, Inc. In his complaint plaintiff alleged that on or about December 16, 1960, he purchased and was the owner of all the accounts receivable of the Furniture Exchange, Inc.; that on or about December 17, 1960 he entered into an agreement with defendants for the collection of said accounts and for the advancement of money to purchase the same, upon consideration the accounts would be *658 collected in plaintiff's place of business in Rapid City; and upon making collection defendants were to reimburse themselves for the amount advanced with legal interest and were further to receive the sum of 10% on all amounts collected.
In accordance with the allegations of his complaint plaintiff testified at the trial, in substance, that he was the owner of the accounts receivable; that he had purchased them from the Receiver through his agent, Joe Laugel; the defendant Northwest Company had loaned him the sum of $21,000 to pay for the accounts; and Northwest was to be reimbursed with interest out of the collections and also was to receive 10% of all the accounts collected. On the other hand, defendant claimed it purchased the accounts from Dusek for the sum of $21,000 and Dusek was to collect the accounts in his store for which he was to receive 10% of the accounts collected.
Contrary to plaintiff's allegations and proof as to the nature of the agreement and relationship between the parties the trial court made and entered the following findings of fact:
"I
"That at a receiver's sale held on December 16th, 1960, Joe Laugel, as agent for the plaintiff, Fred Dusek, for the benefit of the plaintiff, Fred Dusek, made and entered a bid in the amount of $21,000 for lot No. 2 of the items duly advertised for sale by the receiver, which Lot No. 2 consisted of accounts receivable of Furniture Exchange, Inc., of Rapid City, South Dakota, and at the time of making the bid of $21,000 for said accounts receivable paid to the receiver ten per cent of the amount of the bid, being $2,100. That thereafter order confirming sale was duly made and entered by the United States District Court for the District of South Dakota, and that Fred Dusek thereupon became entitled to all bills and accounts receivable of Furniture Exchange, Inc., of Rapid City, South Dakota, generally described in the notice of sale as Lot No. 2.
"II
"That subsequent to the date of sale, and on or prior to December 23rd, 1960, plaintiff, Fred Dusek, entered into an agreement with the Northwest Realty Company by and through its President, Sheldon F. Reese, by the terms of which the parties agreed orally that the Northwest Realty Company would purchase the accounts and bills receivable for the sum of $21,000, and the plaintiff, Fred Dusek, would collect said accounts at his store in Rapid City, South Dakota, for ten per cent of the amounts collected on said accounts. The consideration thereby agreed upon between Fred Dusek and the Northwest Realty Company being $21,000, and ten per cent of the amounts collected on the condition that plaintiff, Fred Dusek, would handle at his store the collecting of the accounts receivable, and that on the 23rd day of December, 1960, at the Rushmore State Bank in Rapid City, Pennington County, South Dakota, for the purpose of effecting the agreement, the Northwest Realty Company, through its officer, agent, and employees, paid to Joe Laugel, the duly authorized agent of Fred Dusek, the plaintiff, for the benefit of Fred Dusek, the sum of $2,100, and to the receiver, the sum of $18,900, and bill of sale of accounts receivable was duly delivered to Joe Laugel conveying the accounts receivable described as Lot 2 in the notice of sale, Joe Laugel at that time being the duly authorized agent of the plaintiff, Fred Dusek, and receiving the conveyance on behalf of and for the benefit of Fred Dusek, and that thereupon in the *659 further completing of the agreement, Joe Laugel, in the presence of, and at the instance of the plaintiff, Fred Dusek, did execute and deliver to the Northwest Realty Company an assignment, assigning to the Northwest Realty Company all accounts receivable contained in Schedule A, annexed to the assignment, which Schedule A had been prepared by the Northwest Realty Company by and through its officers, agents, servants, and employees, which assignment was delivered to Northwest Realty Company at the instance and request, and in the presence of the plaintiff, Fred Dusek, and was duly accepted by the Northwest Realty Company by and through its duly constituted officers, agents, or employees.
"III
"That at the same time and place on December 23rd, 1960, for the purpose of further carrying out the agreement, and for the purpose of properly preserving to the benefit of the parties, the proceeds received from the accounts receivable, there was established at the Rushmore State Bank for the deposit of the proceeds received from said accounts, Northwest Realty Company Account No. 10, and that a book of deposit slips for use in making the deposits in the Rushmore State Bank to the Northwest Realty Company Account No. 10, was furnished and delivered to the plaintiff, Fred Dusek.
"IV
"That the written assignment executed and delivered by Joe Laugel to Northwest Realty Company set out that the consideration for the sale and the assignment was $21,000, but the actual consideration for the sale and assignment of the accounts receivable to Northwest Realty Company was the sum of $21,000 plus ten per cent to Fred Dusek of the accounts receivable actually collected by Fred Dusek at his place of business, being the store in Rapid City, Pennington County, South Dakota.
"V
"That Fred Dusek, immediately after the meeting of December 23rd, 1960, provided a place at his store for the collection of the accounts, and made himself available, ready, willing, and able to carry out the terms of the agreement with reference to the collection of the accounts, and proceeded to enter into his duties in connection therewith, and that the Northwest Realty Company, through its President, Sheldon F. Reese, by letter dated January 7th, 1961, repudiated the agreement with reference to the collection of the accounts by Fred Dusek, plaintiff, and thereby and thereafter prevented the plaintiff, Fred Dusek, from carrying out the agreement with reference to the collection of the accounts through no fault on the part of the plaintiff, Fred Dusek.
"VI
"That the plaintiff, Fred Dusek, did thereafter commence the present action for rescission of the agreement, and did thereby tender to the defendants herein, return of $21,000 plus interest thereon for the accounts receivable and prayed that title to the accounts receivable be quieted in the plaintiff, Fred Dusek. That the only notice of rescission was by virtue of the pleadings in the above-entitled action."
Plaintiff does not question the verity of the findings of fact entered by the trial court although they are substantially contrary to his allegations and proof. Instead, he contends the conclusions of law and judgment are erroneous in view of such findings. More specifically, he claims, to be entitled to a rescission of the contract *660 which the court found existed as he was deprived of the right to collect the accounts in his store by defendant's breach of the collection feature of the agreement. He relies largely upon SDC 10.0802 which authorizes rescission in case of a partial failure of consideration as follows: "A party to a contract may rescind the same in the following cases only: * * * (2) If through fault of the party as to whom he rescinds, the consideration for his obligation fails in whole or in part * * *."
In its finding of fact No. 5 the trial court found that plaintiff was ready, willing, and able to carry out the terms of the agreement with reference to the collection of the accounts. Significantly, the trial court did not find that plaintiff was ready, able, and willing to carry out all the terms of the contract. Nor could such a finding be sustained in view of plaintiff's own testimony that he owned the accounts at the time of defendant's breach and was entitled to 90% of the collections. It is elemental that "One seeking the rescission of a contract on the ground of the failure, refusal, or inability of the other party to perform it must show that he, for his part, is both able and willing to discharge all the obligations which the contract casts upon him." 3 Bl.Resc. (2d Ed.) § 565, p. 1389.
Furthermore, rescission of a contract is not generally permitted "for a casual, technical, or unimportant breach or failure of performance, but only for a breach so substantial as to tend to defeat the very object of the contract." 1 Bl.Resc. (2d Ed.) § 197, p. 550. The same principle applies to rescission based upon partial failure of consideration under our statute. Such a breach must also be substantial or relate to a material part of the contract. That is the conclusion reached by other courts in construing identical statutory provisions. For instance a breach of contract which is not substantial is an insufficient basis for rescission in North Dakota under subdivision 2 of section 9-0902 NDRC 1943, Schaff v. Kennelly, N.D., 61 N.W.2d 538. Likewise, to justify rescission for a partial failure of consideration under subdivision 2 of section 1689 Civil Code of California there must be a wilful failure of one party to perform a material part of the contract, Bonadelle Construction Co. v. Hernandez, 169 Cal. App. 2d 396, 337 P.2d 85, or the nonperformance must be material and go to the essence of the contract, Crofoot Lumber v. Thompson, 163 Cal. App. 2d 324, 329 P.2d 302.
In our opinion the collection of accounts in plaintiff's store was only a minor part of the whole contract which the court found existed. Its breach might sustain an action for damages but it does not justify a rescission of the entire contract. There is no proof that the collection of the accounts in plaintiff's store would be of any benefit. If plaintiff were obligated to make the collections, as the trial court found, it could be burdensome and expensive rather than beneficial. He is now relieved of that burden. However, plaintiff is protected against loss as he will receive 10% of all accounts collected.
Both parties asked for an accounting and for general relief in their respective pleadings. To avoid a multiplicity of suits the trial court was empowered to equitably adjust all matters in dispute between the parties relating to their respective rights and obligations under the contract. The general rule is stated in Vol. 3, Black on Rescission and Cancellation, § 690, p. 1643, as follows: "When a court of equity has taken jurisdiction of a suit for rescission or cancellation, and the facts proven would justify the grant of the relief asked, but a decree for rescission cannot be made because the restoration of the parties to their former situation has become impracticable or legally impossible, it will ascertain and award damages by way of compensation, in order to avoid a multiplicity of suits, and this may be done under *661 the prayer for general relief * * *." It was accordingly well within the prerogative of the trial court to (1) decree title of the accounts in defendant subject to a 10% interest in plaintiff and (2) order an accounting between the parties. Anything less would constitute a failure to grant equitable relief justified by the facts and specifically requested by both parties.
Finding no error on either appeal the judgment is affirmed without cost to either party.
ROBERTS, BIEGELMEIER and HOMEYER, JJ., concur.
RENTTO, J., concurs in result.

=== CASE 2217893 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:36.765925+00 ===

119 N.W.2d 272 (1963)
EMERY TRANSPORTATION COMPANY, Appellee,
v.
Albert BAKER and David Handelman, d/b/a Baker Liquor Company, Appellants.
No. 50766.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
January 15, 1963.
*274 Elliott, Shuttleworth & Ingersoll, Cedar Rapids, for appellants.
John D. Randall, Cedar Rapids, for appellee
LARSON, Justice.
In an action wherein plaintiff asked damages from defendants due to a collision between two motor vehicles a default judgment was entered against each defendant on January 15, 1958. Defendants being nonresidents of Iowa, service was allegedly obtained upon them under the provisions of sections 321.498 et seq., Code of Iowa, 1954, I.C.A.
Learning of this judgment on July 19, 1958, defendants filed a petition under rules 252 and 253, R.C.P., 58 I.C.A., and chapter 683 of the Code, and alleged irregularities, a meritorious defense, and a lack of jurisdiction in the trial court. The prayer was that the judgment be set aside, that it be held void and of no force and effect, and that plaintiff be enjoined from issuing execution thereon. Affidavits were attached. On July 20, 1961, plaintiff's motion to dismiss defendants' petition was sustained, and they appeal.
I. The legal propositions involved are whether the service of notice satisfied the statutory requirements of sections 321.498 et seq. of the Code of 1954, I.C.A., and whether defendants' petition to vacate the judgment against them was sufficient to require relief under rules 252 and 253 and chapter 683 of the Code, I.C.A. In view of our conclusion on the jurisdiction question, and our pronouncement in Jacobson v. Leap, 249 Iowa 1036, 1039, 88 N.W.2d 919, and citations, that while said rules are not applicable where the judgment is void, a petition filed thereunder, based upon a jurisdictional question, may be considered as a motion in the absence of objections to the procedure (and here there were none), we will not decide whether defendants' petition and affidavit satisfied the requirement that they allege a meritorious defense to the original action.
Since there was no objection to this procedure, we will only need to review the jurisdictional question. As to the issue pertaining to a meritorious defense, it will suffice to say "in the absence of a reasonably clear case of abuse of discretion", such as we found in the Eaton v. Downey case, Iowa, 118 N.W.2d 583, the action of the lower court in ruling thereon will not be disturbed by us. Bleakley v. Long, 222 Iowa 76, 79, 268 N.W. 152, 154.
II. The principal issue before us then is whether plaintiff had acquired jurisdiction of the defendants, Albert Baker and David Handelman, so as to sustain a judgment against each. At least two questions relating to the sufficiency of service appear in this appeal. While either decided adverse to plaintiff would be fatal to jurisdiction of the court, we find it necessary only to consider the question of whether notification as set forth in paragraph 2 of section 321.501 is satisfied by showing the envelope containing the notification addressed and mailed to the last known residence or place of abode of defendants was "unclaimed".
Section 321.501 provides in part: "2. By mailing to the defendant, and to each of the defendants if more than one, *275 within ten days after said filing with the commissioner, by restricted registered mail addressed to the defendant at his last known residence or place of abode, a notification of the said filing with the commissioner." We have said the requirements of this statute must be complied with strictly. Esterdahl v. Wilson, 252 Iowa 1199, 110 N.W.2d 241; Johnson v. Brooks, Iowa, 117 N.W.2d 457.
While there was some dispute as to whether a return showing the facts was made at the time default judgment was rendered, we shall assume for the purpose of this discussion that it was, and that it was called to the attention of the court. In the Plaintiff's Amendment to Affidavit of Service filed July 7, 1961, it is stated, "That the notice was sent as shown by the Affidavit of Service and that there is attached hereto, marked as Exhibit "B", a photostatic copy of the return card showing that one of the parties was not in town. That there is also attached hereto, marked also as Exhibit "B", a photostatic copy of the cover of the letter showing that notice was sent to the defendants and the same was unclaimed." As an explanation of the postal department procedure, counsel stated, "That the handling of registered mail is that if a registered letter cannot be delivered a notice is left by the carrier informing the addressee to call at the post office. After five (5) days if the letter has not been called for, a second notice is made out by the registered section and given to the carrier for delivery to the addressee marked `second notice' and dated. Then after five (5) days from the second notice, if the letter has not been delivered or called for it is returned to the sender."
While this explanation is not proof of the fact, and in his motion to dismiss would be improper to so consider, we may for the purpose of this discussion accept the explanation as one which was given the trial court and one of which the court could itself take judicial notice. If such was the case here, and from an examination of the exhibits we believe that was the procedure followed, did the fact that defendants did not call at the post office to obtain the envelope constitute a good and sufficient delivery of the notice to them? We hold it did not.
III. Section 321.504, Code 1954, I.C.A., provided: "In lieu of mailing said notification to the defendant in a foreign state, plaintiff may cause said notification to be personally served in the foreign state * * *."
Section 321.505 provided: "Proof of the filing of a copy of said original notice of suit with the commissioner, and proof of the mailing or personal delivery of said notification to said nonresident shall be made by affidavit of the party doing said acts. All affidavits of service shall be indorsed upon or attached to the originals of the papers to which they relate. All proofs of service, including the return registry receipt, shall be forthwith filed with the clerk of the district court."
Due to the fact that a restricted registered mail receipt was not available, plaintiff explains it was not possible to comply with the "forthwith" filing and thus the receipt did not appear in the files when defendants examined them in July of the succeeding year. Plaintiff asserts, however, that the court was at the time of the default judgment advised of the facts and that it made a finding that jurisdiction of the parties was acquired. We must assume the trial court found such jurisdiction existed when it entered the judgment. Miller v. Miller, 242 Iowa 706, 709, 46 N.W.2d 732; Swift v. Swift, 239 Iowa 62, 29 N.W.2d 535. But that finding is not conclusive so as to become res adjudicata, and from the true facts disclosed by the amended return we are now required to determine the issue of sufficient notification and jurisdiction in this appeal.
IV. The nub of the controversy is whether the card and envelope returned to the plaintiff sender showing that the envelope *276 was "unclaimed", and explaining the reason it was not delivered was that one of the two defendants to whom it was addressed was "not in town", satisfied the statutory requirement of notice.
The envelope bears the address "Baker Liquor Company, A Co-partnership consisting of Albert Baker and David Handelman, 3000 Seventh Ave., Rock Island, Illinois." It was properly stamped, bore the term "Restricted Registered Mail", and had a return address affixed. Stamped thereon we find, "Returned to Writer", and a check mark after the word "Unclaimed", and "Second Notice. No Reply to That Notice 11-9-57." The card entitled "Notice to sender of undelivered or abandoned mail" bearing a date of November 19, 1957, was checked in the provided box "Delivery restricted" with the words added, "One not in town".
It is noted these returns do not disclose a "refusal" by addressees to accept the notificationmerely a failure by them to call at the post office for the letter when requested by the postal authorities. Although in a full hearing under such a return it might be possible to show an actual rejection or refusal, in the state of this record it must be concluded defendants had merely failed to pay attention to the post office notice and claim the letter of notification. Thus the record affirmatively shows neither received the notification of the filing with the commissioner provided in section 321.501(2), which resulted in a lack of service and therefore a want of jurisdiction over Baker and Handelman.
While this is a case of first impression in Iowa, and involves a statutory interpretation of our nonresident provisions in section 321.498 et seq., similar questions have been decided in many other jurisdictions. Those having similar provisions without exception seem to hold such a notice is not received or jurisdiction acquired unless the notification is either delivered or is rejected by the addressee. We must agree with both the reasoning and conclusion in such decisions. Ex parte Smith (1953), 258 Ala. 319, 62 So. 2d 792; General Insurance Co. of America v. O'Day (1960), 144 Colo. 376, 356 P.2d 888; Paxson v. Crowson (1952), 8 Terry 114, 87 A.2d 881; Parker v. Bond (Mo.1959), 330 S.W.2d 121; White v. March (1951), 147 Me. 63, 83 A.2d 296; Zander v. Martine (1961), 66 N.J.Super. 310, 169 A.2d 228; Kohler v. Derderian (D.C.,N.Y., 1960), 187 F. Supp. 173; Muncie v. Westcraft Corporation (1961), 58 Wash.2d 36, 360 P.2d 744; Mollohan v. North Side Cheese Company (1959), 144 W.Va. 215, 107 S.E.2d 372. We shall not burden this opinion with specific references to them. All hold a default judgment entered against the defendants void where they were not served with process as prescribed by law, and hold substantially that restricted registered mail properly addressed is not served where the return shows such stamping as "unknown", "unclaimed", "moved, left no address", etc. Only where it is shown the delivery was "refused" will the service be assumed complete. State ex rel. Charette v. District Court (1939), 107 Mont. 489, 86 P.2d 750; Wax v. Van Marter (1937), 124 Pa.Super. 573, 189 A. 537. Also see 5A Am.Jur. Automobiles and Highway Traffic, § 862, page 776; Annotations 82 A.L.R. 768, 96 A.L.R. 594, 125 A.L.R. 457, 138 A.L.R. 1464; 9A Blashfield Cyclopedia of Automobile Law and Practice, § 5915, page 363.
V. Our position as to the degree of compliance necessary under the referred sections of the Code has been made quite clear in the cases of Esterdahl v. Wilson, supra, and Johnson v. Brooks, supra. Both held where the method of service provided is extraordinary in character and is allowed only because specially authorized and is valid as a means of obtaining jurisdiction, the statutory procedure must be strictly followed. In the Esterdahl case at page 1205 of 252 Iowa, page 244 of 110 N. W.2d, we announced our view as to the legislative intention, saying: "Our legislature has made it clear that it intended delivery to be made only to the defendant in person." *277 Clearly, then, the act of timely mailing a notification, properly addressed, by restricted registered mail, does not end plaintiff's obligation. A receipt showing it has been delivered is required by section 321.505, and with the possible exception of refusal by addressee to accept offered delivery of same, plaintiff must show actual delivery of the notice, usually by the return receipt. When the return shows otherwise, as it did here, there remains an obligation upon plaintiff to seek other means of notification, i. e. service on defendants personally under section 321.504. While a refusal by defendants to accept delivery might involve a question of due proof, the sufficiency of which we do not here consider, the conclusion seems inescapable that if one refuses to receive the letter of notification from the postman and will not sign the receipt, the statute is satisfied with a showing he had an opportunity to do so. It would appear to be the same as a refusal to take a notice tendered by a sheriff or other proper process server.
Considering, then, the legislative mandate that one who selects the mailing method of notification must show delivery or refusal to accept, when delivery is tendered, a mere notification that defendant should call at the post office to accept it, on penalty that it be considered duly served, would indeed be unknown in the law. It would be as strange as a requirement that one must go to the sheriff's office to accept service of a notice when he is notified that the sheriff had attempted service upon him and found him out of town. Such a requirement clearly does not appear in these statutes and we cannot provide it by an interpretation. The burden to show delivery, therefore, remains upon the one seeking the service. In other words, we interpret the statute as requiring one attempting to obtain service on a nonresident to show actual or offered delivery of the notification to the person named, or he must obtain another method of notification, i. e. personal service in the other state (section 321.504), if the court is to obtain jurisdiction of the person of the defendant. Parker v. Bond, supra.
VI. Other jurisdiction questions which appear meritorious were raised by appellants, but in view of our holding above need not be decided here. They question whether the notice and mailing envelope were properly addressed in view of the fact that the action was against the individuals, Baker and Handelman, and that the judgment was secured against not the Baker Liquor Company but the individuals. They raise the further question of whether, under the action as brought, the statute required not one but two notices, one for each defendant. Section 321.501(2). It is sufficient to say both of these complaints raise serious doubts as to the sufficiency of the notification to defendants, had it been delivered.
We are satisfied from the record submitted that the trial court had not acquired jurisdiction of the defendants and that the purported judgment is void and of no force and effect. The cause must, therefore, be reversed and remanded for an order setting aside the judgment.
Reversed and remanded.
All Justices concur.

=== CASE 9738843 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:06.681854+00 ===

Per Curiam.
Rolland R. Roggensack was born September 1, 1927, and is presently thirty-five years old. He is *40a gráduate of the University of Wisconsin Law School, and was admitted to the bar in September, 1953. He is married and the father of three small children. Since July, 1954, he has practiced law at Lancaster, Wisconsin, where he now resides. He served as district attorney of Grant county from January 1, 1957, through April, 1961, when he was suspended by the governor because a criminal prosecution was pending against him in the Dane county circuit court for failure to file state income-tax returns for the years 1958 and 1959. Defendant waived a jury trial. He was convicted of the offense charged, viz., violation of sec. 71.11 (42), Stats.,1 on October 12, 1961, and sentenced to pay a fine of $500.
The facts regarding defendant’s failure to file his 1958 and 1959 state income-tax returns which prompted the Wisconsin department of taxation (hereinafter the “department”) to institute a criminal prosecution are these: November 6, 1959, the department mailed written notice to defendant to file a 1958 return. December 9, 1959, the department mailed notice to defendant of proposed default assessment based on an estimate of his 1958 income. January 8, 1960, notice of default assessment for 1958 was sent to defendant. November 9, 1960, defendant notified by mail of hearing (at which his attendance was not compulsory) to be held at the courthouse in Lancaster to discuss possibility of his paying delinquent 1958 tax. November 14, 1960, letter was sent requesting defendant to file 1959 return and warning him of severe penalties for failure to file. This communication also commented on his failure to file 1958 return result*41ing in the default assessment for that year. December 28, 1960, notice mailed' defendant requesting defendant to fill out his 1959 return and file it by January 13, 1961. Defendant made no reply to any of these communications.
Defendant testified with respect to the communications he received from the tax department as follows: In the fall.of 1959 he received a form letter from the department requesting him to file his 1958 return. He laid it on his desk, which was piled high with papers, expecting to comply by filing the requested return. Shortly thereafter he received notice of a proposed doomage assessment of $400 if he did not file within ten days. He figured that his tax was around that figure and decided he would let the department have a tax lien for that amount. In the fall of 1960 he received a letter requesting a 1959 return and asking him to pay the $400 assessed for 1958. He was not as concerned about this as he should have been — perhaps in the vain hope that - the department would again levy a doomage assessment as it had done in 1958.
In January or February, 1961, an auditor from internal revenue began an audit of defendant’s records in which he co-operated fully. In March, while this .audit was going on, defendant learned that the department had brought a criminal complaint against him. He completed his .1958 and 1959 returns and carried them to Madison and asked the department to compute the total due for tax, interest, and penalties. Not receiving a compliance with this request, he then paid the principal of the tax for the two years with interest thereon at 12 percent per annum. Thereafter, the department notified him of a 100 percent penalty.
In his testimony at the hearing before the referee, defendant told of the pressures exerted upon him and the demands made upon his time during the period of 1958-1960. In 1958 “everything happened at once.” From early that year *42until his suspension as district attorney in April, 1961, he was “engaged in a giant rat race.” The office of district attorney in Grant county is a part-time position; Roggensack also had a growing private practice to attend to. In 1958 he commenced the probate of 21 estates — 10 for the county welfare department and 11 for private clients. Several of the latter estates were sizable with - respect to both amounts involved and problems presented. All of the estates handled for the welfare department involved sales of land which required that defendant clear titles to facilitate these sales.
In April, 1958, he tried an important criminal case, involving many separate counts, and also prepared a multitude of resolutions and other papers for the April meeting of the county board. The juvenile court records disclose that during these years he conducted an average of 75 hearings per year in that court. His presence was required in prosecution of traffic cases which were held in justice court in late afternoons, evenings, and Saturdays. He was driven to distraction by the constant ringing of his home phone by calls from the sheriff’s office, the justice of the peace, the caseworkers in the welfare department, and lawyers whose clients had been arrested. A steady procession made its way to his office consisting of unmarried pregnant girls; village, city, county, and state police; inspectors and agents of the state government ; irate businessmen waving bad checks and demanding instant action; and numerous town chairmen seeking legal advice with respect to town problems.
Civic and church activities also made demands on his time. He was president of the local Jaycee chapter and a member of the board of directors of the Community Chest. He taught a Sunday school class at his church and sang in the church choir which practiced Wednesday evenings. Furthermore, he accepted all speaking engagements extended to him. On top of everything else, he began construction of a new home in the fall of 1958 and did all the painting and varnishing himself.
*43Defendant summed up the effect of all these pressures and demands upon his time by stating: “I concentrated on the things requiring immediate attention and trusted to a Merciful Providence that all other matters would wait until I got to them.” About May; 1958, defendant’s accounting system failed him. All of his gross receipts were deposited in the bank; his only records were the deposit slips. In many cases the checks deposited included reimbursement for expenses as well as fees which rendered his task of determining net income more difficult. At the time, defendant did not become concerned because he figured that toward the end of the year he would take a week off and “reconstruct what had happened.” Nevertheless, when it came time to do this he was worn out and sick in the hospital with pneumonia. When strong enough to return to work, he had to busy himself with making out the income-tax returns of his clients. Things had piled up during his sickness, and he never did find the time to straighten out his own financial records so as to file a 1958 return.
The referee’s report makes reference to a pronouncement made by Judge Edwin M. Wilkie at the time he found defendant guilty in the criminal action. In this pronouncement Judge Wilkie found that defendant failed to file returns for 1958 and 1959 with intent to get .out of paying the taxes due and, in effect, to cheat the government. In commenting thereon in his report the referee states:
“From a careful review of all the proceedings had in the Dane county circuit court, I have been unable to find the slightest bit of evidence to the effect that the defendant actually had any criminal intent, or that any fraud or moral turpitude was involved, as that term is defined by the courts. I gather from Judge Wilkie’s opinion he was of the same belief, but felt, however, that the inferences to be drawn from the defendant’s neglect to respond to the reasonable requests of the department were strong enough to convict the defendant under said sec. 71.11 (42).”
*44On the basis of the evidence produced at the hearing before the referee, which is carefully and fully summarized in his report, the referee made this finding:
“There is no evidence whatsoever of moral turpitude as defined by the McCarthy Case cited [State v. McCarthy (1949), 255 Wis. 234, 38 N. W. (2d) 679]. I am convinced that his delinquencies were due to his own belief that having been delinquent previously, which resulted only in fines and assessments, he could repeat at a time when he was having financial difficulties by building a home, etc., without incurring more than fines and assessments to be paid when he recovered from his financial obligation. Moreover, the department makes no claim of deception, concealment, or other fraud.” ...
Clearly on the basis of the evidence presented before the referee this finding is not against the great weight and clear preponderance of such evidence, and we" adopt same. Although the referee’s finding conflicts with that made by Judge Wilkie in the criminal prosecution, the latter finding is not res judicata in this disciplinary proceeding but merely prima jade evidence of moral turpitude. State v. O’Leary (1932), 207 Wis. 297, 241 N. W. 621, 81 A. L. R. 1193. Its effect as such prima facie evidence disappears by reason of our approval of this finding of the referee.
Nevertheless, the fact that defendant was not guilty of moral turpitude, in the sense of an intention to evade payment of taxes, does not relieve him from discipline. This is because defendant’s failure to file income-tax returns, after being repeatedly notified by the department to do so, was intentionál on his part' even though he did not expect thereby to éscape payment of any taxes. Canon 32 of the Canons of Professional Ethics of the American Bar Association describes the duty of the lawyer in part as follows:
“He must also observe and advise his client to 'observe the statute law, though until a statute shall have been construed and interpreted by competent adjudication, he is free *45and is entitled to advise as to its validity and as to what he conscientiously believes to be its just meaning and extent.” (Italics supplied.)
This canon was made applicable to defendant by Rule 9 of the Rules of the State Bar of Wisconsin, adopted by order of this court effective January 1, 1957, which states:
“The rules of professional conduct set forth from time to time in the Canons of Professional Ethics of the American Bar Association, as supplemented or modified by pronouncements of the court, shall be the standards governing the practice of law in this state.”
The intentional violation of the tax laws is also a violation of Canon 32 of the Canons of Professional Ethics of the American Bar Association. Governments cannot operate effectively unless their revenue laws are obeyed. Such a violation of the tax laws by an attorney is a matter of serious concern because he necessarily must advise clients with respect to their obeyance of such laws. Furthermore, the legal profession is one which is peculiarly charged with the administration of our laws and therefore it is incumbent upon lawyers to set an example for others in observing the law. The intentional failure to file income-tax returns evinces an attitude on the part of the attorney of placing himself above the law. Such an attitude does not befit a lawyer. As Mr. Justice Bradley aptly stated many years ago in Ex parte Wall (1882), 107 U. S. 265, 274, 2 Sup. Ct. 569, 27 L. Ed. 552:
“Of all classes and professions, the lawyer is most sacredly bound to uphold the laws. He is their sworn servant; and for him, of all men in the world, to repudiate and override the laws, . . . argues recreancy to his position and office, and sets a pernicious example to the insubordinate ánd dangerous elements of the body politic. It manifests a want of fidelity to the system of lawful government which he has sworn to uphold and preserve.”
*46Canon 29 of the Canons of Professional Ethics of the American Bar Association states that a lawyer “should strive at all times to uphold the honor and to maintain the dignity of the profession . . .”
We do not wish to imply that every violation of law by an attorney will subject him to discipline. As a general rule, before such violation will be a ground for discipline it must entail moral turpitude as defined in State v. McCarthy (1949), 255 Wis. 234, 249, 38 N. W. (2d) 679. Nevertheless, we deem intentional violation of tax laws, even though without intent to defraud the government, an exception to this general rule because in our opinion such intentional violation constitutes unprofessional conduct.
This brings us to the question, what discipline should be imposed upon defendant ? This question should be considered with the goal of protecting the public in mind. See State v. Barto (1930), 202 Wis. 329, 345, 232 N. W. 553. Punishment of an offending attorney is not the objective of disciplinary proceedings. State v. Kern (1930), 203 Wis. 178, 181, 233 N. W. 629. Primary consideration should be given to the question of whether there is a likelihood, if any discipline is imposed short of suspension or disbarment, of the attorney’s engaging in unprofessional conduct in the future. State v. Markey (1951), 259 Wis. 527, 542, 49 N. W. (2d) 437; State v. McCarthy, supra, at page 250; and State v. Kern, supra, at page 183. On this point, the referee was much impressed, as is the court, by the testimony given in behalf of defendant by Judges Orton and Frantz.
Judge Richard W. Orton has been circuit judge of the Fifth circuit since 1955. He resides in Lancaster which also is defendant’s place of residence. Judge Orton testified that he had known defendant for twenty-five years and described him as a “capable, able, diligent young lawyer whose ethics in my opinion, and whose moral standards and integrity are beyond question.” Judge Orton stated that he is convinced *47that defendant “can in the future practice law without the remotest possibility of any harm coming, to any client or clients, or to the public, and to me that is the ultimate test in a case of this kind.” After defendant’s conviction in the criminal action, Judge Orton joined in appointing defendant as family court commissioner of Grant county because the judge was convinced defendant was the kind of man wanted for the job.
Judge George F. Frantz retired from the bench on July 31, 1961, after serving fifteen years as the county judge of the county court of Grant county. Judge Frantz testified in part as follows:
“I became acquainted with him, as I knew him through his practice ... as district attorney. . . . [H]e was in my court or in my chambers two or three times a day.
“He was an excellent district attorney. He was never derelict in his duty. ... I had explicit confidence in him.”
In response to the question, “[D]o you feel he is fit at this time to continue the practice of law?” — Judge Frantz answered, “Absolutely.”
We are completely satisfied that the discipline of suspension is not required in order to protect the public against any future acts of unprofessional conduct by defendant, and that he possesses the good moral character necessary for continuance of the practice of law.
This brings us to the question of whether a suspension is necessary as a restraining influence upon other attorneys who may also contemplate failing to file income-tax returns. Just as a decision to impose discipline involves “to some extent a punishment,” which, however, is not the “primary consideration” in disciplinary proceedings (State v. Barto, supra, at pages 344, 345 ), so too does a decision to impose discipline interpose to some extent an element of deterrence to others. In re Stolen (1927), 193 Wis. 602, 623, 214 N. W. 379, 216 N. W. 127. If, however, the extensive newspaper publicity *48covering every phase of defendant’s criminal prosecution and conviction, the fine imposed in that action, his suspension from office as district attorney, the adverse effect of such suspension upon his candidacy in a judicial election held April 4, 1961, and the reprimand of this court are not sufficient deterrents to other attorneys, we doubt that suspension from practice would be any more effective. State v. Clarke (1952), 262 Wis. 594, 602, 55 N. W. (2d) 888.
The referee relied heavily on the precedent of State v. McKinnon (1953), 263 Wis. 413, 57 N. W. (2d) 404, in recommending dismissal of the instant proceedings. The unprofessional conduct charged in the McKinnon Case was likewise failure to file state income-tax returns. This court held therein that although the attorney was subject to censure for failure to file the returns, it was not within the scope of this court’s authority to impose discipline. The court stated (p. 416):
“Defendant’s conduct may show an inexcusable lack of moral sense regarding the discharge of his obligations as a private citizen to his government, but it is not within the scope of this court’s authority to impose discipline for conduct which has no relation to his duties and obligations as a lawyer, where the request for disciplinary action is based upon acts involving no moral turpitude.”
This foregoing language clearly conflicts with the instant opinion and thus is hereby overruled.
It is ordered and adjudged, that defendant be reprimanded for his conduct in failing to file his 1958 and 1959 state income-tax returns, and that he pay the costs and expenses of these proceedings, but not to exceed a maximum of $750. Such costs and expenses shall include the fees and disbursements of the referee, the fees and disbursements of the attorney for plaintiff, the fees of the official reporter, the fees of the clerk of this court, and the cost of printing plaintiff’s brief and appendix.
“Any person, other than a corporation, who fails or refuses to make a return at the time hereinbefore specified in each year or shall render a false or fraudulent return shall upon conviction be fined not to exceed $500, or be imprisoned not to exceed one year, or both, at the discretion of the court, together with the cost of prosecution.”

=== CASE 9738844 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:06.686504+00 ===

*49Hallows, J.
(dissenting in part). The majority opinion holds in effect this court has power to revoke or suspend a license of a member of the bar for acts in his private life which do not involve unprofessional conduct or moral turpitude and overrules language in State v. McKinnon (1953), 263 Wis. 413, 416, 57 N. W. (2d) 404, that “it is not within the scope of this court’s authority to impose discipline for conduct which has no relation to his duties and obligations as a lawyer, where the request for disciplinary action is based upon acts involving no moral turpitude.” It was pointed out in State v. McCarthy (1949), 255 Wis. 234, at page 246, 38 N. W. (2d) 679, that sec. 256.28 (8), Stats., provides for a special proceeding relating to the suspension and disbarment of attorneys and, under sec. 256.28 (7), a lawyer found guilty of unprofessional conduct or an act involving moral turpitude may be suspended or disbarred from practice,, but no other penalty is provided.
The majority opinion’s expression of this court’s power is apparently based upon the inherent power of this court to discipline and disbar attorneys. Such power is recognized in In re Stolen (1927), 193 Wis. 602, 214 N. W. 379. But inherent power is not unlimited or founded upon ipse dixit. By overruling the language of the McKinnon Case, the majority opinion leaves a clear implication that regardless of the statute this court has the power and jurisdiction to disbar or suspend an attorney for acts not amounting to unprofessional conduct or not involving moral turpitude. The majority opinion expresses a dangerous doctrine of inherent power and only softens its impact by stating as a general rule it will not exercise such power but there may be exceptions.
I quite agree that on the instant facts the defendant should be censured for his conduct which did not involve unprofessional conduct as defined in sec., 256.29 (2), Stats., or moral turpitude. But I have difficulty with the concept that every violation of the law is unprofessional conduct because *50the Canons of Ethics provide an attorney should obey the law. I do not think this court’s inherent power goes to the extent of disbarring or suspending an attorney for his, private life or his morals which do not amount to a breach of professional conduct or involve moral turpitude. I agree with what we said in the case of In re Richter (1925 ), 187 Wis. 490, 504, 204 N. W. 492: “This court does not sit in this or any other case as a court of inquisition to search out the private life and censor the morals of the attorneys who are its officers.” I must respectfully dissent.
I am authorized to state Mr. Justice Dieterich joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 2217901 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:36.902972+00 ===

437 Mich. 506 (1991)
473 N.W.2d 263
MICHIGAN TAX MANAGEMENT SERVICES COMPANY
v.
CITY OF WARREN
Docket No. 89711.
Supreme Court of Michigan.
Decided July 22, 1991.
Jon P. Gutek for the plaintiff.
Wm. Thomas Marrocco, Jr., for the defendant.
*507 PER CURIAM:
Where a party prevails in an action brought under the Freedom of Information Act, the statute requires the trial court to award reasonable attorney fees. In this case, the circuit court awarded such fees, in an amount that was smaller than the plaintiff's request. The Court of Appeals found the reduction to be error, and ordered that the plaintiff be paid the full requested amount.
When awarding attorney fees under the FOIA, the trial court must determine the amount that is reasonable. The standard for reviewing the trial court's determination is whether the court abused its discretion. Finding no such abuse, we are persuaded that the Court of Appeals erred. Accordingly, we reinstate the judgment of the circuit court.
I
The parties describe plaintiff as a corporation that "performs certain property tax assessment appeal work for various corporate clients." In July, 1987, the plaintiff unsuccessfully attempted to persuade the defendant city to provide some tax assessment records. In July, 1987, the plaintiff filed an action in the Wayne Circuit Court. The basis for the suit was the Freedom of Information Act. MCL 15.231 et seq.; MSA 4.1801(1) et seq.
In its complaint, the plaintiff sought production of the disputed records. It also asked the circuit court to "award reasonable costs including attorney fees, and, in addition, award punitive damages in the amount of $500 as provided by statute."
The circuit court agreed with the plaintiff that the disputed records were subject to disclosure. With regard to the plaintiff's request for monetary relief, the court awarded $225 in costs and disbursements *508 and $4,500 in attorney fees under § 10(4) of the FOIA. MCL 15.240(4); MSA 4.1801(10)(4) provides:
If a person asserting the right to inspect or to receive a copy of a public record or a portion thereof prevails in an action commenced pursuant to this section, the court shall award reasonable attorneys' fees, costs, and disbursements. If the person prevails in part, the court may in its discretion award reasonable attorneys' fees, costs, and disbursements or an appropriate portion thereof. The award shall be assessed against the public body liable for damages under subsection (5).
The attorney fee award of $4,500 was significantly reduced from the requested amount of $14,450.
The circuit court also granted the request for a $500 award of punitive damages under § 10(5) of the FOIA. MCL 15.240(5); MSA 4.1801(10)(5) provides:
In an action commenced pursuant to this section, if the circuit court finds that the public body has arbitrarily and capriciously violated this act by refusal or delay in disclosing or providing copies of a public record, the court shall, in addition to any actual or compensatory damages, award punitive damages in the amount of $500.00 to the person seeking the right to inspect or receive a copy of a public record. The damages shall not be assessed against an individual, but shall be assessed against the next succeeding public body, not an individual, pursuant to whose public function the public record was kept or maintained.
The Court of Appeals held that the circuit court "clearly erred in reducing the attorney fee award," and ordered that attorney fees be provided in the full requested amount of $14,450. 184 Mich. App. 644, 647; 459 NW2d 83 (1990).
*509 The defendant has applied to this Court for leave to appeal.
II
In Int'l Union, United Plant Guard Workers of America v Dep't of State Police, 422 Mich. 432, 455, 458, 472; 373 NW2d 713 (1985),[1] this Court explained that "reasonable fees and other expenses must be awarded to a requester who prevails completely." (Emphasis in original.)[2] Thus the circuit court was obliged in the present case to award reasonable attorney fees.
However, the mandatory character of the award does not relieve the trial court of the obligation to exercise its sound judgment in determining a reasonable fee. In this context, we adopt the analysis employed in Wood v DAIIE, 413 Mich. 573, 587-588; 321 NW2d 653 (1982):
A determination that a party is entitled to attorney fees under the no-fault insurance act does not decide the amount of the award, however. As to this question, we agree with the defendant that the controlling criterion is that the attorney fees be "reasonable." We adopt the guidelines for determining "reasonableness" set forth in Crawley v Schick, 48 Mich. App. 728, 737; 211 NW2d 217 (1973).
The Crawley panel noted that there is no precise formula for computing the reasonableness of an attorney's fee, but said that factors to be considered are:
"(1) the professional standing and experience of the attorney; (2) the skill, time and labor involved; (3) the amount in question and the results achieved; (4) the difficulty of the case; (5) the *510 expenses incurred; and (6) the nature and length of the professional relationship with the client. See generally 3 Michigan Law & Practice, Attorneys and Counselors, § 44, p 275, and Disciplinary Rule 2-106(B) of the Code of Professional Responsibility and Ethics."[[3]]
See also Liddell v DAIIE, 102 Mich. App. 636, 652; 302 NW2d 260 (1981), which applied the Crawley factors to the no-fault insurance scheme. MCL 500.3148(1); MSA 24.13148(1).
While a trial court should consider the guidelines of Crawley, it is not limited to those factors in making its determination. Further, the trial court need not detail its findings as to each specific factor considered. The award will be upheld unless it appears upon appellate review that the trial court's finding on the "reasonableness" issue was an abuse of discretion.
Although the Court of Appeals properly acknowledged that "[t]he controlling criteria in reviewing an award of attorney fees is reasonableness," it erred when it concluded its analysis in this fashion:
There is nothing in the stipulation to contradict the number of hours or the amount of the hourly rate except the defendant's declination to accept. This hardly rebuts the detailed statement of attorney fees which supported the plaintiff's documentation and the waiver of hearing by the defendant is tantamount to acceptance of the reasonableness of same.
... No factual support, no contest of amount, time, reasonableness, customary charges, or expert opinion was asserted [by the circuit court]. We find the court clearly erred in reducing the attorney fee award and we reverse. There being no evidence to the contrary, we order award of the attorney fees in the amount of $14,450. [184 Mich. App. 647.]
*511 Earlier, the Court of Appeals had quoted a portion of the parties' stipulation, in which the defendant explicitly contested the billing rate of plaintiff's counsel, as well as counsel's account of the time spent on this matter.[4] While defense proofs regarding a reasonable rate of compensation and a reasonable number of hours for the completion of a case of this sort would have helped the circuit court to determine the proper amount to award,[5] the court was nonetheless obliged to make an independent determination with regard to a reasonable amount of fees.
That is, the function of the court is to make an original determination and award regarding reasonable fees. The court is not performing a review *512 function limited to approval or disapproval of others' calculations regarding the amount of fees to be awarded.
In this case, the circuit court explained that it had considered "the attorney['s] statement of services and billing detail," as well as "the type of lawsuit, nature of issues in dispute, attorney experience, attorney-client relationship, time and labor required, amount involved and results obtained and the fee customarily charged for similar legal services...." In light of those considerations, the circuit court concluded "that a reasonable attorney fee is $4,500."
The circuit court's determination with regard to a reasonable attorney fee was made on the basis of appropriate criteria.[6] We are further satisfied, after examining counsel's account[7] and considering the comparatively uncomplicated nature of this litigation, that the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in determining that $4,500 is reasonable compensation for the work performed in this case by plaintiff's counsel.[8]
*513 We have considered, but decline to address, the defendant's other allegation of error.
For these reasons, we reverse in part the judgment of the Court of Appeals, and we reinstate the judgment of the circuit court.[9] MCR 7.302(F)(1).
CAVANAGH, C.J., and BRICKLEY, BOYLE, RILEY, GRIFFIN, and MALLETT, JJ., concurred.
LEVIN, J., took no part in the decision of this case.
NOTES
[1]  Modified 423 Mich. 1205 (1985).
[2]  One may contrast the federal statute, under which an award of attorney fees is permissive. 5 USC 552(a)(4)(E).
[3]  With minor stylistic changes, the former text of DR 2-106(B) is reproduced in MRPC 1.5(a).
[4]  These paragraphs are taken from the parties' stipulation of facts:
46. The Plaintiff asserts, and the Defendant does not accept, that the billing rate of the attorney for the Plaintiff is $125 per hour expended.
47. The Plaintiff asserts, and the Defendant does not accept, that the Billing Detail attached as Exhibit Nine and made part of this stipulation describes the work performed for the Plaintiff, shows the actual hours incurred by the Attorney for the Plaintiff, indicates that the amount to be billed to the Plaintiff for actual attorney's fees through the Settlement Conference held February 16, 1989 is $11,950.
48. The Plaintiff estimates, and the Defendant does not accept, that the amount of time to be expended through the remainder of the circuit court proceedings (including the preparation of the required brief) will total 20 hours for an additional attorney fee charge of $2,500 for a total attorney fee of $14,450. [184 Mich. App. 646.]
The Court of Appeals also quoted two additional paragraphs of the stipulation. The filed copy of the stipulation bears handwritten markings that leave us uncertain whether the additional paragraphs were included within the parties' stipulation.
[5]  While a party has the right to present such proofs, often it will be difficult for a party to present a detailed challenge to a billing statement presented by the other party's attorney. In addition, full-blown litigation of such a question might involve greater expense than would foreseeably be saved through such a challenge. It is not error for a party or a court to take reasonable steps to expedite resolution of an attorney-fee dispute, and we do not disapprove summary proceedings that protect the rights of the parties.
[6]  Citing Sentry Ins A Mutual Co v Lardner Elevator Co, 153 Mich. App. 317, 326; 395 NW2d 31 (1986), the plaintiff asks that we hold the measure of reasonable attorney fees to be the "fair value of the services rendered." We do not view the Sentry test as significantly different from the standard quoted in Wood, 413 Mich. 588. Rather, Sentry provides a shorthand expression of an approach that is spelled out in Wood.
[7]  In written submissions to the circuit court, plaintiff's counsel stated that he spent 95.6 hours on the case through February 16, 1989, and that the remaining portion of the circuit court proceedings would require an additional twenty hours of time. At a billing rate of $125 per hour, plaintiff's counsel thus calculated a total fee of $14,450.
[8]  The phrase "reasonable attorneys' fees" is found in MCL 15.240(4); MSA 4.1801(10)(4). The Court of Appeals based much of its analysis on that subsection, but also appeared to hold that the award of $14,450 was proper as "actual or compensatory damages" under MCL 15.240(5); MSA 4.1801(10)(5). We do not reach the question what is meant by the phrase "actual or compensatory damages," except to hold that if it includes attorney fees, it includes only reasonable attorney fees as specified in MCL 15.240(4); MSA 4.1801(10)(4). 184 Mich. App. 648.
[9]  At the conclusion of its opinion, the Court of Appeals said:
Plaintiff has also requested additional attorney fees, costs and disbursements incurred subsequent to the circuit court proceedings for which there is no lower court record or stipulated facts. We decline to address this request but without prejudice to the matter being raised in the trial court. [184 Mich. App. 648.]
The Court of Appeals then remanded the case "for appropriate proceedings in accordance herewith." The defendant has not asked for relief from that portion of the Court of Appeals judgment, and so we neither disturb nor comment upon it.

=== CASE 2217924 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:37.355444+00 ===

189 Mich. App. 367 (1991)
473 N.W.2d 699
ABRAHAM
v.
JACKSON
Docket No. 115525.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided May 20, 1991, at 9:25 A.M.
Bockoff, Zamler, Mellen & Shiffman, P.C. (by Gregory M. Bereznoff), for the plaintiff.
Laurel F. McGiffert, for the defendant on appeal.
Before: GRIBBS, P.J., and MacKENZIE and JANSEN, JJ.
*369 MacKENZIE, J.
Defendants appeal by leave granted from that portion of an order denying their motion for summary disposition of plaintiff's gross negligence claim. We reverse.
Defendants are emergency medical technicians employed by the City of Detroit. On August 30, 1985, they transported plaintiff's decedent, who was in respiratory distress, from her home to a local hospital. The decedent went into full cardiac arrest in the ambulance and died eight days later.
Plaintiff filed this suit against defendants on April 21, 1988. Count I of plaintiff's complaint alleged negligence; count II alleged gross negligence. Defendants moved for summary disposition on the grounds of failure to state a claim and governmental immunity. The trial court granted defendants' motion for summary disposition of the negligence count, but denied their motion with respect to the gross negligence claim. In denying the latter, the court apparently relied on the definition of individual immunity and gross negligence set forth in § 7 of the governmental tort liability act as amended by 1986 PA 175, MCL 691.1407(2)(c); MSA 3.996(107)(2)(c). Under that section, lower-level governmental employees are not immune from tort liability if their conduct amounts to gross negligence, defined as "conduct so reckless as to demonstrate a substantial lack of concern for whether an injury results."
On appeal, defendants contend that the trial court improperly applied the definitions of individual immunity and gross negligence set forth at MCL 691.1407; MSA 3.996(107), as amended by 1986 PA 175, and instead should have applied the individual immunity test set forth in Ross v Consumers Power Co (On Rehearing), 420 Mich 567; 363 NW2d 641 (1984). We agree. 1986 PA 175, § 3 provides that the amended MCL 691.1407; MSA *370 3.996(107) does not apply to causes of action "arising" before July 1, 1986. For purposes of this statute, a cause of action "arises" when the plaintiff's claim accrues, not when it is filed. See Montgomery v Detroit, 181 Mich App 298, 308; 448 NW2d 822 (1989); DeRocco v Harper Grace Hosp, 182 Mich App 188, 191, n 1; 451 NW2d 549 (1989); Hyde v Univ of Michigan Bd of Regents, 426 Mich 223, 246; 393 NW2d 847 (1986). But see Bischoff v Calhoun Co Prosecutor, 173 Mich App 802, 806; 434 NW2d 249 (1988). Here, plaintiff's cause of action arose either on August 30, 1985, the date defendants transported the decedent, or September 8, 1985, the date on which she died. The amended statute therefore is inapplicable to this case. The trial court erred in denying defendants' motion for summary disposition of count II on the basis of the statute rather than Ross.
Before 1986 PA 175 became effective, "the existence and scope of individual immunity [was] a creature of judicial decision-making." Ross, supra, p 629. Ross set forth the following test for individual immunity:
Lower level officials, employees, and agents are immune from tort liability only when they are
1) acting during the course of their employment and acting, or reasonably believe they are acting, within the scope of their authority;
2) acting in good faith; and
3) performing discretionary, as opposed to ministerial acts. [420 Mich 633-634.]
The Supreme Court has applied this test to claims of liability for gross negligence, as well as ordinary negligence. See, e.g., Ross, supra, pp 638, n 45, 639.
Here, there is no question that defendants were acting during the course of their employment and within the scope of their authority when they *371 transported the decedent. Plaintiff has not alleged that defendants were acting in bad faith. Therefore, the only determination necessary is whether defendants were engaged in discretionary acts entitling them to immunity under Ross.
Discretionary acts involve significant decision making and entail personal deliberation, decision, and judgment. Ross, supra, pp 634, 635. Ministerial acts involve the execution of a decision with only minor decision making. Id. Although the execution of a medical decision may at times entail a series of medical decisions requiring personal deliberation and judgment, each of those decisions must entail significant decision making to be considered discretionary. Green v Berrien General Hosp Auxiliary, Inc, 437 Mich 1, 13; 464 NW2d 703 (1990). Whether an activity is discretionary or ministerial is a question of law. Gillam v Lloyd, 172 Mich App 563, 576; 432 NW2d 356 (1988).
Defendants' activities in this case involved more than obedience to routine procedure or minor decision making. They had to assess the degree of the decedent's respiratory distress, determine whether her condition required oxygen therapy, and make a judgment with regard to the amount of physical exertion she was medically able to tolerate. Each of these determinations involved significant medical judgment rather than minor decision making. Defendants therefore were engaged in discretionary activity and were entitled to immunity under Ross. Neither plaintiff's negligence nor gross negligence claim should have survived summary disposition.
Plaintiff argues that the trial court reached the right result in denying summary disposition of her gross negligence claim. Specifically, plaintiff contends that former § 20737 of the emergency medical *372 services act, MCL 333.20737; MSA 14.15(20737), now MCL 333.20965; MSA 14.15(20965), set forth a statutory exception to individual immunity as defined in Ross and that this case falls within that exception. While our Supreme Court recently held that a governmental agency may be held vicariously (but not directly) liable under the emergency medical services act, Malcolm v City of East Detroit, 437 Mich 132; 468 NW2d 479 (1991), the Court has not addressed the question whether former § 20737 set forth an exception to individual immunity. We need not address the question in this case. MCL 333.20737; MSA 14.15(20737) provided that emergency medical technicians were protected from liability for their acts or omissions in treating a patient "unless the act or omission was the result of gross negligence or willful misconduct." Plaintiff, however, has failed to state a claim for gross negligence because she has not alleged that defendants' negligent conduct occurred after some negligent conduct on the part of the decedent. See McNeal v Dep't of Natural Resources, 140 Mich App 625, 632; 364 NW2d 768 (1985). Furthermore, while plaintiff may have pleaded a high degree of carelessness, she has not pleaded wilful misconduct. Accordingly, even if we were to hold that MCL 333.20737; MSA 14.15(20737) constituted a statutory exception to individual immunity as defined in Ross, plaintiff's complaint falls outside the scope of the statute.
Reversed.

=== CASE 2217934 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:37.578195+00 ===

42 Ill.2d 58 (1969)
245 N.E.2d 483
THE PEOPLE ex rel. Charles Edward Lewis, Appellant,
v.
MAX P. FRYE, Warden, Appellee.
No. 41443.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed January 29, 1969.
Rehearing denied March 25, 1969.
*59 CHARLES EDWARD LEWIS, pro se.
Order affirmed.
Mr. JUSTICE WARD delivered the opinion of the court:
The appellant, Charles Edward Lewis, pleaded guilty to two charges of incest on May 9, 1961. On January 6, 1966, he filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus in the circuit court of Union County, claiming that numerous violations of constitutional rights invalidated his convictions and hence he was detained unconstitutionally in the penitentiary. On May 19, 1966, after a hearing at which Lewis was represented by court-appointed counsel, the court granted the State's motion to deny the petition for a writ of habeas corpus. He has now appealed, pro se, to this court. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, ch. 110A, par. 302(a)(3).
The appellant presents here substantially the arguments offered in support of his petition for the writ in the circuit court. He complains his rights to due process and equal protection of the laws were disregarded in that, inter alia, he was insane when he pleaded guilty and the State's Attorney knew of such insanity. Claim that effective assistance of counsel was denied and other allegations of constitutional deprivation are also asserted.
*60 We have consistently held that a court has jurisdiction to direct the release of a prisoner on habeas corpus only where the judgment of the original trial court was void, viz., rendered by a court lacking jurisdiction of the subject matter or the person of the defendant, or where there has been some occurrence subsequent to his conviction which entitles the prisoner to release. (People ex rel. Skinner v. Randolph, 35 Ill.2d 589, 590; People ex rel. Rose v. Randolph, 33 Ill.2d 453, 456-7; and see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, ch. 65, par. 22.) The remedy of habeas corpus is not available to review errors of a nonjurisdictional nature, though they involve claims of denial of constitutional rights. (People ex rel. Haven v. Macieiski, 38 Ill.2d 396, 398; People ex rel. Skinner v. Randolph, 35 Ill.2d 589, 590.) Supplementing the relief available through an appeal, the General Assembly has provided a remedy of review under the Post-Conviction Hearing Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, ch. 38, par. 122 et seq.) specifically for one claiming that conviction was obtained in violation of his constitutional rights. While the trial court could have treated the petition here as a petition under the Post-Conviction Hearing Act and disregarded its designation as one for a writ of habeas corpus, it was not required to do so. People ex rel. Haven v. Macieiski, 38 Ill.2d 396, 398.
Accordingly, we affirm the order of the circuit court dismissing the petition for writ of habeas corpus.
Order affirmed.

=== CASE 2217943 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:37.750597+00 ===

105 Ill. App.2d 216 (1969)
245 N.E.2d 41
People of the State of Illinois, Appellee,
v.
Paul Durant, Appellant.
Gen. No. 51,924.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District, Second Division.
January 28, 1969.
*217 *218 Gerald W. Getty, Public Defender of Cook County, of Chicago (George L. Lincoln and James J. Doherty, Assistant Public Defenders, of counsel), for appellant.
John J. Stamos, State's Attorney of Cook County, of Chicago (Elmer C. Kissane and Robert B. Rosen, Assistant State's Attorneys, of counsel), for appellee.
MR. JUSTICE McCORMICK delivered the opinion of the court.
Paul Durant, defendant, was indicted for the crimes of robbery and aggravated battery. He was tried before a jury which returned a verdict of guilty, and the defendant was sentenced to a term of five to ten years in the Illinois penitentiary, the sentence on each count of the indictment to run concurrently.
In this court the defendant complains that he was not properly identified; therefore, was not proved guilty beyond *219 all reasonable doubt; that irrelevant evidence was introduced; that the prosecutor's arguments were improper; and that the defendant was denied a fair and impartial jury. (The defendant offered no evidence whatsoever in the case.)
There is no question that the complainant, Frank Wilkes, had parked his truck on Homer Street, four feet west of Damen Avenue, in the City of Chicago; that he was attacked by two men and a woman, and suffered head injuries, broken ribs and bruises; and that his wallet was taken, with two fives and a one-dollar bill removed from it. Shortly after the crime Officer Victor Hoffman arrested the defendant and James Catalano in an alley east of Damen and 100 feet south of Homer Street, where they were seen at a "T" in the alley, coming from the north and turning west. Defendant's shirt was out and his pants were unzipped. Catalano was carrying one ten-dollar bill and two singles; defendant carried no money.
Dr. William Haines, a psychiatrist, had examined the defendant three months before the trial and reported he was competent to stand trial. The report indicated that the defendant had been in Elgin State Hospital a few months for observation, and had previously been in the hospital from October 24, 1962 to January 24, 1963; the defendant was described as "emotionally unstable."
On July 5, 1966, a sanity hearing regarding the defendant was held before a jury. At that hearing Dr. Haines testified that he had examined the defendant on June 6 and found that the defendant understood the nature of the charges against him and was able to cooperate with his attorney. The jury returned a verdict finding the defendant competent to stand trial.
When the defendant was brought into the courtroom he was struggling with two deputy sheriffs. The trial judge excused the prospective jurors and asked the defendant if he wished to be present at the trial proceeding. *220 The defendant began mumbling and crying, and said, "Leave me alone." The court then held that defendant had waived his right to be present and ordered him removed from the courtroom until he decided to conduct himself properly. The court noted then that the defendant had behaved normally on prior court dates and during the morning in question; that there had never been any outbursts.
The jury was selected from the panel which had observed defendant's outburst, and the court told the jury that the defendant did not choose to attend the proceedings and was in custody. The jury was carefully examined both by counsel and the court as to whether or not the defendant's conduct in the courtroom would have any effect on their verdict, and the only jurors selected were those who categorically answered that it would not.
The first witness for the State was Frank Wilkes, who testified that on April 21, 1966, at about 7:30 p.m., he and his partner unloaded some merchandise at his antique shop at 1944 North Damen Avenue, after which his partner went inside. Wilkes pulled the truck around the corner on Homer Street, about 20 feet from the shop, and at that time some people threw open both doors of the truck and began clubbing him. (He identified the defendant as one of the assailants.) The defendant then struck him twice with a pressure cooker, and the defendant's companion hit Wilkes from the other side; during this time a girl who was with the assailants was shouting, "Grab him, kick him, grab his purse, grab his wallet, kick him hard." The defendant then picked up a hammer and swung it at Wilkes' head; it struck a glancing blow and the head of the hammer flew across the street. The woman then grabbed Wilkes' legs; he fell, and the three persons kicked him as he lay on the ground.
Wilkes testified that after the three had escaped, he noticed that $11 was missing from his wallet, as well as *221 a valuable gold coin piece he wore around his neck. Shortly afterwards a squad car arrived and Wilkes got into the car to talk with the officers. At this time another squad car (with the two suspects in it) pulled up and parked about seven feet away. Wilkes was unable to see the suspects well enough to recognize them from that distance. When both squad cars went to the police station Wilkes got out and faced the suspects and identified them as the men who had attacked him.
Wilkes testified that he had jerked a jacket off the defendant when he tried to get away, and that the other man (Catalano) was wearing a dark sweater, either black or maroon. Wilkes stated that during the attack he was struck on the side four or five times, resulting in swelling, two broken ribs and a swollen ear.
Officer Victor Hoffman testified that he was in a patrol car on April 21, 1966, about 8:30 p.m., when he was stopped by a citizen on North Damen Avenue; that he then went to Damen and Homer, where he saw Wilkes and noted his bruised and swollen neck and torn trousers. After talking with Wilkes, Hoffman and his partner proceeded to an alley south of Homer and Damen, where they saw the defendant and Catalano running out of an adjoining alley; the men were disheveled in appearance, and when searched by the police Catalano was found to have $12 on his person; no money was found on the defendant. The defendant was wearing a white shirt, gray trousers with hanging suspenders, and the shirt was outside the trousers. Catalano wore a maroon sweater and dark trousers. The officer placed both men under arrest.
At the trial the State offered in evidence a dark shirt which was found in the alley; this exhibit was objected to but was admitted over the objection.
The first objection made by the defendant in this court is that the identification was suggestive and violated due process of law. During the attack Wilkes had grappled *222 with the assailants; shortly after the robbery he confronted the defendant at the police station, and at the trial he pointed out the defendant as the man who had beaten and robbed him; and he stated that he had seen the defendant a couple of times before in the neighborhood. The defendant claims that Wilkes should have identified him while he was sitting in the squad car; however, Wilkes' explanation of his failure to do so was sufficient.
The defendant complains of the fact that a police officer, prior to the identification at the police station, said to Wilkes: "We have the men who assaulted you."
Defendant also complains that Wilkes identified him without his having been placed in a lineup. In People v. Snell, 74 Ill. App.2d 12, 219 NE2d 554, the court held that while it is preferable to have a witness identify a party from a group of unknown persons, failure to follow this practice goes only to the weight of the evidence, and is not necessary. The court said at page 22:
"Where, as here, the witness was present during the commission of the crime, had ample opportunity to observe his assailant, and was called upon to make the identification after a lapse of less than an hour from the time of the occurrence, his testimony, if otherwise credible, can be sufficient for conviction notwithstanding failure to employ an ideal identification procedure."
In People v. Byrd, 21 Ill.2d 114, 171 NE2d 782, the court said at 117:
"Defendant also contends that at the lineup the police officers pointed out and identified defendant before the witnesses had identified him. The evidence is conflicting on this point. However, this circumstance, even if proved, would go only to the weight and credibility of the witnesses' testimony."
*223 The defendant cites People v. Botulinski, 383 Ill. 608, 50 NE2d 716, in which the rule is set out that the proper way to have a witness identify, without suggestion from any officers or any interested persons, is to pick out the guilty party from a number of persons unknown to the witness. However, on page 615 the court said:
"We have held that where one accused of a crime is brought alone before the witness for the purpose of identification, such identification is not entitled to the same weight and credibility as where the witness picks out the accused from a number of persons brought before the witness. [Citing People v. Sanders, 357 Ill. 610.]"
In the Sanders case the court held that where the witness is told in advance of the identification that the guilty party is in the custody of the police and the prisoner is produced alone for the purpose of identification, the weight of the evidence of identification is impaired. And it has been held that a positive identification by one credible witness is sufficient to support a conviction. People v. Saravia, 64 Ill. App.2d 479, 211 NE2d 560; People v. Soldat, 32 Ill.2d 478, 207 NE2d 449.
[1] In the instant case, during the struggle, Wilkes had full opportunity to observe the defendant, and he testified that his recognition of the defendant was aided by the fact that he had seen him a couple of times before in the neighborhood. He identified the defendant at the police station shortly after the robbery, and again in court. His identification was sufficient, and the trial court properly accepted it.
[2] Wilkes also testified that when the police talked to him in the squad car he told them the assailant had bushy black hair; that he was a little taller than Wilkes, who was 5' 9"; and that he was a very young man. (The police officer testified that in his opinion the defendant *224 was 19 or 20 years old.) He did not mention the matter of the man's weight. The defendant complains that the prosecutor said to the jury that Wilkes had stated that he thought the defendant was probably Mexican or Indian. No such statement was made by Wilkes, but this inadvertent remark on the part of the State, while improper, was not reversible error.
[3] The defendant also argues that the foregoing argument of the prosecutor was improper, as well as his statement about a shirt found by the police in the alley near the place of arrest. The defendant was said to have walked out of an alley a few feet from where the incident took place, and that the shirt matching the description given by Wilkes was found in the alley. It is true that Wilkes gave no description of the shirt worn by defendant, and the police officers testified that the defendant was wearing a white shirt at the time of his arrest. The argument was not prejudicial.
[4] The prosecutor also stated that Wilkes had testified he saw the defendant "take off across Damen Avenue, across the street"; Wilkes did not testify to such a fact. What he did say was that at the time the police officers first came to question him, the defendant had already fled; "they were across the street, yes." At the time of the assault the truck was parked on Homer, approximately 4 or 5 feet west of Damen. Officer Hoffman testified that after the conversation with Wilkes, he and his partner went looking for two men, and they went into the alley south of Homer Street, which was eastbound from Damen, about 100 feet from the intersection. The statement of the prosecutor concerning the testimony of the police officers was not improper. Furthermore, no objection was made to the argument at the trial. In People v. Conrad, 81 Ill. App.2d 34, 49, 225 NE2d 713, the court said:
*225 "Defendant attempts to raise on appeal for the first time the alleged prejudicial nature of other statements made by the prosecutor. However, since no objection was made at trial the issue is waived."
And the court in People v. Gaston, 85 Ill. App.2d 403, 229 NE2d 404, said:
"Where the defendant's attorney does not object to the argument deemed improper, the court will not reverse unless it appears that he was deprived of his right to a fair trial."
[5] It has been held that statements based on the evidence or on legitimate inferences deducible therefrom do not transcend the bounds of legitimate argument. People v. Woods, 26 Ill.2d 557, 188 NE2d 1; People v. Allen, 73 Ill. App.2d 256, 219 NE2d 653.
The arguments made by the prosecutor in the instant case did not have the effect of depriving the defendant of a fair trial, and therefore should not be considered by this court.
Defendant also argues that he was deprived of a fair trial because of improper remarks by the court. As we have pointed out earlier in the opinion, the court ordered the defendant excluded from the courtroom in accord with the rule laid down in People v. DeSimone, 9 Ill.2d 522, 138 NE2d 556, in which case the defendant refused to enter the courtroom at various stages of the proceeding, and thus voluntarily absented himself from the trial. On other occasions he caused disorder in the court by profane outbursts directed at witnesses in the court. After one such outburst the court caused the defendant to be removed from the courtroom. The Supreme Court held that the provision of section 9 of Article II of the Illinois Constitution (which ordains that an accused shall have the right to appear and defend in person) may *226 be waived; and the court further held that the defendant did waive his right.
In the instant case, after the defendant was removed from the courtroom the following colloquy occurred between the court and defense counsel (Van Zeyl):
The Court: Mr. Van Zeyl, did you have any conversations with him about being present during the trial?
Van Zeyl: Yes, I did.
The Court: What did he say?
Van Zeyl: Yesterday afternoon at the County Jail he indicated to me by inference  not positively, but just asked me the question as to what would happen if he did something in the courtroom. I made the remark to him, not to play games with me, I am his lawyer. I told him that if he so chooses he would voluntarily absent himself from the courtroom. He wanted to know what that meant and I explained, I told him that he had a right to waive his presence during the trial.
The Court: And he has chosen not to be present.
Van Zeyl: I also spoke to him back in the lockup in back of the courtroom.
The Court: Today?
Van Zeyl: Yes. I went back there at two o'clock before the jury was summoned into the courtroom and I asked him what he wanted to do here today. He told me "leave me alone." I asked him, "Well, I'm your lawyer, I have to know what I am doing when he stepped out before your Honor."
He said, "leave me alone," and he grabbed me by the tie and tried to pull me through the bars. *227 At this point I saw no further use in conducting any kind of a discussion with him, so that's all I know at this time.
[6] During the trial defense counsel made the following statement to the jury:
Confine your deliberations solely to what you heard from the stand, irrespective of what mental problem the defendant may have now or may have had yesterday or 
At this point the Assistant State's Attorney objected, saying there was no showing of any mental problem, and the objection was sustained. Defense counsel said, "Well, judge, I think that's obvious." The court said: "Now, I said sustained, Mr. Van Zeyl." Mr. Van Zeyl said, "All right." The court said, "I don't think there is."
[7, 8] On September 8, 1966, the defendant had a fair trial and was proved guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. The Criminal Code of 1961 (Ill Rev Stats 1963, c 38, § 1-7 (m)) is as follows:
When a person shall have been convicted of 2 or more offenses which did not result from the same conduct, either before or after sentence has been pronounced upon him for either, the court in its discretion may order that the term of imprisonment upon any one of the convictions may commence at the expiration of the term of imprisonment upon any other of the offenses.
The Committee which prepared the draft of the Code adopted by the legislature has said in its comments:
Subsection (m) is intended to codify the holding in People v. Schlenger, 13 Ill.2d 63, 147 NE2d 316 (1958), by the implicit converse of the provision stated, i.e., if the offenses resulted from the same *228 conduct the defendant may not be sentenced on both, either concurrently or consecutively. "Conduct" is defined in section 2-4 and is used in the sense of "the same transaction" discussed in Schlenger, supra.
See People v. Schlenger, 13 Ill.2d 63, 147 NE2d 316; People v. Duszkewycz, 27 Ill.2d 257, 189 NE2d 299; People v. Ritchie, 66 Ill. App.2d 302, 213 NE2d 651; and People v. Ritchie, 36 Ill.2d 392, 222 NE2d 479. In People v. Peery, 81 Ill. App.2d 372, 225 NE2d 730, it was held that even where the question of the improper sentences is not raised (as it was not in the case before us) in the reviewing court, the reviewing court must take notice of it.
[9, 10] Under the authority of the statute and the above cited cases, concurrent sentences for crimes resulting from the same conduct are improper, and the conviction of the lesser crime must be reversed. Therefore, the conviction on the robbery charge is affirmed, and the conviction for aggravated battery is reversed.
Affirmed in part, reversed in part.
LYONS, P.J. and BURKE, J., concur.

=== CASE 2217944 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:37.797008+00 ===

355 Mass. 382 (1969)
245 N.E.2d 243
WARREN BROTHERS ROADS COMPANY
vs.
JOSEPH RUGO, INC. & others.[1]
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
January 7, 1969.
February 28, 1969.
Present: WILKINS, C.J., SPALDING, WHITTEMORE, SPIEGEL, & REARDON, JJ.
John A. Gledhill, Jr., for Joseph Rugo, Inc. & others.
Donald A. Macksey (Harry Downs with him) for the plaintiff.
WILKINS, C.J.
The Commonwealth made a written contract with the defendant Joseph Rugo, Inc. (Rugo) for the construction of a building at the Lakeville State Hospital. Pursuant to G.L.c. 149, § 29, Rugo, the prime contractor, as principal, furnished a bond for payment of subcontractors and materialmen. The respondent insurance companies (Employers' and Aetna) were sureties. This suit by Warren Brothers Roads Company (Warren) is to obtain the benefit of the bond. The facts are stated in a master's report. The defendants other than Maroni, who did not participate in the hearing before the master, appealed from a final decree in favor of the plaintiff.
The sole issue is whether a sworn statement of claim was seasonably filed under G.L.c. 149, § 29 (as amended through St. 1962, c. 696), which provides in material part: "In order to obtain the benefit of such security the claimant shall file with... the contracting officer or agent in the case of a contract with the commonwealth ... a sworn statement of his claim prior to the expiration of ninety days after the claimant ceases to perform labor or furnish labor, materials, appliances and equipment ... as aforesaid, for which claim is made...."
Specifications in Rugo's contract with the Commonwealth called for bituminous concrete paving to be laid over a specified area upon a gravel base. The bituminous concrete paving was subcontracted by Rugo to Maroni. On September 7, 1962, Maroni further subcontracted with Warren for installation of the concrete paving. Under that contract Maroni was required to furnish the gravel base. Warren was to fine-grade and roll the gravel base and then lay a three-layer pavement. The three layers in order were crushed stone, a binder, and top bituminous concrete surface *384 material. The area to be paved by Warren was about 12,000 square yards.
By December 10, 1962, Warren had graded, rolled, and laid 6,744 square yards with crushed stone and binder, and had exhausted all the working area graveled by Maroni. For this reason and due to the onset of the winter season Warren suspended operations until the spring, and informed Maroni to advise when the remaining areas were prepared for the continuance of the paving operation.
In the spring of 1963 Maroni encountered financial difficulty and could not pay his bills. He had paid nothing to Warren for the work and material furnished in December, 1962, which amounted to $12,695.38.[1] In May, 1963, in order to meet its contractual obligation to the Commonwealth, Rugo took over the Maroni equipment at the job site and placed former Maroni personnel on the Rugo payroll. To all appearances no one would know that Maroni was not still performing work. No changes were made in the markings on the Maroni equipment. No one advised the Commonwealth or Warren that Maroni was off the job. The records of the clerk of the works showed as late as November 14, 1963, that Maroni had six men on the job. These were actual employees of Rugo. Maroni was willing to resume work in the spring of 1963, but Rugo justifiably refused to permit it. To have done so would have been inefficient and bad business judgment.
In May, 1963, Warren heard of Maroni's financial difficulty, but had no knowledge of the nature of the agreement between Rugo and Maroni. On May 10, 1963, Warren, at Rugo's suggestion, wrote to Rugo demanding payment of the overdue Maroni bill. On July 15, 1963, Warren sent bills to Maroni for $12,695.38, with interest. On August 15, 1963, Warren wrote Rugo enclosing copies of the bills, stating that Maroni had requested it to commence work, but had not paid its previous bill, and that Rugo had asked a *385 price from Warren "to complete the contract." Warren submitted a price, adding that it "would have to receive payment on our Maroni contract," and that the balance of that contract should become void.
On August 28, 1963, Maroni wrote Warren "to complete the asphalt work at the Lakeville Hospital." Warren did go to the site with men and some equipment. From spring to August, 1963, Warren's superintendent kept in touch to see if the job had progressed to the stage where Warren could resume work. On November 6, 1963, Rugo and Warren entered into a contract whereby Warren was to complete the work which Warren was under obligation to do for Maroni under the original Warren-Maroni contract. Warren commenced this work on November 8, 1963, and completed it on December 10, 1963. All sums due Warren from Rugo for this work have been paid.
On December 13, 1963, Warren filed a sworn statement for $12,695.38 with the Division of Building Construction of the Commonwealth.
Warren last actually performed work and furnished materials at the job site in December, 1962, and did not file its claim till one year later on December 13, 1963. It is seeking no recovery for work done after 1962. Were this all that is material, there would not be compliance with § 29. But there is much more properly to be considered. Warren was forced to stop work in December, 1962, partly because of Maroni's failure to have completed its part of the work which necessarily had to be done first. Warren then was planning to continue with its contract in the spring, and asked Maroni to inform it when the preliminary work was done. From spring to August, 1963, Warren's superintendent kept in touch with the job to see if it had progressed to the stage where Warren could resume work. On August 15 Warren informed Rugo that Maroni had requested it to commence work and on August 28 Maroni wrote Warren to complete the asphalt work. Warren went to the site with men and equipment. It was not until May, 1963, that Maroni's financial difficulties came to Warren's *386 attention. Also unbeknown to Warren, Rugo refused to let Maroni resume work, and in May, for the purpose of completing its contract with the Commonwealth, took over Maroni employees and equipment, without changing the markings. From appearances no one would know that Maroni was not still on the job. Warren and the Commonwealth were never so advised.
Up to this point the contract between Maroni and Warren was still in existence and might be further performed. Wholly apart from Maroni's unfinished gravel work, the unpaid balance would have been enough to enable Warren to treat the contract as subsisting and to withhold performance until it should be paid without losing the security. C.C. Smith Co. Inc. v. Frankini Constr. Co. 334 Mass. 379, 384. See Restatement: Contracts, § 276, illustration 5; Williston, Contracts (3d ed.) § 848.
There was nothing to require a finding that the Warren-Maroni contract was terminated until November 6 when Rugo and Warren entered into a contract for Warren to complete the work which Warren was obliged to perform under its contract with Maroni. Warren commenced this work promptly and completed it on December 10, 1963. Since this work was covered by the original contract, the ninety-day period began to run from the date of its completion. Dolben v. Duncan Constr. Co. 276 Mass. 242, 251-252. See Peerless Unit Ventilation Co. Inc. v. D'Amore Constr. Co. 283 Mass. 121, 124, 125.
We hold that the plaintiff's claim was seasonably filed on December 13, 1963. This comports with the statutory purpose. Section 29 is to be given a liberal interpretation. It is broadly designed to afford security to those who have contracted to furnish labor, equipment, or materials on public work. See Lock Joint Pipe Co. v. Commonwealth, 331 Mass. 346, 353; Cohen v. Henry N. Worthington Co. 334 Mass. 509, 514-515; Mosaic Tile Co. v. Rusco Prod. of Mass. Inc. 350 Mass. 433, 439.
Decree affirmed with costs of appeal.
NOTES
[1]  Arnold H. Maroni, American Employers' Insurance Company, Aetna Insurance Company.
[1]  Payments were to be made by Maroni to Warren within ten days after Rugo received progress payments from the Commonwealth. Final payment was to be made not later than ten days after Rugo was paid.

=== CASE 9738847 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:24.132182+00 ===

*149HENDERSON, Justice.
PROCEDURAL HISTORY/ISSUES
On January 6, 1986, Summary Judgment was entered in favor of Harold White Man (White Man). The trial court determined that the Todd County School Board (Board) did not comply with the statutory notice requirement when it attempted to terminate White Man’s employment. This decision was immediately appealed to the South Dakota Supreme Court by the Board. This Court determined that the trial court’s order was not a final order, as the issue of damages had not been completed. Therefore, the case was remanded to the trial court for a determination of damages and/or reinstatement. An evidentiary hearing was held before the trial court on July 16, 1986, to determine the issue of damages and/or reinstatement. A decision was not made by the trial court until January 29, 1990. The trial court entered judgment in favor of White Man for $9,510.48 in damages for the 1985-86 school year. The trial court also determined that White Man was not entitled to the reinstatement of his teaching position with Todd County. White Man raises one issue on appeal:
Is he entitled to reinstatement and/or damages for the years following the 1985-1986 school year?
We reverse and remand.
FACTS
White Man was a tenured teacher for the Todd County School District during the 1984-85 school year. On March 12, 1985, White Man was evaluated and advised orally and in writing, that the recommendation of the evaluator would be for non-renewal. On March 14, 1985, White Man received a letter signed by the Superintendent of the Board advising White Man that it was his intention not to recommend White Man to the Board for the 1985-86 school year. On April 3, 1985, a typewritten notice to White Man was signed, stating that the School Board decided not to renew White Man’s contract for the 1985-86 school year.
On April 4, 1985, White Man called in sick from his job. This prompted the Superintendent to attempt personal service of White Man’s termination notice. A copy of the letter was attached to the door of White Man’s residence, another copy of the letter was placed in White Man’s car, another copy was placed in his school mailbox and, finally, a copy was mailed to his residence.
White Man acknowledged receiving the letter of April 3, 1985 on April 9, 1985.*
SDCL 13-43-10 places certain obligations on a school board if they make a determination not to renew a teaching contract for the ensuing school year:
Not earlier than fourteen days nor later than twenty-one days after the notice of intent as provided in SDCL 13-43-9.1, such teacher shall be notified in writing by the board of the board’s determination not to renew ... Failure by the board or the superintendent to comply with the provisions and notices of SDCL 13-43-9.1 and SDCL 13-43-10 shall constitute an offer on the part of the board to renew the contract for the ensuing school year under the same terms and conditions as the contract for the then current year, (emphasis added).
The required notice of intent was received by White Man on March 14, 1985. This is the day which triggers the commencement of the twenty-one day period of time referred to in SDCL 13-43-10. Computing time, April 4, 1985, was the last day that the School Board could effect its obligation to notify White Man “in writing.” Thus, the trial court determined that the Board’s failure to comply with the notice statute constituted an offer on the part of the board to renew the contract for the ensuing school year, 1985-86.
After a hearing on damages, the trial court determined that White Man was entitled to:
*150Salary for 1985-86 school year $24,720.00
Insurance Benefits 618.50
Search for employment expense 573.08
Commuting 1,098.90
$27,010.48
However, since White Man found employment at $17,500.00 per year at another school, the trial court determined that his salary must offset these damages. Judgment was entered for White Man in the amount of $9,510.48. The trial court further determined that White Man is not entitled to reinstatement. This appeal followed.
DECISION
Pursuant to SDCL 13-46-1, an aggrieved teacher has a right to appeal a school board’s decision not to renew to the circuit court. SDCL 13-46-6 permits a trial de novo. In the present case, a trial was never held. The trial court dismissed the action pursuant to a summary judgment motion — in favor of White Man. The trial court stated that White Man must be offered a teaching contract for the 1985-86 school year because the Board failed to comply with SDCL 13-43-10. The trial court decided to wait to determine damages until a later date, hoping the parties would settle. Since that did not happen, an evi-dentiary hearing, solely on damages, was held in July, 1986. The trial court did not render a decision until January 30, 1990 stating:
By any standard, there has been an inordinate delay in the issuance of this Memorandum Decision after the court’s receipt of Appellee’s last brief on July 23, 1986. This Court readily admits that this case would have continued to escape attention had not the Appellant personally asked the Court as to the current status on or about January 26, 1990. I do deeply regret and apologize for the great delay that has occurred in this case. The court, apparently simply failed to properly track the case for further disposition after the hearing on July 16, 1986.
The circuit court declined to give damages to White Man beyond the 1985-86 school term. We believe this is error. White Man’s damages continued to accrue during the period between the July 18, 1986, hearing and the judgment entered on May 11, 1990. Damages may even continue to accrue at this time. We so express because it appears that White Man’s contract with Todd County continues to exist. It will continue to exist until it is terminated in compliance with South Dakota’s Continuing Contract Law found in SDCL 13-43-9.1 and SDCL 13-43-10.
We have a unique set of facts before us due to the great delay spawned by the inactivity of the circuit court. There appears to be no South Dakota authority, directly on point, to govern our decision. However, the facts of this case are somewhat reflected in Comstock v. Board of Trustees, etc., 35 Cal.App.2d 466, 95 P.2d 969 (1939). In Comstock, a teacher received a notice of dismissal on December 20, 1935. It was to take effect on January 3, 1936. In July of 1936, the trial court granted the teacher re-employment and back pay for January through May of 1936, after the determination was made that proper notice procedures had not been followed. Subsequently, in November, 1937, the teacher demanded payment equal to his salary for the month of June in 1936 and the 1936-37 school year. This demand was refused. An action was then commenced by the teacher stating that the school board did not notify him on or before the applicable date of his termination for the ensuing year. The teacher argued that he was automatically rehired for the school year 1936-37. The board argued that the notice of December 20, 1935, was notice to the teacher that he would not be employed for the 1936-37 school year. The trial court, however, determined that the notice given was ineffective for any purpose and that the teacher had been reinstated to his position until terminated by one of the methods provided by the legislature. The trial court further determined that the teacher’s services were finally terminated when the school board served him notice on May 11, 1937, that his services would not be required for the 1937-38 school year. See also, Paradis v. Sch. Admin. Dist. No. 33 Sch. Bd., 462 A.2d 474 (Me.1983) (where *151notice of termination of continuing teaching contract did not comply with procedural requirements with respect to non-renewal; teacher was entitled to damages of more than one year back pay from school board).
We reverse and remand, ordering the trial court to determine White Man’s damages for the 1986-87, 1987-88, 1988-89 and 1989-90 school years and to enter a money judgment therefor. Any offsets, by way of money received from other teaching contracts should be considered by the circuit court in its determination.
As to reinstatement, we reverse and remand for a factual determination as to whether reinstatement is a viable alternative based upon both White Man’s and the Todd County School Board’s respective situations as they exist now. Technically, White Man is entitled to reinstatement. Jager v. Ramona Board of Education, Ramona School District, 444 N.W.2d 21 (S.D.1989); Reid v. Huron Board of Education, Huron School District No. 2-2, 449 N.W.2d 240, 245 (S.D.1989). Therefore, we vest the trial court with the discretionary power to make a determination as to the feasibility of White Man’s reinstatement.
We reverse and remand.
SABERS and AMUNDSON, JJ., concur.
MILLER, C.J., concurs specially.
WUEST, J., concurs in part and dissents in part.
White Man took sick leave on April 4, 1985, and stated that he was in Winner, South Dakota, having a medical appointment and having some tests run. After completing the test sometime after 4 p.m., he journeyed to see his daughter at Valentine, Nebraska. The record discloses that April 5, 1985, was Good Friday and a school holiday. No school was held on April 6, 7 or 8.

=== CASE 9738850 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:25.012841+00 ===

AFTER REMAND
Before: Sawyer, P.J., and Marilyn Kelly and Neff, JJ.
Sawyer, P.J.
Defendant pled guilty of delivering *708less than fifty grams of cocaine. MCL 333.7401(2) (a)(iv); MSA 14.15(7401)(2)(a)(iv). He was sentenced for the conviction to serve a term of five to twenty years in prison. Defendant now appeals, and we affirm his conviction but remand for resentencing.
Defendant first argues that he is entitled to resentencing because of joint representation by a single attorney of defendant and his brother on an identical charge. At the time of defendant’s sentencing, MCR 6.101(C)(4) required that a trial court inquire into any potential conflict of interest where the same attorney represented two or more codefendants who had been jointly charged or whose cases had been consolidated. However, as defendant admits in his brief, he and his brother were not codefendants inasmuch as the charges, though the same, were unrelated. That is, they arose on different dates and were separate criminal transactions. Accordingly, MCR 6.101(C)(4) was inapplicable.
Defendant next argues that he is entitled to resentencing because the trial court misscored Prior Record Variable 5 and, therefore, the guidelines sentencing range was incorrect. We agree.
Defendant was originally scored ten points for prv 5 for having four or more prior misdemeanor convictions. However, at sentencing, the trial court agreed to strike a number of those prior convictions because they were obtained when defendant was not represented by counsel. Accordingly, three prior misdemeanor convictions remain, namely, two convictions of operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor and one conviction of driving while impaired. On appeal, defendant contends that those three remaining prior misdemeanor convictions should not be considered in scoring the guidelines and, therefore, *709defendant’s score for prv 5 would be zero. Such a scoring correction would affect the recommendation of the sentencing guidelines and defendant’s sentence would depart from the rescored guidelines recommendations.
The instructions for the scoring of prv 5 provide as follows:
Score a misdemeanor only if it is related to one of the following crime groups: Assault, Burglary, Criminal Sexual Conduct, Drug, Fraud, Larceny, Property Destruction, Robbery, or Weapons Possession.
The prosecutor contends, and the trial court agreed, that drunken-driving misdemeanor convictions are scorable under prv 5 as misdemeanors related to the drug-crime group. Defendant contends that drunken-driving offenses are not properly categorized as belonging to the drug-crime group. We agree.
This issue is the subject of a conflict between panels of this Court. In People v Jerovsek, 172 Mich App 489; 432 NW2d 350 (1988), this Court concluded that, because alcohol is a drug, drunken-driving convictions relate to the drug-crime group. We reached an Opposite conclusion in People v Reyna, 184 Mich App 626; 459 NW2d 75 (1990), concluding that a drunken-driving offense cannot be scored as a misdemeanor under the guidelines. We explained our reasoning as follows:
The Jerovsek Court’s analysis does have some merit in that ouil is related to the abuse of alcohol and alcohol is a drug. However, we are not convinced that the guidelines envisioned such a broad reading of the term "drug” when it listed the crime groups to be considered in scoring prior misdemeanors on a sentencing information report. *710First, the sentencing guidelines advisory committee did prepare a list of misdemeanors which could be used in assessing points under prv 6, and ouil is not on the list under either the drug group or any other crime group. Furthermore, the drug offenses are collected under the Public Health Code with specific sections criminalizing the possession, delivery, or use of various controlled substances. MCL 333.7401 et seq.; MSA 14.15(7401) et seq. ouil, on the other hand, is a violation of the Michigan Vehicle Code under MCL 257.625; MSA 9.2325. Accordingly, we disagree with our colleagues in Jerovsek and conclude that ouil is not a "misdemeanor” which may be scored under the guidelines. [184 Mich App 630.]
We agree with defendant that Reyna represents the better-reasoned view of this issue.1
Because, as the prosecutor points out in his brief, there are some differences between the first edition of the sentencing guidelines and the second edition, a brief consideration of the instructions in the second edition is in order to confirm that the view expressed in Reyna is still valid. As stated above, the instructions to prv 5 require a scoring for a prior misdemeanor conviction if it is related to one of the enumerated crime groups. Thus, the prior drunken-driving convictions are scorable only if they constitute a "misdemeanor” as defined by the Sentencing Guidelines Manual and fall within one of the applicable crime groups, which the prosecutor contends they do, namely, the drug-crime group._
*711The definitions section of the second edition of the Sentencing Guidelines Manual, p 9, defines "misdemeanor” as follows:
A "misdemeanor” is an offense punishable by one year or less of incarceration and falling into one of the following crime groups—Assault, Burglary, Criminal Sexual Conduct, Drug, Fraud, Larceny, Property Destruction, Robbery, and Weapons Possession. [Emphasis in original.]
Thus, to be a misdemeanor within the meaning of the guidelines, the offense must fall within one of the crime groups. The same section, p 8, defines "crime group” as follows:
The offenses covered by the Michigan Sentencing Guidelines have been divided into separate crime groups. The groups, listed alphabetically, are as follows: Assault, Burglary, Criminal Sexual Conduct, Drug, Fraud, Homicide, Larceny, Property Destruction, Robbery, and Weapons Possession. To determine whether an offense falls into a particular crime group, please consult the Crime List section of the manual. [Emphasis added.]
Thus, to determine whether an offense falls within a crime group, it must be listed in the "crime list” section of the manual. Therefore, for a drunken-driving offense to constitute a misdemeanor in the drug-crime group under the sentencing guidelines, it must be included on the drug-crime list.
A review of the drug-crime list fails to reveal the presence of any drunken-driving related offense. In fact, the only crimes included on the drug-crime list are those contained in the Public Health Code, MCL 333.7401 et seq.; MSA 14.15(7401) et seq., and furnishing controlled substances to prisoners, MCL 800.281; MSA 28.1621. Because drunken driving is not on the drug-crime *712list, or any other crime list for that matter, it is not scorable as a prior misdemeanor conviction.2
For the above reasons, we conclude that the instructions to the second edition of the Sentencing Guidelines Manual confirm the correctness of our decision in Reyna and the conclusion that drunken-driving convictions are not scorable misdemeanors under prv 5. Therefore, the trial court erred in scoring those convictions in the case at bar. Accordingly, defendant is entitled to a resentencing and a rescoring of the sentencing guidelines. His prior drunken-driving convictions are not to be considered when scoring prv 5.
Defendant’s final argument is that he is entitled to a correction in his presentence report in which the references to his prior unconstitutional convictions are deleted. This issue, however, was resolved in defendant’s favor on our prior remand to the trial court and, therefore, is moot.
The matter is remanded to the trial court for resentencing consistent with this opinion. We do not retain jurisdiction.
Marilyn Kelly, J., concurred.
We should note that both Reyna and Jerovsek were decided under the first edition of the sentencing guidelines, under which prior misdemeanor convictions were scored as prv 6. Under the second edition of the guidelines, which is at issue here, prior misdemeanor convictions are scored under prv 5.
As noted in Reyna, supra at 630, n 4, certain fraud-related crimes under the Vehicle Code are contained in the fraud-crime list. Thus, as noted in Reyna, the sentencing guidelines committee’s inclusion of certain motor vehicle code violations in the crime list makes the absence of the drunken-driving offenses from any of the crime lists all the more conspicuous.

=== CASE 9738852 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:25.020472+00 ===

ADDENDUM (ON REHEARING)
Sawyer P.J.
Following the release of this opinion to the parties, plaintiff moved for rehearing, seeking a clarification of our original opinion. Although our holding is unaffected, we agree that certain language in the opinion can be read to produce in other cases a result that we did not intend.
Specifically, in the opinion, ante at 711, we state "for a drunken-driving offense to constitute a misdemeanor in the drug-crime group under the sentencing guidelines, it must be included on the drug-crime list.” Later, we state that "[b]ecause drunken driving is not on the drug-crime list, or any other crime list for that matter, it is not scorable as a prior misdemeanor conviction.” Read literally, this would mean that virtually no misdemeanors would be scorable because the crime list only contains crimes for which an sir is to be prepared upon conviction, which are almost all felonies.1 As defendant points out in his answer to plaintiffs motion for rehearing, this was not our *714intention, nor did defendant advocate such a holding. Indeed, such a holding would be contrary to the fact that the sentencing guidelines specifically provide for the scoring of misdemeanors.
Rather, the first of the above-quoted sentences should have read "for a drunken-driving offense to constitute a misdemeanor in the drug-crime group under the sentencing guidelines, it must be related to a crime included on the drug-crime list” and the second sentence should have read "[b]ecause drunken driving is not related to a crime on the drug-crime list, or any other crime list for that matter, it is not scorable as a prior misdemeanor conviction.” We regret any confusion our inartful drafting in the original opinion may have caused.
The point to be made is that, to be scorable, a misdemeanor must bear a relationship to the crimes on one of the crime lists. For example, simple assault, MCL 750.81; MSA 28.276, would be properly scored as a prior misdemeanor because it is related to the various assaultive offenses that are on the assault crime list. Misdemeanor assault is of the same type and character, except for severity, as various felony assault offenses on the crime list. Indeed, misdemeanor assault is included in the same chapter of the Penal Code as many of the felony assault offenses included on the assault crime list.2
Drunken driving bears no relationship to the drug offenses. They are punishable under separate statutes, and the former relates to traffic safety while the latter relates to public health. They simply are not of the same type or character. Indeed, felony drunken driving is not on the drug-crime list, or any other crime list.3
*715Accordingly, we reaffirm our original conclusion, as clarified herein.4
The crime lists do contain some misdemeanors, such as the two-year offense of fourth-degree criminal sexual conduct. MCL 750.520e; MSA 28.788(5).
Lest there be further confusion, this is merely a factor to be considered rather than a requirement to be met.
Again, this is only a factor to be considered and not a test to be *715met. For example, felony retail fraud, MCL 750.356c; MSA 28.588(3), is not on a crime list, yet misdemeanor retail fraud is likely scorable as a prior misdemeanor because it is related to the larceny crime group and is of the same type and character as larceny.
Judge Neff would grant rehearing but stands by her partially concurring and partially dissenting opinion.

=== CASE 2217951 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:37.929636+00 ===

355 Mass. 450 (1969)
245 N.E.2d 420
ERNEST CAREY
vs.
NEW YORKER OF WORCESTER, INC.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Worcester.
February 7, 1969.
March 7, 1969.
Present: WILKINS, C.J., SPALDING, WHITTEMORE, KIRK, & REARDON, JJ.
Stanley B. Milton for the defendant.
Terence F. Riley for the plaintiff.
*451 WILKINS, C.J.
The plaintiff, a patron in the defendant's bar and restaurant, was shot by another patron on December 20, 1964. In this action of tort, of which only count 1 for negligence remains, there was a verdict for the plaintiff. The defendant argues exceptions to the denial of its motion for a directed verdict, to the admission of evidence, and to the charge.
1. The testimony warranted the jury's verdict. The premises were divided by a partition running their length. The dining room was about twenty-five to thirty feet wide and about thirty-five to forty feet long. There were booths on both sides with "just an aisle to walk in" between.
It was about 11:30 P.M. when the plaintiff entered with a party of three or four and sat at a booth on the left. At that time the assailant, one Martel, was seated in a group of four at another booth across the aisle twelve to fifteen feet distant. "[T]here were quite a few people there; awfully noisy." The Martel group was "making a lot of noise ...; they were kind of talking loud and getting up and jumping around." They could be heard from the bar. After ten or fifteen minutes the plaintiff arose and went toward the men's room in the rear of the premises. When he reached a point about two feet from Martel, the latter stood up, pulled a gun, and without warning shot the plaintiff in the side.
Martel was "[a]bsolutely drunk," and for some time had been staggering up and down the aisle going back and forth to the entrance to the bar, and yelling toward someone at the bar or for the waitress. He was loud and very noisy, "just a fresh kid." On two previous occasions he had been made to leave the premises by the police, and had twice been refused service. He was known to be a trouble-maker by the defendant's employees. He looked young and was under age. On this occasion his group of four was served two rounds of whiskey and beer by the waitress. Of this he drank whiskey. He had been drinking elsewhere before he arrived at the defendant's premises. The two *452 employees present, a man in the bar and the waitress, were too busy to observe all that occurred. This was Sunday night, and police protection was hired only on Friday and Saturday nights.
The defendant, as the operator of a restaurant and bar, was in possession of real estate open to the public for business purposes. It owed a duty to a paying patron to use reasonable care to prevent injury to him by third persons whether their acts were accidental, negligent, or intentional. Restatement 2d: Torts, § 344. Rawson v. Massachusetts Operating Co. Inc. 328 Mass. 558. Greco v. Sumner Tavern, Inc. 333 Mass. 144. It was open to the jury to find that the defendant's employees had general knowledge of Martel's previous experience as a patron and should have realized on the occasion here considered the need for repressing him. The jury could have found that the defendant's agents should have tried to stop his drunken staggerings the length of the aisle, and if they did not attempt completely to remove him from the scene, at least should have provided some safeguard for the defendant's patrons. The defendant is in error in claiming that there were no warnings of trouble. There had been commotion and boisterous behavior and continued drinking. That there had been no express threat to any patron is not conclusive. The jury in their judgment could find that the defendant's agents should have realized that there was real danger to others. Nor was it fatal to the plaintiff's case that the method of assault was not precisely foreseeable. Ryder v. Robinson, 329 Mass. 285, 287. Shooting, the defendant contends, was beyond the realm of reasonable expectation, and cites Addison v. Green Cafe, Inc. 323 Mass. 620, 622-623. In that case, which is distinguishable, there was a shooting in a room full of people by one who was not a party to a harmless scuffle. This was held to be a superseding cause. See Restatement 2d: Torts, § 447, comment g. In the case at bar Martel was an active participant in a steady disorder.
This case falls within the authority of McFadden v. Bancroft Hotel Corp. 313 Mass. 56, Quigley v. Wilson Line *453 of Mass. Inc. 338 Mass. 125, and Kane v. Fields Corner Grille, Inc. 341 Mass. 640.
Serving hard liquor, particularly to one already drunk, has a consequence which is not open to successful dispute. Such action may well make the individual unreasonably aggressive, and enhance a condition in which it is foreseeable that almost any irrational act is foreseeable.
That the defendant may also have been violating a statute in serving the assailant is additional evidence which the jury could consider. Wood v. Ray-Al Cafe, Inc. 349 Mass. 766.
2. For the sole purpose of showing age, the judge admitted a record of the police department of Worcester as a result of its investigation "relative to the shooting incident by David Martel against Ernest Carey." The record was made on December 21, 1964, at 4 A.M. The name and date of birth "of the person that did the shooting" appeared as "David Martel, date of birth 11/17/45." The judge then admitted a certificate of birth of Martel from the city clerk's department of Worcester. This showed the date of birth as "November 17, 1945." The exception to the admission of this evidence must be overruled. The police report was admissible. Commonwealth v. Slavski, 245 Mass. 405, 417. G.L.c. 233, § 78. So was the birth certificate, which was required to be kept by the city clerk. G.L.c. 46, § 1.
The phraseology of the language admitting the records eliminates the preliminary issue of identity sought to be raised by the defendant.
3. The judge instructed the jury with reference to G.L.c. 138, § 34, prohibiting the sale of liquor to one under twenty-one years of age; and G.L.c. 138, § 69, prohibiting the sale of intoxicating liquor to one already intoxicated. We summarize this part of the charge. Such prohibitions have a two-fold purpose, the protection of the individual, the minor or the intoxicated person, and the protection of the public, including that portion of the public who are customers in the place of sale. Violation of either section *454 could be found to be evidence of negligence. The defendant could not be held liable unless the injury was a foreseeable consequence of the act or failure to act, if there was such failure or such negligent act. There must be a proximate causal relationship to hold the defendant responsible. The specific kind of harm need not be foreseeable as long as it was foreseeable that there would be harm from the act which constituted the negligence, provided it was foreseeable that there would be violence toward others. If the jury concluded that the shooting was such a remote possibility that it constituted an intervening cause of harm, their verdict should be for the defendant.
The defendant excepted on the ground that the judge should not have made any statement as to the purposes of c. 138, and requested that he instruct the jury that they should not consider § 34, unless they found that the fact the assailant was under, rather than over, twenty-one years of age was a producing cause of the plaintiff's injuries. The judge denied this request. There was no error. See Dimond v. Sacilotto, 353 Mass. 501, 502-503.
Exceptions overruled.

=== CASE 3784407 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:07.91705+00 ===

The sole question presented is whether the Board of Tax Appeals acted unreasonably or unlawfully in affirming the decision of the Tax Commissioner that the furnishing of shoe skates by the appellant to its customers in the manner stated was a "sale" within the meaning of Section 5546-1, General Code. That section provides in part as follows:
" 'Sale' and 'selling' include all transactions whereby title or possession, or both, of tangible personal property, is or is to be transferred, or a license to use or consume tangible personal property is granted, for a consideration in any manner, whether absolutely or conditionally, whether for a price or rental, in money or by exchange or barter, and by any means whatsoever; * * *."
The contention of the appellant is that the 25-cent charge is a charge only for the service required in the cleaning, disinfecting and keeping in repair the socks and shoe skates essential to keep them in proper condition for renting and use by the appellant's patrons.
Appellant contends that the charge made is therefore only a service charge, which, under the provisions of Section 5546-2, General Code, is exempted from tax. Section 5546-2, General Code, reads in part as follows: *Page 297
"The tax hereby levied does not apply to the following sales:
* * * * *
"9. Professional, insurance or personal service transactions which involve sales as inconsequential elements, for which no separate charges are made."
It is to be borne in mind, however, that this controversy does not involve any charge made for any service upon or repairs of the skates or other property of the customers of the appellant. The shoe skates and woolen socks, for the use of which the rental charge is fixed and collected, are the sole property of the appellant. The service performed, whatever it may be, is upon the appellant's own property and is essential to keep his property in condition for the purpose intended and to have it ready to deliver into the possession of customers desiring the same for their use for a fixed period, the customer paying therefor in advance a stated rental charge. There is in no sense a personal service rendered to, for or upon another person or the property of another person.
The transaction here involved clearly comes within the provisions of Section 5546-1, General Code, for there is a transfer of possession of tangible personal property and a license to use or consume such property which is granted for a consideration. The provisions of Section 5546-2, General Code, are applicable. That section reads in part as follows:
"* * * it shall be presumed that all sales made in this state are subject to the tax hereby levied until the contrary is established."
The appellant has failed to bring the transaction involved in this proceeding within any exception which would serve to exempt the transaction from the requirements of the provisions of Section 5546-1, General Code. *Page 298
A discussion of the transactions involved in the towel and linen supply industry would serve no useful purpose, particularly since, subsequent to the decision of this court inPioneer Linen Supply Co. v. Evatt, Tax Commr., 146 Ohio St. 248,  65 N.E.2d 711, holding adversely to the exemption of that service from the sales tax, Section 5546-1, General Code, was amended so as to provide that:
"* * * towel and linen service or supply * * * shall not be deemed a 'rental' * * * but shall be deemed personal service transactions."
Although rather trite, it seems proper to repeat the admonition that the function of courts is to construe, interpret and apply the law, and to refrain from usurping legislative functions.
The decision of the Board of Tax Appeals is neither unreasonable nor unlawful and is, therefore, affirmed.
Decision affirmed.
WEYGANDT, C.J., TURNER, HART, ZIMMERMAN, SOHNGEN and STEWART, JJ., concur. *Page 299

=== CASE 3784408 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:07.998413+00 ===

Section 614-91, General Code, requires that when applications for certificates to operate between fixed termini are filed, the Public Utilities Commission shall give written notice of such filing to like transportation companies operating in the territory through which the applicant proposes to operate. When a hearing date is fixed by the commission, it is required to give the applicant and the other transportation companies operating in the same territory at least ten days notice of the time of hearing. The notices required to be given pursuant to the foregoing code section were not here given, and for that reason the plaintiffs in error challenge the jurisdiction of the commission to hear Watson's application resulting in the order of extension made April 20, 1931, and contend that it is void. The commission found that the plaintiffs in error had actual notice of the filing and pendency of Watson's application for an extension. The application was granted on April 20, 1931. No complaints against such order of extension were made until December 4, 1933, more than two years and seven months after the order of extension was made.
The record discloses that during this intervening time the respondent was engaged in actual operation under its certificate of extension, that the applicant for extension had caused public notices of the application to be published in newspapers of general circulation in the counties through which the applicant proposed to operate, and that officials of two of the plaintiffs *Page 589
in error, at or shortly after the extension order had been granted by the commission, were advised of intended operations of respondent between Cleveland and Elyria under the extension order.
The plaintiffs in error offered no testimony substantially controverting these facts, but rest on their legal contention that, because of its failure to give the notice required by Section 614-91, General Code, the commission acted without jurisdiction and its order of April 20, 1931, was null and void.
That brings us to the crucial question, whether the plaintiffs in error, under the situation presented, are now estopped from attacking an order made two years and seven months prior to the filing of their several complaints for vacation; and whether by their knowledge and conduct they have waived their right to challenge the order of extension made on April 20, 1931.
Motor transportation companies in this state acquire no vested right for unlimited continuous operations over the state highways. Their certificates may be amended, revoked for cause, or otherwise impinged upon by the grant of other certificates over the same route, when public convenience and necessity is thereby subserved. The commission had undoubted jurisdiction of the subject-matter. Whatever failure of jurisdiction may have been lacking in the proceeding instituted in March, 1931, it consisted in the failure to obtain personal jurisdiction over the parties entitled to notice. The latter may be, and in this case was, waived by the complainants in permitting the respondent to operate under its amended certificate, with full knowledge of the operation thereunder, and by waiting for so long a period of time before entering their complaint before the commission. They failed to make timely protest.
The plaintiffs in error rely on the case of Erie Rd. Co. v.Public Utilities Commission, 128 Ohio St. 472, 191 N.E. 782, where this court held that the failure of *Page 590
the commission to give the required statutory notice was not waived by the railroad company by reason of the latter's mere knowledge of the filing and pendency of an application for a certificate prior to the decision of the commission. That case is authority supporting the principle that in proper cases the principle of estoppel or waiver may be invoked; but the features distinguishing that case from this are, first, that while the railroad company knew of the application and its filed request it was not presumed to know that the terms of the application would be later enlarged in the final order, to its prejudice; and second, that when it did learn of the order it filed a timely protest by seeking its vacation shortly after the order was made.
The order of the Public Utilities Commission is affirmed.
Order affirmed.
WEYGANDT, C.J., STEPHENSON, MATTHIAS, BEVIS, ZIMMERMAN and WILKIN, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2217973 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:38.388309+00 ===

473 N.W.2d 339 (1991)
BROWNSDALE COOPERATIVE ASSOCIATION, Respondent,
v.
HOME INSURANCE COMPANY, Appellant.
No. C7-91-220.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
July 23, 1991.
Review Denied September 25, 1991.
*340 Bryan J. Baudler, Baudler, Baudler, Maus & Blahnik, Austin, for respondent.
Seth M. Colton, John D. Norquist, Maun & Simon, Saint Paul, for appellant.
Considered and decided by KLAPHAKE, P.J., and LANSING and DAVIES, JJ.
OPINION
LANSING, Judge.
In an appeal from a declaratory judgment action enforcing a Miller-Shugart-type settlement, Home Insurance Company contests the trial court's finding of policy coverage and, based on lack of notice, challenges the enforceability of the settlement agreement. We conclude that the record supports the finding of coverage and hold that because Home breached its duty to defend its insured, it was not entitled to notice of the settlement.
FACTS
Conger Construction Company, Inc. built a four-silo grain storage facility for Brownsdale Cooperative in 1979. In the spring of 1982, the co-op discovered that 100,000 bushels of grain stored in the silos had been destroyed or badly damaged. The co-op filed suit against Conger, alleging negligent failure to install heat sensor cables and to provide adequate ventilation.
Home Insurance Co., which provided Conger with general liability insurance coverage from July 1, 1978, to October 1, 1981, retained counsel to defend Conger. Over the course of six years, counsel deposed witnesses, obtained expert evaluation of the co-op's claimed damages, and prepared for trial.
Two months before trial, Home concluded that the damage to the grain occurred after its policy coverage ended in October 1981 and withdrew from Conger's defense. United States Fidelity & Guaranty (USF & G), Conger's insurer after October 1, 1981, assumed Conger's defense and retained new counsel. After examining the case file, discussing the experts' assessments of damages with previous counsel, and consulting with Conger, new counsel entered settlement negotiations with the co-op.
Without notifying Home, Conger and the co-op reached a Miller-Shugart-type settlement agreement. Conger agreed to entry of judgment against it for $174,000, plus costs, disbursements, and prejudgment interest, and to assign to the co-op its causes of action against Home for wrongful denial of coverage and refusal to defend. In return, the co-op agreed to release Conger from liability and to seek satisfaction of the judgment from Home.
After entry of judgment against Conger, the co-op brought a declaratory judgment action against Home to enforce the judgment. Home denied coverage and claimed that the settlement was unenforceable on three grounds: (1) Home did not receive notice; (2) the settlement amount was unreasonable; and (3) the settlement was the product of fraud and collusion.
At trial, five co-op employees testified about the silos' defects, the effects of those defects on the grain, and the times at which grain was deposited and removed from the silos. For the limited purpose of determining whether the settlement was reasonable, the trial court admitted expert testimony on damages, including deposition testimony by the co-op's expert.
The trial court found coverage under the Home policy, concluding that the grain spoilage was due to Conger's negligent construction and that substantially all of the spoilage occurred before October 1, 1981. The trial court also found that the settlement was reasonable; that there was no evidence of fraud; and that because Home abandoned Conger, it was not entitled to notice of the settlement agreement.
The trial court calculated that grain deposited in the silos in 1979 constituted 25% of the co-op's loss, or $43,500, and grain deposited in 1980 constituted 75% of the co-op's *341 loss, or $100,000. Applying the policy's annual total liability limit of $100,000, the court offset $38,985 in payments already claimed under the 1980-81 policy, and found Home liable for $104,515 plus costs, fees, disbursements, and prejudgment interest.
ISSUES
1. Did the trial court err in finding that the damage to the grain occurred before October 1, 1981 and was therefore covered under the Home insurance policy?
2. Did the trial court err in enforcing the Miller-Shugart-type settlement agreement, finding that Home was not entitled to notice, the settlement was reasonable, and it was not the product of fraud and collusion?
3. Did the trial court err in admitting deposition testimony on damages to determine the reasonableness of the settlement?
ANALYSIS
I
Before addressing the enforceability of the settlement agreement, the trial court found coverage under the Home policy. See Economy Fire & Casualty Co. v. Iverson, 445 N.W.2d 824, 827 (Minn.1989). This finding is supported by the evidence and is not clearly erroneous. See Farmers Ins. Group v. Hastings, 366 N.W.2d 293, 294 (Minn.1985) (factual determinations affecting coverage will not be overturned unless clearly erroneous).
The record supports the trial court's finding that the grain damage occurred before October 1, 1981, "during the policy period." The weight of the testimony established that grain was placed in the silos at the end of the 1979 and 1980 seasons, completely filling the facility, and that improper ventilation and heat detection were present from the time of construction. From this evidence, the trial court could reasonably find that grain deposited in 1979, about 25% of the loss, spoiled between July 1, 1979 and July 1, 1980, and that grain deposited in 1980, about 75% of the loss, spoiled between July 1, 1980 and July 1, 1981.
Although some of the trial testimony was impeached by previous deposition testimony, the witnesses affirmed that their trial testimony, not the deposition testimony, was accurate. Because the trial court had the advantage of fully hearing the testimony, observing the witnesses' demeanor, and weighing the witnesses' statements against inconsistent deposition testimony, we defer to the trial court's findings. See Minn.R.Civ.P. 52.01; Stiff v. Associated Sewing Supply Co., 436 N.W.2d 777, 779 (Minn.1989).
II
A settlement agreement in which an insured stipulates to a money judgment in favor of a plaintiff and the plaintiff releases the insured from personal liability is enforceable against the insurer if (1) the insurer receives notice of the agreement; (2) the agreement is reasonable; and (3) the agreement is not the result of fraud or collusion. See Miller v. Shugart, 316 N.W.2d 729, 732-33 (Minn.1982). Because Conger did not notify Home of the agreement, Home argues that the settlement is unenforceable. We conclude that because Home breached its duty to defend Conger, Conger was entitled to reach a reasonable, good faith settlement without notifying Home.
Home had a contractual duty to defend Conger against any claims arguably occurring during the scope of its coverage. See Prahm v. Rupp Constr. Co., 277 N.W.2d 389, 390 (Minn.1979). Although the appropriate response to a coverage dispute was to continue to defend Conger and to bring a declaratory judgment action to determine coverage, see Miller, 316 N.W.2d at 733; Prahm, 277 N.W.2d at 391 n. 2, Home denied coverage and abandoned Conger two months before trial.
Home's breach of its duty to defend released Conger from its reciprocal duty to cooperate with Home and left "the entire control and conduct of the litigation" with Conger. See Butler Bros. v. American Fidelity Co., 120 Minn. 157, 164, 139 N.W. 355, 357 (1913). Accordingly, Conger was *342 entitled to protect itself from personal liability by entering a reasonable, good faith settlement without notifying Home. See id.; see also Coblentz v. American Surety Co., 416 F.2d 1059, 1062-63 (5th Cir.1969); State Farm Mutual Auto. Ins. Co. v. Paynter, 122 Ariz. 198, 200-01, 593 P.2d 948, 950-51 (Ct.App.1979); Shook v. Allstate Ins. Co., 498 So. 2d 498, 500 (Fla.Dist. Ct.App.1986); pet. for rev. denied, 508 So. 2d 13 (Fla.1987); Texas United Ins. Co. v. Burt Ford Enterprises, 703 S.W.2d 828, 835 (Tex.Ct.App.1986).
Although notice was not required, the settlement must be reasonable and entered in good faith to be enforceable. See Butler Bros., 120 Minn. at 165, 139 N.W. at 36. The reasonableness of the settlement agreement "is not determined by conducting the very trial obviated by the settlement." Alton M. Johnson Co. v. M.A.I. Co., 463 N.W.2d 277, 279 (Minn.1990). Instead, the co-op had to show that a reasonably prudent person in Conger's position would have settled at $174,000, considering the merits of the co-op's claim, the evidence bearing on liability and damages, and the risks of going to trial. Miller, 316 N.W.2d at 735.
The only disputed issue for trial was damages, and the crucial evidence on damages consisted of conflicting expert opinion. The co-op's expert estimated damages at $224,000. Applying the same methodology, Conger's expert concluded that $15,000 to $20,000 was a more accurate amount; however, had Conger's expert applied the methodology he deemed appropriate, he could not testify that the co-op's damages were significantly less than $224,000.
Given this evidence, a jury could have found Conger liable for $224,000, see Osgood v. Medical, Inc., 415 N.W.2d 896, 903 (Minn.App.1987), pet for rev. denied (Minn. Feb. 12, 1988), an amount that would have made Conger personally liable for the portion exceeding applicable insurance coverage. Accordingly, a $174,000 settlement that protected Conger from personal liability was not unreasonable.
As the trial court concluded, Home failed to produce any evidence of bad faith, fraud, or collusion. See Miller, 316 N.W.2d at 734. The inconsistencies between some co-op employee's trial testimony and their deposition testimony does not rise to the level of deliberate misrepresentation of facts. There is no evidence that the attorney defending Conger was furthering USF & G's interests, rather than Conger's, by settling with the co-op.
III
Admitting the deposition of the co-op's expert for the limited purpose of assessing the information available to the parties at the time of settlement was not error. Because the deposition was not admitted to prove the truth of the matter asserted, the amount of damages, it was not hearsay. See Minn.R.Evid. 801(c). The existence of the deposition, whether true or not, was relevant to the reasonableness of the settlement and was properly admitted. See Minn.R.Evid. 402.
DECISION
The record supports a finding of coverage under the Home policy. Despite the absence of notice, the reasonable, good faith settlement agreement between Conger and the co-op was enforceable against Home because Home denied coverage and breached its duty to defend Conger.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9738958 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:06:02.946448+00 ===

SABERS, Justice.
Indian mother living on reservation with her three children challenges the subject matter jurisdiction of state circuit court to modify the child custody provisions of a Wyoming divorce decree.
Facts
Young (mother) and Harris (father) were divorced by a Wyoming state court in 1981. Mother is an enrolled member of the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe (tribe). Father is not an enrolled member of tribe and is apparently non-Indian.
The Wyoming divorce decree gave mother custody of the couple’s three daughters: Bernice (b. 1974), Misty (b. 1976) and Sabrina (b. 1978). Prior to the divorce, mother and daughters moved to the town of Isabel in Dewey County, South Dakota. Isabel is within the boundaries of the Cheyenne River Indian Reservation (reservation). Daughters Bernice and Misty, like mother, have at all relevant times been enrolled members of tribe. Sabrina is not an enrolled member although her parentage is identical to that of Bernice and Misty and mother claims she is eligible for tribal enrollment.1
Later in 1981, mother petitioned circuit court in Dewey County to modify the custody and visitation provisions of the Wyoming divorce decree, alleging that father abused and mistreated the three daughters during summer visitation. The court issued a temporary restraining order enjoining father from exercising his visitation rights at Christmas, 1981.
In 1988, father moved near the town of Meadow in Perkins County, South Dakota. Perkins County is not within the boundaries of any Indian reservation. Sabrina spent Thanksgiving, 1988 with father. Af-terwards, she refused to return to mother allegedly because of the environment of alcohol abuse and exposure to sexual misconduct.
On January 12, 1989, father petitioned circuit court in Dewey County to modify the 1981 Wyoming divorce decree and award him custody of all three daughters. Father’s petition alleged that mother was often drunk, that Sabrina had seen mother having sex with three different men and that her sister had been sexually abused by mother’s boyfriend.
On April 20, 1989, mother moved to dismiss father’s petition, arguing that subject matter jurisdiction lies exclusively in tribal court. Following a hearing on mother’s motion to dismiss held May 1, 1989, the court denied the motion to dismiss and ordered the 1981 Wyoming divorce decree modified to award custody of Sabrina to father. The court entered findings of fact and conclusions of law on October 16,1989. *143Mother appeals and argues that the court erred in:
(1) Finding that mother and daughter reside outside the boundaries of reservation;
(2) Applying the Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction Act to the proceedings;
(3) Applying the Indian Child Welfare Act to the proceedings; and
(4) Concluding that it had subject matter jurisdiction.
1. Reservation Boundaries
The court found that the home of mother and daughters in Isabel is “within the original exterior boundaries of the Cheyenne River Indian Reservation, but outside of the diminished reservation.”
This finding is clearly erroneous. The United States Supreme Court has ruled that the Cheyenne River Indian Reservation was never diminished. Solem v. Bartlett, 465 U.S. 463, 481,104 S.Ct. 1161, 1171, 79 L.Ed.2d 443 (1984). Beyond doubt, Isabel is within reservation boundaries and is “Indian country" within the meaning of 18 U.S.C. § 1151 (1988).
2. Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction Act
The court concluded that it had “jurisdiction of the subject matter ... based on the factors contained in SDCL 26-5A-3 et seq.” This, too, is error for two reasons.
First, SDCL 26-5A-3 does not confer subject matter jurisdiction on any court. Chapter 26-5A is South Dakota’s enactment of the Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction Act (UCCJA). It merely sets forth the nexus which is sufficient for a court in this state to assume personal jurisdiction over a child custody case when relevant parties are in another state. In addressing itself to any “court of this state which is competent to decide child custody matters,” the UCCJA assumes, but does not create, subject matter jurisdiction. SDCL 26-5A-3 (emphasis added).
Normally, any circuit court in South Dakota is “competent to decide” child custody matters. See SDCL 25-4-45. In this case, the question is whether the circuit court has subject matter jurisdiction over child custody matters where the children and one parent are Indians domiciled on a federally recognized reservation. The UCCJA provides no guidance in answering this question.
The second problem with reliance on the UCCJA in a custody matter where necessary parties are domiciled on a reservation is that the UCCJA speaks only of “states.” An Indian reservation is not a “state” within the meaning of the UCCJA. SDCL 26-5A-2(10). Therefore, even for its intended limited purpose of establishing personal jurisdiction, the UCCJA has no application where parties reside not between different states but between reservation and non-reservation areas within the same state.
We conclude that to the extent the trial court based its finding of subject matter jurisdiction on SDCL 26-5A-3, the finding must be rejected.
3.Indian Child Welfare Act
Mother claims the court erred in applying the provisions of the Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA), 25 U.S.C. §§ 1901-1963 (1988), to the facts of this case. Although ICWA has no application in this case because the placement of a child with a parent in connection with a divorce decree is not a “child custody proceeding” within the meaning of ICWA, 25 U.S.C. § 1903(1); Application of Defender, 435 N.W.2d 717, 721-722 (S.D.1989), there is no basis for mother’s claim. The court’s findings of fact and conclusions of law do not mention ICWA, much less apply its provisions to this case. Therefore, we find no error in this regard.
4.Subject Matter Jurisdiction
Mother and her three daughters live on reservation. Mother and two of her daughters are enrolled members of tribe and the third daughter is allegedly eligible for enrollment. We must decide whether, under these circumstances, the circuit court had subject matter jurisdiction of the petition of the non-Indian, off-reservation father to *144modify custody provisions based on a change in circumstances which occurred on reservation.2
[W]e must resort to the traditional jurisdictional test set forth in Williams v. Lee, 358 U.S. 217, 79 S.Ct. 269, 3 L.Ed.2d 251 (1959). Under Williams, we must determine whether the exercise of state jurisdiction infringes upon the right of reservation Indians to make their own laws and be governed by them. Id. Further, we must be guided by the United States Supreme Court’s admonition that tribal courts have been recognized as appropriate forums for the exclusive adjudication of disputes affecting important personal and property interests of both Indians and non-Indians. Santa Clara Pueblo v. Martinez, 436 U.S. 49, 98 S.Ct. 1670, 56 L.Ed.[2d] 106 (1978).... We also recognize that tribal courts play a vital role in the area of custody of Indian children. See Matter of Guardianship of D.L.L. and C.L.L., 291 N.W.2d 278 (S.D.1980).
Application of Defender, 435 N.W.2d at 722 (citations omitted).
The state of South Dakota has no general civil jurisdiction over Indians on reservations within its borders. State v. Spotted Horse, 462 N.W.2d 463, 467 (S.D.1990); Rosebud Sioux Tribe v. South Dakota, 900 F.2d 1164, 1167 (8th Cir.1990), cert. denied, — U.S. —, 111 S.Ct. 2009, 114 L.Ed.2d 98 (1991). Clearly, if this were a custody dispute between two enrolled members of tribe domiciled on reservation, the subject matter jurisdiction of the tribal court would be exclusive. Fisher v. Dist. Court of Sixteenth Jud. Dist., 424 U.S. 382, 96 S.Ct. 943, 47 L.Ed.2d 106 (1976); see also Wells v. Wells, 451 N.W.2d 402 (S.D.1990).
In contrast, when one parent is a non-Indian domiciled off-reservation who petitions the state court for relief to which any state citizen is entitled, the Williams infringement test becomes a closer question. We note initially that mother fails to point out any specific ways in which the exercise of state jurisdiction under these circumstances would infringe on the right of reservation Indians to make their own laws and be governed by them.
In a similar case, the North Dakota Supreme Court ruled that a state court lacks subject matter jurisdiction over the child custody modification motion of the off-reservation father where the mother and child were domiciled on the reservation. Malaterre v. Malaterre, 293 N.W.2d 139 (N.D.1980). Malaterre is distinguishable because the father, although living off-reservation, was an enrolled member of the same tribe to which mother and child belonged. Following Malaterre, Byzewski v. Byzewski, 429 N.W.2d 394 (N.D.1988), held that the state court lacked subject matter jurisdiction over custody and support matters in a divorce action brought by an off-reservation, non-Indian husband against his reservation Indian wife. Byzewski, too, can be distinguished from the present case because there the husband lived continuously on the reservation with his wife for nearly three years, and only left the reservation after the wife began divorce proceedings in tribal court. The husband filed for divorce in state court approximately one day after moving off the reservation.
In Matter of Guardianship of Flyinghorse, 456 N.W.2d 567 (S.D.1990), this court recently held that a state court lacked subject matter jurisdiction over the petition of the Veterans Administration to assume guardianship of a reservation Indian, and that under the Williams v. Lee infringement test, the tribal court had exclusive jurisdiction. See also Matter of Guardianship of Sasse, 363 N.W.2d 209 (S.D.1985). However, the Flyinghorse guardianship petition, even though filed by *145a non-Indian party, a federal agency, implicated no interests outside the reservation and involved no parties other than “Indians residing on the reservation.” Flyinghorse, 456 N.W.2d at 568. The case is far different where, as here, a non-Indian, off-reservation party domiciled in South Dakota brings an adversary proceeding against a reservation Indian in state court.
On balance, we believe Wells v. Wells, supra, although not cited by either party, is the key South Dakota precedent for deciding the present case. In Wells, an off-reservation Indian wife brought a divorce action in state court against her reservation Indian husband. We held that the state and tribal courts had concurrent subject matter jurisdiction over the cause of action. Under concurrent jurisdiction, the case could be adjudicated by whichever court system first obtained valid personal jurisdiction over the parties, and there was no impermissible interference with the sovereignty of the tribe.
Once [wife] left the reservation and took up residence in Rapid City, the state acquired an interest in the marriage of [wife] and [husband], and their divorce can no longer be characterized exclusively as a “reservation matter.” ... The ... tribe is not denied the ability to enact its own laws governing divorce and to enforce those laws in its own courts.... [T]he state court is merely exercising its own concurrent jurisdiction over the marriage of one of its domiciliaries.... Just as South Dakota does not retain exclusive jurisdiction over the marriage of South Dakota citizens who leave the state, the tribe does not retain exclusive jurisdiction over the marriage of its members who leave the reservation.
Id. at 405. Cf. Byzewski and other cases cited and distinguished in Wells, supra, at 406.
Concurrent subject matter jurisdiction in divorce-related litigation between an Indian party domiciled on a reservation and a party domiciled elsewhere in South Dakota is even more compelling in this case than in Wells because this father is not an enrolled member of tribe and apparently was not domiciled on reservation anytime within the past ten years, if ever. Moreover, Sabrina is not an enrolled member of tribe either, and it is possible she may not be eligible for enrollment, see footnote 1.
A further consideration underscoring the need for concurrent state and tribal subject matter jurisdiction in this case is that “the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe’s By-Laws expressly state that the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribal Courts shall not have jurisdiction over disputes involving Indian and non-Indian parties unless both parties stipulate to such jurisdiction. Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe By-Laws Art. V § 1(c) (1935).” Pommersheim, South Dakota Tribal Court Handbook, 12-13 (1988). In other words, if the tribal court had exclusive jurisdiction over this cause of action, mother could deny father all relief simply by refusing to stipulate to the tribal court’s personal jurisdiction.3 Therefore, concurrent jurisdiction *146not only passes the Williams v. Lee infringement test but is compelled by specific provisions of the tribe’s own By-Laws.
A final factor supporting concurrent subject matter jurisdiction is that mother herself used the state court system in 1981 to temporarily restrain father from exercising his visitation rights under the Wyoming divorce decree. We generally recognize that “subject matter jurisdiction can neither be conferred on a court, nor denied to a court by the acts of the parties or the procedures they employ.” Application of Koch Exploration Co., 387 N.W.2d 530, 536 (S.D.1986) (citing In re Marriage of Helm, 271 N.W.2d 725, 727 (Ia.1978)). Nevertheless, while not dispositive on the question of subject matter jurisdiction, mother’s previous use of the state court system to the same end father now pursues is a factor supporting our conclusion that tribal sovereignty will not be infringed by concurrent jurisdiction permitting father to do no more than what has already been done by mother. We note further that mother’s attempt to deny father the same relief she has already claimed appears opportunistic, self-serving and it is poorly received. For all of the above reasons, we affirm the trial court’s conclusion that it had subject matter jurisdiction.
5. Failure to Cite Supporting Authority
Mother, as appellant,4 cites SDCL § 15-26A-60(6) and Mielitz v. Schmieg, 461 N.W.2d 763 (S.D.1990), for the proposition that father’s failure to cite authority in support of three of his arguments constitutes waiver.
SDCL 15-26A-60(6) provides in part: “The brief of the appellant shall contain ... citations to the authorities relied on.” (Emphasis added). In Mielitz v. Schmieg, 461 N.W.2d at 764, this court held that an appellee who failed to support his notice of review with argument and authority waived the issue.
Although SDCL 15-26A-61 provides that the brief of appellee shall conform to SDCL 15-26A-60, the rule requiring supporting authority is addressed primarily to those who raise issues, not to those who respond to them. Here, father is appellee and has filed no notice of review. Father stands by the judgment of the circuit court. While it is no doubt poor strategy for an appellee to respond to appellant’s argument without citing supporting authority, just as it is generally poor strategy for an appellant not to file a reply brief, it is the party who raises an issue and then fails to support it with authority who will be deemed to have waived the issue.
*147In summary, we reverse the trial court’s finding that the Cheyenne River Indian Reservation has been diminished and its conclusion that its subject matter jurisdiction was based in part on the Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction Act. However, we affirm the trial court’s conclusion that it had subject matter jurisdiction and further hold that the state court’s subject matter jurisdiction is concurrent with that of the tribal court.
MILLER, C.J., and WUEST and AMUNDSON, JJ., concur.
HENDERSON, J., concurs in part and dissents in part.
. Whether Sabrina is eligible for enrollment in tribe is a significant factor in determining the relative weight of Indian and non-Indian interests in this case. Yet this court cannot determine whether she is eligible or not due to the inadequate record and briefing of the issue on the part of both parties' attorneys. Apparently the Constitution of the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe originally set no minimum tribal blood quantum for enrollment eligibility. Tribe subsequently amended its Constitution to require a ¼ tribal blood quantum for persons born after the effective date of the amendment to qualify for enrollment, but the Constitution does not state on its face when the amendment took effect. See CRST Const. Art. II. Father’s counsel claimed at oral argument that the tribal blood quantum of the three daughters is considerably less than ¼ and that the constitutional amendment making ¼ the minimum quantum for enrollment took effect between the birth dates of Misty and Sabrina. If these assertions tire true, then Sabrina cannot become a tribal member even though her mother and sisters are already members. The problem is that nothing in the record or the briefs supports, refutes or is even relevant to either assertion.
. Since a determination of whether state court jurisdiction infringes on tribal sovereignty depends in part on a weighing of all relevant factual circumstances, it would be helpful to have some background on the parties and their marriage. Instead, the briefs and the record barely mention that father is non-Indian, a critical factor. They provide no information whatever on where mother and father were married, where daughters were born, whether father had ever been domiciled on reservation, and whether mother had ever been domiciled on reservation prior to moving there in 1980.
. Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe By-Laws Art. V. § 1(c) provides in part that tribal court "shall have jurisdiction over ... disputes or lawsuits ... between Indians and non-Indians where such cases are brought before it by stipulation of both parties!.]" Whether this provision remains good law is questionable. It has been subject to scathing criticism by tribe’s high court in Becker County, Mn. Welfare Dept. v. Mestes, Mem.Op. (CRST Ct.App. Sept. 22, 1989), and Thorstenson v. Cudmore, Mem.Op. (CRST Ct.App. Feb. 15, 1991). In its detailed analysis in Thorstenson, the court refers to the stipulated jurisdiction provision as a legal "oddity” inserted into the 1935 By-Laws by the BIA either through oversight or political trepidation and not reflective of either the congressional mandate embodied in the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934, at 25 U.S.C. § 476 (1988), or of "any considered decision of the Cheyenne River Sioux people.” Thorstenson, supra, at 10-11. The court goes on to point out the negative public policy and due process consequences of literally applying a by-law which, in the case of disputes between Indians and non-Indians, "effectively placets] the opportunity to pursue remedial redress in the hands of the alleged 'wrongdoer.' ” Id. at 15. Thus it is possible that father might have successfully brought an action to modify the divorce decree in tribal court whether mother stipulated to jurisdiction or not.
Nevertheless, we cannot say with certainty that father could have brought his action as of right. The stipulated jurisdiction provision in the By-Laws remains on the books. The tribal court’s criticism of the provision in Becker County and Thorstenson is ultimately dicta: *146Becker County found jurisdiction present without stipulation because the real parties in interest were both tribal members, one of whom merely assigned her cause of action to a non-Indian entity, and Thorstenson reached the same result by finding that the written contracts which were the subject of the dispute between the Indian and non-Indian parties, both domiciled on reservation, supplied the required stipulation to jurisdiction.
The tribe’s codified law also reflects the tribe’s desire to get beyond the narrow confines of the stipulated jurisdiction provision in the By-Laws:
It is hereby declared as a matter of Tribal policy ... that the Tribe provide itself, its members, and other persons living within the territorial jurisdiction of the Tribe ... with an effective means of redress in ... civil ... cases against members and non-Tribal members who through either their residence, presence, business dealings, other actions or failures to act, or other significant minimum contacts with this Reservation ... incur civil obligations to persons or entities entitled to the Tribe's protection.
CRST Law and Order Code 1-4-1. Even so, the benefit of this statute appears limited to tribe, its members and non-members residing on reservation — to the exclusion of this father.
We note again that neither counsel directed the trial court’s attention to this critically important stipulated jurisdiction provision in tribe’s By-Laws, nor briefed nor researched same for this court.
. Although it is necessary in this section to refer to the parties as "appellant" and "appellee," we are aware of SDCL 15-26A-63, which pertains to references to parties in briefs and arguments by counsel, and provides:
In their briefs and oral arguments counsel should minimize references to parties by such designations as "appellant" and "appellee.” It promotes clarity to use the designations used in the trial court, or the actual names of the parties, or descriptive terms such as "employer,” "owner,” "guest," “injured person,” "husband,” etc.
For purpose of clarity, we continue to urge compliance with this statute by all counsel.

=== CASE 9738959 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:06:02.951999+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(concurring in part, dissenting in part).
ISSUE I
I concur.
ISSUE II
I specially concur. Essentially, an Indian tribe is not a state within the meaning of the Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction Act (UCCJA). As held by the case of Malaterre v. Malaterre, 293 N.W.2d 139, 144 (N.D.1980), the UCCJA pertains to situations where there are jurisdictional disputes with sister states. Here, the child and mother live within South Dakota but reside on the Cheyenne Indian Reservation and therefore come within the purview of the federal Act of August 15,1953, 67 Stat. 558, now codified at 18 U.S.C. § 1162. South Dakota has never effectively assumed general civil jurisdiction over Indian Reservations under P.L. 280. Rosebud Sioux Tribe v. State of South Dakota, 900 F.2d 1164, 1171 (8th Cir.1990).
ISSUE III
I specially concur. It appears the circuit court decided that the Indian Child Welfare Act applied to the proceedings upon which it adjudicated. Not so. ICWA provides, inter alia, that it has no application to an “award, in a divorce proceeding, of custody to one of the parents.” 25 U.S.C. § 1903(1). Therefore, the trial court’s decision on this point of law could not be based upon the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe’s failure to intervene or request a transfer. Settled law: Application of Defender, 435 N.W.2d 717, 721 (S.D.1989).
ISSUE IV
I dissent. This case should be reversed and remanded due to the dearth of salient facts as reflected by footnotes 1 and 2 of the majority opinion. As the facts go, so goes the applicable law. Additionally, mother and three daughters appear to be Indians, (mother and two daughters are enrolled members of the tribe and the third daughter appears to be eligible for enrollment), residing on the reservation, and all the circumstances supposedly justifying a change in custody occurred within the exterior boundaries of the Cheyenne River Indian Reservation. Thus, the action taken by the circuit court appears to infringe upon the right of the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe to decide where Indian children should live. Where circumstances concerning the internal affairs of Indians residing on the reservation occur on the reservation, state court authority has consistently been held to be invalid. Matter of Guardianship of Sasse, 363 N.W.2d 209, 211 (S.D.1985); Matter of Guardianship of D.L.L. & C.L.L., 291 N.W.2d 278, 281 (S.D.1980).
Recently, our sister state of North Dakota recognized exclusive tribal jurisdiction in domestic matters involving resident Indians. Byzewski v. Byzewski, 429 N.W.2d 394, 399 (N.D.1988). South Dakota has never effectively assumed general civil jurisdiction over Indian reservations under P.L. 280. Rosebud Sioux Tribe v. State of South Dakota, 900 F.2d 1164, 1171 (8th Cir.1990), cert. denied, — U.S. —, 111 S.Ct. 2009, 114 L.Ed.2d 98 (1991). See State v. Spotted Horse, 462 N.W.2d 463 (S.D.1991). The Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals stated: “We believe that the failure to assume jurisdiction in a manner consistent with the purposes of P.L. 280 is not sufficient action within the terms of the offer made by Congress to the States in 1953.” Rosebud, at 1171.
*148Here, the trial court’s action was preempted by federal law. Once it is determined that a particular matter has been preempted by federal law, any state action taken is a nullity and therefore void. White Mountain Apache Tribe v. Bracker, 448 U.S. 136, 143, 100 S.Ct. 2578, 2583, 65 L.Ed.2d 665, 672 (1980).
In Byzewski, the North Dakota Supreme Court recognized that domestic relations among its members is an important issue of tribal control and does not dissipate merely because one of the parties to a marriage is a non-Indian. 429 N.W.2d at 399. See also the United States Supreme Court ruling in Iowa Mutual Ins. Co. v. LaPlante, 480 U.S. 9, 107 S.Ct. 971, 94 L.Ed.2d 10 (1987), holding, inter alia, that the United States Supreme Court recognized that the Indians Civil Rights Act, 25 U.S.C. § 1302, provides non-Indians with various protections against unfair treatment in the tribal courts.
Thus, it is presumed that father has legal rights he may assert and that same will be protected and recognized by fair dealing in the tribal court.
ISSUE V
I concur.

=== CASE 9738960 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:06:07.492516+00 ===

Neff, J.
Plaintiffs, Mark and Virginia Gore, sued the law firm of Rains & Block and certain partners thereof for legal malpractice for failing to file a timely medical malpractice claim on their behalf. Following a jury trial, Mark Gore was awarded $60,000 for the underlying medical malpractice claim and $60,000 for mental anguish arising out of the legal malpractice claim, for a total of $120,000 in damages. Virginia Gore was awarded $30,000. Defendants thereafter moved for a new trial, remittitur, and a judgment notwithstanding the verdict. In part, the motion for the judgment notwithstanding the verdict was related *732to Virginia Gore’s claim for loss of consortium. The court granted defendants’ motion for a judgment notwithstanding the verdict with regard to Virginia Gore, but otherwise denied defendants’ motion. Virginia Gore then filed a claim of appeal, challenging the circuit court’s order granting defendants’ motion for a judgment notwithstanding the verdict. Defendants filed a cross appeal with regard to the judgment entered in favor of Mark Gore and the circuit court’s order denying their motion for a new trial, remittitur, or a judgment notwithstanding the verdict.
We affirm the circuit court’s denial of defendants’ motion for a judgment notwithstanding the verdict with regard to Mark Gore’s claims. We reverse the circuit court’s order granting defendants’ motion for a judgment notwithstanding the verdict with regard to Virginia Gore’s loss of consortium claim.
i
On October 11, 1981, Mark Gore went to Thorne Hospital’s emergency room, complaining of pain associated with a swollen testicle. While initially a surgeon informed him that his testicle would have to be amputated, no operation occurred, apparently because that doctor ruled out torsion, a twisting of the testicle which would normally require amputation to prevent gangrene. Instead, the doctors who treated Gore at Thorne Hospital determined that he had an infection and proceeded to treat it. After discharge from the hospital, Gore continued to see one of the doctors who had seen him at the hospital. That doctor prescribed different antibiotics and cortisone. While the doctor believed that Gore’s condition was improving, he was still concerned about the swelling, *733which to him appeared to be slightly decreased. At that time, Mark Gore’s testicle was less than double in size.
On November 30, 1981, the sixth time Gore was treated by the doctor, the doctor changed antibiotics again and told him that he could return to work the following week. Gore believed that his condition was not improving and, therefore, did not return to the doctor’s office for further treatment even though he had not been discharged from the doctor’s care. We note that Mark Gore did not have medical insurance.
Mark Gore was subsequently treated for other ailments and, in fact, hospitalized for a head injury he received in an unrelated automobile accident. He did not mention that his testicle continued to be swollen. He testified that, on the basis of the information provided by the original surgeon who indicated that his testicle "wasn’t any good anyway,” he believed that he had to live with the swollen testicle.
In April 1983, Mark Gore went to the emergency room of another hospital because he was unable to get out of bed. At that time, the testicle was approximately six times its normal size. Gore was referred to Dr. Chin-Ti Lin, a urologist, who removed his testicle on April 14, 1983, suspecting cancer. Malignant cancer was confirmed, and Gore was scheduled to undergo a second surgery on May 9, 1983. Mark Gore and Virginia Gore married on May 7, 1983. Mark Gore underwent the second surgery to remove his lymph nodes on May 9, 1983.
Sometime after Mark Gore first met with Dr. Lin, it is not clear exactly when, Gore suspected that the doctors at Thorne Hospital had missed diagnosing the cancerous tumor. However, Gore was too worried about himself to consult an attor*734ney. After the second surgery, Gore thought that he should consult an attorney because any money he recovered could be used to support his family in the event that he did not survive. At trial, Virginia Gore confirmed that, shortly after their discussion with Dr. Lin, she and Mark thought that the original doctors had committed malpractice in failing to detect Mark Gore’s cancer. Virginia Gore was never questioned on direct examination or cross-examination concerning whether she first suspected medical malpractice before or after her marriage to Mark Gore.
On October 2, 1983, Mark and Virginia Gore met with defendant Block. Plaintiffs claim that thereafter their repeated telephone calls and letters went unanswered by defendants. On June 25, 1985, defendant Gurvitz wrote Mark Gore the following letter:
My sincere apologies for the delay in responding to your earlier communications however, we have been making a thorough inquiry into the facts of your alledged [sic] complaints. We have not been able to find an expert to make the appropriate causal relationship or support our theories of possible malpractice. Accordingly, we are not going to be proceeding on your claim and will close our file.
If you have any questions or want to discuss the matter further, please feel free to contact us.
Within two weeks, Mark Gore sought the advice of another attorney and on October 1, 1985, filed a legal malpractice suit against defendants. Therein, Mark Gore alleged that defendants failed to file a malpractice suit against doctors who treated him at Thorne Hospital within the applicable statute of limitations. On November 5, 1985, plaintiffs filed an amended complaint, adding Virginia Gore as a plaintiff and claiming that she had suffered a loss *735of consortium as the result of the legal malpractice.
Defendants filed a motion for summary disposition of Virginia Gore’s loss of consortium claim, alleging that she had married Mark Gore after the removal of his testicle and, therefore, she had no loss of consortium claim. The circuit court denied defendants’ motion for summary disposition.
At trial, the defendants conceded liability on the legal malpractice claim for failing to file a medical malpractice action within the statute of limitations; however, defendants claimed that medical malpractice had not occurred. Plaintiffs claimed that medical malpractice did occur. The jury found in favor of plaintiffs. As noted above, the court subsequently granted defendants’ motion for a judgment notwithstanding the verdict with regard to Virginia Gore’s claim.
ii
On appeal, Virginia Gore claims that the trial court improperly granted defendants’ motion for a judgment notwithstanding the verdict relative to her claim for loss of consortium. She contends that she was married to Mark Gore when the legal malpractice occurred and, therefore, is entitled to recover for loss of consortium on the legal malpractice claim.
While Virginia Gore was aware of Mark’s physical condition when they married, neither was necessarily on notice that his physical condition was attributable to the medical malpractice committed in 1981. Since reasonable minds could differ concerning when the cause of action for medical malpractice was discovered, we cannot conclude as a matter of law that Virginia "married a cause of action” and thereby should be precluded from *736pursuing a claim for loss of consortium. Furby v Raymark Industries, Inc, 154 Mich App 339, 347-348; 397 NW2d 303 (1986). Rather, the issue is one for the jury. Kermizian v Sumcad, 188 Mich App 690, 692-693; 470 NW2d 500 (1991); Moss v Pacquing, 183 Mich App 574, 583; 455 NW2d 339 (1990). Because, however, the jury was never instructed to determine when, through the exercise of reasonable diligence, plaintiffs discovered or should have discovered they had a possible cause of action, we must reverse the trial court’s order granting defendants’ motion for a judgment notwithstanding the verdict with regard to Virginia Gore’s loss of consortium claim and remand this case for retrial on this issue.
hi
We now turn to the issues raised in defendants’ cross appeal.
A
Defendants first argue that certain evidence of the details of their breach of the standard of care was inadmissible and requires reversal. We disagree. Defendants admitted at trial that they breached the applicable standard of care by failing to pursue in a timely manner plaintiffs claim of medical malpractice. However, they disputed the merit of the underlying medical malpractice claim, thereby essentially denying liability for their professional malpractice.
The trial court permitted plaintiffs to call two of the individual defendants as witnesses over the objections of the defense. Defendants argue that their admission of negligence precluded any testimony concerning violation of the applicable profes*737sional standard of care. On appeal, defendants argue that the evidence was inadmissible and prejudicial.
The decision whether to admit evidence is within the sound discretion of the trial court and will not be disturbed on appeal absent an abuse of discretion. People v Watkins, 176 Mich App 428, 430; 440 NW2d 36 (1989); Kochoian v Allstate Ins Co, 168 Mich App 1, 12; 423 NW2d 913 (1988). An abuse of discretion is found only if an unprejudiced person, considering the facts on which the trial court acted, would say there was no justification or excuse for the ruling made. Watkins, supra. When reviewing a court’s decision to admit evidence, this Court will not assess the weight and value of the evidence, but will only determine whether the evidence was of a kind which properly could be considered by the jury. Schanz v New Hampshire Ins Co, 165 Mich App 395, 405; 418 NW2d 478 (1988).
Defendants’ admission that they breached the applicable professional standard of care was a judicial admission. Such an admission is generally made for the express purpose of dispensing with formal proof of a particular fact. Macke Laundry Service Co v Overgaard, 173 Mich App 250, 253; 433 NW2d 813 (1988). However, defendants cite no authority, and we find none, for the proposition that formal proof on an admitted point is forbidden, especially where the evidence is admissible for other purposes. In this case, we find that most of the testimony elicited from the individual defendants was relevant to the issue of damages.
Defendants have quoted the comment to SJI2d 17.01, which states:
The jury should not be permitted to consider the question of liability where it has been admitted. It *738is reversible error to submit any issue to the jury which has not been questioned or has been admitted.
In this case, there was no violation of the principle set out in the comment to SJI2d 17.01, because the jury was not permitted to consider the question whether defendants breached their standard of care in handling the case. The court instructed the jury:
The defendants have admitted that they are liable to the plaintiff for any damages which the plaintiff might hve [sic] recovered in an action against Dr. Dickman, Dr. Carothers and Thorne Hospital. You are to decide only the question of whether plaintiff would have prevailed on his medical malpractice claim; and if so, the amount to be awarded to the plaintiff....
The court clearly limited the jury’s consideration of the testimony in question and precluded the jury from considering the question of defendants’ liability for any injuries which may have occurred because of their negligence.
To the extent that some of the testimony elicited from the individual defendants constituted purely evidence relating to their judicial admission, any error arising out of the admission of such evidence was clearly harmless. Defendants have failed to explain how they were prejudiced by this testimony, and we have been unable to glean any prejudice from the record. In light of the trial court’s clear instruction to the jury to focus on the underlying medical malpractice claim, we find no error requiring reversal regarding the disputed testimony.
B
Defendants next argue that the trial court *739should have granted their motion for remittitur with regard to the jury’s separate award of $60,000 for Mark Gore’s "emotional damages” associated with the legal malpractice claim, because he failed to prove a definite and objective physical injury was produced as a result of emotional distress proximately caused by defendants’ negligent conduct. We disagree.
We first point out that defendants’ assertion that plaintiffs sought "emotional distress” damages is in error.1 Plaintiffs never claimed emotional distress damages, and the jury was not instructed on such damages. Rather, plaintiffs sought, and the case went to the jury on the basis of jury instructions concerning, damages based on consideration of pain and suffering, mental anguish, fright and shock, denial of social pleasure and enjoyment, and embarrassment, humiliation, or mortification.
The jury found that medical malpractice had occurred, and damages were assessed accordingly. The jury then went on to determine, pursuant to the instructions that had been given without objection from the defense, that separate damages were attributable to defendant law firm.
Under the circumstances, there is no requirement of physical harm to plaintiff Mark Gore as a condition precedent to recovery of damages for "emotional distress.” The jury was not instructed concerning any such condition of recovery, and the record is silent concerning any request for such an *740instruction by the defense. Moreover, on the facts of this case, physical injury was not required to establish entitlement to the "mental anguish” damages requested by plaintiffs.
The distinction between "emotional distress” damages and "mental anguish” damages is made in Ledbetter v Brown City Savings Bank, 141 Mich App 692, 701-705; 368 NW2d 257 (1985). Most pertinent to the case sub judice is the definition of mental anguish damages found in Ledbetter, supra, pp 703-704:
Mental anguish damages, however, are not so circumscribed. A plaintiff is not limited to recovery for physical pain and anguish, but, rather, is entitled to damages for mental pain and anxiety which naturally flow from the injury, i.e., for shame, mortification, and humiliation. Beath v Rapid R Co, 119 Mich 512, 517-518; 78 NW 537 (1899); Grenawalt v Nyhuis, 335 Mich 76, 87; 55 NW2d 736 (1952); Veselenak [v Smith, 414 Mich 567, 574; 327 NW2d 261 (1982)]. As the Supreme Court stated in Veselenak:
"[J]uries are not asked to differentiate between mental states, such as shame, mortification, humiliation and indignity. Juries are asked to compensate mental distress and anguish, which flows naturally from the alleged misconduct and may be described in such terms as shame, mortification, humiliation and indignity. In addition, if the plaintiff is being compensated for all mental distress and anguish, it matters not whether the source of the mental distress and anguish is the injury itself or the way in which the injury occurred.” (Emphasis in original.) 414 Mich 576-577.
It is not necessary to prove physical injury to be entitled to recovery for mental anguish damages under the circumstances of this case. A malpractice plaintiff is entitled to recover damages to the extent of the injury, which in this case includes *741the underlying physical injury caused by the medical malpractice (failure to diagnose) and the mental anguish caused by the legal malpractice (failure to process the claim). Basic Food Industries, Inc v Grant, 107 Mich App 685, 692; 310 NW2d 26 (1981).
Defendants admitted liability, and because there was evidence on the record from which the jury could determine that mental anguish damages were a legal and natural consequence of defendants’ negligence, the jury’s award should be allowed to stand. Law Offices of Lawrence J Stockler, PC v Rose, 174 Mich App 14, 33; 436 NW2d 70 (1989).
c
Defendants also claim that the trial court erred when it refused to give their requested jury instruction concerning Mark Gore’s failure to minimize his damages. We note that discussions concerning the jury instructions occurred off the record. After the judge instructed the jury, defendants stated that they had no corrections of the instructions given, which did not include an instruction on minimizing damages. We further note that defendants requested such an instruction in their trial brief, which was filed with the clerk’s office one day after the jury returned its verdict. Nonetheless, the lower court judge indicated that he would have his secretary bring him the trial briefs on the first day of trial, after defendants’ attorney claimed that his trial brief was filed the Friday before trial.
Given defendants’ failure to object to the instructions given, appellate review is precluded absent manifest injustice. Janda v Detroit, 175 Mich App 120, 126; 437 NW2d 326 (1989). We *742believe that a mitigation of damages instruction such as SJI2d 53.05 applies when the plaintiff fails to minimize his damages after he knows of the injury. Mark Gore did not know that the doctors who had treated him at Thorne Hospital had failed to properly diagnose his condition. In fact, he testified that he failed to obtain a second opinion, even though his condition continued to cause him pain, because of what the surgeon at Thorne Hospital told him. We further note that defendants’ experts testified that it was a breach of the standard of care for the physician who was treating Mark Gore not to follow up after he did not appear for further treatment. Under these circumstances, no manifest injustice resulted from the failure to give an instruction on Mark Gore’s failure to mitigate his damages.
D
Finally, defendants claim that they are entitled to a new trial because of Mark Gore’s testimony concerning numerous statements made by Dr. Lin, who did not testify. Defendants argue that these statements were improperly admitted hearsay. We note that defendants moved to preclude testimony concerning statements made by Dr. Lin to Mark Gore. The trial court declined to rule until confronted with the specific testimony and objection of defendants.
Gore began to testify about Dr. Lin’s manner and statements made during the first visit. Defendants did not object, and plaintiff’s counsel told Gore not to testify about what Dr. Lin had stated, because it was hearsay. Eventually, defendants’ attorney did object, and Gore did not answer the question. Gore then testified that Dr. Lin told him that his "chances aren’t too great.” Defendants *743objected and moved to strike. Plaintiffs attorney responded that the statement was not offered to prove the truth of the matter, but to show Mark Gore’s fearful state of mind. The trial court agreed. Gore subsequently testified that he would continue to be fearful of the cancer returning until Dr. Lin told him otherwise. Defendants did not object. Mark Gore later testified that Dr. Lin told him that his chances of surviving the second surgery were fifty-fifty. Defendants did not object. When plaintiffs counsel asked Gore if Dr. Lin had given him "the all clear sign,” defendants’ attorney objected. Plaintiffs’ attorney again claimed the statement went to Mark Gore’s state of mind. The trial court ruled that Gore could testify regarding his expectations. Gore did so, and then testified: "I just wish he [Dr. Lin] could be here today, but he’s too busy for these kind of things . . . .” Plaintiffs’ attorney then told Gore that he should not "go into that.” Gore then testified: "Well, I’m just trying to say, I wish he was here. You know, this would have been all over. This would be over.” Defendants did not object.
Defendants sought to introduce a letter from plaintiffs’ attorney to Dr. Lin in which plaintiffs’ attorney asked Dr. Lin for his opinion of the original doctors’ actions. Defendants claimed that the letter was probative to rebut the inference created by Mark Gore’s testimony that Dr. Lin would have testified favorably to him. The court declined to admit the exhibit and instead stated that it would give an instruction on the matter. The trial court instructed the jury:
Dr. Lin’s name has been mentioned in connection with this matter. Dr. Lin did not appear to testify in this case. You may not consider anything said by the plaintiff as to what Dr. Lin’s testimony *744would have been. You must assume that Dr. Lin had no opinion in this matter.
To the extent that defendants objected to Gore’s testimony concerning statements made by Dr. Lin at trial, we hold that the matters were handled properly. To the extent that defendants did not object, no manifest injustice occurred.
Defendants also object to Gore’s testimony concerning Dr. Lin’s unavailability for trial. Again, defendants did not object, and, contrary to defendants’ argument, we hold that the curative instruction was sufficient to cure any prejudice.
Defendants further claim that the trial court erred when it failed to admit the letter from plaintiffs’ attorney to Dr. Lin. We disagree.
Defendants next argue that the trial court should have instructed the jury as provided in SJI2d 6:01. We disagree. There was no testimony that plaintiffs had control over Dr. Lin and failed to produce him. Again, the curative instruction given by the trial court was sufficient.
Finally, defendants claim that the cumulative effect of these errors denied them their right to a fair trial. Having found no error, we disagree.
IV
The jury’s verdict in favor of Mark Gore for $60,000 on the medical malpractice claim underlying the legal malpractice claim is affirmed. The jury’s separate verdict for $60,000 for Mark Gore’s mental anguish damages resulting from the legal malpractice claim is affirmed. The trial court’s order granting defendants’ motion for a judgment notwithstanding the verdict as to the jury’s award of $30,000 to Virginia Gore for loss of consortium is reversed and the case is remanded for a new trial of that issue.
*745Affirmed in part, reversed in part. Remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. We do not retain jurisdiction.
Michael J. Kelly, J., concurred.
Emotional distress damages are available in Michigan to a bystander who witnesses a negligent injury inflicted on a close family member. May v William Beaumont Hosp, 180 Mich App 728, 749; 448 NW2d 497 (1989); Pate v Children’s Hosp of Michigan, 158 Mich App 120, 123; 404 NW2d 632 (1986). Actual physical harm is an element of damages for emotional distress which may also be available in other tort actions. Ledbetter v Brown City Savings Bank, 141 Mich App 692, 703; 368 NW2d 257 (1985).

=== CASE 3784409 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:08.040853+00 ===

House Bill No. 652, 116 Ohio Laws, part 2, —, reads in part as follows:
"Section 1. There shall be a court of common pleas in each county of the state held by one or more judges, each of whom shall have been admitted to practice as an attorney and counsellor at law in this state for a period of at least six years immediately preceding his appointment or commencement of his term, residing in said county and elected by the electors therein. Each judge shall be elected for six years at the general county election next preceding the year in which the term, as hereinafter provided, shall commence, and his successor shall be elected at the general county election next preceding the expiration of such term. Each judge heretofore elected as a judge of the court of common pleas shall continue to serve as judge of said court until the expiration of his term of office; provided, however, that any vacancy which has occurred in any office of judge of said court of common pleas, the term of which office has not expired, and which vacancy has not yet been filled in the manner provided in section 141 of the General Code, and any vacancies which may hereafter occur, in each instance shall be filled in the manner provided in said section 141 of the General Code. The number of judges for each county, the time for the next election of said judges in several counties and the beginning of their terms shall be as follows: * * *
"In Cuyahoga county, 15 judges. The terms of seven of said judges shall commence January 1, 1937, January 2, 1937, January 3, 1937, January 4, 1937, January 5, 1937, January 6, 1937, and January 7, 1937, *Page 100
respectively. Said seven judges shall be elected in 1936.
"The term of another said judge shall commence February 9, 1937; said judge to be elected in 1936.
"The terms of four of said judges shall commence January 1, 1939, January 2, 1939, January 3, 1939, and January 4, 1939, respectively. Said four judges shall be elected in 1938.
"The terms of three of said judges shall commence January 1, 1941, January 2, 1941, and January 3, 1941, respectively. Said three judges shall be elected in 1940. * * *
"Section 2. That Section 1532 and Sections 1532-1 to 1532-12, both inclusive, of the General Code be, and the same are hereby repealed."
It will be noted that in substance this bill repeals and supersedes Sections 1532 to 1532-12, inclusive, General Code, relating to the offices of judges of the Courts of Common Pleas. Under the provisions of those sections the people of Cuyahoga county would choose at the general election in 1936, eight judges of the Court of Common Pleas for terms of six years each. One of those terms would begin February 9, 1937, and the other seven would start January 1, 1937. The dates of six of these eight terms are affected by the act in question. One term beginning January 1, 1937, and that starting February 9, 1937, remain unchanged, but it is now provided that the remaining six terms shall begin on the respective dates of January 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7, 1937. The single and simple question here presented is whether these changes are violative of any provision of the Constitution of Ohio.
First it must be noted that, although much comment has been made with reference to the wisdom of this enactment, this is a phase of the matter with which this court is not permitted to concern itself. The decisive *Page 101
question confronting this court is one solely of power and not in any sense one of policy.
Under the Constitution of Ohio did the Legislature have the power to repeal the existing sections and enact the provisions of House Bill No. 652, 116 Ohio Laws, part 2, —? The conclusive answer is found in the pertinent sections of Article IV of the Constitution. Sections 1 and 3 provide for Courts of Common Pleas and require that there be at least one judge thereof in each county. Then there is the further provision for the election of such additional resident judges as may beprovided by law. This language is sufficiently comprehensive to be decisive of this controversy, but fortunately it is unnecessary to rely upon it alone. In Section 15 of Article IV appears the inescapable provision that "Laws may be passed * * * to increase beyond one or diminish to one the number of judges of the court of common pleas in any county." In the exercise of this power what has the Legislature in fact done in this enactment? The relator suggests two possible theories, each of which he insists is fatal to the alleged constitutional validity of this act. According to the first, this was a repeal
of Sections 1532 to 1532-12, General Code, thereby destroying the present judgeships and creating new ones in Cuyahoga county. Under the second theory this was merely a pretended repeal and was in fact an amendment to these sections. However, a careful study of the constitutional provisions fails to disclose any reason whatsoever why the Legislature could not properly have followed either course. Under the repeal theory Cuyahoga county will at no time be deprived of its constitutional minimum of one judge; neither will this occur under the amendment theory. It is urged further that the Constitution permits no legislative interference with the length of term. This is of course true; and under each theory each incumbent will be *Page 102
allowed to serve the entire term for which he was elected. Likewise the judges to be elected for full terms in the future will be chosen for exactly six years. According to the unambiguous wording of the enactment itself the Legislature followed the repeal theory, as it had the power to do.
Also it is insisted by the relator that in separating the terms formerly beginning on. January 1st, the Legislature violated the "equal protection and benefit" clause of Section 2 of Article I of the Constitution. What possible merit can be found in this contention? The relator concedes the validity of the provision for one term beginning February 9, 1937. Likewise he concedes the validity of the varying term dates over the state ranging through seven different months of the year. He agrees also that no fault could be found with the separation of terms if the Legislature were creating new and additional judgeships. Yet carried to the ultimate, this contention of the relator obviously would invalidate the term beginning February 9, 1937, and would require its advancement to January 1st, or some other common date. Clearly if this date of February 9th is permissible, so is that of January 9th, or January 2nd, or any other. Manifestly mere proximity or identify of dates is wholly immaterial in creating terms of judicial office. Furthermore, what vested right can the relator or any other candidate for judicial office be said to have to a so-called group contest as distinguished from one in which but a single judgeship is to be filled?
The relator relies strongly upon the decision of this court in the case of State, ex rel. Graves, v. Bernon, 124 Ohio St. 294,  178 N.E. 267, and insists that it is controlling in the instant case. It is sufficient to observe that that controversy involved the constitutional validity of a statute requiring a judicial candidate to designate the particular term desired by naming the *Page 103
incumbent he sought to succeed. As indicated by paragraph two of the syllabus, this court held simply that such a required designation contravened Section 2 of Article I of the Constitution of Ohio. Furthermore, as clearly pointed out in the opinion of the Court of Appeals in that case, "counsel has not questioned the authority of the Legislature to establish in a given county separate terms beginning either in different years or at different times during the same year."
It is the conclusion of this court that the provisions of House Bill No. 652, 116 Ohio Laws, part 2, —, are a constitutionally valid exercise of legislative power. The judgment of the Court of Appeals is therefore affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
STEPHENSON, WILLIAMS, JONES, DAY and ZIMMERMAN, JJ., concur.
MATTHIAS, J., not participating.

=== CASE 3784410 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:08.081268+00 ===

The question here is whether there was a final submission to the court of common pleas of the cause pending before it. If there was not, the plaintiff could voluntarily dismiss his action without prejudice to a new action, under the following section of the General Code:
Section 11586. "An action may be dismissed without prejudice to a future action: 1. By the plaintiff, before its final submission to the jury, or to the court, when the trial is by the court." The succeeding subdivisions of that section provide for dismissal by the court, or by the plaintiff, in vacation. This dismissal was not sought during vacation. It is conceded that neither oral argument was heard *Page 481
nor briefs filed in the case; nor was there any indication made by the court as to what his decision might be.
Had not counsel for the relator, the plaintiff below, filed his brief within the time fixed by the court, it might well have been argued that the court might have considered the cause as having been submitted on July 16, 1931, when the time limit for the filing of plaintiff's brief had expired. But that date may be ignored since the trial judge, Skeel, on July 20, 1931, extended the time for filing plaintiff's brief until July 24, 1931. This action conclusively shows that Judge Skeel did not consider the case as having been finally submitted to him until such brief was filed. However, before the time for filing that brief had expired, viz., on July 23, 1931, plaintiff's counsel tendered an entry voluntarily dismissing his cause without prejudice, which entry the court refused to approve, and the clerk refused to file. Was the case in the common pleas court at that time finally submitted? Under our system of jurisprudence, questions of law to be determined by the trial court may be as important, or more so, than questions of fact, and counsel have a right to present their argument on both fact and law either orally or by brief before the trial court arrives at its decision. It is after that has been done that the case can be considered as having been finally submitted to the court.
In the case of Laub Baking Co. v. Middleton, 118 Ohio St. 106, at page 112, 160 N.E. 629, 631, this same statute being under consideration, the opinion states: "In various states, having similar provisions to our own, authorizing a dismissal of his case by the plaintiff, there has been a great diversity *Page 482
of authority, supporting or denying the right of dismissal. Many such cases are cited in the opinion of Price, C.J., inTurner v. Pope Motorcar Co. and Baker Motor Vehicle Co.,79 Ohio St. 153, 86 N.E. 651." In the Turner case and the LaubBaking Co. case, supra, this court announced the principle that after a question determinative of the case has been argued, and the court has announced its conclusion thereon, the time for voluntary dismissal of an action by the plaintiff has passed.
The record in the case at bar discloses that on July 20, 1931, the trial judge extended the time for filing plaintiff's brief until July 24, 1931, but that prior to the expiration of the time for filing that brief plaintiff's counsel filed his entry of dismissal, and paid the costs.
We are therefore of the opinion that under such circumstances the case had not been finally submitted to the trial court for its determination of both fact and law. While under the later subdivisions of Section 11586, General Code, above cited, the court has authority to dismiss the action without prejudice, the plaintiff under subdivision (1) had the right, under its express terms, to dismiss the action before its final submission. We recognize the fact that this method of procedure may be employed to harass a defendant, and may prolong expensive and annoying litigation. On the other hand, in some cases, it may be employed for the benefit of a plaintiff who finds himself presently unable to go forward with the litigation, and who seeks to preserve his just rights. This phase is discussed in the case of Houston's Admr. v. Thompson'sAdmr., 87 Mo. App., 63, at page 70. In practice the usual method *Page 483
of procedure is for plaintiff's counsel to present his motion to the court for a continuance, showing cause therefor. The statute is clear and unambiguous, and we are unable to construe it otherwise than to authorize the plaintiff to dismiss his action voluntarily before its final submission, and that its final submission contemplates its submission upon law and fact after argument. If a different procedural remedy should be supplied, it should be supplied by the Legislature rather than by the court.
There are many authorities variously construing the method of procedure under substantially similar statutes, but under dissimilar facts. Here we confine ourselves to the facts peculiar to this case, which are set forth in the pleadings. Of the cases touching this question, that of Crane v. Leclere,204 Iowa 1037, 216 N.W. 622, is more exactly in point than any other. Section 11562 of the Iowa Code of 1924 is a statute similar to our own, and may be found in the reported case ofEclipse Lumber Co. v. City of Waukon, 204 Iowa 278, at page 283, 213 N.W. 804. In the Crane case, supra, the parties had introduced their evidence and rested, and counsel for both sides had been given ten days to file briefs; but on the day such action was taken, and without brief being filed, plaintiff moved to dismiss his action without prejudice, and this was sustained by the trial court. The Supreme Court of Iowa held that there was no final submission until the briefs were filed or until the time for filing had expired, and in the course of the opinion it was stated, at page 1042 of 204 Iowa,216 N.W. 622, 624: "If the court had granted time for the attorneys to appear and argue the case orally, certainly there would have been no final submission *Page 484
of the case, and the plaintiff could voluntarily dismiss the same before the arrival of the time fixed. The effect of granting time to file briefs was that the case was not finally submitted for determination by the court until the court could have the briefs for the consideration of the matters before him, or until the expiration of the time granted for the filing of same. * * * The cause was only submitted in so far as the taking of evidence was concerned, but was open for what aid the parties could give the court as to the law applicable to the evidence which had been previously received. The stipulation that the defendant on its application is given ten days to file a brief negatives the claim of appellant that the case was finally submitted on that day. There can be but one final submission of the case."
We therefore hold that within the purview of Section 11586, General Code, a final submission to the court contemplates its submission upon both law and fact, and that where the evidence has been concluded and time given to counsel for future oral argument, or future filing of briefs, the cause is not finally submitted until such arguments are made or briefs are filed, or until such time limit for argument or the filing of briefs has expired. Prior to that time a plaintiff may dismiss his action without prejudice under the sanction of the Code provision herein referred to. It follows that, under the conceded facts, the relator is entitled to the writ prayed for.
Writ allowed.
MARSHALL, C.J., MATTHIAS, DAY, ALLEN, KINKADE and ROBINSON, JJ., concur. *Page 485

=== CASE 3784411 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:08.123916+00 ===

It is contended by counsel for the city of Cleveland that Section 614-46, General Code, as applied to the facts of this case, and the action of the commission thereunder are unconstitutional.
Constitutionality of Appeal Statutes.
Counsel for the gas company urge that a consideration of the constitutional questions presented in the brief of the city is precluded by reason of the fact that such questions were not raised before the commission and are not referred to or stated in the application for rehearing before the commission. In support of that position, Section 543, General Code, is relied upon. That section provides for the filing of an application for rehearing and requires that the application "shall set forth specifically the ground or grounds on which the applicant considers said decision or order to be unreasonable or unlawful." Supporting cases cited are City of Tiffin v. PublicUtilities Commission, 110 Ohio St. 659, 145 N.E. 32; Travis
v. Public Utilities Commisson, 123 Ohio St. 355,175 N.E. 586; and City of *Page 238 Dover v. Public Utilities Commission, 126 Ohio St. 438,185 N.E. 833.
In the first of these cases, it appears that no application for rehearing had ever been filed, and in the last case, the application for rehearing had not been filed within the required time. It is stated in the syllabus in the Travis case
that "the filing of an application for rehearing before the Public Utilities Commission is a jurisdictional prerequisite to an error proceeding from the order of the commission to this court, and only such matters as are set forth in such application can be urged or relied upon in an error proceeding in this court."
The specific question here presented is referred to only in the Travis case. It there appears that Krumm, a trustee, who, as such, was the owner and holder of bonds of the utility company involved, filed his petition in this court under claim or right as presenting a debatable constitutional question, in which he sought review of the same order complained of by other parties in other cases which were jointly presented. Having reference to the contention made by counsel for Krumm that the record presented a question arising under the Constitution and that therefore he could file his petition in error as of right, it is stated in the opinion that "this question need not be decided, because, if a constitutional question be conceded, the proceeding must be filed within the time limited for prosecuting error from the commission."
In the instant case, the application for rehearing was filed and the appeal taken within the required time. It seems quite obvious that the requirement of the filing of an application for rehearing contemplates the enumeration only of the grounds which the Public Utilities Commission would be authorized to consider and determine. It was the manifest duty of the commission to proceed under and in accordance with the terms and provisions of the statute with the assumption of its *Page 239
constitutionality. Constitutionality of statutes is a question for the courts and not for a board or commission.
The provisions of Section 4, Article XVIII, of the state Constitution, confer authority upon municipalities to contract with a public utility for its product or service. Such contracts are entered into by the passage of an ordinance fixing the rate and terms for such product and service for a specified period and the filing of a written acceptance thereof by the company. A contract so entered into is binding upon both parties and is not subject to review by the Public Utilities Commission. Link v. Public Utilities Commission, 102 Ohio St. 336,  131 N.E. 796; City of Akron v. Public UtilitiesCommission, 126 Ohio St. 333, 185 N.E. 415; City of Cleveland
v. Cleveland City Ry. Co., 194 U.S. 517,48 L.Ed., 1102, 24 S.Ct., 756; Columbus Ry., Power  Light Co. v. City ofColumbus, 249 U.S. 399, 63 L.Ed., 669, 39 S.Ct., 349.
It does not appear, however, in this instance that there is any existing contract between the city of Cleveland and the utility fixing the rate and terms for product or service. In the absence of such contract, the Public Utilities Commission is authorized by Section 614-46, General Code, upon hearing upon appeal to fix and determine the just and reasonable rate and order the same substituted for the rate fixed by the ordinance, or it may find and declare the rate so fixed by the ordinance to be just and reasonable and ratify and confirm the same. Section 614-45, General Code, permits the utility to collect the former rate until the commission passes on its validity, and the commission is authorized not merely to fix the rate for the remainder of the ordinance period but to substitute a new rate for the entire period covered by the ordinance. We are unable to see anything in the statutes or in their application by the utilities commission violative of the home *Page 240
rule provision authorizing a contract between the parties.
An appeal to the Public Utilities Commission is provided for when the ordinance rate is not accepted, as was the case here. The effect of such appeal is clearly stated in the statutory provisions which have been discussed and applied in numerous cases. Service is to be continued, but the rate therefor will be such as is finally determined by the commission, subject, of course, to review by this court. Pending hearing and final determination, the immediately previous effective rate may be charged if the utility enters into an undertaking as prescribed by statute. Such appeal does not constitute a waiver of the right to charge and collect such rate as may be finally established as the fair and reasonable rate. City of Cleveland
v. Public Utilities Commission, 126 Ohio St. 91,183 N.E. 924.
Delay Rentals.
Another controversy between the city of Cleveland and The East Ohio Gas Company grows out of the question as to whether the cost of canceled and abandoned leaseholds, held for a period of time before abandonment to determine whether they could be made productive, should be treated as a part of the cost of the used and useful leaseholds retained by the company and operated by it in the production of gas, and should be included in the rate base.
The city conceded that the nominal cost of acquisition of leases, which were drilled, found to be productive and transferred to operated leaseholds, and the cost of delay rentals paid on these particular leases while unoperated during exploration up to the time they were drilled and found productive, with interest on these costs, may be properly carried into the rate base.
The company, on the other hand, claims that not only these items should be included in the cost of operated leases, but that the nominal cost of the acquisition of *Page 241
unoperated leases canceled in the process of exploration in the average amount of 52 acres unoperated leases canceled to one acre found to be productive, and the delay rentals paid during the exploration period on these average 52 acres canceled to one acre operated leases developed, together with interest on these items, should also be charged in the rate base as a part of the actual cost of the presently operated used and useful leaseholds now in production.
There is no disagreement that delay rentals paid on unoperated but retained leases, as distinguished from abandoned and canceled leases, are not and should not be capitalized until these leases are operated, but these rentals are charged to operating expense in accordance with the commission's requirements as to accounting. All agree that such rentals should not be allowed and were not allowed as a current expense for rate-making purposes.
Evidence admitted shows that in the 32 years (1906-1937), the company acquired and sorted about 2,500,000 acres out of which it found approximately 48,060 acres of productive leases of which, in 1937, it operated 27,724 acres; that it canceled and abandoned 52 acres for each productive acre retained. Therefore, the company claims that the cost of its 48,060 operated acres drilled between 1906 and 1937 includes the cost of acquiring and canceling leaseholds covering 2,486,627 acres, together with the delay rentals paid thereon during the same years; that since only 27,724 acres of the 48,060 operated leaseholds acres, which the company had drilled in its history, were still operated in 1937, a proportional part of the total delay rentals paid and cost of acquisition of the leaseholds abandoned, in the ratio that the present companydrilled operated acreage bears to the total company operated acreage, should be capitalized as a part of the rate base.
In addition to the 27,724 acres of operated leaseholds developed by the company itself, the record *Page 242
shows that it operated 4,031 acres which it purchased already developed. The company claims that in this purchase from the owner there was included the entire cost of the operations of the owner in finding these productive acres, corresponding to the cost of abandoned leases and delayed rentals thereon in developing its own operated acres.
For the purpose of showing that the cost of its developed leaseholds was reasonable, testimony was offered, received and undisputed to the effect that its 4,031 operated acres so purchased were estimated as having 6,686,000,000 cubic feet remaining reserves valued at $713,242 or $177 per acre, or 10 1/2 cents per M c. f. of remaining reserves, or a cost of 3 1/2 cents per M c. f. more than the cost of gas from operated acres which the company itself had developed under leases.
The commission adopted substantially the view of the company on the subject of the cost of gas developed under leases and in its finding said:
"The company presented evidence showing that to acquire and develop these leases it actually spent, exclusive of expenditures on wells that proved nonproductive, in excess of $6,000,000, or approximately $220 per acre. It reduced this development cost by the amount of exhaustion on these leases to the date certain, showing a remaining development cost of slightly less than $2,000,000, or $71.31 per acre on the average. This is equivalent to about 7 cents per M c. f. of remaining reserves.
"These development costs necessarily include the sums spent by the company in acquiring, carrying and canceling unoperated acres which eventually proved nonproductive but which the company had to acquire, test and cancel in order to locate the productive acres in service on the date certain. They do not include expenditures for current delay rentals since these are apart of the cost of the development of future operated leases not presently used. This evidence on the part *Page 243
of the company was in nowise challenged and showed that the cost of developing its own gas supply by the methods it did use was substantially less per acre and per M c. f. of reserves than the cost of its purchased gas supply.
"Upon consideration of all the evidence we fix the present value of the company's 27,724 acres of developed leases at an average of $70 per acre, or a total of $1,940,680 as of June 30, 1937. This finding places in the rate base for acres developed by the company a little less than 7 cents per M c. f. as compared with 10 1/2 cents per M c. f. of reserves for acres purchased by the company as operated, and as against 9.6 cents per M c. f. which the city recommended to be included for the value of the leaseholds purchased by the company as operated."
The city claims that the commission erred in its finding on this subject and argues that this court, in the case ofEast Ohio Gas Co. v. Public Utilities Commission, 133 Ohio St. 212,  12 N.E.2d 765, held that a depletion allowance could not include the cost of acquiring and carrying presently unoperated acres, and, a fortiori, could not include the cost of unoperated acreage abandoned or canceled.
However, the Supreme Court of the United States in the case of Columbus Gas  Fuel Co. v. Public Utilities Commission,292 U.S. 398, 78 L.Ed., 1327, 54 S.Ct., 763, reversing this court (127 Ohio St. 109, 187 N.E. 7) indicates that in giving effect to the terms of the Ohio statute as providing a method of fixing the price for a utility product through a determination of the value of its property used and useful in the operation, a strict construction cannot be applied to a utility such as a gas company which suffers wasting assets.
Mr. Justice Cardozo, speaking for the court in that case, said:
"We have seen in the Dayton case that * * * the commission included among the operating expenses * * * *Page 244
an annual allowance of $4,158,954, to amortize the value of leaseholds * * * (* * * then in use) and of the well-structures and equipment used in connection therewith, and thus provide a fund that would restore the depleted capital when the gas had been exhausted. The same allowance was made here.
"Upon the appeal by the city of Columbus to the Supreme Court of Ohio the item thus allowed was excluded altogether. The court did not deny that without the creation of a fund to replenish wasting assets the affiliated seller would be left with only a salvage value for leases, well and fittings after the exhaustion of the gas. It put its judgment upon the ground that the statute of Ohio defining the powers of the commission and the method of appraisal makes no provision for depletion (Ohio General Code, Sections 499-9 to 499-13), and that the statute, and nothing else, gives the applicable rule. We may assume in submission to the holding of that court that the amortization allowance must be rejected if the rate making process is to conform to the rule prescribed by statute, irrespective of any other. That assumption being made, the conclusion does not follow that the statutory procedure may set at naught restrictions imposed upon the states and upon all their governmental organs by the Constitution of the nation.
"To withhold from a public utility the privilege of including a depletion allowance among its operating expenses, while confining it to a return of 6 1/2 per cent upon the value of its wasting assets, is to take its property away from it without due process of law, at least where the waste is inevitable and rapid, * * *. Plainly the state must either surrender the power to limit the return or else concede to the business a compensating privilege to preserve its capital intact. * * * It is idle to argue that a company using up its capital in the operations of the year will have received the *Page 245
same return as one that at the end of the year has its capital intact and interest besides.
"We hold that a fair price for gas delivered at the gateway includes a reasonable allowance for the depletion of the operated gas fields and the concomitant depreciation of the wells and their equipment. What that allowance shall be has not yet been considered by the Supreme Court of Ohio, invested with jurisdiction to review the law and facts. * * * There will be power, we assume, to direct another hearing if the basis for an intelligent judgment is lacking in the record. When the allowance has been fixed and has been charged to operating expenses, it will supply the answer to other questions in controversy now. There will be no need, when that is done, to include in operating expenses a separate provision for the payment of 'delay rentals' upon leases in reserve. * * *"
In view of the above discussion by the Supreme Court of the United States, what is meant by an allowance for wasting assets? Primarily, it undoubtedly refers to an amortization of the decrease of gas reserves under a leasehold as the gas is removed. But all leaseholds taken by the company in good faith with the reasonable expectation that gas may be found underneath them, represent a cost to the company, and are, while held by the company, assets of the company. When some of such leaseholds must be abandoned because upon test it is found that they will not produce gas, there is a dimunition or wasting of assets in the process which cannot well be differentiated from the diminution or wasting of assets on other productive leaseholds by the gradual removal of the gas reserves underneath them. In both cases, the leaseholds eventually become worthless and must be abandoned, and when so abandoned the company has suffered a waste of assets to the extent of the money invested in them.
The cost of the unproductive abandoned leaseholds, including delay rentals while they were held by the *Page 246
company, must be charged back as a loss and represents a wasted or wasting asset.
It must be apparent that the cost of acquiring, holding for a time during which delay rentals must be paid, testing and finally canceling unproductive acres is the only method by which productive gas acres can be found and developed, and it is equally apparent that this expense must be borne by the consumer who ultimately uses the gas from the productive acres.
We think the commission, in taking this position and in making its finding accordingly, was fully justified under the law.
Gas Purchased from Affiliate.
Another complaint of the city of Cleveland is that "the commission erred in making an excessive allowance for gas purchased from the affiliated [The] Hope Natural Gas Company and in failing to find that the company has not sustained the burden of proving an allowance for payments to Hope in excess of 30 cents per thousand cubic feet at the Ohio river."
The aggravating cause of the unending and understandable strife on this point is the complicating fact that The East Ohio Gas Company and The Hope Natural Gas Company are affiliated corporations, both being owned by the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey. This is the third time in six years that this price has been litigated.
From the welter of figures in the record and briefs it appears that this contract price averaged 36.15 cents during the year ending June 30, 1937. During the following year the average was 36.82 cents per M c. f.
The East Ohio Gas Company purchases approximately 70 per cent of its gas from the Hope company whose producing fields are mainly in the northern part of West Virginia. About 15 years ago this supply was found to be inadequate. To meet this difficulty the company extended its pipe-line system over one hundred miles to the southern part of West Virginia *Page 247
at a cost of more than $6,000,000. It also entered into long-term contracts with a number of producers for a supply of gas. There is no evidence to indicate that these transactions were not conducted in good faith in order to meet the fluctuating seasonal demands.
While the price allowed by the commission is liberal, this court would not be justified in holding it excessive.
General Overheads.
The commission's finding with respect to general overheads reads as follows:
"General Overheads. General overheads are a matter of proper estimate. Ohio Utilities Co. v. Public Utilities Commission,267 U.S. 359 (1925) [69 L.Ed., 656, 45 S. Ct., 259]. The general overheads set forth in Table 1 are based upon the percentages agreed to between the parties in the former Cleveland case (E. O. X. 19, pp. 19-20), agreed to between the company and the present city experts in the Akron case (E. O. X. 3, p. 9, 17, P. U. R. [N. S.], 433 p. 440), used by the company, commission and city engineers throughout their reports and valuations made in connection with this case and testified to by Mr. Rhodes as less than are actually encountered in the construction of large natural gas properties * * *."
The total general overhead allowed is 16 per cent of the estimated reproduction cost new, broken down as follows: Interest during construction — 7 per cent; preliminary organization expense — 0.5 per cent; taxes during construction — 2 per cent; engineering and superintendence during construction — 4.5 per cent; and administrative and legal expense during construction — 2 per cent.
The city of Cleveland does not contest the items but merely the percentages allowed.
The city's contention is that the allowance was excessive because made on the basis of theory and not on the basis of the actual experience of the company, and *Page 248
that the finding was therefore arbitrary and unreasonable.
The record discloses that the city of Cleveland and The East Ohio Gas Company had agreed upon a schedule of general overhead allowances for 1931, which schedule was again used in the instant case. The city of Cleveland contends that it was error to use this schedule as of June 30, 1937, because economic conditions have changed since 1931, and figures which were then applicable are no longer reasonable when applied to the year 1937. It must be noted, however, that the record fails to disclose any evidence submitted by the city showing, or tending to show, what figures would be applicable and reasonable for the year 1937. It was only after all the evidence had been introduced into the record that the city, through its counsel, for the first time raised the question in argument.
The proceeding is here for review on the record, and to the record we are obliged to confine ourselves. The city contends that the figures which the commission used and adopted are conjectural. Yet the record contains no evidence adduced by the city showing what figures are not conjectural. On the other hand, there is a substantial basis in the evidence contained in the record for the commission's estimate that the general overheads would amount to 16 per cent as above set forth. Thus, there is in evidence an agreement between the company and the city, entered into in 1933, stipulating that 16 per cent should be the allowance for general overhead in 1931. There is also in evidence a report, bearing date of January, 1936, from the city engineers to the city council, which contains the same general overhead figure. On December 17, 1936, a city engineer and a gas company engineer made a joint report to the city council in which all general overheads were computed in accordance with the 1931 schedule of general overheads. The work-sheets of the city engineer, made in connection with the report he submitted *Page 249
to the city council on April 1, 1937, show that he used the same schedule of general overheads. It is thus seen that the 1931 schedule of general overhead estimates was used as a basis by the city engineers, relied upon by them and never questioned, and that the city introduced no evidence in derogation thereof. The attack against the 1931 schedule came not in the form of evidence introduced into the record by witnesses competent to express expert opinions, but it came by argument of counsel after the evidence was all introduced. The function of argument is to interpret and not to replace evidence. Whether it was right or wrong for the commission to use the 1931 estimate as a basis must be judged by the evidence alone. Yet we find no evidence in the record which disputes the correctness of the 1931 estimate which the commission used as a basis for its allowance in this case. There is no testimony in the record adduced by the city engineers that the 1931 estimate, as applied to 1937, is excessive, or that it would be unfair to apply it. In view of the state of the record, acceptance of the 1931 estimate of the general overhead for 1937 was not arbitrary, but, on the contrary, its rejection would have been arbitrary. Its acceptance was based on evidence which was not contradicted or in any way challenged by competent evidence of the city. Being supported by substantial evidence, the finding of the commission cannot be said to be arbitrary.
With respect to the question of reasonableness, suffice it to say that the commission is protected by the presumption that its findings and orders are just and reasonable.
With respect to the city's contention that the 16 per cent allowance was excessive because the company offered no evidence that such an amount had been actually expended in the construction of its property, or that it would necessarily be expended in reproducing the property, suffice it to say that the amount to be allowed for general overhead charges does not depend *Page 250
upon proof of actual expenditures originally made, but depends upon estimate. Ohio Utilities Co. v. Public UtilitiesCommission, 267 U.S. 359, 69 L.Ed., 656, 45 S.Ct., 259.
Among the percentages contested is the rate of interest allowed, the city arguing that 7 per cent is too high. While this court will take judicial notice of a decline in the general interest rate, it will not take judicial notice of the amount of the decline. There is no evidence in the record, either of the fact of decline or of the amount. The only evidence in the record bears upon the rate of interest on call money and hence is not here applicable.
Leakage and Unaccounted for Gas.
The city challenges the allowance of 4,000,000,000 cubic feet per annum fixed by the commission for leakage and unaccounted for gas in the Hope system and contends that a fair and reasonable allowance would be 1,000,000,000 cubic feet which was the amount fixed by the commission in the formerCleveland and Akron cases. The commission in its findings asserts that the record contains "substantial additional factual evidence" supporting the present allowance.
The East Ohio Gas Company measures all but a small fraction of its gas whether produced by itself or purchased from others. On the other hand Hope measures the gas it buys from others but does not meter all the gas produced from its own wells; consequently it is impossible to determine with absolute accuracy Hope's leakage and unaccounted for gas, and methods of computation must be resorted to.
The city's contention is grounded mainly upon the testimony of A.P. Learned, an expert. Basing his computation upon the leakage experience of The East Ohio Gas Company, he fixed the leakage and unaccounted for gas of Hope at 100,000 cubic feet per mile per year or 1,000,000,000 cubic feet per year for the whole system. *Page 251
The company's expert, George I. Rhodes, recites facts which tend to show that Learned's conclusions are wrong and inaccurate even if The East Ohio Gas Company's experience is used as the basis for calculation. Rhodes also advanced what he claims is a more accurate formula. He took Hope's books and from them found the ratio of metered to calculated production. By applying this ratio to the average annual calculated production from all wells he found the average annual equivalent metered production from all wells. From the amount obtained he subtracted the average annual accounted for production. The result was 4,779,000,000 cubic feet which he found to be the everage annual unaccounted for gas from purchases and production.
To prove the accuracy of his formula, Rhodes took the experience of other West Virginia companies as found in reports made by them to the West Virginia Public Service Commission and showed that their line loss per mile exceeded that of Hope as he estimated it.
The commission was warranted in fixing 4,000,000,000 cubic feet per annum (which is an amount less than Rhodes' estimate) by expert testimony and "substantial additional factual evidence." The finding in this behalf is not unreasonable, unlawful or against the manifest weight of the evidence.
Rate of Return.
The East Ohio Gas Company contends that the commission erred in allowing a rate of return of only 6 1/2 per cent, whereas the commission should have allowed, and erred in failing to allow, a return of a least 7 1/2 per cent. The company contends also that the commission erred in fixing a rate of return of only 6 1/2 per cent as reasonable for The Hope Natural Gas Company, whereas a rate of return of at least 8 per cent would be reasonable.
On the other hand the city claims the commission erred in finding that a return of 5 1/2 per cent "would *Page 252
be not only unfair and unreasonable but border on the line of confiscation," and in failing and refusing to find and conclude as requested by the city that even a 5 per cent return on the present fair value would be nonconfiscatory.
The commission in its finding upon a fair rate of return for the period between June 30, 1937, and July 1, 1939, relied upon the case of East Ohio Gas Co. v. Public Utilities Commission,133 Ohio St. 212, 12 N.E.2d 765, which involved fixing the rates in Akron for a four-year period from May 19, 1933, to May 19, 1937. In the Akron proceeding the company insisted upon a return of 7 1/2 to 8 per cent and the city a rate of 6 per cent as adequate. In the present case the commission recognized its duty of establishing a rate which would be higher than the line of confiscation and quoted the following from page 229 of the opinion of this court in the Akron case:
"A return of 6 1/2 per cent on the valuation was allowed by the commission, which is similar to that allowed in other cases before this court for approximately the same period. A rate of return may vary as to times depending on business conditions, but it must be one that shall be reasonably sufficient to assure confidence in the financial soundness of the utility.Blue-field Water Works v. Public Service Commission,262 U.S. 679, 692, 693, 67 L.Ed., 1176, 43 S.Ct., 675."
On the same page of the opinion Judge Gorman said that "a rate of return of 6 1/2 per cent during the early years of the [Akron] ordinance would be high, but during the latter years was fair and reasonable. It is not a rate that could be said to be confiscatory."
The commission stated in the present rate-making proceeding:
"The record in this case discloses a substantial improvement in business conditions and resultant corporate earnings over the average prevailing during the period of the Akron ordinance and over the 1931-36 *Page 253
period of the Cleveland ordinance involved in the former Cleveland case, * * * and in our opinion a rate of return of but 5 1/2 per cent as suggested by the city would be not only unfair and unreasonable but border on the line of confiscation, while on the other hand we are not satisfied that conditions warrant a rate of return of 7 1/2 per cent as claimed by the company."
The conclusions of the commission as to the rate of return are supported by the record and a rate of 6 1/2 per cent is sufficient to assure confidence in the financial soundness of the gas companies, is not confiscatory and is not unfair or unreasonable as between the public and the utilities.
Practice and Procedure.
The city of Cleveland, contends there were errors in practice and procedure committed by the commission of such a material nature as to require a reversal and a remand of the cause.
These alleged errors relate to the refusal to grant a stay of the proceedings until the Federal Power Commission had acted on the city's application for an investigation of the rate charged by The Hope Natural Gas Company to The East Ohio Gas Company at the Ohio river; denying the city an opportunity to inspect full pipe lengths of transmission lines; failing to require The East Ohio Gas Company to produce available evidence of the original cost of its properties; and failing to require the gas company to produce relevant and material evidence on other controlling matters, including the river rate.
As to the first complaint, the commission had before it a rate ordinance of only two years' duration, expiring July 1, 1939, and had to move with celerity in the main objective of fixing the fair and reasonable rate which the consumers should pay for their gas as it came from the burner tips on their premises. And in so doing it was the duty of the commission to fix a rate in Cleveland as of June 30, 1937. Any river rate *Page 254
the Federal Power Commission might designate would be of an entirely prospective nature and would consequently be of no benefit or controlling force in the present proceedings.
It was found by the commission that the principal purpose of the city in demanding the right to inspect the pipes comprising the transmission lines was to reassert its theory that an accrued depreciation should be based on the deepest pit in a 20-foot length of pipe. This method for determining accrued depreciation had been rejected by the commission in at least two previous cases, as unsound and impractical, and the commission adopted a formula or test to determine this element, which was denoted as fair and adequate in the case of East OhioGas Co. v. Public Utilities Commission, supra, known as theAkron case.
As to the claimed error on the part of the commission in not requiring The East Ohio Gas Company to produce a statement of the original cost of its properties, it was testified by the company accountants that such cost did not appear upon the company books with any completeness, was not readily ascertainable from any other source and, if it could be obtained, would not prove definite or satisfactory in determining the fact for which it was desired.
The city did not offer evidence to disprove these statements nor did it avail itself of the opportunity to examine the company's books to determine any such costs. Besides, in Ohio, there is no statute requiring the commission to consider evidence of original cost in fixing a fair and reasonable rate if such rate can be determined on other reliable bases.
Concerning the complaint that the commission erred in not ordering the company to produce other evidence, the commission determined, under the circumstances, that the company was not obligated to do so. However, the company's records were made available to the city, its engineers and accountants, so that the information *Page 255
could be ascertained and presented by the city if it deemed the same of importance in the proceeding.
A careful examination of the claimed errors in connection with practice and procedure fails to show anything of sufficient gravity to warrant a reversal.
For the reasons stated the orders of the commission are not unlawful or unreasonable and they are therefore affirmed.
Orders affirmed.
WEYGANDT, C.J., DAY, ZIMMERMAN, WILLIAMS, MATTHIAS and HART, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9738857 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:34.106929+00 ===

Jackson, J.
This is in effect an appeal from an interlocutory order for support entered by the above entitled court in this cause. It appears that on August 25, 1966, on petition of plaintiff-appellee an order was entered granting her suit and support money, care and custody of the minor children of the parties, providing for visitation of the children by appellant, the sum of $100.00 per week support for plaintiffappellee, the right of occupancy of certain described property and ordering appellant to pay certain designated bills, all pendente lite.
Thereafter, on May 31, 1967, plaintiff-appellee filed in said court a petition for an increase of support order for additional funds by way of lump sum allowance, for funds to send the children to summer camps and for an order requiring the defendant-appellant to pay the bills. Hearing on the motion was set for June 19, 1967; as such petition requires ten pages of record we omit the same.
On June 13, 1967, appellant-defendant filed his motion to strike out certain allegations set forth in plaintiff-appellee’s petition. Content of the motion is omitted, as without the petition for increase in allowance, the motion is unintelligible. Hearing was had on appellant-defendant’s motion to strike, the same was denied and then hearing was had on appelleeplaintiff’s petition for increase in support order. Final evidence and argument of counsel on said petition was completed on October 17, 1967, and the court took the matter under advisement.
*98Thereafter, on November 17, 1967, the court found for the petitioner on her petition and modified the order of August 25, 1966, appearing in Order Book No. 184, at page 119, of the records of the court as follows, to-wit:
“The Defendant shall and he is hereby ordered to pay to the Clerk of this Court on Friday, the 24th day of November, 1967, the sum of Two Hundred ($200.00) Dollars for the support and maintenance of the Plaintiff and the minor children of the parties, and to pay to said Clerk for such purpose a .like sum of $200.00 on each succeeding Friday thereafter until the further order of the Court.
It is further ordered that the Plaintiff shall continue to have the right to use and occupy the premises known as 2170 Tecumseh Park Lane, West Lafayette, Indiana, for the residence of herself and the minor children, Pendente Lite. And the Defendant shall pay all mortgage payments, taxes, insurance payments and utility bills excepting telephone service, and shall pay all reasonable costs of maintenance and repair in connection with the occupancy of said premises as a residence for said Plaintiff and minor children.
And the Defendant is further ordered and directed to furnish and install within thirty days from this date in the kitchen of the premises at 2170 Tecumseh Park Lane, West Lafayette, Indiana, occupied by Plaintiff and said minor children, a tile floor of the color and design acceptable to plaintiff and of a like quality to the tile originally installed in said kitchen.
The Defendant and Cross-Complainant is further ordered and directed to furnish all medical, dental and hospital care required by Petitioner and the childen of the parties or any of them.
The Defendant and Cross-Complainant is further ordered to pay to Plaintiff and to accept her receipt therefor within fifteen (15) days from this date, the sum of Five Thousand ($5000.00) Dollars; and the plaintiff is directed to pay out of such fund all existing indebtedness and to furnish to the Court within thirty (30) days after receipt of such money a list evidencing payment of such obligations; at which time the Court shall order disposition of any balance remaining of said fund. The Court further orders that to the extent that same maybe necessary for the raising of such lump sum by the defendant, the Clerk *99may release to the defendant for the purpose of pledging same as security for the obtaining of such funds, the shares of stock of Purdue National Bank, provided, however, that such shares may not be sold for such purpose.”
It is from this order that this appeal stems. The appellant’s assignment of errors, omitting heading, formal parts and signature, in pertinent part reads as follows:
1. That the court erred in denying appellant’s Motion to Strike Certain Allegations in appellee’s Petition for Increase of Support.
2. That the court erred in granting appellee’s Petition for Increase of Support Order and thereby modifying the pendente lite Support Order of August 25,1966.
3. That the decision of the court in entering the Order of November 17, 1967, modifying the order of August 25, 1966, is not sustained by sufficient evidence.
4. That the decision of the court in entering the Order of November 17, 1967, modifying the Order of August 25, 1966, is contrary to law.
5. That the court erred in the admission of evidence as follows:
(a) In admitting a Dun and Bradstreet report of appellant’s employer. (Plaintiff’s-Appellee’s Exhibit 16).
(b) In admitting Plaintiff’s-Appellee’s Exhibits 29, 30 and 31.
(c) In admitting the testimony of Leona Cohen.
(d) In admitting the testimony of William Godby.
6. That the court erred in admitting all testimony concerning matters prior to August 25, 1966, and thereby not limiting testimony to matters constituting change in circumstances.
7. That the court erred in basing the Support Order upon a prospective bonus to be received by appellant in March of 1968.
8. That the court erred in deciding upon insufficient evidence that the appellant would receive a bonus in March of 1968.”
*100On May 16, 1968, appellee filed a motion entitled Motion to Dismiss Appeal or to Affirm Order. While we do not regard the proceedings herein as a model to be followed, we are of the opinion there has been a sufficient compliance with the statute and with the rules of this Court to permit the denial of the motion to dismiss and to consider the appeal on the merits.
We deem it unnecessary to go into detail as to a summary of the evidence most favorable to the appellee, i.e., the worth of the appellant, his income, etc. for the reason that while we are mindful of the well established rule, that this Court will not disburb the order of the trial court unless it clearly appears that there has been an abuse of discretion in making the order, it is equally true that this judicial discretion is subject to review on appeal.
In the case at bar we are of the opinion a clear abuse of discretion by unfair and arbitrary action has been shown. The pendente lite allowance for support of plaintiff and two minor children was, on motion of appellee, doubled. Plaintiff continued in the right to use and occupy the premises known as 2170 Tecumseh Park Lane, West Lafayette, Indiana, for the residence of herself and the minor children, and the defendant required to pay all mortgage payments, taxes, insurance payments and utility bills excepting telephone service, and to pay all reasonable costs of maintenance and repair in connection with the occupancy of said premises as a residence for said plaintiff and minor children. Defendant was further ordered and directed to furnish and install, within thirty days from the date of the order (November 17, 1967), in the kitchen of such premises a tile floor of the color and design acceptable to plaintiff and of a like quality to the tile originally installed in said kitchen. The defendant was further ordered to furnish all medical, dental and hospital care required by the petitioner and the children of the parties or any of them. The defendant was further ordered to pay *101the plaintiff within fifteen (15) days from date the sum of $5,000.00, etc. (See modified order, supra.)
The evidence adduced in support of the order as modified was, so far as disclosed by the record, primarily a rehash of the hearing previously held prior to the granting of the original allowance and order of August 25, 1966, without any showing of a change in the circumstances of the parties. It appears from the record herein that appellant has an income of approximately $25,000.00 per annum, his annual living expenses amount to $17,395.00, he is the owner of approximately 4% of the stock of a family owned and successful merchandising corporation, the present value of which was not proven, that he is the owner of certain bank stocks valued at approximately $15,000.00, he or he and his wife jointly (the record here does not disclose which way the title is held) own a nice home on two acres of ground valued at from $50,000.00 to $75,000.00 which is encumbered by a mortgage of from $30,000.00 to $35,000.00, and appellant is indebted to others in addition to the mortgage loan on the real estate to the extent of approximately $25,800.00.
The allowance awarded by the modified order, in view of the attendant circumstances and the failure of the trial court to limit the testimony to changes in the circumstances of the parties, if any, since the allowance of the original order of August 25, 1966, in our opinion constitutes such an abuse of discretion as requires a reversal of the amended order, absent a showing of fraud on the part the defendant in concealing assets at the time of the hearing on the first allowance Pendente Lite.
The cause is reversed and remanded with instructions to grant a new trial on the petition to modify the order of August 25, 1966, or if the issues are made up or can be made up promptly a trial on the merits where all the issues can be determined and this litigation be brought to a conclusion.
DeBruler, C.J., and Arterbum, J., concur in result; Givan, J., dissents with opinion in which Hunter, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9738858 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:34.111039+00 ===

*102Dissenting Opinion
Givan, J.
I dissent from the majority opinion for the following reasons:
1. The opinion of the Court appears to be based entirely upon the proposition that evidence was erroneously admitted concerning conditions prior to August 25,1966, the same being the date of a prior order for custody and support. It is apparently the majority opinion’s position that it was reversible error for the trial court to hear any evidence other than evidence of a change in the condition subsequent to August 25, 1966. However, the opinion does not cite any authority for this position. In fact, the opinion is completely devoid of authority of any sort, either cases or statute. There is case law in Indiana that where no vital change in condition was averred in the petition nor shown in the evidence on a petition to modify it would be improper for the trial court to enter a judgment changing custody or increase support payments. See Abair v. Everly (1959), 130 Ind. App. 192, 163 N. E. 2d 34. However, the entire group of cases setting forth this well-known proposition of law are confined to the modification of final divorce decrees, whereas the question in the case at bar is concerned with an interlocutory appeal from an order pendente lite. It has been specifically held by this Court that orders pendente lite made under the provisions of Burns’ 3-1216 do not dispose of the cause. They leave the question of custody and support for final determination in the decree of divorce. They are clearly interlocutory. Haag v. Haag (1959), 240 Ind. 291, 163 N. E. 2d 243.
2. The appellant’s brief although mentioning the point upon which the majority opinion decides the case, cites absolutely no authority for its proposition. This in itself is a violation of Eule 2-17 of the Eules of this Court. The appellant does not even make a philosophic argument on his contention that the change of condition rule should be applied in this case. In fact, there is nothing in the brief by which the appellant *103draws any distinction between the two situations of a final decree as against the decree pendente lite.
3. The only proposition in appellant’s brief which is supported by the citation of authority begins in his brief at page 99 and is directed to the general proposition that the trial court abused its discretion in entering the amended order for support pendente lite, and even in the cases cited by the appellant it is clearly stated that the discretion of the trial court will be interfered with only when a clear abuse is shown. However, in the review of the evidence which follows his general citation of authority, I find no evidence which would indicate that the trial court was unfair or arbitrary in its action to the extent that this Court would be justified in holding that there was an abuse of discretion.
The trial court should, therefore, be affirmed.
Hunter, J., concurs.
Note.—Reported in 245 N. E. 2d 831.

=== CASE 2217986 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:38.645315+00 ===

473 N.W.2d 81 (1991)
238 Neb. 939
STATE of Nebraska, Appellee,
v.
Jeff A. WEST, Appellant.
No. 90-512.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
August 16, 1991.
James R. Mowbray, of Mowbray & Walker, P.C., Lincoln, for appellant.
William F. Austin, Lincoln City Atty., and Gerald F. Fisher, Lincoln, for appellee.
HASTINGS, C.J., and BOSLAUGH, WHITE, CAPORALE, SHANAHAN, GRANT, and FAHRNBRUCH, JJ.
*82 GRANT, Justice.
Defendant-appellant, Jeff A. West, was charged in the county court for Lancaster County, Nebraska, with two misdemeanor offenses in violation of the Lincoln Municipal Code: (1) indecent exposure and (2) "[t]respass upon the property of another without the permission of the owner or tenant thereof." After trial to the county court, sitting without a jury, the court found the defendant not guilty of the first count, stating, "While the court finds that the evidence is clear that the defendant was in a private area (not his own) without pants, the ordinance doesn't cover this particular factual situation." The trial court found defendant guilty of trespassing and fined him $500 plus costs. Defendant appealed to the district court, which affirmed the sentence.
We note the appeal herein from the county court to the district court was filed on February 16, 1990. Therefore, the procedural rule in such appeals set out in State v. Erlewine, 234 Neb. 855, 452 N.W.2d 764 (1990), effective March 23, 1990, does not apply.
Defendant then timely appealed to this court, assigning a single error: "The trial court and District Court erred in failing to find that the evidence at trial was insufficient as a matter of law to sustain a conviction beyond a reasonable doubt." We affirm.
The record shows the following: A witness, Bert Smith, testified that when he awoke to get a glass of water at approximately 2:15 a.m. on August 2, 1989, he heard his dog barking outside. He looked out his window and saw a figure moving along the side of his next door neighbors' house. Smith saw the figure go around the front of that house and go toward the west toward the Tussing house, two doors west of the Smith house. Smith got dressed and went outside to investigate. Smith testified that as he neared the Tussing home, where Wendy Tussing resided, he saw a man in a crouched position on the Tussings' east side porch, peering into the bottom row of windows on the side door. Smith came up behind the man and said, "All right, cowboy, what are you doing here?"
Smith testified that the startled man jumped up, ran past Smith within a few feet, and continued to run away from the house. Smith testified that he recognized the man as another of his neighbors, defendant West, who lived across the street from the Smith and Tussing homes. At this time Smith saw that West had no clothes on from the waist down. Smith testified that he shouted, "[R]unning's not going to do you any good," but that West kept running.
Smith returned to his home and kept watch from inside his doorway. He testified that 3 or 4 minutes later, he saw a figure that he could not identify jump over the railing of the Wests' front porch and disappear into the West home. Smith then called the police. Officers arrested defendant at his home at about 3 a.m. The officers testified that West answered his door wearing "gym shorts" and that he had an odor of alcohol on his breath. Both defendant and his wife testified that defendant was still out watering the lawn when his wife went to bed at a little after 1:30. Defendant testified that he drank four or five beers that evening and specifically testified that he had not been on the Tussing premises on August 2, 1989.
Lincoln Mun.Code § 9.52.220 (1984) stated:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to loiter about or trespass upon the property of another without the consent of the owner or tenant thereof; provided, that windowpeeping in the windows of a private dwelling house, apartment or residence of another after sunset shall be prima facie evidence of trespass. (Ord. 3489 § 21-222; July 6, 1936).
Defendant contends that the State failed to satisfy its burden of proof because "[t]here was no testimony by Wendy Tussing whether or not Mr. West, or anyone else, did not have permission to be on the property." Brief for appellant at 6. Tussing testified that she had still been awake watching television at 2:30 a.m. and had *83 heard noises and shouting outside, but that she did not investigate.
Defendant argues that because there is no direct evidence on the issue of consent, the court must have found him guilty based upon a mandatory presumption which he alleges can be derived from the second part of the ordinance. Defendant then contends that the second half of the ordinance does create a mandatory presumption which denies him his constitutional right to due process, citing Francis v. Franklin, 471 U.S. 307, 105 S. Ct. 1965, 85 L. Ed. 2d 344 (1985), and State v. Kipf, 234 Neb. 227, 450 N.W.2d 397 (1990). There is nothing in the record showing that the issue of constitutionality of the statute was presented to either the county court or the district court, by motion or otherwise. We will not consider a constitutional issue, or other issues, raised for the first time in this court. State v. Dixon, 237 Neb. 630, 467 N.W.2d 397 (1991); State v. Oldfield, 236 Neb. 433, 461 N.W.2d 554 (1990).
The State argues that lack of consent can be established through sufficient circumstantial evidence, without the necessity of utilizing any presumptions. We agree. In reviewing a criminal conviction, it is not the province of this court to resolve conflicts in the evidence, to pass on the credibility of witnesses, to determine the plausibility of explanations, or to weigh the evidence. Such matters are for the finder of fact, whose findings must be sustained if, taking the view most favorable to the State, there is sufficient evidence to support them. On a defendant's claim of insufficiency of the evidence, the State is entitled to have all of its relevant evidence accepted as true, the benefit of every inference reasonably drawn from the evidence, and every controverted fact resolved in its favor. State v. Grantzinger, 235 Neb. 974, 458 N.W.2d 461 (1990). On a claim of insufficiency of the evidence, the Supreme Court will not set aside a guilty verdict in a criminal case where such verdict is supported by relevant evidence. Only where evidence lacks sufficient probative force as a matter of law may the Supreme Court set aside a guilty verdict as unsupported by evidence beyond a reasonable doubt. Id.
We have held that a conviction may be based on circumstantial evidence as long as that evidence, taken as a whole, establishes guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Buckman, 237 Neb. 936, 468 N.W.2d 589 (1991); State v. Cortis, 237 Neb. 97, 465 N.W.2d 132 (1991). Evidence in this case shows that a half-naked man crept onto the side porch of the Tussing residence, peeped into a window in the middle of the night, and fled when he was unexpectedly discovered. He was identified by a neighbor. This is not a case of a stranger approaching a house by way of the front door and seeking entry or information. It was certainly not unreasonable for the court to find under these circumstances that no one consented to this activity. This is especially true in light of Tussing's testimony that she feared to investigate when she heard noises and shouting and that she worried that it might be somebody with a gun.
The evidence is sufficient to support defendant's conviction. The order of the district court, affirming the verdict of the county court, is affirmed.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 2217988 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:38.696482+00 ===

164 Wis. 2d 10 (1991)
473 N.W.2d 546
IN the INTEREST OF J.F.F., a child under the age of 18:
STATE of Wisconsin, Appellant,
v.
J.F.F., Respondent.
No. 90-2465.
Court of Appeals of Wisconsin.
Submitted on briefs June 4, 1991.
Decided July 23, 1991.
*11 On behalf of the appellant, the cause was submitted on the briefs of E. Michael McCann, district attorney, and David Robles, assistant district attorney.
On behalf of the respondent, the cause was submitted on the briefs of James P. McLinden of Gonzalez & Associates of Milwaukee.
Before Moser, P.J., Sullivan and Fine, JJ.
FINE, J.
The State of Wisconsin appeals from a suppression order entered in a juvenile delinquency proceeding. We affirm.
I.
On August 10, 1990, J.F.F., a juvenile, was charged with possession of cocaine with intent to deliver, as party to a crime, in violation of sections 161.16(2)(b)1, 161.41(1m), and 939.05, Stats.[1] Claiming that he was illegally searched, J.F.F. moved the trial court for an order suppressing the cocaine. The cocaine was discovered in a cigarette package police found in a pocket of his trousers.
*12 At the hearing on J.F.F.'s motion, John Andrews, a City of Milwaukee police officer, testified that while on patrol with another police officer at 1:25 a.m., they saw J.F.F. and another person walking together on a city street. According to Officer Andrews, J.F.F. was "carrying a stereo speaker that measured approximately two feet by three feet, and it had the speaker wire dangling down a couple of feet from the back of the stereo, back of the speaker." The officers stopped J.F.F. because they suspected the speaker might have been "taken in a burglary or through the commission of some other crime." They also patted him down to see if he had any weapons. Neither any weapons nor any cocaine were found.
J.F.F. and his companion told the officers that they were on their way home. The officers determined that J.F.F. was a juvenile and arrested him for violating the City of Milwaukee curfew, which prohibits persons under the age of seventeen from being "upon the public streets . . . in the city of Milwaukee . . . between the hours of 11 p.m. and 5 a.m. of the following day." Milwaukee Code of Ordinances 106-23 (2/91). J.F.F. was not arrested on suspicion of burglary or theft.
Officer Andrews testified that when stopped, J.F.F. was asked his name and that he responded with his name and an address. Nevertheless, Officer Andrews explained to the trial court that J.F.F. "had no identification on him" and that "[w]e had to establish his identity, so he was going to take earn [sic] down to police headquarters to be fingerprinted to see if his fingerprints matched up with the records downtown." J.F.F. was then arrested, handcuffed and searched. The cocaine was found during the course of the search.
In response to questioning by the trial court, Officer Andrews testified that after J.F.F. gave him his name and an address, the officers checked the information *13 "but nothing came back with Division of Transportation." The officer told the trial court that they "didn't go so far as to try to contact his parent." The trial court held that the officers had no authority to arrest J.F.F. for a curfew violation and that, therefore, the search incident to the arrest was unlawful. Accordingly, the trial court suppressed the cocaine.
II.
As the trial court pointed out, the officers' initial stop of J.F.F. was lawful and appropriate. See sec. 968.24, Stats. ("[A] law enforcement officer may stop a person in a public place for a reasonable period of time when the officer reasonably suspects that such person is committing, is about to commit or has committed a crime, and may demand the name and address of the person and an explanation of his conduct."); Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968); see also United States v. Sokolow, 490 U.S. 1, 7 (1989) ("[T]he police can stop and briefly detain a person for investigative purposes if the officer has a reasonable suspicion supported by articulable facts that criminal activity `may be afoot,' even if the officer lacks probable cause." (quoting Terry, 392 U.S. at 30)). The pat-down search for weapons was also lawful. See Terry, 392 U.S. at 23-27.
[1,2]
A search that is incident to a lawful arrest is valid. United States v. Robinson, 414 U.S. 218 (1973); State v. Murdock, 155 Wis. 2d 217, 227-228, 455 N.W.2d 618, 622-623 (1990). Although we independently review the trial court's findings of constitutional fact, Murdock, 155 Wis. 2d at 226, 455 N.W.2d at 621-622, we agree with the trial court that the arrest here was not lawful and, accordingly, the search of J.F.F.'s person as incident to *14 that unlawful arrest exceeded the scope of the officer's authority.
It is "unlawful for any person under the age of 17 years to congregate, loiter, wander, stroll, stand or play in or upon the public streets . . . in the city of Milwaukee . . . between the hours of 11 p.m. and 5 a.m. of the following day, official city time, unless accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having his or her care, custody or control." Milwaukee Code of Ordinances 106-23. A person under the age of seventeen years who violates this curfew "shall be referred to the proper authorities as provided in ch. 48, Wis. Stats." Milwaukee Code of Ordinances 106-23(4).[2] The ordinance does not authorize the juvenile's arrest.[3] We thus turn to chapter 48, Stats., the Children's Code.
Under the Children's Code, a juvenile may be taken into custody for violating "a local ordinance" if the ordinance is "punishable by a forfeiture." Section 48.19(1)(d)8, Stats. Violation of ordinance 106-23 by a person under the age of seventeen years is not punishable by a forfeiture. The state argues that the ordinance *15 should, nevertheless, "be construed as being an ordinance punishable by a forfeiture" using the following reasoning:
 The ordinance provides that a person under the age of seventeen years "shall be referred to the proper authorities as provided in ch. 48, Wis. Stats."
 The court assigned jurisdiction under chapter 48, Stats., has jurisdiction over "children aged 14 or older for violations of county, town or other municipal ordinances." Section 48.17(2), Stats.
 A juvenile adjudged guilty of having violated a municipal ordinance may be subject to a forfeiture "not to exceed $25." Section 48.343(2), Stats.
 Therefore, violation of the Milwaukee ordinance is "punishable by a forfeiture."
We disagree. In A.E. Housman's phrase, the state presents us with a "brook[ ] too broad for leaping." A.E. Housman, A Shropshire Lad canto 54 (1932).
[3, 4]
Adopting the state's argument would rewrite section 48.19(1)(d)8, Stats., to provide that a child may be taken into custody if the child violates almost any ordinance, since a court assigned jurisdiction under chapter 48 is empowered to impose a forfeiture upon a juvenile violating any municipal ordinance, other than those prohibiting truancy.[4] By limiting the power to take juveniles into custody for ordinance violations that subject the juvenile *16 to the possibility of a forfeiture, the legislature clearly wanted to reserve arrest to those circumstances that were deemed sufficiently serious by local authorities to warrant the imposition of a monetary penalty. We may not substitute our judgment in this regard for that of the legislature; we may not rewrite the statute. See State v. Bruckner, 151 Wis. 2d 833, 844, 447 N.W.2d 376, 381 (Ct. App. 1989). Nor may we rewrite the ordinance. The trial court's order must be affirmed. See Illinois v. Krull, 480 U.S. 340, 347 (1987) ("When evidence is obtained in violation of the Fourth Amendment, the judicially developed exclusionary rule usually precludes its use in a criminal proceeding against the victim of the illegal search and seizure.").[5]
By the Court.Order affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  J.F.F. was born on November 9, 1973, and was thus sixteen on August 10, 1990. A person over the age of twelve but under eighteen is "delinquent" if he or she violates "any state or federal criminal law" except certain traffic and boating violations, and unless waived into adult court. Sections 48.02(3m), 48.17, and 48.18, Stats.
[2]  Ordinance 106-23(1), (2), & (3) prohibits parents, operators of "places of amusement or entertainment," and lodging facilities from permitting curfew violations. Effective March 1,1991, Ordinance 106-23(5) provides:
PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation violating this section upon conviction shall forfeit not less than $100 nor more than $200, and in default of payment thereof be confined in the county house of correction not more than 8 days.
Since this provision became effective after J.F.F.'s arrest, we need not decide whether it also applies to minors who violate the curfew.
[3]  We do not consider the validity of an ordinance that may authorize a juvenile's arrest under circumstances where the juvenile could not be taken into custody under chapter 48, Stats.
[4]  Section 48.343(2), Stats., permits the court to impose a $25 forfeiture "[e]xcept as provided by ss. 48.342 and 48.344." Section 48.344, Stats., permits forfeitures in excess of $25 for violations of statutes and ordinances concerning alcohol or drugs. Section 48.342, Stats., does not authorize the imposition of a forfeiture for the violation of an ordinance prohibiting truancy.
[5]  In an undeveloped argument that is not supported by the appellate record, the state alternatively argues that the cocaine was in "plain view." See State v. Washington, 134 Wis. 2d 108, 121-122, 396 N.W.2d 156, 161-162 (1986) ("Evidence in plain view is not restricted to items which can only be seen, but rather includes the realization of items or events to all of the human senses, smell, sight, touch, hearing and taste."). The cocaine was neither in plain view nor plain touch. The officers missed it totally on their initial pat-down for weapons. Thus, this case is not like State v. Richardson, 156 Wis. 2d 128, 145-150, 456 N.W.2d 830, 836-839 (1990), where the court upheld an extensive search of the defendant when an initial Terry-type pat-down revealed no weapons but gave the officer probable cause to believe that the defendant possessed contraband. Here, the cocaine was only discovered when J.F.F. was searched as incident to his curfew-violation arrest. Since the arrest was unlawful, the search incident to and occasioned by that arrest was unlawful as well.

=== CASE 9738859 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:36.496282+00 ===

Per Curiam
Appellant, Virginia Agnes Qualls, brought an action against appellee, J. C. Penney Company, for damages for personal injuries allegedly resulting from and sustained by appellant in a fall on an escalator owned and operated by appellee. Appellant, Delbert D. Qualls, also brought an action against the appellee for medical expenses and loss of services allegedly caused by and arising out of the same accident. Upon appellee’s motion, appellants’ separate causes of action were consolidated for trial.
Trial was had by jury, which resulted in a verdict in ap-pellee’s favor. Appellants filed a motion for new trial, which was subsequently overruled, and they now assign as error the overruling of said motion.
The evidence discloses that on January 23, 1964, at approximately 7:55 p.m., appellant, Virginia Agnes Qualls, was shopping in appellee’s store and while going from the second floor to the first floor stepped on the escalator and slipped and fell, thereby sustaining the injuries complained of. The appellant testified that she had stepped on a slippery spot on the escalator.
Appellants’ first specification of error is that the trial court erred in giving, over objection, appellee’s Instruction No. 2. The instruction reads as follows:
“The law recognizes that persons may be injured or may die and that property may be damaged in an occurrence without there being fault or negligence on the part of anyone. In such a situation the occurrence is termed an accident.
“If you should find by the greater weight of all the evidence that the occurrence sued upon here was an accident, then there would be no right of recovery by the plaintiff, *278Virginia Agnes Qualls, against this defendant and your verdict must be for the defendant, J. C. Penney Company.”
Appellants allege that although the words “mere” or “pure” are not specifically used to describe the word “accident’? in the above quoted instruction, the instruction as given constitutes a mere or pure accident instruction and, as such, the giving of said instruction constituted reversible error. Appellants argue that the use of the word “accident” alone prejudiced the jury because descriptive words such as “mere” and “pure” are superfluous and add nothing to instructions.
In Miller v. Alvey (1965), 246 Ind. 560, 565, 207 N. E. 2d 633, the Supreme Court of Indiana stated:
“What is the meaning of the term ‘accident’? Webster’s Third New International Dictionary (p. 11), defines it inter alia as ‘a usually sudden event or change occurring without intent or volition through carelessness,. unawareness, ignorance, or a combination of causes and producing an unfortunate result (a traffic accident in which several persons were injured).’ It is thus readily apparent that the word ‘accident’ does not necessarily preclude fault or negligence. The term is susceptible of different meanings and constructions and to tell a jury there is no liability in case of ‘unavoidable accident’ or ‘pure accident’ i.e., an unintentional careless, or unknown occurrence, is misleading and confusing to say the least, and is not compatible with the principles of tort law imposing liability on persons who fail to exercise ordinary or reasonable care.
“In fact the term ‘unavoidable accident’ appears to be an obsolete relic or remnant carrying over from a time when damages could be recovered in an action for trespass and strict liability imposed unless the defendant proved the injury was caused by an ‘inevitable or unavoidable accident.’ ‘Unavoidable accident’ was then an affirmative defense to be pleaded and proved by the defendant. See: 2 Harper & James, The Law of Torts (1956), § 12.2, p. 747 et seq.; Butigan v. Yellow Cab Co. (1958), supra, 49 Cal. 2d 652, 657, 320 P. 2d 500, 504, 65 A. L. R. 2d 1.”
Our Supreme Court reaffirmed the position taken in Miller v. Alvey, supra, in White, v. Evansville American Legion *279Home Association (1965), 247 Ind. 69, 70, 210 N. E. 2d 845, wherein it stated:
“Appellant contends error was committed in the giving over objection of instruction No. 5 which was as follows:
“ ‘The law recognizes the possibility of a mere accident, that is, an occurrence which is no way due to the negligence of any one. Therefore, if you find from the evidence that the injuries complained of by the plaintiff in this case were the result of a mere accident, there can be no recovery by the plaintiff Anna Mary White.’
“In our recent opinion in the case of Miller v. Alvey (1965), 246 Ind. page 560, 207 N. E. 2d 633, we had before us an instruction on pure accident, the giving of which we held to be reversible error.
“It has been argued we held in Miller v. Alvey, supra, that an instruction on ‘pure accident’ or ‘unavoidable accident’ was proper if there was evidence to support such an instruction. That construction is completely at variance with a careful reading of our opinion in which we pointed out that the expressions ‘pure accident’ or ‘unavoidable accident’ had no particular connotation in modern pleading of negligence cases, that such expressions were ambiguous and confusing to lay jurors, their use in instructions was undesirable and unwise, and we disapproved any statements in prior decisions which could be construed to the contrary. Consistent with Miller v. Alvey, we must hold it was error for the court to give instruction No. 5.”
In Rust v. Watson (1966), 141 Ind. App. 59, 215 N. E. 2d 42, 217 N. E. 2d 859 (Transfer denied), the court stated at pages 48 and 49 of 215 N. E. 2d as follows:
“Appellants’ Instruction No. 34 which was refused provided :
“ ‘I instruct you that the laws of the State of Indiana recognize the possibility of a mere accident, that is, an occurrence which is in no way due to the fault or negligence of anyone.
“ ‘The happening of a mere accident, resulting in injury cannot support a verdict for damages. Therefore, if you find that the injury or damage suffered by the plaintiff, *280Ida May Watson, were the result of a mere accident, then there can be no recovery by the plaintiff and it will be your duty to return a verdict for the defendants,....’
“This matter was fully discussed in appellants’ Instruction No. 27 which was given and reads as follows:
“ ‘You are instructed that an unavoidable accident has been defined to be an occurrence or happening as under all the attendant circumstances and conditions could not have been foreseen or prevented by using ordinary care. So, in this case, if you find by a preponderance of the evidence that the involved accident was one that could not have been foreseen or prevented by either plaintiff or defendant, in the exercise of ordinary care, then I instruct you that this was an unavoidable accident, and plaintiff cannot recover.’
“It should be noted that Instruction No. 34 tendered by the appellant and refused by the court appears t© be a standard instruction on the ‘mere accident’ theory. Similar instructions had been upheld by this court and the Supreme Court prior to the cases of Miller v. Alvey (1965), Ind., 207 N. E. 2d 633, and White v. Evansville American Legion Home Ass’n. (1965), Ind., 210 N. E. 2d 845. In view of the latter two decisions, it appears to this court that the appellants’ Instruction No. 27 concerning the proposition of ‘unavoidable accident’ which was given by the court is at least as much or more than the appellants were entitled to under the broad theory of ‘accident instructions.’ Therefore, we hold that the refusal to give the appellants’ Instruction No. 34 could in no way be construed to be reversible er-
Judge Hunter, in speaking of the Rust v. Watson decision, stated in his concurring opinion to a denial of appellant’s petition to transfer in Wilson Freight Co. v. Scheurich (1968), 143 Ind. 53, 238 N. E. 2d 25, 241 N. E. 2d 142, as follows:
“I concur in the denial of the petition to transfer in this case as I do not feel that either instruction in issue so prejudiced the appellant as to constitute reversible error.
“But I do want to point out that Instruction No. 15, as worded, discussing and defining the possibility of there being an ‘unavoidable accident,’ is probably not a proper *281instruction in the case at bar under the laws of this state. The opinion in Rust v. Watson (1966), Ind. App., 215 N. E. 2d 42, was relied upon by the Appellate Court in approving this instruction. In Bust, the court held that a similarly worded instruction was ‘at least as much or more’ than the defendants were entitled to under the broad theory of accident instructions. This was said in the context of affirming the trial court’s refusal of another of the defendants’ requested instructions which was essentially an instruction based on the possibility of a ‘mere accident,’ and it should be noted this refusal did not constitute reversible error as related to the facts of that case. The court did not mean to necessarily approve an instruction based on the possibility of an ‘unavoidable accident’ and, to this extent, the opinion in Bust has been misconstrued by the Appellate Court.”
In Pierce v. Horvath (1968), 142 Ind. App. 278, 233 N. E. 2d 811, 815, 817 (transfer denied), the court, relying on the above cited authorities, stated :
“Appellant next argues that the trial court also erred in giving defendant-appellee’s tendered Instruction No. 21, over appellant’s objection, that it was a mere accident instruction, the giving of which is reversible error since the decision in Miller v. Alvey (1965), Ind., 207 N. E. 2d 633.
“Defendant-appellee’s Instruction No. 21 reads as follows:
“ ‘Negligence alleged is not to be presumed from the mere happening of an accident. The plaintiff must establish by a fair preponderance of the evidence that the defendant, in the exercise of ordinary care, ought to have anticipated and prevented the accident.’ U
“We believe that the true purpose and intent of our Supreme Court by its decisions in the Miller and White cases was to prevent the jury from being instructed that the law of Indiana recognizes a mere accident situation. This idea can, of course, be conveyed to the jury both directly and indirectly and in many forms. It is not limited necessarily to any particular wording. It is the meaning portrayed to the jury by the words used that is controlling.
“We are of the opinion that appellee’s Instruction No. 21 does, in fact, convey to the jury that the law of Indiana recognizes a mere accident situation and, therefore, comes *282within the prohibition in the decisions set forth above, and the giving thereof by the trial court was therefore reversible error. We cannot agree with appellee that since it is coupled with proper language this would cure the erroneous part nor that it can be considered only a part of the proper language.”
As we interpret the above cited authorities, it is reversible error to give an instruction in which is incorporated the phrases “mere accident”, “unavoidable accident”, “pure accident”, or any form or phrase regardless of form which directly or indirectly conveys to the jury a mere accident situation.
In the case at bar, appellee, while recognizing that mere, pure and unavoidable accident instructions have been disapproved by the Indiana courts, contends that the instruction in question does not fall within the ambit of the aforementioned prohibition because it does not contain the words “mere”, “pure” or “unavoidable”.
In Miller v. Alvey, supra, our Supreme Court recognized that the word “accident” is susceptible to different meanings and implications when it stated at page 565 of 246 Ind. as follows:
“The term is susceptible of different meanings and constructions and to tell a jury there is no liability in case of ‘unavoidable accident’ or ‘pure accident’ i.e., an unintentional, careless, or unknown occurrence, is misleading and confusing to say the least, and is not compatible with the principles of tort law imposing liability on persons who fail to exercise ordinary or reasonable care.”
In the opinion of this court, the use of the word “accident” in appellee’s Instruction No. 2 is more misleading and confusing than the wording used in the instructions which has been disapproved by our courts in the above cited cases.
Appellee’s motion to dismiss or in the alternative to affirm, which was previously held in abeyance, is now denied.
*283For the reasons above given, the judgment in this cause is hereby reversed as to the appellant, Virginia Agnes Qualls, with instructions to grant said appellant’s motion for new trial. The judgment as to appellant, Delbert D. Qualls, is hereby affirmed.
Costs shall be taxed fifty per cent. (50%) against appellants and fifty per cent. (50%) against appellee, pursuant to the provisions of Burns’ Ind. Stat. Ann., § 2-3237.
White, J., dissents with opinion.

=== CASE 9738860 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:36.500863+00 ===

Dissenting Opinion
White, J.
Since I find myself in general agreement with the court’s opinion on the merit (or demerit) of appel-lee’s Instruction No. 2, I am reluctant to dissent. However, I cannot bring myself to the conclusion that a new trial should be ordered.
First of all, only a part of the evidence was brought to this court. I have not been shown enough to tell me whether either plaintiff made a prima facie case. The giving of the instruction could hardly be prejudicial to either appellant, no matter how erroneous, if neither were entitled to recover in any event.
Secondly, I am not satisfied that the trial court was given an adequate opportunity to discover whatever may be wrong with appellee’s Instruction No. 2. Here is what occurred by way of objection to that instruction:
“Mr. Crokin: The Plaintiff will object to Defendant’s tendered instruction number two in the Virginia Agnes Qualls case; and these will all be on the Virginia Agnes Qualls case, all of our objections; instruction number two on the grounds that it amounts to a mere accident instruction, and that there is no need to instruct the jury on mere accident and it is error to do so.
“Plaintiff also objects to Defendant’s instruction number ...
*284“The Court: Did you say number two? Defendant’s in-struc . . . uh, oh, Virginia Qualls you said, didn't you?
“Mr. Croltin: Virginia Qualls, yes. Uh, if the Court please, we have, I don’t believe, any objections to any of the instructions on the other case, on the Delbert.
“The Court: As to Delbert, all right.”
At oral argument, appellants’ counsel says it was his intention to object on behalf of both appellants, since the two cases were being tried together. However, he used the expression “in the Virginia Agnes Quail’s case”. Because the instruction was tendered only in that case and was “No. 2” only in that case. His objection, however, is quite easily understood as an objection by Mrs. Qualls alone and not an objection by Mr. Qualls.
The reason for the objection is even more ambiguous, or obscure, than whether one plaintiff or two plaintiffs were objecting. In my opinion the interpretation most favorable to appellants which the trial court could have put on the words “. . . it amounts to a mere accident instruction” would have been that those words were the equivalent of saying: “This instruction is objectionable for the same reason that the mere accident instruction in White v. Evansville American Legion Home Association, 247 Ind. 69, 70, 210 N. E. 2d 845 (1965), was held objectionable.” And perhaps if appellant had actually said that, citing the case, the trial judge may have had a duty to read the Supreme Court’s opinion before ruling on the objection. If he had that duty, he may have been in error in overruling the objection.
But if we are required to interpret the objection most favorable to appellee and the trial judge, I would say that the objection was patently unfounded because the instruction contained no word modifying “accident”, no word which was the equivalent of “mere” and did not, therefore, amount to a mere accident instruction. Furthermore, the objection did not tell the trial judge why a mere accident instruction was objectionable.
*285It has often been suggested by learned critics that courts at the appellate level often construe too narrowly the requirement that error be preserved by timely and adequate objection. Such criticism is actually a criticism of the adversary and advocate system and often underestimates the pressures and time limitations under which trial judges must operate. The assistance of trial counsel is essential to the orderly and efficient administration of justice in our system of justice.
Nevertheless, were the record such that it showed more than a mere possibility that a miscarriage of justice had occurred in the trial court, I would vote to reverse. And if I were thus able to resolve the ambiguity of the objection in favor of the appellant wife, I would also resolve it in favor of the appellant husband and reverse for him as well.
In my opinion appellee’s instruction No. 51 is a correct statement of the law and is applicable to the case and is not in conflict with appellants’ instruction No. 2.2
*286The escalator could have been “at all times under the control of competent employees” without each escalator step being under constant surveillance for the detection of a foreign substance or of a regurgitating rider.
As to appellants’ tendered instruction No. 43 which was refused by the court, we do not know, in the absencé of all the evidence, whether the failure to produce presumably favorable witnesses was satisfactorily explained. In fact, we cannot even know that they were not produced.
I would affirm both judgments.
Note. — Reported in 245 N. E. 2d 860.
. “The mere fact, if you find such to be the fact, that there was some foreign substance on the step of the escalator where Virginia Agnes Qualls fell does not of itself establish that the defendant was negligent. You must further find before you would find the defendant negligent that such foreign substance has been on such step for such a length of time and that such substance was reasonably obvious for such length of time that a reasonable shopkeeper should have known of its presence and made reasonable efforts to make the condition created by the foreign substance reasonably safe.” (Tr. p. 153.)
. “You are instructed that if the plaintiff Virginia Qualls, was shopping .in defendant’s store, and in the course of her shopping she had occasion to use the esclator (sic) in defendant’s store, then at the time she stepped upon that escalator for the purpose of being transported from one floor to another, she became a passenger on the escalator, and defendant then owed to her the same legal obligations as does any other common carrier of passengers, such as a railroad or bus line.
“Specifically, the duty owed by the common carrier of passengers toward its passengers is to keep its equipment in safe operating condition, and to take .every reasonable' precaution to make its conveyance safe, consistant with the practical operation of its business.
“This duty clearly contemplates that the moving machinery, used in the business of transporting passengers, should be at all times under the control of competent employees.
• “And if you find that Mrs. Qualls suffered an injury while she was a passenger on defendant’s excalator (sic), and that her injury, was proximately caused by defendant’s failure to live up to the above described legal duties and obligations that it had toward her, then, unless you also find that Mrs. Qualls injuries were also proximately caused *286by some failure on her part to act as a reasonable prudent person under the circumstances, then your verdict should be for the Plaintiffs.” (Tr. p. 166.)
. “Where a party has the power and opportunity of producing evidence of a witness or witnesses presumably friendly to him whose testimony would or could explain the transaction or enlighten the Court or Jury, then a failure to produce such evidence or witnesses or to make any effort to do so, entitles you to presume that such evidence or witnesses if produced would be unfavorable to the party or his position.” (Tr. p. 168.)

=== CASE 9738861 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:40.193773+00 ===

Pfaff, C. J.
This is an action for damages for wrongful death brought by the appellant, Joyce Hobson, Adminis-tratrix of the Estate of Damon Hobson, deceased, against the appellee, Beck Welding and Mfg., Inc., arising out of an accident that occurred in the city of Indianapolis, Indiana, on February 9, 1964, at about six o’clock in the evening.
*201Damon Hobson, husband of the appellant, was employed by the H. Coster Electric Car Sales & Service, Indianapolis, Indiana, as a part-time driver of a semi-trailer truck unit hauling electric golf carts to and from golf courses located in Indiana. The trailer of this truck unit was specially constructed by the appellee for Hobson’s employer. The trailer had two levels, the upper level being supported by upright steel posts and cross braces between said posts. On the date in question, as Hobson attempted to board the truck, by grasping the steel braces and hoisting himself up onto the lower lever, a cross brace broke and caused him to fall backward, striking his head. Said injuries were fatal.
Issues were formed by appellant’s complaint alleging that the appellee had negligently made the welds which had fractured, thus causing said accident, and appellee’s answer thereto.
Trial was had by jury and a verdict returned for the ap-pellee. Judgment was entered thereon on March 22, 1966, said judgment reading as follows:
“IT IS THEREFORE ordered, adjudged and decreed by the Court that the plaintiff take nothing by her action on her complaint.
“It is further ordered and decreed by the Court that the costs herein to be taxed to the plaintiff.”
Subsequently appellant filed a motion for new trial, alleging as follows:
“1. The verdict of the jury is contrary to law.
“2. Error of law occurring at the trial, as follows:
“a. The court erred in giving to the jury, at the request of the defendant each of defendant’s instructions numbered 9, 10, 19, 30, 31 and 35, and to the giving of each of which instructions the plaintiff duly objected within the proper time by filing written objections to each of said instructions after the court had indicated the instructions it would give to the jury.
*202“b. The court erred in submitting to the jury,' at the request of the defendant each of defendant’s written interrogatories to the jury numbered 3, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11 and 12, and to the submitting of each of which written interrogatories to the jury the plaintiff duly objected within the proper time by filing written objections to each of said written interrogatories to the jury after the court had indicated the written interrogatories to the jury it would submit to the jury.”
Said motion was overruled and appellant assigns as error the overruling of such motion.
The evidence discloses that the decedent’s employer, Harley Coster, operated an electric car sales and service company in Indianapolis, Indiana. The appellee company operated a welding shop in Elkhart, Indiana, where it made undercarriages for house trailers and did some custom work.
Decedent’s employer had several trailers built by the appel-lee to be used for transporting golf carts. One semi-trailer unit was built in January, 1962, and another in May, 1963, the latter being the one involved in the accident in this cause. Appellee built the May, 1963, trailer from a flatbed trailer purchased by the decedent’s employer. Also, the top level of the January, 1962, trailer was cut off and installed as the top level of the May, 1963, trailer.
The newer model golf carts were approximately six inches higher than the older models and, as a result, the appellee was requested to make the top level of the trailer six inches higher. The evidence discloses that at each end of the cross brace there were four edges that could have been welded, but that at each end only one was welded; that the penetration achieved — the amount of parent metal melted along with the amount of weld metal fused into the joint — extended only one-sixteenth of an inch to one-eighth of an inch into the thickness of the cross braces at each end.
Appellant contends that the trial court erred in giving over her objection defendant’s instruction No. 19. Said instruction reads as follows:
*203“If you should find from a fair preponderance of the evidence in this case that the Defendant, Beck Welding and Manufacturing, Inc., constructed the trailer involved in this lawsuit for Harley Coster under his supervision and according to plans and specifications furnished by him; and if you further find that Harley Coster had an opportunity to examine and inspect the trailer after it was completed and then accepted the completed trailer in the condition in which it then was, the acceptance of the trailer by Harley Coster operated as the intervention of an independent human agency which broke the chain of causation so as to preclude the Plaintiff’s decedent and the Plaintiff on his behalf from asserting or relying on any duty on the part of the Defendant to use care for the Plaintiff’s decedent in the construction of the trailer in question, unless you further find that either (1) the supervision of Harley Coster, if any, or the plans and specifications furnished by him, if any, were so obviously dangerous that no reasonable man would have accepted the supervision, if any, or followed the plans and specifications, if any, furnished by Harley Coster; or (2) the Defendant knew of the existence of the defects and fraudulently concealed them; or (3) the work done by the Defendant was so negligently defective as to be imminently dangerous to third persons.”
In the opinion of this court, the giving of appellee’s instruction No. 19 over appellant’s objection thereto constituted reversible error. For the purpose of this holding, the court would direct its attention to the following language contained in said instruction:
“. . . and if you further find that Harley Coster had an opportunity to examine and inspect the trailer after it was completed and then accepted the completed trailer in the condition in which it then was, the acceptance of the trailer by Harley Coster operated as the intervention of an independent human agency which broke the chain of causation so as to preclude the Plaintiff’s decedent and the Plaintiff on his behalf from asserting or relying on any duty on the part of the Defendant to use care for the Plaintiff’s decedent in the construction of the trailer in question . . .”
*204*203As a general rule it may be stated that a contractor or manufacturer is liable to only those individuals in privity *204with him, and may not be held to be liable to third persons who do not have a contractural relationship with him, for negligence in the construction or manufacture of goods. In J. I. Case Co. v. Sandefur (1964), 245 Ind. 213, 197 N. E. 2d 519, our Supreme Court, citing with approval an exception to the general rule as above stated, quoted from the case of Huset v. J. I. Case Threshing Mach. Co. (1903), (8 C.C.A.), 120 Fed. 865, as follows:
“ ‘The third exception to the rule is that one who sells or delivers an article which he knows to be imminently dangerous to life or limb to another without notice of its qualities is liable to any person who suffers an injury therefrom which might have been reasonably anticipated, whether there were any contractural relations between the parties or not.’ ”
Further, in J. I. Case Co. v. Sandefur, supra, the court stated:
“As so often happens in the development of the common law, eventually the exceptions become the rule, and that is what has happened during the last sixty years to the principle under consideration here.”
A limitation to the rule exception cited in Huset v. J. I. Case Threshing Mach. Co., supra, and later adopted by the Supreme Court of Indiana, is set forth in the cases of Travis, Admx. v. Rochester Bridge Co. (1919), 188 Ind. 79, 122 N. E. 1, and Davis v. Henderlong Lumber Co. (1963), 221 F. Supp. 129. In the Davis case, the court stated:
“Thus, it was stated in Russell v. Arthur Whitcomb, Inc., 100 N. H. 171, 121 A. 2d 781 (1956), that one important limitation on the rule placing building contractors on the same footing as sellers of goods, and holding them to the general standard of reasonable care for the protection of anyone who may foreseeably be endangered by their negligence even after acceptance of the work, is that the contractor is not liable if he has merely carried out the plans, specifications, and directions given him, since in that case the responsibility is assumed by the employer, at least when the plans are not so obviously dangerous that no reasonable man would follow them.”
*205In the case at bar the evidence discloses that appellee made two semi-trailers for Coster, the first in January, 1962, and the second in May, 1963. It was the second trailer that was involved in Hobson’s death. Appellee’s president, Erman Beck, testified that he provided the design and plan for the building of the first trailer and that Coster told him he had had trouble with the undercarriage of the first trailer being too light and he wanted Beck to build a second trailer, this time using a heavy duty Fruehauf flatbed to correct the problem. Coster wanted the top six inches higher for the second trailer because the new golf carts were higher. As to the design and general plan for the second trailer, Beck testified that he had supposed from the conversation with Coster that Coster meant that the second was to be the same, except that the top level should be raised six inches.
While it may be found from the above stated evidence that the design of the May, 1963, trailer was provided by Coster, the evidence is uncontradicted that the accident in question resulted from the fracture of a crossbar and not from a flaw in the design. The evidence is also uncontradicted that the employees of appellee possessed the expertise in the area of welding and that such expertise was completely outside the experience, skill or submitted plans of decedent’s employer, Harley Coster.
Appellant has asserted reversible error in the giving of other instructions, but in light of the fact that we are of the opinion that the giving of defendant’s instruction No. 19 constituted reversible error in that it was an improper statement of the law, we deem it unnecessary to discuss the propriety of these other instructions.
Judgment reversed and remanded with instructions to grant appellant’s motion for a new trial. Costs taxed against appellee.
Hoffman, J., concurs, White, J., concurs in result, Sharp, J., concurs in result with opinion.

=== CASE 9738862 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:40.198303+00 ===

*206Concurring Opinion
Sharp, J.
Although I concur in the result reached by the majority opinion, I believe it necessary to discuss arguments raised by the brief and oral arguments in this case. I do this in view of the importance of this case in the so-called products liability area.
The arguments of both sides generally polarize around their respective characterizations of the legal status of Appel-lee.
Basically, Appellant would classify Appellee as a manufacturer and would object to Defendant’s Instruction Number 19, set out in the majority opinion, for the reason that it requires privity, which requirement, Appellant argues, was abrogated in Indiana by J. I. Case v. Sandefur, 245 Ind. 213, 197 N.E. 2d 519 (1964).
Appellee’s argument as it pertains to Defendant’s Instruction Number 19 is that Appellee is and should be considered an independent contractor and thus the case of Davis v. Henderlong Lumber Co., 221 F. Supp. 129 (N. D. Ind. 1963), is relevant. The Davis case, while recognizing that Indiana would follow the rule of MacPhersen v. Buick Motor Co., 217 N. Y. 382, 111 N. E. 1050 (1916), in products liability cases, retains an exception to that rule in cases involving independent contractors.
The facts of this case, as the arguments indicate, do not lend themselves to a simple classification of the Appellee either as a manufacturer or an independent contractor. I do not believe that the applicable law requires such an automatic labeling or categorization.
The important question is not whether the Appellee is a “manufacturer” or an “independent contractor.” The proper question presented here is: What is the liability to third persons of a party who constructs or manufactures chattels for another party for injuries sustained by the third party because of a defect in the product?
*207In what have been traditionally labeled as “products liability” cases, Indiana finally formally adopted the rule of MacPhersen v. Buick Motor Co., supra, in the J. I. Case decision. The Indiana Supreme Court held that the manufacturer of a product would be liable to third persons for the negligent manufacture of the product with hidden defects. The Court stated that the manufacturer does not thereby become an insurer. It is not necessary in this opinion to examine in more detail the well established ramifications of this general rule.
It is necessary, however, to examine the law as it applies to those cases which cannot so easily be labeled as “products liability” cases; that is, cases in which the Defendant does not individually and separately plan, design, produce and sell a product on the “open market.”
Traditionally, the other class of cases which was recognized as being significantly different and warranting the application of' different principles of law was that class involving building contractors. The liability to third persons of one who constructs a building or structure for another has not kept pace with that of a “manufacturer.” In many jurisdictions, including Indiana, the requirement of privity lingered. See Anno, at 58 A. L. R. 2d 869, 870. See also, Travis v. Rochester Bridge Co., 188 Ind. 79, 122 N. E. 1 (1919). The Travis case held that the acceptance of the work by the other party to the contract operates as the intervention of an independent human agency which breaks the claim of causation so as to preclude a third party from maintaining an action against the contractor. The Court held that in cases involving products not “inherently dangerous” there could be no liability for hidden defects unless the builder knew of the defects and failed to warn the user or if he fraudulently concealed the defects. Davis v. Henderlong Dumber Co., supra, dispensed with the privity requirement in construction cases but retained one proper exception. That case held that a building contractor is held to the same general standard of reasonable care for the protection of anyone who may fore-*208seeably be endangered by his negligence, even after completion and acceptance of the work or structure, unless the contractor has merely carried out plans and specifications and directions given him. The Court held that a builder is not held responsible for accidents resulting from inadequacies in plans or specifications, unless the plans are so obviously dangerous that no reasonable man would follow them. Davis inherently would hold a contractor liable for hidden defects, without requiring that he fraudulently concealed them. See also the leading case of Hanna v. Fletcher, 231 F. 2d 469 (D. C. Cir. 1956).
This is the proper law. There is no logical reason for holding a manufacturer and contractor to different standards of care with respect to hidden defects. The rule and reasoning of MacPhersen v. Buick Motor Co. should be applicable to both.
Finally, it is necessary to consider that group of cases, like the instant one, which do not easily fit neatly in one category or the other, i.e., in neither the “products liability” group nor building contractor group.
The duty and standard of care should be no different. The rule stated in Davis need not be arbitrarily restricted only to the classes of cases which can be labeled as independent building contractor cases. The rules of Davis and J. I. Case are not mutually exclusive. One who constructs a chattel or building for another is liable to third persons who are injured as a result of a hidden defect in the product. For a builder, contractor, or manufacturer to be liable to a third person for an injury sustained by that person after the completion and acceptance of the work, the defendant must have been guilty of negligence, the plaintiff must be one of a class as to whom the consequences of negligence may be foreseen, the injury must be the proximate result of the negligence, and the plaintiff must be free of contributory negligence. If the contractor or builder is acting upon plans and specifi*209cations furnished by the other contracting party, the contractor is justified in relying upon those plans and specifications, unless they are so obviously defective that an ordinary contractor of ordinary prudence would not follow them.
To the extent that Defendant’s Instruction Number 19 states the Appellee’s liability to third persons for hidden defects would be cut off by acceptance of the work unless the Appellee “knew of the existence of the defects and fraudulently concealed them”, it is erroneous.
An important distinction of the Davis case should be noted here. It is possible for defect to be inherent in the plans and specifications furnished to the builder or contractor. In the Davis case, for example, the defect resulting in the injury was in a chemical fume hood and exhaust apparatus constructed by the defendant and installed in a newly constructed chemical laboratory. The defect was inherent in the plans and specifications given to the defendant and were without the bounds of the expertise of the defendant. In such a situation the defendant is not held responsible unless, as has already been stated, the plans are so obviously defective no reasonable builder would follow them. If, however, the defect is in the construction itself, the principles of MacPhersen v. Buick Motor Co. apply.
The great emphasis which counsel for both sides place upon the determination of who supplied the plans, designs, and specifications for the trailer in question is not only reduced by the anomolous answers to interrogatories given by the jury in which they found neither Harley Coster nor Beck Welding designed the trailer, but also by the principle stated above; i.e., that the builder or contractor is liable to third persons if the defect resulting in the injury is in the construction itself and not a defect inherent in the plans and specifications. Here the evidence is clear the defect was in a weld, in the construction itself. Only if the injury to Hobson resulted from a defect in the design of the trailer would the *210question of who furnished those designs and specifications have the relevance that counsels would have us give it.
Although Defendant’s Instruction Number 19 constitutes reversible error, thé foregoing discussion is relevant also to Defendant’s Instruction Number 31, objected to by Appellant and herein set out:
“Before a manufacturer can be held to respond in damages to an injured third party who is not in privity of contract with the manufacturer and in circumstances where the manufacturer so constructed the product as to make it imminently dangerous when put to the use for which it was intended, it must be shown that the article is imminently dangerous when put to the use and serving the very purpose for which it is bought and sold.”
This instruction is also erroneous in that it establishes a different standard of liability for those persons “not in privity” with a manufacturer. J. I. Case v. Sandefur, supra, has abolished this difference in Indiana as has been stated.
Both instructions are erroneous. For this reason and the reasons set out above I concur in the result reached by the majority opinion.
Note. — Reported in 245 N. E. 2d 344.

=== CASE 9738863 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:40.736518+00 ===

Boyle, J.
This action arises under MCL 423.210(l)(e); MSA 17.455(10)(l)(e) of the public employment relations act. Amalgamated Transit Union has charged that the Southeastern Michigan Transit Authority (now the Suburban Mobility Authority for Regional Transportation) committed an unfair labor practice by unilaterally altering a term or condition of employment, specifically the disciplinary scheme applicable to probationary employees. We affirm the decision of the Court of Appeals, which upheld the conclusion of the Michigan Employment Relations Commission that semta did engage in an unfair labor practice by unilaterally altering the disciplinary policy it applied to probationary employees.
i
In 1975, the parties drew up a letter of understanding specifying penalties for an operator’s failure to appear for work at the scheduled time and place. This letter was substantially incorporated in the 1977 contract between the parties as article *44537, § 1, providing a seven-step "Miss-Outs” procedure.1
The 1977 contract also contained the following provision regarding probationary employees:
All new operators coming within the scope of this Agreement shall be on probation for a period of ninety (90) calendar days from the date they complete their training requirements. Such probationary period shall constitute a trial period during which the authority judges the ability, competency, fitness, and other qualifications of new operators to do the work for which they were employed. . . .
During such probationary period, the authority may discharge the operator at any time and its right to do so shall not be questioned by the union; nor shall the union assert or present any grievance on behalf of any such new operator.
The above provisions of article 6, §§ 1-2, of the 1977 contract were also contained in the 1974-77 contract between the parties; however, the earlier contract provided that both the union and semta were to judge the qualifications and fitness of probationary employees.2_
*446The evidence presented at the hearing in this matter showed that semta generally applied the provisions of article 37, § 1 to probationary employees. In July or August of 1979, semta altered this practice and began applying a new "miss” policy to probationary employees. Union officers met with members of semta management to protest this change. On August 15, 1979, semta posted the new policy whereby probationary employees would be automatically terminated from employment after only four misses.
The union filed the instant unfair labor practice charge on February 12, 1980. Upon a motion by semta, the merc stayed its proceedings pending the conclusion of the arbitration proceedings.
After considering the terms of the contract as well as the practices of the parties, the arbitrator initially found that article 37, § 1 of the 1977-80 collective bargaining agreement, specifying a seven-step disciplinary scheme for "misses,” did apply to probationary employees, and "that [article 6, § 2] does not prevent the Union from questioning disciplinary action, including discharge, by semta of probationary employees for engaging in miss-outs, or the presentation of grievances by the Union on behalf of such operators in such circumstances.”
*447On appeal, the circuit court again examined the contract, particularly articles 6 and 37, and concluded that the miss policy applicable to probationary employees was not subject to arbitration. The court’s analysis turned on the article 6 provision that semta was to judge the "ability, competency, fitness, and other qualifications” of probationary employees. Any contract provision relating to the "ability, competency, fitness, and other qualifications” of probationary employees, the court concluded, was not subject to arbitration.3 The court found that misses — failure to appear at the scheduled time and place — related to the qualifications of probationary employees. The court thus found that the arbitrator lacked jurisdiction and granted summary disposition in favor of semta.
The Court of Appeals affirmed the decision of the circuit court on somewhat different grounds. Relying on the language of article 6, §2 and article 10, § 1, the Court of Appeals concluded that the contract dispute was not arbitrable:
Article 6, § 2 of the collective-bargaining agreement between plaintiff and defendant states that the union will not assert or present any grievance on behalf of any probationary employee. Article 10, § 1 of the agreement defines a grievance as any matter involving the interpretation or application of the terms of the agreement and any dispute concerning the suspension or discharge of an employee. Under these articles, defendant is prohib*448ited from bringing a grievance to arbitration if it concerns a probationary employee. Because defendant was prohibited from bringing the grievance to arbitration by a specific clause of the collective-bargaining agreement, we can say with positive assurance that the arbitration clause did not cover this agreement. [116 Mich App 154, 158; 321 NW2d 876 (1982).]
The union did not appeal the Court of Appeals determination.
With arbitration thus concluded, the merc proceedings relating to the union’s unfair labor practice charges resumed. In a decision and recommended order, the hearing referee rejected semta’s argument that the circuit court’s order granting semta summary disposition was res judicata regarding the matters raised in the unfair labor practices charge. The hearing officer reasoned that since the instant charge alleged statutory issues and not merely a contract violation, it raised issues which were not and could not have been resolved in the arbitration proceedings. She concluded next that the application of the miss policy contained in article 37 of the parties’ collective bargaining agreement to probationary employees became a term or condition of employment which could not be altered unilaterally. The hearing officer viewed the crux of the dispute as being whether article 6, § 2 of the collective bargaining agreement waived the union’s right to bargain over changes in the disciplinary policy applicable to probationary employees and concluded that the union did not waive such right.
The Michigan Employment Relations Commission affirmed the decision of the hearing officer. 1987 MERC Lab Op 721. The merc agreed that semta’s consistent application of the seven-step miss procedure set forth in article 37, § 1 had rendered the procedure a term or condition of *449employment for probationary employees. The merc cast the waiver question as "whether [semta’s] practice should be regarded as subservient to Article 6, and the duty to bargain over changes in the practice waived, or whether the existence of the practice served to limit the grant of broad discretion contained in Article 6 to the extent of requiring [semta] to give notice to and bargain with [the union] before changing this policy.” Id. at 730. The merc concluded that the latter was the case, emphasizing the stringent standard applied to the waiver of statutory rights. The merc also rejected semta’s argument that the prior circuit court and the Court of Appeals determinations in the arbitration proceedings estopped consideration of the union’s charge of unfair labor practices.
The Court of Appeals affirmed the commission’s decision, Amalgamated Transit Union v Southeastern Michigan Transportation Authority, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, decided February 10, 1989 (Docket No. 103428). This Court granted leave to appeal in an order issued April 16, 1990. 434 Mich 900 (1990). Appellant has raised three issues for this Court’s consideration: 1) whether the doctrine of collateral estoppel precludes the union from asserting the instant unfair labor practice charge, 2) whether the merc erred when it concluded that the seven-step miss procedure had become a term or condition of employment for probationary employees, and 3) whether the merc erred in finding that the union did not waive its statutory right to bargain over such term or condition of employment.
ii
The pera imposes a duty to negotiate in good faith over mandatory subjects of bargaining which persists during the life of the collective bargaining *450agreement. MCL 423.215; MSA 17.455(15).4 Thus, while the parties may by contract agree to grant the right to take unilateral action, it is well established that neither party may take unilateral action on such a subject unless it either has satisfied the statutory obligation or has been freed from it. NLRB v C & C Plywood Corp, 385 US 421; 87 S Ct 559; 17 L Ed 2d 486 (1967).
Our review of the commission’s decision is circumscribed by the statutory mandate that factual findings of the commission are conclusive if supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence on the record considered as a whole. MCL 423.216(e); MSA 17.455(16)(e), Const 1963, art 6, § 28. Review of factual findings of the commission must be undertaken with sensitivity, and due deference must be accorded to administrative expertise. Reviewing courts should not invade the exclusive fact-finding province of administrative agencies by displacing an agency’s choice between two reasonably differing views of the evidence. MERC v Detroit Symphony Orchestra, 393 Mich 116, 124; 223 NW2d 283 (1974).
Legal rulings of administrative agencies are not given the deference accorded factual findings. Legal rulings of an administrative agency are set aside if they are in violation of the constitution or a statute, or affected by a substantial and material error of law. MCL 24.306(l)(a), (f); MSA 3.560(206)(l)(a), (f). Southfield Police Officers Ass’n v Southfield, 433 Mich 168; 445 NW2d 98 (1989).
hi
Thus we turn to the first issue on appeal. Semta *451argues that the issue now cast as an unfair labor practice in violation of the pera presents the same factual question that was resolved in the earlier arbitration proceedings.
Collateral estoppel applies to preclude relitigation of issues actually determined by final judgment and essential to the judgment in a prior action between the parties. Senior Accountants v Detroit, 399 Mich 449, 459; 249 NW2d 121 (1976). 1 Restatement Judgments, 2d, § 27, p 250. In order for collateral estoppel to apply, the issue must be identical to that determined in the prior action. NAACP v Detroit Police Officers Ass’n, 821 F2d 328, 330 (CA 6, 1987).
Semta characterizes the dispositive issue determined in the prior action as the finding "that 'misses’ for probationary operators related to their 'qualifications’ as judged by semta under Article 6, and that Article 37’s seven-step procedure simply did not apply to probationary operators.” (Emphasis in the original.)
Assuming that the circuit court did in some sense resolve what semta generally refers to as the "Article 37 versus Article 6” issue, it did so as a matter of contractual interpretation. The question of contract interpretation which was decided in arbitration is not identical to the statutory issue in this case.5 It is true that this action is based upon the same events that underlay the earlier arbitration proceedings, specifically semta’s application of a four-step disciplinary procedure to probationary employees beginning in July or August, 1979. But as this Court recognized in Bay City Schools v Bay City Ed Ass’n, 425 Mich 426, *452430; 390 NW2d 159 (1986), contractual and statutory claims, even when based on the same controversy, generally involve different factual and legal issues.6
The determination whether semta engaged in an unfair labor practice prohibited by the pera requires inquiries beyond interpretation of articles 6 and 37 of the collective bargaining agreement. The hearing officer and the merc were required to determine whether the application of the seven-step miss procedure to probationary employees had become a term or condition of employment by virtue of its consistent application to probationary employees.7 A determination that article 37 of the collective bargaining agreement did not apply to probationary employees would not settle the question whether the application of the seven-step miss procedure had become a term or condition of employment which, pursuant to the pera, could not be unilaterally altered absent impasse or waiver. In connection with the unfair labor practice charge upon which this case is based, the hearing officer and the merc both considered whether article 6 constituted a waiver of the union’s statutory right to negotiate over changes in disciplinary policy. Because this question must be answered by application of the stringent standard *453for waiver of statutory rights,8 the issue is not the same as that settled in the prior action.
We disagree with semta’s contention that the applicability of article 37 to probationary employees was a necessary predicate for the circuit court or the Court of Appeals determinations. By deciding that the union could not bring a grievance on behalf of probationary employees, the courts did not, and were not required to, determine whether article 37 applied to such employees. A decision on the question of arbitrability does not decide the merits of the underlying claim. AT&T Technologies, Inc v Communications Workers of America, 475 US 643; 106 S Ct 1415; 89 L Ed 2d 648 (1986).
Finally, assuming that the circuit court actually decided that article 37 was applicable to probationary employees, we conclude that the circuit court’s decision was not a final judgment for purposes of collateral estoppel. The Court of Appeals, affirming the circuit court’s summary disposition, decided only that article 6, § 2 precluded the union from asserting any grievance on behalf of probationary employees. Because the rationale used by the circuit court was never reached by the Court of Appeals, the circuit court’s judgment is not given conclusive effect:
A judgment affirmed on appeal has conclusive effect, but if the appellate court affirms on grounds that differ from those relied upon by the lower court, the conclusiveness of the judgment as res judicata and as collateral estoppel are governed by the appellate decision. Thus if the trial court rests its judgment on two grounds, each of which is independently adequate to support it, the judgment is conclusive as to both; but i[f] the appellate court affirms on one ground without passing on the other, the second ground is no longer conclu*454sively established under the collateral estoppel doctrine. [IB Moore, Federal Practice, ¶ 0.416(2), p 518.]
Having concluded that collateral estoppel does not bar the instant action, we turn to the merits of the appeal.
IV
The next question is whether semta’s application of the seven-step miss procedure to probationary employees became a term or condition of employment so that it could not be unilaterally altered absent impasse or waiver.9 A past practice which does not derive from the parties’ collective bargaining agreement may become a term or condition of employment which is binding on the parties.10 The creation of a term or condition of employment by past practice is premised in part upon mutuality; the binding nature of such a practice is justified by the parties’ tacit agreement *455that the practice would continue.11 The nature of a practice, its duration, and the reasonable expectations of the parties may justify its attaining the status of a "term or condition of employment.”12
The inquiry whether a past practice has given rise to a term or condition of employment is not limited to the consideration of the consistency and duration of the practice itself. Whether the parties have bargained regarding the subject or dealt with it in their collective bargaining agreement are also relevant considerations. In finding that there was substantial evidence in support of a board finding that a Christmas bonus had become a term or condition of employment, the United States Circuit Court of Appeals for the First District in Isla Verde Hotel Corp v NLRB, 702 F2d 268 (CA 1, 1983), considered not only the past practice of paying bonuses, but also the bargaining relationship of the parties which had included discussions about bonus payments. Id. at 271. In Office & Professional Employees Intl Union v NLRB, 136 US App DC 12; 419 F2d 314 (1969), the court considered "past practice” not only in terms of the consistent use of unit employees to perform audits, but also took note that the union had bargained on the matter in the past, and that discussions had resulted in no contractual provision on the subject. Id. at 19.13
*456Semta argues in the instant case that the requisite element of agreement that the practice of applying the terms of article 37 to probationary employees would continue was not present because semta used article 37 merely as a "guide” for probationary employees, consistent with its discretionary rights under article 6.14 Thus, semta argues, the seven-step procedure did not become a term or condition of employment because semta, pursuant to article 6, § 1, retained discretion to discharge probationary employees. When a prac*457tice is consistent with discretion conferred upon an employer by contract, but is not required by contract, a factual question is presented regarding the existence of the mutuality necessary for a binding past practice. While the existence of a management-rights clause would be evidence that the mutuality upon which a "past practice” term or condition of employment must be based is not present, it is not determinative of the question.
Thus, in NLRB v Merill & Ring, Inc, 731 F2d 605, 608 (CA 9, 1984), the court concluded that a "uniform past practice and policy” that employees summoned for jury service were not required to report for work in the morning before jury duty had become a term or condition of employment, notwithstanding the employer’s claim that this practice was affirmatively permitted by a clause in the contract.
Similarly, in Trenton v Trenton Fire Fighters, 166 Mich App 285, 289-290, 295; 420 NW2d 188 (1988), the Court of Appeals upheld the merc’s conclusion that the fire department’s "long-standing policy” regarding minimum manpower requirements established a term or condition of employment, notwithstanding the arbitrator’s conclusion in prior proceedings that the contract management-rights clause reserving the employer’s right to control "operations” permitted a change in manpower requirements.
The relevance of a contractual provision or other policy of employer discretion to the question whether a term or condition of employment has arisen from past practice was recognized in Battle Creek Fire Dep't v Organization of Supervisory Personnel, 1989 MERC Lab Op 726, where the union charged that the city committed an unfair labor practice when it unilaterally began assigning overtime work previously performed by battalion *458chiefs to persons outside the bargaining unit. The commission found no evidence of "the mutuality necessary for a binding past practice,” noting specifically that the contract had been changed to remove the requirement that overtime be assigned to battalion chiefs, instead making the practice permissive. Id. at 736.
Similarly in AFSCME v Detroit Transportation Dep't, 1989 MERC Lab Op 30, the merc declined to find a past practice constituting a term or condition of employment where, pursuant to express written policy, the employer retained the option to deviate from the alleged "past practice.”15
The approaches of the federal courts, of the Michigan Court of Appeals, and of the commission reveal that the existence of a term or condition of employment is a factual matter. While the existence of a contractual clause granting management discretion to engage in a particular practice *459may be evidence that the mutuality required for a binding "past practice” is lacking, Battle Creek, supra, it does not preclude the creation of a "term or condition of employment.” The courts must examine all pertinent evidence, including the specificity of the reservation, the practices of the parties, the policies of the employer, and the bargaining history to determine whether a term or condition of employment is established.
In this case, the existence of a contractual clause reserving semta’s right to judge the "ability, competency, fitness, and other qualifications” of probationary employees and to discharge at any time provides some evidence against the conclusion that a term or condition of employment was created. However, the evidence is not so strong as it was in Detroit Transportation Dep’t, for example, where the written policy specifically permitted the annual readjustment of the disciplinary "triggers.” The evidentiary weight of the management-rights clause is counterbalanced by the highly consistent manner in which the seven-step disciplinary procedure was applied to probationary employees.
A review of the exhibits admitted before the hearing officer reveals that at least ninety percent of probationary employees disciplined before August, 1979, were disciplined consistent with the seven-step procedure in article 37. Significantly, most of the violation records make express reference to article 37. At the hearing, two semta operators testified that in their initial training, which immediately preceded the probationary period, they received literature summarizing the seven-step miss procedure. The union introduced as an exhibit a booklet which had been compiled for distribution to probationary employees. That *460booklet contained a page headed "Article 37 Miss-Outs” and stated the provisions of article 37.
We find the merc’s conclusion that the application of the provisions of article 37 to probationary employees had become a term or condition of employment to be supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence on the record. The commission’s view that the application of the seven-step procedure to probationary employees became a term or condition of employment is clearly a reasonable view of the evidence, and one which should not be displaced by this Court.
v
Thus we turn to the final issue raised by semta and conclude that the commission’s finding that the union did not waive its right to bargain over the disciplinary policy applied to probationary employees was not erroneous and was supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence on the whole record.
The waiver of statutorily protected rights in a contractual provision should not be inferred unless the undertaking is "explicitly stated”; such a waiver must be "clear and unmistakable.” Metropolitan Edison Co v NLRB, 460 US 693, 708; 103 S Ct 1467; 75 L Ed 2d 387 (1983). In applying this standard, the nlrb has looked for evidence of an actual intent to waive a bargaining right:
In order for contract language to effect a waiver of bargaining rights, it must be "clear and unmistakable.” In assessing that question, the Board considers the bargaining history of the contract language and the parties’ interpretation of the language. Where an employer relies on contract language as a purported waiver to establish its right to change terms and conditions of employ*461ment not contained in the contract unilaterally, the Board requires evidence that the matter in issue was "fully discussed and consciously explored during negotiations and the union must have consciously yielded or clearly and unmistakably waived its interest in the matter.” [1 Morris, Developing Labor Law (2d ed, 5th supp), ch 13, pp 332-333.]
The "clear and unmistakable” standard is applied by the merc, as well as our Court of Appeals. See Lansing Fire Fighters v Lansing, 133 Mich App 56; 349 NW2d 253 (1984); Kent Co Ed Ass’n v Cedar Springs, 157 Mich App 59, 66; 403 NW2d 494 (1987); Westland Fire Fighters Ass’n v West-land, 1987 MERC Lab Op 793, 801; Royal Oak Police Officers Ass’n v Royal Oak, 1988 MERC Lab Op 605, 611. The merc frequently looks for an "explicit” waiver as well. See Roseville Fire Fighters Ass’n v Roseville, 1982 MERC Lab Op 1377, 1386 (clear and explicit waiver is required, absent past practice or other evidence of explicit intent to waive a bargaining right); Teamsters Union v Mt Clemens, 1986 MERC Lab Op 30, 33.
The merc’s conclusions regarding whether the union clearly and unmistakably waived its right to bargain over a specific matter is typically reviewed as a factual finding. See Kent Co Ed Ass’n, supra at 66; Mid-Michigan Ed Ass’n v St Charles, 150 Mich App 763, 771; 389 NW2d 482 (1986) (a management-rights clause was not a sufficiently clear and explicit waiver when viewed in the context of the parties’ past practice). See also Int’l Union v NLRB, 802 F2d 969, 973 (CA 7, 1986). We cannot dispute the commission’s finding that the management-rights clause did not represent a clear and unmistakable waiver of the duty to bargain before altering the disciplinary procedure applicable to probationary employees.
*462We consider first the language of article 6, § 1 providing that semta "judges the ability, competency, fitness, and other qualifications of new operators to do the work for which they were employed.” This wording is not so unequivocal as to justify this Court’s overturning the commission’s conclusion that the union did not clearly and unmistakably waive the right to bargain over changes in disciplinary policy with respect to probationers. The merc, as well as the nlrb, typically look for a waiver of the duty to bargain about a specific subject.
The degree of specificity which will indicate an intent to waive a statutory bargaining right is illustrated in NLRB v United Technologies Corp, 884 F2d 1569, 1574 (CA 2, 1989), where the court considered whether a contractual management-rights clause constituted a waiver of the union’s right to bargain concerning a change in the company’s progressive discipline policy. The contractual clause reserved management’s right " 'to make and apply rules and regulations for production, discipline, efficiency, and safety.’ ” On the basis of this language and additional contractual language specifically granting the employer the right " 'to discharge or otherwise discipline any employee for just cause,’ ” the court found a waiver of union’s right to negotiate over disciplinary policy.
By contrast, the nlrb in Dearborn Country Club & Hotel Employees, 298 NLRB —; 134 LRRM 1211 (1990), found that the language of a management-rights clause was not sufficiently specific to constitute a waiver of the union’s right to bargain over changes in an established practice of offering overtime first to full-time employees. The board found the contractual clause reserving the employer’s right "to arrange its work schedules, to designate *463days off, and to fix hours worked by employees,” "lacking in specific authorizations to make the change in question.” The board distinguished the clause held to constitute a waiver in United Technologies, supra, noting its specific reference "to the creation and application of rules and regulations for discipline.”
In Spring Lake Ed Ass’n v Spring Lake Schools, 1988 MERC Lab Op 362, the commission found no waiver of the union’s right to bargain over a change in the content of the form used to evaluate teachers, despite a contractual clause reserving management’s right to hire teachers and to " 'determine their qualifications and the conditions for their continued employment ....’” The merc noted the absence of explicit reference to the evaluation instrument. The merc also reviewed the parties’ bargaining history, which did not reveal an intent by the union to waive its right to bargain over the evaluation form. Id. at 366.
The contract in this case is lacking the specificity which would indicate that the union "consciously yielded” its right to negotiate concerning the discipline applied to probationary employees.16 Article 6, § 1 of the agreement contains no mention of the employer’s right to discipline probationary employees. While the right to discipline, not referenced in the contract, is certainly closely related to the employer’s judgment of ability, competency, fitness, and "other qualifications,” which right is contractually reserved, it is not the same matter. We conclude that the management-rights clause contained in article 6, § 1 of the contract *464between the parties is not sufficiently specific to demonstrate that the union clearly and unmistakably waived its right to bargain over changes in the disciplinary policies applied to probationary employees.17
Semta also relies on the "sweepingly broad” language of article 6, §2 which provided that semta could discharge a probationary employee "at any time and its right to do so shall not be questioned by the union; nor shall the union assert or present any grievance on behalf of any such new operator.” We accept the commission’s conclusion that this language did not clearly and explicitly waive the union’s right to bargain over changes in the disciplinary policy applied to probationary employees. Article 6, § 2 refers to discharge, but not to discipline. Nor has semta cited any evidence which would indicate an actual intent by the union to relinquish the statutory right to negotiate concerning the disciplinary scheme applicable to probationary employees.
Semta contends that article 6, § 2’s broad language providing that the union will not "question” the discharge of probationary employees would be rendered meaningless if interpreted only as a waiver of the right to grieve since article 6, § 2 expressly provides that the union shall not "assert or present any grievance” on behalf of probationary operators.18 However, the record supports the *465union’s contention that article 6, § 2 contemplated only the waiver of the union’s right to grieve on behalf of probationers.
In 1980, the ambiguous language of article 6, § 2 was changed to provide that a probationary operator "may be discharged by the Authority without such discharge being subject to grievance.”19 Union representative Phillip Don Leo testified that Daniel Morrill, SEMTA Director of Operations, indicated that this change only clarified what was intended in the 1977-80 contract. That intent, Leo stated, was that the union was able to file grievances for probationary employees relating to actions short of discharge, but not including discharge. According to Leo, the 1980 negotiations involved no discussion about the union’s right to go to the merc or any other agency on behalf of probationary employees, focusing solely on grievance matters.
In view of this testimony, it appears unlikely that the language of the 1977 contract was intended to waive the union’s statutory right to negotiate concerning the discipline imposed on probationary employees. We conclude that the commission’s findings were supported by competent, substantial, and material evidence.
CONCLUSION
The merc and the Court of Appeals correctly *466found that the instant unfair labor practice charge was not precluded by the prior decisions of the circuit court and Court of Appeals concerning the arbitrability of the parties’ contractual dispute. We affirm the commission’s finding that the parties’ consistent practice with respect to the discipline of probationary employees gave rise to a term or condition of employment, as supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence on the whole record. We also affirm the commission’s finding that the management-rights clauses contained in articles 6, § 1 and 6, § 2 did not constitute a "clear and unmistakable” waiver of the union’s right to negotiate concerning the disciplinary policy applicable to probationary employees.
The decision of the Court of Appeals is affirmed.
Cavanagh, C.J., and Levin, J., concurred with Boyle, J.
For each failure to report for duty at the proper time and place, an operator will be charged with a miss. Discipline for misses will be as follows:
A. First miss — written warning.
B. Second miss — without sixty (60) days free of misses since the last miss — one (1) day violation.
C. Third miss — without sixty (60) days free of misses since the last miss — three (3) days violation.
D. Fourth miss — without sixty (60) days free of misses since the last miss — one (1) day suspension.
E. Fifth miss — without sixty (60) days free of misses since the last miss — three (3) days suspension.
F. Sixth miss — without sixty (60) days free of misses since the last miss — seven (7) days suspension.
G. Seventh miss — without sixty (60) days free of misses since the last miss — dismissal.
Article 5 of the 1974-77 contract provided:
*446All new employees coming within the scope of this Agreement shall be on probation for a period of sixty (60) days from the date they complete their training requirements and report to an assigned station designated by the authority, ready for work. Such probationary period shall constitute a trial period during which the authority and the union are to judge the ability, competency, fitness, and other qualifications of new employees to do the work for which they were employed. During such probationary period, the authority may discharge the employee at any time and its right to do so shall not be questioned by the union; nor shall the union assert or present any grievance on behalf of any such new employee because of any matter or occurrence whatsoever falling within such probationary period.
The court contrasted "vested” rights or interests granted probationers by contract, which it found were plainly intended to be enforceable. The court viewed these as interests which were "an award of compensation,” such as free passes to travel on semta buses, or medical benefits. The circuit judge gave effect to article 6, § 1 by distinguishing between "vested” rights of probationers relating to benefits or compensation, and other contract provisions relating to the ability, competence, fitness or other qualifications of probationary employees.
The statute requires bargaining with respect to "wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment.” Subjects falling within the scope of this phrase are known as mandatory subjects of bargaining, Detroit Police Officers Ass’n v Detroit, 391 Mich 44, 54; 214 NW2d 803 (1974).
The merc expressly noted that the applicability or nonapplicability of article 37 was not at issue. 1987 MERC Lab Op at 729, n 1.
The strict holding in Bay City Schools was that the pendency of unfair labor practices in the Michigan Employment Relations Commission does not preclude arbitration of a contract claim arising from the same controversy. Because of the procedural stance of that case, the Court was not faced with the dilemma which might occur if the factual findings in arbitration conflicted with those made in an unfair labor practice case on the basis of the same incidents. Nor are we faced with that dilemma here, where the circuit court and Court of Appeals decisions were limited to the arbitrability of the asserted grievance, see pp 452-454.
Semta does not dispute that discipline in general is a mandatory subject of bargaining. Rules governing attendance and setting forth disciplinary policies constitute a mandatory subject of bargaining, Pontiac Police Officers Ass’n v Pontiac (After Remand), 397 Mich 674, 681; 246 NW2d 831 (1976).
See pp 460-465.
In Pontiac Police Ass’n', n 7 supra at 677, this Court decided that disciplinary procedures fall within the scope of " 'other terms and conditions of employment’ ” and are a mandatory subject of bargaining.
See Mid-Michigan Ed Ass’n v St Charles Community Schools, 150 Mich App 763, 768; 389 NW2d 482 (1986) (the practice of allowing teachers with employed spouses to coordinate health care benefits became a term or condition of employment although not required by contract [for further discussion see n 14]); Plymouth Fire Fighters Ass’n v Plymouth, 156 Mich App 220; 401 NW2d 281 (1986) (the city’s practice of using fire fighters for "first response” ambulance work, an area not covered by contract, was a term or condition of employment); Westland v Westland Firelighters Ass’n, 1988 MERC Lab Op 853 (the practice of paying mileage to overtime employees required to travel to different locations for the rest of the shift, a matter not covered by the contract, was a term or condition of employment; the practice of basing overtime pay for union business on time reported by a union officer also became a term or condition of employment by virtue of past practice); Mid-Michigan Ed Ass’n v Lake Fenton Community Schools, 1988 MERC Lab Op 178 (the employers’ past practice of providing long-term disability benefits not subject to offset, although not required by contract, had become a term or condition of employment).
This principle is explicitly stated in two recent decisions of the commission: "To be binding, a past practice must rest on the tacit consent of both parties to the continuation of the practice.” AFSCME v Detroit Transportation Dep’t, 1989 MERC Lab Op 30, 35; see also Battle Creek Fire Dep’t v Organization of Supervisory Personnel, 1989 MERC Lab Op 726, 735-736.
For example, in NLRB v Nello Pistoresi & Son, Inc, 500 F2d 399, 400 (CA 9, 1974), the court, considering whether Christmas bonuses were protected terms or conditions of employment, stated that bonuses "are considered wages if they are of such a fixed nature and have been paid over a sufficient length of time to have become a reasonable expectation of the employees and, therefore, part of their anticipated remuneration.”
We have located a lone federal circuit case taking the position *456that "[i]n the face of . . . established practice, the contract is only relevant to the extent that it may indicate the union’s waiver of its right to bargain.” Road Sprinkler Fitters Local Union v NLRB, 219 US App DC 228, 233; 676 F2d 826 (1982). Curiously, the court cited Office & Professional Employees Int’l Union, supra, where the court considered not only the bargaining history but the absence of a contractual provision regarding audits or auditors before concluding that the consistent use of unit employees to perform audits had become a term or condition of employment, id. at 19. The two other cases cited in Road Sprinkler Fitters for the statement that the contract is only relevant to the issue of waiver, Rose Arbor Manor v Retail Clerks Union, 242 NLRB 795 (1979), and NLRB v Sweet Lumber Co, 515 F2d 785 (CA 10, 1975), cert den 423 US 986 (1975), do analyze management-rights clauses within the analytical framework of waiver. However, they do not limit the relevance of the contract to that question, nor is such a limitation required or suggested by the analyses.
Semta would thus distinguish this case from St Charles, supra, which it apparently accepts as standing for the proposition that a practice which is contrary to a contractual term may give rise to a term or condition of employment. However, as the merc pointed out on the remand initially ordered in St Charles, the practice of providing coordinated benefits to married teachers was not contrary to contractual provision; rather, the contract did not require such benefits but did not forbid them either. The merc thus treated the situation as presenting the question whether a term or condition had arisen with regard to a practice not covered by the contract. 1985 MERC Lab Op 721, 723. In the Court of Appeals, the panel’s characterization of the practice as contrary to contract appeared to relate to the Court’s reasoning that the employer, having instituted such practice, could not rely on the contract to unilaterally alter the practice. Thus, the result was in the nature of a waiver of the waiver defense. 150 Mich App 769. We are not faced today with a practice that is "contrary” to contract, and we do not pass on the correctness of the rule, for which St Charles has been cited, that a practice contrary to contract may establish a term or condition of employment.
In Detroit Transportation Dep’t, the union charged that the transportation department had committed an unfair labor practice by unilaterally altering the "triggers” for various levels of discipline. The City of Detroit had a written policy specifying "triggers,” defined by the number of hours a dot operator had been absent in a one-year period, which would dictate what level of the six-step disciplinary procedure would be applied to a particular employee. Pursuant to the written policy, the "triggers” were to be set by reference to the average absences of the city’s dot employees in the previous year. Thus, for example, step 3 discipline would be "triggered” by fifty percent of average absences; step 4 discipline would be "triggered” by one hundred percent of average absences. Id. at 32. Despite its express reservation of the right to adjust the "triggers” each year on the basis of actual absences, dot did not do so for seven years. Relying on St Charles, supra, the union contended that the city’s “past practice” of failing to readjust the "triggers” created a term or condition of employment which could not be unilaterally altered. Id. at 33. The commission rejected this theory. First, the commission distinguished St Charles, noting that there was no conflict between the failure to readjust and the language of the policy, which allowed, but did not require, readjustment. The commission opined that merely refraining from action does not establish a "past practice” precluding future action, and found no evidence that the city had consented to the elimination of its express option contained in the written policy to readjust the "triggers” for disciplinary action. Id. at 35.
However, to the extent that the Court of Appeals would require express reference to the "duty to bargain,” "unfair labor practices,” or the use of the word "waiver” in order to effect a valid waiver of the statutory bargaining right, it is in error. Clear and unmistakable is a high standard, but it does not require the use of key words to waive the statutory bargaining right.
Hollins v Kaiser Foundation Hosps, 727 F2d 823 (CA 9, 1984), cited by semta as containing contract provisions "virtually identical” to those at issue here, is distinguishable in one crucial regard. Hollins was a breach of contract action, not a statutorily based unfair labor practice claim. The stringent "clear and unmistakable” standard for waiver, thus, was not applicable in that case.
During such probationary period, the authority may discharge the operator at any time and its right to do so shall not be questioned by the union; nor shall the union assert or present any grievance on behalf of any such new operator.
The 1980-83 version of article 6, § 2 was read into the record in its entirety at the hearing before the hearing referee:
"During such probationary period, the operator may be represented by the Union in matters regarding wages and hours. However, during such period, the operator may be discharged by the Authority without such discharge being subject to a grievance. The Authority agrees to provide the Union with a written statement setting forth the reasons for discharge.”

=== CASE 9738864 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:40.743217+00 ===

Brickley, J.
(dissenting). I agree with the majority that collateral estoppel (issue preclusion) does not foreclose this appeal. However, because I believe that the litigation below did not adequately resolve the question whether the employer’s conduct created through practice a term of employment unamenable to unilateral change, I respectfully dissent.
Labor law has long prohibited an employer from unilaterally changing a term or condition of employment embracing a mandatory subject of bargaining. NLRB v Katz, 369 US 736; 82 S Ct 230; 8 L Ed 2d 230 (1962). A unilateral change by an employer violates the duty to bargain and thus contravenes "[o]ne of the primary purposes of the Act [designed to] promote the peaceful settlement of industrial disputes by subjecting labor-management controversies to the mediatory influence of *467negotiation [in awareness that] refusals to confer and negotiate had been one of the most prolific causes of industrial strife.” Fibreboard Paper Products Corp v NLRB, 379 US 203, 211; 85 S Ct 398; 13 L Ed 2d 233 (1964).
In the instant case, however, the employer did not viólate the duty to bargain over a term or condition. The union and the employer did in fact bargain to vest an unconditional right of the employer to discharge probationary employees.1 The employer’s exercise of discretion in establishing an orderly and fair disciplinary procedure for probationary employees short of discharge did not comprise a unilateral change of a material term or condition under the facts presented. Rather, it constituted an exercise of an agreed-upon provision of the collective bargaining agreement.
Unilateral change of term or condition cases generally appear in two factual configurations. In the first configuration, the contract/collective bargaining agreement is silent or ambiguous with respect to the alleged term or condition created by a past practice. However, the fact that the contract does not explicitly allow a term or condition is of no practical import, since "[the] statutory duty to bargain is independent of any obligation the employer may incur under [the] contract.” Road Sprinkler Fitters Local Union v NLRB, 219 *468US App DC 228, 233; 676 F2d 826 (1982). Thus, for example, an employer that consistently provides Christmas bonuses to employees, and then rescinds those bonuses without bargaining may commit an unfair labor practice. NLRB v Nello Pistoresi & Son, Inc, 500 F2d 399 (CA 9,1974).
In the second configuration, the contract may explicitly allow or prohibit a particular practice. Even so, courts have found that a consistent policy or practice contrary to the contractual provision may yet ripen into a term or condition which if unilaterally changed initiates an unfair labor practice violation. Thus, in Mid-Michigan Ed Ass’n v St Charles Community Schools, 150 Mich App 763, 767, 769; 389 NW2d 482 (1986), the Court of Appeals held that "the [employer’s] past practice of providing health care benefits, although contrary to the contract provision, constituted a term of employment which could not be unilaterally changed.” The Court reasoned that "[b]ecause the district instituted the practice and permitted it to continue, knowing that it was contrary to the contract, the district cannot now rely on the contractual language to unilaterally change the practice.”
The Employment Relations Commission relied on St Charles in concluding that in the instant case "[w]hile the broad language of Article 6 gave [the employer] discretion to discharge probationary employees, it did not give [the employer] the explicit right to change a disciplinary policy which constituted an established term or condition of employment without giving [the union] notice and an opportunity to demand bargaining.” 1987 MERC Lab Op 721, 730. This statement, of course, begs the question. The obvious answer is that the language of article 6 did give the employer the discretion to discharge probationary employees, *469and the appropriate question is having been given that discretion in very clear and unmistakable language, is the rule relating to unilateral change of a term or condition applicable?
The instant case is distinguishable both from cases in which the contract does not refer to the alleged term or condition created by past practice and cases in which a contractual provision conflicts with an established term or condition. Here, the parties bargained, and the resulting bargain provided the employer unfettered discretion to establish any policy to discharge probationary employees during the probationary period, or no policy at all. In exercise of that discretion, the employer chose to utilize the seven-step procedure of article 37 for failure to report for duty, and apparently did so in a fairly consistent manner. However, under the analysis of the merc, as adopted by the majority, an employer confronts a Hobson’s choice. Either an employer could establish no policy regarding discharge, and discharge probationers for the first infraction, or the employer could strive for perfect inconsistency in meting discipline to probationers. Only these courses would avoid the establishment of a uniform past practice and prevent an obligation to bargain over what had previously been bargained.
Under the analysis of the merc and the majority, an employer that bargains for and obtains discretion to act independently relinquishes that discretion the moment it exercises discretion in a consistent fashion. If the employer exercises bargained-for discretion in an arbitrary and inconsistent manner, the creation of a term or condition through practice does not arise. In the instant case, the employer did not act contrary to the collective bargaining agreement, but in accordance with its terms. Under these circumstances, it can*470not be said that the employer’s conduct created a term or condition of employment. Such an analysis frustrates the preeminent goal of fostering peaceful and orderly collective bargaining.
The majority states that "while the parties may by contract agree to grant the right to take unilateral action, it is well established that neither party may take unilateral action on such a subject unless it either has satisfied the statutory obligation or has been freed from it.” Ante, p 450, citing NLRB v C & C Plywood Corp, 385 US 421; 87 S Ct 559; 17 L Ed 2d 486 (1967). If that were a correct reading of the Plywood Court, it would be the end of the matter. I read the case differently, however, and, in fact, believe that it supports the opposite conclusion.
In Plywood, a classified wage scale had been agreed upon in the contract, and management had reserved the right to give premium pay to some employees. It subsequently attempted to give such premium pay to a class of employees, and the union brought an unfair labor practice petition. In granting the petition, the nlrb ruled that "the union had not ceded power to the employer unilaterally to change the wage system as it had.” Id. at 425. The Supreme Court said, "In refusing to enforce the Board’s order, the Court of Appeals did not decide that the premium pay provision of the labor agreement had been misinterpreted by the Board.” Id. (Emphasis added.) Because the United States Supreme Court accepted the factual finding of the meaning of the contract, it reversed the decision of the United States Court of Appeals and reinstated the decision of the nlrb. In doing so, the United States Supreme Court further stated,
But in this case the Board has not construed a labor agreement to determine the extent of the *471contractual rights which were given the union by the employer. It has not imposed its own view of what the terms and conditions of the labor agreement should be. . . . The Board’s interpretation went only so far as was necessary to determine that the union did not agree to give up these statutory safeguards. Thus, the Board, in necessarily construing a labor agreement to decide this unfair labor practice case, has not exceeded the jurisdiction laid out for it by Congress. [Id. at 428. Emphasis added.]
It seems to be implicit in this nlrb case before the Supreme Court that if the contract had specifically given the employer the discretion to give this premium pay in the manner in which it did, it would not have had to bargain before instituting the premium pay. The Supreme Court seemed to think that that was the controlling factor. Plywood clearly suggests that the merc should have made a determination of whether or not the employer was changing its seven-step procedure to a four-step procedure pursuant to the contract. The hearing referee’s conclusion, affirmed by the merc, about the meaning of article 6 is as follows:
In my view, the contract language here simply removed Respondent’s obligation to demonstrate, with respect to discharged probationary employees, that the discharges were fair and in accord with established policies. [1987 MERC Lab Op 737.]
The specific language of article 6 by any fair and objective reading does not permit such a watering down of its obvious intent.
The parties in this case vested in the employer the sole authority to establish how and under what conditions probationary employees could be discharged. No violation of the duty to bargain *472exists under these facts because the parties bargained over the terms, and the employer’s conduct clearly is consistent with the bargain. Even under the mutuality analysis applied by the majority, it cannot be said that the employer’s conduct created a reasonable expectation that the probationers were entitled to the seven-step procedure for failure to report for duty.
The rule requiring compulsory bargaining over terms created by past practice is designed to foster collective bargaining and ought not be distorted to obliterate a term of a contract that results from the process of collective bargaining. Such a result places the cart before the horse, or, better stated, allows the end to serve the means. For these reasons, I respectfully dissent.
I would hold that an exercise of a practice that is clearly pursuant to, consistent with, and in fulfillment of a term or terms of a collective bargaining agreement does not become a term or condition of employment apart from the collective bargaining agreement that requires midterm bargaining.
I would reverse the decision of the Court of Appeals and remand the case to the merc for the application of this standard to the case at hand.
Griffin, J., concurred with Brickley, J.
Riley and Mallett, JJ., took no part in the decision of this case.
Article 6, §§ 1-2, of the contract provided:
All new operators coming within the scope of this Agreement shall be on probation for a period of ninety (90) calendar days from the date they complete their training requirements. Such probationary period shall constitute a trial period during which the authority judges the ability, competency, fitness, and other qualifications of new operators to do the work for which they were employed. . . .
During such probationary period, the authority may discharge the operator at any time and its right to do so shall not be questioned by the union; nor shall the union assert or present any grievance on behalf of any such new operator.

=== CASE 9738865 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:41.008285+00 ===

MR. PRESIDING JUSTICE ADESKO delivered the opinion of the court. Harry McIntyre, plaintiff, brought this personal injury action to recover damages occasioned by the alleged negligence of the defendant, The Belt Railway Company of Chicago, in the operation of its diesel switch engine at a railroad crossing at grade. Defendant, Peter Hanik, was dismissed as a party to the cause after the jury was selected. The jury rendered a verdict for the plaintiff, upon which the court entered the judgment from which this appeal is taken. No questions are raised on the pleadings. The plaintiff, Harry McIntyre, was injured on April 24, 1961, at about 7:00 p. m., when his automobile was struck by defendant’s switch engine at a railroad grade crossing near 67th Street and Lavergne Avenue, in the Village of Bedford Park, Illinois. Plaintiff had left his gasoline station, at 7400 South Cicero Avenue, drove North on Cicero to 67th Street, turned left and went West on 67th Street to Lavergne, a distance of about two blocks. At Lavergne there is a stop sign and a railroad cross-buck sign. Plaintiff stopped his automobile and then proceeded to turn right to go Northbound on Lavergne. There is a railroad crossing consisting of four sets of tracks crossing Lavergne at right angles in an East and West direction. As one travels Northbound on Lavergne, the first set of tracks is approximately ten to fifteen feet North of 67th Street. The second set of tracks is approximately fifty feet North of 67th Street. The third set of tracks is about five feet North of the second set of tracks, and the fourth set of tracks is about ten feet further North of the third set. Both the second and third set of tracks originate in a factory on the East side of Lavergne Avenue, and each set emerges from a different entrance. The area where the accident took place is predominately industrial and commercial, with factories on both sides of Lavergne Avenue. The defendant’s diesel locomotive involved in this collision was being operated on the third set of tracks, and was emerging in a backward direction from the factory entrance on the East side of the street. As the defendant’s locomotive emerged from the factory, it was at first heading directly South, then the third set of tracks curves to the West, and by the time the locomotive emerges from the curve to the West, it is heading almost due West as it reaches Lavergne Avenue. The weather conditions that evening were poor—■ it was very dark and cloudy, and it was raining. There were no street lights at the intersection of 67th and Lavergne. There were no lights in the area of the third set of tracks crossing Lavergne Avenue, nor any lights emerging from the factories. There were no crossing gates, flashing lights, flagmen or guard towers, where the tracks cross Lavergne Avenue, nor were there any pedestrians present at the time of the collision. As the plaintiff turned to go North on Lavergne, he was following a line of approximately twelve cars going in the same direction, and he was followed by about the same number. Plaintiff was traveling about five to ten miles per hour as he approached the third set of tracks. He saw only the headlights of cars going North and South across the tracks. When the front portion of plaintiff’s automobile was on the third set of tracks, his vehicle was struck on the right side by the defendant’s locomotive. Members of the locomotive crew testified that the locomotive was traveling two to four miles per hour; that the bell was ringing; that the headlight was on bright; and that the engineer blew the whistle several times as they approached the crossing. All five members of the locomotive crew were riding on the locomotive at the time of the collision. The evidence adduced by plaintiff at the trial concerning the collision disclosed that he was familiar with the crossing, since he had traveled over the railroad intersection over one hundred times in the past, but had never seen a train or locomotive operating on the tracks prior to the accident. Because it was raining, all the windows of his car were up. The windshield wipers were on as well as the defroster and heater. He heard no bells, whistles or horns, nor saw any flashing lights, and when he reached the third set of tracks he was struck by something “like a ton of bricks.” Plaintiff was dazed and did not recall what happened next. When he awoke, he was in the hospital. On cross-examination, plaintiff testified that the muffler of his car was defective and that it made a purring sound. Defense counsel impeached the plaintiff as to the condition of the muffler as follows: “Q. Would you admit that the muffler was noisy that night? “A. Not so noisy that I couldn’t hear a train. As a qualified mechanic I would say it was more like a purr than a roar. . . . “Q. You mean your muffler purred ? “A. It had a little pin hole in it. . . . “Q. I see. Calling your attention to this deposition that you gave ... I will ask you if this question was asked and if this answer was given: “ ‘Q. During the period of time then that you moved from track No. 2 to track No. 3, did you look to your left or to your right? “ ‘A. I was looking to my left. I heard—got a, got a noisy muffler on the car because the muffler was shot. So the muffler was making noise and I could hear loud factory noises.’ “Q. Was that question asked and that answer given? “A. Yes.” Plaintiff continued to testify that the lights of his automobile did not flare out to illuminate peripheral areas but that they were set to illuminate the area directly in front of the automobile. Plaintiff stated that he looked both ways before crossing the third set of tracks but could not see out the right-hand door windows because of the rain. Again, plaintiff emphasized that he saw no locomotive or locomotive headlight; nor heard any horn, whistle or bells, and that he was following other cars over the tracks at about five to ten miles per hour and at no time applied his brakes to stop his vehicle. This was the extent of the evidence plaintiff produced as to the accident. Defendant’s motion for a directed verdict at the close of plaintiff’s case was denied. Defendant presented the testimony of three of the crew of the locomotive, which in summary was that the locomotive had made a switching operation at one of the factories in the area and was backing upon the third set of tracks. The engineer sounded his whistle for the crossing, the engine bell had been ringing since they left the factory building area, the engine headlight was on bright, directed towards the crossing area, and there were lanterns on the engine at the time. The locomotive was traveling about two to four miles per hour around the curve and there was no obstruction to the view as they approached the crossing, although it was raining and very dark. The brakes of the locomotive were applied immediately before the collision. Harry Meritt, the fireman on the locomotive, also testified the southbound traffic had stopped. At the time of the impact all five crew members were on the locomotive, three were in the cab, one was at the head of the engine and one at the rear. At the time of the trial, the engineer, Mr. Haney, had passed away. It is Belt’s theory that the plaintiff failed to show any negligence on the part of Belt that was the proximate cause of his injuries and that the plaintiff failed to prove due care on his part which makes him guilty of contributory negligence as a matter of law. We note that plaintiff did not offer any eyewitnesses to this accident. In addition, there was no evidence presented by plaintiff concerning the negligent operation of the locomotive; no evidence as to the speed of the train; and no evidence that defendant negligently operated its locomotive into the plaintiff’s automobile. There was no testimony that the crew of the locomotive was negligent and by the plaintiff’s own testimony, he did not see any flashing light, or anything else, when he looked to the right when crossing the third set of tracks because of the misting rain and the poor visibility through the wet window. Inside plaintiff’s automobile, the defroster and heater were turned on and the windshield wipers were operating. With a defective muffler also contributing to the noise level and as plaintiff stated the noise from the adjacent factories, it is understandable that the plaintiff testified he heard no bell, whistle or horn or warning sounds from the oncoming locomotive.  Negligence is a question of fact. McCann v. City of Waukegan, 88 Ill App2d 284, 227 NE2d 558 (1967). It is obvious that damages cannot be assessed upon a mere surmise and conjecture as to what possibly happened to cause an injury, since the law requires affirmative and positive proof of actionable negligence as to the proximate cause of injuries and resulting liability. Sansone v. Atchison, T. & S. F. Ry. Co., 83 Ill App2d 435, 228 NE2d 101 (1967).  It is our opinion from a reading of this record that there is no evidence, direct or circumstantial indicating that defendant caused the accident in question. The mere fact that defendant’s locomotive came in contact with plaintiff’s automobile does not make that negligence. Inasmuch as the testimony of the plaintiff failed to (1) disclose any fact giving rise to a reasonable inference that defendant was guilty of any negligence; (2) establish the cause of the accident; and (3) connect the defendant to the cause of the accident, we think the plaintiff failed to make out a prima facie case against the defendant.  Implicit in any verdict for a plaintiff, there must be a finding of the absence of any contributory negligence on his behalf. Freedom from contributory negligence must be affirmatively pleaded and proved by the plaintiff. Sweeney v. Matthews, 94 Ill App2d 6, 236 NE2d 439 (1968). In considering whether plaintiff was contributorily negligent as a matter of law, the evidence must be considered, with all reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom, in its aspects most favorable to the plaintiff. The uncontradicted evidence shows that the headlight of the locomotive was burning, that the bell was ringing, and the whistle was blown for the crossing, yet the plaintiff heard nothing, nor saw anything.  Plaintiff made no effort to explain why he did not hear anything, yet he testified that the windshield wipers were on, the defroster was operating, the heater was on and there were noises coming from the muffler of his automobile. In addition, there was a noise from the adjacent factories and the volume of traffic going over the four sets of tracks. The right side-door window was rolled up and wet from the falling rain and plaintiff could not see out of it, yet he stated that he approached the crossing with caution and looked both ways. When there is any evidence which tends to show plaintiff’s due care, the question of due care is for the jury, but whether there is any such evidence, is a question of law, and in determining that question the Appellate Court can examine the record to determine whether such evidence really exists. Elliott v. Elgin, J. & E. Ry. Co., 325 Ill App 161, 59 NE2d 486 (1945). Under the factual situation as disclosed by the evidence in this case, we are of the opinion that the plaintiff has failed to establish due care on his part.  While the trial judge declined to grant defendant’s post-trial motion for a new trial, a reviewing court may overturn a jury’s verdict if such is contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. Whitman v. Prescott, 80 Ill App2d 49, 225 NE2d 384 (1967). We find the jury’s verdict was unreasonable and opposed to the weight of the evidence and therefore grounds for a new trial. Since there must be another trial of this cause, we shall not discuss the other contentions raised by the defendant. The judgment of the Circuit Court of Cook County is reversed and the cause remanded for a new trial. Judgment reversed and remanded. MURPHY, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9738866 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:41.013084+00 ===

BURMAN, J., dissenting: I cannot agree with the conclusion reached by the majority of the Court that the plaintiff failed to establish that he had exercised due care or that the plaintiff failed to make out a prima facie case giving rise to a reasonable inference that the defendant was guilty of negligence. The plaintiff testified at the trial that the collision in which he and the defendant, Belt Railway Company, were involved occurred in a heavily industrial area. The plaintiff stated that in order to reach his destination, he had to cross four sets of railroad tracks, crossing Lavergne Avenue within this area. Plaintiff said that he had passed through the crossing at least a hundred times prior to the collision and that he had never encountered a locomotive on the tracks until the evening in question. After setting the time of the collision at about 7:00 p. m., the plaintiff said that he had turned on his headlights because of the darkness and that he had turned on his windshield wipers because it was “misting rain and drizzling.” He further stated that he was following about twelve cars and that the same number were following him. The plaintiff said that when he came to the crossing he stopped his car at the stop sign, turned, looked both ways, and not seeing an approaching train proceeded forward. As the plaintiff approached the third set of tracks he was struck by defendant’s locomotive and was injured. The plaintiff said that he neither heard a bell or whistle nor saw a light on the locomotive. Also, there was no artificial illumination at the crossing—no streetlights, factory lights, blinking signals or crossing gates. The record reveals that the defendant’s diesel locomotive was not attached to any cars and was in the process of backing up from a factory entrance along a curving track when it collided with the plaintiff’s car. A flagman was not present at the crossing although there were four men on the locomotive. A police officer testified that the traffic was quite heavy before and after the time of the collision. Edward Dean, a conductor on the locomotive and the person directing its operation, testified on cross-examination that when the locomotive was fifty to seventy-five feet from Lavergne Avenue he saw a car go across the crossing in a northerly direction. At that moment the conductor stated, he also saw the plaintiff’s car turning the corner of 67th and Lavergne Avenue. From that time until the moment of impact, the conductor testified that he did not take his eyes off the plaintiff’s car. The defendant takes the position that “ [t] he prime controversy is whether the defendant had a light on the train, blew a whistle or sounded a bell.” Apparently, if any of these elements were present the plaintiff would be barred from recovery, because warned of the locomotive’s presence he nevertheless proceeded through the crossing, thus failing to exercise due care. The defendant maintains that because the “[pjlaintiff’s testimony as to the light, whistle and bell is negative in character” and the plaintiff’s testimony was countered by positive testimony from the defendant’s witnesses, the plaintiff failed to raise an issue of fact about the absence or presence of the light, whistle or bell, and the question should not have gone to the jury. The defendant cites Berg v. New York Cent. R. Co., 391 Ill 52, 62 NE2d 676, in support of his theory. In Berg, the Illinois Supreme Court was asked to determine “whether the negative testimony of plaintiff’s witnesses may be considered as proving, or tending to prove, that no warning was given of the approach of the train by sounding of a bell or whistle.” Although the Court considered this question holding “that negative evidence is admissible where the attending circumstances are such as to show that it has some probative force” and that “[t]here was a conflict in the evidence on this issue [whether a warning was given] and its weight was for the jury” 1 the Supreme Court held that the icy condition of the street was the proximate cause of the plaintiff’s injury, not the defendant’s wrongful act, and under such circumstances there was no question of fact for the jury. I fail to see how the Berg case supports the defendant’s contention in the case at bar. Rather, the dicta relied on by the defendant appears to bolster the plaintiff’s claim that he presented a prima facie case even though he used negative testimony. I believe that the record in the instant case reveals that the attending circumstances were such as to show that the plaintiff’s negative testimony had some probative force and thus there was a question of fact for the jury to consider. Furthermore, I do not believe that the jury’s determination on the conflicting evidence should be disturbed by this Court. As stated in Bunton v. Illinois Cent. R. Co., 15 Ill App2d 311, 323, 146 NE2d 205: The jury saw and heard the witnesses. Where disputed questions of fact are presented to a jury and the jury passes upon them, unless palpably erroneous, the finding of fact will not be disturbed by the reviewing court. It is not the province of the court to substitute its judgment for that of the triers of the fact, where there is a conflict in the evidence. It is the province of the jury alone, to determine the weight and the credibility of witnesses. To be against the manifest weight of the evidence requires that an opposite conclusion be clearly evident. I am of the opinion, after examining the record in this case, that the actions of the trial judge who saw and heard the witnesses and who denied the defendant’s post-trial motions after receiving the jury’s verdict were correct and should have been affirmed.   The Court was of the opinion that “[t]he negative testimony of plaintiff’s witnesses was sufficient to sustain the finding of negligence when attacked by a motion for judgment non obstante veredicto.”

=== CASE 9738867 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:41.96346+00 ===

GARTZKE, P.J.
Gregory Gesch appeals from a judgment of conviction on one count of criminal trespass to a medical facility, sec. 943.145, Stats. The issue is whether the judgment should be reversed because the trial court denied the defendant's motion to excuse from the jury a brother of the state's police witness. We affirm the judgment.
*995Gesch was arrested because of an incident at an abortion clinic. Madison Police Officer David Wineke was one of two officers dispatched to the clinic. The prosecution listed him as a potential witness at trial. When the jury was being selected, prospective juror Daniel Wineke stated that Officer Wineke was his brother. In response to defense counsel's questioning, juror Wineke stated that he and his brother live in Madison. They see each other about every other month and are on good terms. He stated that he would not feel uncomfortable if, during jury deliberations, another juror questioned his brother's credibility.
The court asked juror Wineke several questions to determine whether he could be impartial. Wineke answered that he could.1 Gesch moved to strike Wineke for cause. The court refused. The court stated:
[D]emeanor of the juror ... is one of the factors upon which the Court exercises its discretion. I think it is fair to say that Mr. Wineke was very strong not *996only in the substance but also in his demeanor in terms of asserting his independence. There were a couple of times he smiled when asked if he would have any difficulty seeing his brother criticized. I guess I inferred from that that he's quick to criticize his brother or certainly comfortable in the context of having his brother criticized .... I feel fairly confident, actually very confident that Mr. Wineke was quite forthright in his expression of his independence
Gesch used his peremptory challenges on other prospective jurors. Before the evidentiary portion of the trial, he again moved to disqualify juror Wineke for cause. Denying the motion, the court said:
Certainly I was suspicious and inclined to excuse him if he in fact didn't persuade me quite convincingly that he was of a very strong independent mind about treating his brother in a fashion virtually identical to a witness he didn't know. For many family situations, that would be a difficult proposition. It was clear to me that it was not a difficult proposition for that particular juror.
Officer Wineke testified at trial about the events at the clinic leading to Gesch's arrest. The state produced the testimony of several witnesses, but Officer Wineke was the only police witness to testify. The jury found Gesch guilty, and this appeal resulted.2
Gesch argues that Wineke's service on the jury denied him his right to due process and an impartial jury. He quotes from Nyberg v. State, 75 Wis. 2d 400, 404-05, 249 N.W.2d 524, 526 (1977) (citation omitted):
*997A trial court must honor challenges for cause whenever it may reasonably suspect that circumstances outside the evidence may create bias or appearance of bias. These guidelines are equally if not more important in a criminal trial where the accused may eventually be deprived of his or her liberty.
Nyberg is not dispositive. Following the passage Gesch quotes, the Nyberg court noted that the trial court had conducted a thorough voir dire, dismissed some jurors for cause and declined to dismiss others. The Nyberg court concluded that the trial court used the correct standard for dismissing panel members and had not abused its discretion. 75 Wis. 2d at 405, 249 N.W.2d at 526. Implicit in the court's analysis is that whether a trial court "may reasonably suspect" bias or the appearance of bias must be determined with respect to the particular juror whom a party wants excused. Nyberg does not compel the creation of broad, general rules.
Gesch does not argue that juror Wineke was partial or that the trial court's assessment of his ability to be impartial was erroneous. He points only to the fact that the juror is the brother of the police witness. That is not enough.3 Gesch proposes a per se rule barring jury ser*998vice by relatives of witnesses. A per se rule would remove the matter from the trial court's discretion and convert it to an exclusion required by law. Gesch cites cases from other states,4 but the Wisconsin Supreme Court has been "reluctant to exclude groups of persons from serving as petit jurors as a matter of law." State v. Louis, 156 Wis. 2d 470, 479, 457 N.W.2d 484, 488 (1990), cert. denied, 111 S. Ct. 1078 (1991). The Louis court refused to hold that, as a matter of law, jurors must be excused who are officers in the same police department as other officers who will testify.5
Gesch argues that sec. 805.08(1), Stats., compels Wineke's being excused from the jury. The statute provides in relevant part:
The court shall examine on oath each person who is called as a juror to discover whether the juror is related by blood or marriage to any party or to any *999attorney appearing in the case .... If a juror is not indifferent in the case, the juror shall be excused.
Gesch argues that Officer Wineke should be considered a "party" and therefore his brother should have been excused from the jury. Gesch notes that the state was represented by only two persons in the courtroom, the prosecutor and Officer Wineke, that the criminal complaint was founded on Wineke's report, and that he was the state's only witness. Gesch concludes that Officer Wineke was the "functional equivalent" of a party. We disagree.
Section 805.08(1), Stats., mandates excusing the relative of a party to avoid the juror's having to cast a vote which is deemed unquestionably to affect the fortune or future of a relative. Juror Wineke's vote would not unquestionably affect his brother's fortune or future.
Gesch argues that we have expanded "party" in sec. 805.08(1), Stats., to include persons who are so "closely allied" with a party that their interests are inseparable. He relies on State v. Noren, 125 Wis. 2d 204, 371 N.W.2d 381 (Ct. App. 1985). In Noren, the defendant, convicted of second-degree murder, appealed on grounds that the trial court should have excused a juror whose second cousin was married to the victim's sister. We said that marriage does not cause the blood relatives of one spouse to become related to the blood relatives of the other spouse. Id. at 211, 371 N.W.2d at 385. Gesch argues that we implicitly held that the victim in a criminal prosecution is a party for purposes of sec. 805.08(1). We did not. Because we held that the blood relatives of one spouse are not related to the blood relatives of the other spouse, we had no reason to decide whether a juror related to the victim must be excused.
*1000We conclude that the judgment of conviction must be affirmed.
By the Court. — Judgment affirmed.
The colloquy was as follows:
Q. • Would you find it difficulty on sitting on [sic] a case where your brother is a potential witness?
A. No.
Q. You don't think you would? You think you would be able to fairly and impartially judge his testimony even though he is your brother? I don't want to presume anything about your relationship here.
A. I don't believe it would be significant.
Q. Okay. In other words, you feel that if I were to instruct you to not give any additional weight to his testimony and treat him as you would any witness that you didn't know as well as you know your brother, do you think you could do that?
A. Easily. Yes.
Q. Easily? Okay, that's fine.
It would not have resulted had the trial court exercised its undoubted discretion to excuse juror Wineke.
The dissent's quotation from Lord Coke misses the mark. When discussing a "principall challenge" to a juror, Lord Coke said:
And again a principall challenge is of two sorts, either by judgment of law without any act of his, or by judgment of law upon his owne act.
And it is said that a principall challenge is, when there is expresse favour or expresse malice.
1. Without any act of his, as if the juror be of blood or kindred to either partie, consaguineus, which is compounded ex con & sanguine, quasi eodern sanguine natus, as it were issued from the same blood; and this is a principal challenge, for that the law presumeth *998that one kinsman doth favour another before a stranger; and how far remote soever he is of kindred, yet the challenge is good.
1 Coke's Commentary Upon Littleton (Butler & Hargrave's Notes) Note 157.a on Book 2, ch. 12 sec. 234 (1853) (footnotes omitted).
As the full quotation shows, Lord Coke refers to disqualification of a juror related to a party, not to a juror related to a witness.
He cites: Ex Parte Tucker, 454 So. 2d 552 (Ala. 1984); State v. Kuster, 353 N.W.2d 428 (Iowa 1984); Calvert v. Commonwealth, 708 S.W.2d 121 (Ky. Ct. App. 1986); Hayes v. Commonwealth, 458 S.W.2d 3 (Ky. 1970); Thompson v. State, 519 P.2d 538 (Okla. Crim. App. 1974); State v. Beckett, 310 S.E.2d 883 (W. Va. 1983); and State v. Kilpatrick, 210 S.E.2d 480 (W. Va. 1974).
We are not free to adopt the approach taken by the dissent. As an error-correcting court, we are bound by Louis.

=== CASE 9738868 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:41.967905+00 ===

SUNDBY, J.
(dissenting). There are relationships between prospective jurors and those who must ensure a criminal defendant a fair trial so close that it is contrary to human nature to expect that the juror can serve impartially. Such a relationship is present in this case. The juror Gesch challenged for cause is the brother of the arresting officer who was the state's only police witness.
I am sure that juror Wineke honestly believed that he could serve without partiality. The trial court conducted an extensive voir dire of the juror to determine whether he was actually biased. But actual bias is not the only test. "A trial court must honor challenges for cause whenever it may reasonably suspect that circumstances outside the evidence may create bias or appearance of bias." Nyberg v. State, 75 Wis. 2d 400, 404, 249 N.W.2d 524, 526 (1977) (emphasis added). Perhaps the circumstance is better described as implied bias, a term adopted by other courts. See United States v. Haynes, 398 F.2d 980, 984 (2d Cir. 1968), cert. denied, 393 U.S. 1120 (1969).
In determining whether a prospective juror should be excluded on this ground [implied bias] his statements upon voir dire are totally irrelevant; a person 'may declare that he feels no prejudice in the case; and yet the law cautiously incapacitates him from serving on the jury because it suspects prejudice, because in general persons in a similar situation would feel prejudice.'
*1001Id. at 984 (quoting United States v. Burr, 25 F. Cas. 49, 50 (C.C. Va. 1807) (No. 14692g)).
Here, the trial court suspected prejudice because of the close relationship between the prospective juror and the state's witness. The court said: "Certainly I was suspicious . . " The juror's responses to the court's questions satisfied the court that the juror was not actually biased. The juror's responses were, however, totally irrelevant. No matter how honest the juror's responses, the law cautiously incapacitated him from serving on the jury because in general, persons in a similar situation would feel prejudice. As Lord Coke put it: "[T]he law presumeth that one kinsman doth favour another before a stranger." 1 Coke's Commentary Upon Littleton (Butler & Hargrave's Notes) Note 157.a on Book 2, ch. 12 sec. 234 (1853).
Voir dire occurs at the beginning of criminal trials. The jurors are usually unfamiliar with criminal trials and may honestly believe that they can serve impartially. The conduct of the trial may educate the juror with too close a relationship to a witness, that he or she cannot make credibility determinations as impartially as he or she may have expected. By then, however, it is too late, as a practical matter, for the juror to withdraw. Hence the law's caution.
Further, the presence of a close relative of an important witness in the jury room may deter other jurors from making impartial credibility determinations, even if the juror/relative in fact remains impartial. A criminal defendant may not be made to bear this risk.
I do not, however, suggest a "class" or per se rule when a prospective juror is challenged because of a blood relationship with a witness. There may be no issue of credibility with respect to the witness. Where, however, as here, the witness's credibility is critical to the state's *1002case, a challenge to a prospective juror who has a close blood relationship to the witness must be honored to avoid the appearance of bias. "In any sound judicial system it is essential not only that justice be done but also that it appear to be done." State v. Jackson, 203 A.2d 1, 11 A.L.R.3d 841, 852 (N.J. 1964), cert. denied, Ravenell v. New Jersey, 379 U.S. 982 (1965).
I conclude that the trial court applied an incorrect standard to Gesch's motion to excuse juror Wineke. The court sought only to determine the juror's actual bias and did not consider the juror's appearance of bias. I therefore dissent.

=== CASE 9738869 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:42.916205+00 ===

SABERS, Justice.
State appeals denial of its motion to dismiss third party complaint against state on grounds of sovereign immunity and deficient notice.
Facts
On September 20, 1989, Wilson and Hogan were involved in a car accident on a Rapid City street in which Wilson died. On November 9, 1989, plaintiff, as Wilson’s representative, brought suit against Hogan for negligence for damages for Wilson’s death.
On May 21, 1990, Hogan’s attorney notified the South Dakota attorney general, pursuant to SDCL 3-21-2 and 3-21-3,1 that he intended to file a third party liability claim against the state that “[a]n inadequately designed and maintained storm drainage system on East St. Joseph Street (Highway 79) ... contributed to ... Wilson’s death[.]” Hogan’s attorney wrote: “Despite the history of the water drainage problems on this road, an adequate storm drainage system has not been installed.” On June 26, 1990, Hogan filed his third party complaint for contribution or indemnity against Rapid City (city) and the State of South Dakota (state).
On July 17, 1990, state moved to dismiss Hogan’s third party complaint on the grounds that it was barred by sovereign immunity, that Hogan failed to give state commissioner of administration notice as required by SDCL 3-21-3 and that notice to the attorney general was two months late under SDCL 3-21-2. City later filed its own motion to dismiss on the grounds that Hogan failed to provide the required notice to city officials. Following a hearing, circuit court denied both motions to dismiss.
On December 20, 1990, this court granted state’s petition for intermediate appeal from the order denying the motion for dismissal. State raises sovereign immunity and deficiency of notice. City did not appeal the denial of its motion.
1. Sovereign Immunity
There are no facts in dispute in this intermediate appeal. Whether Hogan’s third party action against state is barred by sovereign immunity is a question of law which is “reviewed by this court de novo.” Brown v. Egan Consol. Sch. Dist., 449 N.W.2d 259, 260 (S.D.1989) (citing Beville v. U.S.D./Bd. of Regents, 420 N.W.2d 9, 11 (S.D.1988)). We give no deference to the trial court’s order denying the state’s motion to dismiss. Id.
The question is whether the plaintiffs cause of action against state in tort would be barred by the doctrine of sovereign immunity. Hogan points out that his third party complaint against state for contribution or for indemnity under an implied contract theory does not sound in tort, but is equitable in origin. Dehn v. Prouty, 321 N.W.2d 534, 537 (S.D.1982); Degen v. Bayman, 86 S.D. 598, 200 N.W.2d 134, 136 (1972) (Degen I). See also Samuelson v. Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific Ry. Co., 287 Minn. 264, 178 N.W.2d 620, 623 (1970); 18 Am.Jur.2d Contribution § 2 (1985). The right to contribution is now codified at SDCL 15-8-12. However, actions for contribution do not stand alone. They are *494derivative of the principal action, and “[t]here can be no right to contribution unless the injured party has a possible remedy against two or more persons.” Burmeister v. Youngstrom, 81 S.D. 578, 139 N.W.2d 226, 231 (1965). See also 18 Am. Jur.2d, supra, at § 3. In other words, Hogan’s third party derivative action against state is barred by sovereign immunity if an action by the principal plaintiff against state in tort would have been barred by sovereign immunity.
In general, the doctrine of sovereign immunity as found in the common law and in our South Dakota Constitution means that the governing acts of the state, its agencies and other public entities2 cannot be attacked in court without the state’s consent. S.D. Const, art. Ill, § 27; Blue Fox Bar, Inc. v. City of Yankton, 424 N.W.2d 915, 917 (S.D.1988). However, this broad statement of the principle is subject to significant qualifications.
Not all acts performed by all public entities or their employees are governing acts. To prohibit all lawsuits against all public officials, regardless of the character of their jobs, and all public entities, regardless of the nature of their functions, would defeat another constitutional provision: the “open courts” provision at S.D. Const, art. VI, § 20, according to which “[a]ll courts shall be open, and every man for an injury done him in his property, person or reputation, shall have remedy by due course of law, and right and justice, administered without denial or delay.” See Oien v. City of Sioux Falls, 393 N.W.2d 286, 291 (S.D.1986).
Therefore, the negligent acts of public employees are not shielded by sovereign immunity when the employees are acting in a merely ministerial, rather than discretionary capacity. Gasper v. Freidel, 450 N.W.2d 226, 230 (S.D.1990); Bego v. Gordon, 407 N.W.2d 801, 806 (S.D.1987); Nat’l Bank of S.D. v. Leir, 325 N.W.2d 845, 848-850 (S.D.1982); Kruger v. Wilson, 325 N.W.2d 851, 853-854 (S.D.1982); Sioux Falls Constr. Co. v. City of Sioux Falls, 297 N.W.2d 454, 458-459 (S.D.1980). Similarly, the functions of a public entity which are proprietary or commercial, as opposed to governmental, are not shielded by sovereign immunity. Aune v. B-Y Water Dist., 464 N.W.2d 1, 3 (S.D.1990); Blue Fox Bar, 424 N.W.2d at 918; Oien v. City of Sioux Falls, 393 N.W.2d at 290-291; Jensen v. Juul, 66 S.D. 1, 278 N.W. 6, 8 (1938); State v. Board of Commissioners, 53 S.D. 609, 222 N.W. 583, 592 (1928); O’Rourke v. City of Sioux Falls, 4 S.D. 47, 54 N.W. 1044, 1045-46 (1893).
As to the state itself, “there is no distinction between governmental and proprietary functions.” High-Grade Oil Co., Inc. v. Sommer, 295 N.W.2d 736, 738 (S.D.1980) (citing State v. Board of Commissioners, 222 N.W. at 593). Therefore, the inquiry into whether a function is governmental or proprietary is only relevant in the case of non-state public entities like municipalities, which participate in the state’s sovereign immunity only “to a lesser extent.” Aune v. B-Y Water Dist., 464 N.W.2d at 5.
Even where suit against a public entity would otherwise be barred, either because it is the state or because it is a public entity other than the state acting in a governmental capacity, the public entity may choose to waive sovereign immunity. It may do so by entering into a contract which implicitly gives the other party to the contract a right of action upon it. Blue Fox Bar, 424 N.W.2d at 917-918. See also Finck v. City of Tea, 443 N.W.2d 632, 635 (S.D.1989). The state may also waive sovereign immunity by legislative enactment identifying the conditions under which lawsuits of a specified type would be permitted. S.D. Const, art. Ill, § 27; Brown v. Egan Consol. Sch. Dist, 449 N.W.2d at 262; Norgeot v. State, 334 N.W.2d 501, 503 (S.D.1983); High Grade Oil, 295 N.W.2d at 739.
*495“Under Article XIII, § 9 of our state constitution, construction and maintenance of public highways is a function of state government.” High-Grade Oil, 295 N.W.2d at 737. The state legislature has “paramount control over all the public highways of the state[.]” Hurley v. Rapid City, 80 S.D. 180, 121 N.W.2d 21, 24 (1963). State may delegate its “paramount control” over public highways to municipalities. Id. SDCL 9-45-1 provides:
Every municipality shall have power to lay out, establish, open, vacate, alter, widen, extend, improve, repair, grade, gravel, service, pave, repave, bridge, construct a viaduct upon or over, erect equipment for street lighting in and otherwise improve, and establish and change the grade of roads, streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public grounds, and to regulate the making of openings and connections therein and the erection of lights thereon as provided by this title.
However, whether control over the roadway on which Wilson died was delegated to city under SDCL 9-45-1 and, if so, whether city’s authority is governmental or proprietary need not be reached, because city neither based its motion for dismissal on sovereign immunity nor appealed the denial of its motion. However, even delegation of “paramount control” would not remove the shield of sovereign immunity from the state. Therefore, state is immune from suit arising from the construction and maintenance of roadways unless it has waived its sovereign immunity.
2. Waiver of Sovereign Immunity ?
The next question is whether state waived its sovereign immunity from suits arising from the construction or maintenance of roadways. It is clear that no contract is involved and had plaintiff brought an action against state, that action would have been in tort. Therefore, if state waived its sovereign immunity, it was by legislative action.
SDCL 21-32-16 provides in part:
To the extent ... liability insurance is purchased ... and to the extent coverage is afforded thereunder, the state shall be deemed to have waived the common law doctrine of sovereign immunity and consented to suit in the same manner that any other party may be sued.
Under this statute, the state’s sovereign immunity may be waived, but only by the purchase of liability insurance. The affidavit of state’s Commissioner of Bureau of Administration states that no such liability insurance has been purchased which would provide coverage for this tort action against state. Therefore, state has not waived its sovereign immunity under SDCL 21-32-16.
Even though self-insurance through participation in a risk sharing pool accomplishes the same purpose as purchase of commercial insurance, it has been held that participation in such a risk sharing pool does not waive the state’s sovereign immunity under SDCL 21-32-16. In re Request for Opinion of Supreme Court, 379 N.W.2d 822, 827 (S.D.1985). Nor does the state waive sovereign immunity through participation in a risk sharing pool under SDCL 21-32A-1:
To the extent that any public entity, other than the state, participates in a risk sharing pool or purchases liability insurance and to the extent that coverage is afforded thereunder, the public entity shall be deemed to have waived the common law doctrine of sovereign immunity and shall be deemed to have consented to suit in the same manner that any other party may be sued.... (Emphasis added).
While this statute permits some public entities to waive sovereign immunity by participating in a risk sharing pool, it specifically excludes state from its provisions.
Finally, we note that at the time of the accident, SDCL 31-32-10 provided:
In case any highway, culvert, or bridge shall become in whole or in part destroyed or out of repair by reason of floods, fires, or other cause to such extent as to endanger the safety of public travel, it shall be the duty of the governing body or board under statutory duty to maintain such highway, culvert, or bridge upon receiving notice thereof to *496cause to be erected for the protection of travel and pubic safety, within forty-eight hours thereafter, substantial guards over such defect or across such highway of sufficient height, width, and strength to guard the public from accident or injury and to repair the same within a reasonable time thereafter. It shall also be the duty of such governing body or board to guard any abandoned public highway, culvert, or bridge in like manner. Any officer who violates any of the provisions of this section commits a petty offense.
Although this statute imposes a duty, the duty is only to warn of danger and to make reasonably timely repairs upon notice that a damaged roadway is creating a safety hazard. The statute creates no duty to design or construct a roadway safely in the first place. Gulbranson v. Flandreau Twp., 458 N.W.2d 361, 362 (S.D.1990); Zens v. Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul & Pacific R.R. Co., 386 N.W.2d 475, 478 (S.D.1986). Beyond this narrow statutory duty, there is no common law duty that would permit a “right of action against a [public entity] for recovery of damages resulting from a defective highway.” Zens, supra (citations omitted).
Moreover, SDCL 31-32-10 does not waive the sovereign immunity of any public entity for breach of the warn-and-repair duty it sets forth. Its companion statute, SDCL 31-32-11, did that and provided in part:
Any person who shall sustain injury to person or property by reason of any violation of § 31-32-10 shall have a cause of action against the county, township, city, or town as the case may be for such damages as he may have sustained....
However, SDCL 31-32-11 was repealed in 1986 and even when it was in effect, it waived sovereign immunity only for public entities other than the state.
In summary, we hold that sovereign immunity shielded state from any liability in tort arising from the construction and maintenance of public roadways, and that sovereign immunity has not been waived by state. As a result, the doctrine of sovereign immunity would have barred suit by plaintiff against state for injuries and damages received in the September 20, 1989 car accident. Because a suit in tort against state would have been barred, Hogan’s derivative third party action against state for contribution or indemnity is also barred by sovereign immunity.
Since Hogan’s third party action is barred on the basis of sovereign immunity, we need not reach the issue of whether notice of the action to state was proper under SDCL 3-21-2 and 3-21-3.
Reversed and remanded, with directions to the circuit court to grant state’s motion for dismissal.
MILLER, C.J., and HENDERSON and AMUNDSON, JJ., concur.
WUEST, J., concurs in result.
. SDCL 3-21-2 provides:
No action for the recovery of damages for personal injury, property damages, error or omission or death caused by a public entity or its employees may be maintained against the public entity or its employees unless written notice of the time, place and cause of the injury is given to the public entity as provided by this chapter within one hundred eighty days after the injury.
SDCL 3-21-3 provides in part:
Notice shall be given to the attorney general and ... [i]n the case of the state of South Dakota, to the commissioner of administration; ... [i]n the case of a municipality, to the mayor or city finance officer[.]
. SDCL 3-21-1(1) defines "public entities” as: “the state of South Dakota, all of its branches and agencies, boards and commissions. The term also includes all public entities established by law exercising any part of the sovereign power of the state, including, but not limited to municipalities[.]”

=== CASE 9738871 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:04:43.1646+00 ===

Hunter, J.
Appellant was charged by affidavit in three counts with robbery, Ind. Ann. Stat. § 19-4101 (1956 Repl.), being an habitual criminal, Ind. Ann. Stat. § 9-2207 (1956 Repl.), and armed robbery, Ind. Ann. Stat. § 10-4709 (1956 Repl.). He was tried by jury, found guilty on all three counts, *72and was sentenced to life imprisonment for being an habitual criminal.
Ind. Ann. Stat. § 9-2208 (1956 Repl.) sets forth how a person is to be charged with being an habitual criminal.
“To authorize a sentence of imprisonment for life under this act, the indictment or affidavit shall allege that the defendant has been previously twice convicted, sentenced and imprisoned in some penal institution, for felonies, describing each separately.”
Pursuant to this statute, Count Two of the affidavit in the case at bar charged that the appellant had been previously convicted and imprisoned for two felonies:
“. . . that AARON VIRL JOHNSON WAS on or about the 27th day of FEBRUARY, 1948 CONVICTED IN THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE UNITED STATES FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF INDIANA, OF A FELONY, TO WIT: INTERSTATE TRANSPORTATION OF A STOLEN MOTOR VEHICLE, IN VIOLATION OF TITLE 18, SECTION 408, OF THE UNITED STATES CODE, AND THAT AS A RESULT OF, AND BASED ON SUCH CONVICTION, SAID DEFENDANT WAS SENTENCED ON FEBRUARY 27, 1948, BY SAID DISTRICT COURT OF THE UNITED STATES FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF IND ANA, TO THE UNITED STATES PENITENTIARY AT TERRE HAUTE, IN THE STATE OF INDIANA, WHICH WAS THEN AND THERE A PENAL INSTITUTION, FOR A TERM OF FIVE (5) YEARS, AND THAT IN PURSUANCE OF SAID JUDGMENT SAID AARON VIRL JOHNSON WAS IMPRISONED AT THE UNITED STATES PENITENTIARY AT TERRE HAUTE, IN THE STATE OF INDIANA, IN ACCORDANCE WITH SAID SENTENCE.
THAT AARON VIRL JOHNSON WAS ON THE 21ST DAY OF FEBRUARY, 1968, CONVICTED IN SUPERIOR COURT OF DELAWARE COUNTY NO. 2, IN THE STATE OF INDIANA, OF A FELONY, TO WIT: SECOND DEGREE BURGLARY, AND THAT AS A RESULT OF, AND BASED ON SUCH CONVICTION, SAID DEFENDANT WAS SENTENCED ON THE 4TH DAY OF *73MARCH, 1963, BY SAID SUPERIOR COURT OF DELAWARE COUNTY NO. 2 TO THE INDIANA STATE PRISON, AT MICHIGAN CITY, IN THE STATE OF INDIANA, WHICH WAS THEN AND THERE A PENAL INSTITUTION, FOR A TERM OF NOT LESS THAN TWO (2) NOR MORE THAN FIVE (5) YEARS, AND THAT IN PURSUANCE OF SAID JUDGMENT SAID AARON VIRL JOHNSON WAS IMPRISONED AT THE SAID INDIANA STATE PRISON, AT MICHIGAN CITY, IN THE STATE OF INDIANA, IN ACCORDANCE WITH SAID SENTENCE....”
The appellant filed a verified motion to quash this count on two separate grounds:
“(1) That said Second County (sic) of Affidavit, more specifically, rhetorical paragraph One (1) thereof, does not set out with certainty which County of the State of Indiana the Defendant was found guilty in and from which County said Defendant was sentenced. The Federal District Court for the Southern District of Indiana sits in many of the Counties in the State of Indiana;
(2) That said Second Count of Affidavit violates the right of Defendant not to incriminate himself in contravention of the Fifth Amendment of the Constitution of the United States and violates further the Defendant’s right to due process of law as provided by the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution of the United States.”
In a memorandum attached to this motion, the appellant argued that:
“To let the jury in the principal charge hear and know of defendant’s past criminal record, whether he takes the stand or not, is, in effect, making the defendant testify against himself and obviously contravenes the protection of the Fifth Amendment to the Constition of the United States.”
The trial court overruled the motion to quash, and the appellant contends that this ruling constitutes reversible error.
*74In support of his first contention, appellant argues that an affidavit charging a person with being an habitual criminal must allege two previous convictions with specificity and certainty, and that, since this affidavit did not allege the county in which one of the convictions had been obtained, it was not sufficiently specific. While it is true that the affidavit does not allege that the federal District Court for the Southern District of Indiana is located in Marion County, Indiana, we do not think this is an allegation which is required or appropriate. There is only one District Court of the United States for the Southern District of Indiana; it is not a county court and need not be identified by a county designation. Appellant’s reliance on Shutt v. State (1954), 233 Ind. 120, 117 N. E. 2d 268, and Goldstine v. State (1952), 230 Ind. 343, 103 N. E. 2d 438, is without merit since, in each of those cases, the charge failed to specify the name of the particular court in which the conviction had been obtained. Midland v. State (1943), 220 Ind. 668, 46 N. E. 2d 200, is inapplicable to the issues in this case as the affidavit in Midland failed to allege where the defendant had been imprisoned.
Appellant’s second contention can not be the basis of quashing Count Two of the affidavit. Ind. Anno. Stat. § 9-1129 (1956 Repl.) sets forth the reasons for which a defendant may move to quash an affidavit:
“The defendant may move to quash the indictment or affidavit when it appears upon the face thereof either:
First. That the grand jury which found the indictment had no legal authority to inquire into the offense charged.
Second. That the facts stated in the indictment or affidavit do not constitute a public offense.
Third. That the indictment or affidavit contains any matter which, if true, would constitute a legal justification of the offense charged, or other legal bar to the prosecution.
Fourth. That the indictment or affidavit does not state the offense with sufficient certainty.”
*75Since appellant’s second contention does not fall within one of the statutory grounds for sustaining a motion to quash, the trial court could not properly have considered this argument in ruling on the motion. Bottorf v. State (1927), 199 Ind. 540, 156 N. E. 555. State v. Jackson (1918), 187 Ind. 694, 121 N. E. 114. The appellant’s objection is not that Count Two of the affidavit is insufficient or improper on its face, but rather that it should not have been presented to the jury when they were making a determination on the principal charges. The objection, therefore, should not have been to quash the affidavit itself, but rather to suppress its presentment to the jury until after they determined appellant’s guilt or innocence on the principal charges.
To prove the allegations of Count Two, the state introduced Exhibits Nineteen and Twenty. Exhibit Nineteen is a certified copy of a conviction of the appellant by the United States District Court of the Southern District of Indiana for two separate felonies: interstate transportation of a stolen vehicle and illegal possession of a firearm. Exhibit Twenty is a certification of the appellant’s commitment to the United States Penitentiary at Terre Haute for both of those convictions and in addition for a conviction for the violation of the White Slave Traffic Act. Thus, in an apparent attempt to prove one of the two previous convictions alleged in the affidavit, the state was actually introducing evidence of two other previous convictions. While the defense counsel vigorously protested the introduction of these exhibits on the grounds that the state had not proved their authenticity and certification, no objections were made on the grounds that it was error to admit evidence of prior convictions. The trial court overruled the objections relating to the certification and authentication of these exhibits and permitted the prosecution to read them to the jury.
The appellant now contends that the trial court committed reversible error in admitting evidence of his past convictions while the jury was determining his guilt or innocence on the *76principal charges. He further contends that, even if it was proper to admit evidence establishing the two convictions alleged in the affidavit, it was error for the court to admit evidence of two other unrelated convictions.
Had the trial court admitted the two exhibits over a timely and valid objection by the appellant, this court could have considered the admissability of this evidence. However, there is no contention on appeal that the exhibits were not properly authenticated and certified, and this was the only objection presented to the trial court. We can not find that the trial court committed error in failing to consider an evidentiary objection which was not made when the evidence was introduced. White v. State (1955), 234 Ind. 193, 125 N. E. 2d 442.
This should not be construed to mean that this court necessarily approves the procedures presently used under the habitual criminal statutes. Had the issue been properly presented, this court might well have questioned the fairness of a procedure which allows the jury to learn of a defendant’s past convictions while deciding his guilt or innocence on the principal charge. Regarding this contention, this court has previously stated:
. . it has been held by the Supreme Court in this state and in other jurisdictions, that the allegation and proof of former convictions are alleged in the affidavit or indictment and shown upon the trial, for the single purpose of classifying the defendant as an habitual criminal, and for no other purpose. The jury has no right to consider such proof as bearing upon the charge for which the defendant is upon trial, except in so far as he has been cross-examined concerning those convictions” (our emphasis). Metzger v. State (1938), 214 Ind. 113, 117-118, 13 N. E. 2d 519, 521.
*77*76In other words, the justification for allowing evidence of prior convictions has been to “classify the defendant”, for the pur*77pose of imposing his sentence for the principal offense and the evidence is not to be considered in determining his guilt or innocence of that offense. Smith v. State (1949), 227 Ind. 672, 87 N. E. 2d 881. The mental manipulation required by the present procedure would be difficult for one specialy trained in the rules of evidence, and we would be less than realistic to expect evidence of prior convictions not to influence the jurors’ determination of guilt or innocence on the principal offense. See Spencer v. Texas (1967), 385 U. S. 554. However, this question was never properly presented to the trial court and, therefore, cannot be considered by this court on this appeal.
For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the trial court must be affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
DeBruler, C. J., and Givan, J., concur.
Arterburn and Jackson, JJ., concur in result.
Note.—Reported in 245 N. E. 2d 659.