=== CASE 2223892 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:09.656906+00 ===

338 N.W.2d 53 (1983)
215 Neb. 240
William P. HARRIS and Evelyn P. Harris, Appellees,
v.
Viola EBERHARDT, Appellant.
No. 82-484.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
August 26, 1983.
*54 W.G. Whitford, Madison, for appellant.
No appearance for appellees.
BOSLAUGH, WHITE, and HASTINGS, JJ., and BROWER and McGINN, District Judges.
PER CURIAM.
The plaintiffs, William and Evelyn Harris, instituted an action in the small claims court of Madison County, asking judgment in the sum of $1,000 on the ground that "defendant refuses to release savings of plaintiffs." The claim was based on the allegation that the defendant had not returned all of the money which had been entrusted to her by the plaintiff William Harris. After a trial, at which the parties appeared, the small claims court determined that of the $1,654 placed in confidence with the defendant, she had not returned $874. On appeal the District Court, hearing the case de novo, found that the defendant had not returned $854, and entered judgment accordingly. We affirm.
The defendant has assigned two points of error on appeal to this court. First, the defendant contends that the small claims court and the District Court erred in proceeding on a complaint for money damages which did not state a cause of action.
The entire matter in small claims court is on a very informal basis, with a minimum of procedural requirements. State ex rel. Simpson v. Vondrasek, 203 Neb. 693, 279 N.W.2d 860 (1979). Neb.Rev. Stat. § 24-526 (Reissue 1979) provides that "No formal pleadings other than the claim and notice, and the counterclaim or setoff and notice, if appropriate, shall be required in the Small Claims Court ...."
This court's holding in Fuchser v. Jacobson, 205 Neb. 786, 290 N.W.2d 449 (1980), is pertinent here. In that decision we held that "Inasmuch as no specific theories of recovery are required to be pleaded in Small Claims Court, that court's decision must be affirmed by the District Court if it can be founded on any theory supported by the evidence." Id. at 788, 290 N.W.2d at 451. We believe the evidence amply supported the court's finding.
Second, the defendant argues that the small claims court lacked the necessary jurisdiction to try the case, since the mail receipt of the notice was not signed by the defendant. Neb.Rev.Stat. § 24-524(3) (Reissue 1979) provides that "Service by mail shall be complete upon return to the court of the receipt signed by the defendant...."
In this case, however, the defendant did not challenge the sufficiency of the notice before the small claims court, but participated fully on the merits of her cause. These acts constituted a general appearance before that tribunal. Abel v. Southwest Cas. Ins. Co., 182 Neb. 605, 156 N.W.2d 166 (1968); Ivaldy v. Ivaldy, 157 Neb. 204, 59 N.W.2d 373 (1953).
This court has long adhered to the general rule that "A general appearance waives any defects in the process or notice, the steps preliminary to its issuance, or in the service or return thereof." 6 C.J.S. Appearances § 41 at 67 (1975); White v. Merriam, 16 Neb. 96, 19 N.W. 703 (1884); Cropsey v. Wiggenhorn, 3 Neb. 108 (1873).
As the Supreme Court of Arkansas said in Pender v. McKee, 266 Ark. 18, 35, 582 S.W.2d 929, 938 (1979), "Any defect in the process, the return thereon or the service thereof is cured or waived by the appearance of the defendant without raising an objection, and he is precluded from thereafter taking advantage of the defect." It is immaterial that the defendant was *55 ignorant of the irregularity which rendered the process ineffective. 5 Am.Jur.2d Appearance § 7 (1962).
For the reasons stated above, the decision of the District Court must be affirmed.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 3784450 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:10.145015+00 ===

Plaintiff in error Andrew Voytko contends that the Court of Appeals erred in finding that subcontractors and materialmen held liens upon the consideration agreed to be paid by the owner to the principal contractor, i. e., the old house; that it was error for the court in any case to order the sale of real estate in no sense the res of the action, and against which no relief had been sought in the action below. That the action of the Court of Appeals was a proceeding in error, not a trial de novo; and that it was not only error but a denial of the constitutional right to due process of law to there order the sale of property not the subject of the action, and to decree enforcement of rights not asserted in the court of common pleas, as to which the plaintiffs in error never had an opportunity to present a defense.
It is conceded that all the liens are regular in form and that each lienholder has fully complied with the statute.
The crucial question to be determined in this case is whether or not Section 8313, General Code, providing that "the owner * * * shall not be liable to the subcontractors, material men or laborers for any greater amount than he contracted to pay the original contractor," shall be regarded as denying recovery by the holders of mechanics' liens herein on their liens on the new house, even though Section 8310 makes provision that "every person who *Page 555
does work or labor upon, or furnishes * * * material, * * * shall have a lien to secure the payment thereof * * * upon the interest * * * in the lot or land upon which they may stand, * * * to the extent of the right, title and interest of the owner."
Prior to the amendment of the Constitution in 1912, the right of lienholders, subcontractors, materialmen, etc., to direct liens did not exist; an act so providing being held unconstitutional by this court in Palmer  Crawford v. Tingle,55 Ohio St. 423, 45 N.E. 313. To meet this emergency, the amendment to the Constitution in 1912 was passed, Section 33, Article II, to the effect that "laws may be passed to secure to * * * subcontractors and material men, their just dues by direct lien upon the property, upon which they have bestowed labor or for which they have furnished material. No other provision of the constitution shall impair or limit this power."
Pursuant to this constitutional amendment, Sections 8310 and 8313, General Code, together with other sections, were passed in April, 1913, constituting the so-called Mechanic's Lien Code (103 Ohio Laws, 369). It is apparent that the constitutional intent was to give a direct lien to subcontractors and materialmen upon the structure and the lot upon which the same was situated, which structure their labor and material produced. The provision of Section 8313 in the expression, "shall not be liable to the subcontractors, material men or laborers for any greater amount than he contracted to pay the original contractor," merely places a limitation on the owner's liability; and the fact that the contract does not provide for payment in money, but for payment *Page 556
in some other form, does not operate to deprive the lienholders of their right to recover under the statute. The aggregate of the liens in this case does not exceed the amount named in the contract between the owner and the principal contractor.
The verdict of the jury rendered in this case upon Ehret's claim that he was entitled to personal judgment for money against Voytko did not affect the amount which Voytko had contracted to pay to Ehret, which was $5,050, although, as above indicated, the consideration was not payable in money but in the real estate to be exchanged. Being therefore of opinion that Sections 8313 and 8310 are not inconsistent as applied to this case, and that Section 8310 makes plain provision for a lien upon the interest of the owner in any real estate upon which the labor and materials of subcontractors and materialmen have entered by the construction of a building thereon, it follows that the judgment and decree of the common pleas court should be affirmed and that of the Court of Appeals reversed.
Judgment of the Court of Appeals reversed and Judgment of thecourt of common pleas affirmed.
KINKADE, MATTHIAS and ALLEN, JJ., concur. *Page 557

=== CASE 9740506 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:42.720441+00 ===

OPINION
BARNES, Judge.
Case Summary
Scott Wells appeals his convictions for Class C misdemeanor operating a vehicle while intoxicated (“OWI”) and Class B misdemeanor disorderly conduct. We affirm.
*1139Issues
We restate and reorder the issues before us as:
I. whether the jury venire represented a fair cross-section of the community of Monroe County;
II. whether the trial court properly denied Wells’s motion for a continuance;
III. whether the State committed pros-ecutorial misconduct during closing argument;
IV. whether the statutes defining the offense of OWI are void for vagueness; and
V. whether Wells’s disorderly conduct conviction violates his right to free speech under Article 1, Section 9 of the Indiana Constitution.
Facts
The following facts reflect the evidence in a light most favorable to the convictions. In 2002, Wells was a Bloomington city councilman. Bud and Amy Bernitt, as well as their acquaintance, Indiana State Police Sergeant J.D. Maxwell, also were involved in local politics, but at the other end of the political spectrum from Wells. On September 27, 2002, Bud called Sergeant Maxwell at his home to inform him that he believed Wells was driving a vehicle while intoxicated. Bud reported that he had seen Wells leave the Crazy Horse bar in Bloomington, then drive erratically to the corner of Sixth and Dunn Streets, where Wells exited his car and urinated in the street.
Sergeant Maxwell called State Police dispatch to see if any troopers were available to investigate Bud’s report. After learning that Trooper Stacy Brown was available, Sergeant Maxwell asked the post commander to have Trooper Brown call him at home, which deviated from regular State Police procedure. When Trooper Brown called, Sergeant Maxwell told him Bud’s story and asked him to meet the Bernitts in a parking lot near Sixth and Dunn Streets. The Bernitts related what they had seen and gave Trooper Brown a description of Wells and his vehicle, but did not reveal that they knew Wells.
Trooper Brown then left and soon thereafter located Wells’s vehicle parked illegally. He called to have the vehicle towed, but Wells got into the vehicle and drove away before a tow truck could arrive. At first, Wells was not wearing his seatbelt, but he put it on after driving by and seeing Trooper Brown’s police car. Trooper Brown then pulled behind Wells and saw Wells make a sharp turn around a corner, head to the curb, then overcorrect so that Wells was straddling the center line of the street. Trooper Brown then initiated a stop of the vehicle.
When Trooper Brown approached Wells’s vehicle, the window was rolled up and Wells had evident difficulty rolling the window down but finally was able to do so. Trooper Brown asked Wells for his license and registration, and Wells responded by asking repeatedly why he had been stopped, sometimes using profane language. Pursuant to Trooper Brown’s training and usual practice, he asks for a license and registration before advising a driver why he or she has been pulled over. Finally, Wells attempted to give his license to Trooper Brown but had difficulty finding and removing it from a stack of cards held together by a rubber band, even though the license was on top of the stack.
Trooper Brown then told Wells that he had been pulled over for not wearing a seatbelt. Wells again responded by being argumentative and using profane language. When Trooper Brown also told Wells of his erratic driving and the report that he had urinated in the street, Wells *1140called Trooper Brown a “f* * *ing liar.” Tr. p. 149.
At this point, Trooper Brown noticed the smell of alcohol on Wells’s breath. Trooper Brown also noticed that Wells’s eyes were red and watery and that his speech was sometimes slurred and mumbled. Wells also began asking Trooper Brown if he knew who Wells was, and Trooper Brown responded that he did not know and did not care. Wells also asked if Trooper Brown knew Sergeant Maxwell, and when Trooper Brown said he did, Wells began stating that he had been “set up” by Maxwell. Id. at 152. Trooper Brown later admitted that he was unhappy with Sergeant Maxwell’s actions, but nevertheless believed that the Bernitts’ report that Wells was driving while intoxicated was proven to be correct.
Because Wells was being belligerent and highly emotional, and as part of normal protocol for investigating a possible OWI, Trooper Brown called Trooper Travis Coryea for assistance. Before Trooper Coryea arrived on the scene, a nearby resident, Joel Chanvisanuruk, called 911 because Wells was “freaking out.” Id. at 278. Specifically, Wells was shouting and screaming extensively and appeared to be angry to the extent that Chanvisanuruk was concerned for Trooper Brown’s safety and thought he needed backup to help deal with Wells.
When Trooper Coryea arrived, he and Trooper Brown repeatedly asked Wells to get out of his car before Wells finally did so. Wells had difficulty exiting the car; he started to fall backwards in the car when he turned in his seat to exit and had to pull himself up on the steering wheel before getting out, and after getting out he again started to fall backwards before reaching back and steadying himself on the car and closing the door. Wells refused to perform any field sobriety tests and again yelled that he was being embarrassed “because of that motherf* * *er J.D. Maxwell.... ” Id. at 160. When Trooper Brown attempted to inform Wells of the implied consent law, Wells repeatedly interrupted him by yelling obscenities and asserting that he had been set up. Throughout Trooper Brown’s interaction with Wells, he repeatedly asked Wells to quiet down, but Wells did not do so.
When Wells refused to take a breath test after being read the implied consent law, Trooper Brown decided to place Wells under arrest. After learning this, Wells refused to cooperate with Trooper Brown and Coryea’s attempts to handcuff him and place him in a police car. Again, Wells repeatedly yelled obscenities at the troopers in connection with his claim that he had been set up.
On November 7, 2002, the State charged Wells with Class A misdemeanor OWI, Class D felony battery on a law enforcement officer, Class A misdemeanor resisting law enforcement, Class B misdemeanor public intoxication, Class B misdemeanor disorderly conduct, and Class D infraction failure to use a seat belt. The State later amended the information to remove the public intoxication and seat belt charges. Before trial, Wells moved to disqualify the jury panel because it contained no Indiana University-Bloomington students. The trial court denied the motion. On November 12, 2003, a jury found Wells guilty of Class C misdemeanor OWI, a lesser-included offense of Class A misdemeanor OWI, and of disorderly conduct; it acquitted Wells of resisting law enforcement and battery on a police officer. Wells now appeals.
Analysis
I. Jury Venire
Wells contends that the jury venire for his trial did not represent a fair cross-section of the Monroe County community, in violation of the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution. Specifically, *1141Wells notes that the jury venire included no students attending Indiana University-Bloomington (“IU”). He also claims that those students comprise almost one-third of Monroe County’s census population, or approximately 38,000 out of 120,000 residents.
“[T]he selection of a petit jury from a representative cross section of the community is an essential component of the Sixth Amendment right to a jury trial.” Taylor v. Louisiana, 419 U.S. 522, 528, 95 S.Ct. 692, 697, 42 L.Ed.2d 690 (1975). The jury selection process should operate to reflect a reasonable cross-section of the community from which the veni-re is drawn. Wilder v. State, 813 N.E.2d 788, 791 (Ind.Ct.App.2004), trans. denied (disapproved of on other grounds by Laux v. State, 821 N.E.2d 816, 820 n. 4 (Ind.2005)). There is no requirement, however, that jury panels be a microcosm of a county or a court district. Id. “Jurors need not be mathematically proportioned to the character of the community, and there is no requirement that any particular class be represented on every jury.” Id. The primary requirement is that the selection of a jury venire should not be arbitrary. Id.
In order to establish a prima fa-cie violation of the fair cross-section requirement, the defendant bears the burden of showing: 1) that the group alleged to be excluded is a “distinctive” group in the community; 2) that the representation of this group in venires from which juries are selected is not fair and reasonable in relation to the number of such persons in the community; and 3) that this underrepre-sentation is due to systematic exclusion of the group in the jury selection process. Id. If a defendant makes a prima facie showing that he has been denied his right to have a jury drawn from a fair cross-section of the community, the burden shifts to the State to justify the selection process by showing that attainment of a fair cross-section is incompatible with a significant state interest. Id. at 791-92.
Indiana’s jury pool selection method is governed by statute. Azania v. State, 778 N.E.2d 1253, 1256 (Ind.2002). Indiana Code Section 33-28-4-3(c) allows jury commissioners to use a computerized jury selection system, but requires that the system employed “must be fair and may not violate the rights of persons with respect to the impartial and random selection of prospective jurors.” Our supreme court has held that our state jury selection statute, in requiring an “impartial and random selection,” demands no less than the Sixth Amendment. Id. at 1259.
The manner in which Monroe County selected the jury venire for Wells’s case comported with the jury selection statute. It utilized voter registration and property tax records, as required by subsection (a) of Indiana Code Section 33-28-4-3, and supplemented those lists with records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles, as permitted by subsections (f) and (g) of the same statute.1 The fact that this selection method resulted in no IU students in Wells’s jury pool would seem to indicate that many do not consider themselves to be part of the Monroe County “community” to the extent that they have voted, purchased property, or obtained a driver’s license or registered a vehicle in the county. Also, to the extent some IU students have voted, purchased property, or registered with the BMV as a Monroe County resident, there was evidence presented that a large number of jury questionnaires sent to these students are returned by the post office as undeliverable and often no *1142current address for these students can be readily found. This further supports the conclusion that most IU students are not permanent members of the Monroe County “community.”
We also conclude that Wells has failed to meet his burden of demonstrating that IU students constitute a distinctive group within the Monroe County community for purposes of a fair cross-section analysis. This court has held, “‘[BJefore exclusion may be held improper, there must be a common thread running through the excluded group[,J a basic similarity of attitudes, ideas or experience among its members so that the exclusion prevents juiies from reflecting a cross-section of the community.’ ” Moore v. State, 427 N.E.2d 1135, 1138 (Ind.Ct.App.1981) (quoting Adams v. Superior Ct. of San Diego Co., 12 Cal.3d 55, 115 Cal.Rptr. 247, 524 P.2d 375, 379 (1974)). Our supreme court previously “has explicitly rejected the contention that persons between eighteen and twenty four years old are a distinctive group” for fair cross-section purposes. Ewing v. State, 719 N.E.2d 1221, 1226 (Ind.1999). Most IU students would fall into this age category, but Wells attempts to avoid the holding of cases like Ewing by arguing that it is not only the age of the students that is relevant, but also that they “are more diverse in their ethnic, racial, and religious characteristics than the rest of the population” of Monroe County. Appellant’s Br. p. 38. This seems to directly contradict the Moore requirement of a “distinctive” group within a community sharing common attitudes, ideas, and experiences.
Any conclusion that college students are somehow “different” from other members of the community would have to rely on stereotypical assumptions about them; i.e., that college students as a whole think differently, on average, from other members of society as a whole and on average. We decline to engage in such unsupported speculation. Wells has failed to establish the first prong of the test for establishing a prima facie violation of the fair cross-section requirement.
We also observe, as has the Supreme Court, that most cases finding a violation of the fair cross-section component of the Sixth Amendment or the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment have involved groups such as African-Americans, women, and Mexican-Americans. See Lockhart v. McCree, 476 U.S. 162, 175, 106 S.Ct. 1758, 1766, 90 L.Ed.2d 137 (1986) (citing Peters v. Kiff 407 U.S. 493, 92 S.Ct. 2163, 33 L.Ed.2d 83 (1972); Duren v. Missouri, 439 U.S. 357, 99 S.Ct. 664, 58 L.Ed.2d 579 (1979); Castaneda v. Partida, 430 U.S. 482, 97 S.Ct. 1272, 51 L.Ed.2d 498 (1977)). The Court identified several special concerns in cases where such groups were excluded from jury pools, including that such exclusion was “completely unrelated to the ability of members of the group to serve as jurors in a particular case,” the exclusion was on the basis of immutable characteristics such as race, gender, or ethnic background, and that “such exclusion improperly deprived members of these often historically disadvantaged groups of their right as citizens to serve on juries in criminal cases.” Id. No such concerns are present in this case concerning the exclusion of IU students from Wells’s jury pool, which appears to have resulted from the fact that such persons generally are not permanent residents of the Monroe County community and not because of any improper reason.2 *1143We perceive no violation of the Sixth Amendment in the selection of Wells’s jury venire.
II. Motion for Continuance
Wells contends the trial court erred in refusing his request for a brief continuance before the commencement of voir dire. The request was made after the State belatedly revealed certain evidence not previously made available to Wells during the normal course of discovery. The evidence consisted of audiotapes of police radio traffic on the night of Wells’s arrest, which allegedly might support a conclusion that law enforcement officials wished to “cover up” certain details of the incident.3 The existence of the tapes was first disclosed on the day before voir dire was set to begin. On the morning of voir dire, counsel for Wells stated that he had not yet received all of the State’s transcripts of the tapes, and counsel requested that voir dire be delayed for an hour and a half in order to obtain and review the transcripts. The trial court denied this specific request, but expressed displeasure at the State’s late disclosure of the evidence and did agree to delay the presentation of evidence to the jury until Wells had had an opportunity to review the new evidence.
Wells does not argue that his continuance motion was based upon grounds set forth in Indiana Code Section 35-36-7-1. Rulings on non-statutory motions for continuance are within the sound discretion of the trial court and will be reversed only for an abuse of that discretion and resultant prejudice. Schmid v. State, 804 N.E.2d 174, 177 (Ind.Ct.App.2004), trans. denied. An abuse of discretion occurs only if a decision is clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and circumstances before the court. Id.
Because the continuance in this case was requested following the State’s alleged violation of a discovery order, we also note that absent clear error and resulting prejudice, the trial court’s determination of discovery violations and sanctions ordinarily will be affirmed. Fleming v. State, 833 N.E.2d 84, 91 (Ind.Ct.App.2005). “When reviewing a challenge to discovery matters, we must give a trial court wide discretionary latitude.” Id. “In cases where there has been a failure to comply with discovery procedures, the trial court is usually in the best position to determine the dictates of fundamental fairness and whether any resulting harm can be eliminated or satisfactorily alleviated.” Id. A continuance is usually the proper remedy if a discovery violation warrants remedial measures. Id. Although the negligent destruction or withholding of material evidence by police or prosecution may present grounds for reversal, an appellant must affirmatively show that there was error prejudicial to his or her substantial rights before reversal is warranted. Id. at 92.
Wells does not argue that he was not, in fact, given sufficient time to prepare for the presentation of evidence to the jury after the late disclosure of the audiotapes. Instead, he argues that he was disadvantaged by not fully knowing the contents of the tapes before conducting voir dire of the potential jurors. To address this argument, it will be helpful to review the purpose and regulation of voir dire in Indiana.
The function of voir dire examination is not to educate jurors. Perryman v. State, 830 N.E.2d 1005, 1008 (Ind. *1144Ct.App.2005). Instead, it is to ascertain whether jurors can render a fair and impartial verdict in accordance with the law and the evidence. Id. “Jurors are to be examined to eliminate bias but not to condition them to be receptive to the questioner’s position.” Id. Questions that seek to shape a favorable jury by deliberate exposure to the substantive issues in the case are improper. Id.
At the same time, proper examination may include questions designed to disclose the prospective jurors’ attitudes about the type of offense charged in order to allow the parties to intelligently exercise challenges. Id. Similarly, the parties may attempt to uncover the prospective jurors’ preconceived ideas about a defense the defendant intends to use. Id. “To make these determinations, the parties may pose hypothetical questions, provided they do not suggest prejudicial evidence not adduced at trial.” Id.
In the present case, it is clear that a central tenet of Wells’s defense was that he had been improperly “set up” by local law enforcement and political opponents. This was true practically from the moment Wells was first pulled over by Trooper Brown. Any voir dire conducted by Wells’s counsel of prospective jurors could have be.en tailored to assess their preconceived ideas about the trustworthiness of law enforcement and their potential receptivity to a defense centered on an alleged abuse of police power by political operatives, regardless of whether counsel knew the full contents of the late-appearing audiotapes. Those tapes merely had the potential to enhance claims of abuse of power, not to create an entirely new defense. In any event, Wells’s counsel properly would have been precluded from delving into details of his prospective defense during voir dire.4 See Perryman, 830 N.E.2d at 1008. Given this, and that the trial court was in the best position to determine the appropriate remedy for the State’s discovery violation, we cannot say the court abused its discretion in fashioning a remedy that included delaying the presentation of evidence to the jury, but not delaying the commencement of voir dire. We also find no definitive prejudice to Wells resulting from the discovery violation and the trial court’s remedy for it.
III. Prosecutorial Misconduct
Wells also claims that one of the prosecutors engaged in misconduct during closing argument by stating, “If there had been a slightest bit of credible evidence that Trooper Brown and Coryea conspired with J.D. or Bud Bernitt to arrest the Defendant, I wouldn’t have prosecuted this.” Tr. pp. 1431-32. Wells immediately objected to this comment. The trial court sustained the objection and directed the jury to disregard the comment. However, the court did not grant Wells’s contemporaneous motion for a mistrial.
Reversal of a conviction based on a claim of prosecutorial misconduct requires a determination that the misconduct had a probable persuasive effect on the jury’s decision. Rodriguez v. State, 795 N.E.2d 1054, 1058 (Ind.Ct.App.2003), trans. denied. When reviewing a properly preserved claim of prosecutorial misconduct, such as Wells’s, we first determine whether the prosecutor engaged in misconduct and then consider whether, under all of the circumstances, the prosecutor’s misconduct placed the defendant in a position of grave peril to which he or she should not have been subjected. Id. “This inquiry depends upon an analysis of the probable persuasive effect any misconduct had on the jury’s decision, and whether the al*1145leged misconduct was repeated such that it appears that the prosecutor engaged in a deliberate attempt to improperly prejudice the defendant.” Id. at 1059. Additionally, a mistrial is an extreme remedy that is warranted only when less severe sanctions will not satisfactorily correct the error. Id. A decision to deny a motion for a mistrial is within the trial court’s discretion. Id.5
Wells claims that the prosecutor’s statement constituted impermissible vouching prohibited by Section 3.4(e) of the Indiana Code of Professional Responsibility, which states:
A lawyer shall not ... in trial, allude to any matter that the lawyer does not reasonably believe is relevant or that will not be supported by admissible evidence, assert personal knowledge of facts in issue except when testifying as a witness, or state a personal opinion as to the justness of a cause, the credibility of a witness, the culpability of a civil litigant or the guilt or innocence of the accused....
We agree that under this rule, it was improper for the prosecutor to express his personal opinion as to the merits or justness of the case against Wells.
We cannot conclude that Wells suffered grave peril as a result of this conduct. First, the one-sentence comment occurred in the midst of a closing argument by the State that spans over eighty pages in the transcript and that was divided between two attorneys because of its length. Wells points to no other comments made by either prosecutor that would have warranted a mistrial. The statement appears to have been a one-time mistake by the prosecutor, not part of a deliberate and concerted effort to unfairly prejudice Wells.
Second, the trial court immediately recognized and appropriately addressed the statement by directing the jurors to disregard the statement. It also gave final instructions informing the jurors that they were the exclusive judges of the evidence, and that unsworn statements of counsel were not evidence they could consider in reaching their decision. Given the isolated nature of the prosecutor’s objectionable comment and the trial court’s admonition and instructions to the jury, we cannot say the trial court abused its discretion in denying Wells’s motion for a mistrial, nor do we believe reversal of his convictions is required.
TV. Vagueness of OWI Statutes
Next, we address Wells’s claim that the statutes defining the offense of Class C misdemeanor OWI .are unconstitutionally void for vagueness.6 Indiana Code *1146Section 9-30-5-2(a) provides, “a person who operates a vehicle while intoxicated commits a Class C misdemeanor.” Indiana Code Section 9-13-2-86 defines “intoxicated” as being under the influence of alcohol or another substance “so that there is an impaired condition of thought and action and the loss of normal control of a person’s faculties.” Wells argues that a person of ordinary intelligence would be unable to determine the conduct prohibited by the statutes because they do not precisely define what amount of alcohol consumption could lead to a finding of impairment under the laws. Wells also contends that the vague nature of the statutes could lead to arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement of the laws.
Initially, we note that challenges to the constitutionality of a criminal statute generally must be raised through a motion to dismiss prior to trial, and the failure to do so waives the issue on appeal. Adams v. State, 804 N.E.2d 1169, 1172 (Ind.Ct.App.2004). We see no indication in the record that Wells ever filed any such motion with respect to the OWI charge. Although we could consider this issue waived for our review, we choose to address it on the merits.
We begin with a “presumption of constitutionality” when the validity of a statute is challenged. State v. Lombardo, 738 N.E.2d 653, 655 (Ind.2000). The party challenging the statute bears the burden of rebutting this presumption, and all reasonable doubts must be resolved in favor of the statute’s constitutionality. Id. “A statute will not be found unconstitutionally vague if individuals of ordinary intelligence would comprehend it adequately to inform them of the proscribed conduct.” Id. at 656. The statute need only inform the individual of the generally proscribed conduct, and need not list with exactitude each item of conduct prohibited. Id. Finally, vagueness challenges to statutes that do not involve First Amendment freedoms must be examined in light of the particular facts of the case at hand. Id.
Criminalizing operating a vehicle while intoxicated does not impact any First Amendment freedoms. Thus, we will examine the specific facts of this case to determine whether Wells was put on sufficient notice that the OWI statutes prohibited his conduct. The evidence most favorable to the OWI conviction reveals that Wells was unsteady on his feet and had difficulty exiting his car, had impaired manual dexterity, had bloodshot eyes and slurred or mumbled speech, was loud and belligerent, and smelled of alcohol. These are all clear signs of intoxication. See Dunkley v. State, 787 N.E.2d 962, 965 (Ind.Ct.App.2003). A person of ordinary intelligence reasonably should be on notice that driving a vehicle while exhibiting such signs is illegal and prohibited by the OWI statutes. See Lombardo, 738 N.E.2d at 656 (holding that person of ordinary intelligence would be on notice that defendant’s particular conduct in that case violated the anti-wiretapping statute).
Wells contends that because there is not a crystal clear definition of what constitutes “intoxication,” persons could never know whether they had reached that threshold before making a decision whether to drive a vehicle. First, we note again that there were clear indications in this case that Wells was intoxicated and should not have been driving. Second, to the *1147extent that persons who have been drinking might have some doubt as to whether they are legally “intoxicated,” it surely is reasonable to ask such persons to err on the side of caution and not drive.7 Third, we reiterate that criminal statutes need not be written with the degree of exactitude that Wells seems to be demanding. See id.
Wells also seems to contend that the OWI statutes were rendered unconstitutionally vague by 2001 amendments to the statutes. Prior to the 2001 amendments, Indiana Code Section 9-30-5-2 provided for one offense of Class A misdemeanor OWI. Also, Indiana Code Section 9-13-2-86 defined “intoxicated” as “an impaired condition of thought and action and the loss of normal control of a person’s faculties to an extent that endangers a person.” The 2001 amendments removed “to an extent that endangers a person” from the definition of “intoxication,” created the offense of Class C misdemeanor OWI, and provided that OWI is a Class A misdemeanor if the person is so intoxicated that driving a vehicle endangers a person.
We fail to see how the 2001 amendments rendered the OWI statutes unconstitutionally vague. Conviction for Class A misdemeanor OWI still requires prove of intoxication to a degree that operating a vehicle results in endangerment to any person. The creation of the new Class C misdemeanor OWI offense does not require definitive proof of endangerment, but it still requires proof of impairment. The argument could be made that driving a vehicle while intoxicated always endangers someone. However, it might not always be possible to prove such endangerment beyond a reasonable doubt to a fact-finder’s satisfaction, and that clearly was the case here. Regardless of whether there is intoxication to the point of endangerment, persons of reasonable intelligence still are on clear notice that driving while impaired, or while exhibiting signs of impairment such as Wells did here, is illegal. Wells has not met his burden of establishing that the OWI statutes are void for vagueness.
V. Disorderly Conduct
Finally, we address Wells’s argument that his conviction for disorderly conduct violates Article 1, Section 9 of the Indiana Constitution.8 Article 1, Section 9 states, “No law shall be passed, restraining the free interchange of thought and opinion, or restricting the right to speak, write, or print, on any subject whatever: but for the abuse of that right, every person shall be responsible.” The portion of the disorderly conduct statute under which Wells was charged and convicted states, “A person who recklessly, knowingly, or intentionally ... [m]akes unreasonable noise and continues to do so after being asked to stop *1148... commits disorderly conduct....” Ind. Code § 35-45-1-3.
When reviewing whether the State has violated Article 1, Section 9, we first must determine whether state action has restricted a person’s expressive activity. See U.M. v. State, 827 N.E.2d 1190, 1192 (Ind.Ct.App.2005). There is no question that Wells’s conviction for disorderly conduct based on his yelling at Troopers Brown and Coryea satisfies this first requirement.
If, as here, state action has restricted a person’s expressive activity, the court then must decide whether the restricted activity constituted an “abuse” of the right to speak. See id. In the ordinary case, the reviewing court is typically only required to find the State’s determination of an “abuse” to be rational. See id. If, however, a claimant is able to show that the expressive activity was “political,” the State must demonstrate that it did not “materially burden” the claimant’s opportunity to engage in political expression. Id. The State does not “materially burden” “political” expression if the restricted speech “inflicted particularized harm analogous to tortious injury on readily identifiable private interests.” Id. “Evidence of mere annoyance or inconvenience is not sufficient” to justify restricting political speech. Id.
The difficult question in this case is whether Wells’s tirade following the stop by Trooper Brown constituted political speech. Expressive activity is political if its point is to comment on government action, including criticizing the conduct of an official acting under color of law. Whittington v. State, 669 N.E.2d 1363, 1370 (Ind.1996). “In contrast, where an individual’s expression focuses on the conduct of a private party — including the speaker himself or herself-it is not political.” Id. Courts judge the nature of expression by an objective standard, and the burden is on the claimant to demonstrate that his or her expression would have been understood as political. Id. “If the expression, viewed in context, is ambiguous, a reviewing court should find that the claimant has not established that it was political and should evaluate the constitutionality of any state-imposed restriction of the expression under standard rationality review.” Id.
In Price v. State, 622 N.E.2d 954 (Ind.1993), our supreme court first set forth the special protection afforded political speech under Article 1, Section 9 of the Indiana Constitution and reversed the disorderly conduct conviction of a defendant who had yelled loudly and profanely at police officers. Initially, the defendant was yelling with respect to the officers’ treatment of a third party whom they had arrested, but after her own arrest the defendant began yelling, “F* * * you. I haven’t done anything.” Noting that it was clear that the defendant’s tirade “was a protest about the legality and appropriateness of police conduct,” our supreme court concluded that the defendant’s expressive activity was political speech and stated, “When a citizen’s protest is occasioned by the conduct of government actors and regards a matter of public concern, it is squarely within the public pale.” Price, 622 N.E.2d at 961.
Price, by itself, might support the conclusion that Wells’s tirade, in part directed toward Troopers Brown and Coryea and indirectly toward Sergeant Maxwell, was political speech. In fact, our supreme court later clarified that portions of the Price defendant’s tirade were not political in Whittington v. State, 669 N.E.2d 1363 (Ind.1996). Chief Justice Shepard, who also authored Price, wrote for the majority, “where an individual’s expression focuses on the conduct of a private party— including the speaker himself or herself— it is not political.” Id. at 1370. He noted that in Price, the defendant was protesting *1149police treatment of another citizen before being warned to be quiet, at which time her expression shifted to a defense of her own conduct. Id. The Chief Justice then concluded, “It was the State’s reliance on Price’s pre-warning political expression to prove an essential element of the offense that was fatal to the conviction.” Id. (emphasis added). Additionally, Whittington clarified that a defendant has the burden of establishing that particular speech is political, and if there is ambiguity about the nature of certain speech, courts should err on the side of concluding that it is not political. Id.
The particular facts of Whittington were that the defendant loudly protested police investigation of a domestic complaint, which led to his arrest and conviction for disorderly conduct. The majority had “little difficulty concluding that his expression was not political” where the defendant merely was protesting that he had not done anything and that the other witnesses were lying. Id. at 1370-71. Later, in Johnson v. State, 719 N.E.2d 445 (Ind.Ct.App.1999), this court addressed the defendant’s disorderly conduct delinquency adjudication after he loudly protested that he was not going to adhere to his probation conditions. We concluded that the statements were at best ambiguous and, therefore, not political. Id. at 449. We reasoned,
Although it is not implausible that Johnson was criticizing the State for imposing unfair probation conditions, it is equally plausible that Johnson was simply commenting on his own conduct and intentions. Johnson merely stated that he was not going to attend the required classes.- This comment could be construed to reflect nothing more than Johnson’s opinion that he can do what he wants, when he wants.
Id.
Additionally, in Shoultz v. State, 735 N.E.2d 818, 827 (Ind.Ct.App.2000), trans. denied, we held that words directed at a policeman about the treatment of another person were political speech. We acknowledged, however, that a “speaker’s defense of his or her own conduct to a police officer is not political....” Shoultz, 735 N.E.2d at 826. What invalidated the disorderly conduct conviction in that case was that it was based in part on the defendant’s protests regarding a police officer’s alleged “hassling” of a fellow motorcyclist, not solely upon any later attempt by the defendant to protest his innocence. Id. at 827. Similarly, in the U.M. case, what was held to be political speech was the defendant’s complaints to a police officer regarding his forcing one of the defendant’s companions to keep his arms up. See U.M., 827 N.E.2d at 1193. There was no indication that the disorderly conviction was based solely on the defendant’s protestations of his own innocence; as we noted, “U.M. was expressing himself regarding the legality and appropriateness of police conduct toward his companion.” Id. (emphasis added).
Here, Wells was not protesting police treatment of a third party. He was angry that an officer had stopped him for a relatively minor seat belt violation. Wells also was quick to inform the officer that, because of local political machinations, he believed he had been “set up.”9 However, *1150no one forced Wells to drive after he had consumed alcohol, and it was his failure to fasten his seat belt that occasioned the stop.
Wells’s loud diatribe was only about himself and his predicament. Although we now know that Wells’s political adversaries had called his situation to the attention of law enforcement, Wells did not know that with certainty at the time of his téte-á-téte with Trooper Brown. Moreover, Wells was not “set up” in the sense of having evidence against him fabricated; he actually did commit the infraction of driving without a fastened seat belt and the crime of operating a vehicle while intoxicated.
We conclude that at best, Wells’s speech in this situation was ambiguous as to whether it was political speech. Thus, we must err on the side of concluding that it was not political. See Whittington, 669 N.E.2d at 1370. In one sense, Wells’s speech could be seen as “political” because he was alleging impropriety in the conduct of certain public officials. On the other hand, the speech reasonably can be viewed simply as an attempt by Wells to “talk his way out of’ a ticket or further investigation by the police into whether he was operating while intoxicated. Wells was not coming to the defense of a third party whom he believed was being treated unfairly by the police or other public officials. Under Whittington and Johnson, such speech is not political.
Having concluded that Wells’s speech was not political, the constitutionality of his conviction for disorderly conduct is evaluated “under standard rationality review.” Id. A conviction for disorderly conduct that does not involve political speech is constitutional if it is reasonable to conclude that the defendant’s expressive activity “was an ‘abuse’ of the right to speak or was, in other words, a threat to peace, safety, and well-being.” Id. at 1371. Here, there is no doubt that Wells’s diatribe met this standard. The loudness and anger of his diatribe compelled a nearby resident, Chanvisanuruk, to call 911 because Wells was disturbing his ability to complete a school assignment and because he feared for the safety of Trooper Brown. Clearly, Wells’s speech posed a threat to peace, safety, and well-being. Wells’s conviction for disorderly conduct does not violate Article 1, Section 9 of the Indiana Constitution.
Conclusion
Wells has failed to demonstrate reversible error regarding the conduct of his trial in his claims regarding the jury venire, denial of his motion for a continuance, and prosecutorial misconduct. He also has not established that the OWI statutes are void for vagueness. Finally, we conclude that his conviction for disorderly conduct does not violate the free speech provision of the Indiana Constitution. We affirm.
Affirmed.
SHARPNACK, J., concurs.
RILEY, J., concurs in part and dissents in part with separate opinion.
. Effective July 1, 2006, Indiana Code Section 33-28-4-3 will place sole responsibility for determining lists of prospective voters with the Indiana Supreme Court; there will no longer be a set statutory basis for the source of jury pools. See P.L. 80-2006 § 4.
. Also, unlike a distinctive gender or ethnic group within a community, IU students are not an unchanging groups of persons within the community. Although the total enrollment at the university may be relatively constant, the particular identities of the students are constantly changing as graduating or *1143transferring students are replaced with new students.
. Wells, however, admits in his brief, “While the evidence did contain some evidence of a cover-up, in retrospect that issue did not warrant the attention it received, in jury selection, opening statement, and the trial.” Appellant's Br. p. 44.
. Wells did not request a transcript of the voir dire for this appeal, so we do not know precisely what questions were asked of the prospective jurors.
. Wells argues in his brief that the prosecutor's comment amounted to a federal constitutional violation, and we must review whether this violation is harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. He cites for this proposition United States v. Cotnam, 88 F.3d 487 (7th Cir.1996), cert. denied, 519 U.S. 942, 117 S.Ct. 326, 136 L.Ed.2d 240 (1996). However, the Cotnam case concerned prosecutorial argument that infringed upon the defendant’s Fifth Amendment right not to testify. The Cotnam opinion very clearly delineates that general prosecutorial misconduct claims that do not infringe upon a specific constitutional right are evaluated under a different standard, i.e. generally whether the defendant was deprived of a fair trial because of the alleged misconduct. See id. at 497-98. The opinion nowhere states that general prosecu-torial misconduct claims are reviewed under the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt standard, but rather quite clearly indicates that they are not. See id. at 500 n. 14. Wells's prosecutorial misconduct claim is a general one, not an allegation that a specific constitutional violation occurred. We review his claim under the well-settled Indiana standard recited in Rodriguez.
. Wells states the issue in his brief as whether the OWI statutes "violate the due process guarantees of the Indiana Constitution in the context of this case....” Appellant's Br. p. *114630. The Indiana Constitution has no due process clause, but instead has a due course of law provision. See Ind. Const, art. 1, § 12. Regardless, Indiana courts have reviewed claims of unconstitutional vagueness in the same manner, whether the defendant invokes the United States Constitution, the Indiana Constitution, or both. See Bemis v. State, 652 N.E.2d 89, 92 (Ind.Ct.App.1995).
. Also, to the extent a person might have decreased judgment as to whether they are intoxicated, once they are in fact intoxicated, voluntary intoxication is not a defense to any crime in Indiana. See Sanchez v. State, 749 N.E.2d 509, 517 (Ind.2001). Clearly, allowing persons to claim they lacked the faculties to determine whether they were intoxicated because they were intoxicated would vitiate the OWI statutes.
. Wells frames this issue in his "Statement of the Issues” as whether the trial court improperly refused to instruct the jury regarding the offense of disorderly conduct. However, the argument section of his brief contains no case law or analysis concerning the proper standard for reviewing the giving or refusal of jury instructions and instead focuses generally on whether his disorderly conviction violates Article 1, Section 9. Thus, that is how we will address this issue. Additionally, Wells refers to the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and "the First Amendment protection for political protest under the Indiana Constitution.” Appellant’s Br. p. 15. The only cogent argument in the brief, however, concerns Article 1, Section 9 of the Indiana Constitution, and that is the only constitutional provision we will address here.
. There might have been more than a grain of truth to these allegations. However, subjective reasons for initiating a traffic stop are irrelevant so long as there is objective, reasonable suspicion that a driver has violated some provision of the traffic code. See Mitchell v. State, 745 N.E.2d 775, 787 (Ind.2001). Wells has challenged neither the legality of his initial stop nor tire ensuing investigation into whether he was operating while intoxicated.

=== CASE 9740507 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:42.725901+00 ===

RILEY, Judge
concurring in part and dissenting in part.
I concur with Parts I, II, III, and IV. I respectfully dissent to Part V and would vacate Wells’ conviction for disorderly conduct. Unlike the majority, I conclude that in protesting his stop and arrest, Wells engaged in protected political speech.
Our supreme court has explained that Article I, Section 9 of the Indiana Constitution contemplates a broad notion of expressive activity, extending to all subjects and every conceivable mode of expression, including the projection of any words in any manner. Whittington v. State, 669 N.E.2d 1363, 1368 (Ind.1996). In addition, this court has previously held that the *1151language of Section 9 “affirms the rights of expression in language much more comprehensive than the First Amendment.” Mishler v. MAC Systems, Inc., 771 N.E.2d 92, 97 (Ind.Ct.App.2002). Thus, given the expansive language and reading of Section 9, there is no question that Wells was engaged in expressive activity, and that the state’s action, convicting Wells of disorderly conduct, in effect restricted that expressive activity. See Madden v. State, 786 N.E.2d 1152, 1156 (Ind.Ct.App.2003), trans. denied.
While I agree that not all political expression is shielded from criminal liability, I disagree with the majority’s distinction in the present case between political speech pertaining to government misconduct toward a third party and such misconduct pertaining to one’s own self. See id. at 1157. My reading of Price v. State leads me to conclude that Price engaged in political speech when she objected to the arrest of a third party, as well as when she objected to her own arrest. Price v. State, 622 N.E.2d 954, 964-65 (Ind.1993), reh’g denied. Among Price’s statements to the police officer were, “F— you,” and “I haven’t done anything.” Id. at 957. The Price court concluded that this expressive activity was political speech because Price was protesting the legality and appropriateness of police conduct. Likewise, my reading of the recent case, U.M. v. State, is that U.M. was not just protesting the police officers’ treatment of his friend, but also protesting the general conduct of the officers. Among U.M.’s statements were, “You guys are all racists,” and “f— the police.” U.M. v. State, 827 N.E.2d 1190, 1191 (Ind.Ct.App.2005). Albeit reluctantly, based on the precedent of Price, we ultimately concluded that U.M. was engaged in expressive activity that targeted the conduct of a government actor, the police. Id. at 1193.
Similar to Price and U.M., I find that the thrust of Wells’ speech was to comment on actions by government actors, specifically the arresting police officers’ possible involvement in a set-up by other government officials. Accordingly, I would hold that the restriction on Wells’ criticism of the officers imposed a material burden on his fundamental right to free speech. See id. at 1192. Even though, as the Price court also noted in that case, Wells’ conduct may have been sufficient to support a conviction for public nuisance, in light of the boundaries imposed on our disorderly conduct statute by the Indiana Constitution’s protection for freedom of expression, I conclude that Wells was improperly convicted of disorderly conduct.

=== CASE 9740508 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:42.989431+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(on reassignment).
We affirm the trial court’s judgment dated March 11, 1982, awarding appellee wife $11,789.61 in alimony and child support ar-rearages, interest thereon, costs, and other declarations therein sustaining the original divorce decree.
Appellant husband and appellee wife were married in Pipestone, Minnesota, on September 26, 1961. Two daughters were born of the marriage; Rhonda on August 4, *8431962, and Rochelle on May 19, 1966. A marital domicile was established in Minneh-aha County, South Dakota. On March 11, 1977, appellee wife filed a divorce petition in Minnehaha County, South Dakota, the forum state. Appellant husband departed South Dakota on April 16, 1977, leaving behind his wife, children, and some personalty. Appellee wife and the children have been residents of South Dakota at all times relevant hereto. Personal service of process was effectuated upon appellant husband in California on September 6, 1977.
Appellant husband failed to answer or otherwise appear in the South Dakota action. After notice of intent to take a default judgment was mailed to appellant husband in California, appellee wife was granted an ex parte divorce in South Dakota on February 10, 1978. Judgment was entered in favor of appellee wife awarding her, among other things, $100 per month alimony, $150 per month child support, attorney’s fees, and costs. On June 1, 1978, appellee wife filed a Uniform Reciprocal Enforcement of Support Act (URESA) action under SDCL ch. 25-9 against appellant husband in California. On September 13, 1978, appellant husband appeared in the Superior Court of California, County of Orange, and rather than attacking the South Dakota judgment, consented to the entry of an order directing him to pay $150 per month child support.
On October 19, 1978, appellant husband filed an affidavit to show cause collaterally attacking South Dakota’s in personam jurisdiction and requesting the return of his personalty in South Dakota. Appellee wife resisted and filed her own motion to show cause requesting appellant husband be held in contempt for failure to meet the divorce judgment terms. In April of 1979, appellee wife executed a second URESA action against appellant husband, who was then residing in Arizona. On December 30,1981, appellee wife renewed her application to show cause in the divorce action and appellant husband responded with a motion to vacate the judgment and decree of divorce, or, in the alternative, to vacate those portions of the decree of divorce which awarded appellee alimony, child support, and further ordered appellant to pay certain bills and attorney fees and costs.
Appellant contends that the trial court was without jurisdiction to enter a personal judgment against him for alimony, child support, and other liability in the divorce action. We disagree.
Our long-arm statute, SDCL 15-7-2, in relevant part provides:
Any person is subject to the jurisdiction of the courts of this state as to any cause of action arising from the doing personally, through any employee, through an agent or through a subsidiary, of any of the following acts:
[[Image here]]
(3) The ownership, use, or possession of any property, or of any interest therein, situated within this state;
[[Image here]]
(7) Failure to support a minor child residing in South Dakota;1
[[Image here]]
(9) With respect to any action for divorce, separate maintenance or spousal support the maintenance in this state of a matrimonial domicile at the time the claim arose or the commission in this state of an act giving rise to the claim, subject to the provisions of § 25-4-30[.]2
Provisions of SDCL 15-7-2 comport with due process requirements when the out-of-state party has sufficient minimal “purposeful contacts” with South Dakota. Kulko v. California Superior Court, 436 U.S. 84, 98 S.Ct. 1690, 56 L.Ed.2d 132, rehearing denied, 438 U.S. 908, 98 S.Ct. 3127, 57 L.Ed.2d 1150 (1978). In Bunker v. Bunker, 261 Ark. 851, 853, 552 S.W.2d 641, 642 (1977), Justice George Rose Smith, writing for the Arkansas Supreme Court, stated: *844“The basic test is whether the defendant’s contacts within the state were such that the maintenance of the suit does not offend traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice. International Shoe Co. v. Washington, 326 U.S. 310, 66 S.Ct. 154, 90 L.Ed. 95 (1945).”
Appellant husband maintained marital domicile in South Dakota. He left his minor children and property here to voyage in California and Arizona. This state has an interest in all acts arising as an incident to this marriage. "Restatement (Second) of Conflict of Laws § 36 comment e (1971), provides in part:
A state is naturally interested in all acts done within its territory. A state will usually have judicial jurisdiction over an individual who does, or who causes to be done, in the state an act, even though it is not claimed to be tortious, as to causes of action arising from the act.
We may safely conclude that due process was not offended herein.
Appellant husband’s attack on his child support obligation must fail. It is well settled in this jurisdiction that a child’s domicile in South Dakota is sufficient to attach in personam jurisdiction on a nonresident parent for the purpose of obtaining child support. SDCL 15-7-2(7); Johansen v. Johansen, 305 N.W.2d 383 (S.D.1981). Likewise, appellant husband’s other jurisdictional complaints are flawed. In his pleadings, appellant husband acknowledges that he had personal property of “significant value” in South Dakota. Since appellant husband was personally served with process, SDCL 15-7—2(3) unquestionably provided the trial court with jurisdiction over appellant to the extent of his property in South Dakota. See also, Nelson v. Nelson, 71 S.D. 342, 24 N.W.2d 327 (1946).
As a further and more pervasive ground for decision, we acknowledge the applicability of SDCL 15-7-2(9) to the case at bar. As we held in Johnson v. Kusel, 298 N.W.2d 91, 92 (S.D.1980): “Considered ‘as a whole,’ it is clear that the legislature intended that SDCL 15-7-2 and all its subdivisions are to be applied retroactively.” (Emphasis in original.) Therefore, the clear language of SDCL 15-7-2(9) removes any claimed merit in appellant husband’s position.
Affirmed.
FOSHEIM, C.J., and DUNN and MORGAN, JJ., concur. .
WOLLMAN, J., concurs in part and dissents in part.
. Subdivision (7) was added in 1978 S.D.Sess. Laws ch. 146, §§ 1, 2.
. Subdivision (9) was added in 1983 S.D.Sess. Laws ch. 156, § 1.

=== CASE 9740509 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:42.993565+00 ===

WOLLMAN, Justice
(concurring in part, dissenting in part).
I agree that under our holding in Johansen v. Johansen, 305 N.W.2d 383 (S.D.1981), that portion of the judgment imposing child support obligations upon appellant is juris-dictionally valid.
If I could agree that SDCL 15-7-2(9), as added by 1983 S.D.Sess.Laws ch. 156, § 1, was retroactively applicable to this case, I would join in upholding that portion of the judgment imposing the obligation to pay alimony, attorney fees, and costs. The day is past when a valid attack can be leveled against the constitutionality of statutes granting in personam jurisdiction in the class of cases covered by SDCL 15-7-2(9). See, e.g., Bunker v. Bunker, 261 Ark. 851, 552 S.W.2d 641 (1977); Whitaker v. Whitaker, 237 Ga. 895, 230 S.E.2d 486 (1976); Baker v. Baker, 100 Idaho 635, 603 P.2d 590 (1979); Scott v. Hall, 203 Kan. 331, 454 P.2d 449 (1969); Fliter v. Filter, 383 So.2d 1084 (Miss.1980); Mizner v. Mizner, 84 Nev. 268, 439 P.2d 679 (1968); Mitchim v. Mitchim, 518 S.W.2d 362 (Tex.1975); Dillon v. Dillon, 46 Wis.2d 659, 176 N.W.2d 362 (1978); Note, “Long-Arm Jurisdiction in Alimony and Custody Cases,” 73 Columbia L.Rev. 289 (1973).
In the absence of a statute granting extra-territorial in personam jurisdiction in domestic relations cases, however, the rule referred to in Nelson v. Nelson, 71 S.D. 342, 345, 24 N.W.2d 327, 329 (1946), still obtains, with the result that a court’s jurisdiction over a non-resident in a divorce action extends only to the marriage relationship itself and cannot support a personal judg*845ment for alimony or child support. See, e.g., In Re Marriage of Vogel, 293 N.W.2d 215 (Iowa 1980); Wiles v. Wiles, 211 Or. 198, 315 P.2d 131 (1957); 24 Am.Jur.2d Divorce and Separation §§ 542, 544, 828 (1966).
It is true that in Johnson v. Kusel, 298 N.W.2d 91 (S.D.1980), we held that later-enacted provisions expanding the scope of SDCL 15-7-2 should be given retroactive effect in view of SDCL 15-7-4, a section of the enactment that gave rise to SDCL 15-7-2(3), which states that the provision of SDCL 15-7-1 and 15-7-2 are to apply to causes of action arising before the enactment thereof. Were it not for the fact that the 1983 enactment contained an emergency clause, I would be hard-pressed to hold that the legislature did not intend that SDCL 15-7-4 should give retroactive effect to the several subsections contained in Chapter 156, given the legislature’s presumed knowledge of our holding in Johnson v. Kusel. The fact that an emergency clause was appended to Chapter 156 indicates to me, however, that the legislature did not intend that the 1983 amendments be given retroactive effect, for such retroactive application would have made it unnecessary to give immediate force and effect to the provisions of Chapter 156. Accordingly, I would hold that SDCL 15-7-2(9) has no application to the case before us.

=== CASE 9740510 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:44.53509+00 ===

OPINION
BAILEY, Judge.
Case Summary
Appellants-Defendants Phillip W. and Anita B. Richardson (collectively, the “Richardsons”) appeal the trial court’s denial of their motions to suppress evidence obtained from the warrantless search of them trash. We affirm.1
*1099Issues
The Richardsons raise two issues on interlocutory appeal, which we restate as whether the trial court erred by denying their motions to suppress evidence under the Indiana Constitution because:
I. An anonymous tip that the Rich-ardsons manufactured methamphetamine did not give police reasonable, articulable suspicion to search their trash; and
II. The good faith exception established in Indiana Code Section 35-87-4-5 is inapplicable to the present action.
Facts and Procedural History
On or about August 10, 2003, Indiana State Police Trooper Rick Gill (“Trooper Gill”) received a telephone call from a “concerned citizen.” Tr. at 5. The citizen, who remained anonymous,2 informed Trooper Gill that Mr. Richardson “was manufacturing methamphetamine at his residence on Stipps Hill Road and that ... they [sic] observed him growing marijuana behind an outbuilding behind the residence.” Id. The caller also told Trooper Gill that Mr. Richardson had a suspended driver’s license, a fact which the officer later verified. Trooper Gill relayed the information about Mr. Richardson’s possible drug activity to another state trooper, Trooper Wuestefeld, who had already been advised of the same information.3
Subsequently, Troopers Gill and Wues-tefeld decided to investigate the anonymous tip or tips further. On August 11, 2003, the officers contacted the private trash service used by the Richardsons and arranged to “ride along with the trash truck” as it picked up the Richardson’s trash. Id. at 12.
Two days later, Trooper Gill, wearing plain clothes, met with the driver of the garbage truck for the ride along. At that time, the trooper inspected the back of the truck and made certain that it was empty. Trooper Gill then rode in the passenger seat of the truck as the driver made a “direct beeline right to the Richardson’s trash dumpster.” Id. at 16. The dumpster was located on private property, in close proximity to three residences, including that of the Richardsons. When the driver backed the truck up to the dumpster, Trooper Gill got out of the truck and watched the driver empty the contents of the dumpster into the trash truck, along with other items that were lying near the dumpster. Trooper Gill then returned to the passenger seat of the garbage truck and the driver drove to a pre-arranged location.
There, Troopers Gill and Wuestefeld searched the trash, directing them attention to four bags in particular. In one bag, the troopers found an empty bottle of mini-ephedrine and a letter addressed to Mr. Richardson at “23104 Stipps Hill Road, Laurel, Indiana.” Id. at 20. In a second trash bag, the officers found numerous plastic baggies with the corners cut off and a letter addressed to Mrs. Richardson at “23104 Stipps Hill Road.” Id. at 20-21. The third trash bag contained “zig-zag rolling paper with numerous cut straws containing residue and a burnt hand-rolled cigarette which later tested positive for THC.”4 Id. at 21. The troopers also discovered a prescription to Mr. Richardson in the third bag. Finally, *1100in the fourth bag, the troopers found: (1) two empty bottles of mini-ephedrine; (2) numerous cut straws with residue inside; (3) unaltered plastic baggies; and (4) plastic baggies with the corners cut off. The fourth bag of trash also contained a prescription for Zanax to Mrs. Richardson, other empty prescription bottles, and a “receipt for hydrocodone to [Mr.] Richardson.” Id.
As a result of the trash search, Troopers Gill and Wuestefeld sought and obtained a search warrant for the Richardsons’ home and property. During the execution of that warrant, the officers searched a one-room building where Mrs. Richardson’s son was staying and found suspected marijuana plants that had been stripped, pipes containing THC, and plastic baggies containing plant material. The officers also found “eight plastic baggies, two cellophane bags, one corner had been cut on a plastic bags [sic], two cut straws with residue,” and a fire extinguisher that tested positive for anhydrous ammonia. Id. at 34.
Inside the Richardsons’ residence, the troopers found a pipe that later tested positive for THC, cut straws with residue, and empty bottles of mini-ephedrine. The officers also found electronic scales, a brass pipe that tested positive for THC, and approximately eight guns. Near a shed on the property, the officers discovered a propane tank with a rubber hose attached that tested positive for anhydrous ammonia. Behind the shed, the troopers saw growing marijuana plants, which Mrs. Richardson’s son later identified as his.
On August 21, 2003, the State charged the Richardsons, individually, with the following Counts: (I) cultivating marijuana as a Class D felony;5 (II) possessing anhydrous ammonia with the intent to manufacture methamphetamine as a Class D felony;6 (III) possessing drug paraphernalia as a Class A misdemeanor;7 (IV) maintaining a common nuisance as a Class D felony;8 (V) improper handling of anhydrous ammonia as a Class A misdemean- or; 9 and (VI), possessing cocaine as a Class D felony.10 On October 5, 2004, the Richardsons filed separate motions to suppress the physical evidence seized from their property, which the trial court denied after conducting a hearing. On May 17, 2005, the Richardsons filed a motion to reconsider the denial of the motions to suppress, requesting that the trial court reconsider its judgment in light of Litchfield v. State, 824 N.E.2d 356 (Ind.2005). However, the trial court denied this motion.
On June 14, 2005, the trial court certified for interlocutory appeal its orders denying the Richardsons’ motions to suppress. The Richardsons then filed this discretionary interlocutory appeal, pursuant to Indiana Appellate Rule 14, which we granted on August 9, 2005.
Discussion and Decision
I. Standard of Review
The Richardsons challenge the trial court’s denial of their motions to suppress. We review the denial of a motion to suppress in a manner similar to other sufficiency matters. Taylor v. State, 689 N.E.2d 699, 702 (Ind.1997). We determine whether substantial evidence of probative value exists to support the trial court’s denial of the motion. Id. In reviewing a motion to suppress, we do not reweigh the evidence, and we consider conflicting evi*1101dence most favorable to the trial court’s ruling. Marlowe v. State, 786 N.E.2d 751, 753 (Ind.Ct.App.2003). However, unlike the typical sufficiency of the evidence case where only the evidence favorable to the judgment is considered, we also consider the uncontested evidence favorable to the defendant. Johnson v. State, 829 N.E.2d 44, 47 (Ind.Ct.App.2005), trans. denied. We will affirm the judgment of the trial court if it is sustainable on any legal grounds apparent in the record. Alford v. State, 699 N.E.2d 247, 250 (Ind.1998).
II. Analysis
A. Constitutionality of the Trash Search
On appeal, the Richardsons argue that the trial court erred when it denied their motions to suppress evidence because the police violated their rights under Article 1, Section 11 of the Indiana Constitution by searching their trash without reasonable articulable suspicion.11 Article 1, Section 11 of the Indiana Constitution provides, in relevant part: “The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable search or seizure, shall not be violated.” The legality of a governmental search under the Indiana Constitution turns on an evaluation of the reasonableness of the police conduct under the totality of the circumstances. Litchfield v. State, 824 N.E.2d 356, 358 (Ind.2005). Recently, our Supreme Court recognized: “[T]he totality of the circumstances requires consideration of both the degree of intrusion into the subject’s ordinary activities and the basis upon which the officer selected the subject of the search or seizure.” Id. The Litchfield Court noted that, while there may well be other relevant considerations under the circumstances, the reasonableness of a search or seizure turns on a balance of: (1) the degree of concern, suspicion, or knowledge that a violation has occurred; (2) the degree of intrusion that the method of the search or seizure imposes on the citizen’s ordinary activities; and (3) the extent of law enforcement needs. Id. at 361; see also Crook v. State, 827 N.E.2d 643, 645 (Ind.Ct.App.2005).
The Indiana Supreme Court has observed that the “[sjeizure of trash that is in its usual location for pickup is no intrusion at all on the owner’s liberty or property interests” because the owner of the property wants, and indeed expects, the trash to be taken away. Litchfield, 824 N.E.2d at 363; see also Love v. State, 842 N.E.2d 420, 425 (Ind.Ct.App.2006). However, “it is not reasonable for law enforcement to search indiscriminately through people’s trash.” Litchfield, 824 N.E.2d at 363. Therefore, to impose the appropriate balance between the privacy interest of citizens and the needs of law enforcement, two requirements exist for a search of trash to be reasonable. Edwards v. State, 832 N.E.2d 1072, 1074 (Ind.Ct.App.2005). First, the trash must be retrieved in substantially the same manner as the trash collector would use. Litchfield, 824 N.E.2d at 363. Because the Richardsons’ trash service collected the garbage bags in question, this requirement is satisfied in *1102the present case and the Richardsons do not contend otherwise.
Second, for the search of the trash to be permissible, the officer must possess a reasonable, articulable suspicion, i.e., the same as that required for a Terry12 stop of an automobile, for seizing the trash. Litchfield, 824 N.E.2d at 364; see also Crook, 827 N.E.2d at 646. The United States Supreme Court has acknowledged that the concept of reasonable suspicion “is somewhat abstract,” prompting the Court to “avoid[] reducing it to ‘a neat set of legal rules.’ ” U.S. v. Arvizu, 534 U.S. 266, 274, 122 S.Ct. 744, 151 L.Ed.2d 740 (2002) (citations omitted); see also Sellmer v. State, 842 N.E.2d 358, 360 (Ind.2006). Nevertheless, the Supreme Court has directed reviewing courts to “make reasonable suspicion determinations by looking] at the ‘totality of the circumstances’ of each case to see whether the detaining officer has a ‘particularized and objective basis’ for suspecting legal wrongdoing.” State v. Bulington, 802 N.E.2d 435, 438 (Ind.2004) (quoting Arvizu, 534 U.S. at 273, 122 S.Ct. 744). Reviewing courts have also been directed to “review trial court determinations of reasonable suspicion de novo.” Id.
In the present case, any reasonable suspicion that the troopers may have had that the Richardsons were involved in criminal activity would have originated with the information given to Trooper Gill by the anonymous tipster. In Alabama v. White, 496 U.S. 325, 329-30, 110 S.Ct. 2412, 110 L.Ed.2d 301 (1990), the Supreme Court held that, as a general matter, “an anonymous tip alone is not likely to constitute the reasonable suspicion necessary for a valid Terry stop.” Recently in Sellmer, our Supreme Court held that for an anonymous tip to constitute the reasonable suspicion necessary for a valid investigatory stop, at least two conditions must be met. Sellmer, 842 N.E.2d. at 361. First, “significant aspects of the tip [must be] corroborated by the police.” Id. (citing Lampkins v. State, 682 N.E.2d 1268, 1271 (Ind.1997)). Such corroboration requires that an anonymous tip give the police something more than details regarding facts easily obtainable by the general public to verify its credibility. Sellmer, 842 N.E.2d. at 361 (citing Johnson v. State, 659 N.E.2d 116, 119 (Ind.1995) (holding that an anonymous tip that provided only information easily obtainable by members of the general public was insufficiently reliable to constitute reasonable suspicion to conduct an investigatory stop)). Second, an anonymous tip, if it is to be considered reliable enough to constitute reasonable suspicion to conduct an investigatory stop, must also demonstrate an intimate familiarity with the suspect’s affairs and be able to predict future behavior. See Sellmer, 842 N.E.2d. at 361.
The Sellmer Court explained that protection against uncorroborated anonymous tips is necessary because “ ‘[i]f any anonymous caller’s allegation, uncorroborated by anything beyond public knowledge, could justify a search, every citizen’s home ... would be fair game for a variety of innocent and not so innocent intrusions.’ ” Id. (quoting Jaggers v. State, 687 N.E.2d 180, 183 (Ind.1997)). We therefore review the anonymous tip that led to the search of the Richardsons’ trash under the “totality of the circumstances” so as to determine whether that tip conformed to the principles outlined above and provided Trooper Gill with sufficient indicia of reliability to justify the search.
*1103The tip received and acted upon by Trooper Gill does not meet the two-part standard outlined above. The anonymous tip provided the trooper with information regarding where the Richardsons reside and that Mr. Richardson had a suspended driver’s license — a fact that was later verified independently by Trooper Gill. However, the tip failed to provide the trooper with several important pieces of information, including the basis of the caller’s knowledge or any information detailing the future acts of the Richardsons that would demonstrate the caller’s intimate knowledge of the suspects’ activities and provide “officers the tools with which to verify its dependability.” See, e.g., Johnson, 659 N.E.2d at 119.
Although the anonymous tip in this case provided the police with some information that was not readily knowable by a member of the general public — i.e., the suspended driver’s license — it lacked any information that would allow the police to corroborate the caller’s claim that illegal activity was afoot. See Sellmer, 842 N.E.2d at 362 (citing Florida v. J.L., 529 U.S. 266, 272, 120 S.Ct. 1375, 146 L.Ed.2d 254 (2000) (observing that reasonable suspicion “requires that a tip be reliable in its assertion of illegality, not just in its tendency to identify a determinate person”)). Nor did the tip provide the Indiana State Police any information regarding the Rich-ardsons’ future acts that would bolster its reliability. The anonymous tip, by itself and without further police corroboration, was not sufficiently detailed in predicting the Richardsons’ future actions to justify indiscriminately searching their trash.13 Accordingly, under Litchfield, the items found in the trash were not properly discovered evidence.
B. Good Faith Exception
Nevertheless, the State argues that we should not apply the exclusionary rule to the present action “because the trooper relied in good faith on the facially valid search warrant that was consistent with prevailing case law at the time the warrant was issued and executed.” Appellee’s Br. at 5. Indiana Code Section 35-37-4-5 provides that, in a prosecution for a crime, a court may not grant a motion to exclude evidence on the grounds that the search or *1104seizure by which the evidence was obtained was unlawful if the law enforcement officer obtained the evidence in good faith. Subsection (b) of that statute explains that evidence is obtained in good faith if it is obtained pursuant to “a state statute, judicial precedent, or court rule that is later declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalidated.” 14 As previously noted, Litch-field — which requires articulable suspicion for trash searches — had not been decided at the time of the trash search at issue.15 Instead, at that time, a different test for the search of trash was being applied by our courts. See Edwards, 832 N.E.2d at 1076. In Moran v. State, 644 N.E.2d 536, 541 (Ind.1994), reh’g denied, our Supreme Court noted that the constitutionality of a trash search should be determined based upon the reasonableness of the search. Of primary importance to the Moran Court was the manner in which the trash was seized. The Court recognized, for example, that the police officers did not trespass on the premises to get the trash bags, but collected them from an area approximately a foot from the street, next to the mailbox, where they had been left for pickup by the trash collector. Id. at 538, 541. Further, the Moran Court observed that the officers did not cause a disturbance because they conducted their activities early in the morning when they were unlikely to be seen. Id. at 541. What is more, the officers conducted themselves in the same manner as those whose duty it was to collect the trash. Id.
Subsequently, in Lovell v. State, 813 N.E.2d 393, 398 (Ind.Ct.App.2004), trans. denied, this Court upheld the validity of a search of three trash bags by officers after reviewing the totality of the circumstances to determine the reasonableness of the trash search. There, the trash in question had also been placed next to the mailbox for collection. Id. In addition, many of the neighboring residences had bags placed along the street for pickup. Id. Moreover, in Lovell, the record did not indicate that the officers had to trespass on the defendant’s property or disturbed his neighbors in seizing the trash bags. Likewise, in Mast v. State, 809 N.E.2d 415, 420-21 (Ind.Ct.App.2004), reh’g denied, trans. denied, this Court upheld the search and seizure of the defendant’s trash as reasonable under the Indiana Constitution. There, a police officer rode with the defendant’s trash carrier when it collected the defendant’s trash from a dumpster, on the day previously scheduled for trash removal. Id. at 417. The dumpster was located approximately fifteen to twenty feet from the public roadway. Id. In Mast, the officer remained in the trash truck during the entire collection process. Id.
However, in State v. Stamper, 788 N.E.2d 862, 865 (Ind.Ct.App.2003), abrogated by Litchfield, another panel of this Court determined, under a set of facts readily distinguishable from those in Moran, that the search of the defendant’s trash was unreasonable. There, the defendant, while under surveillance by an Indiana State Police Detective, placed a trash bag at the bottom of a garbage pile that was some feet onto his property, near the end of the driveway. In Stamper, the evidence revealed that trash collection was not done by a government-run collection service but by the defendant’s sister’s fian-*1105cé. Accordingly, this Court held that because the detective had to go onto the defendant’s property to collect garbage, which was not normally collected by a public trash collection service, the search was unreasonable. Id. at 865.
In light of the case law that existed at the time of the search of the Richardsons’ trash, the search in question was not unreasonable and the evidence obtained was properly discovered evidence. Instead, the facts of the present case are very similar to Moran and Mast. Here, Trooper Gill rode in the trash truck on the day that the Richardsons’ trash was scheduled to be collected by their trash collector. The dumpster containing the trash was located on private property but Trooper Gill did not enter the property to seize the trash. Rather, the trash service entered the property to collect the contents of the dumpster, as it is paid by the Richardsons to do, and Trooper Gill, on foot, merely supervised the collection process. Because the search at issue conformed to the prevailing case law at the time, the evidence could not have been properly excluded under Indiana Code Section 35-37-4-516 and, thus, could provide support for the finding of probable cause to issue the warrant to search the Richardsons’ house and property.17
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the trial court’s denial of the Richardsons’ motions to suppress evidence obtained from the warrantless search of their trash.
Affirmed.
BAKER, J., concurs.
NAJAM, J., dissents with separate opinion.
. We heard oral argument in this case on April 12, 2006, at New Albany High School in New Albany, Indiana. We thank counsel for their advocacy and extend our appreciation to New Albany High School for hosting the event and to the members of the Sherman Minton Inn of Court for their hospitality.
. Trooper Gill could only identify the caller as a male.
. The record does not reveal the source of the information that was given to Trooper Wues-tefeld.
.THC is the active ingredient in marijuana. See Oman v. State, 737 N.E.2d 1131, 1149 (Ind.2000), reh’g denied, cert. denied, 534 U.S. 814, 122 S.Ct. 38, 151 L.Ed.2d 12 (2001).
.Ind.Code § 35-48-4-11(2).
. Ind.Code § 35-48-4-14.5(c).
. Ind.Code § 35-48-4-8.3(c).
. Ind.Code § 35-48-4-13(b)(2)(D).
. Ind.Code § 22-1 l-20-6(b)(l).
. Ind.Code § 35-48-4-6(a).
. In California v. Greenwood, 486 U.S. 35, 39, 108 S.Ct. 1625, 100 L.Ed.2d 30 (1988), the United States Supreme Court upheld the warrantless search of the defendant’s garbage left at the curb for pickup, holding that there was no violation of the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution. See Litchfield v. State, 824 N.E.2d 356, 358 (Ind.2005). Apparently recognizing that Greenwood forecloses any claim under the Fourth Amendment, the Richardsons do not challenge the search of their trash under the Federal Constitution, but rather ask us to exclude the evidence in question as the product of a search and seizure in violation of Article 1, Section 11 of the Indiana Constitution. See Litchfield, 824 N.E.2d at 359.
. A citizen's constitutional rights are not violated by an investigatory stop conducted by a police officer where the officer has a reasonable articulable suspicion of criminal activity. See Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 20, 88 S.Ct. 1868, 20 L.Ed.2d 889 (1968).
. We find the present case distinguishable from Beverly v. State, 801 N.E.2d 1254, 1262 (Ind.Ct.App.2004), trans. denied. There, another panel of this Court held that law enforcement officers had reasonable suspicion to stop the defendant where multiple anonymous 9-1-1 callers corroborated each other with respect to the fact that shots were being fired and to the general description of the car, driver, and location. Id. (citing United States v. Schaefer, 87 F.3d 562, 566 (1st Cir.1996) (“Courts often have held that consistency between the reports of two, independent informants helps to validate both accounts.”)). Here, however, the record does not sufficiently demonstrate that the tips given to Troopers Gill and Wuestefeld corroborated each other to the extent that they contained independent indicia of reliability. Rather, the transcript merely provides:
Q: Now as a result of this particular anonymous call, what did you do next?
[Trooper Gill:] ... I contacted Trooper Wuestefeld and advised him of what I had been advised of on the phone and at that time he told me that he also had information of the same.
Q: Same about what (inaudible)
[Trooper Gill:] Mr. Richardson growing marijuana and a possible methamphetamine lab at his house.
[[Image here]]
Q: Did you make inquiry of Trooper Wueste-feld what the source of his information was? .
[Trooper Gill:] I don't [sic] ask him what his source of information was, you’d have to ask him.
Q: Don't you think that's important?
[Trooper Gill:] If Trooper Wuestefeld told me something, I'd take his word as something I could go with, yes.
Tr. at 9-10.
. Indiana Code Section 3 5-3 7-4-5 (b)(2) also requires that the law enforcement officer, at the time he or she obtains the evidence, have satisfied applicable minimum basic training requirements established by rules adopted by the law enforcement training board under Indiana Code Section 5-2-1-9. Because Trooper Gill’s training is not presently in dispute, we do not examine this subsection.
. The record demonstrates that Trooper Gill searched the Richardsons' trash on August 13, 2003. Yet, Litchfield was not decided until March 24, 2005.
. See, e.g., State v. Harmon, 846 N.E.2d 1056 (Ind.Ct.App.2006); cf. Hopkins v. State, 582 N.E.2d 345, 351 (Ind.1991) (noting that the federal good-faith exception enunciated in United States v. Leon, 468 U.S. 897, 104 S.Ct. 3405, 82 L.Ed.2d 677 (1984), reh'g denied, which was codified in Indiana Code Section 35-37-4 — 5, has been held applicable to the prohibition of unreasonable search and seizure found in Article 1, Section 11 of the Indiana Constitution), reh’g denied.
. The Richardsons do not contest that, with the evidence obtained from the search of their trash, probable cause existed to support the warrant to search their premises.

=== CASE 9740511 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:44.540832+00 ===

NAJAM, J.,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent. The majority opinion misapplies the statutory good faith exception. Indiana Code Section 35-37-4-5 cannot nullify our Supreme Court’s holding in Litchfield, requiring that a trash search be supported by reasonable suspicion, in this and other cases pending or not yet final when Litchfield was decided. Because Trooper Gill did not have reasonable suspicion to support the trash search, I would reverse.
In Edwards v. State, 832 N.E.2d 1072 (Ind.Ct.App.2005), we concluded that evidence discovered during a trash search could not be excluded because, under the state of the law as it existed at the time of the search, it was not unreasonable. Thus, we concluded that according to Indiana Code Section 35-37-4-5, the evidence could not have been properly excluded and could provide support for the finding of probable cause to issue a warrant. Id. at 1077. I was a member of the panel that decided Ediuards. But in Edwards, we did not consider the fundamental question of whether Litchfield supersedes the statutory good faith exception in those cases where, as here, the search straddles an old rule and a new rule. Having now considered the issue, I am convinced that the Richardsons are entitled to the constitutional protection afforded by Litchfield, notwithstanding the Indiana good faith statute.
*1106“It is firmly established that ‘a new rule for the conduct of criminal prosecutions is to be applied retroactively to all cases, state or federal, pending on direct review or not yet final, with no exception for cases in which the new rule constitutes a “clear break” with the past.’ ” Smylie v. State, 823 N.E.2d 679, 687 (Ind.2005) (quoting Griffith v. Kentucky, 479 U.S. 314, 328, 107 S.Ct. 708, 93 L.Ed.2d 649 (1987)). “A rule is new for the purposes of retroactivity ‘if the result was not dictated by precedent existing at the time the defendant’s conviction became final.’ ” Id. (quoting Teague v. Lane, 489 U.S. 288, 301, 109 S.Ct. 1060, 103 L.Ed.2d 334 (1989)). Prior to Litchfield, “officers were free to search curbside trash willy-nilly[.]” Turner v. State, 843 N.E.2d 937, 941 (Ind.Ct.App.2006). In Litchfield, our Supreme Court enunciated a new rule and held that “law enforcement officers may only search curbside trash if they have an articulable, individualized suspicion that the trash may contain evidence of criminal conduct.” Id. “Litchfield represents a significant development in Indiana constitutional law because it prohibits the State from randomly searching and seizing trash containers and holds that there must be an evidentiary foundation for such activity.” Id. at 942. As we noted in Turner, after Litchfield “Indiana residents enjoy greater protection from trash searches under Article I, Section 11 than they do under the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution.” Id.
Despite the new standard announced in Litchfield, the majority holds that the search of the Richardsons’ trash passes constitutional muster even though it was not supported by reasonable suspicion. Specifically, the majority relies on Indiana Code Section 35-37-4-5(b)(l)(B) and concludes that the officers who executed the trash search obtained evidence in good faith because they acted pursuant to a judicial precedent that was later ruled unconstitutional. Therefore, the majority reasons that under the statute the evidence obtained during the trash search cannot be excluded. But the dispositive and overarching issue presented is whether the statutory good faith exception can nullify a retroactive rule of constitutional law announced by our Supreme Court.
The State argues that the exclusionary rule does not apply because Trooper Gill relied in good faith on a facially valid warrant. The State contends that because the exclusionary rule is designed to deter police misconduct, “[it] serves no purpose here.” Brief of Appellee at 8. But the State mischaracterizes the issue. The question in this case is not whether the police acted in good faith but whether the Richardsons have recourse to a new rule of substantive constitutional law. To prevail, the Richardsons do not have to allege police misconduct but only have to show that they are entitled to invoke the new rule articulated by our Supreme Court in Litchfield.
Today’s holding creates several other concerns. First, the good faith exception, as applied here, nullifies our Supreme Court’s holding in Litchfield. That is, the majority holds that in those cases pending on direct review or not yet final, as long as a police officer conducting a trash search acts in accordance with existing law before Litchfield, the good faith exception negates the reasonable suspicion requirement for trash searches and renders the evidence seized admissible. But, as noted above, a new rule for the conduct of criminal prosecutions shall be applied retroactively to all cases pending on direct review or not yet final. See Smylie, 823 N.E.2d at 687. A conviction becomes final for purposes of retroactivity analysis when the availability of direct appeal has been exhausted. Robbins v. State, 839 N.E.2d 1196, 1199 (Ind.Ct.App.2005) (citation *1107omitted). Thus, because the Richardsons’ case is not yet final, the new constitutional rule announced in Litchfield applies in their case, notwithstanding the statutory good faith exception.
Further, today’s holding treats similarly situated defendants, the Litchfields and the Richardsons, differently simply because the Litchfields were the lucky defendants whose case was chosen as the vehicle for announcing the new principle. See Hankerson v. North Carolina, 432 U.S. 233, 247, 97 S.Ct. 2339, 53 L.Ed.2d 306 (1977) (Powell, J., concurring); see also Pirnat v. State, 607 N.E.2d 973, 974 (Ind.1993). The Richardsons should not be penalized simply because our Supreme Court chose the Litchfields’ case to hold that Article I, Section 11 provides more protection than the Fourth Amendment in the area of warrantless trash searches. Retroactive application of a new constitutional rule is an illusion if it can be taken away by statute.
Finally, it is the province of the judiciary to determine the admissibility of evidence. See Campbell v. Shelton, 727 N.E.2d 495, 500 (Ind.Ct.App.2000) (“The Indiana Rules of Evidence were adopted by the Indiana Supreme Court on August 24, 1993, and became effective on January 1, 1994.”), trans. denied. More than 80 years ago, in Callender v. State, 193 Ind. 91, 138 N.E. 817, 819 (1922), our Supreme Court adopted an exclusionary rule under Article I, Section 11, which was almost 40 years before the United States Supreme Court made the federal exclusionary rule applicable to the states in Mapp v. Ohio, 367 U.S. 643, 81 S.Ct. 1684, 6 L.Ed.2d 1081 (1961). See Randall T. Shepard, Second Wind for the Indiana Bill of Rights, 22 Ind. L.Rev. 575, 578-79 (1989). The Indiana exclusionary rule sits on its own constitutional bottom. And because the exclusionary rule is a rule of evidence, a statute cannot divest our Supreme Court of its authority to determine its operation and effect. Indeed, where, as here, a “conflict exists [between a statute and a rule of evidence], the conflicting statute is nullified.” Humbert v. Smith, 664 N.E.2d 356, 357 (Ind.1996) (citation omitted). “Rules of procedure, including rules of evidence, established by [our Supreme Court] court prevail over any statute.” Harrison v. State, 644 N.E.2d 1243, 1251 n. 14 (Ind.1995), superseded in part on other grounds by statute.
Under the hierarchy of law governing our state, the Indiana Constitution controls a statute to the contrary enacted by the General Assembly. See Ind.Code § 1-1-2-1. In Litchfield, our Supreme Court determined that Article I, Section 11 requires an “articulable individualized suspicion” before trash may be searched or seized. Litchfield, 824 N.E.2d at 364. And, once more, our Supreme Court has held that a new rule for the conduct of criminal prosecutions which constitutes a “clear break with the past” applies retroactively “with no exception.” Smylie, 823 N.E.2d at 687. No exception means no exception. In this case, and other cases in the same procedural posture, the statutory good faith exception must yield to Article I, Section 11 of the Indiana Constitution as interpreted by our Supreme Court.18 Thus, I respectfully dissent.
. It is important to note that the issues presented in this case apply to a narrow class of transitional cases, namely, to those cases pending on direct review or not yet final when Litchfield was announced. Eventually, this issue will run its course.

=== CASE 2223903 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:09.956149+00 ===

338 N.W.2d 419 (1983)
STATE of Minnesota, Respondent,
v.
Elmer M. LALLI, Appellant.
Nos. C2-82-1218; C5-82-1388.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
September 23, 1983.
John Remington Graham, Brainerd, for appellant.
Hubert H. Humphrey, III, Atty. Gen., St. Paul, Stephen C. Rathke, County Atty., Brainerd, for respondent.
Considered and decided by the court en banc without oral argument.
TODD, Justice.
Defendant was found guilty by a district court jury of six counts of bribery and six counts of theft, Minn.Stat. §§ 609.42, subd. 1(2), 609.52, subds. 2(1), 3(3)(d) (1982). At the sentencing hearing the prosecutor moved for (a) an order combining the six counts of bribery, each of which covered a different period, into one count covering the period from November 1, 1978 through August 31, 1981, and (b) sentencing only on that count. Defense counsel did not oppose this motion and the trial court granted it. The presumptive sentence for the offense (which is a severity level IV offense) by a person with defendant's criminal history score (zero) is 1 year and 1 day stayed. The trial court departed both durationally and dispositionally, imposing an executed prison term of 18 months. The court also fined defendant $3,000. Defendant did not order a transcript of the trial and recognizes therefore that he cannot challenge the sufficiency of the evidence of his guilt or the fairness of his trial. However, he has provided us with a copy of the transcript of the grand jury proceedings and he contends that his conviction should be reversed on the ground that the indictment was not based on sufficient evidence. He also argues *420 that his sentence was incorrect. We affirm.
1. Defendant's first contention is that there was insufficient evidence for the grand jury to indict and that therefore his subsequent conviction must be vacated.
(a) Defendant admits that one of the items of evidence before the grand jury was a confession he made to a deputy sheriff during a noncustodial interrogation on September 1, 1981. However, he contends that there was insufficient evidence independently establishing the corpus delecti and that without such other evidence there was insufficient evidence to indict.
The requirement that the corpus delecti be established by evidence independent of the confession is codified at Minn.Stat. § 634.03 (1982), which provides that "A confession of the defendant shall not be sufficient to warrant his conviction without evidence that the offense charged has been committed." The rule is discussed in E. Cleary, McCormick on Evidence § 158 (2d ed. 1972).
The test for the sufficiency of evidence to indict is set forth in Minn.R.Crim.P. 18.06, subd. 2, which provides:
The grand jury may find an indictment when upon all of the evidence there is probable cause to believe that an offense has been committed and that the defendant committed it. Reception of inadmissible evidence shall not be grounds for dismissal of an indictment if there is sufficient admissible evidence to support the indictment.
Defendant erroneously contends that this is merely a "rephrasing" of the since-repealed Minn.Stat. § 628.03, which provided that the grand jury could indict if all the evidence "would, if unexplained and uncontradicted, warrant a conviction by a trial jury." The comment to the rule states that the provision that an indictment may be found upon probable cause "changes" section 628.03. Specifically, the rule "substitutes the constitutional standard of probable cause, by which the validity of complaints are measured." 7 H. McCarr, Minnesota Practice, Criminal Law and Procedure 482 (1976). And see State v. Terrell, 283 N.W.2d 529 (Minn.1979).
Whether the corpus delecti requirement applies even at the grand jury stage of proceedings is an issue that we need not and do not address, because even if the requirement does apply at the grand jury stage, it was satisfied here by the state's evidence independently establishing probable cause to believe that the crimes of theft and bribery had been committed. Specifically, the state's evidence established (a) that a scrap dealer named Ross frequently picked up large amounts of valuable scrap electrical wire which was owned by the Brainerd Water and Light Department, (b) that defendant, who was the superintendent, was usually present when this occurred, (c) that after the wire was loaded onto Ross' truck Ross often would "disappear" with defendant for a few minutes or hand cash to another employee of the department, (d) that the city had no record of having been paid by Ross for most of the scrap he picked up, and (e) that there was another scrap dealer, who always paid by check, who wanted to buy more scrap wire from the city but kept being rebuffed by defendant. In conclusion, we believe that there was sufficient evidence to support the indictment.
(b) Because of this conclusion, we do not need to address the issue of whether a conviction based on sufficient evidence should be reversed if the indictment was not based on sufficient evidence.
2. Defendant's other contention is that the trial court erred in departing dispositionally and durationally from the presumptive sentence.
Three of the six counts of bribery related completely to conduct that occurred before May 1, 1980, the effective date of the Guidelines. The court therefore could have sentenced defendant to the statutory maximum of 10 years on each of these three counts, without regard to the Guidelines and without violating section 609.035. See State v. Eaton, 292 N.W.2d 260 (Minn.1980).
*421 The agent who prepared the sentencing worksheet did not propose sentencing without regard to the Sentencing Guidelines but did use the Hernandez method of computing defendant's criminal history score. See Minnesota Sentencing Guidelines and Commentary, II.B.101. (1982) and State v. Hernandez, 311 N.W.2d 478 (Minn.1981). That is, the agent assigned defendant a zero criminal history score for the first offense of bribery, one for the second, two for the third, etc. This gave defendant a criminal history score of five for the last offense of bribery. The presumptive sentence for a severity Level IV offense by a person with a criminal history score of five is an executed prison term of 32 (30-34) months in prison.
The prosecutor moved at the sentencing hearing to have all six counts of bribery consolidated into one count and have defendant sentenced for bribery. The trial court, without objection from defendant, granted the motion. This meant that the Hernandez method could not be used and that defendant's criminal history score was zero. The presumptive sentence therefore was 1 year and 1 day stayed. The prosecutor then moved for a dispositional departure and for a double durational departure. The trial court granted the motion but limited the durational departure to one and one-half rather than two times the presumptive sentence.
The trial court's departure report stated: The reason for departure from the guidelines in both a dispositional and durational manner are substantially intertwined in this instance.
The evidence at the trial does support a finding that the offense was a major economic offense in that it was a series of illegal acts (committed by other than physical means) involving concealment and guile to obtain money for the defendant over a three-year period of time to the detriment of the community which he purported to serve.
In addition, the defendant used his position as supervisor of the Brainerd Water and Light Department to facilitate the commission of the offense.
The testimony at the trial would sustain a finding that the defendant had accepted bribes on literally dozens of occasions in amounts varying from $20 to $500 and that in so doing, the defendant subverted respect for the authority of his employer.
The logic of State v. Evans, 311 N.W.2d 481 (Minn.1981), generally bars use of one set of aggravating circumstances as justification for both a durational departure and a departure with respect to consecutive service in the same case, but clearly does not bar use of both a dispositional and a durational departure in the same case or a dispositional departure and one with respect to consecutive service in the same case.
In this case the trial court relied on the fourth of the five aggravating factors listed in Minnesota Sentencing Guidelines and Commentary, II.D.2.b. (1982), i.e., the one dealing with major economic offenses.[1] Defendant contends that this factor does not apply but he has not provided us with a transcript of the trial or pointed to anything in the presentence investigation report *422 that would support his argument. The record we do have indicates that reliance on this factor was justified.[2]
Affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  The offense was a major economic offense, identified as an illegal act or series of illegal acts committed by other than physical means and by concealment or guile to obtain money or property, to avoid payment or loss of money or property, or to obtain business or professional advantage. The presence of two or more of the circumstances listed below are aggravating factors with respect to the offense:
(a) the offenses involved multiple victims or multiple incidents per victim;
(b) the offense involved an attempted or actual monetary loss substantially greater than the usual offense or substantially greater than the minimum loss specified in the statutes;
(c) the offense involved a high degree of sophistication or planning or occurred over a lengthy period of time;
(d) the defendant used his or her position or status to facilitate the commission of the offense, including positions of trust, confidence, or fiduciary relationships; or
(e) the defendant has been involved in other conduct similar to the current offense as evidenced by the findings of civil or administrative law proceedings or the imposition of professional sanctions.
[2]  Specifically, the record indicates the presence of circumstances (a), (c) and (d)  that is, three of the five circumstances listed. The court could have departed even if only two of the five were present.

=== CASE 9740514 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:45.403035+00 ===

WAHL, Justice.
These consolidated cases raise important questions of insurance law in the context of underinsurance coverage, settlements, and subrogation rights.
In the first case, Rosemarie Schmidt sued for the wrongful death of her husband, Lloyd H. Schmidt. On November 1, 1979, Mr. Schmidt was hit and killed by a truck driven by defendant Clothier and owned by Clothier’s employer, defendant Furniture House of Hastings, Inc., which carried a $100,000 liability policy on the truck with St. Paul Fire and Marine Insurance Company (St. Paul Fire). St. Paul Fire offered to settle with Mrs. Schmidt for the $100,000 policy limit in exchange for a full release.
Mrs. Schmidt carried $100,000 of underin-surance coverage with appellant, Safeco Insurance Company (Safeco). Because it was clear that her damages exceeded $265,000, and thus that the liable parties were under-insured, Mrs. Schmidt notified Safeco that she intended to settle with St. Paul Fire. Safeco, in reliance on the cooperation clause in Mrs. Schmidt’s policy and its claimed subrogation interest, refused to acquiesce in the settlement.
Mrs. Schmidt thereafter demanded arbitration of her underinsurance claim. Safe-co refused to pay underinsured benefits to Mrs. Schmidt and refused as well to submit her claim to arbitration. After Mrs. Schmidt threatened to file a bad-faith lawsuit against it, Safeco tendered a check to Mrs. Schmidt in the amount of $100,000 but required her to agree to hold in trust for Safeco any recovery she obtained from any source and to fully release Safeco from any claim she might make.
Mrs. Schmidt, who had been without recovery from any source for the 2 years after her husband’s death, then moved the Dakota County District Court for an order authorizing her to accept both the check from Safeco and the check from St. Paul Fire. The district court authorized Mrs. Schmidt to accept the $100,000 settlement offered by St. Paul Fire on behalf of itself and its insureds. Mrs. Schmidt was further authorized to execute a general release of all claims against the defendants. This portion of the order was stayed 10 days, to allow Safeco the opportunity to tender a check in the amount of $100,000 to Mrs. Schmidt to protect any subrogation interest which Safeco claimed against any of the defendants. If Safeco made such a tender, Mrs. Schmidt was ordered not to negotiate any settlement with St. Paul Fire or to sign any release. The court further ordered that within 10 days Safeco either pay its underinsured benefits of $100,000 to the plaintiff or submit the matter to arbitration. Safeco refused to pay underinsured benefits and ignored the order to arbitrate. Although the order was not appealable, we granted discretionary review.
In the second consolidated case, respondent Paskoff was injured on January 13, 1977, while a passenger in a car driven by Linda Epperly and owned by the Minneapolis Special School District No. 1, when Ep-perly’s car collided with a car driven and owned by Gerald Hoag. Paskoff sued Hoag and Epperly. Hoag offered to settle for $22,000 out of his $25,000 liability policy, and Epperly offered $4,000 out of the school district’s $300,000 policy.
Paskoff, who carried an underinsurance policy with Safeco, notified it of his intent to accept the settlement offers and sought Safeco's consent to the settlements as he was required to do under the Safeco policy. Safeco refused to consent, contending that settlement would impair its subrogation rights and that Paskoff was not entitled to underinsurance benefits until he had exhausted the limits of the defendants’ liability policies.
*260Paskoff thereafter moved the Hennepin County District Court for an order authorizing him to execute the releases and negotiate the checks tendered to him by the defendants. The district court so ordered but, as did the court in Mrs. Schmidt’s case, stayed the order 10 days to give Safeco the opportunity to exchange its check for $26,-000 for the settlement drafts tendered to Paskoff in order to protect its subrogation interests. Safeco appealed from that order. Epperly eventually moved for a court order finding Paskoff in contempt for refusing to accept the settlements. The court ordered Paskoff to negotiate the settlement checks, and the defendants were thereafter released. Paskoff thus has received a recovery from the liability defendants, but Safe-co has refused to process his underinsured claim.
The issues involved in these cases are (1) whether underinsurance benefits are available to the insured where the proposed settlement with the tortfeasor does not exhaust the tortfeasor’s liability insurance and, if so, for what amount the underinsurer is liable, and (2) whether a general release executed as part of a settlement with the tortfeasor destroys the underinsurer’s subrogation rights or precludes the insured from recovering underinsurance benefits.
These cases were briefed and argued extensively by the parties, as well as by two amici, the Minnesota Trial Lawyers Association and the Minnesota Defense Lawyers Association. All advocates have requested that we formulate a rule setting forth the rights and duties of the insured, the under-insurer, the liability insurer, and the tort-feasor.
In doing so we have kept in mind the purposes of the Minnesota no-fault automobile insurance act, Minn.Stat. §§ 65B.41-.71 (1982), which include relieving the economic hardships encountered by uncompensated accident victims, Minn.Stat. § 65B.42(1), encouraging proper medical treatment by assuring prompt payment for such treatment, Minn.Stat. § 65B.42(3), and speeding the administration of justice and easing the burden of litigation on the courts of this state, Minn.Stat. § 65B.42(4).
The first issue raised is whether policy exhaustion clauses are enforceable. Both underinsurance policies in these cases contained an exhaustion clause which provided: “We will pay under this coverage only after the limits of liability under any applicable bodily injury liability bonds or policies have been exhausted by payment of judgments or settlements.” Enforcement of this clause in Paskoff’s case would deny him any underinsurance benefits because he has settled within the limits of the defendants’ liability policies.
Both Safeco and the Defense Lawyer amicus, however, have taken the position before this court that underinsurance benefits should be available, despite a below-limits settlement, where the injured person’s damages are greater than the liability limits of the tortfeasor.1 They are willing to concede that the legislature intended underin-surance coverage to provide benefits in excess of the tortfeasor’s liability limits and that the insured has a right to full control over the lawsuit against the tortfeasor, a control which would include the right to make the best settlement possible.
The purposes of the no-fault act, noted above, include those of easing the burden of litigation and encouraging prompt payment of claims. Enforcement of policy exhaustion clauses would produce results contrary to those purposes. It could serve to force an insured to litigate the claim to final judgment in order to exhaust the policy limits. Litigation expenses would lessen the insured’s net recovery, the time involved in litigation would serve to delay payment to the insured, and the litigation itself would unnecessarily burden our court system. Where the best settlement available is less than the defendant’s liability limits, the insured should not be forced to forego settlement and go to trial *261in order to determine the issue of damages. The insured has the right to accept what he or she considers the best settlement available and to proceed to arbitrate the underin-surance claim for a determination of whether the damages do indeed exceed the tort-feasor’s liability limits. Thus, we hold that exhaustion clauses are void as against the policies of the no-fault act. The insured may recover underinsurance benefits where the total damages sustained (as determined by either arbitration or judgment) exceed the limits of the tortfeasor’s liability policy even where the insured settles with the tortfeasor for less than the liability limits.2
Safeco and the Defense Lawyer amicus argue that, even though the insured should not be required to exhaust the tortfeasor’s liability limits, the underinsurer is liable only for those damages suffered in excess of those limits, for it is only in this amount that the tortfeasor is truly “underinsured.” Respondents and the Trial Lawyers amicus counter that, in order to effectuate the statute’s policy of full compensation of accident victims, the underinsurer should be required to pay that amount by which the insured’s damages exceed the settlement amount, i.e., the underinsurer must pay, as underinsurance benefits, the “gap” between the defendant’s liability limits and what the insured has accepted as a settlement.
In resolving this question we must look to the language of the statutory provision in effect when these causes of action arose, which made mandatory offers of underinsured motorist benefits coverage. That provision required carriers to offer underinsurance coverage whereby the reparation obligor agrees to pay damages the insured is legally entitled to recover on account of a motor vehicle accident but which are uncompensated because the total damages exceed the residual bodily injury liability limit of the owner of the other vehicle. Minn.Stat. § 65B.49, subd. 6(e) (1978) (repealed 1980). This language makes clear that the legislature contemplated excess coverage over the liability limit that, would be available when damages were uncompensated merely because the tortfeasor carried inadequate liability insurance. It does not call for underinsurance coverage when damages are uncompensated because the insured has chosen to settle with the tortfeasor for less than the liability limits.
We conclude that the insured cannot obtain a below-limit settlement from the tortfeasor and then recoup the “gap” from the underinsurance carrier. Practically, the insured would have no incentive to obtain the best settlement if he or she is assured of recovering the “gap” from the underinsurer. Use of underinsurance benefits in this way runs counter to the agreement of the parties. It would also place the underinsurer at an unfair disadvantage in which it had no control over the insured’s right to settle but yet had to pay the difference between the settlement and the liability limits. It might also lessen the incentive of the liability carrier to make its best offer to the claimant. We hold that the underinsurer is liable only for the amount of damages suffered by the insured in excess of the liability limits of the defendant. This holding permits the underinsurance claim to be processed immediately, without regard to any eventual settlement, for the underin-surer’s liability depends not on the settlement but rather on the readily ascertainable liability limit of the defendant.
Safeco next argues that settlement by the insured with the tortfeasor destroys its subrogation rights and therefore precludes recovery by the insured of the underinsurance benefits granted by Minn.Stat. § 65B.49, subd. 6(e). Subrogation is a limited, not absolute, right that comes into existence only after the insurer has paid benefits to its insured, a fact rec*262ognized in the statutory language.3 6A J. Appleman Insurance Law and Practice § 4051 at 112 (1972). Once an insurer has paid the benefits it contractually owes to its insured and gives notice thereof to the tort-feasor, a subsequent release obtained by the tortfeasor will not defeat the subrogation right but rather will be viewed as a waiver of the rule against splitting the cause of action. Travelers Indemnity Co. v. Vaccari, 310 Minn. 97, 245 N.W.2d 844 (1976). If the tortfeasor is released before payment by the insurer, however, no subrogation rights ever arise. Great Northern Oil Co. v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Insurance Co., 291 Minn. 97, 99-100, 189 N.W.2d 404, 406-07 (1971). An underinsurer which promptly sends an underinsurance claim to arbitration and pays its insured will be protected from the effects of a settlement and release of the tortfeasor.
Safeco contends that destruction of its potential subrogation rights precludes recovery of underinsurance benefits by its insureds. Safeco cites Bacich v. Homeland Insurance Co., 212 Minn. 375, 3 N.W.2d 665 (1942), which held that the insured’s release of a tortfeasor barred recovery under his insurance policy because the release had destroyed the insurer’s subrogation rights. Since Bacich was decided, however, the Minnesota legislature enacted the Minnesota no-fault automobile insurance act. Safe-co recognizes that the policies of that act override Bacich and require a different result here. It is the public policy of Minnesota that injured persons should not, by virtue of having purchased underinsurance, be placed in a financial position inferior to that which they would have held had the tortfeasor been fully insured. See Milbank Mutual Insurance Co. v. Kluver, 302 Minn. 310, 313, 225 N.W.2d 230, 232 (1974). Thus, we hold that settlement and release of an underinsured tortfeasor does not preclude recovery of underinsurance benefits.
Respondents and the Trial Lawyers ami-cus take the position that subrogation rights for underinsurance benefits will never arise in the context of settlement. They argue that subrogation rights exist only when the injured person has been fully compensated and only to the extent necessary to prevent double recovery by the insured. Id. Since the underinsurer is in a position to prevent double recovery, they claim, subrogation will never arise when its insured settles with an underinsured tort-feasor.
Subrogation rights depend on “general principles of equity and the nature of the contract of insurance.” Bacich v. Homeland Insurance Co., 212 Minn. at 376, 3 N.W.2d at 665. In Kluver, the insurer was attempting to recoup benefits it had paid by obtaining the proceeds of a settlement reached by its insured with two liquor vendors who had sold liquor to the uninsured tortfeasor. We held that the insured was entitled to retain the settlement proceeds because the insurance benefits and the settlement amount together did not fully compensate her for her injuries. In that case, the equities to be balanced, the insurer’s right to recoup benefits paid and the injured person’s right to obtain full compensation, weighed in favor of our public policy favoring full compensation of injured persons. Clearly, in the cases before us, under the rule of Kluver, the underinsurer would not be able to recover underinsu-rance benefits from settlements obtained by its insured from liability defendants because, by definition, the injured person has-not been fully compensated.
Safeco argues, however, that it should not be denied the right to pursue the underinsured tortfeasor for benefits it has paid. In the situation before us, the equities to be balanced are those between the underinsurer, which has paid benefits, and the underinsured tortfeasor, who has not paid for the damages he or she has caused. *263Between these two parties, the equities balance in favor of the underinsurer. The underinsurer, however, will have this subro-gation right against the tortfeasor only if it has paid underinsurance benefits prior to release of the tortfeasor. Thus, the under-insurer is entitled to notice of the tentative settlement and an opportunity to protect those potential rights by paying underinsu-rance benefits before release. The district court in each of the cases before us provided just this opportunity. Under the procedure set out in those orders, the underinsurer was given notice of the tentative settlement agreement and a period of time in which to assess the case. In that time it could evaluate relevant factors, such as the amount of the settlement, the amount of liability insurance remaining, if any, the amount of assets held by the tortfeasor and the likelihood of their recovery via subrogation, the total amount of the insured’s damages, and the expenses and risks of litigating the insured’s cause of action. If the underinsurer were to determine after assessment that recovery of underinsurance benefits it paid was unlikely (e.g., where the liability limits are exhausted or nearly so and the tortfeasor is judgment-proof), it could simply let the “grace period” expire and permit the settlement and release. It must, of course, thereafter process the un-derinsurance claim but would not be able to recover those payments through subrogation. Great Northern Oil Co. v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Insurance Co., 291 Minn. 97, 189 N.W.2d 404.
If, on the other hand, damages were substantially more than the liability limits and the tortfeasor had substantial assets, the underinsurer could substitute its payment to the insured in an amount equal to the tentative settlement. In this situation, the underinsurer’s payment,, would protect its subrogation rights to the extent of the payment, and the insured would receive the amount of the settlement offer in cash. The underinsurer would then have to arbitrate the underinsured claim and could, thereafter, attempt to negotiate a better settlement or could proceed to trial in the insured’s name. We note again that prompt assessment, arbitration, and payment of underinsurance claims will protect the underinsurer’s subrogation rights, and the underinsurer will avoid having to choose later between either acquiescing in the settlement or substituting its check for the amount of the settlement offer.
The district courts gave the under-insurer 10 days in which to make this assessment in cases where the underinsurer had failed to pay underinsurance benefits by the time a tentative settlement had been reached. We conclude that in the future 30 days from the written notice of the tentative settlement agreement is a more reasonable time period, and so the procedure set out in the district court orders should hereafter be modified.
In applying this procedure to the cases before us, we find that Safeco has, in Mrs. Schmidt’s case, lost its ability to either protect its subrogation rights or to deny its liability for underinsurance benefits. The district court order gave Safeco the choice of either paying Mrs. Schmidt $100,000 in underinsurance benefits or submitting her claim to arbitration. The order compelling arbitration was not appealable under Minn. Stat. § 572.26 (1982), but Safeco refused to arbitrate the claim. We hold that Mrs. Schmidt may accept St. Paul Fire’s settlement offer and execute a release of the defendants, and we order Safeco to tender its unrestricted check for $100,000 in payment of Mrs. Schmidt’s claim for underinsu-rance benefits.
In Paskoff’s case, the defendants have already been released. Safeco could have protected its subrogation rights by substituting its check for the checks and releases tendered by the liability insurers. It could then have arbitrated the underinsu-rance claim with its insured and thereafter have proceeded against the tortfeasor. It chose not to do this. Thus, we hold that Safeco must proceed to arbitration of Pas-koff’s underinsurance claim and is liable to pay the amount, if any, by which Paskoff’s *264total damages exceed the liability limits of the underinsured defendant Hoag.
The district court orders are affirmed.
. Appellant also concedes that underinsurance benefits are available where any one of the multiple tortfeasors is underinsured.
. Our holding is consistent with the conclusions that Minnesota state and federal district courts have reached on this issue. See Nelson v. U.S. Fidelity & Guaranty Co., U.S.DistCt., Minn. 3rd Div.Civ. 3-80-368, March 20, 1981; Boulton v. Dairyland Insurance Co., Henn.Cty. Dist.Ct. No. 768522, Jan. 14, 1981; Franke v. Allstate Insurance Co., Henn.Cty.Dist.Ct. No. 756530, June 23, 1980.
. The relevant statute, Minn.Stat. § 65B.49, subd. 6(e) (1978) (repealed 1980), pfovides in part: “The reparation obligor [is] subrogated to any amounts it pays and upon payment [has] an assignment of the judgment if any to the extent of the money it pays.” (Emphasis added.)

=== CASE 9740515 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:45.407688+00 ===

TODD, Justice
(concurring and dissenting).
I concur in the majority opinion except that portion which requires the injured party to obtain less than full compensation in order to expedite the total claim. That portion of the opinion is inconsistent with the rest of the opinion. The so-called “gap” arises when the liability carrier tenders less than the full amount of its coverage. The majority concludes that the injured party would have no incentive to seek maximum recovery if the underinsured carrier is responsible for all amounts due over and above the proposed settlement amount. This approach ignores the solution provided in the opinion itself and .has a very bad practical effect. If allowed to stand the injured party will not be able to negotiate any reasonable settlement with the liability carrier unless willing to bear a financial loss. This is not necessary. The majority opinion provides the solution. The injured party should negotiate the best possible settlement. The offer is communicated to the underinsured carrier. If it is not satisfied, the offer should be rejected, the underin-sured carrier should immediately pay the amount of the offer to the injured party, and they should immediately proceed to arbitration. This method places in the under-insured carrier the ability to manage its role in the pending claim to its best advantage without imposing any financial burden on the injured party.

=== CASE 2225206 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:40.207761+00 ===

782 N.W.2d 579 (2010)
STATE of Minnesota, Respondent,
v.
Robert William STERLING, Appellant.
No. A09-418.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
May 18, 2010.
*580 Lori Swanson, Attorney General, St. Paul, MN, and LaMar Piper, Watonwan County Attorney, Kevin C. Lin, Assistant County Attorney, St. James, MN, for respondent.
Allen P. Eskens, Eskens Gibson and Behm Law Firm, Mankato, MN, for appellant.
Considered and decided by ROSS, Presiding Judge; STONEBURNER, Judge; and HARTEN, Judge.
OPINION
HARTEN, Judge.[*]
After being charged with two counts of fourth-degree driving while impaired (DWI), appellant moved to dismiss the charges on the ground that the deputy sheriff unlawfully requested him to give a urine sample after he had provided breath samples for an Intoxilyzer test. His motion was denied. Under the procedure set out in Minn. R.Crim. P. 26.01, subd. 4, appellant acknowledged that the denial of his motion was dispositive, maintained his not guilty plea, and waived his right to a jury trial. The district court found him guilty on stipulated facts. He challenges his conviction.[1]
FACTS
On 22 May 2008, appellant Robert Sterling was stopped by a Watonwan county *581 deputy sheriff who observed appellant's vehicle swerve over the center line. Appellant failed the field sobriety tests that the deputy administered and admitted drinking two beers about a half an hour earlier. The deputy arrested appellant for DWI, took him to the county jail, and read him the implied consent advisory.
The deputy, a certified operator of the Intoxilyzer 5000, followed correct procedure in using the machine, and appellant submitted two adequate breath samples, which the machine accepted and measured. But the Intoxilyzer failed to complete the procedure: it stopped on "Air Blank" and did not provide a printout of appellant's alcohol concentration level to the deputy.
The deputy then read the implied consent advisory to appellant again and asked appellant to provide a urine sample, which appellant did. It showed a .15 alcohol concentration. The next day, the Bureau of Criminal Apprehension (BCA) provided a printout of the Intoxilyzer test; it also showed a .15 alcohol concentration. The BCA confirmed that the machine had accurately evaluated appellant's breath sample.
Based on the results of the urine test, respondent State of Minnesota charged appellant with two counts of fourth-degree DWI.
ISSUES[2]
1. Did the officer lawfully request a urine sample from appellant?
2. Did the district court err in using the results of the urine test to convict appellant?
ANALYSIS
In an appeal following a Minn. R.Crim. P. 26.01, subd. 4, procedure (superseding the procedure set out in State v. Lothenbach, 296 N.W.2d 854, 857-58 (Minn.1980)), this court's review is limited to the pretrial order that denied the motion to suppress. State v. Ortega, 770 N.W.2d 145, 147 n. 1, 149 (Minn.2009). This court reviews undisputed facts and "determine[s], as a matter of law, whether the evidence need be suppressed." Id. at 149 (quotation omitted).
1. Alternative Urine Sample
"[A] driver who submits to a breath test is obligated to submit to a blood or urine test if the breath testing machine does not work . . . if he does not want to lose his license." Gunderson v. Comm'r of Pub. Safety, 351 N.W.2d 6, 7 (Minn.1984). Appellant argues that the district court erred in relying on Gunderson because, in that case, "the testing machine malfunctioned by not giving a reading on the breath sample . . . [and the] machine was taken in for repairs" while the machine in the instant case "was working properly at the time it was used and it provided a print out of the breath results." Appellant cites the parties' Minn. R.Crim. P. 26.01, subd. 4, stipulation at 6(k) for support of this statement. But appellant misreads 6(k) and takes it out of context. The relevant portion of the stipulation reads:
Defendant stipulates to the following facts:
. . . .
f. [Appellant] submitted two adequate breath samples and the Intoxilyzer *582 machine accepted the breath samples.
g. After [appellant] provided the breath samples, the Intoxilyzer machine display stopped on "Air Blank" and failed to complete the testing procedure or provide a printout with [appellant's] alcohol concentration level.
h. [The deputy] read [appellant] the Implied Consent Advisory again and asked [appellant] to submit to a urine test. [Appellant] agreed and provided a urine sample.
i. The urine sample results showed a.15 alcohol concentration level.
j. Both the breath test and the urine test were conducted within two hours of [appellant] driving or operating a motor vehicle.
k. The day after, on May 23, 2008, the BCA provided a printout of the Intoxilyzer result showing a .15 alcohol concentration level. The BCA also confirmed the machine was working properly [i.e., accurately evaluating breath samples] at the time [that appellant provided breath samples].
After taking appellant to the county jail, the deputy's immediate responsibility was to ascertain appellant's alcohol concentration. The deputy's attempt to do so with the Intoxilyzer failed because the machine did not provide that information, and the deputy had no way of knowing when, if ever, the Intoxilyzer would provide him with an evaluation of appellant's breath samples. As it happened, the Intoxilyzer did provide the evaluation on the following day, but that fact is irrelevant; under the circumstances, the deputy could not wait until the next day to determine what appellant's alcohol concentration had been while he was driving.
Appellant relies on Young v. Comm'r of Pub. Safety, 420 N.W.2d 585, 587 (Minn. 1988) (holding that "under the present facts, a driver need not submit to a second test when the first test is reliable and adequate"). But appellant's reliance is misplaced: the holding in Young is explicitly limited to its facts, and those facts are clearly distinguishable. See also Nelson v. Commissioner of Public Safety, 779 N.W.2d 571, 574-77 (Minn.App.2010) (distinguishing Young and following Gunderson to affirm sustaining of revocation of driver's license when driver's first blood sample had been drawn using an expired blood-test kit, officer had second blood sample, and test result of second sample was basis for revocation of driver's license).
In Young, the driver provided two breath samples, each of which was tested twice. Id. at 586. The first sample provided readings of .094 and .097; the second provided readings of .109 and .110. Id. The final reported score (obtained by dropping the third digit from the lowest of the four readings) was .09. Id.; id at n.1. The correlation between the samples was 88%, and the BCA had instructed the deputy to request a second test if the correlation was less than 90%. Id. He did so. Id. In the second test, the reported value was .10 and the correlation of the samples was 99%. Id. In the instant case, the deputy sheriff never obtained any Intoxilyzer score on appellant's samples. Appellant's Intoxilyzer test, unlike the first test in Young, was not "reliable and adequate."
Appellant also argues that the deputy had no authority to make "the unilateral determination that [a]ppellant's breath samples were inadequate," relying on language in Young: "[I]t is the machine that determines whether a breath sample is adequate or deficient and not the officer." Id. at 586. But neither the deputy nor anyone else claimed that appellant's breath samples were inadequate; the deputy determined *583 that the machine malfunctioned by failing to disclose appellant's alcohol concentration, because of appellant's breath samples were inadequate.
A driver submits to a chemical test of blood, breath, or urine "for the purpose of determining the presence of alcohol." Minn.Stat. § 169A.51, subd. 1(a) (2008). The deputy lawfully requested appellant to provide a urine sample when the Intoxilyzer test did not achieve that purpose.
2. Use of Urine Test Result
Appellant also argues that, once it was known that the Intoxilyzer test was adequate, the urine test should have "be[en] deemed to be a contingent test that should [have been] thrown out." For this argument, he relies on LeClair v. Comm'r of Pub. Safety, 416 N.W.2d 209 (Minn.App.1987). Again, his reliance is misplaced: LeClair is distinguishable. In that case, a license was revoked for refusal to test because the arresting officer believed the urine sample to be inadequate. Id. at 210. The sample was nevertheless submitted and tested, revealing an alcohol concentration of .15. Id. at 210. The order of revocation was amended to show that the license was revoked for operating a motor vehicle with an alcohol concentration of .10 or more, not for refusal to test. Id. The district court rescinded the amended revocation, indicating the revocation could not be amended to conform to later-discovered evidence. Id. at 211. This court reversed the rescission, concluding that both the issuance of the revocation for refusal to test and the amendment of the order of revocation were proper. Id. at 211-12.
LeClair involved only one test; therefore, it is not relevant to the use of results from a second test. Appellant provides no other support for his view that, when two tests are administered, the results of the second are inadmissible if the first is later determined to have been valid.
DECISION
If an Intoxilyzer unexpectedly malfunctions by failing to display a driver's alcohol concentration, the attending officer may request a sample for an alternative blood or urine test, the results of which are admissible. The district court did not err in admitting the results of appellant's urine test. We affirm his conviction.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[*]  Retired judge of the Minnesota Court of Appeals, serving by appointment pursuant to Minn. Const. art. VI, § 10.
[1]  The time for his appeal was stayed pending supreme court review of Morris v. State, No. A06-2101, 2008 WL 126645 (Minn.App.15 Jan.2008) (dispositive of appellant's right to counsel). On 14 May 2009, Morris v. State, 765 N.W.2d 78 (Minn.2009), established appellant's right to counsel. An order of this court dissolved the stay and the appeal proceeded.
[2]  Appellant also raises the issue of whether he was deprived of due process because he was not given the source code for the Intoxilyzer 5000 EN. The state asserts, and we agree, that appellant has no standing to raise this issue because the state's charges were based solely on appellant's urine test.

=== CASE 9740524 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:48.999095+00 ===

ROBB, Judge,
concurring with separate opinion.
Although I concur with the majority, I write separately to emphasize that the result we have reached herein avoids what could, under other facts, be an inconsistent result. Here, we are concerned only with medical expenses owed to a hospital. Our legislature has chosen, via the Hospital Lien Act, to protect hospitals and ensure that they are compensated at least in part for them services. See slip op. at 5 (quoting Tankersley v. Parkview Hosp., Inc., 791 N.E.2d at 204). Providers not qualified as “hospitals” and not protected by the Hospital Lien Act are able to pursue the full amounts owed to them by the usual means. It would be incongruous, then, not to allow hospitals to pursue the remainder of the debt owed to them outside of the settlement. Any other result would actually result in less protection for the very entity the legislature has determined should be protected.5 The Hospital Lien Act only ensures that hospitals will receive some recompense. There is no indication the legislature intended the guaranty of some payment would be the quid pro quo for foregoing the balance. It does not limit a hospital’s ability to pursue full compensation. Subject to these comments, I concur with the majority.
. Our supreme court recently decided the case of Midtown Chiropractic v. Illinois Farmers Ins. Co., 847 N.E.2d 942 (Ind., 2006). In determining that Indiana common law prohibiting the assignment of personal injury claims also prohibits the assignment of the proceeds thereof, the court noted that if assignment of proceeds from a personal injury claim was allowed as distinguished from the personal injury claim itself, it "would operate to extend to [providers] unbridled collection rights far in excess of the statutory rights provided for hospitals....'' Op. at 947. Although not entirely germane to the issue before us in this case, I feel it is important to note the supreme court's acknowledgment in Midtown Chiropractic of the legislature's intention to benefit hospitals and its reluotance to extend greater rights to those not protected by the lien statute.

=== CASE 9740525 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:49.27506+00 ===

MORGAN, Justice.
This appeal arises from a trial court’s order denying appellant John Miller (Miller) post-conviction relief from a conviction for escape from the South Dakota State Penitentiary (penitentiary). Miller appeals and we affirm.
On November 13, 1979, while serving the fourth year of a twenty-five year sentence in the penitentiary, Miller escaped from the penitentiary’s “west farm” near Ellis, South Dakota. Approximately four days later, Miller was arrested in Dodgeville, Wisconsin. He was subsequently convicted by a *675jury of escape and sentenced to two and one-half years in the penitentiary. This court affirmed that conviction in State v. Miller, 313 N.W.2d 460 (S.D.1981).
Miller now brings this post-conviction proceeding under the provisions of SDCL ch. 23A-34. The trial court denied Miller’s request for post-conviction relief and Miller appeals. The issues on this appeal, as framed by Miller, are whether the trial court’s inquiry as to Miller’s reasons for requesting a change of judge denied Miller due process of law; whether the prosecution’s and trial court’s misinforming the jury regarding Miller’s plea to the information denied Miller his right to a fair and impartial jury trial and his right to due process of law; whether the trial court’s failure to properly instruct the jury on Miller’s mental illness defense denied Miller his right to a fair and impartial jury trial and his right to due process of law; and, whether Miller was denied his right to effective assistance of counsel.
The grounds for instituting a post-conviction proceeding are provided at SDCL 23A-34^1,1 which states:
Except at a time when direct appellate relief is available, any person who has been convicted of, or sentenced for, a crime and who claims:
(1) That his conviction or sentence was in violation of the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of this state;
[[Image here]]
(4) That there exists evidence of material facts bearing upon the constitutionality of the petitioner’s detention or sentence, not previously presented and heard, that requires vacation of the conviction or sentence in the interest of justice;
[[Image here]]
(6) That his conviction or sentence is otherwise subject to collateral attack upon any ground of alleged error heretofore available under any common law, statutory or other writ, motion, petition, proceeding, or remedy;
may institute a proceeding under this chapter to secure relief.
A post-conviction proceeding is not a substitute for a direct appeal. See Rauscher v. State, 292 N.W.2d 106 (S.D.1980). The burden of establishing a basis for post-conviction relief rests upon a petitioner. State v. Roth, 84 S.D. 44, 166 N.W.2d 564 (1969). The court must make specific findings of fact, and state expressly its conclusions of law on each issue presented. SDCL 23A-34-18. On appeal, this court cannot disturb such findings unless they are clearly erroneous. SDCL 15-6-52(a); Gregory v. State, 325 N.W.2d 297 (S.D.1982); Spirit Track v. State, 272 N.W.2d 803 (S.D.1978).
Miller’s first claim is that the trial court’s inquiry into his reasons for requesting a change of judge denied him due process of law. Three days prior to his trial for escape, Miller moved for a change of judge. SDCL 15-12-27 requires such a motion to be made at least ten days prior to the date of trial. Since the motion was not properly made, the trial court rejected it.
Before proceeding with the case, however, the trial court judge asked Miller for the reasons for the motion for change of judge. Although the judge need not have asked for the reasons for the motion, see State v. Thompson, 43 S.D. 425, 180 N.W. 73 (1920), Miller did not object to the judge’s questions. Further, when Miller directly appealed his conviction to this court, he did not raise this issue. The general rule is that a petitioner who takes a direct appeal cannot thereafter raise in a post-conviction proceeding any matter which he knew at the time of the direct appeal, but did not raise. Geelan v. State, 85 S.D. 346, 182 N.W.2d 311 (1970); State v. Roth, supra. Since Miller did not object to the judge’s questions and further, was aware of this issue when he directly appealed his convic*676tion, he cannot raise it now in this post-conviction proceeding.
Miller’s second contention is that the prosecutor and trial court misinformed the jury of Miller’s plea to the information. SDCL 23A-24-2 provides, in pertinent part, that: “After a jury has been impaneled and sworn, a trial must proceed in the following order: (1) If the ... information is for a felony, the clerk or prosecuting attorney must read it and state the plea of the defendant to the jury.” When Miller was arraigned on April 8, 1980, he pleaded not guilty and not guilty by reason of insanity. At that time, Russell D. Kading (Kading) was Miller’s attorney. Subsequently, Kad-ing withdrew and A. Thomas Pokela (Poke-la) was appointed. The judge ordered a psychiatric report on Miller and as Pokela testified at the post-conviction hearing when Pokela received the report he felt there were no grounds to proceed with the defense of insanity at trial. Consequently, when the plea to the information was read to the jury at trial, only the plea of not guilty was read; the plea of not guilty by reason of insanity was not read. Miller now contends he did not intend to drop the defense of insanity and the failure to read the entire plea constitutes reversible error.
In previous cases, where the plea to the information was incorrectly read, the inaccuracy was later cured by one of the attorneys or the judge. See State v. Wilson, 297 N.W.2d 477 (S.D.1980); State v. Hoover, 89 S.D. 608, 236 N.W.2d 635 (1975). Significantly here, Miller had requested and had been appointed co-counsel before the trial started.2 Neither Pokela nor Miller objected to the fact that only one of the defenses was read. Moreover, Pokela testified at the post-conviction hearing that before the trial he and Miller discussed the defense of insanity after receiving the psychiatric report and they agreed not to pursue the insanity plea.3
Clearly, here, Miller and his co-counsel, Pokela, did not object to the plea as read, did not attempt to correct this alleged error at trial and also did not move for a new trial or raise this as an assignment of error on direct appeal. Moreover, the record indicates that this defense of insanity was abandoned before trial. Accordingly, the trial court did not err by reading only the plea of not guilty to the jury.
We now turn to Miller’s third contention which is that the trial court’s failure to properly instruct the jury on Miller’s mental illness defense denied Miller his right to a fair and impartial jury trial and to due process of law.
Although errors in instructing the jury do not always rise to a constitutional level as required by Rauscher, supra, if the error goes to the heart of a defendant’s theory of defense it can infringe upon defendant’s rights to due process and jury trial. Zemina v. Solem, 438 F.Supp. 455 (D.S.D.1977) aff'd 573 F.2d 1027 (8th Cir.1978). A trial court is required to instruct on the law only when there exists evidence on the record upon which such instruction can be based. State v. Bean, 265 N.W.2d 886 (S.D.1978). Miller now asserts that the heart of his defense was mental illness. As a veteran of Vietnam, Miller claims the stressful circumstances at the penitentiary caused his mind to snap and he began to hallucinate about Vietnam. Miller claims he “woke up” from the hallucinations when he was arrested in Dodgeville, Wisconsin.
According to the record, however, the heart of Miller’s theory of defense was not insanity. As Pokela testified at the post-conviction hearing, after receiving the psychiatric report he and Miller discussed the theory of defense and decided to drop insanity as a defense. Additionally, the record overwhelmingly indicates that Miller and Pokela pursued a theory of not guilty by reason of justification. According to testimony at trial, in June, 1979, Miller had been stabbed and severely injured by anoth*677er inmate while m the mam prison facility. After recovering, Miller was transferred to the penitentiary’s “west farm.” On the morning of November 13, 1979, guards informed Miller that he was being returned to the main prison facility later that day. Thereafter, according to the testimony, Miller, fearing for his life, left the “west farm” before he could be transferred. In our view, the defense of mental illness would be inconsistent with the defense of justification.
Clearly, the record shows that Pokela and Miller decided to abandon the theory of insanity. Moreover, since the testimony overwhelmingly supports the theory of justification, a jury instruction on insanity would not go to the heart of Miller’s defense. Accordingly, this does not rise to a constitutional level as required by Rauscher, supra, when seeking post-conviction relief. While Miller has the burden of establishing a basis for post-conviction relief, Roth, supra, he has failed to meet that burden.
We now turn to Miller’s final issue which is whether Miller was denied effective assistance of counsel. Every defendant in a criminal prosecution has a constitutional right to counsel.4 In Grooms v. State, 320 N.W.2d 149 (S.D.1982), this court held that when reviewing the issue of ineffective assistance of counsel: (1) an attorney is presumed competent; and (2) the party alleging incompetency has a heavy burden of establishing ineffective assistance of counsel. Additionally, the petitioner attempting to show ineffective counsel must also demonstrate that he was prejudiced by the alleged ineffective assistance. State v. Pieschke, 262 N.W.2d 40 (S.D.1978).
The trial court made the following conclusion of law concerning this issue:
(8) The entire record as presented to this court fails to demonstrate ineffective assistance of counsel upon any grounds; and fails specifically upon the ground that counsel failed to file for change of the trial court judge, upon the ground that counsel failed to present a mental illness defense, upon the ground that counsel failed to demand instructions; and upon the ground that counsel failed to request a mistrial. State v. Grooms, 320 N.W.2d 149 (S.D.1982) PSCR 41. [Grooms v. State, 320 N.W.2d 159 (S.D.1982).]
Accordingly, for this court to reverse the trial court, we would have to find this conclusion in error as a matter of law.
Miller’s primary claim here is that his co-counsel’s failure to pursue the mental illness defense based upon “Vietnam Stress Syndrome” constitutes ineffective assistance of counsel. In support of this contention, Miller cites United States v. Baynes, 687 F.2d 659 (3rd Cir.1982), which discusses a defense attorney’s duty to investigate possible defense. In Baynes, the court held that “a defense attorney, whether appointed or retained, is obligated to inquire thoroughly into all potentially exculpatory defenses and evidence.”5 Id. at 668. Similarly, this court held that the right of an accused to the services of an attorney envisages that his attorney will investigate and consider possible defenses. State v. Walker, 287 N.W.2d 705 (S.D.1980); State v. Pieschke, supra.
The record before us demonstrates that Pokela did not pursue the mental illness defense based upon the “Vietnam Stress Syndrome.” He read the psychiatrist’s report but did not seek another opinion; nor did he attempt to procure Miller’s V.A. records. As Pokela testified, after the trial *678was in progress and Miller had testified, he had second thoughts about the mental illness defense.6 At that time, however, it was too late since Miller and Pokela had already chosen their trial tactics.
Miller relies upon Baynes, supra, a recent Third Circuit Court of Appeals case. In Baynes, the Third Circuit Court points out that ordinarily a lawyer is not required to anticipate changes in the law or pursue novel theories of defense.7 The “Vietnam Stress Syndrome” is a new theory of defense. Neither party cites to a case in which this theory was utilized. The only authority cited by Miller is a 23-page pamphlet published by Disabled American Veterans in 1980. Miller escaped from the penitentiary in 1979 and this trial was held in 1980. While mental illness is an established defense, clearly this “Vietnam Stress Syndrome” is a novel theory of defense— and especially so three years ago, in 1980.
On review, it is not this court’s function to second-guess tactical decisions of defense counsel at trial; this court will not substitute its own theoretical judgment for that of counsel. State v. McBride, 296 N.W.2d 551 (S.D.1980). Effectiveness of counsel is not to be judged by hindsight. State v. Bartlett, 210 Neb. 886, 317 N.W.2d 102 (1982). Miller has a heavy burden in establishing ineffective assistance of counsel, State v. Walker, supra, and from our review of the entire record, Miller has not met that burden.
Accordingly, we affirm.
FOSHEIM, C.J., and WOLLMAN and DUNN, JJ., concur.
HENDERSON, J., dissents.
. SDCL ch. 23A-34 which provided for post-conviction proceedings was repealed by 1983 S.D.Sess.L. ch. 169, § 15.
. According to the record, the trial court judge explained in detail to Miller the dangers of being his own counsel.
. There was no formal withdrawal of the insanity plea.
. The Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution states, “In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to ... have the assistance of counsel for this defense. Article VI, Section 7 of the South Dakota Constitution states, “In all criminal prosecutions the accused shall have the right to defend in person and by counsel; .... ”
. The American Bar Standards states: “It is the duty of the lawyer to conduct a prompt investigation of the circumstances of the case and explore all avenues leading to facts relevant to guilt and degree of guilt or penalty.” American Bar Association Standards, The Defense Function § 4.1 (1971).
. Pokela later testified that Miller’s testimony on the stand differed from what they discussed before trial.
. Baynes applies the Moore standard, Moore v. United States, 432 F.2d 730 (3d Cir.1970), for determining effective assistance of counsel. Moore stresses the customary skill at the time and place of the representation. Baynes, 687 F.2d at 668 n. 11, provides:
“We do not suggest that Trice’s counsel was constitutionally negligent in failing to order a spectrographic comparison of the two recordings. In 1975, when this case went to trial, the only Court of Appeals that had ruled on the admissibility of spectro-grams had held them to be inadmissible. See United States v. Addison, 498 F.2d 741 (D.C. Cir.1974). In fact, as mentioned infra, the admissibility of such evidence has yet to be settled in this Circuit. Under these circumstances, it would not be in order to criticize trial counsel for deciding to forego spectro-graphic examination of the exemplar and the intercepted conversation. See DuPree v. United States, 606 F.2d 829, 831 (8th Cir.1979), cert. denied, 445 U.S. 919, 100 S.Ct. 1284, 63 L.Ed.2d 605 (1980). Additionally, the Moore standard ordinarily would not require a lawyer to anticipate changes in the law or pursue novel theories of defense. See Cerbo v. Fauver, 616 F.2d 714, 718 (3d Cir.) (Moore ‘stresses the customary skill at the time and place of the representation’) (emphasis added), cert. denied, 449 U.S. 858, 101 S.Ct. 158, 66 L.Ed.2d 73 (1980).”

=== CASE 9740526 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:49.281753+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(dissenting).
This Vietnam War veteran's plea was “not guilty” and “not guilty by reason of mental illness.” Our state statute absolutely mandates that a'plea be placed before the jury. SDCL 23A-24-2(1).1 The intent is obvious: 1) so the jury is aware of defendant’s legal position that he or she was mentally ill during the commission of the alleged crime; 2) so the state is on its proof with respect thereto; 3) so the jury can track the evidence knowing the defense; 4) so the trial judge can guide the trial with the issues framed in his mind. Defendant’s mental illness plea was not presented to the jury by the prosecutor or the clerk, as required by state law. The plea of not guilty by reason of mental illness was never withdrawn. Furthermore, and as I will highlight in this writing, testimony of mental illness pervaded the defense. Therefore, both pleas were alive and for the jury’s consideration.2
*679Considering the circumstances of this case and the testimony adduced, I cannot bring myself to disregard our state statute. Although defendant acted as his own co-counsel, it was not the responsibility of this Vietnam War veteran to solely protect the record and it was surely not his responsibility to conduct the trial. It was the responsibility of his court-appointed counsel to aid him in offering jury instructions and it was the trial judge’s duty to instruct on the applicable law of the case and to apprise the jury that this Vietnam War veteran had pleaded “not guilty by reason of mental illness.” The Vietnam War veteran was not schooled in the law. Trial procedures and techniques were unfamiliar to him. The record reflects that defendant tried to study law in his prison cell.3 Defendant could only have “abandoned” his plea of not guilty by reason of mental illness by withdrawing the plea or by failure to produce a mental illness defense. A prosecutor and trial judge cannot unilaterally withdraw a plea or deem it “abandoned.” People v. Morse, 60 Cal.2d 631, 36 Cal.Rptr. 201, 217, 388 P.2d 33, 49 (1964), holds: “Neither the court nor defense counsel could withdraw from the jury’s consideration the question of defendant’s innocence without his personal consent.” Mental illness goes to his innocence. Even defense counsel is unable to withdraw a plea unless defendant consents on the record to a withdrawal. State v. Johnston, 84 Wash.2d 572, 577, 527 P.2d 1310, 1313 (1974), substantiates my theory for it holds that the defendant’s choice to enter a plea of mental illness “is his — not that of his attorney — for the constitution gives him the right to appear and defend either in person or by counsel,” (quoting State v. Dodd, 70 Wash.2d 513, 519-20, 424 P.2d 302, 306 (1967)). See U.S. Const. amend. VI, S.D. Const., art. VI, § 7. It grieves fundamental fairness, and therefore grieves the law, to deem a plea “abandoned,” where, as particularly reflected in this case, a factual mental illness defense was presented. If a prosecutor, trial judge, and court officers have the power to conceivably cause, in their minds, and transform this into an “abandonment” of a plea, all roads will lead to conviction. The role of the jury will dissipate into legal infinity, and we will have reached the end of the road for this Nation “conceived in liberty,” as Abraham Lincoln so eloquently penned on an envelope en route to Gettysburg.
During the trial, defendant produced testimony that he suffered from Vietnam flashback syndrome, also termed posttrau-matic stress disorder, a recognized symptom of that war. Under oath, defendant testified he hallucinated and escaped from confinement believing he was running from the Viet Cong. The jury, of course, had a right to believe or disbelieve his story. Inasmuch as the jury did not have the mental illness plea before it, the jury’s verdict was perforce impacted against him. From a standpoint of truth, issues in the case, proof, fairness, and recognition of a mental derangement of this combat veteran, the jury might well have found him “not guilty by reason of mental illness.” However, defendant’s trial counsel failed to insist that the mental illness plea be brought to the attention of the jury. It is important to note defendant’s pretrial counsel was present when his two pleas were entered. His trial counsel, nonetheless, knew the mental illness plea existed and permitted the state and the clerk of the court to disregard a state statute. Notwithstanding defendant’s plea, the trial judge never instructed the jury on the mental illness defense and failed to submit a verdict form to the jury which would have permitted the jury to find the defendant “not guilty by reason of mental illness.” Trial counsel failed to request such a verdict form.
During the trial, defendant testified that when he was walking towards the milk machine in the mess hall of the Penitentia*680ry, the inmates were no longer Americans. “It was more of the Vietnamese type thing,” he told the jury. He further testified: “[T]hey were all looking at me” and “You [referring to himself] are going to get killed here.” Asked by his trial counsel, who had failed to propose a critical instruction on mental illness, “What did you see in your mind as you were leaving the room?”, he replied “I was back in Vietnam.” Concerning leaving the work farm (escaping), he was asked: “What were your intentions when you left the farm?” His answer: “Get back to the States.” After leaving the farm, defendant testified that he went downtown: “[A]nd I went to the big Buddha shrine they have there [actually it was the Cathedral Church in Sioux Falls, South Dakota], and I stayed there for a period of days, and I came out occasionally and when I did, I was still surrounded by Vietnamese so I was still scared.” Defendant claims he blacked out for several days and told the jury: “The last thing I remember is crossing a rice patty field and was shot at by somebody, and the next thing I remember is talking to two police officers, one was named Curley, in Wisconsin.” The State vigorously cross-examined defendant on this posttraumatic stress disorder or flashback syndrome.4 The point is: this veteran’s mental illness at the time of the commission of the alleged offense was deeply in issue. Evidence having been placed before the jury on defendant’s alleged mental illness during the commission of the alleged crime, the trial court was required to instruct on the law concerning this defense. State v. Bean, 265 N.W.2d 886 (S.D.1978). See also, Jackson v. State, 149 Ga.App. 253, 253 S.E.2d 874 (1979) (for the premise that a defendant’s sworn testimony is sufficient to raise an issue regarding an instruction to a jury); Commonwealth v. Mattson, 377 Mass. 638, 387 N.E.2d 546 (1979).
Clearly, there was evidence before the jury which could lead it to believe that defendant was mentally ill. Under the laws of the State of South Dakota, all persons are capable of committing crimes except those belonging to designated classes, among which are persons who, at the time of committing the act charged against them, were mentally ill. An act done by a person in a state of mental illness cannot be punished as a public offense. SDCL 22-3-1(3); SDCL 22-1-2(22). This jury should have been so instructed. It was not. The jury should also have been instructed as to what constitutes mental illness in the State of South Dakota based upon our statutes and decisional law. It was an issue in the case. In South Dakota, mental illness of short duration, referred to in the law as temporary mental illness, is as fully recognized as a defense as is mental illness of longer duration. If, at the time of alleged escape, defendant was temporarily mentally ill, he must be found not guilty by reason of mental illness in South Dakota even if he was sane at earlier or later times or at any earlier or later period. State v. Graves, 83 S.D. 600, 163 N.W.2d 542 (1968); South Dakota Pattern Jury Instructions (Criminal) § 2-14-5b. Trial counsel failed to ade*681quately and effectively represent defendant by neglecting to request such instructions. Although expert medical testimony is lacking in this case, defendant squarely put into issue his state of mind at the time of the alleged offense.5 The jury should have been instructed on the burden of proof with respect to not only proving the essential elements of the offense beyond a reasonable doubt, but to prove that defendant was sane at the time he escaped beyond a reasonable doubt. South Dakota Pattern Jury Instructions (Criminal) § 2-14-5e; State v. Waugh, 80 S.D. 503, 127 N.W.2d 429 (1964). See also, State v. Standing Soldier, 299 N.W.2d 568, 572 (S.D.1980), for the essential holding that the presumption of sanity disappears and the accused’s mental capacity to commit the act for which he is charged becomes an essential element to be proven beyond a reasonable doubt where evidence has been introduced pertaining to a defense of mental illness. Again, counsel failed to request such an instruction and the trial court failed to instruct the jury on burden of proof.
Defendant was entitled to adequate and effective assistance of counsel. State v. Pieschke, 262 N.W.2d 40 (S.D.1978). Counsel should have pursued, investigated, and made himself aware of the mental problems created in Vietnam War veterans. The right of an accused to the services of an attorney envisages that his attorney will investigate and consider possible defenses. Defense counsel’s representation cannot be casual and perfunctory. State v. McBride, 296 N.W.2d 551 (S.D.1980). In my opinion, it was.
The psychiatric profession has a desk manual referred to as the diagnostic and statistic manual III. “The manual was first released in unfinished form in early 1980 and was recommended to the American Psychiatric Association for use in diagnosis and treatment in July, 1981.... the Veteran’s Administration did not recognize post-traumatic stress disorder as a treatable disease until October, 1980.” State v. Serrato, 424 So.2d 214, 223 (La.1982). For background information to shed understanding on posttraumatie stress disorder in Vietnam veterans, this author recommends a reading of State v. Felde, 422 So.2d 370 (La.1982). Suffice it to say, these veterans uniquely feel great remorse and guilt. Sixty percent of the Vietnam War combat veterans experience posttraumatie distress. “This is because units did not stay together, there was no real war objective, the soldiers were quite young, and drugs were freely available at a low price. Vietnam soldiers averaged 19.2 years, whereas those in World War II and Korea averaged 26½. The units in World War II stayed intact and came home together whereas in Vietnam each veteran came home alone.... Twenty-five percent of all men in prison are Vietnam era veterans.” Felde, 422 So.2d at 377. In my opinion, this prison population percentage is a national disgrace.
The post-conviction hearing judge openly expressed that this case created interesting and intriguing questions of particular import, especially the defense of the Vietnam stress syndrome. The post-conviction judge put it this way: *682The post-conviction judge refused to recognize, in his entire review of this case, Vietnam stress syndrome as a mental illness factor. Conclusion of Law number 5 states: “The entire record as presented to this court fails to present a sufficient evidentia-ry basis to support a mental illness defense.” With this conclusion, I take exception and would hold that it is clearly erroneous. Gregory v. State, 325 N.W.2d 297 (S.D.1982). “A trial court must instruct a jury as warranted by the evidence presented.” State v. Grey Owl, 295 N.W.2d 748, 750 (S.D.1980). I cannot countenance the courts of this state refusing to recognize the Vietnam stress syndrome as a mental illness, albeit temporarily. The books on the Vietnam War, the American Psychiatric Association, and the United States Veterans Administration recognize it as a form of mental illness. It appears that the reviewing judge’s mind was closed to the very defense that permeated the trial.
*681The second question that I think is intriguing has to do with the matter concerning the Vietnam stress syndrome. I do know that has been recognized by some states as a proper defense. However, our state has repeatedly said that the test for mental illness is a right from wrong test. We don’t have the irresista-ble [sic] impulse test in this state and I think the second question that counsel ought to address themselves to has to do with whether the Vietnam stress syndrome, you know, can somehow be reconciled with our standard and I guess I have my doubts as to whether it can, because it has to do with his conscious level and being able to distinguish right from wrong. That’s just what your standard is in South Dakota.
*682It is to be noted that in a post-conviction hearing on June 2, 1982, the Minnehaha County Public Defender (third attorney for defendant) stipulated with the state’s attorney’s office of Minnehaha County that there existed a “medically defined post-traumatic disorder which is in DSM 3, the Diagnostic Manual for mental illness which is widely used and accepted in the mental health field.”
Defense counsel testified at the post-conviction hearing concerning the mental illness instruction. He testified:
I started to bring it up and Judge Patterson interrupted me and said that he was going to do everything in order and the first thing — first order of business was going to be the Instructions as proposed. And we went through all of those, and I guess when it came back, this just wasn’t there in my mind any more.
The next question to counsel was as follows: “So no formal offer of the Instruction was ever made?” And he testified: “Neither formal or informal.” Defense counsel also testified:
[I] gave my file to Sid Strange and prior to that, I stripped the file and when I moved and changed offices, somehow or other my notes disappeared. I have no idea where my notes are relative to this case. All I remember is John [defendant] and I discussed it and after I got the letter from Dr. Kennelly or the report from Dr. Kennedy, I put insanity out of my mind and it never ready came back up again in my mind until towards the end of the trial.6
When defense counsel was asked: “Do you have a professional opinion about the relevancy of the mental illness defense at that time?”, he responded: “At this time, I felt that there should be Instructions relative to it.”
Defendant further testified at the post-conviction hearing that he twice reminded his defense lawyer to request the mental illness instruction. Explaining, he testified:
So then the morning we’re preparing the jury Instructions, they’re going through some of the jury Instructions and they take a break and they come out and I told him, I said, look, where is the document on my insanity plea? Whére’s the Instruction I’m going to have on this? I was sitting in a chair like this. He was sitting over here talking and said, now, look, we’ve got a lot of good Instructions. I don’t know if I want to push him to give me the other Instruction. I told Pokela [his trial counsel], I didn’t care about that. I want my insanity. I got up on the stand and I told one side of the story and that jury is sitting there listening, and if they don’t have the insanity Instruction, then they’re just going to think I’m nuts if they don’t have no reason why I spoke the way I did. And he *683says we didn’t have no expert witnesses. Well, the State asked me what I felt about it. I said, and I told him that I was crazy so what more do you need. If you didn’t bring a witness, that’s our fault and you messed it up and I want the Instruction. He said, okay. I’ll take care of it. He went on in to see the Judge. I thought I’ll hear the Instructions and thought it was a normal Instruction.
Defendant further testified at the post-conviction hearing:
The jury got up and left. I asked Pokela where was my insanity Instruction. All of a sudden, everybody looked at everybody and the State got mad and they all ran off to the Judge’s chambers and about five minutes later, they had me in there and I was wanting a mistrial because I didn’t get — everybody was telling me I was crazy. That’s what I was trying to say to begin with and that’s about how it went.
The transcript of the criminal jury trial proceedings buttresses defendant’s post-conviction testimony. It reveals that defendant expressly told the trial judge in chambers that he had not abandoned his mental illness defense. Mr. Pokela admitted, on the record, during a conference immediately subsequent to the jury receiving the case for deliberation, that his client had pointed out that he wanted a mental illness instruction. Mr. Pokela told the trial judge that he had pointed out the mental illness matter earlier to the trial judge in the morning and that it was “dropped at that point.” During this conference, Mr. Pokela answered the judge’s unique question about what he had told the judge that morning. Mr. Pokela replied:
As I remember, I walked into your chambers and I think Mr. Schumacher [deputy state’s attorney] was there. I said that it had been pointed out to me that Mr. Miller had pled not guilty and not guilty by reason of mental illness. That I thought that perhaps something ought to be done about it. Then, you stated, is it part of the case, and then I don’t remember what I said after that. I may have said, if I remember right, I guess it’s my position only to the extent that his testimony regarding his leaving of the penitentiary farm would be mental illness. Then, I guess somehow it kind of disappeared. I don’t remember talking about it any more.
Revealingly, the trial court denied a motion for mistrial which was made by defendant and not his attorney. In so ruling, about the dropped instruction on mental illness the trial judge expressed: “But, I believe that there was a mistake made. I don’t believe that the mistake, however, is prejudicial to the substantial rights of the accused.” Therein, I manifestly disagree with the trial court and the entire manner in which the defense counsel pursued the mental illness defense. The truth of this record is that it glaringly reveals that although mental illness was pleaded as a defense, and mental illness was testified to as a defense, the jury was never once told about his plea or instructed concerning the law of mental illness.
Rauscher v. State, 292 N.W.2d 106 (S.D.1980), holds that only errors of constitutional dimension are reviewable in post-conviction proceedings. This defendant’s Constitutional rights were violated in that he obviously did not receive a fair and impartial jury trial and effective assistance of trial counsel. His mental illness defense went to the heart of his case and although the jury deliberated at length on his innocence or guilt, no jury instruction or jury verdict form related to the very central issue of the case. By the prosecutor, trial judge, and his own defense counsel, appellant was stripped of his Sixth Amendment constitutional rights.
The temple of justice avails him not in case at bar. He bears a prison sentence of two and one-half years. This Vietnam War veteran is in need. I would that I could keep him — help him — in his right. Thus, through this dissent, have I defended his cause.
I therefore respectfully dissent as defendant was entitled to post-conviction relief in accordance with SDCL 23A-34 — 1.
. See People v. Girard, 96 Mich.App. 594, 293 N.W.2d 639 (1980) setting forth enlightened approach of Michigan requiring that the trial court instruct the jury on the definition of legal insanity before testimony is presented on that issue.
. Instruction number two states only one of appellant’s pleas: “To the information filed by the State the defendant has pleaded not guilty *679which plea is a denial of and puts in issue every material fact consituting [sic] the offense charged in the information.”
. Preparing written instructions would encompass the use of law books, typewriter, bond paper, carbon paper, typing erasure, and desk. Cells are not equipped with such furniture or supplies.
. South Dakota is rich in public education, institutions of higher learning, and public libraries. Books on the Vietnam War, and the effects on our American troops are readily found in libraries throughout this state and appreciation of this veteran’s claimed mental illness could be found in public libraries in South Dakota. Such books include, but are not limited to, the following: G.I. Guinea Pigs (How the Pentagon Exposed Our Troops to Dangers More Deadly Than War: Agent Orange and Atomic Radiation), distributed by Harper & Row, copyright 1980, by Michael Uhl and Tod Ensign; Spoils of War by Charles J. Levy, Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston, 1974, copyright 1971 by Transaction, Inc.; No Victory Parades (The Return of the Vietnam Veteran) by Murray Polner published by Holt Rein-hart & Winston, copyright 1971 by Murray Polner; The Discarded Army (Veterans After Vietnam), by Paul Starr, published by Charter House, New York, copyright 1973, by Center for Study of Responsive Law. Any lawyer defending a case where a Vietnam War veteran is claiming mental illness because of flashback syndrome necessarily had to understand something about the mental disorders created by that War. A book is often the key which opens the golden door of knowledge but you have to first unlock the door. An attorney owes a duty to investigate and consider possible defenses. State v. Walker, 287 N.W.2d 705 (S.D.1980); State v. Erickson, 80 S.D. 639, 129 N.W.2d 712 (1964).
. Defense counsel sought no psychiatric evaluations for his client and made no motions to the trial court to secure expert testimony on his client’s behalf. Defendant strongly urged him to do so.
. A strikingly analogous factual situation is reported in Harris v. United States, 30 Crim.L.Rev. 2368, 2369 (D.C.Ct.App.1982). In that case, as in this case, defense counsel had lost his notes and thus was unable to investigate and discover information central to the case. This constituted ineffective assistance of counsel. See also, Walker v. Solem, 648 F.2d 1188, 1189 (8th Cir.1981), for failure of counsel to conduct a necessary investigation into the facts which may result in prejudice.

=== CASE 2223921 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:10.359223+00 ===

848 N.E.2d 1124 (2006)
Chad HENRY, Appellant-Petitioner,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Respondent.
No. 64A04-0511-PC-655.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
June 14, 2006.
Karen Jensen, Indianapolis, IN, Attorney for Appellant.
*1125 Steve Carter, Attorney General of Indiana, Ryan D. Johanningsmeier, Deputy Attorney General, Indianapolis, IN, Attorneys for Appellee.
OPINION
DARDEN, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Chad Henry appeals the denial of his petition for post-conviction relief.
We affirm.
ISSUE
Whether the post-conviction court erred in denying relief to Henry.
FACTS
On December 16, 2002, Henry was charged with one count of murder. On December 4, 2003, pursuant to an agreement with the State, Henry tendered a guilty plea to one count of voluntary manslaughter by means of a deadly weapon, a class A felony, with sentencing to be determined by the court. On January 27, 2004, Henry was sentenced to a term of forty-five years, with five years suspended. On February 25, 2004, Henry filed his notice of appeal. On May 15, 2004, Henry submitted his appellate brief. Therein, Henry argued that the trial court erred when it found that aggravating circumstances warranted an enhanced sentence, and that the sentence imposed was inappropriate. On July 14, 2004, his appeal was fully briefed and transmitted to this court. We affirmed on September 21, 2004. See Henry v. State, No. 64A-03-0404-CR183, 816 N.E.2d 97 (Ind.Ct.App. Sept. 21, 2004). Henry did not petition for rehearing or for transfer.
In the meantime, on June 24, 2004, the U.S. Supreme Court announced in Blakely v. Washington, 542 U.S. 296, 124 S. Ct. 2531, 159 L. Ed. 2d 403 (2004), that other than the fact of a prior conviction or facts admitted by the defendant, any fact used to increase the penalty for a crime beyond the statutory maximum must be submitted to a jury.
On March 9, 2005, our Supreme Court considered the effect of Blakely and United States v. Booker, 543 U.S. 220, 125 S. Ct. 738, 160 L. Ed. 2d 621 (2005), on Indiana's sentencing system in Smylie v. State, 823 N.E.2d 679 (Ind.2005), cert. denied. Like Henry, Smylie pleaded guilty and was sentenced before Blakely, and he was ordered to serve an enhanced sentence. Smylie's appellate brief was filed in January of 2004, and he "sought sentence relief from the Court of Appeals based on arbitrariness or unreasonableness." 823 N.E.2d at 690. We affirmed Smylie's sentence on April 13, 2004, also before Blakely. However, unlike Henry, Smylie filed a petition for transfer. He did so on July 15, 2004, after Blakely was issued. In his transfer petition, Smylie challenged the constitutionality of his sentence under Blakely.
On March 9, 2005, the Indiana Supreme Court in Smylie held that Indiana's sentencing system ran "afoul of the Sixth Amendment." 823 N.E.2d at 685. To remedy the constitutional infirmity, our Supreme Court held that when the facts used to enhance the standard term were "the sort of facts envisioned by Blakely as necessitating a jury finding," then those facts must have been found by a jury. Id. at 686. Because "aggravating factors used to enhance [Smylie's] sentence were not submitted to the jury or admitted by Smylie," the enhancement could not stand. Id. at 687.
On July 26, 2005, Henry filed his petition for post-conviction relief, claiming that "pursuant to the holding in Smylie," he was entitled to relief on Blakely grounds. (App.43). At a hearing on September 27, 2005, he pressed this same argument. On October 24, 2005, the post-conviction court denied Henry's petition, concluding inter *1126 alia that by failing to raise Blakely "in an amendment, petition to transfer, or in any other manner while his appeal was on direct review," Henry had "forfeited his ability to appeal his sentence on Blakely grounds." (App.42, 43).
DECISION
We paraphrase Henry's framing of the issue as follows: "In order to preserve the issue of an unreasonable sentence" and "be entitled to sentencing relief pursuant to Blakely," must the appellant whose case "was pending on direct appeal after Blakely was decided" have raised a Blakely claim "in an amendment, petition to transfer, or some other manner" before the decision denying his direct appeal became final? Henry's Br. at 4. We answer in the affirmative, finding that Smylie does not provide for an automatic Blakely analysis to apply to every case that was pending on direct appeal at the time Blakely was decided and had argued error in sentencing.
As Henry correctly notes, Smylie held that "Indiana will apply Blakely retroactively to all cases on direct review at the time Blakely was announced for defendants who sought sentence relief from the Court of Appeals based on arbitrariness or unreasonableness." Henry's Br. at 8-9. However, he fails to complete our Supreme Court's statement of its holding in that regard:
. . . we regard defendants such as Smylie who sought sentence relief from the Court of Appeals based on arbitrariness or unreasonableness, and who added a Blakely claim by amendment or on petition to transfer as having adequately presented the issue of the constitutionality of their sentence under Blakely.
823 N.E.2d at 690 (emphasis added, internal citation to record omitted). Henry did challenge his sentence so as to come within the ambit of the first clause; his appeal challenged his sentence and was before the Court of Appeals when Blakely was issued.
Henry appears to argue that the second clause is immaterial, asserting that "logic dictates" that under Smylie he should be able to argue Blakely now in a petition for post-conviction relief. Henry's Br. at 10. In a footnote in Smylie, our Supreme Court appeared to anticipate Henry's argument, when it declared as follows:
. . . our "fundamental error" rule sometimes affords relief to claimants who did not preserve an issue before the trial court and seek to raise it for the first time on appeal. Under our holding today, Blakely claimants who have appealed their sentences will be allowed to add a tardy Blakely claim and thus have no need to claim "fundamental error." The fundamental error doctrine will not, as caselaw holds, be available to attempt retroactive application of Blakely through post-conviction relief.
823 N.E.2d at 689, n. 16 (citations omitted).
Moreover, Smylie expressly stated that for Blakely to retroactively apply to the defendant whose sentence was pending on direct appeal at the time Blakely was announced, the defendant must have "added a Blakely claim by amendment or on petition to transfer. . . ." 823 N.E.2d at 690. Henry failed to do so. In the months while his appeal was pending after Blakely was issued (on June 24, 2004), Henry took no action to amend his brief to add Blakely in support of his argument that his sentence was erroneous. See Ind. Appellate Rule 47 ("On motion for good cause, the Court may grant leave for a party to amend a brief. . . ."). Further, after we issued our decision on September 21, 2004  nearly three months after Blakely, Henry did not file a petition for rehearing and argue for the application of Blakely. See Ind. Appellate Rule 54 (petitions for *1127 rehearing may be filed for 30 days after decision). Finally, Henry did not seek to raise a Blakely argument in a petition for transfer, an option that was available for him until October 21, 2004, see Ind.App. R. 57, a date nearly four months after Blakely was issued.[1] Accordingly, Henry has forfeited a challenge to his sentence based on Blakely.
We affirm.
RILEY, J., and VAIDIK, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Also, if Henry had initially petitioned this court for rehearing, and if his petition had been denied, he would have had an additional 30 days from the date of that denial to petition for transfer to the Indiana Supreme Court, see Ind.App. R. 57(C), extending the time in which to have raised a Blakely claim to an even later date.

=== CASE 2223925 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:10.433832+00 ===

848 N.E.2d 228 (2006)
365 Ill. App.3d 226
302 Ill.Dec. 228
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Aric SVEN, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 2-05-0393.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Second District.
May 3, 2006.
Rehearing Denied June 1, 2006.
*230 Thomas C. Brandstrader, Chicago, for Aric Sven.
Michael J. Waller, Lake County State's Attorney, Waukegan, Martin P. Moltz, Deputy Director, Joan M. Kripke, State's Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor, Elgin, for the People.
Presiding Justice GROMETER delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant, Aric Sven, was convicted of one count of child pornography (720 ILCS 5/11-20.1 (West 2002)) following a bench trial in the circuit court of Lake County. Prior to trial, defendant pleaded guilty to four counts of unlawful videotaping (720 ILCS 5/26-4 (West 2002)). He raises no issue as to these counts on appeal. He does, however, contest his conviction of child pornography, arguing that the tapes he produced do not fall within the statutory definition of child pornography. We disagree and therefore affirm. We also reject defendant's contention that his sentence of eight years' imprisonment is excessive.
Defendant produced a number of videotapes, which were recovered from his home with the consent of his wife, by virtue of placing hidden video cameras in his bathroom. Two cameras were operating, one aimed at waist level and the other pointing down from a higher angle. The latter was hidden in the speaker of a television set that was mounted in the corner of the bathroom. The cameras did not zoom in or out, nor did they pan from side to side.
At issue here is a tape defendant recorded of his daughter's babysitter. At the time of the taping, defendant's daughter was still an infant. The babysitter was 14 or 15 years old. When defendant arranged for the babysitter to care for his daughter, he instructed her to give the baby a bath. Defendant instructed the babysitter to get into the tub with the baby, purportedly for safety reasons. The babysitter testified that she was unaware that she was being taped.
The tape shows the babysitter dressing and undressing in the bathroom. Throughout much of the video, she is nude. The babysitter is seen bathing with the baby, holding the baby, bouncing the baby in her arms, and, at one point, dancing with the baby to keep her from crying. As the trial court noted, there were two occasions where the babysitter touched her own genital area. However, as the trial court also correctly noted, this was the sort of innocent conduct in which people engage in the bathroom. The sole issue before us is whether these images constitute child pornography. We hold that they do.
The crime of child pornography is defined by section 11-20.1 of the Criminal Code of 1961 (Code) (720 ILCS 5/11-20.1 (West 2002)), in pertinent part, as follows:
*231 "(a) A person commits the offense of child pornography who:
(1) films, videotapes, photographs, or otherwise depicts or portrays by means of any similar visual medium or reproduction * * * any child whom he knows or reasonably should know to be under the age of 18 * * *:
* * *
(vii) depicted or portrayed in any pose, posture or setting involving a lewd exhibition of the unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or, if such person is female, a fully or partially developed breast of the child * * *."
Defendant contends that the videotape he made does not constitute child pornography because the images are not lewd, as required by the statute. He argues that the tape simply depicts ordinary activity in which people engage while in the bathroom.
Defining "lewd" has proven somewhat problematic for courts. In People v. Walcher, 162 Ill.App.3d 455, 460, 113 Ill. Dec. 510, 515 N.E.2d 319 (1987), the court, quoting Black's Law Dictionary, defined "lewd" as "`[o]bscene, lustful, indecent, lascivious, lecherous.'" Walcher, 162 Ill. App.3d at 460, 113 Ill.Dec. 510, 515 N.E.2d 319, quoting Black's Law Dictionary 817 (5th ed.1981). These terms, while synonymous, provide little concrete guidance. Relying on definitions like these would leave courts with an I-know-it-when-I-see-it approach, reminiscent of the United States Supreme Court's attempts to define obscenity. See Jacobellis v. Ohio, 378 U.S. 184, 197, 84 S.Ct. 1676, 1683, 12 L.Ed.2d 793, 803-04 (1964) (Stewart, J., concurring). Such an approach is constitutionally infirm. It is true that child pornography enjoys no protection under the first amendment. New York v. Ferber, 458 U.S. 747, 764, 102 S.Ct. 3348, 3358, 73 L.Ed.2d 1113, 1127 (1982). A definitional problem, however, does exist. In order for a court to determine whether an image is not protected, the court must first determine whether the content of the image fits within the boundaries of child pornography. As the Supreme Court phrased it in Ferber, "The category of [depicted] `sexual conduct' proscribed must also be suitably limited and described." Ferber, 458 U.S. at 764, 102 S.Ct. at 3358, 73 L.Ed.2d at 1127.
Strictly speaking, we are not confronted with a constitutional issue; rather, the issue before us is whether the images defendant produced are lewd within the meaning of Illinois's child pornography statute (720 ILCS 5/11-20.1 (West 2002)). However, as the Illinois Supreme Court recognized, the child pornography statute finds its genesis in the standards set forth in Ferber:
"In accordance with the standards set forth in Ferber, a person commits the offense of child pornography in Illinois by photographing or possessing photographs of any child whom the person knows or reasonably should know to be under the age of 18 where such child is `depicted or portrayed in any pose, posture or setting involving a lewd exhibition of the unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or, if such person is female, a fully or partially developed breast of the child or other person.'" (Emphasis in original.) People v. Lamborn, 185 Ill.2d 585, 590, 236 Ill.Dec. 764, 708 N.E.2d 350 (1999), quoting 720 ILCS 5/11-20.1(a)(1)(vii), (a)(6) (West 1996).
Thus, in determining whether an image is lewd for the purpose of the child pornography statute, a court also necessarily is determining whether the image is not protected by the first amendment. Constitutional proscriptions, such as Ferber's requirement *232 that the conduct proscribed is sufficiently defined (Ferber, 458 U.S. at 764, 102 S.Ct. at 3358, 73 L.Ed.2d at 1127), do apply. Accordingly, a workable definition of "lewd" is required.
In United States v. Dost, 636 F.Supp. 828 (S.D.Cal.1986), the United States District Court for the Southern District of California articulated a number of factors that have been widely adopted by courts assessing whether an image of a child is lewd or lascivious. See Lamborn, 185 Ill.2d at 592, 236 Ill.Dec. 764, 708 N.E.2d 350 (collecting cases). The standard has been adopted and applied in this state. Lamborn, 185 Ill.2d at 592, 236 Ill.Dec. 764, 708 N.E.2d 350; People v. Lewis, 305 Ill.App.3d 665, 678, 238 Ill.Dec. 679, 712 N.E.2d 401 (1999). In making such determinations, the following factors are relevant:
"(1) whether the focal point of the visual depiction is on the child's genitals; (2) whether the setting of the visual depiction is sexually suggestive, i.e., in a place or pose generally associated with sexual activity; (3) whether the child is depicted in an unnatural pose, or in inappropriate attire, considering the age of the child; (4) whether the child is fully or partially clothed, or nude; (5) whether the visual depiction suggests sexual coyness or a willingness to engage in sexual activity; and (6) whether the visual depiction is intended or designed to elicit a sexual response in the viewer." Lamborn, 185 Ill.2d at 592, 236 Ill.Dec. 764, 708 N.E.2d 350.
Not all factors need be present for an image to be deemed lewd. Lamborn, 185 Ill.2d at 592, 236 Ill.Dec. 764, 708 N.E.2d 350. Instead, the image must be judged in light of its overall content, while taking into account the age of the minor. Lamborn, 185 Ill.2d at 592-93, 236 Ill.Dec. 764, 708 N.E.2d 350. Since the overall content is relevant, the Dost factors are not all inclusive. Finally, simple nudity, while a factor to consider under Dost, is not sufficient in itself to render an image lewd. The Illinois legislature proscribed a "lewd exhibition of the unclothed genitals." 720 ILCS 5/11-20.1(a)(1)(vii) (West 2002). Equating nudity with lewdness would render the term "unclothed" meaningless, which contravenes a basic principle of statutory construction. People v. Maggette, 195 Ill.2d 336, 350, 254 Ill.Dec. 299, 747 N.E.2d 339 (2001) ("A court should construe a statute, if possible, so that no term is rendered superfluous or meaningless").
It must be emphasized that we are assessing the content of the images rather than the conduct of defendant. As our supreme court stated, "We must review the photographs themselves and determine whether those photographs are lewd under the child pornography statute." Lamborn, 185 Ill.2d at 590, 236 Ill.Dec. 764, 708 N.E.2d 350. Later, in discussing the sixth prong of the Dost test, the court emphasized that "[a] determination that a photograph constitutes child pornography focuses on the photograph itself." Lamborn, 185 Ill.2d at 594, 236 Ill.Dec. 764, 708 N.E.2d 350. Our inquiry, then, is clearly limited to the content of the videotape itself. As defendant points out in his brief, the manner of its making and other facts external to the images, though unsavory, are irrelevant for the purpose of determining whether the images are lewd. In fact, defendant's conduct surrounding the making of the tape constitutes the separate crime of unlawful videotaping (720 ILCS 5/26-4 (West 2004)).
Finally, in determining whether an image is "lewd" within the meaning of the child-pornography statute, the de novo standard of review applies. Lamborn, 185 Ill.2d at 590, 236 Ill.Dec. 764, 708 N.E.2d 350. This standard has been criticized. *233 See Lamborn, 185 Ill.2d at 598, 236 Ill. Dec. 764, 708 N.E.2d 350 (Heiple, J., dissenting); Lewis, 305 Ill.App.3d at 677, 238 Ill.Dec. 679, 712 N.E.2d 401. Given that the analysis focuses on the content of the images, de novo review makes sense. Quite simply, the trial court is in no better position to judge the content of a photographic image than we are where the image is available to us. Indeed, the principle that we conduct de novo review where facts are undisputed and only questions of law remain is a common one. See, e.g., City of Champaign v. Torres, 214 Ill.2d 234, 241, 291 Ill.Dec. 768, 824 N.E.2d 624 (2005) ("The pertinent facts are uncontroverted. The task before us is to determine how the relevant statutory terms and constitutional principles should apply to those uncontroverted facts. Where, as here, the question on appeal is limited to application of the law to undisputed facts, the standard of review is de novo"); People v. Kleutgen, 359 Ill.App.3d 275, 278, 295 Ill. Dec. 583, 833 N.E.2d 416 (2005) (DUI case); People v. Dieppa, 357 Ill.App.3d 847, 849, 294 Ill.Dec. 458, 830 N.E.2d 870 (2005) (validity of search); Farris v. Industrial Comm'n, 357 Ill.App.3d 525, 527, 293 Ill.Dec. 789, 829 N.E.2d 372 (2005) (wage determination under Worker's Compensation Act). Here, not only are the facts undisputed, but we are able to observe the alleged crime, that is, the images, firsthand. There is no reason to defer to the trial court's determination on this matter.
With these standards in mind, we now turn to the images at issue in this case. The first factor we must consider is "whether the focal point of the visual depiction is on the child's genitals." Lamborn, 185 Ill.2d at 592, 236 Ill.Dec. 764, 708 N.E.2d 350. Defendant concedes that there are times where all that is seen is the babysitter's genitals. However, he points out that at other times, her entire body is visible and at still others, nothing is visible save the bathroom itself. Defendant's argument requires us to consider a preliminary question: are we to consider the tape as a whole or is it proper to focus upon particular images such that one portion of the tape may be lewd while another may not? We believe the latter approach is correct. Ferber provides sound guidance on this point. In that case, the Supreme Court made the following observation: "[A] work which, taken on the whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value may nevertheless embody the hardest core of child pornography. `It is irrelevant to the child [who has been abused] whether or not the material * * * has a literary, artistic, political or social value.' [Citation]." Ferber, 458 U.S. at 761, 102 S.Ct. at 3356-57, 73 L.Ed.2d at 1125. In the present case, it is similarly irrelevant that portions of the tape show nothing but the bathroom itself. The presence of such passages on the tape does not serve to dilute other portions where the babysitter appears naked. We conclude, therefore, that it is proper to consider portions of the tape individually and determine whether they, in themselves, are lewd.
Having rejected defendant's premise that the videotape should be judged in its entirety, his concession that "there are times that all that is seen on the videotapes are the minor's vagina or buttocks" becomes dispositive. Since there are times in which "the focal point of the visual depiction is on the child's genitals" (Lamborn, 185 Ill.2d at 592, 236 Ill.Dec. 764, 708 N.E.2d 350), this factor weighs in favor of finding that the images are lewd.
The next factor is "whether the setting of the visual depiction is sexually suggestive, i.e., in a place or pose generally associated with sexual activity." Lamborn, 185 *234 Ill.2d at 592, 236 Ill.Dec. 764, 708 N.E.2d 350. It is, perhaps, debatable whether a bathroom is a place "generally associated with sexual activity." However, Lewis teaches that a more substantial inquiry is necessary. In Lewis, this court observed the following:
"Regarding factor two, although the setting is a bedroom, this fact is not used to suggest sexual activity. A made-up bed appears in the background without any indication that the bed has any sexual meaning in the photo." Lewis, 305 Ill. App.3d at 678, 238 Ill.Dec. 679, 712 N.E.2d 401.
A bedroom is certainly more closely associated with sexual activity than a bathroom, yet even regarding a bedroom, the Lewis court considered the overall tone of the image. Applying the same analysis in this case, there is nothing sexually suggestive about the setting of the tape. While a bathroom may be associated with sexual activity in some circumstances, in this case, where the victim was bathing an infant, the "setting" is not sexually suggestive. Indeed, the State does not seriously contest this prong.
Third, we must determine "whether the child is depicted in an unnatural pose, or in inappropriate attire, considering the age of the child." Lamborn, 185 Ill.2d at 592, 236 Ill.Dec. 764, 708 N.E.2d 350. Defendant asserts that there is nothing unnatural about the activities that take place in the videotape. Considering the images in themselves, according to defendant, the activity depicted could simply be a young mother bathing with her infant. The State's response goes seriously awry at this point. The State argues that assuming that there was a familial relationship between the infant and the person bathing her, and further assuming that a mother would bathe with her infant, the images at issue "are not the spontaneous type of photograph taken by parents of their young child bathing." Instead, the State continues, "they are the premeditated, secretive videotapes of a fully-developed, completely naked, 14 or 15 year old neighbor who had been duped by defendant into bathing with his daughter." Indeed, the State concludes that this is so because the images "involve[ ] a naked minor not related to the baby." The State's argument is ill-taken in that it relies on how the tape was made (which, as noted previously, constitutes a different crime) and other information extraneous to the images themselves. That the person holding the infant had been duped cannot be known from the images themselves, nor can the fact that she was a neighbor. Moreover, as defendant points out, "[n]udity is appropriate for bathing." This factor does not support a finding that the images defendant produced are pornographic, because the victim is not depicted in an unnatural pose. However, to say that the activity in which the victim engaged is natural is not the same thing as saying that the images themselves are natural. That consideration, however, is best addressed in the context of the sixth prong.
The fourth factor we must consider is "whether the child is fully or partially clothed, or nude." Lamborn, 185 Ill.2d at 592, 236 Ill.Dec. 764, 708 N.E.2d 350. Defendant properly does not contest this factor. Accordingly, this factor favors a finding that the images defendant produced are pornographic.
The fifth factor is "whether the visual depiction suggests sexual coyness or a willingness to engage in sexual activity." Lamborn, 185 Ill.2d at 592, 236 Ill.Dec. 764, 708 N.E.2d 350. The parties and the trial court focused upon one occurrence on the videotape where the babysitter appeared to touch the area of her vagina and then placed her finger in her mouth. On *235 another occasion, the babysitter appeared to touch her genitals. The trial court found that though the conduct in question was innocent, it still could suggest sexual coyness and a willingness to engage in sexual activity. Our viewing of this portion of the tape reveals nothing of the sort. Indeed, this conduct was, as defendant suggests, something that people sometimes do in the bathroom. Therefore, this factor weighs against a finding that the videotape contains pornographic images.
We come, at last, to the sixth factor, "whether the visual depiction is intended or designed to elicit a sexual response in the viewer." Lamborn, 185 Ill.2d at 592, 236 Ill.Dec. 764, 708 N.E.2d 350. This factor has proven quite difficult to apply. Two problems arise: first, intended or designed by whom, and, second, who is the viewer. Both appear to conflict with the directive that "[a] determination that a photograph constitutes child pornography focuses on the photograph itself." Lamborn, 185 Ill.2d at 594, 236 Ill.Dec. 764, 708 N.E.2d 350. The first seems to require an inquiry into a defendant's state of mind, and the second appears to focus upon the reactions of viewers of the image. These things, however, are external to the image itself.
Indeed, some courts struggling to apply the sixth factor set forth in Dost have virtually abandoned it. Both the First and Third Circuits of the Federal Court of Appeals have come to the following conclusion: "We believe that the sixth Dost factor, rather than being a separate substantive inquiry about the photographs, is useful as another way of inquiring into whether any of the other five Dost factors are met." United States v. Villard, 885 F.2d 117, 125 (3rd Cir.1989); see United States v. Amirault, 173 F.3d 28, 35 (1st Cir.1999). Indeed, this court conducted such an analysis in Lewis, 305 Ill.App.3d at 678, 238 Ill.Dec. 679, 712 N.E.2d 401, essentially determining that the sixth factor did not indicate that the image at issue was pornographic, because the second and fifth factors did not. While treating the sixth factor in this manner poses no conceptual difficulties regarding deviating from the four corners of the image, it really adds nothing to the analysis and deprives the sixth factor of any true content. Contrary to the First and Third Circuits, we do not see how revisiting the first five factors in the guise of applying the sixth is a particularly useful exercise.
As for the first problem  intended or designed by whom  the resolution is simple enough. Given that the image must be judged on its own terms, a defendant's subjective intentions are irrelevant. Thus, the inquiry is necessarily limited to what the image itself says about itself. Put differently, only the characteristics of the image are relevant to determining whether it was created to evoke a sexual response in the viewer. Moreover, just as a defendant's subjective intentions cannot condemn an otherwise innocent image, neither can they save an otherwise pornographic one. The image must be evaluated solely on its own terms. Lamborn, 185 Ill.2d at 594, 236 Ill.Dec. 764, 708 N.E.2d 350.
Turning to the second problem  the identity of the viewer  our supreme court, while emphasizing that whether a defendant is aroused by an image is not relevant, held that "viewer" refers to the objective viewer. Lamborn, 185 Ill.2d at 594, 236 Ill.Dec. 764, 708 N.E.2d 350. If one were to take that holding to require an analysis of how the average, ordinary person would react to the image, the problem of departing from the four corners of the image remains. The average person's reaction, like the subjective reaction of an individual pedophile, is something external to the image itself.
*236 Furthermore, determining whether an image is lewd by reference to whether a sexual response would be elicited in an ordinary person (or perhaps an ordinary pedophile) creates a further problem. In Ferber, the Supreme Court held that "[t]he category of [depicted] `sexual conduct' proscribed must also be suitably limited and described." Ferber, 458 U.S. at 764, 102 S.Ct. at 3358, 73 L.Ed.2d at 1127. Trying to determine what response an ordinary person would have to an image invites unguided speculation and undermines the balance of the analysis set forth in Dost. After carefully applying the first five factors, a court would then consider the reaction of an ordinary person without any concrete guidance whatsoever. Proceeding in this manner would run afoul of Ferber.
Moreover, why the reaction of an ordinary person is relevant to determining whether an image is child pornography is unclear. Cf. People v. Spargo, 103 Ill. App.3d 280, 287, 59 Ill.Dec. 8, 431 N.E.2d 27 (1982) ("For example, if the court determines that the material is designed for the specially susceptible audience of pedophiles, must the court then determine that the material is `patently offensive' and `lacks serious literary, artistic, educational, political or scientific purpose or value' to the average pedophile, or must the court make those determinations with reference to the `ordinary adult'?"). It would seem that child pornography would not elicit a sexual response in an ordinary person, as an ordinary person is not a pedophile. In the context of obscenity law, the United States Supreme Court was confronted with a similar argument:
"Indeed, appellant's sole contention regarding the nature of the material is that some of the books involved in this prosecution, those depicting various deviant sexual practices, such as flagellation, fetishism, and lesbianism, do not satisfy the prurient-appeal requirement because they do not appeal to a prurient interest of the `average person' in sex, that `instead of stimulating the erotic, they disgust and sicken.'" Mishkin v. New York, 383 U.S. 502, 508, 86 S.Ct. 958, 963, 16 L.Ed.2d 56, 61-62 (1966).
The Supreme Court rejected this argument, explaining:
"Where the material is designed for and primarily disseminated to a clearly defined deviant sexual group, rather than the public at large, the prurient-appeal requirement of the Roth test is satisfied if the dominant theme of the material taken as a whole appeals to the prurient interest in sex of the members of that group." Mishkin, 383 U.S. at 508, 86 S.Ct. at 963, 16 L.Ed.2d at 62.
It cannot be that the sixth factor of the Dost test requires a finding that an image would elicit a sexual response in an ordinary person in order for that factor to support a finding that an image constitutes child pornography. As the Supreme Court recognized in the context of obscenity, such a standard makes no sense. Ordinary people are not sexually stimulated by child pornography.
Taking "viewer" to refer to the ordinary pedophile is not satisfactory for several reasons. One commentator recognized the following problem: "But how are we to get inside the head of the pedophile and to see the world from his eyes?" A. Adler, Inverting the First Amendment, 149 U. Pa. L.Rev. 921, 955 (2001). Moreover, if the criterion is whether a pedophile would find an image sexually stimulating, virtually any image of a child could be classified as child pornography. See 149 U. Pa. L.Rev. at 956 ("In fact, it is arguable that when viewed from the perspective of pedophiles, all children could be erotic"). Thus, considering the objective viewer to be an ordinary *237 pedophile creates other problems. In addition to departing from the four corners of the image and inviting unguided speculation, such a standard puts the trier of fact in the position of having to discern the mental state of a deviant group on a matter alien to the average person's understanding. It also puts numerous obviously nonpornographic images at risk of being classified as pornography.
Indeed, the reaction of the "ordinary person" or the "ordinary pedophile" cannot be what the supreme court intended when it held that the "viewer" of the sixth prong is the "objective viewer." (Emphasis added and in original.) Lamborn, 185 Ill.2d at 594, 236 Ill.Dec. 764, 708 N.E.2d 350. Either formulation conflicts with the court's holding that the image be evaluated on its own terms. Thus, the court must have meant something else.
The only plausible meaning to ascribe to the term that limits the analysis to the four corners of the image is point of view. That is, the question is whether the characteristics of the image invite the viewer to see the image from a particular perspective. "Point of view" is defined as, inter alia, "a particular position (as in space, time, development) from which something is considered or evaluated: STANDPOINT, VIEWPOINT from the point of view of a child, many things in the adult world are mysterious." (Emphasis added and in original.) Webster's Third New International Dictionary 1750 (2002). As the definition includes the "development" of an individual, as exemplified by the reference to the "point of view of a child," it is clear that "point of view" refers to both the physical-spatial orientation of the viewer toward an object and the mental condition of the viewer insofar as it affects the way the viewer sees the object. An image may or may not invite a viewer to see an object from a particular point of view.
In the world of art, the concept is well known. One art dictionary defines the term, in relevant part, as follows: "A position or angle from which something is observed or considered, and the direction of the viewer's gaze; a standpoint which is either a physical location or one in the mind. * * * A manner of viewing things; an attitude. The attitude or outlook of a narrator or character in a piece of literature, a movie, or another art form." http://www.artlex. com/pm.html. The same source defines "attitude," as used in the above definition, as "[a] mental position (feeling or emotion) concerning a fact or a state; a state of mind; a point of view or an outlook." http://www.artlex. com/ aru.html. Often, the point of view from which the viewer sees the image is a result of the characteristics of the image itself. See K. O'Neill, The Ambush Interview: A False Light Invasion of Privacy?, 34 Case W. Res. L.Rev. 72, 87 (1983) ("The interviewee's credibility may be further undermined by the effect of lighting, camera angle, camera movement, and sound recording. The `stalking' movement of the handheld camera as it aggressively approaches the subject may contribute to viewer perception of his guilt, or the cameraman may photograph the subject from a low angle to create a `sinister' look"). Similarly, a photographic image might place "its viewer in an epistemically privileged position, one step removed from the eyewitness." L. Harmon, Fishing Deep Waters: Tributes & Commentaries: The Canyon of Doubt: John William Corrington's the Risi's Wife, 26 Legal Stud. Forum 859, 863 (2002). Moreover, images themselves establish a point of view regardless of their creator's intent. Cf. P. Quint, Free Speech and Private Law in German Constitutional Theory, 48 Md. L.Rev. 247, 300 n. 173 (1989) ("Moreover, the documentary form is particularly dangerous because the film's point of view is *238 often accepted as a representation of reality"). Quite simply, artistic images affect their viewers. See J. Nivala, The Landscape Art of Daniel Urban Kiley, 29 Wm. & Mary Envtl. L. & Pol'y Rev. 267, 322 (2005), quoting T. Joffrain, Deriving a (Moral) Right for Creators, 36 Tex. Int'l L.J. 735, 785 (2001) and V. Zlatarski, "Moral" Rights and Other Moral Interests: Public Art Law in France, Russia, and the United States, 23 Colum.-VLA J.L. & Arts 201 (1999) ("If we accept `the notion that "art is expression," something to "express feeling and transmit understanding" no matter the medium,' then landscape design is art  visual art. It is also public art, which `does not merely present a collection of formal aesthetic attributes; it alters its environment, affects its viewer, and forges moral meaning'"); S. Nahmod, Artistic Expression and Aesthetic Theory: The Beautiful, The Sublime, and The First Amendment, 1987 Wis. L.Rev. 221, 256 (1987) ("Moreover, while nonrepresentational art often involves the use of forms chosen by the artist to create a certain feeling in the viewer, these forms also reflect the artist's view of the world"). Visual art consists of images, and, while it would be a stretch to call what defendant created art in the same sense that it would be to call candid family photographs art (at least in the traditional sense), any image might place the viewer into a particular point of view.
Returning to the world of the law, a more concrete example might prove more helpful. In obscenity prosecutions, the question of whether a work has some redeeming value is a part of the analysis. See People v. Page Books, Inc., 235 Ill. App.3d 765, 773, 175 Ill.Dec. 876, 601 N.E.2d 273 (1992). In City of Chicago v. Geraci, 46 Ill.2d 576, 583, 264 N.E.2d 153 (1970), the question arose as to whether a 10-page introduction by a doctor that "purport[ed] to place the contents of an [otherwise obscene] book into some psychological perspective" vested the book with some redeeming value such that it fell within the protection of the first amendment. In essence, the defendant was arguing that the introduction altered the nature of the book because it altered the point of view from which the viewer would perceive the material. Although the supreme court ultimately rejected the defendant's argument, finding the introduction a "hollow subterfuge," it took the argument seriously. Geraci, 46 Ill.2d at 583-84, 264 N.E.2d 153. If, in fact, the introduction had not been simply a ruse to escape an obscenity prosecution, the material could not have been deemed obscene. This is solely because the introduction would have created an atmosphere where the reader would have been encouraged to perceive the balance of the book from an appropriate point of view. Hence, the point of view in which a work places a viewer is a characteristic of the work itself and can change the very nature of the work.
If the sixth factor of Dost refers to the point of view, if any, in which the image places the viewer, the problems set forth above are largely avoided. Because the perspective of the viewer is determined from the characteristics of the image, there is no reference to matter outside of the four corners of the image. Similarly, the inquiry does not focus upon the hypothetical reaction of the average viewer or the average pedophile, which also lies outside of the image. Indeed, reaction per se becomes irrelevant. The inquiry does not focus upon the reaction of a viewer, objective or otherwise, having been invited to view the work from a certain point of view. It simply asks, in which point of view does the image place the viewer? This approach does not require the trier of fact to ascertain the state of mind of a pedophile. Moreover, it *239 avoids the problem of transmuting otherwise ordinary images into child pornography simply because they might arouse a pedophile. Thus, we believe that the proper inquiry focuses upon whether the image invites the viewer to perceive the image from some sexualized or deviant point of view. Cf. United States v. Wiegand, 812 F.2d 1239, 1244 (9th Cir.1987) ("[L]asciviousness is not a characteristic of the child photographed but of the exhibition which the photographer sets up for an audience that consists of himself or likeminded pedophiles" (emphasis added)). As noted above, not all of the Dost factors need be present in order to find that an image is child pornography. Lamborn, 185 Ill.2d at 592, 236 Ill.Dec. 764, 708 N.E.2d 350. It may turn out that in the majority of cases, this factor will have little application. However, our approach has the virtue of restoring to the sixth factor some content independent of the first five, and it confines the analysis to the four corners of the image. In certain circumstances it may prove a useful tool for evaluating a particular image. This is one such case.
In the present case, we must first remember that we are assessing images. We are not simply deciding whether a naked teenaged girl bathing a naked infant is lewd. Indeed, the conduct depicted is properly assessed under the third prong of Dost. Lamborn, 185 Ill.2d at 592, 236 Ill. Dec. 764, 708 N.E.2d 350. Instead, we must determine whether the videotape that defendant produced is lewd. Our final inquiry to this end is whether the images invite the viewer to see the activity on the tape from some sexualized or deviant point of view. We conclude that they do.
Essentially, the tape places the viewer in the role of voyeur. There is no narrative or plot. The images are not a scene connected to anything else.[1] In watching the tape, the viewer stands in relation to the victim as would a peeping tom. This point of view is reinforced by the fact that the victim does not react to the camera whatsoever. Whether an image is candid or posed has been deemed relevant in determining whether an image is lewd. See Villard, 885 F.2d at 125; Doe v. Chamberlin, 139 F.Supp.2d 637, 648 (M.D.Pa.2001). Generally, as suggested by the third factor, certain poses would support a finding that an image is lewd. However, where, as here, the viewer is placed in the point of view of a voyeur, that the images are candid contributes to their lewdness. Because the victim does not react, the image creates a sense of covert observation that would not otherwise exist.
Voyeurism is sexually motivated conduct, and it is recognized as deviant behavior. See In re Marquardt, 100 Ill.App.3d 741, 745, 56 Ill.Dec. 331, 427 N.E.2d 411 (1981) ("In addition to drug abuse, the following are classified as mental disorders in various editions of DSM: sexual deviations, including homosexuality, fetishism, pedophilia, voyeurism"); People v. Penney, 7 Ill.App.3d 191, 197, 287 N.E.2d 220 (1972) ("The story is replete with accounts of intercourse, rape, cunnilingus, voyeurism, fellatio, lesbianism and other abnormal sexual acts"). Thus, by placing the viewer in the role of voyeur, the images become sexualized. Moreover, they are *240 sexualized in a way consistent with deviant behavior.
Here, that the point of view in which the viewer is placed leads to the conclusion that the tape is lewd can be seen by comparing it with a certain photograph at issue in Lamborn. In that case, the supreme court determined that the photograph was not lewd. The court explained, "This photograph is best described as capturing an uninhibited moment of adolescent spontaneity, in which two teenage girls whimsically pull off their bikini tops while swimming together." Lamborn, 185 Ill.2d at 593, 236 Ill.Dec. 764, 708 N.E.2d 350. In other words, the photograph was of the sort that friends might take of friends. The videotape at issue here is of a totally different nature. These are not the type of image described in Lamborn, nor do they bear any similarities with the sort of photograph a parent might take of a young child bathing. It is different because it places the viewer in the position of a voyeur rather than that of a parent observing a young child bathing or that of a friend, as the picture suggested in Lamborn. Accordingly, this prong of Dost indicates that the images defendant created are lewd.
In sum, the first, fourth, and sixth factors all indicate that the videotape defendant produced is lewd and therefore child pornography within the meaning of section 11-20.1 (720 ILCS 5/11-20.1 (West 2002)). The victim was fully nude, the tape contained images that focused upon her genitalia, and the characteristics of the tape place the viewer in the perspective of a voyeur. Three factors, the second, third, and fifth, militate for a different conclusion. The setting was not sexually suggestive, the victim was not depicted in an unnatural pose or attire, and the victim did not exhibit sexual coyness or a willingness to engage in sexual activity. However, given the voyeuristic nature of the videotape, the fifth factor is entitled to little weight. One simply would not expect the victim to exhibit sexual coyness or a willingness to engage in sexual activity while engaged in normal activity. The fact that she exhibited neither, under such circumstances, does not undermine the lewd nature of the videotape. Likewise, that the images were not posed does not undercut the voyeuristic nature of the images. Considering the totality of the videotape in light of the six considerations articulated in Dost, we conclude that the tape is lewd. Therefore, we affirm defendant's conviction.
In a related argument, defendant contends that the legislature did not intend section 11-20.1 (720 ILCS 5/11-20.1 (West 2002)) to apply to what he terms "peeping tom" cases such as this one. As evidence of this intent, he compares section 11-20.1 to new amendments to section 26-4 of the Code (720 ILCS 5/26-4 (West 2004)), which make unlawful videotaping of a minor a felony in certain circumstances, and section 11-20.2 of the Code, which imposes an obligation upon film processors to report to a peace officer photographic images of minors engaged in sexual conduct (720 ILCS 5/11-20.2 (West 2004)). Defendant claims that these statutes should be read in pari materia with section 11-20.1.
The principle that statutes that relate to the same subject should be read in pari materia is a principle of statutory construction. See Mowen v. Holland, 336 Ill.App.3d 368, 374, 270 Ill.Dec. 605, 783 N.E.2d 180 (2003). Therefore, the rule applies only when it is necessary to resolve a statutory ambiguity. People v. Aleman, 355 Ill.App.3d 619, 626, 291 Ill.Dec. 550, 823 N.E.2d 1136 (2005). Defendant has not attempted to establish that section 11-20.1 is ambiguous in any way. Thus, absent *241 an ambiguity, it is unnecessary for us to construe the statute.
Before concluding this portion of this opinion, we note that defendant has set forth, as a separate argument, that the trial court erred by allowing evidence regarding the circumstances under which the images were produced. As is clear from the above discussion, we agree with this contention. It does not, however, provide a basis for reversal. Because we are conducting de novo review, our conclusion that the images at issue here constitute child pornography was arrived at independently of and without deference to the trial court's decision. We did not consider evidence external to the images in reaching this conclusion. It is well settled that we may affirm on any basis apparent in the record. People v. Braggs, 209 Ill.2d 492, 519, 284 Ill.Dec. 682, 810 N.E.2d 472 (2003).
Finally, defendant also contends that his sentence is excessive. The propriety of a sentence is a matter lying within the discretion of the trial court, and we will not interfere with that discretion unless it is abused. People v. Roberts, 338 Ill.App.3d 245, 251, 273 Ill.Dec. 191, 788 N.E.2d 782 (2003). An abuse of discretion occurs where no reasonable person could agree with the position taken by the trial court. People v. Allen, 351 Ill.App.3d 599, 605, 287 Ill.Dec. 23, 815 N.E.2d 426 (2004). Indeed, a trial court, as it has the opportunity to observe a defendant and hear evidence firsthand, is in the best position to take into account such things as the defendant's character, demeanor, credibility, social environment, and habits; therefore, the trial court has wide latitude in imposing a sentence so long as it does not ignore relevant mitigating evidence or consider improper factors in aggravation. People v. Bilski, 333 Ill.App.3d 808, 819, 267 Ill.Dec. 510, 776 N.E.2d 882 (2002). A court of review, then, may not simply reweigh the evidence and substitute its judgment for that of the trial court. People v. Streit, 142 Ill.2d 13, 19, 153 Ill.Dec. 245, 566 N.E.2d 1351 (1991). Where mitigating evidence has been presented, the trial court is presumed to have considered it. People v. Dominguez, 255 Ill.App.3d 995, 1004, 193 Ill.Dec. 465, 626 N.E.2d 775 (1994).
Defendant asserts that he is not simply asking this court to reweigh the evidence that the trial court considered; however, a reading of his argument reveals that that is exactly what defendant is doing. Defendant contends that his sentence is excessive because: (1) he has no criminal background; (2) he was sexually abused as a child; (3) he was a poor student who went on to become a successful businessman; (4) a psychologist and a doctor who specializes in treating sex offenders opined that he was a low risk to reoffend and a good candidate for a community-based plan; (5) the sentence will create an undue hardship for his five children, who depend on his income and support; (6) he has a good general character and attitude; and (7) he has been sober for over 16 years and is an active participant in Alcoholics Anonymous, where he has helped other people. After setting forth these points, defendant simply argues that "it defies logic that this defendant has never touched anyone improperly (i.e., did not commit an Aggravated Criminal Sexual Abuse, which is probational) and failed to get the minimum four-year sentence." Defendant is, in essence, asking us to reconsider the evidence presented to the trial court (and, perhaps, to conduct a cross-comparison analysis with the crime of aggravated criminal sexual abuse (720 ILCS 5/12-16 (West 2004)); however, such an argument is no longer viable in light of People v. Sharpe, 216 Ill.2d 481, 298 Ill.Dec. 169, 839 N.E.2d 492 (2005)).
*242 In addition to asking us to do something we cannot, that is, reweigh the evidence, defendant's argument ignores several aggravating factors upon which the trial court relied. Notably, defendant fails to mention the trial court's finding that defendant's conduct threatened serious emotional harm to others and that a need existed to deter defendant and other people from engaging in the conduct in which defendant engaged. Thus, contrary to the implication of defendant's argument, not all considerations militated for a minimum sentence.
Indeed, the trial court expressly relied upon numerous considerations. It began its ruling by stating that it had considered all of the evidence as well as the factual basis for the pleas defendant entered on the unlawful videotaping counts. It stated that it considered the presentence investigation and the reports provided by the psychologist and the doctor who specializes in treating sex offenders. The trial court acknowledged the financial impact of incarceration, both on the State and on defendant's children. The court next noted defendant's childhood, including the abuse defendant suffered and educational difficulties he experienced. It then credited defendant with relieving people of the burden of testifying by pleading guilty on the unlawful videotaping counts, and it noted that this indicated an acceptance of responsibility. The court observed that defendant cared for and supported his children. Additionally, the court stated that it considered defendant's "industry in putting together a business." Finally, the court noted defendant's lack of a criminal history. In aggravation, the court first found that defendant's behavior threatened serious emotional harm to others. It also expressly cited the need for deterrence, regarding both defendant and others.
The court added that it was considering the arguments of the attorneys as to sentencing alternatives; defendant's statement, in which he indicated remorse; and the victim impact statements. The court noted that it had heard from people who testified that defendant is a person of integrity; that he puts his children first; that he is caring and considerate; and that he was helpful as a brother, insightful as a mentor, and helpful to others. The court indicated that it had read statements submitted upon defendant's behalf as well as information received from experts on addiction.
The court then went on to note the effect defendant's actions had upon his victims.[2] It observed that the victims felt betrayed, ashamed, violated, embarrassed, and angry. Also, many testified that they had started to feel guilty, though they had done nothing wrong. The court further noted that several indicated that they felt fear and that for the rest of their lives they may always fear whether someone is filming them or watching them.
The court then again noted defendant's expression of remorse, but stated that "you certainly have a long way to go." It also noted defendant's participation in Alcoholics Anonymous. Finally, before pronouncing defendant's sentence, it reiterated that it was considering "all the factors that [it] was required to consider." The court then sentenced defendant to eight years' imprisonment.
We cannot say that no reasonable person could agree with the trial court that an eight-year sentence was appropriate. Defendant correctly points out that substantial *243 mitigating circumstances exist. There were, however, substantial aggravating factors as well. Thus, a reasonable person could conclude that a sentence in excess of the minimum was warranted. Moreover, defendant could have been sentenced to up to 15 years' imprisonment, so the sentence defendant received was closer to the minimum for a Class 1 felony. See 730 ILCS 5/5-8-1 (West 2002). Defendant was thus shown some leniency. Defendant's assertion, that he is not asking us to reweigh the evidence but simply to conclude that the trial court abused its discretion in light of all the circumstances of the offense and his personal history, is ill-founded. Making such a determination would appear to us to involve reweighing the evidence, and defendant does not explain how it would not. We therefore must reject defendant's argument.
In light of the foregoing, we hold that defendant was properly convicted and sentenced in the trial court below. The videotape defendant produced constitutes child pornography, and the sentence defendant received was not excessive. Accordingly, the judgment of the circuit court of Lake County is affirmed.
Affirmed.
HUTCHINSON and KAPALA, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  We are cognizant that, under Ferber, 458 U.S. at 764, 102 S.Ct. at 3358, 73 L.Ed.2d at 1127, "the material at issue need not be considered as a whole." We do not here mean to suggest that an otherwise pornographic image could be saved by the balance of a work. However, here, we are not concerned with balancing the value of a work as a whole with a particular scene, as in an obscenity case. We are asking whether the overall nature of the work colors the images themselves.
[2]  In addition to the babysitter discussed above, defendant's pleas of guilty to unlawful videotaping involved other victims.

=== CASE 9740527 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:52.916925+00 ===

LARSON, Justice.
The substantive issue here is whether a claim for damages may be asserted against a parent who has refused to return the parties’ child within the time provided in the dissolution decree. A motion to dismiss the petition was sustained by the district court. We reverse and remand.
The plaintiff’s petition alleged that, “from December 25, 1981, to January 29, 1982, the defendant kidnapped the minor child of plaintiff from her care, custody and control” and that such act was “negligent, willful, malicious and in utter disregard for the rights of. the plaintiff.” She demanded actual and punitive damages.
The defendant responded by filing a motion to dismiss, alleging:
1. That there is no cause of action as alleged by the plaintiff as to warrant her receiving money damages from the defendant so that this matter should be dismissed.
2. That there are no statutory nor common law grounds which form the basis of this action.
WHEREFORE, defendant prays that plaintiff’s petition be dismissed at her cost.
The district court sustained the motion to dismiss in a calendar entry which simply said: “Defendant’s Motion to Dismiss is sustained. Copies to counsel.”
I. The Procedural Issue.
The plaintiff complains that the district court’s ruling sustaining the motion to dismiss did not comply with Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure 11 because it did not rule separately on each ground of the motion. Rule 118 provides:
Specific rulings required. A motion, or other matter involving separate grounds *124or parts, shall be disposed of by separate ruling on each and not sustained generally-
This court has said that the purpose of this rule is to enable the parties to know which grounds are sustained by the court and to narrow the issues on appeal, thereby saving time and expense. Brown v. Ellison, 304 N.W.2d 197, 200 (Iowa 1981); Oak Leaf Country Club, Inc. v. Wilson, 257 N.W.2d 739, 743 (Iowa 1977). We have held that failure of a court to abide by rule 118 ordinarily is reversible error. Brekken v. County Board of Review, 223 N.W.2d 246, 247 (Iowa 1974); Ruby v. Easton, 207 N.W.2d 10, 14-15 (Iowa 1973).
In this case, however, failure of the court to separately rule on each paragraph of the motion did not amount to a failure to rule on “separate grounds” as required by rule 118. While the motion to dismiss was in separate paragraphs, it raised only one issue: Does Iowa recognize this claim for damages?
II. The Claim for Abduction.
In an early case, this court discussed the right of a parent to recover damages for deprivation of custody of a child:
That the father has a right to the care and custody of his minor children, and to superintend their education and nurture, is a proposition that does not admit of controversy. And where he is deprived of such care and custody, and of this superintendence, by the act of another, he has his remedy, by proper action, against such person, is equally clear. As it is the duty of the father to educate, protect, and nurture his children, so it is his right to have their society, their services, and the control of their moral and intellectual training.
Everett v. Sherfey, 1 Iowa 356, 359 (1855).
In its early stages, a claim for wrongfully seizing or retaining custody of a child was restrictively applied; only a father could pursue the claim, and it was based on a deprivation of the child’s services. Id. at 360-61; see also Pyle v. Waechter, 202 Iowa 695, 697, 210 N.W. 926, 927 (1926); W. Pros-ser, Handbook of the Law of Torts § 124, at 882-83 (4th ed. 1971). The rule permitting recovery has since been expanded; most courts requiring a loss of services as a prerequisite have been willing to find a constructive loss of services, even though none are being rendered. Other courts disregard earlier restrictions and merely adopt what is characterized as the “modern” view. Under this approach, the essence of the claim is the interference with the parental relationship, not a loss of services. Id. at 883.
As long ago as 1938, the Restatement of Torts recognized an action for tortious interference with custody. See Restatement of Torts § 700 (1938). The current section states the principle:
§ 700 Causing Minor Child to Leave or not to Return Home. One who, with knowledge that the parent does not consent, abducts or otherwise compels or induces a minor child to leave a.parent legally entitled to its custody or not to return to the parent after it has been left him, is subject to liability to the parent.
Restatement (Second) of Torts (1977). The Restatement rule permits suits by parents against noncustodial parents, as well as against nonrelatives:
c. When both parents entitled to custody and earnings. When the parents are by law jointly entitled to the custody and earnings of the child, no action can be brought against one of the parents who abducts or induces the child to leave the other. When by law only one parent is entitled to the custody and earnings of the child, only that parent can maintain an action under the rule stated in this Section. One parent may be liable to the other parent for the abduction of his own child if by judicial decree the sole custody of the child has been awarded to the other parent.
Restatement, supra, § 700, comment c. (Emphasis added.)
The claim for interference with custody rights appears to have been recognized in every jurisdiction which has addressed the *125issue. See, e.g., Rosefield v. Rosefield, 221 Cal.App.2d 431, 435-37, 34 Cal.Rptr. 479, 483 (1963); Bennett v. Bennett, 682 F.2d 1039, 1044 (D.C.Cir.1982); Spencer v. Terebelo, 373 So.2d 200, 202 (La.App.1979) (cause of action based on violation of kidnapping statute; breach of legal duty); Wasserman v. Wasserman, 671 F.2d 832, 834-35 (4th Cir.1982) (applying Maryland law) (complaint alleging “child enticement” is a generally recognized common law tort); Kipper v. Vokolek, 546 S.W.2d 521, 525 (Mo.App.1977) (“The tort may be actionable between parents of the child where, by proper judicial decree, the sole custody of the child has been awarded to one of the parents.” The Missouri court dismissed the father’s action, however, because the custody orders upon which he based his claim were void for lack of proper notice); LeGrenada v. Gordon, 46 N.C.App. 329, 331-32, 264 S.E.2d 757, 758-59, appeal on petition for review dismissed, 300 N.C. 557, 270 S.E.2d 109 (1980) (interspousal suit under a valid custody agreement); Fenslage v. Dawkins, 629 F.2d 1107, 1109 (5th Cir.1980) (applying Texas law); Sheltra v. Smith, 136 Vt. 472, 392 A.2d 431 (1978) (cause of action for intentional infliction of mental distress resulting from denial of personal contact or communication with daughter allowed to be maintained); Lloyd v. Loeffler, 694 F.2d 489, 495-96 (7th Cir.1982) (applying Wisconsin law); Kajtazi v. Kajtazi, 488 F.Supp. 15, 18-21 (E.D.N.Y.1978) (applying New York law).1 See also Restatement (Second) of Torts § 700 (1977); W. Prosser, Handbook on the Law of Torts (4th ed. 1971) § 124, at 883-84; 67A C.J.S. Parent and Child § 130, at 512 (1978); see generally Note, Tortious Interference with Custody: An Action to Supplement Iowa Statutory Deterrents to Child Snatching, 68 Iowa L.Rev. 495 (1983).
Another, similarly uniform, line of cases establishes the tort claim where the interference is instigated or furthered by relatives or other third parties. While these cases do not have spouses as defendants, they often spring from abduction of the child by a spouse.. In all, the logic and language support a cause of action by a custodial parent against the other, noncustodial parent. See Gibson v. Gibson, 15 Cal.App.3d 943, 93 Cal.Rptr. 617 (1971); Hinton v. Hinton, 436 F.2d 211, 213 (D.C.Cir.1970), aff'd w’out op., 492 F.2d 669 (D.C.Cir.1974); Brown v. Brown, 338 Mich. 492, 498, 61 N.W.2d 656, 659 (1963); Oversmith v. Lake, 295 Mich. 627, 295 N.W. 339 (1940); Pickle v. Page, 252 N.Y. 474, 169 N.E. 650 (1930); Lisker v. City of New York, 72 Misc.2d 85, 338 N.Y.S.2d 359 (1972); McEvoy v. Helikson, 277 Or. 781, 562 P.2d 540 (1977); McBride v. Magnuson, 282 Or. 433, 436, 578 P.2d 1259, 1259-60 (1978).
Frequently, in fact, the abducting spouse figures prominently in the case and is not a defendant only because he or she has fled with the child to a foreign jurisdiction. See, e.g., Gibson, 15 Cal.App.3d at 945, 93 Cal.Rptr. at 618; Brown, 338 Mich, at 495-97, 61 N.W.2d at 657-59; McEvoy, 277 Or. at 784, 562 P.2d at 542. This recurring scenario itself suggests the need for recognition of a civil claim for damages.
III. Other Alternatives.
There obviously are several remedies available to a victimized parent. Each of them, including the tort claim, however, has its limitations. (A tort claim will obviously furnish little deterrent or likelihood of recovery in the ease of an impecunious defendant.) Concerning the use of alternative remedies in such cases, see Note Tor-*126tious Interference with Custody, supra, 68 Iowa L.Rev. at 500-15.
The case now before us illustrates how the tort claim can, more effectively than any of the alternative sanctions, serve both to prevent child-snatching and to pick up the pieces if it does occur.
A. The UCCJA. The Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction Act, Iowa Code chapter 598A, is basically just that — a jurisdiction act. It provides no compensation for interference with custody in any case. In the present case, it would not even allow recovery of expenses, because the custody decree is not one of “another state.” See Iowa Code § 598A.15. Because the uniform act provides no compensation for the plaintiff, it provides little or no deterrent to the defendant.
Professor Sanford Katz, chairman of the Family Law Section of the American Bar Association and editor-in-chief of the Family Law Quarterly, has written extensively on the UCCJA. He notes the widespread problem of child-snatching (estimated at 25,000 to 100,000 per year) and discusses the inability of the UCCJA alone to deal with the problem. He points out that this Act is largely jurisdiction-oriented, not remedy-oriented and concludes: “The parent entitled to custody of a child, but unlawfully deprived of it by the noncustodial parent, must still [after adoption of the UCCJA] seek relief in a number of traditional, well established methods.” Katz, Legal Remedies for Child Snatching, 15 Fam.L.Q. 103, 105 (1981). A tort suit is one of the “traditional” remedies suggested. Id. In another publication, Prof. Katz says that “[ajnother lack of force [in the UCCJA] is that its provisions are not tied to any. specific enforcement provisions, sanctions or parent-oriented remedies” and repeats his suggestion that “more direct sanctions” such as criminal prosecution or tort suits are needed. Katz, Child Snatching: The Legal Response to the Abduction of Children, at 33 (1981).
Patricia M. Hoff, director of the Child Custody Project, National Legal Resource Center for Child Advocacy and Protection of the American Bar Association, has also noted the ineffectiveness of the UCCJA in furnishing a complete remedy:
Perhaps more so than other existing remedies in parental kidnapping cases, the child snatching tort suit holds great promise for compensating the victim parent to the full extent of his or her damages. While the Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction Act makes it possible for the person entitled to custody or visitation to recover his or her attorneys’ fees, court costs, and necessary travel and related expenses from the person violating the decree, a tort action ultimately expands both the nature and the amount of the recovery, and enlarges the number of potential defendants. All damages suffered by the plaintiff as a consequence of the wrongful conduct may be recovered in a tort action, including punitive damages in some instances and any person who assists the defendant-parent in the abduction, retention, or concealment of the child may conceivably be held liable.
P. Hoff, Interstate Child Custody Disputes and Parental Kidnapping: Policy, Practice and Law, at 14r-l (1982).
B. The kidnapping alternatives. Other alternatives include prosecutions under federal and state kidnapping statutes. A kidnapping prosecution, however, provides for no recovery of expenses or compensation for the victimized parent. There is another problem more subtle, but real nevertheless: Cases with domestic overtones occupy a position of low priority with law enforcement personnel and prosecutors. In' fact, this reality appears to be widely observed. See Justice Dep’t. Scored for Flouting Parental Kidnapping Act’s Mandate, 7 Fam.L.Rep. (BNA) 2739-42 (Oct. 6, 1981). In Iowa, child-snatching by a parent is only a misdemeanor, unless the child is removed from the state, in which case it is a felony. Iowa Code § 710.6. If the child is removed from the state, the chances of extradition are slim, again because of the domestic overtones of the cases and the inherent inertia of law enforcement personnel in dealing with them.
*127C. The contempt alternative. The usefulness of a contempt action is doubtful. It would provide no recovery of expenses or compensation, and if the party has left the state, any sanctions which are imposed will be of no effect. Further, it provides no basis for extradition. The weaknesses of the contempt alternative are noted in Katz, Legal Remedies for Child Snatching, supra, at 117-22, and in Katz, Child Snatching, supra, at 103-06. See also P. Hoff, Interstate Child Custody Disputes and Parental Kidnapping: Policy, Practice and Law, supra, at 14-1.
One authority summarizes the advantages of the tort suit over the other alternatives: A tort suit will be more likely to effect a speedy return of the child; it will result in better cooperation by potential third-party defendants seeking to avoid the suit; potential punitive damages will serve as an additional deterrent; and increased knowledge of a child’s whereabouts will result through the broad scope of civil-case discovery. Hoff, id. at 14-1.
We conclude that we should follow the majority of jurisdictions by recognizing and applying section 700 of the Restatement. The district court ruling must therefore be reversed, and the case remanded for further proceedings.
REVERSED AND REMANDED.
All Justices concur except WOLLE, J., who dissents joined by HARRIS and McGIVERIN, JJ.
McCORMICK, J., joins division I of the dissent.
. Two New York cases have refused to recognize a civil claim in suits between spouses. See McGrady v. Rosenbaum, 62 Misc.2d 182, 308 N.Y.S.2d 181, aff'd 37 A.D. 917, 324 N.Y.S.2d 876 (1970) and Friedman v. Friedman, 79 Misc.2d 646, 361 N.Y.S.2d 108 (1974). However, McGrady was a suit against a custodial parent for denial of visitation rights, not for interference with the right of custody, an interest of greater state concern. It is unclear from the Friedman opinion whether that case involved custody or visitation rights. The McGrady case has been criticized as unresponsive to the problems of interstate parental kidnapping, see P. Hoff, Interstate Child Custody Disputes and Parental Kidnapping: Policy, Practice and Law, at 14-1, 14-15 (1982), and has not been seen as denying a claim for interference with custody. See Kajtazi, 488 F.Supp. at 19 (applying New York law).

=== CASE 9740528 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:52.921356+00 ===

WOLLE, Justice
(dissenting).
I dissent because I believe the Restatement rule will have unacceptable practical consequences and because that rule is unlikely to be in the best interest of children affected by the litigation it spawns. I do not here quarrel with the seeming logic of the rule; if money damages can be recovered from a child-snatching stranger, why not from a child-snatching non-custodial parent. Neither do I disregard the fact that a majority of the jurisdictions which have addressed the issue, encouraged by commentators, have extended the cause of action to permit interspousal money-damage lawsuits for child-snatching. Logic, decisions from other jurisdictions, and views of authoritative commentators must carefully be considered. In the final analysis, however, the rule should be placed in its domestic setting and studied exhaustively in the light of competing policy considerations involving the family as a unit. Adopted, the Restatement rule would become an integral part of Iowa family law. Stripped to essentials, this new civil remedy which the plaintiff espouses is a new weapon for the arsenal of litigants engaging in marital or post-marital warfare. I propose a freeze on new weapons of domestic warfare. Our legislature has not included this cause of action in our body of Iowa family law and neither should this court.
I. We can reasonably predict that the majority opinion will initially generate a proliferation of money-damage lawsuits whose quantity and variety will be far out of proportion to their value. These lawsuits will burden a court system already straining to keep pace with cases now on file while continuing to deliver quality judicial services.
Recent statistical reports clearly show that domestic litigation weighs heavy on our judges’ time. In 1981, actions arising directly from family problems accounted for 28,205 cases, or 48.4 percent of all civil filings. At the appellate level, cases involving domestic relations comprised 37.2 percent of all formal appellate decisions in appellate cases — the largest single category of dispositions. The number of rulings in domestic relations cases increased 42 percent from 1980 to 1981. See 1981 Annual Statistical Report to the Iowa Supreme Court by the Iowa Court Administrator, pp. iv-vii. The figures for 1982 show that domestic case filings and dispositions have decreased slightly in each category, but that welcome decline may be shortlived if the Restatement rule is now adopted. See 1982 Annual Statistical Report to the Iowa Su*128preme Court by the Iowa Court Administrator, pp. iv-vii.
We cannot accurately predict the number of lawsuits that will now be filed by family members on the law side of our burdened court dockets. Neither can we yet define their characteristics, though the variety may be limited only by the limits of trial lawyers’ ingenuity. When parents seek redress for alleged violations of custody orders, their lawyers will be duty-bound to inform them of this decision. We know that parties in domestic cases may be motivated less by good sense — the best interest of their children or family economic concerns — than by their emotions. The tort here involved, after all, is for infliction of emotional distress. Will not lawyers studying this case reasonably conclude that many similar new actions may be permitted? Will not parents conclude, reasonably or not, that they desire to seek money damages from each other?
The gist of the instant action is the alleged violation of the final dissolution decree. Would this not logically invite a counterclaim for alleged violation of visitation provisions in most dissolution decrees? If a parent may bring such an action, might not each child similarly have an action against the parent for infliction of emotional damages? If a parent may bring such an action, why not also a grandparent with custodial or visitation rights? Would not alleged violations of joint custody provisions also give rise to multiple causes of action for the parents, their children, and other interested parties?
If alleged violations of a final or modified decree of dissolution can be the basis for this new cause of action, so also would be alleged violations of a temporary decree entered during the marriage. This spectre of concurrent equity and law actions during the marriage should deeply concern us. Completion of expected discovery procedures may well seriously delay trial of many dissolution actions. Money-damage lawsuits between the parents or other family members would certainly reduce the likelihood of reconciliation, a vital concern whenever a petition for dissolution of marriage is filed. See Iowa Code §§ 598.16, .19 (1983) (providing for conciliation procedures and a ninety day pre-decree waiting period).
These actions are at law, providing the parties the right to trial by jury of the issues. When, if ever, will the emotional distress be considered de minimis. What if a parent seeks compensation for emotional injury resulting from one week without the children? What if a grandparent is deprived of visitation for one weekend, or one day?
These potential causes of action are mentioned here to show that little else but logic supports them. Although they seem at first blush to be logical extensions of the Restatement rule, the utility of such new varieties of domestic lawsuit would clearly be outweighed by unacceptable consequences for our court system and affected family members. Even though this court today has adopted the Restatement rule in deciding this case, we should hereafter be careful not to extend that rule beyond the specific facts here alleged by plaintiff.
II. I believe the practical adverse effect which the Restatement rule may have on our court system and family members should first be studied carefully by the Iowa legislature before it is accepted as part of our body of Iowa family law. The legislature is better equipped than this court to obtain empirical data, conduct a detailed study, and utilize what such a study reveals.
Our legislature has already demonstrated in several ways that it is actively concerned about domestic relations law in general and deterrence of child-snatching in particular. The 1981 Iowa General Assembly addressed and revised our laws governing children of distressed marriages, encouraging joint custody and liberal visitation rights while reaffirming that the polestar for decisionmak-ing should be the best interests of the child. Iowa Code § 598.41 (1983).
Our legislature’s concern for deterring child kidnapping has been manifested in the statutory remedies available to the custodial parent who is aggrieved by action of the *129non-custodial parent. The Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction Act, adopted by our Legislature in 1977, provides a means for enforcing custody decrees across state lines and specifically permits the court to assess against a person violating an out-of-state custodial decree “necessary travel and other expenses, including attorney’s fees, incurred by the party entitled to the custody or by that party’s witnesses.” Iowa Code § 598A.15 (1983). Persons abducting minor children can be charged with criminal offenses under Iowa as well as federal criminal statutes. Iowa Code §§ 710.5, .6 (1983); 18 U.S.C. § 1073 (1976 & Supp. IV 1980). Additionally, our legislature has codified the traditional action for contempt of court in domestic cases. A court may punish a person who violates a custodial order in a temporary or final decree by imposing a fine or jail sentence. Iowa Code §§ 598.23, 665.4 (1983); see Wilson v. Fenton, 312 N.W.2d 524, 527-29 (Iowa 1981).
We should have laws which deter parental child-snatching, and the Iowa legislature has already enacted laws designed to accomplish that purpose. The parent contemplating child-snatching faces tough civil, criminal, and contempt sanctions. The plaintiff in this case has not demonstrated that these existing remedies are inadequate. I suggest that the statutory remedies already available should be time-tested and shown clearly to be inadequate before we authorize trial by jury of what are essentially child custody issues.
III. Regardless whether it is more appropriate for the Iowa legislature or this court to accept or reject the Restatement rule, that decision should turn on whether such a lawsuit between family members is in the best interest of affected minor children. This court has consistently held that in child custody cases the first and governing consideration is the best interest of the child. Iowa R.App.P. 14(f)(15); In lie Marriage of Winter, 223 N.W.2d 165,166 (Iowa 1974). The legislature has expressly so provided in several statutes. See e.g., Iowa Code §§ 598.41(1), (3); 598A.1(1), .8(2) (1983).
The instant case, and others here discussed, would arise from the same domestic discord as child custody cases, would be generated by the same family circumstances as child custody cases, and would either run concurrently with such cases (in the event temporary orders are violated) or follow in their aftermath. What will be the likely effects on the children of money-damage lawsuits?
Again, a detailed legislative study would provide us far more insight than our limited personal experience and instincts. Lacking such a study, we should at least consider worst-case possibilities and predict likely effects.
Worst-case examples need not be imagined — they will certainly soon occur. The litigants in many of our decided cases have proved they can go to great lengths in battling for custody of their children. See, e.g., In Re Marriage of Bevers, 326 N.W.2d 896 (Iowa 1982); In Re Marriage of Schoonover, 228 N.W.2d 31 (Iowa 1975). The emotional injury in many of these Iowa cases was certainly great, as was the vigor and ingenuity of the attorneys. Parents and their counsel will certainly use this new weapon skillfully, if not always wisely.
Certain will be the right to jury trial. Surely, the children often will be called as witnesses, pressed to choose sides — for one parent and against the other. Is this not contrary to the recently-enacted statute which encourages not only the granting of joint custody but also liberal visitation rights “which will assure a minor child frequent and continuing contact with both parents after the parents have separated or dissolved the marriage....”? Iowa Code § 598.41 (1983).
Certain will be the expense to the family unit of additional lawyers’ fees and court costs. Monies needed for raising of children may often be sacrificed to the parents’ continuing internecine struggle. Likely, too, will be prolonged bitterness among family members resulting from jury verdicts, whether damages be collected or denied.
*130I suggest that the Restatement rule is not only unneeded as a deterrent but also contrary to the best interests of most of the minor children who would be entangled in the litigation.
IV. Although some jurisdictions have adopted the Restatement rule, most have not yet addressed the issue. We would not be alone in holding that the rule should not be adopted by court decision. In McGrady v. Rosenbaum, 62 Misc.2d 182, 308 N.Y.S.2d 181 (1970), aff’d 37 A.D.2d 917, 324 N.Y. S.2d 876 (1970), the court refused to recognize a father’s claim for damages based on the mother’s alleged denial of his visitation rights. The court distinguished Pickle v. Page, 252 N.Y. 474, 169 N.E. 650 (1930), which involved abduction of a child from the custodial parent by a sheriff, then commented that “an action for damages or a damage verdict would probably be the least useful technique for the resolution of matrimonial differences or custody disputes.” 308 N.Y.S.2d at 190. The court concluded:
The remedy against a spouse who violates a court order respecting custody or visitation by removing the child from the state is by way of contempt or by precluding her standing to challenge the order or to enforce its support provisions, not by an action for damages, [citations omitted] Custody may be awarded to the father in an appropriate action, in such cases, [citations omitted] But this does not authorize damages.
308 N.Y.S.2d at 188. That New York decision was followed by Friedman v. Friedman, 79 Misc.2d 646, 361 N.Y.S.2d 108 (1974), in which the court quoted the above language from the McGrady opinion, distinguished other New York cases involving suit by the parents of infants against third parties, and held:
It would appear, therefore, that as between the parents of the child, an action for damages for mental anguish resulting from interference with custodial rights is not actionable.
361 N.Y.S.2d at 110.
This court, like those two New York courts, should reject interspousal law actions for damages arising from violations of orders and decrees in dissolution actions. Our courts of equity should continue to address these serious problems for parents and their children without unduly burdening the law side of our crowded court dockets. Our courts can and should continue to deter child-snatching by encouraging speedy trial of criminal proceedings, imposing appropriate sanctions for contempt, and granting traditional forms of equitable relief when custodial orders are violated. The legislature, not this court, should decide whether new remedies are needed and, if so, whether such a cause of action as plaintiff here espouses is really in the best interest of our court system and, more importantly, the best interest of children whom their parents would involve in such litigation.
I would affirm the trial court’s dismissal of this action.
HARRIS and McGIVERIN, JJ., join this dissent and McCORMICK, J., joins division I.

=== CASE 2223929 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:10.53455+00 ===

338 N.W.2d 443 (1983)
215 Neb. 337
STATE of Nebraska, Appellee,
v.
Cynthia KUCERA, Appellant.
No. 82-792.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
September 23, 1983.
*444 Dennis R. Keefe, Lancaster County Public Defender, and Dorothy A. Walker, Lincoln, for appellant.
Norman Langemach, Jr., City Prosecutor, Lincoln, for appellee.
KRIVOSHA, C.J., BOSLAUGH, WHITE, HASTINGS, CAPORALE and SHANAHAN, JJ., and GRANT, District Judge.
HASTINGS, Justice.
Upon her plea of guilty the defendant was convicted in the municipal court of Lincoln of the crime of theft of less than $300, and was sentenced to 5 days in jail. On appeal to the District Court, in which she assigned as error only the excessiveness of the sentence, the conviction and sentence were affirmed.
The record in municipal court does not disclose that the defendant was advised of any of her rights at any time during these proceedings. This deficiency was raised for the first time on appeal to this court.
Lest there be any misunderstanding on the part of county courts and municipal courts taking guilty pleas in situations where there is a possibility of a jail sentence, we repeat the following language from State v. Tweedy, 209 Neb. 649, 654-55, 309 N.W.2d 94, 98 (1981): "We therefore hold that no defendant may be imprisoned for any offense, whether a traffic infraction, misdemeanor, or felony, absent a knowing and intelligent waiver of his rights as provided for by the Boykin-Turner rule. That means that such defendants are entitled to be informed of the nature of the charges against them, the right to assistance of counsel, the right to confront witnesses against them, the right to a jury trial where otherwise authorized, and the privilege against self-incrimination. A voluntary and intelligent waiver of these rights must affirmatively appear from the record."
We do not agree with the defendant that she is entitled to a dismissal of the complaint. By vacating her conviction and remanding the case for rearraignment, the defendant is not being subjected to double jeopardy.
The defendant's conviction is ordered vacated, and the cause is remanded to the District Court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
CONVICTION VACATED. REVERSED AND REMANDED FOR FURTHER PROCEEDINGS.

=== CASE 9740529 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:54.137047+00 ===

OPINION OF THE COURT
ClPABICK, J.
We are asked to decide whether evidence presented to a grand jury that a judge accepted a benefit for violation of his duty as a public servant, as defined by the Rules of Judicial Conduct (22 NYCRR part 100), is legally sufficient to support six counts of receiving reward for official misconduct in the second degree (Penal Law § 200.25). We hold that the People’s reliance on the Rules to support the allegation that defendant violated his official duties was not improper. The Rules set forth a constitutionally mandated duty upon the judiciary and, when combined with the additional factor of receiving a reward, a violation of that duty may serve as a basis for prosecution under Penal Law § 200.25. We conclude that the evidence presented to the grand jury was legally sufficient to support the six counts of receiving reward for official misconduct in the second degree. The additional count charging defendant with official misconduct (Penal Law § 195.00 [2]) was properly dismissed.
I.
Defendant was a justice of the Supreme Court of the State of New York who at the time of these events was assigned to a matrimonial part in Kings County. After investigation, the People presented evidence to the grand jury that, from October 2001 through March 2003, defendant engaged in a course of conduct where on numerous occasions he violated his duty as a public servant for which he received benefits of cash and other gratuities. The People presented evidence that defendant and *607Paul Siminovsky, an attorney who regularly appeared before him, developed a relationship in 2000 wherein Siminovsky would buy defendant meals and give him gifts expecting and receiving preferential treatment in return. This relationship blossomed to the extent that by 2003, according to the testimony before the grand jury, Siminovsky was buying defendant lunch three to four times a week and drinks in the evening between three and five times a week.
In the first count under consideration here, the grand jury heard evidence that defendant conducted improper ex parte conversations about the “Levi case” with Siminovsky, for which defendant received a box of cigars as a reward. Specifically, Siminovsky represented Avraham Levi in a divorce proceeding which was pending before defendant (itself allegedly a circumvention of the random assignment system, facilitated by another Siminovsky client and defendant’s court clerk). The grand jury heard that while the Levi case was before defendant, the Kings County District Attorney’s office began to monitor defendant’s robing room by video and audio surveillance. Among the ex parte conversations captured was one where defendant is heard saying that Siminovsky would prevail in the Levi case even though he did not deserve it. Defendant also instructed Siminovsky to subpoena an expert witness who was unwilling to appear before the court and instructed him what questions to ask of the expert. Defendant told Siminovsky that he would not order the sale of the marital residence and that Mr. Levi would be entitled to its exclusive use.
Grand jury testimony revealed that shortly thereafter, Siminovsky was arrested and entered into a cooperation agreement with the District Attorney’s office. On March 4, 2003, while wearing a recording device but unaware of the video surveillance, Siminovsky brought defendant 27 Romeo and Juliet cigars—a box and two singles—at a cost of $272.28. Siminovsky brought them to the robing room and gave defendant an individual cigar, kept one for himself, and then placed the box in the top left drawer of defendant’s desk. Siminovsky thanked defendant for helping him formulate a winning strategy in the Levi case. Shortly thereafter, Siminovsky again thanked defendant for the “little pointers” while defendant removed the box of cigars from his desk and inspected it. Before leaving, Siminovsky stated, “[n]ow you’re just going to tell me what to write in the memo” in reference to the closing memorandum of law required at the conclusion of the Levi tried. Defendant responded *608that Siminovsky would have to charge extra for the memo and then went on to substantively detail what the memo should include.
The other five counts of receiving reward for official misconduct in the second degree allege that defendant accepted monies for referring clients, in his official capacity, to Siminovsky. The first of these referrals allegedly occurred in late 2001. Evidence before the grand jury showed that defendant told Siminovsky that defendant’s wife, Robin Garson, referred a client to Siminovsky and that he should compensate her in return.1 The client is alleged to have known that defendant was a judge and was seen visiting him in his robing room. Subsequently, Siminovsky, while in defendant’s robing room, handed defendant $750 in cash as a referral fee for Robin Garson.
Grand jury testimony showed that defendant, for a second time, referred a friend to Siminovsky with the direction that Siminovsky “should take care of Robin.” In this instance, the individual knew defendant was a judge. They were seen together at a Brooklyn Bar Association function and were personal acquaintances. After Siminovsky was retained by this client, he wrote a check to Robin Garson for either $1,000 or $1,500.2
In a third instance, the People assert that defendant referred an employee of a restaurant he frequented to Siminovsky. The employee knew that defendant was a judge and he believed that the referral helped his case. He commented “[blecause I lived in Staten Island, what were the chances of Judge Garson getting the case?” Testimony also indicated that Siminovsky paid defendant $1,000 or $1,500 in cash for the referral by slipping it into his hand during a handshake in defendant’s robing room.
In the fourth referral, as alleged by the People, evidence before the grand jury showed that defendant informed Siminovsky that another attorney would be calling him with a referral. As a result of the call, Siminovsky once again obtained a new client. This client knew defendant to be a judge from having met him at a country club. Siminovsky gave defendant $500 in cash by placing it in an envelope and putting it in defendant’s desk drawer in his robing room. Siminovsky gave a fee to defendant but not to the attorney who facilitated the referral.
*609In the fifth and sixth referrals as alleged, defendant, according to grand jury testimony, accepted a lump sum payment as a reward for two referrals. Both clients retained Siminovsky as their counsel and likewise are alleged to have known that defendant was a judge from professional and personal relationships with him. Siminovsky paid defendant $1,000 for the referrals. At the time of the payment, March 10, 2003, Siminovsky was cooperating with the District Attorney’s office. On that day, while wearing a recording device but unaware of the video surveillance, Siminovsky handed defendant $1,000 in marked bills in defendant’s robing room. As he handed the money to defendant, Siminovsky stated the money was for the referrals of “Aiello” and “Caputo” as well as a third person who did not retain him as counsel.
Evidence before the grand jury showed that shortly after defendant placed the money in his pocket, Siminovsky said “[m]ake sure it doesn’t fall out of your pocket,” to which defendant replied “[fit’s not going to fall out for at least an hour or two. Then it is gone.” Siminovsky then left the robing room, at which point defendant took out the money, counted it, placed some of it in his pocket and placed the rest in an envelope in his desk drawer. Several minutes later, defendant called Siminovsky from his cell phone and left him a message asking him to return. Siminovsky returned 38 minutes later at which point defendant handed him the envelope with the money and suggested that Siminovsky make a check out to Robin Garson’s campaign committee since she was experiencing a shortfall of $25,000. Siminovsky returned the envelope to defendant and told him “[d]on’t worry about it.” Defendant took back the envelope and reiterated that Siminovsky should write a check out to the campaign committee. On March 12, 2003, defendant was arrested. The grand jury heard that at the time he had in his possession the 10 marked $100 bills that Siminovsky had given him on March 10, 2003.
Two indictments were filed and later consolidated.3 As relevant to this appeal, defendant was indicted on six counts of *610receiving reward for official misconduct in the second degree in violation of Penal Law § 200.25.
Penal Law § 200.25 provides that a “public servant is guilty of receiving reward for official misconduct in the second degree when he solicits, accepts or agrees to accept any benefit from another person for having violated his duty as a public servant.” The first count of the indictment states:
“The defendant, on or about March 4, 2003, in the County of Kings, being a public servant, did solicit, accept and agree to accept a benefit, namely a box of cigars, from another person, namely Paul Siminovsky, for having violated his duty as a public servant.”
To support the first count, the People submit that defendant violated his duty as a public servant by failing to comply with 22 NYCRR 100.3 (B) (6), which provides in part that “[a] judge shall not initiate, permit, or consider ex parte communications.” The People asserted that defendant violated this rule when he engaged in numerous ex parte communications with Siminovsky concerning the Levi case—advising Siminovsky what witnesses to call, what arguments to make and how defendant intended to rule on key issues in the case. This violation of the rule in conjunction with his acceptance of a benefit—the cigars—is sufficient, the People contend, to satisfy the elements of Penal Law § 200.25.
The remaining five counts under Penal Law § 200.25 charge defendant as follows:
“The defendant, on or about [five different dates], in the County of Kings, being a public servant, did solicit, accept and agree to accept a benefit, namely a sum of United States currency, from another person, namely Paul Siminovsky, for having violated his duty as a public servant.”4
In support of these charges, the People turn to 22 NYCRR 100.2 (C), which provides in part that “[a] judge shall not lend the prestige of judicial office to advance the private interests of the *611judge or others.” The People contend that this section prohibits defendant, a judge, from making referrals by lending the prestige of his judicial office to advance his own interests or those of another, here, Siminovsky. The grand jury could have inferred based on the evidence presented that defendant made the referrals to help Siminovsky’s practice and, in turn, to gain monetary benefits in the form of “referral fees.” Thus, the People maintain that defendant lent the prestige of his judicial office to Siminovsky in order to benefit Siminovsky and himself in violation of rule 100.2. The People argue that this dereliction of duty when coupled with the acceptance of benefits—payments—is sufficient to establish every element of Penal Law § 200.25 in each of the five instances.
Supreme Court granted defendant’s motion to dismiss the indictment to the extent of dismissing the six counts of receiving reward for official misconduct on the ground that the “evidence presented to the grand jury that the defendant violated the Rules [of Judicial Conduct] is legally insufficient to establish that he violated a duty he had as a public servant within the meaning of the Penal Law.” (4 Misc 3d 258, 266-267 [2004].) The essence of the court’s analysis was that the People could not rely on the Rules to establish that defendant’s conduct was in dereliction of his duties as a judge. Supreme Court further dismissed two of three counts of official misconduct (Penal Law § 195.00). The court held that sufficient evidence existed to support one count only: that defendant received compensation in exchange for advice under Penal Law § 195.00 (1) in violation of Judiciary Law § 18. The Appellate Division affirmed. A Judge of this Court granted leave, and we now modify and reinstate the six counts charging defendant with receiving reward for official misconduct under Penal Law § 200.25.
II.
“Where the language of a statute is clear and unambiguous, courts must give effect to its plain meaning” (Matter of Tall Trees Constr. Corp. v Zoning Bd. of Appeals of Town of Huntington, 97 NY2d 86, 91 [2001]). In addition, legislative history can be useful to aid in interpreting statutory language (see Riley v County of Broome, 95 NY2d 455, 463 [2000]). The receiving reward offense, defined in Penal Law § 200.25, is part of Penal Law article 200, which addresses “Bribery Involving Public Servants and Related Offenses.” In enacting Penal Law article 200, the Legislature intended its coverage to be comprehensive to help prevent and prosecute abuses of power in government.
*612A “public servant” is
“(a) any public officer or employee of the state or of any political subdivision thereof or of any governmental instrumentality within the state, or (b) any person exercising the functions of any such public officer or employee. The term public servant includes a person who has been elected or designated to become a public servant” (Penal Law § 10.00 [15]).
Thus, “public servant” has been defined “broadly enough to include not only every category of government or public officer, but every employee of such officer or agency” (Donnino, Practice Commentary, McKinney’s Cons Laws of NY, Book 39, Penal Law art 200 [internal quotation marks omitted]). “Benefit” is also broadly defined to encompass “any gain or advantage to the beneficiary and includes any gain or advantage to a third person pursuant to the desire or consent of the beneficiary” (Penal Law § 10.00 [17]). The plain language of Penal Law § 200.25 is consistently broad in that it embraces any variation of reward for benefit, whether one “solicits, accepts or agrees” to such reward.
In enacting Penal Law § 200.25, the Legislature has specifically defined the terms “public servant” and “benefit” and left for factual resolution whether a public servant has “violated his duty.” The Legislature’s decision not to further define the duty element is understandable given the hundreds of different types of public officials and employees whose misconduct was intended to be covered under the statute. The duty of a Department of Motor Vehicles clerk is not the same as that of a Health Department inspector or, for that matter, a judge. It would therefore have been difficult if not impossible for the Legislature to construct a definition of “duty” that would have encompassed all the derelictions of duty it sought to proscribe. Instead, the Legislature has required that the People prove the duty violated in each case. Such proof can come in the form of live testimony from a lay witness or expert, reliance on an internal or formal body of rules, or other indicia of a defendant’s knowledge of wrongdoing.
The Legislature’s comprehensive approach finds its roots in the legislative history. Article 200 of the Penal Law sets forth various crimes addressing bribery and bribe receiving, all of which involve a benefit or reward for a future act by a public *613servant. Prior to the enactment of Penal Law § 200.25, there was a void in the law that allowed for prosecution of bribery-like offenses where a benefit was given in contemplation of an act in the future (see Penal Law §§ 200.00, 200.10), but did not allow for prosecution when an improper act occurred and a benefit was later bestowed upon the public official for that act. Penal Law § 200.25, receiving reward for official misconduct, and its counterpart Penal Law § 200.20, rewarding official misconduct, are intended to fill that void (see Commission Staff Notes, reprinted following NY Cons Law Serv, Book 23B, Penal Law § 200.25; see People v Alvino, 71 NY2d 233, 244 [1987] [explaining that reward receiving, a lesser offense of bribe receiving, “involves accepting a reward for past official misconduct”]). Judges fall within the broad definition of “public servant.” And even prior to the enactment of Penal Law § 200.25, prosecution of “judicial officers” had been authorized under the bribery statutory scheme (see former Penal Law § 372).
Defendant urges us to interpret the statute to create a new void—the immunization of judges from criminal prosecution when they receive an illicit benefit after violating a rule of judicial conduct. Specifically, defendant claims that the term “violated his duty” lacks express legislative definition and cannot be proved by evidence that defendant violated his duty under the Rules. This claim lacks merit.
For an indictment to survive a motion to dismiss on sufficiency grounds, the evidence presented to the grand jury must set forth prima facie proof of the crimes charged (see People v Bello, 92 NY2d 523, 525-526 [1998]; CPL 70.10). Here, the evidence submitted before the grand jury satisfies this requirement to the extent that defendant is a public servant and that he accepted a benefit. Assuming for a moment that defendant was in violation of his duties as a public servant, it was also reasonable for the grand jury to infer that defendant received the benefits for having violated his judicial duties. Defendant urges us to interpret Penal Law § 200.25’s element that the public servant be in violation of his duty, to exempt judges because they are subject to what he deems the ethically-driven Rules of Judicial Conduct. We reject his contention.
The People set forth evidence that defendant offered ex parte advice to Siminovsky, an attorney appearing in a case pending before him. The evidence further showed that the advice conveyed was substantive in nature in that defendant informed *614Siminovsky that his client would prevail even though the client did not deserve to win. It was reasonable for the grand jury to find that defendant violated his explicit duty not to “initiate, permit, or consider ex parte communications . . . concerning a pending or impending proceeding” (22 NYCRR 100.3 [B] [6]).
The same is true as to defendant’s referral of cases to Siminovsky. The evidence presented to the grand jury supports an inference that defendant, in referring potential clients to Siminovsky, was lending the prestige of his judicial office for the sake of advancing private interests—both his own and Siminovsky’s. The grand jury could rationally have found that defendant meant for the clients to be influenced by his judicial position when they selected the lawyer he recommended, and also that defendant expected to be compensated by Siminovsky for the referrals. We do not imply that a judge, acting in a purely private, unofficial capacity, may not refer a friend or acquaintance to a lawyer when the judge expects no benefit for doing so (see Advisory Comm on Jud Ethics Op 93-89 [1993]); but the grand jury could have concluded that that is not what happened here.
We are further governed by the principle that “we must interpret a statute so as to avoid an ‘unreasonable or absurd’ application of the law” (People v Santi, 3 NY3d 234, 244 [2004], quoting Williams v Williams, 23 NY2d 592, 599 [1969]; see also People v Kramer, 92 NY2d 529, 539 [1998] [a court may consider whether one reading of the statute “might produce absurd and fundamentally unfair results”]; Matter of New York State Assn. of Criminal Defense Lawyers v Kaye, 96 NY2d 512, 519 [2001] [“courts have repeatedly rejected statutory constructions that are unconscionable or antithetical to legislative objectives”]). “The law binds all men equally, the Judges no less than the judged” (Matter of Stern v Morgenthau, 62 NY2d 331, 339 [1984]; see also Matter of Mason [State Commn. on Jud. Conduct], 100 NY2d 56, 60 [2003] [“Judges must be held to a higher standard of conduct than the public at large”]).
To hold otherwise, as urged by the dissent, would lead to the incongruous result of insulating judges from criminal liability under Penal Law § 200.25 because they have a formal body of rules governing their conduct while subjecting other public servants—whose duties are not defined in either Penal Law § 200.25 or any express code of conduct comparable to the Rules—to criminal liability for similar conduct. Such a result not only effectively immunizes judges but also runs counter to *615the legislative objective of deterring public servants from, and prosecuting them for, abusing their positions (cf People v Jaehne, 103 NY 182, 195 [1886] [“The crime of bribery . . . impairs public confidence in the integrity of official administration, a confidence most necessary to be maintained”]).
A comparison to prosecutions under Penal Law § 200.35 further exposes the flaw in the dissent’s position.5 Under that statute, a judge who accepts a benefit for authorized conduct can be prosecuted for receiving unlawful gratuities. However, if the conduct was unauthorized, as it is alleged here, defendant would be immunized from prosecution under the rationale set forth by the dissent since the People relied on the Rules of Judicial Conduct to establish the violations. We see no justification for such a perverse result—not in the plain language of the statute, not in the legislative history, and not in our precedents.
Thus we conclude that the People may rely on the Rules of Judicial Conduct to prove the element of a judge’s “duty as a public servant” within the meaning of Penal Law § 200.25. The Rules are a compendium of regulations that insures the integrity of the judiciary and the resultant confidence and impartiality that must repose in the justice system. Any other construction runs afoul of these goals. We hold the evidence presented to the grand jury is legally sufficient, in accordance with CPL 70.10, and supports every element of counts one through six of the indictment charging defendant with violating his duties as a public servant and then accepting benefits in exchange for those violations.
III.
In support of his position that the Rules cannot supply that necessary element, defendant, like the dissent, views our holding in People v La Carrubba (46 NY2d 658 [1979]) as a bar to prosecuting judges who violate an explicit code of conduct. In La Carrubba, a judge was charged with official misconduct under Penal Law § 195.00 (2) for improperly dismissing, for failure to prosecute, a simplified traffic information issued to a personal friend. In that prosecution, the People relied on Canons 2 and 3 of the Code of Judicial Conduct in support of the charges.
*616Unlike the Rules of Judicial Conduct in effect today that have been promulgated pursuant to the State Constitution and Judiciary Law § 212 (2) (d), the Code of Judicial Conduct that existed in 1974 was merely “a compilation of ethical objectives and exhortations” which were "[c]ouched in the subjunctive mood” (46 NY2d at 663). The Code was promulgated by the American Bar Association, adopted by the New York State Bar Association and then subsequently incorporated by reference in the respective rules of the Appellate Divisions. Canon 2 of the Code suggests that “A Judge Should Avoid Impropriety and the Appearance of Impropriety in All of the Judge’s Activities” and Canon 3 likewise evokes the proposition that “A Judge Shall Perform the Duties of Judicial Office Impartially and Diligently.” We refused to permit a prosecution for official misconduct under Penal Law § 195.00 (2) based upon these violations of the ethical canons contained within the Code of Judicial Conduct. To hold otherwise, we said, would permit “a prosecutor [to] initiate and take charge of proceedings to enforce the Code of Judicial Conduct” (46 NY2d at 664).
Here, there are two significant distinctions from La Carrubba. First, the Rules of Judicial Conduct do not present the same notice and enforcement concerns that we faced with the Code of Judicial Conduct in La Carrubba. Whereas the Code encouraged judges to act with utmost ethical forethought—it was framed in suggestive terms and applicable only as adopted by the Appellate Divisions—the Rules of Judicial Conduct are rooted in a constitutional amendment of State Constitution, article VI, § 20 (b) which states that “Qjudges and justices of the courts . . . shall also be subject to such rules of conduct as may be promulgated by the chief administrator of the courts with the approval of the court of appeals” (emphasis added).6
After this constitutional amendment was adopted, the Legislature enacted Judiciary Law § 212 (2) (b), which directs the Chief Administrator of the Courts to “[pjromulgate rules of conduct for judges and justices of the unified court system with the approval of the court of appeals, in accordance with the provisions of section twenty of article six of the constitution.” Pursuant to the Constitution and the statute, the Chief Administrator of the Courts promulgated the Rules of Judicial Conduct which were then approved by the Court of Appeals. These Rules, *617including 22 NYCRR 100.2 and 100.3, affirmatively state that a judge “shall” comply with the rules of conduct and set out a basic standard of compliance (see also 22 NYCRR part 100 [preamble] [“The text of the rules is intended to govern conduct of judges . . . and to be binding upon them . . . The rules are intended ... to state basic standards which should govern their conduct and to provide guidance to assist them in establishing and maintaining high standards of judicial and personal conduct”]).
The dissent relies on the preamble of the Rules which also states that “[t]hey are not designed or intended as a basis for civil liability or criminal prosecution” (see dissenting op at 631). However, preambles are not controlling of a statute or rule’s terms but are simply a useful aid for interpreting them when there is ambiguity (cf. McKinney’s Cons Laws of NY, Book 1, Statutes § 122). Moreover, our holding is not inconsistent with the preamble because the Rules themselves do not subject judges to criminal sanctions. Here, a breach of the Rules supplies proof that an official duty has been violated. It is the “receiving reward” aspect of defendant’s conduct that gives rise to the criminal prosecution, not just the existence or violation of the Rules.
The mandatory nature of the Rules and their constitutional source ameliorate the concerns we expressed in La Carrubba. The Rules provide a fundamental objective standard of how judges must conduct themselves. This addresses the concern that a prosecutor could use an advisory, aspirational code of ethics to help prove an element of a crime. It further diminishes any concern that a defendant would not have proper notice of the conduct prohibited, as the Rules and the Penal Law are clear as to their applicability.7
A second key difference is that in La Carrubba we were concerned with “the permissibility of the enforcement of the provisions of the Code of Judicial Conduct by resort to criminal prosecution” (La Carrubba, 46 NY2d at 662). There, the District Attorney was prosecuting the judge for refraining from perform*618ing duties inherent to the nature of her office—the duties to avoid the appearance of impropriety and to act impartially. In essence, the Penal Law was being used as a vehicle to pursue claims of “ethical improprieties]” which, contrary to the intent of the Legislature, effectively did nothing more than permit the prosecutor to “take charge of proceedings to enforce the Code of Judicial Conduct” (La Carrubba, 46 NY2d at 664).
In the present case, the criminal prosecution rests not on a violation of the Rules alone but on the acceptance of a benefit for violating an official duty defined by the Rules. Thus, a public servant who violates a tangible duty and further “solicits, accepts or agrees to accept” a benefit for the breach, is subject to prosecution under Penal Law § 200.25.® Had the judge as a public servant violated ethical duties alone—without accepting a benefit for the violation—and had the action not otherwise been prohibited by the Penal Law, the public servant would be subject only to discipline in a proceeding brought by the Commission on Judicial Conduct. This critical distinction alleviates many of the concerns we had in La Carrubba, including the concern that to allow criminal prosecution of ethical violations under Penal Law § 195.00 (2) would create an “awkward and often unseemly” landscape where different groups would likely “jockey for prosecutorial priority or advantage” (46 NY2d at 665).8
9
We thus reject defendant’s argument that La Carrubba is controlling here. The People’s use of the Rules of Judicial Conduct to establish the duty element before the grand jury in this case did not render the proof insufficient or the indictment defective.
The People’s remaining claim as it relates to the dismissal of the charge of official misconduct in violation of Penal Law § 195.00 (2) is meritless.
Accordingly, the order of the Appellate Division should be modified by reinstating six counts charging defendant with receiving reward for official misconduct in the second degree and, as so modified, affirmed.
. Defendant’s wife, Civil Court Judge Robin Garson, was in private practice at the time.
. Siminovsky did not recall whether he gave the check to defendant or to Robin Garson.
. On May 21, 2003, defendant was charged in indictment No. 3515/2003 with six counts of receiving reward for official misconduct in the second degree (class E felonies), one count of official misconduct and one count of receiving unlawful gratuities (class A misdemeanors). On August 5, 2003, defendant was charged in indictment No. 5332/2003 with bribe receiving in the third degree (a class D felony) and three counts of official misconduct (one of which superseded the official misconduct count of the earlier indictment).
*610Supreme Court concluded there was legally sufficient evidence to support the charges of receiving unlawful gratuities (Penal Law § 200.35), bribe receiving in the third degree (Penal Law § 200.10) and one count of official misconduct (Penal Law § 195.00 [1]). A trial on those counts is pending.
. Counts two through six of indictment No. 3515/2003 allege the dates on which defendant allegedly accepted a fee: October 9, 2001, October 31, 2001, September 5, 2002, November 15, 2002, and March 10, 2003.
. Penal Law § 200.35 reads: “A public servant is guilty of receiving unlawful gratuities when he solicits, accepts or agrees to accept any benefit for having engaged in official conduct which he was required or authorized to perform, and for which he was not entitled to any special or additional compensation.”
. Article VI, § 20 of the State Constitution was amended in 1977 and was not applicable to defendant in La Carrubba.
. To the extent that defendant raises a vagueness “as applied” challenge to Penal Law § 200.25, we are not persuaded. The failure to define each term in a criminal statute does not render the statute void for vagueness (see People v Nelson, 69 NY2d 302 [1987]). The statute at issue, as applied to these facts, is “sufficiently definite to give a person of ordinary intelligence fair notice that his contemplated conduct is forbidden by the statute” (People v Stuart, 100 NY2d 412, 420 [2003] [citations and internal quotation marks omitted]).
. See e.g. United States v Davis, 183 F3d 231, 245 (3d Cir 1999); ReSource N.E. of Long Is., Inc. u Town of Babylon, 80 F Supp 2d 52 (ED NY 2000); People v Blumenthal, 55 AD2d 13 (1st Dept 1976).
. Certainly there are violations where the same conduct can form the basis of a criminal prosecution and an administrative proceeding. The burdens of proof are different, as are the penalties that may be imposed, and both can be prosecuted in tandem. Typically, the criminal prosecution goes forward first and the disciplinary proceeding is held in abeyance pending the outcome of the criminal prosecution.

=== CASE 9740530 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:54.143451+00 ===

*619G.B. Smith, J. (dissenting in part).
The primary issue here is whether the Rules of Judicial Conduct may be used as criminal statutes to prosecute a judge. I agree with the trial court and the Appellate Division that the Rules are not criminal statutes. Thus, the evidence before the grand jury was legally insufficient to sustain 8 of the 11 charges in the consolidated indictments (Nos. 3515/2003 and 5332/2003).
Facts
The People assert that there was an ongoing improper attorney-judge relationship between Paul Siminovsky and defendant over a period of three years, including lunches, drinks, money and cigars in exchange for ex parte advice on cases pending before the judge, client referrals, and favorable treatment in the courtroom.
From approximately October 1, 2002 to March 4, 2003, defendant had ex parte conversations with attorney Siminovsky about the Avraham Levi case, a divorce case pending before him. The conversations involved advice about how to proceed in the case, statements concerning how defendant would rule on the distribution of property between the parties, and suggestions about what questions Siminovsky should ask the witnesses. The People claim that these conversations violated 22 NYCRR 100.3 (B) (6).1
On March 4, 2003, defendant accepted two boxes of cigars from Siminovsky for giving him advice in the Levi case. According to the People, defendant violated Judiciary Law § 182 when he accepted the cigars. The People claim that the defendant also *620accepted money for referring clients to Siminovsky on five separate dates, including October 9, 2001; October 31, 2001; September 5, 2002; November 15, 2002; and March 10, 2003. Client referrals from a judge to an attorney are alleged to be violations of 22 NYCRR 100.2 (C).3
Also from January 1, 2002 through March 12, 2003, defendant accepted lunches, beverages and cigars from Siminovsky in exchange for “assigning law guardianships, and giving ex parte advice to Siminovsky concerning cases that were pending before defendant.”
In February 2003, during the Avraham Levi divorce case, the Kings County District Attorney began a video and audio surveillance of the judge’s robing room. During that surveillance, defendant and Siminovsky discussed the following: subpoenaing an expert witness, the fact that the defendant was not going to order the sale of the house, that Levi would get exclusive use of the home and that Levi would win the case, even though he did not deserve it.
In early 2003, the District Attorney’s office arrested Siminovsky who agreed to cooperate with the prosecutor. On March 4, 2003, Siminovsky gave defendant two cigars which had been purchased by the District Attorney’s office. Unbeknownst to Siminovsky, the District Attorney continued to conduct video and audio surveillance of defendant’s robing room.
On March 10, 2003, Siminovsky, wearing a recording device, handed defendant 10 $100 bills which had been given to him by *621the Kings County District Attorney. Defendant placed the money in his pocket. However, shortly thereafter, he called Siminovsky on his cell phone and asked him to return. After conferring with the District Attorney, Siminovsky returned to defendant’s chambers.
Defendant tried to return part of the money. Instead of the money, defendant asked that Siminovsky write a check for Robin Carson’s (defendant’s wife) judicial campaign which had experienced a shortfall. In the end, defendant kept the $1,000, and Siminovsky agreed to write a check. Defendant was arrested on March 12, 2003. At the time of arrest, defendant had the $1,000 in his pockets.
Indictment No. 3515/2003 charged defendant with one count of receiving reward for official misconduct in the second degree (Penal Law § 200.25)4 for accepting a box of cigars, five counts of receiving reward for official misconduct in the second degree (Penal Law § 200.25) for referral fees, one count of official misconduct (Penal Law § 195.00 [1]) pertaining to ex parte advice to Paul Siminovsky (Penal Law § 195.00 [l])5 and one count of receiving unlawful gratuities (Penal Law § 200.35).6
Indictment No. 5332/2003 charged defendant with one count of bribe receiving in the third degree (Penal Law § 200.10)7 for *622agreeing to provide favorable treatment to Siminovsky. For accepting the cigars concerning the advice on the Levi case, defendant was charged with two counts of official misconduct (Penal Law § 195.00 [1], [2]). By indictment No. 5332/2003, defendant was also charged with a third count of official misconduct (Penal Law § 195.00 [1]), “which superseded the count of official misconduct in indictment number 3515/03.”
On September 9, 2003, Supreme Court, Kings County consolidated indictment No. 3515/2003 with indictment No. 5332/2003 and dismissed as superceded the count of official misconduct charged in indictment No. 3515/2003.
Motion to Dismiss
On December 15, 2003, defendant moved to dismiss the indictments as based upon legally insufficient evidence. Defendant argued that judicial rules of conduct cannot serve as predicates for criminal charges. Also, defendant argued that receiving the box of cigars was not compensation within Judiciary Law § 18.
On April 29, 2004, Supreme Court, Bangs County, dismissed six counts of receiving reward for official misconduct in the second degree (Penal Law § 200.25) finding:
“[I]n any prosecution for receiving reward for official misconduct, the evidence must identify a duty the defendant had as a public servant, and must establish that he or she violated that duty and thereafter solicited, accepted or agreed to accept a benefit for having done so. . . .
“In sum, although the Chief Administrator of the Courts has properly promulgated enforceable ethical standards, I hold that he has not discharged, nor has he attempted to discharge, the legislative responsibility of defining elements of crimes. Accordingly, evidence presented to the grand jury that the defendant violated the Rules of the Chief Administrator is legally insufficient to establish that he violated a duty he had as a public servant within the meaning of the Penal Law. The grand jury evidence, therefore, fails to establish an essential element of each of the counts charging the crime of receiving reward for official misconduct in the second degree.” (4 Misc 3d 258, 261-267 [2004].)
*623In reference to official misconduct (Penal Law § 195.00), there were three charges. Two were dismissed as based upon legally insufficient evidence and one was sustained as based on defendant’s acceptance of a box of cigars “as compensation” for ex parte advice on the Avraham Levi divorce case pending before him. His acceptance of the box of cigars was in violation of his duty not to accept compensation for engaging in authorized or unauthorized conduct.
On the charge of receiving unlawful gratuities, the motion court wrote:
“A review of the testimony and exhibits presented to the grand jury reveals that the evidence was legally sufficient to support the count charging the defendant with the class A misdemeanor of receiving unlawful gratuities in that he allegedly accepted benefits from an attorney for having engaged in official conduct as a judge which he was authorized to perform, and for which he was not entitled to any special or additional compensation (Penal Law § 200.35).” (4 Misc 3d at 268.)
Supreme Court concluded, “The case will therefore proceed to trial on the top count of bribe receiving in the third degree, on one count of official misconduct, and on one count of receiving unlawful gratuities.” (Id. at 277.)
On April 25, 2005, the Appellate Division, Second Department affirmed, writing:
“The court properly dismissed counts one through six of indictment No. 3515/03, charging the defendant with receiving reward for official misconduct in the second degree. An indictment in which the defendant’s duty as a public servant, an essential element of the crime of receiving reward for official misconduct (Penal Law § 200.25), is defined solely by reference to the Rules of Judicial Conduct, specifically, 22 NYCRR 100.2 (C) and 100.3 (B) (6), is insufficient (see People v La Carrubba, 46 NY2d 658, 665 [1979]).
“The court also properly dismissed count three of indictment No. 5332/03, charging the defendant with official misconduct (Penal Law § 195.00 [2]), as multiplicitous, since there is no fact to be proven under that count that is not also required to be *624proven under count two of the same indictment” (17 AD3d 695 [2005] [citations omitted]).
On June 24, 2005, the Chief Judge of the Court of Appeals granted leave to appeal to the People. The People seek to reinstate six counts of receiving reward for official misconduct in the second degree (Penal Law § 200.25) and one count of official misconduct as defined by Penal Law § 195.00 (2).
Discussion
The New York State Constitution, the Rules of Judicial Conduct and the Penal Law do not authorize a prosecutor to charge a judge with crimes by alleging violations of the Rules of Judicial Conduct.
Constitution and Preamble of Rules of Judicial Conduct
Article III, § 1 of the New York State Constitution states, “The legislative power of this state shall be vested in the senate and assembly.”
“Th[e] legislative power cannot be passed on to others. What is legislative and what [is] administrative is not always easy to define, but the difficulty is not apparent here” (see Darweger v Stoats, 267 NY 290, 305 [1935]). “Authority to make administrative rules is not a delegation of legislative power, and such rules do not become legislation because violations thereof are punished as public offenses” (see id. at 306). The clearest reading of 22 NYCRR part 100 is that it consists of rules governing judicial conduct, not criminal statutes passed by the Legislature, the only body in this state that can make conduct criminal.
The preamble of the Rules of Judicial Conduct makes clear that they were not intended to be criminal statutes:
“The rules governing judicial conduct are rules of reason. They should be applied consistently with constitutional requirements, statutes, other court rules and decisional law and in the context of all relevant circumstances. The rules are to be construed so as not to impinge on the essential independence of judges in making judicial decisions.
“The rules are designed to provide guidance to judges and candidates for elective judicial office and to provide a structure for regulating conduct through disciplinary agencies. They are not designed or intended as a basis for civil liability or criminal prosecution” (emphasis supplied).
*625The sections of the Rules of Judicial Conduct used in the criminal prosecution of this defendant are 22 NYCRR 100.2 (C) and 100.3 (B) (6). There is nothing in the preamble to suggest that criminal prosecution can result from any violation of the Rules. Further, the preamble explicitly states that criminal prosecution should not result from the Rules. Consequently, defendant was not on notice that the rules of conduct could result in criminal prosecution. Notice, of course, is an essential requirement prior to prosecution (see La Carrubba, 46 NY2d at 663, supra).
The prosecution has charged the defendant twice for the same crime. Defendant allegedly accepted the cigars for giving ex parte advice in the Levi case. The advice and the compensation were, however, all one offense. The People cannot charge official misconduct once for the advice and a second time for the compensation because the offense was receiving compensation for giving advice. Thus, only one count of official misconduct is warranted based upon Judiciary Law § 18 where the judge did “receive . . . compensation for giving his advice in an action . . . pending before him.”
Grand Jury Charges and Legally Sufficient Evidence
The prosecutor charged the grand jury as though the Rules of Judicial Conduct were criminal statutes. On May 20, 2003, the prosecutor charged the grand jury on the rules that govern judicial conduct, not on the criminal law, reciting, verbatim, two provisions of the Rules of Judicial Conduct. They were the following:
22 NYCRR 100.2, which is headed: “A Judge shall avoid impropriety and the appearance of impropriety in all of the judge’s activities.” Subdivision (C) states:
“A judge shall not lend'the prestige of judicial office to advance the private interests of the judge or others; nor shall a judge convey or permit others to convey the impression that they are in a special position to influence the judge.”
22 NYCRR 100.3, which is headed: “A judge shall perform the duties of judicial office impartially and diligently.” Subdivision (B) (6) states:
“A judge shall accord to every person who has a legal interest in a procéeding, or that person’s lawyer, the right to be heard according to law. A *626judge shall not initiate, permit, or consider ex parte communications, or consider other communications made to the judge outside the presence of the parties or their lawyers concerning a pending or impending proceeding, except: . . .
“Ex parte communications that are made for scheduling or administrative purposes that do not affect a substantial right of any party are authorized, provided the judge reasonably believes that no party will gain a procedural or tactical advantage as a result of the ex parte communication, and the judge, insofar as practical and appropriate, makes provision for prompt notification of other parties or their lawyers of the substance of the ex parte communication and allows an opportunity to respond. . . .
“A judge, with the consent of the parties, may confer separately with the parties and their lawyers on agreed-upon matters.”
Concerning indictment No. 3515/2003, the prosecutor instructed the grand jury that it could indict the defendant for violating the Rules of Judicial Conduct if it determined that defendant had accepted cigars, accepted money, referred persons to Paul Siminovsky or gave advice.
Pursuant to CPL 190.65, a grand jury indictment is authorized as follows:
“1. Subject to the rules prescribing the kinds of offenses which may be charged in an indictment, a grand jury may indict a person for an offense when (a) the evidence before it is legally sufficient to establish that such person committed such offense provided, however, such evidence is not legally sufficient when corroboration that would be required, as a matter of law, to sustain a conviction for such offense is absent, and (b) competent and admissible evidence before it provides reasonable cause to believe that such person committed such offense.”
Legally sufficient evidence is defined under CPL 70.10 (1) as “competent evidence which, if accepted as true, would establish every element of an offense charged and the defendant’s commission thereof.” Three crimes alleged in the consolidated indictment are authorized because they charge violations of the *627Penal Law. The Rules of Judicial Conduct were not meant to serve as elements of criminal statutes or as criminal statutes. The charges given to the grand jury by the prosecutor indicate that the People are alleging both violations of the Penal Law and violations of the Rules of Judicial Conduct in prosecuting defendant.
The Rules of Judicial Conduct are rules of ethics and not criminal statutes or predicates for criminal statutes. There has been no legislative enactment allowing for their use in criminal prosecution and the Rules have not been subjected to any standards of proof. Further, the burden of proof for violations under the judicial rules of conduct is “preponderance of the evidence” whereas, for felonies, it is beyond a reasonable doubt (see Matter of Collazo [State Commn. on Jud. Conduct], 91 NY2d 251, 253 [1998]).
In Matter of Stern v Morgenthau (62 NY2d 331, 333 [1984]), this Court determined that the grand jury’s purpose and investigations would not be thwarted if the prosecutor is not allowed to have access to “confidential records of the State Commission on Judicial Conduct” which developed as part of the Commission’s investigation into misconduct by two judges. Specifically, this Court held that the grand jury and the Commission “serve quite different purposes” (see id. at 334). The Court illuminated the difference with the following words:
“The Grand Jury is drawn from the population at large and charged with the duty of investigating and preferring charges against those suspected of criminal conduct while the Commission is composed of members appointed for fixed terms as defined in the Constitution and charged with the duty of investigating misconduct in the judicial branch of government and imposing discipline if misconduct is found. Thus, while the two bodies serve similar functions, they are separate and independent. One is responsible for investigating crime; the other for disciplining Judges.” (Id.)
The difference addressed in Stern between the grand jury and the Commission on Judicial Conduct is relevant to the case at bar. In order to prosecute defendant under the consolidated indictment, the People must show that defendant violated duties as a public servant defined in the Penal Law and separate and apart from the rules that govern judicial conduct. The indictment repeatedly makes reference to “being a public servant.” *628However, except for the charge referred to in footnote 2 (at 619), there is no reference to what duties in the criminal statutes defendant violated.
The People argue that the Rules put judges on notice that if they engage in “official misconduct,” they will be held accountable for their actions through criminal prosecution. Further, failure to prosecute judges for engaging in illegitimate actions will have a negative effect on the public’s confidence in the judiciary. According to appellant, defendant failed not only in his duty as a public servant but also in not complying with both the judicial rules of conduct and the criminal statutes. Defendant asserts that there are no cases which hold that a judge can be criminally liable for failure to comply with the judicial rules of conduct. Defendant argues, “Simply put, that a judge has a duty to comply with the Rules does not mean that compliance with those Rules is enforceable under the Penal Law.”
There appear to be no statutes and no cases that hold that a judge can be held criminally liable for failure to comply with the Rules of Judicial Conduct. There is no question that the prosecutor has amassed a great deal of damning evidence against the defendant. However, what is at issue is whether or not Rules of Judicial Conduct (22 NYCRR part 100) can be used as a predicate for criminal prosecution, not whether or not there is enough evidence to prosecute the defendant.
One count of bribe receiving in the third degree (Penal Law § 200.10) for “accepting benefits from Siminovsky upon an agreement or understanding that defendant would provide Siminovsky with favorable treatment” is legally sufficient. Second, defendant allegedly accepted a box of cigars and two loose cigars for providing advice on the Levi divorce case which was pending before him. As a result of these actions, the charge that the judge violated Penal Law § 195.00 by accepting compensation for giving advice is appropriate (see La Carrubba, 46 NY2d 658, 664 [1979], supra). Thus, one charge of official misconduct is appropriate. Third, the evidence was legally sufficient to establish one count of receiving unlawful gratuities in violation of Penal Law § 200.35 because defendant accepted the cigars for advice concerning the Levi divorce case. However, the evidence was legally insufficient to sustain the other six charges pursuant to Penal Law § 200.25.
*629
People v La Carrubba
Relying on People v La Carrubba (46 NY2d 658, 664-665 [1979]), both the Supreme Court and the Appellate Division found that the Code cannot be used in such a manner. In La Carrubba, this Court held:
“We find nothing in section 195.00 of the Penal Law which suggests that by the device of incorporation by reference a prosecutor may initiate and take charge of proceedings to enforce the Code of Judicial Conduct as such. To accept the proposition advanced by [appellant] District Attorney would be to countenance the institution of criminal proceedings for any alleged violation of the provisions of the code. We perceive no intention on the part of the Legislature to cloak the District Attorney with responsibility for compelling conformity with the Code of Judicial Conduct.” (46 NY2d 658, 664-665 [1979], supra.)
In La Carrubba, the issue was enforcement of Penal Law § 195.00 (2) for official misconduct by a judge. This Court determined that judges can be prosecuted for criminal acts but not on the basis of the judicial rules of conduct which were never meant to serve as part of the penal code (see 46 NY2d 658, 663 [1979], supra). In this case, judges are not put on notice that misconduct under the Rules of Judicial Conduct could serve as a basis for criminal prosecution (see id,.). Thus, as the Supreme Court has found, the prosecution in the case at bar is precluded from imposing criminal penalties under Penal Law § 200.25 based upon 22 NYCRR 100.2 and 100.3. While the Rules of Judicial Conduct are meant to include sanctions which can include removal from the bench (see Matter of Sims [State Commn. on Jud. Conduct], 61 NY2d 349, 356 [1984]; Matter of VonderHeide [State Commn. on Jud. Conduct], 72 NY2d 658, 660-661 [1988]), there is no indication that the Rules were meant to be used as a predicate for criminal sanctions (see La Carrubba, 46 NY2d 658, 664-665 [1979], supra; People v Stuart, 100 NY2d 412, 419 [2003]). As a result, the six charges of receiving reward for official misconduct in the second degree, as outlined by the Supreme Court, were properly dismissed.
Finally, the majority refers to language in La Carrubba that “the Code of Judicial Conduct that existed in 1974 was merely ‘a compilation of ethical objectives and exhortations’ which were ‘[c]ouched in the subjunctive mood,’ ” adopted by the *630American Bar Association, then the New York State Bar Association and then “incorporated by reference in the respective rules of the Appellate Divisions.” (Majority op at 616.) Thus, the Code consisted of rules adopted by the Appellate Divisions. Here, the Rules of Judicial Conduct were promulgated by the Chief Administrator of the Courts and designed to “provide guidance to judges and candidates for elective judicial office and to provide a structure for regulating conduct through disciplinary agencies.” (22 NYCRR part 100 [preamble].) The Legislature thus directed the Chief Administrator of the Courts to adopt rules of conduct, not criminal statutes.
New York State Constitution, Article VI, § 20 (b) and Judiciary Law § 212 (2) (b)
The overriding principle that governs in this instance is whether it was the legislative intent to make criminal judicial conduct based upon the Rules of Judicial Conduct. The principle in effect in this case, as has been true in other cases, is that “legislative intent is the great and controlling principle” (see Matter of Theroux v Reilly, 1 NY3d 232, 244 [2003]; Matter of Sutka v Conners, 73 NY2d 395, 403 [1989]; Stoats, 267 NY 290, 306 [1935], supra). There is no evidence that the Rules of Judicial Conduct were meant as a predicate for criminal prosecution.
New York Constitution, article VI, § 20 (b) states in part, “Judges and justices of the courts specified in this subdivision shall also be subject to such rules of conduct as may be promulgated by the chief administrator of the courts with the approval of the court of appeals.” No evidence is submitted that indicates any Judge of this Court intended the Rules of Judicial Conduct to be a portion of any criminal statute without specific language from the Legislature designating such conduct a crime. Judiciary Law § 212 (2) (b) states that the Chief Administrator of the Courts shall “[promulgate rules of conduct for judges and justices of the unified court system with the approval of the court of appeals, in accordance with the provisions of section twenty of article six of the constitution.” Again, no evidence is submitted that any Judge of this Court determined that a vote for the Rules of Judicial Conduct was a vote for a criminal statute or part of a criminal statute. Moreover, no evidence is submitted that the Legislature intended that by referring to the constitutional provision permitting the Chief Administrator of the Courts to promulgate rules of judicial conduct, it was also making such rules, which were to be promulgated in the future, crimes for which a prosecutor could indict.
*631Vagueness
Defendant was not on notice that violations of the Rules of Judicial Conduct would result in violations of the criminal statute. Therefore, it would be a violation of defendant’s due process rights if appellant’s arguments were accepted and the prosecution proceeded, with proof of crimes based on the Rules of Judicial Conduct.
A statute is unconstitutionally vague when it does not give “fair notice to those to whom [it] is directed” that their behavior may subject them to criminal prosecution (see American Communications Assn. v Douds, 339 US 382, 412 [1950]; People v Stuart, 100 NY2d 412, 418 [2003]). In People v Stuart, this Court laid out a two part test for determining whether a statute is void for vagueness. First, a court must determine “whether the statute in question is ‘sufficiently definite “to give a person of ordinary intelligence fair notice that his contemplated conduct is forbidden by the statute” ’ ” (see 100 NY2d 412, 420 [2003], supra, quoting People v Nelson, 69 NY2d 302, 307 [1987]). Second, the statute must be reviewed to determine “whether the enactment provides officials with clear standards for enforcement” (see Stuart, 100 NY2d at 420, supra). “As generally stated, the void-for-vagueness doctrine requires that a penal statute define the criminal offense with sufficient definiteness that ordinary people can understand what conduct is prohibited and in a manner that does not encourage arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement” (see Kolender v Lawson, 461 US 352, 357 [1983] [citations omitted]).
The Rules of Judicial Conduct state specifically, “They are not designed or intended as a basis for civil liability or criminal prosecution.” (22 NYCRR part 100 [preamble].) The stated purpose of the Rules alone renders specific rule's vague if used for criminal prosecution. There is nothing in the Rules themselves that remotely suggests criminal prosecution. In fact, the duties at issue are related to rules of conduct for the profession rather than criminal standards of official misconduct. Certainly, defendant was on notice that his conduct would violate sections of the Penal Law. He was also on notice that his conduct violated the Rules of Judicial Conduct which could lead to charges by the Commission on Judicial Conduct.
The words of the motion court that dismissed the charges on appeal here are entirely relevant:
“Section 20 (a) of article VI of New York’s Constitu*632tion provides that ‘Judges . . . shall ... be subject to such rules of conduct as may be promulgated by the chief administrator of the courts with the approval of the court of appeals.’ . . .
“Much like the Code of Judicial Conduct which it parallels, the Rules of Judicial Conduct part of the Rules of the Chief Administrator of the Courts (22 NYCRR part 100) is, in large measure, a compilation of ethical standards, goals, and aspirations that are stated in broad and general terms. Thus, for example, the rules provide that ‘[a] judge should participate in establishing, maintaining and enforcing high standards of conduct, and shall personally observe those standards so that the integrity and independence of the judiciary will be preserved’ (22 NYCRR 100.1), and that ‘[a] judge shall respect and comply with the law and shall act at all times in a manner that promotes public confidence in the integrity and impartiality of the judiciary’ (22 NYCRR 100.2 [A]), and that ‘[a] judge shall be patient, dignified and courteous to litigants, jurors, witnesses, lawyers and others with whom the judge deals in an official capacity, and shall require similar conduct of lawyers, and of staff, court officials and others subject to the judge’s direction and control’ (22 NYCRR 100.3 [B] [3]).
“The notion that rules like these can define an element of a crime is untenable. ...
“In light of both their language and their application, the two rules at issue here are problematic when employed to define an element of a crime. And, significantly, they were never meant to be used for that purpose.” (4 Misc 3d 258, 263-265 [2004].)
The Majority Decision
First, the majority asserts that the preamble of the Rules of Judicial Conduct which states, “They are not designed or intended as a basis for civil liability or criminal prosecution,” is not controlling and cites McKinney’s Cons Laws of NY, Book 1, Statutes § 122 in support of its position. Section 122 does not support the majority and states:
“The preamble or preliminary recitals of a statute are no part of the statute and do not control or af*633feet its terms, although they may be considered as an aid to interpretation when the body of the act is not free from ambiguity.”
“However, a preamble frequently contains recitals which illuminate the purpose and intent of the enactment. In fact, it is said to be the key which opens the mind of the lawmakers as to the mischiefs which are intended to be remedied by the statute, and it may sometimes be considered in determining legislative intent. Accordingly, the language of a preliminary recital may be considered as an aid to interpretation when the body of the act is not free from ambiguity, and a legislative declaration concerning public conditions is entitled to great respect though it is not conclusive.” (Statutes § 122, Comment [emphasis added].)
The underscored portion indicates that a preamble may indicate the intent of the Legislature. While we are not dealing with a statute here, even if section 122 applies, it supports the fact that the Rules of Judicial Conduct are not criminal statutes. It does so by its explicit words.
The majority indicates that since the language of the rules is “mandatory” (majority op at 616) rather than precatory, a person of reasonable intelligence is on notice of possible criminal prosecution. There is not a single case that supports the majority’s assertion that defendant was on notice that the Rules of Judicial Conduct would serve as the basis for a criminal prosecution. As a result, whether the word “shall” or “may” is used does not suffice for purposes of notice in relation to criminal prosecution (People v Stuart, supra [words not sufficiently definite for purposes of criminal prosecution]).
Second, a criminal prosecutor becomes the judge of when and how a rule of judicial conduct becomes criminal. The majority does not define the duties that can lead to criminal prosecution as opposed to sanctions by the Commission on Judicial Conduct. Does a judge now risk criminal prosecution when he or she advises a relative or friend that a particular lawyer is well suited to handle a case? Is a judge improperly exercising his or her authority when a recommendation is given to a law school? What if a judge recommends one school over another? Suppose a judge is on a not-for-profit board of directors and his or her name inadvertently appears on a notice of a fundraiser, a matter forbidden by the Rules? Should *634a judge refrain from all of these things because he or she lends the prestige of the office and promotes the interest of the judge or another person in violation of 22 NYCRR 100.2? Which rules subject a judge to criminal prosecution and which do not?
Third, the Commission on Judicial Conduct which is given constitutional authority in article VI, § 22 of the New York State Constitution to investigate and determine whether judicial conduct violates the Rules is now placed in a secondary position. Section 22 states in part:
“There shall be a commission on judicial conduct. The commission on judicial conduct shall receive, initiate, investigate and hear complaints with respect to the conduct, qualifications, fitness to perform or performance of official duties of any judge or justice of the unified court system, in the manner provided by law; and, in accordance with subdivision d of this section, may determine that a judge or justice be admonished, censured or removed from office for cause, including, but not limited to, misconduct in office, persistent failure to perform his or her duties, habitual intemperance, and conduct, on or off the bench, prejudicial to the administration of justice, or that a judge or justice be retired for mental or physical disability preventing the proper performance of his or her judicial duties.”
Does the Commission on Judicial Conduct now wait to see if there is going to be a criminal prosecution before it acts? Conclusion
It is simply incorrect that judges are immune from the criminal law if the Rules of Judicial Conduct do not authorize a criminal action. This defendant, without reference to the Rules of Judicial Conduct, is being prosecuted for bribe receiving in the third degree (Penal Law § 200.10), official misconduct (Penal Law § 195.00 [2]) and receiving unlawful gratuities (Penal Law § 200.35).
For the foregoing reasons, I dissent in part and would affirm the dismissal of six counts of receiving reward for official misconduct in the second degree and one count of official misconduct.
*635Chief Judge Kaye and Judges Rosenblatt, Graffeo, Read and R.S. Smith concur with Judge Ciparick; Judge G.B. Smith dissents in part and votes to affirm in a separate opinion.
Order modified by reinstating six counts charging defendant with receiving reward for official misconduct in the second degree and, as so modified, affirmed.
. 22 NYCRR 100.3:
“A judge shall perform the duties of judicial office impartially and diligently. . . .
“(B) Adjudicative responsibilities. . . .
“(6) A judge shall accord to every person who has a legal interest in a proceeding, or that person’s lawyer, the right to be heard according to law. A judge shall not initiate, permit, or consider ex parte communications, or consider other communications made to the judge outside the presence of the parties or their lawyers concerning a pending or impending proceeding.”
. Judiciary Law § 18 states: “A judge or other judicial officer shall not demand or receive a fee or other compensation for giving his advice in an action, claim, matter, motion or proceeding pending before him, or which he has reason to believe will be brought before him for decision.”
Count three of indictment No. 5332/2003 charged defendant with the crime of official misconduct in violation of Penal Law § 195.00 (2) committed on March 4, 2003 when defendant “refrained from performing a duty pertaining *620to his receipt of a box of cigars from Paul Siminovsky.” In responding to a demand in a bill of particulars to identify the duty that defendant refrained from performing, the People alleged, “The defendant refrained from performing the duty that was imposed upon him by Jud. L. § 18 to refuse the box of cigars as compensation for providing advice to Siminovsky about the Levi divorce case and to return such compensation.”
. 22 NYCRR 100.2:
“A judge shall avoid impropriety and the appearance of impropriety in all of the judge’s activities.
“(A) A judge shall respect and comply with the law and shall act at all times in a manner that promotes public confidence in the integrity and impartiality of the judiciary.
“(B) A judge shall not allow family, social, political or other relationships to influence the judge’s judicial conduct or judgment.
“(C) A judge shall not lend the prestige of judicial office to advance the private interests of the judge or others; nor shall a judge convey or permit others to convey the impression that they are in a special position to influence the judge. A judge shall not testify voluntarily as a character witness.”
. Penal Law § 200.25:
“Receiving reward for official misconduct in the second degree. “A public servant is guilty of receiving reward for official misconduct in the second degree when he solicits, accepts or agrees to accept any benefit from another person for having violated his duty as a public servant.”
. Penal Law § 195.00:
“Official misconduct
“A public servant is guilty of official misconduct when, with intent to obtain a benefit or deprive another person of a benefit: “1. He commits an act relating to his office but constituting an unauthorized exercise of official functions, knowing that such act is unauthorized.”
. Penal Law § 200.35 states,
“A public servant is guilty of receiving unlawful gratuities when he solicits, accepts or agrees to accept any benefit for having engaged in official conduct which he was required or authorized to perform, and for which he was not entitled to any special or additional compensation.”
. Penal Law § 200.10, a class D felony, states,
“A public servant is guilty of bribe receiving in the third degree when he solicits, accepts or agrees to accept any benefit from another person upon an agreement or understanding that his vote, *622opinion, judgment, action, decision or exercise of discretion as a public servant will thereby be influenced.”

=== CASE 9740531 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:54.445267+00 ===

SHIRLEY S. ABRAHAMSON, J.
This appeal from the judgment of the circuit court of Racine county, John C. Ahlgrimm, Circuit Judge, is before us on certification of the court of appeals. Secs. 808.05(2) and 809.61, Stats. 1981-82.
The court of appeals certified the following issue: Is a stepmother who has acted as the minor’s mother for more than ten years and has signed the minor’s application for a driver’s license as his “mother,” a “parent” *393within the meaning of sec. 343.15(1) and (2), Stats. 1977, so that both the stepmother and the minor’s father are liable for damages caused by the minor’s negligence while operating a motor vehicle ?
The circuit court had concluded that the stepmother in this case signing as sponsor on a minor’s application for a driver’s license was a “parent” under sec. 343.15(1), Stats. 1977, and entered judgment decreeing the minor, the minor’s stepmother, and the minor’s father jointly and severally liable under sec. 343.15(2), for damages caused by the minor’s negligent operation of a motor vehicle. We affirm the judgment of the circuit court as modified herein as to amount of damages.
Sec. 343.15(1), Stats. 1977, provides that a sponsor must sign a minor’s application for a driver’s license and identifies those persons who may be sponsors. Among the persons it permits as sponsors is a minor’s parent. Sec. 343.15(2), imposes liability on the sponsor for damages caused by the minor’s negligent or wilful misconduct when operating a vehicle. Furthermore, if the sponsor is a parent, liability is imposed on both parents where both have custody of the minor. Secs. 343.15 (1) and (2), provide as follows:
“(1) [T]he application of any person under 18 years of age for a [driver’s] license shall be signed and verified before a person duly authorized to administer oaths by either of the applicant’s parents; or if neither parent has custody, then by the person or guardian having such custody or by the applicant’s employer. . . .
“ (2) Any negligence or wilful misconduct of a person under the age of 18 years when operating a motor vehicle upon the highways is imputed to the parents where both have custody and either parent signed as sponsor, otherwise, it is imputed to the adult sponsor who signed the application for such person’s license. The parents or the adult sponsor is jointly and severally liable with such operator for any damages caused by such negligent or wilful misconduct.”
*394The facts are undisputed. On June 29, 1979, an automobile driven by Lon Fesko, a minor, collided with an automobile driven by Elma Ynocencio. Mrs. Ynocencio and her husband, plaintiffs, filed a personal injury action naming Lon Fesko, his father, Charles Fesko, and his stepmother, Sharon Fesko, as defendants.
Before trial the parties stipulated to a number of matters which relate to the issues on appeal. The parties agreed that the negligence causing the accident should be apportioned 90 percent to the minor driver and 10 percent to the plaintiff driver. They also agreed as to the dollar amount of special damages, while the jury determined plaintiffs’ damages for personal injury and loss of society and companionship. The total damages, which are now undisputed, are $6,200.11 and judgment was entered for that amount. The parties agree on appeal that the circuit court erred in not reducing the total damages in accordance with the stipulation that apportioned 10 percent negligence to the plaintiff driver. We modify the judgment accordingly. Sec. 895.045, Stats. 1981-82.
The parties also stipulated to a number of facts which relate to the issue of the liability of the minor’s father and stepmother under sec. 343.15. The following stipulated facts are the basis for the parties’ dispute on appeal:
(1) Lon Fesko was a minor, sixteen years of age at the time of the accident;
(2) Sharon Fesko, Charles Fesko’s wife, signed as sponsor on Lon Fesko’s application for a driver’s license and “indicated in executing the application she was the mother of Lon Fesko”; this license was in effect at the time of the accident;
(3) Both Sharon Fesko and Charles Fesko had “custody of the minor Lon Fesko at the time of the accident and indeed Lon had been living with them for a period *395of ten years;” Sharon Fesko “considered herself to be, and was called by the family in general, Lon’s mother,” and for ten years before the accident she “took on the normal duties of a mother;”
(4) Sharon Fesko is not the natural mother of Lon Fesko, and although she signed Lon Fesko’s application for a driver’s license “indicating she was the mother of Lon Fesko, there was no intent to attempt anything of a fraudulent nature
(5) Sharon Fesko signed Lon Fesko’s application for a driver’s license “for the purpose of satisfying the requirement that an adult sponsor the license in accordance with statutory law.”
The whereabouts of Lon Fesko’s natural mother during the ten-year period are not in the record.
Plaintiffs argue that Sharon Fesko is, under the facts stipulated in this case, a parent sponsor within the meaning of sec. 343.15(1) and is liable under sec. 343.15(2) ; that Charles Fesko is liable because sec. 343.15(2) imputes the minor’s negligence to both parents when both parents have custody and either parent signs the application for a driver’s license as sponsor; and that Sharon Fesko should be precluded from denying liability under sec. 343.15(2) since she voluntarily signed Lon Fesko’s application as a sponsor.
Sharon Fesko contends that liability cannot be imputed to her under sec. 343.15(2), because she is not qualified under sec. 343.15(1) to sign as a sponsor. She is not qualified to sign as a sponsor under sec. 343.15(1), she says, because she is not Lon’s biological or adoptive mother. She argues that since she cannot lawfully be a sponsor under sec. 343.15 (1), liability can not be imputed to her under sec. 343.15(2). Charles Fesko contends that he is not liable under sec. 343.15(2), because he did not sign the minor’s application for a driver’s license and liability can not be imputed to him from the fact that his *396wife, Sharon Fesko, signed as a sponsor since she is not qualified to be a sponsor. Charles and Sharon Fesko thus contend that the entire judgment should be against Lon Fesko, the minor.
This court must determine the meaning of the word “parent” as used in sec. 343.15(1) in order to determine whether the statute applies to the fact situation before the court. The interpretation of a statute and the determination of its applicability to a stipulated fact situation are questions of law which this court ordinarily can decide without giving deference to the decision of the trial court. Wassenaar v. Panos, 111 Wis. 2d 518, 525, 331 N.W.2d 357 (1983).
The legislature has not, for purposes of the motor vehicle code, defined the word “parent.” We know that a word is a symbol and may have several referents. “A word is not a crystal, transparent and unchanged, it is the skin of a living thought and may vary greatly in color and content according to the circumstances and the time in which it is used.” Towne v. Eisner, 245 US 418, 425 (1917). The word “parent” can be used to denote consanguinity rather than affinity. Thus the word “parent” can be used to refer to the biological mother or biological father only. Parent can also refer to an adoptive mother and father. Sec. 48.02(13), Stats. 1981-82. The word “parent” is also frequently used in everyday conversation more broadly to include a stepmother or stepfather, who is in de facto charge of the child concerned and has established what one might call a parental relation with the child.
In this case it is evident that Sharon Fesko comes within the word “parent” as that word is popularly used to include a stepmother. At the time of the accident Lon Fesko had lived with his stepmother and his father for more than ten years. The parties agreed that the step*397mother had “custody” of the minor, along with the father. The record does not explain whether the word “custody” as used by the parties means “legal custody,” that is, whether the stepmother had custody of Lon Fesko pursuant to a court order, or means “physical custody,” that is, whether the stepmother was in fact responsible for the protection, care, and maintenance of the minor. The parties also stipulated that the stepmother accepted the duties and responsibilities of a parent and that both the stepmother and the minor recognized the existence of the parent-child relationship. Thus it is clear from the stipulation that Sharon Fesko and Lon Fesko established what would be referred to in ordinary conversation as a mother-son relationship. Only under the most narrow definition or construction of the word “parent” would Sharon Fesko’s relationship to this minor not be characterized as that of parent and child.
The issue before us is one of statutory interpretation. More specifically, we must determine whether the legislature intended to use the word “parent” in sec. 343.15 in the popular sense or in a more limited sense to refer only to biological or adoptive parents.
This court has recognized that the legislature, in referring to family relationships, has included persons who are not related by blood. Jones v. Mangan, 151 Wis. 215, 138 N.W. 618 (1912), concerned a statute relating to firemen’s relief associations. The statute limited an insured’s power to name beneficiaries to members of the insured’s family. The rules of the firemen’s relief association further limited the lawful beneficiaries to the widow, child, mother or father, sister or brother, or niece or nephew of the insured. In Jones, the insured had named his stepmother as beneficiary, characterizing her as his mother. The insured was very young when his biological mother died, and from the age of five he lived with his father and his stepmother. The stepmother was the “housewife *398in charge of the home.” Id. at 219. After the insured’s father died, the stepmother remarried and the insured continued to reside with the stepmother and was a member of her household. The association argued that “family” as used in the statute and “mother” as used in the association rules meant biological mother, but the court concluded that this construction was too narrow in view of the purpose of the statutes establishing firemen’s relief associations and of the association’s rules, namely, the relief of the family of the deceased member. On the basis of the facts and the purpose of the statute and rule the court concluded that the stepmother qualified as a “mother.”
In this case, as in Jones, where the legislature’s intention as to the meaning of a word is uncertain, the answer to the question of legislative intent may be found in considering the problems that the legislature addressed in the statute and the ends the legislature sought to achieve. This court’s “cardinal rule in interpreting statutes is that the purpose of the whole act is to be sought and is favored over a construction that will defeat the manifest object of the act.” Student Assoc. of UW-M v. Baum, 74 Wis. 2d 283, 294-95, 246 N.W.2d 622 (1976). See Hurst, The Legislative Branch and the Supreme Court, 5 Ark. L. Rev. 487, 499 (1983).
Sec. 343.15 addresses the problems of regulating the minor’s ability to obtain a driver’s license and of imposing liability for a minor’s negligent or wilful misconduct in the operation of a motor vehicle on persons other than the minor in order to protect the public. The legislature limited the minor’s ability to obtain a driver’s license by requiring a sponsor to sign the application. The legislature selected as sponsors persons who are likely to have personal knowledge of the minor’s characteristics and to *399have an opportunity to exercise some degree of control over the minor’s driving. Sec. 343.15(1), Stats. 1977. The legislature apparently intended the sponsor’s control over the minor to afford protection to other users of the road by decreasing the likelihood of the minor’s negligent or wilful misconduct in the operation of the motor vehicle. See Bispham v. Mahoney, 37 Del 285, 183 A 315 (1936) ; Bilsten v. Porter, 33 Colo. App. 208, 516 P.2d 656 (1973). Furthermore, in enacting sec. 343.15(2), which imposes liability on the sponsor for the minor’s negligence or wilful misconduct, the legislature was trying to provide the injured person with a potential source of payment for damages in addition to the minor or other persons liable under common law. Swanigan v. State Farm Ins. Co., 99 Wis. 2d 179, 299 N.W.2d 234 (1980). In summary, the legislative purpose in this statute was to afford users of the road protection from minor drivers by requiring a sponsor for a minor to get a driver’s license, by limiting sponsors to those persons who would be likely to be able to exercise control over the minor’s driving, and by imposing financial responsibility on the sponsor for the minor’s negligence or wilful misconduct in the operation of a motor vehicle.
Considering the popular usage of the word “parent,” our holding in Jones, and the legislative objectives underlying sec. 343.15, we can draw no other conclusion on the basis of the stipulated facts than that Sharon Fesko who signed the minor’s application for a driver’s license as a sponsor is a parent under sec. 343.15(1) and is liable under sec. 343.15(2). If the word “parent” in sec. 343.15 were interpreted so narrowly that Sharon Fesko was excluded, the objectives sought to be accomplished by the statute would be defeated, and we would reach an absurd result.
*400We are not asked in this case to interpret “parent” as used in sec. 343.15 to include all stepparents or to include all persons who have “an affinity” with the minor or are in de facto charge of the minor, and we do not do so. Our decision is based on the facts stipulated in this case. The application form for the driver’s license is not part of the record, and we cannot decide, and we do not decide, whether language in that form provides grounds for creating liability on every person who signs as sponsor. We hold only that under the facts stipulated, Sharon Fesko who signed as a sponsor is a parent for purposes of liability under sec. 343.15(1) and is liable under sec. 343.15(2). Inasmuch as both Charles and Sharon Fesko have custody over the minor and Sharon Fesko is a parent who signed as sponsor, Charles Fesko is also liable under sec. 343.15 (2).
For the reasons set forth, we modify the judgment by reducing the damages awarded in accordance with the parties’ stipulation apportioning negligence and as modified affirm the judgment of the circuit court decreeing Sharon Fesko, Charles Fesko, and Lon Fesko jointly and severally liable.
By the Court. — Judgment modified, and as modified affirmed.

=== CASE 9740532 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:54.449978+00 ===

STEINMETZ, J.
(dissenting). I dissent from the result and the reasoning in this case.
There is no suggestion in this record that the word “custody” in the stipulation means legal custody. The plaintiffs’ attorney at argument agreed that it was his understanding that “custody” meant physical custody only and not legal custody. Even if Sharon Fesko had legal custody by the terms of sec. 343.15(1), Stats. 1977, the father, Charles, would still be the only person available to sign for the license. The statute states that only *401“if neither parent has custody” may another person having custody sign.
Sec. 343.15(1) and (2), Stats. 1977 is in derogation of the common law. But for the section of that statute, parents would not be liable for their minors’ negligent driving unless facts showed agency circumstances.
Through defining “parent” in sec. 343.15(1), Stats. 1977 as the majority has, other statutes are also affected and the original intent of the legislature will have been expanded judicially. Under the reasoning of the majority, the relationship of Sharon to Lon Fesko makes her a “parent” of Lon for purposes of the driver’s license statute. It is equally reasonable that this relationship makes her a “parent” for purposes of sec. 48.275(1) and (2), Stats., “Parents’ contribution to cost of court and legal services.”
The legislature in sec. 343.15(1), Stats. 1977 allowed more than parents to sign for a minor’s driver’s license. Included in the category of persons allowed to sign are:
(1) Either parent;
(2) or if neither parent has custody, then by
(3) the person or guardian having such custody; or
(4) by the applicant’s foster parent; or
(5) by the applicant’s employer.
Since Sharon Fesko does not qualify in any of the categories, the majority writes into the statute a new category — a stepmother with a particular relationship to the minor. The rule can vary on a case basis. If the legislature had so intended, it could have allowed a person having physical custody, but not legal custody, of a minor to sign. The legislature over the years of the statute’s existence has carefully added categories to the statute of persons who could sign, the latest being in 1980 when a minor’s foster parent was added. The court invades the *402province of the legislature by adding Lon Fesko’s stepmother, Sharon.
Making the giant step in reasoning as it did left only a short step to hold Lon’s father, Charles J. Fesko, liable under subsec. (2) of sec. 343.15, Stats. 1977. It is interesting to note that there is no reason in this record why the father did not sign for Lon’s license in the first place.
People should not be able to determine whether they qualify under a statute to act, but rather should fit within categories established by the legislature. A stepmother, such as Sharon, does not qualify as a parent, legal guardian, or foster parent and, therefore, her signing for Lon’s license had no legal effect.
I would reverse the judgment of the circuit court and let the legislature determine whether more identities should be added to the statute as potential driver’s license sponsors.

=== CASE 9740535 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:56.757981+00 ===

OPINION
CRONE, Judge.
Case Summary
American Family Insurance Company (“American Family”), as subrogee of its insured, Alice Griepenstroh, appeals the trial court’s grant of a motion for change of venue filed by Ford Motor Company (“Ford”). We reverse and remand.
Issue
The dispositive issue is whether the trial court abused its discretion in granting Ford’s motion for change of venue.
*321Facts and Procedural History
The relevant facts are undisputed. Griepenstroh is a resident of Spencer County. On April 15, 2003, Griepenstroh was driving her 2001 Ford Explorer in Spencer County when it caught fire, resulting in damage to the vehicle. Griepen-stroh was reimbursed for the damage under her automobile insurance policy with American Family, a company authorized to do business in Indiana. The American Family office that handled Griepenstroh’s claim is located in Marion County. On March 14, 2005, as Griepenstroh’s subro-gee, American Family filed a complaint for damages against Ford in Marion Superior Court based on Ford’s failure to reimburse Griepenstroh or American Family and on other alleged breaches of “express or implied warranties applicable to the sale of the vehicle.” Appellant’s App. at 7.
On April 6, 2005, Ford filed a motion for change of venue pursuant to Indiana Trial Rules 12(B)(3) and 75(A).1 In its motion, Ford asserted that preferred venue lies in Spencer County because the vehicle fire occurred in Spencer County, Griepenstroh is a resident of Spencer County, and Ford, the sole defendant, is a Delaware corporation with no offices in Indiana. American Family filed a response, and Ford filed a reply. On June 27, 2005, after a hearing, the trial court issued an order granting Ford’s motion and transferring the case to Spencer County as the county of preferred venue. This appeal ensued.
Discussion and Decision
American Family asserts that the trial court improperly granted Ford’s motion for change of venue. Our standard of review is well settled:
We review a trial court’s order on a motion to change venue for an abuse of discretion. An abuse of discretion occurs when the trial court’s decision is clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and circumstances before the court, or when the trial court has misinterpreted the law.
Lake Holiday Conservancy v. Davison, 808 N.E.2d 119, 121 (Ind.Ct.App.2004) (citation and quotation marks omitted).
“Indiana Trial Rule 75 exclusively governs venue requirements in Indiana.” Id. Pursuant to Trial Rule 75(A), a case may be tried in any county in Indiana. Bostic v. House of James, Inc., 784 N.E.2d 509, 511 (Ind.Ct.App.2003), trans. denied. Trial Rule 75(A) states in pertinent part:
Any case may be venued, commenced, and decided in any court in any county, except, that upon the filing of a pleading or a motion to dismiss allowed by Rule 12(B)(3), the court, from allegations of the complaint or after hearing evidence thereon or considering affidavits or documentary evidence filed with the motion or in opposition to it, shall order the case transferred to a county or court selected by the party first properly filing such motion or pleading if the court determines that the county or court where the action was filed does not meet preferred venue requirements or is not authorized to decide the case and that the court or county selected has preferred venue and is authorized to decide the case.
Trial Rule 75(A) contains ten subsections listing certain criteria under which preferred venue lies. The rule creates no preference among these subsections. See Bostic, 784 N.E.2d at 511. “[I]f the initial *322court is not a preferred venue, the action must be transferred to a preferred venue under the criteria listed in the rule.” Id. “[I]f the suit is initially filed in a county of preferred venue, a transfer of venue will not be granted.” Id.
American Family asserts that Marion County is a preferred venue under Trial Rule 75(A)(10), which states that preferred venue lies in
the county where either one or' more individual plaintiffs reside, the principal office of any plaintiff organization or governmental organization is located, or the office of any such plaintiff organization or governmental organization to which the claim relates or out of which the claim arose is located, if the case is not subject to the requirements of subsections (1) through (9) of this subdivision or if all the defendants are nonresident individuals or nonresident organizations without a principal office in the state.
(Emphases added.) American Family notes that Griepenstroh’s claim was administered at its Marion County office and that Ford, the sole defendant, is a nonresident organization without a principal office in the state. Thus, American Family argues, preferred venue lies in Marion County, and the trial court abused its discretion in transferring the case to Spencer County-
Ford responds that Trial Rule 75(A)(10) applies if — and only if — preferred venue cannot be established under subsections (1) through (9). Ford cites a string of cases, including two from our supreme court, that arguably support this proposition. See, e.g., RJR Nabisco Holdings v. Dunn, 657 N.E.2d 1220, 1222 (Ind.1995)2 (“[I]f the initial county of filing is not a county of “preferred venue,” as defined in the rule, the action may be transferred to a county of preferred venue under the criteria listed in Trial Rule 75(A)(l)-(9), and if there is no county of preferred venue under Trial Rule 75(A)(l)-(9), then preferred venue may be established under Trial Rule 75(A)(10).”); Meridian Mut. Ins. Co. v. Harter, 671 N.E.2d 861, 863 n. 3 (Ind.1996) (“[Ind. Trial Rule 75(A)(10) ], by its own terms, is applicable only when [Ind. Trial Rule 75(A)(l)-(9) ] do not provide preferred venue”); Shelton v. Wick, 715 N.E.2d 890, 893 (Ind.Ct.App.1999) (“Counties which meet the requirements of subsections (1) through (9) are equally preferred, but a county which meets the requirement of subsection (10) is preferred only when there is no county of preferred venue pursuant to subsections (1) through (9).”), trans. denied (2000); Western Sales & Serv., Inc. v. Ford Motor Co., 576 N.E.2d 631, 632-33 (Ind.Ct.App.1991) (“[Defendant] Ford’s only principal office in Indiana is located in Marion County, Indiana.3 Therefore, pursuant to T.R. 75(A)(4) preferred venue lies in Marion County. Ind. Trial Rule 75(A)(10), which determines preferred venue in the event the provisions of T.R. 75(A)(l)-(9) do not apply, is inapplicable.”); Ford Motor Co. v. Paoli Aluminum Fabricating Co., 565 N.E.2d 767, 768 (Ind.Ct.App.1990) (stating that Ind. Trial Rule 75(A)(10) “applies only when the other nine subsections do not.”) (citation omitted); Parkison v. TLC Lines, Inc., 506 N.E.2d 1105, 1107 (Ind.Ct.App.1987) (“[I]t is clear that though the provisions of subsections (A)(1) to (A)(9) are equally preferred, subsection (A)(10) is *323only secondarily preferred. By its own terms, the tenth subsection applies only when the other nine do not.”); Grove v. Thomas, 446 N.E.2d 641, 642 n. 1 (Ind.Ct.App.1983) (“If preferred venue cannot be established in subdivisions (1) through (9) of Trial Rule 75(A), the plaintiff may commence suit in the county in which he resides pursuant to Trial Rule 75(A)(10). However, subdivision (10) is not applicable where the other subdivisions fix venue.”).4 Ford contends that preferred venue lies in Spencer County pursuant to subsections (2) and (3) of Trial Rule 75(A)5 and therefore subsection (10) does not apply.
We disagree for two reasons. First, we observe that none of the cases cited above (and neither of the similar cases we found in our research6) specifically involved only defendants who were nonresident individuals or nonresident organizations without a principal office in the state. As such, their statements regarding the applicability of Trial Rule 75(A)(10) can only be considered dicta on this point. Second, we must adhere to the well-settled principle that “[i]f the language of a rule is clear and unambiguous, it is not subject to judicial interpretation.” Carter-McMahon v. McMahon, 815 N.E.2d 170, 175 (Ind.Ct. App.2004). Trial Rule 75(A)(10) clearly and unambiguously states that preferred venue lies in the county where the plaintiff organization’s office “to which the claim relates or out of which the claim arose is located” under either of two conditions: (1) “if the case is not subject to the requirements of subsections (1) through (9)”; or (2) “if all the defendants are nonresident individuals or nonresident organizations without a principal office in the state.” In this case, preferred venue lies in Marion County because the second condition has been met. Ford’s interpretation of Trial Rule 75(A)(10) disregards the plain language of the rule.7
*324Ford contends that even if we disagree with its interpretation of the rule, preferred venue cannot lie in Marion County because American Family filed suit as the subrogee of Griepenstroh, a resident of Spencer County. Ford notes that a subrogee is “ ‘[o]ne who is substituted for another in having a right, duty, or claim. An insurance company frequently becomes a subrogee after paying a policy claim Appellee’s Br. at 9 (quoting Martinez v. Belmonte, 765 N.E.2d 180, 185 n. 6 (Ind.Ct.App.2002)) (quoting Black’s Law DICTIONARY 1441 (7th ed.1999)) (alteration in Martinez). A subrogor, on the other hand, is “ ‘[o]ne who allows another to be substituted for oneself as creditor, with a transfer of rights and duties.’ ” Id. (quoting Black’s Law DictionaRY at 1441) (alteration in Martinez). The subrogee insurer “ ‘stands in the same position as the subro-gor, for one cannot acquire by subrogation what another, whose rights he claims, did not have.’ ” Erie Ins. Co. v. George, 681 N.E.2d 183, 186 (Ind.1997) (citation omitted). Ford asserts that Griepenstroh’s county of preferred venue is Spencer County and therefore “[a]ny subrogee of Griepenstroh’s claim does not, and cannot, acquire rights to bring the action in a different county of preferred venue.” Ap-pellee’s Br. at 9.8
Initially, we observe that Ford cites no authority regarding the existence of a “right” to preferred venue. “A party waives any issue for which it fails to develop a cogent argument or support with adequate citation to authority.” Steiner v. Bank One Indiana, N.A., 805 N.E.2d 421, 429 n. 6 (Ind.Ct.App.2004). Instead, Ford raises the specter of subrogees “forum shopping” and soliciting claims against out-of-state defendants “for the sole purpose of bringing the action in [a] ‘favorable’ forum.” Appellee’s Br. at 9, 10. Ford also laments that
American would have this action proceed in Marion County — where there is no connection with the events giving rise to the action, nor the witnesses. In fact, American Family — -the insurer arguably discharged with the duty of protecting its own insured and key witness in this matter — is wholly discounting the hardship a Marion County action will have on the insured (Griepenstroh) for attendances at depositions, trial, etc.
American Family also ignored the hardship on other potential occurrence witnesses, including any eye-witnesses, firefighters, law enforcement personnel, and towing company employees — all of whom are located in Spencer County. Having the action proceed in Marion County simply because the insurance company, who is bringing an action as a subrogee of its insured, has an office in Marion County is an inconvenient result, contravening what American Family admits is the “spirit” of Rule 75 — convenience.
Id. at 10.
We find these policy arguments unpersuasive. Trial Rule 75(A) allows both plaintiffs and defendants to seek favorable forums within certain limits, and American Family undoubtedly investigated Griepenstroh’s insurance claim in Spencer County before reimbursing her and filing suit against Ford in Marion County. More to the point, Trial Rule 75(A) draws *325no distinction between plaintiffs and subro-gee-plaintiffs, and we find no basis for drawing a distinction here. See Carter-McMahon, 815 N.E.2d at 175 (“[I]n construing a rule, it is just as important to recognize what it does not say as it is to recognize what it does say.”).
In summary, we conclude that Marion County is a preferred venue pursuant to Trial Rule 75(A)(10) and that the trial court abused its discretion in granting Ford’s motion for change of venue. We therefore reverse and remand for further proceedings.
Reversed and remanded.
FRIEDLANDER, J., concurs.
MAY, J., concurs with opinion.
. Indiana Trial Rule 12(B)(3) states that a motion may be made for "[i]ncorrect venue under Trial Rule 75, or any statutory provision. The disposition of this motion shall be consistent with Trial Rule 75.”
. American Family cites to this Court's opinion in RJR Nabisco Holdings, which was vacated upon our supreme court’s grant of transfer. See RJR Nabisco Holdings v. Dunn, 642 N.E.2d 538 (Ind.Ct.App.1994), trans. granted (1995).
. Ford states that it no longer has any offices in Indiana. Appellee's Br. at 4 n. 1.
. Contrary to Ford’s assertion, Lake Holiday Conservancy, 808 N.E.2d 119, does not support its argument. See id. at 124 ("Our construction of Rule 75(A)(5) does not render Rule 75(A)(10) superfluous. Rule 75(A)(5) only provides for venue in an individual plaintiff's county of residence if a governmental entity is sued. Rule 75(A)(10) provides for such venue in cases where non-resident defendants are sued or any of the other provisions of subsections (1) through (9), such as those relating to the location of an accident or the location of-property, do not apply.”) (emphasis added).
. Those subsections state that preferred venue lies in
(2) the county where the land or some part thereof is located or the chattels or some part thereof are regularly located or kept, if the complaint includes a claim for injuries thereto or relating to such land or such chattels, including without limitation claims for recovery of possession or for injuries, to establish use or control, to quiet title or determine any interest, to avoid or set aside conveyances, to foreclose liens, to partition and to assert any matters for which, in rem relief is or would be proper; or
(3) the county where the accident or collision occurred, if the complaint includes a claim for injuries relating to the operation of a motor vehicle or a vehicle on railroad, street or interurban tracks[.]
Ind. Trial Rule 75(A).
. See Pratt v. Pierce, 713 N.E.2d 312, 315 (Ind.Ct.App.1999) ("If no county of preferred venue is established under T.R. 75(A)(l)-(9), then preferred venue may be established under Trial Rule 75(A)(10).”); Humphrey v. Christopher, 692 N.E.2d 932, 935 (Ind.Ct.App.1998) (stating that Ind. Trial Rule 75(A)(10) “only allows preferred venue in the county where the plaintiff resides when preferred venue is not established under subsections (1) through (9).").
. Indeed, Ford's interpretation substantially changes the wording of the rule. See Appel-lee's Br. at 6 ("Subsection (10) only applies if: preferred venue does not exist under subsections (1) through (9); or if preferred venue does not exist under subsections (1) through (9) and all of the defendants are nonresident indi*324viduals or nonresident organizations without a principal office in the state.”) (emphasis added).
. Ford also asserts that "Griepenstroh could not have originally filed suit against Ford” in Marion County. Appellee’s Br. at 9. This is incorrect. See Ind. Trial Rule 75(A) ("Any case may be venued, commenced and decided in any court in any county ....").

=== CASE 9740536 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:56.763215+00 ===

MAY, Judge,
concurring.
Because our opinion reaches the only result our Trial Rules permit, I concur. Nevertheless, I write separately to note my concerns about the possible implications of this result and to suggest modification of Trial Rule 75(A)(10).
Subsection (A)(10) of Trial Rule 75 determines preferred venue because the defendant, Ford, is a “nonresident organization without a principal office in the state.” Under that subsection, preferred venue is in “the county where ... the principal office of any plaintiff organization ... is located, or the office of any such plaintiff organization ... to which the claim relates or out of which the claim arose is located .... ” T.R. 75(A)(10). Marion County is the preferred venue in this case because American Family’s Marion County Office handled Griepenstroh’s claim.
Ford notes Griepenstroh lives in Spencer County and complains Marion County is not the most convenient forum because the accident occurred in Spencer County. Presumably, much evidence and many witnesses will be located there. In light of these facts, I agree with Ford that, in the event this cause goes to trial and witnesses must be presented, Marion County is not the most convenient forum.
Ford next asserts Trial Rule 75(A)(10) would permit, and perhaps even encourage, forum shopping by companies who could maintain offices only in counties known to dispense large verdicts.9 I agree with Ford there is a possibility of forum shopping under the current language in this Rule, and I find this policy argument sufficiently persuasive to prompt my separate opinion.
Nevertheless, as Judge Crone notes, “Trial Rule 75(A) draws no distinction between plaintiffs and subrogee-plaintiffs.” Op. at 324-25. The Rule refers only to “individual plaintiffs” and “plaintiff organizations.” See T.R. 75(A).
Neither does Trial Rule 17(A), when read in conjunction with Indiana subrogation law, permit us to read such a distinction into the term “plaintiffs” in Trial Rule 75. Trial Rule 17(A) requires: “Every action shall be prosecuted in the name of the real party in interest.” In Risner v. *326Gibbons, 136 Ind.App. 45, 51, 197 N.E.2d 184, 187 (Ind.Ct.App.1964), we explained:
[T]he plaintiff must have some interest in the litigation. If he has had full settlement by his insurance company we think it is obvious that he has no interest in a claim and that he would not be the real party in interest. In such event his assignee or subrogee ought to be the party plaintiff, and if there is any doubt about the standing of the one who sub-rogates or assigns his entire interest to another, one standing in such position could be made a party defendant, thus to answer to his interests.
Accordingly, if an insurance company pays its insured’s full claim, the company becomes the “real party in interest” for purposes of any lawsuit filed against the tort-feasor. See Erie Ins. Co. v. George, 681 N.E.2d 183, 190 (Ind.1997) (“Indeed, where an insurer has paid an insured’s entire loss under an insurance policy and been assigned the right to pursue any and all causes of action, the insured can no longer sue in its own name.”).
One court has addressed whether venue is controlled by the location of the subro-gee-plaintiff insurance company or the subrogor-insured. The Kansas Supreme Court held:
Although a subrogee ... may be said, in the eyes of the law, to stand in the same shoes as the party for whom he is substituted and thus he succeeds to the rights which the subrogor had in the cause of action ..., we cannot say he is restricted to using the same forum for enforcing his rights as the subrogor ... may have been.
Appalachian Ins. Co. of Providence v. Betts, 213 Kan. 609, 518 P.2d 385, 388 (1974).
Despite my concerns about forum shopping, I am constrained by subrogation law and the language of Trial Rules 17 and 75 to concur. A modification of Trial Rule 75(A)(10) might be in order to address the problems Ford notes.
. Ford claims those companies could then "solicit claims” against out-of-state organizations that have no principal office in Indiana. (Appellee’s Br. at 9.) Because that situation did not occur here, I need not address this argument in detail. However, I note solicitation of claims might prohibit one from being considered the "real party in interest.” See Steury v. Northern Indiana Public Service Co., Inc., 510 N.E.2d 213, 214 (Ind.Ct.App.1987) (Party becomes a real party in interest by being entitled to be subrogated to the rights of another. "The doctrine of subrogation may be invoked in favor of persons who are legally obligated to pay for a loss caused by another’s tort. However, the person who pays the debt must not be a mere volunteer ....”) (internal citations omitted), reh’g denied with opinion 520 N.E.2d 1280 (Ind.Ct.App.1988).

=== CASE 2223942 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:10.783152+00 ===

114 Wis.2d 314 (1983)
STATE of Wisconsin, Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
Stephen SEREBIN, Defendant-Appellant.[]
No. 82-232-CR.
Court of Appeals of Wisconsin.
Submitted on briefs January 17, 1983.
Decided July 26, 1983.
*315 For the appellant the cause was submitted on the briefs of Robert E. Sutton of Milwaukee.
For the respondent the cause was submitted on the brief of Bronson C. La Follette, attorney general, and Kirbie Knutson, assistant attorney general.
Before Foley, P.J., Dean and Cane, JJ.
FOLEY, P.J.
Stephen Serebin, a nursing home administrator, was convicted of homicide by reckless conduct, party to a crime, secs. 940.06[1] and 939.05, Stats; *316 and twelve counts of neglect of nursing home residents,[2] party to a crime, secs. 940.29(7)[3] and 939.05, Stats.[4] Because the state failed to prove that Serebin's conduct caused a death or caused harm to any nursing home resident, we reverse the convictions and remand this matter to the trial court with directions to vacate the judgment and dismiss the complaint.
The basis for the reckless homicide charge was that one of the residents left the nursing home and died of exposure to cold. The basis for the twelve neglect charges was that residents lost weight or developed bedsores. The state claims that Serebin caused the death, bedsores, and weight loss by failing to provide sufficient staff and adequate diet.[5]
*317 To convict Serebin of any of the charged crimes, the state must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that a causal relationship existed between Serebin's conduct and the harm.[6]See State v. McClose, 95 Wis. 2d 49, 51-54, 289 N.W.2d 340, 341-42 (Ct. App. 1980); Wis JICrim 1160 (1962); Wis JICrim 1270 (1974).[7] Although a jury may draw reasonable inferences from the evidence, Serebin cannot be convicted on mere suspicion or conjecture. See State ex rel. Kanieski v. Gagnon, 54 Wis. 2d 108, 117, 194 N.W.2d 808, 813 (1972). Whether the evidence was sufficient to prove causation beyond a reasonable doubt is a question of law. See Seraphine v. Hardiman, 44 Wis. 2d 60, 65, 170 N.W.2d 739, 742 (1969). We independently review questions of law. First National Leasing Corp. v. City of Madison, 81 Wis. 2d 205, 208, 260 N.W.2d 251, 253 (1977).
Serebin was the administrator of the Glendale Convalescent Center when Bruno Dreyer, a resident, left the facility and died of exposure. He died between midnight and 3 a.m., when the temperature was between 8° and 15°F. His body was found outside the facility between 8 a.m. and 8:30 a.m., after the morning shift discovered that he was missing.
When Dreyer left the facility, there were only two aides and one nurse on duty for the 200 residents on three floors. An aide put Dreyer to bed at about midnight. She looked into the room from the corridor sometime later, and it appeared to her that Dreyer was in his bed. On the *318 basis of information the aides gave her, a nurse made an entry on Dreyer's chart that the side rails on his bed were up, he was checked every two hours, there were no problems, and he slept well.
The jury could not reasonably infer from this evidence that Serebin's failure to provide sufficient staff, whatever number that may be, caused Dreyer's death. To meet its burden, the state had to prove at the very least that sufficient staff would have prevented Dreyer from leaving the facility unnoticed. The most favorable inference that can be drawn from the state's evidence is that a reasonable number of additional staff would have made it less probable that Dreyer could leave unnoticed. An unspecified degree of probability does not permit the inference of a fact beyond a reasonable doubt.
Also, even with efficient two-hour bed checks, Dreyer could have died of exposure before his absence was discovered. There is no indication of how quickly Dreyer died when exposed to the 8° to 15°F temperatures. For all the jury knew, Dreyer could have left the facility right after one bed check and died before the next bed check.
The state also did not prove a causal connection between the lack of staff and the bedsores and weight loss. There was undisputed testimony that there are many causes of bedsores and weight loss in elderly nursing home residents. Age, insufficiency of the venous or arterial systems, nutrition, albumin, the ability of certain body tissues to repair themselves, and chronic disability all influence the development of bedsores. Weight loss may result from metabolic problems despite normal food intake, and elderly people tend not to eat as well because of depression, a decrease in total number of taste buds, and denture problems. Because of the many possible medical *319 causes, the determination of the specific cause of bedsores or weight loss in an individual resident required special medical knowledge or experience, which we cannot presume the jury had. This required the state to prove by expert opinion testimony that the cause of each resident's bedsores and weight loss was Serebin's neglect in failing to hire sufficient staff or provide an adequate diet. See Kelly v. Hartford Casualty Insurance Co., 86 Wis. 2d 129, 134-35, 271 N.W.2d 676, 679 (1978).
The expert testimony, even considered in the light most favorable to the convictions, left the question of cause to speculation. None of the experts examined any of the twelve residents with the bedsores or weight loss. No expert gave an opinion on a specific cause for a specific resident. No expert gave an opinion that any bedsore or weight loss was due to Serebin's neglect. The closest the state came to proving any cause was its expert testimony that bedsores should be preventable with sufficient and adequate nursing skill and vigilance. The focus of this testimony is not limited to staff numbers, the state's theory of the case, and it therefore neither proves Serebin's neglect as the specific cause nor does it disprove all other reasonably possible causes.
Testimony that bedsores should be preventable with sufficient and adequate nursing skill and vigilance merely proves that bedsores are the result of someone's neglect. As the state's own expert indicated, the frequent presence of bedsores suggests the likelihood of faulty nursing techniques or administration or insufficient staff. This testimony offers three possible causes of the bedsores, and there is no basis in the record for the jury to choose one cause rather than another. Even if a reasonable juror could reject the testimony of Serebin's medical doctor and believe the state's nurse experts that bedsores should not occur in the absence of someone's neglect, the evidence was not sufficient to permit the jury to infer *320 that the bedsores were caused by Serebin's neglect in failing to hire sufficient staff.[8]
By the Court.Judgment reversed and cause remanded with directions.
NOTES
[]  Petition to review granted.
[1]  Section 940.06, Stats., provides:
Homicide by reckless conduct. (1) Whoever causes the death of another human being by reckless conduct is guilty of a Class C felony.
(2) Reckless conduct consists of an act which creates a situation of unreasonable risk and high probability of death or great bodily harm to another and which demonstrates a conscious disregard for the safety of another and a willingness to take known chances of perpetrating an injury. It is intended that this definition embraces all of the elements of what was heretofore known as gross negligence in the criminal law of Wisconsin.
[2]  Although the information charged Serebin with knowingly permitting employees of a nursing home to neglect residents, the jury convicted him of neglect of nursing home residents.
[3]  940.29 (7), Stats. (1975), provided:
Abuse of inmates of institutions. Any person in charge of or employed in any of the following institutions who abuses, neglects or ill-treats any person confined in or an inmate of any such institution or who knowingly permits another person to do so may be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than one year in county jail or both:
. . . .
(7) A nursing home as defined in s. 50.02.
Section 940.29(7) has been changed and now provides:
Abuse of residents of facilities. Any person in charge of or employed in any of the following facilities who abuses, neglects or ill-treats any person confined in or a resident of any such facility or who knowingly permits another person to do so is guilty of a Class E felony:
....
(7) A nursing home as defined in s. 50.01(3).
[4]  The supreme court denied Serebin's petition to bypass the court of appeals and refused our certification of this appeal.
[5]  We assume, for purposes of this opinion, that Serebin failed to provide sufficient staff and adequate diet.
[6]  Criminal liability for all true crimes punishable by imprisonment rather than by small fines should be based exclusively on causation. See Sayre, Criminal Responsibility for the Acts of Another, 43 Harv. L. Rev. 689, 719 (1930).
[7]  The state did not challenge the jury instruction that "neglect" includes an act or failure to act that causes suffering, misery, or physical harm to a person.
[8]  Because we are reversing the judgments, we do not decide the other issues raised by Serebin.

=== CASE 2223944 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:10.818951+00 ===

848 N.E.2d 679 (2006)
Stephen Clark WIELAND, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee.
No. 49A02-0504-PC-357.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
June 5, 2006.
Rehearing Denied July 17, 2006.
Transfer Denied September 7, 2006.
*680 Stephen C. Wieland, Michigan City, IN, pro se.
Steve Carter, Attorney General of Indiana, Ellen H. Meilaender, Deputy Attorney General, Indianapolis, IN, Attorneys for Appellee.
OPINION
SULLIVAN, Judge.
Appellant, Stephen Wieland, challenges the denial of his petition for post-conviction relief. Upon appeal, Wieland presents one issue for our review: whether his appellate counsel was ineffective for failing to amend his brief on direct appeal in order to challenge his sentence in light of Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466, 120 S.Ct. 2348, 147 L.Ed.2d 435 (2000).
We affirm.
On February 10, 1998, Wieland was charged with Count I, murder; Count II, felony murder; Count III, robbery as a Class A felony; Count IV, felony murder; Count V, attempted robbery as a Class A felony; Count VI, conspiracy to commit robbery as a Class A felony; and Counts VII and VIII, confinement as Class B felonies. Wieland waived his right to a jury trial on September 14, 1998, and a bench trial was held on March 25, 1999. On May 11, 1999, the trial court acquitted Wieland on Count I, but found him guilty of the remaining Counts.
On July 2, 1999, the trial court sentenced Wieland to fifty-five years on Count II, thirty years on Count III, fifty-five years on Count IV, thirty years on Count V, thirty years on Count VI, and ten years each on Counts VII and VIII.[1] The court ordered the sentence on Count IV be "merged" with the sentence on Count II and that Counts VI and VII be served consecutively to each other and consecutively to Count II[2] for a total aggregate sentence of ninety-five years. Furthermore, based upon the finding that Wieland was on bond for another crime when he committed the current offenses, the trial court ordered that the sentence imposed in this cause run consecutively to a forty-year sentence imposed in a different cause.[3]
Upon direct appeal, the Indiana Supreme Court vacated Wieland's convictions on Count III, robbery, and Count VII, confinement, and held that the trial court's merging of Count IV with Count II operated to vacate the conviction on Count IV, felony murder. Wieland v. State, 736 N.E.2d 1198, 1206 (Ind.2000). The Court also reduced Wieland's convictions for Count V, attempted robbery, and Count *681 VI, conspiracy to commit robbery, to Class B felonies and imposed the presumptive sentence of ten years on each. Id. On December 6, 2000, in accordance with the Supreme Court's instructions, the trial court vacated Wieland's convictions on Counts III, IV, and VII and re-sentenced Wieland to ten years on each of Counts V and VI.
On April 23, 2001, Wieland filed a pro se petition for post-conviction relief. On November 12, 2004, Wieland filed an amended petition for post-conviction relief. The post-conviction court held a hearing on Wieland's petition on January 12, 2005. On March 2, 2005, the post-conviction court entered written findings of fact and conclusions of law denying Wieland relief.
Upon appeal, Wieland argues that the post-conviction court erred in concluding that his appellate counsel was not ineffective for failing to amend his brief upon direct appeal in order to challenge his sentence in light of the United States Supreme Court's decision in Apprendi. Defendants who have exhausted the direct appeal process may challenge the correctness of their convictions and sentence by filing a post-conviction petition. Ind. Post-Conviction Rule 1(1). Post-conviction proceedings, however, do not afford a petitioner with a super-appeal. Timberlake v. State, 753 N.E.2d 591, 597 (Ind. 2001), cert. denied, 537 U.S. 839, 123 S.Ct. 162, 154 L.Ed.2d 61 (2002). Rather, post-conviction proceedings provide defendants the opportunity to present issues which were not known at the time of the original trial or that were not available upon direct appeal. Ben-Yisrayl v. State, 738 N.E.2d 253, 258 (Ind.2000), cert. denied, 534 U.S. 1164, 122 S.Ct. 1178, 152 L.Ed.2d 120 (2002). The petitioner for post-conviction relief has the burden of establishing his grounds for relief by a preponderance of the evidence. Ind. Post-Conviction Rule 1(5); Timberlake, 753 N.E.2d at 597.
To prevail upon a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel, Wieland must present strong and convincing evidence to overcome the presumption that his counsel's representation was appropriate. See Allen v. State, 743 N.E.2d 1222, 1234 (Ind. Ct.App.2001), trans. denied. The two-pronged standard for evaluating ineffective assistance of counsel claims was enunciated in Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 104 S.Ct. 2052, 80 L.Ed.2d 674 (1984). A defendant claiming a violation of the right to effective assistance of counsel must first show that counsel's performance was deficient. Strickland, 466 U.S. at 687, 104 S.Ct. 2052; Timberlake, 753 N.E.2d at 603. This requires a defendant to show that counsel's representation fell below an objective standard of reasonableness and that the errors were so serious that they resulted in a denial of the right to counsel as guaranteed by the Sixth Amendment. Strickland, 466 U.S. at 687-88; Timberlake, 753 N.E.2d at 603. A defendant must also show that counsel's deficient performance prejudiced the defense. Strickland, 466 U.S. at 687, 104 S.Ct. 2052; Timberlake, 753 N.E.2d at 603. To establish prejudice, a defendant must show that there is a reasonable probability that, but for counsel's unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been different. Strickland, 466 U.S. at 694, 104 S.Ct. 2052; Timberlake, 753 N.E.2d at 603. The two prongs of the Strickland test are independent inquiries and thus, if the defendant makes an insufficient showing on one, there is no reason to address the other component of the analysis. Strickland, 466 U.S. at 697, 104 S.Ct. 2052; Timberlake, 753 N.E.2d at 603. This same standard is applicable to claims of ineffective assistance of appellate counsel. Stevens v. State, 770 N.E.2d 739, 760 (Ind. *682 2002), cert. denied, 540 U.S. 830, 124 S.Ct. 69, 157 L.Ed.2d 56 (2003).
Indiana courts recognize three basic categories of alleged appellate counsel ineffectiveness: (1) denying access to an appeal, (2) failing to present an issue upon appeal, and (3) failing to present issues completely and effectively. Bieghler v. State, 690 N.E.2d 188, 193-95 (Ind. 1997), cert. denied, 525 U.S. 1021, 119 S.Ct. 550, 142 L.Ed.2d 457 (1998). Ineffectiveness is rarely found when the issue is the failure to present a claim upon appeal. Id. at 193. This is so because the decision of what issue or issues to present upon appeal is one of the most important strategic decisions made by appellate counsel. Id. In analyzing such a claim, we first consider whether the unraised issues were significant and obvious upon the face of the record. Id. at 194. We will not find deficient performance in appellate counsel's choice of some issues over others when the choice was reasonable in light of the facts of the case and the precedent available to counsel at the time the decision was made. Id.; Stevens, 770 N.E.2d at 760.
On direct appeal, Wieland was represented by attorney Gregory Bowes. Attorney Bowes filed a brief on behalf of Wieland on November 29, 1999, in which he challenged the sufficiency of the evidence supporting Wieland's convictions and argued that several of the convictions were violative of double jeopardy principles. Wieland, 736 N.E.2d at 1201. Bowes filed a reply brief on March 2, 2000. On October 13, 2000, the Indiana Supreme Court issued an opinion in which it concluded that the evidence was sufficient to support Wieland's convictions, but that several of the convictions violated double jeopardy. Id. at 1206. On June 24, 2000, over three and one-half months after Attorney Bowes filed the reply brief and months before the Indiana Supreme Court issued its opinion on Wieland's appeal, the United States Supreme Court issued its decision in Apprendi, holding that "[o]ther than the fact of a prior conviction, any fact that increases the penalty for a crime beyond the prescribed statutory maximum must be submitted to a jury, and proved beyond a reasonable doubt." 530 U.S. at 490, 120 S.Ct. 2348. Wieland argues that Attorney Bowes representation was deficient because he did not seek to file an amended brief to present a claim based upon Apprendi.[4] We disagree.
Even after Apprendi was decided, there was no basis for Attorney Bowes to believe that Apprendi had any impact upon Wieland's jury trial waiver and sentence. Indeed, it was not until four years after Apprendi, when the United States Supreme Court decided Blakely v. Washington, 542 U.S. 296, 124 S.Ct. 2531, 159 L.Ed.2d 403 (2004), that there was any indication that the Apprendi decision had an impact on Indiana's sentencing scheme such that it would have affected Wieland's sentence. In Blakely, the United States Supreme Court, for purposes of applying *683 the Apprendi rule, set forth the unanticipated definition of "statutory maximum" as "the maximum sentence a judge may impose solely on the basis of the facts reflected in the jury verdict or admitted by the defendant." Blakely, 542 U.S. at 303, 124 S.Ct. 2531. In Smylie v. State, 823 N.E.2d 679, 687 (Ind.2005), cert. denied, ___ U.S. ___, 126 S.Ct. 545, 163 L.Ed.2d 459, our Supreme Court concluded that Blakely, and thus Apprendi, affect Indiana's sentencing scheme and acknowledged that "Blakely radically reshaped our understanding of a critical element of criminal procedure, and ran contrary to established precedent." In holding that a defendant may present a Blakely claim even when they did not object based upon Apprendi at their sentencing hearing, the Supreme Court rationalized:
"Because Blakely represents a new rule that was sufficiently novel that it would not have been generally predicted, much less envisioned to invalidate part of Indiana's sentencing structure, requiring a defendant or counsel to have prognosticated the outcome of Blakely or of today's decision would be unjust." Id. at 689.
Subsequent history makes clear that the Apprendi decision was not generally understood as giving defendants a right to a jury trial on sentencing factors. In other words, an Apprendi claim was not significant and obvious from the face of the record.
As our Supreme Court noted in Smylie, "`[a]n attorney is not required to anticipate changes in the law and object accordingly'" in order to be considered effective. 823 N.E.2d at 690 (quoting Fulmer v. State, 523 N.E.2d 754, 757-58 (Ind. 1988)). The Court in Smylie went on to state that "an appellate lawyer would not be ineffective for proceeding without adding a Blakely claim before Blakely was decided." Id. at 690. In light of existing precedent at the time of Wieland's direct appeal and the fact that Attorney Bowes should not be held to have predicted the Blakely and Smylie decisions regarding the impact of Apprendi, we conclude that Wieland has not demonstrated that Attorney Bowes performed deficiently in his representation of Wieland upon direct appeal. See Walker v. State, 843 N.E.2d 50, 59-60 (Ind.Ct.App.2006), reh'g denied. Moreover, even had Wieland's attorney been permitted to amend his brief to present a claim based upon Apprendi, Wieland has not shown that the outcome would have been different because, at that time, Apprendi had not been interpreted in a manner that would have invalidated Wieland's sentence. See Walker, 843 N.E.2d at 59. The trial court properly denied Wieland's petition for post-conviction relief.[5]
*684 The judgment of the post-conviction court is affirmed.
KIRSCH, C.J., and DARDEN, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  We note that for each offense the trial court imposed the presumptive sentence for the class of offense. See Ind.Code §§ 35-50-2-3 through 5 (Burns Code Ed. Repl.2004).
[2]  In support of imposition of consecutive sentences, the trial court identified aggravating factors, placing particular emphasis on Wieland's criminal history, which the court noted consisted of six prior convictions, four of which were felonies and included offenses such as aggravated battery and intimidation.
[3]  See Ind.Code § 35-50-1-2(d) (Burns Code Ed. Supp.2005).
[4]  Specifically, Wieland argues that the trial court violated his constitutional rights as set forth in Apprendi by ordering that the presumptive term for Count VI, conspiracy to commit robbery, run consecutive to the presumptive term imposed on Count II, felony murder, based upon the trial court's finding of aggravating factors. Wieland also argues that the Apprendi decision precluded the trial court from ordering that the aggregate sentence imposed in the present cause be served consecutively to the sentence imposed in a different cause based upon the court's finding, not a jury finding, that he was on bond at the time he committed the instant offenses. Although Wieland claims a violation of Apprendi, his argument is based upon an interpretation of Apprendi which is in turn based upon the United States Supreme Court's definition of "statutory maximum" as set out in Blakely v. Washington, 542 U.S. 296, 303, 124 S.Ct. 2531, 159 L.Ed.2d 403 (2004).
[5]  Assuming for the sake of argument that even if we were to impose the Blakely definition of "statutory maximum" into an Apprendi analysis at the time of Wieland's direct appeal, Wieland would not have been entitled to relief. In Smylie, our Supreme Court addressed the impact of Blakely on Indiana's sentencing scheme, first noting that Indiana's "fixed term" or "presumptive" sentence was equivalent to the "standard sentencing range" considered in Blakely. 823 N.E.2d at 683. Thus, in Indiana, the presumptive sentence was the "mandatory starting point for sentencing criminals based on the elements of proof necessary to prove a particular offense and the sentencing class in to which the offense falls." Id. The Court concluded that the judicial fact-finding which was necessary to impose a sentence above the presumptive fixed term is what the United States Supreme Court in Blakely deemed a violation of a defendant's Sixth Amendment right. Id. The Indiana Supreme Court thus upheld the presumptive fixed term, but modified Indiana's sentencing system such that facts in aggravation are required to be found by a jury. Id. at 685-86. The Court further held that Blakely does not invalidate Indiana's arrangement for consecutive sentences so long as the trial court does not exceed the combined statutory maximums. Id. at 686.
Here, the trial court sentenced Wieland to the presumptive term for each class of offense for which he was convicted. The trial court relied upon aggravating factors only as justification for imposing consecutive sentences. Given that the Apprendi/Blakely rule is not applicable to presumptive sentences or imposition of consecutive terms, Wieland's constitutional rights as set out in Apprendi/Blakely were not violated.

=== CASE 9740537 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:59.658881+00 ===

KELLEY, Justice.
Defendant was charged with assault in the second degree, Minn.Stat. § 609.222 (1982) (assault with a dangerous weapon), for beating his 6-year-old stepson with a board. After entry of a plea of guilty, the defendant was sentenced by the judge to an executed term of 21 months in prison. Following the sentencing, defendant retained different counsel and moved to withdraw his guilty plea alleging (a) his original at*250torney had promised him he would be placed on probation if he pleaded guilty, and (b) he had not understood that imprisonment was a reasonable possibility. The trial judge denied the motion. On appeal, petitioner urges he should be permitted to withdraw his plea because (a) the factual basis made at the time the plea was entered was inadequate to establish that the board, as used, was a dangerous weapon or that he inflicted all of the victim’s injuries, and (b) his original attorney had not represented him effectively and defendant believed the trial judge thought he had no choice but to place defendant on probation. Alternatively, defendant seeks a remand for resentenc-ing because the trial judge was unaware that, on his own motion, he could sentence defendant without regard to the mandatory minimum law if he found that substantial mitigating factors existed. We affirm.
The child beating out of which this prosecution arose occurred when the defendant, a large man weighing approximately 300 pounds, while enraged with the child’s behavior, beat his 6-year-old stepson for up to 10 minutes with a board 3 feet long, 2 inches wide and ¾ of an inch thick. In response to a report that a child was being abused, Willmar police went to defendant’s house where the officers literally caught the defendant in the act. Slightly over a month later, defendant, represented by his appointed attorney, signed and filed a petition to enter a guilty piea to the charge.1 This petition states: “I have been told by my attorney and I understand * * * that the maximum penalty that the court could impose for this crime * * * is imprisonment for 5 years.” The petition does not set forth any promises by the prosecutor. It also states: “No one — including my attorney, any policeman, prosecutor, judge, or any other person — has made any promises to me * * * in order to obtain a plea of guilty from me.” That same day, defendant .appeared before the trial court and entered his plea of guilty. At the plea hearing, in open court, the trial court meticulously questioned the defendant to ascertain if he understood his rights. In particular, defendant was asked by the trial judge if he understood that the maximum sentence that he could receive was a $5,000 fine and/or up to 5 years in prison. He was specifically asked if anyone had made any promises to him. He stated they had not. When asked if there was any doubt about this, defendant said no. When asked to describe what happened, the defendant freely admitted that, while enraged at the child, he had struck the small boy with the board a number of times over a 10-minute time span. In questioning the defendant, the trial judge did everything that Minn.R. Crim.P. 15.01 and our cases mandate he do in order to insure the integrity of the plea. Thereafter, the court accepted the plea after receiving these assurances and ordered a pre-sentence investigation report, together with a psychological evaluation.
After receipt of these reports, the case came on for sentencing on May 10, 1982. At the sentencing hearing, the prosecutor acknowledged that he was, at first, under the impression that the presumptive sentence under the Sentencing Guidelines was a 21-month stayed sentence, and that was why he had, by memorandum, urged the court to make a dispositional departure. But he also stated that he had since learned the presumptive sentence was 21 months executed, because this was a Minn.Stat. § 609.11 offense — use of a dangerous weapon — carrying a mandatory executed term of 1 year and 1 day.2 Defendant’s attorney requested a stay of execution and treatment. The prosecutor argued that if departure were to be ordered in this case, it should be an upward departure. When the *251trial judge asked if there was any dispute as to whether the offense involved the use of a dangerous weapon, the prosecutor said he did not think there was any dispute about that. Defendant’s counsel and defendant said nothing. After a brief discussion of the appropriate sentence under the guidelines, the court stated: “The court finds that there are no substantial compelling reasons [to depart] from the presumptive sentence.” He then imposed a 21-month executed sentence. At the sentencing hearing, defendant did not contend that he had believed under the guidelines the court could only give him a probationary sentence.
Approximately 2 weeks later, defendant, represented by different counsel, moved to withdraw his plea of guilty. In support of his motion, defendant testified his former attorney had promised him he would not have to go to prison and that, at the most, he might have to serve from 30 to 90 days of probationary jail time. He then also stated that he did not understand that he might have to go to prison and that when he said he did understand at the plea hearing, he was just giving the answers necessary in order to get his plea accepted by the court. He admitted to the judge that at the plea hearing he was aware that the statutory maximum was a possible 5 years imprisonment, but that he believed it had no application in his case. He claimed that his initial counsel never told him what the presumptive sentence was. Defendant’s wife testified that defendant’s first counsel had told him that generally in this type of case only probationary jail time was imposed.
In essence, defendant’s former attorney admitted that he had not considered the effect of section 609.11 and that he thought the presumptive sentence in defendant’s case was 21 months stayed. He further admitted that he had told defendant that probation was likely with some jail time, but he specifically denied giving defendant any promises that he would receive probation. The attorney further testified that he felt that the state’s case against the defendant was strong, and he was doubtful whether he would have advised the defendant to stand trial even if he had known the correct presumptive sentence was 21-month executed sentence.
After the hearing, the trial judge found the former counsel had not promised defendant that he would receive probation and further found that defendant was aware he could receive up to 5 years in prison. Moreover, the court concluded defendant had failed to establish that he had been denied effective assistance of counsel.
1. There are three basic prerequisites to a valid guilty plea: the plea must be accurate, voluntary and intelligent (i.e., knowingly and understandingly made). The main purpose of the accuracy requirement is to protect a defendant from pleading guilty to a more serious offense than he could be convicted of were he to insist on his right to trial. Other possible benefits of the accuracy requirement include assisting the court in determining whether the plea is intelligently entered and facilitating the rehabilitation of the defendant. The purpose of the voluntariness requirement is to insure that the defendant is not pleading guilty because of improper pressures. The purpose of the requirement that the plea be intelligent is to insure that the defendant understands the charges, understands the rights he is waiving by pleading guilty, and understands the consequences of his plea.
In this case, the defendant argues that the record made at the time he pleaded guilty did not contain an adequate factual basis. The usual way in which the factual basis requirement is satisfied is for the court to ask' the defendant to express in his own words what happened. State v. Hoaglund, 307 Minn. 322, 240. N.W.2d 4 (1976). The defendant’s statement usually will suggest questions to the court which then, with the assistance of counsel, can interrogate the defendant in further detail. Other ways of establishing a factual basis include testimony of witnesses and statements summarizing the evidence. Kochevar v. State, 281 N.W.2d 680 (Minn.1979); State v. Goulette, 258 N.W.2d 758 (Minn.1977). The *252court should not accept the plea unless the record supports the conclusion that the defendant actually committed an offense at least as serious as the crime to which he is pleading guilty. State v. Goulette, 258 N.W.2d 758 (Minn.1977); State v. Hoaglund, 307 Minn. 322, 240 N.W.2d 4 (1976).
In this case, defendant admitted using a board approximately 3 feet long, and he also admitted that he beat the victim in a rage for from 5 to 10 minutes. The record also contains a copy of the complaint and defendant, by his plea of guilty, in effect judicially admitted the allegations contained in the complaint. The record also contains pictures of the victim’s injuries taken at the hospital following the beating. Moreover, the trial judge carefully interrogated the defendant about the acts, and the defendant freely admitted that he had beaten the boy for up to 10 minutes.
We believe that this constituted a sufficient factual basis to support the plea. The record amply supports the conclusion that defendant used the board to beat the victim and that the victim’s injuries were severe. Some things that are not ordinarily thought of as dangerous weapons become dangerous weapons if so used. See, e.g., State v. Moyer, 298 N.W.2d 768 (Minn.1980) (gasoline); State v. Mings, 289 N.W.2d 497 (Minn.1980) (boots); State v. Meehan, 280 N.W.2d 44 (Minn.1979) (automobile); State v. Moss, 269 N.W.2d 732 (Minn.1978) (scissors). Clearly, a board of this nature qualifies as a dangerous weapon if so used. Defendant judicially admitted that is how he used the board.
2. Next, the defendant contends he should be permitted to withdraw his guilty plea because he proved at the hearing on his motion to withdraw the plea that defense counsel had promised him probation at the time he entered the plea.
If the former counsel made an unqualified promise of probation, then defendant should be permitted to withdraw his plea on the ground that the promise is unfulfilled. Kochevar v. State, 281 N.W.2d 680 (Minn.1979). Here, defendant’s claim that he was promised probation by defense counsel was negated by the petition he signed, by the statements he made at the time he entered his plea and by his former counsel’s testimony at the hearing on defendant’s motion. Clearly, therefore, the trial court was justified in finding that no such promise had been made. Kochevar v. State, 281 N.W.2d 680 (Minn.1979).
3. The defendant next contends that he should be allowed to withdraw his plea of guilty because he did not know about the terms of the mandatory minimum term law, Minn.Stat. § 609.11 (1982), or that under the Sentencing Guidelines the presumptive sentence was a 21-month executed sentence. Originally, both the prosecutor and the defendant’s former attorney were unaware that section 609.11 and presumptive sentence under the guidelines would call for an executed sentence. At the time of the sentencing hearing, however, the prosecutor was well aware of that fact and made it known to the court. Prior to that time, under the impression that a stayed sentence would be appropriate, the prosecutor had filed a memorandum supporting a disposi-tional departure because of the egregiousness of the defendant’s conduct. After discussion before the court in which counsel participated, neither the defendant nor his counsel at that time made any motion to continue the sentencing hearing or to withdraw the plea for a mistake. The defendant at all times knew that he was subject to possible imprisonment for up to 5 years. Under the facts of this case, including in particular the fact that defendant was literally caught in the act of beating this child with a large board, there was no disputing that the board was used as a dangerous weapon, and at the sentencing hearing both defendant and his counsel did not challenge that contention.
We are unwilling to hold that a defendant must be questioned by the trial court at the time he enters his guilty plea to insure that he understands what the presumptive sentence is under the Minnesota Sentencing Guidelines. In a substantial number of cases, the prosecution, the de*253fense counsel and the court must wait until after a pre-sentence investigation report has been prepared before they can accurately determine the presumptive sentence. This is true because frequently defendants do not know their own criminal history scores. It may well be better practice for the court to question the defendant to insure that he understands not only the maximum penalty to which he is subjecting himself but that there is a minimum executed sentence if section 609.11 is applicable.3
In this case, there was overwhelming evidence to sustain a conviction based upon the plea. Defendant’s first counsel conceded that the evidence against the defendant was strong and he would not likely have advised the defendant to stand trial. If the plea were withdrawn, this is not a case where the trier of fact would likely return a verdict for a lesser included offense providing for probation. The plea was meticulously taken by the trial judge. A withdrawal of the plea at a trial would most assuredly result in the same disposition.
4. Defendant finally claims that the trial court was not aware that on its own motion it could sentence the defendant without regard to the mandatory minimum term law if the court found that substantial mitigating factors existed. See State v. Olson, 325 N.W.2d 13 (Minn.1982). In the present case, the trial court specifically stated that it found no substantial compelling reasons for departing from the presumptive sentence, as the defendant at the time of the sentencing urged the court to do. This statement of the court indicates that he was, in fact, aware that he could have departed were proper circumstances presented.
Finding the defendant’s contentions to be without merit, we affirm.
Affirmed.
. The petition was identical with the one set forth in Appendix A to Rule 15 of the Minnesota Rules of Criminal Procedure (1982).
. Under Minn.Stat. § 609.11, subds. 4 and 9 (1982), defendant was subject to a mandatory minimum term of 1 year and 1 day. Under Minnesota Sentencing Guidelines and Commentary, II.E. (1982), when a defendant is convicted of such an offense, the presumptive sentence duration is “18 months or the duration of prison sentence provided in the appropriate cell of the Sentencing Guidelines Grid, whichever is longer.”
. See Minn.R.Crim.P. 15.01, which provides that the court, in accepting the plea, shall advise a defendant if a minimum sentence is required by statute, in which case the court must sentence to imprisonment for the statutory minimum sentence. This was a recent amendment to the Minnesota Rules of Criminal Procedure and was effective on August 1, 1983. It was not in effect at the time the defendant’s sentence was imposed.

=== CASE 9740538 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:36:59.663233+00 ===

AMDAHL, Chief Justice
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent.
The record establishes that it was not until the day of sentencing that the court, the prosecutor, and defense counsel became aware that a mandatory minimum executed 21-month sentence was the required sentence. None of them was aware at the time of the plea of the existence of such a fact and all of them believed that the presumptive sentence was 21 months stayed.
The record also establishes that at the time he entered his plea, the defendant knew that he could be sentenced to a maximum term of 5 years and that he had been told by his counsel that probation was likely and that he had not been informed that the mandatory minimum law was applicable and that it mandated execution of the sentence.
Under such circumstances, I cannot agree that his plea was intelligently entered and would hold that he should be permitted to withdraw his guilty plea and stand trial, whether or not it is true, as the majority opinion indicates, that “a trial would most assuredly result in the same disposition.”

=== CASE 9740540 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:37:00.526049+00 ===

Hallows, J.
The appeal raises three questions which respectively relate to whether Pintar was negligent, whether Avina’s negligence was causal, and whether the apportionment of the causal negligence between Avina and Laufenberg was correct. In determining these issues this court must test the findings of the trial court by the “great weight and clear preponderance of the evidence” rule. State ex rel. Isham v. Mullally (1961), 15 Wis. (2d) 249, 255, 112 N. W. (2d) 701; Mitchell v. Western Casualty & Surety Co. (1966), 30 Wis. (2d) 419, 421, 141 N. W. (2d) 212.
The collision occurred in a 50-miles-per-hour speed zone on Highway 15 in Waukesha county two miles east of Prospect Hill at 9:45 p. m. on September 19, 1962. Highway 15 at this point runs approximately east and west and on the night of the accident the road was dry. A private driveway from the premises south of the highway known as the Berlin Auction Barn connects to the *129highway 30 or 40 feet west of the point of impact. West of the driveway, Highway 15 is straight for 1,000 feet and then curves slightly to the south for 880 feet.
Pintar was leaving the Berlin Auction Barn parking lot and as he reached the south side of Highway 15 he stopped on the private driveway and looked to the west and to the east twice. He testified that the first time he looked to the west he saw beams of a car’s headlights glowing around the curve but saw nothing to his right. On his second look to the left he saw the headlights of a car which he estimated to be about 1,000 feet away. On his second look to the east he saw the glow of lights of a westbound car over the slight crest of the road some 600 feet distant. He testified he did not compute or calculate the speed of the car approaching from the west but he assumed he could safely enter the highway and make his turn to the east.
Pintar entered the highway and proceeded east, shifting the gears of his car. He testified in making the turn he did not cross the center line. The Ackerman car, whose lights he had seen approaching from the east, now passed him going west and when he was about 100 feet east of the driveway and had completed his shifting, Pintar felt a nudge or a tick on his car.
Laufenberg, who admits his negligence, testified he came around the curve from the west with Avina close behind him and shortly thereafter saw the Pintar car emerging from the driveway and blocking his lane of travel and one half of the westbound lane. He applied his brakes, but realizing he could not stop his car in time to avoid a collision he turned his wheels to the left. What then happened is unbelievably true. Laufenberg’s car turned 180 degrees while remaining on the paved portion of the two-lane highway and continued east in the direction of its momentum, but backwards in the westbound lane. While proceeding in this way for some dis*130tance Laufenberg had what is best called, although with the rear end, a “head-on collision” with the front end of the oncoming westbound Ackerman car, which Lauf-enberg never saw. Laufenberg is not sure what happened to the cars after this impact.
Avina testified he was three to four car lengths behind Laufenberg just before the accident. There is other testimony that he was much closer. When he saw Laufen-berg’s brake lights go on he applied his brakes and turned to the right. He was unable to testify concerning the sequence of events, but from paint transfers and indentations on the cars it is a verity that the Laufenberg and Avina cars collided and the Avina and Ackerman cars collided. There is evidence from paint marks and physical damage that the Avina-Ackerman impact was not severe. After these collisions the Laufenberg car came to rest in the ditch south of the highway, facing south, the Avina car in the ditch on the north side of the highway, facing west and behind the Ackerman car which was also in the ditch, facing west. Pintar stopped his car on the south edge of the highway several hundred feet east of the driveway when he became aware of the collision behind him.
It was contended in the trial court and is urged here that Pintar was causally negligent both as to lookout- and failing to yield the right-of-way to Laufenberg. The trial court found otherwise on the theory that Pintar could assume that Laufenberg was proceeding at a lawful rate of speed, which at the time and place of the accident was 50 miles per hour. The court also considered Pintar had concluded it was safe to enter the highway and his failure to judge the speed of the oncoming Laufen-berg car was relatively unimportant.
The majority of the court, not including the writer and the chief justice, believes the finding exonerating Pintar of any negligence is not against the great weight and clear preponderance of the evidence. This view is *131based upon two reasons: First, Laufenberg was 1,000 feet west of the driveway when Pintar entered and turned to the east. At that distance from the driveway Laufenberg was not “approaching” as that term is used in sec. 346.18 (4), Stats.,1 so as to have a right-of-way to the road at and east of the driveway. Secondly, Pintar had a right to assume Laufenberg was proceeding at a lawful speed and the miscalculation failure which lead to his assumption it was safe for him to enter the highway was a reasonable miscalculation, or one he reasonably did not have to make because of the 1,000-feet distance of the Laufenberg car.
It is true, an experienced driver may almost unconsciously, in a fraction of a second, judge distance and speed of an oncoming car sufficiently to determine whether it is safe for him to proceed onto a highway and yet be unable to state exactly the oncoming car’s distance in feet or rate of speed in miles per hour. Given a sufficient look, a calculation of speed and distance may be in error and yet be reasonable and thus not determinative of negligence. Heinecke v. Hardware Mut. Casualty Co. (1953), 264 Wis. 89, 94, 58 N. W. (2d) 442. In Heinecke, we pointed out that one charged with the duty of lookout had to exercise, after making his observation, reasonable judgment in calculating the time it would take him to enter and reach his proper position on the highway. This case espoused a reasonable calculation. In Plog v. Zolper (1957), 1 Wis. (2d) 517, 527, 85 N. W. (2d) 492, we again addressed ourselves to calculation and to the sufficiency of the observation as elements of lookout. In Bowers v. Treuthardt (1958), 5 Wis. (2d) 271, 275, 92 N. W. (2d) 878, we state almost categorically that “[f] ailure properly to evaluate what is seen is as *132much an element of negligent lookout as not to see the source of the danger at all.” The controlling element in the decisions is the reason for the incorrect conclusion that it was safe for the driver to proceed on the highway.
The minority of the court would hold Pintar negligent as a matter of law. Laufenberg was on an arterial highway and did not forfeit his right-of-way because of his excessive speed. Magin v. Bemis (1962), 17 Wis. (2d) 192, 199, 116 N. W. (2d) 129. Having the right-of-way, he was entitled to have the immediate use of his lane of the highway ahead of his car free from obstruction. The distance ahead which is appropriated by this right-of-way depends upon the speed of the car and not the lawfulness of the speed. In Ide v. Wamser (1964), 22 Wis. (2d) 325, 331, 126 N. W. (2d) 59, we stated a special dignity was afforded to one who was traveling upon an arterial. “In order to expedite traffic, the law permits drivers on arterial highways to proceed uninterruptedly at a lawful rate of speed with the assumption that other drivers approaching the arterial will yield to them.” Since excessive speed does not forfeit the right-of-way on an arterial, one traveling at an excessive speed may proceed uninterruptedly with the assumption other drivers approaching the arterial will yield.
The negligence of one using excessive speed on an arterial does not excuse one approaching the arterial for not yielding the right-of-way. Magin v. Bemis, supra. In Magin, we defined a vehicle on an arterial as approaching an intersection when it was not so far distant that considering the rate of speed at which the car is traveling it would be reasonable to assume that a collision would occur if a vehicle stopped at the intersection on the non-arterial were to start in motion and move into the path of the vehicle on the arterial. This correctly implied for the purpose of determining right-of-way that the driver on the arterial was not required to brake his car. This right was not conditioned upon lawful speed.
*133The minority believes Pintar had no right to rely on the assumption that Laufenberg was proceeding at a lawful rate of speed on the arterial because this in effect denies the right-of-way to Laufenberg. Besides, the duty to yield the right-of-way does not end when one enters the highway and assumes his position if by doing so the oncoming car’s speed must be drastically reduced to avoid a rear-end collision. The right-of-way on an arterial means the right to immediately use the road ahead without being required to brake your car in order to accommodate another entering the highway. One entering an arterial must be reasonably sure he can enter into the flow of the traffic thereon without disrupting it. To disrupt the flow of traffic is to create a traffic hazard. The minority thinks Pintar was causally negligent in entering the highway without ascertaining that Laufenberg was coming at an excessive speed and in blocking the path of the Laufenberg car by not accelerating faster than he did. From Pintar’s testimony, he traveled 100 feet while Laufenberg traveled 1,000. If Laufenberg was going 80 miles per hour, Pintar only averaged 8 miles per hour.
There can be no question but that Avina was negligent. The trial court found him negligent as to speed, lookout and following Laufenberg too closely. The evidence of his negligence in all these respects is overwhelming. Avina claims his negligence was not causal or, if it was, he was not as causally negligent as Laufenberg. He argues that if he had not been following Laufenberg the same damage for which the claim was made would have occurred, because the impact of the Laufenberg car going backward and colliding with the Ackerman car was sufficient to cause the death of Mrs. Ogle. He also contends from the paint transfers and slight damage to his car that the impact of his car with the Ackerman car was so slight as not to aggravate the injuries or contribute to the death of Mrs. Ogle.
*134We think counsel for Avina has an erroneous concept of causation. The severity of an impact is only one link. It is true, illegal racing was not pleaded as required by Giemza v. Allied American Mut. Fire Ins. Co. (1960), 10 Wis. (2d) 555, 560, 103 N. W. (2d) 538, 106 N. W. (2d) 609, and therefore was not an issue. If racing had been pleaded and proved, the damage done by the Laufen-berg car during the race would also have been attributable to Avina regardless of whether Avina’s car had struck the Ackerman car. In a race, the participants share equally the responsibility for damage done by any participant. Nelson v. Nason (1961), 343 Mass. 220, 177 N. E. (2d) 887; Haddock v. Stewart (1963), 232 Md. 139, 192 Atl. (2d) 105, 107; 60 C. J. S., Motor Vehicles, p. 702, sec. 297, racing. This shared responsibility is founded upon the mutual understanding which gives rise to the race, and the race is considered to be the basic cause of the damage and injury resulting from any act of negligence of a participant. The fragmentation of cause into the severity of impacts for apportionment purposes is unrealistic. It is the negligence considered as a whole including its character and nature which must be considered in contributing to the cause of the collision.
Laufenberg met Avina by prearrangement at a tavern in Rock county after work on the night of the accident. After having several beers they decided to visit a cocktail bar in the city of Milwaukee and started out for that destination. Avina was in the lead and prior to the accident, some miles away from the starting point, Laufenberg passed Avina, Avina in turn passed Laufen-berg, and Laufenberg passed Avina a second time, at an admitted speed of 80 miles per hour. After this last passing, Avina and Laufenberg traveled east on Highway 15 toward their common destination almost as one car, or as cars in tandem.
A traffic officer testified he was going west on Highway 15 about two miles west of the scene of the accident *135when Laufenberg and Avina going east passed him at a speed estimated at 80 miles per hour and Avina was only one car length behind Laufenberg. The officer turned around and pursued them but did not catch up with them until the accident had happened.
We think when there is an understanding to reach a common destination and in doing so illegal speed is used and the cars are driven so closely together as to be practically in tandem, or to constitute a unit, that we have a situation of mutual stimulation where the negligence of each participant is so related to the negligence of the other participants that the participants should each be chargeable with the causal negligence of the other as to speed and their percentage of causal negligence should be equal. The apportionment rule of causal negligence applicable to the usual cases of independent tort-feasors whose negligence combined or concurred in some manner to cause a result requires in the instant case as a matter of law, because of the mutual fault of Laufenberg and Avina, that the causal negligence be apportioned equally between them.
The trial court so held and we think correctly; therefore, the judgment should be affirmed.
By the Court. — Judgment affirmed.
“(4) ENTERING Highway From Alley Or Non-Highway Access. The operator of a vehicle entering a highway from an alley or from a point of access other than another highway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching on the highway which he is entering.”

=== CASE 2225207 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:40.211874+00 ===

90 Ill. App. 2d 222 (1967)
232 N.E.2d 459
Mary Runowicz, Petitioner,
v.
Rock Island Bank and Trust Company, Administrator of the Estate of Joseph DePover, Deceased, Respondent.
Gen. No. 67-45.
Illinois Appellate Court  Third District.
December 20, 1967.
*223 Coyle, Stengel, Gilman & Keefe, of Rock Island, for appellant.
Schroder & Schroder, of Rock Island, for appellee.
*224 ALLOY, J.
This cause is before us on an appeal from an order of the Circuit Court of Rock Island County granting a new trial to respondent, Rock Island Bank and Trust Company, as Administrator of the Estate of Joseph DePover, deceased. This cause originated through the filing of a claim against the Estate of Joseph DePover for services rendered as a housekeeper by Mary Runowicz asserted to have been from October 1957 to the time of decedent's death on June 11, 1965. The trial was held before the court without a jury on December 14, 1966, and as a result of such trial a judgment was entered by the court in favor of Petitioner and as against the Estate for $3,780. This judgment was later corrected by the court to the sum of $3,120. Thereafter, the respondent filed a motion for a new trial setting forth what was described as "newly discovered evidence" as a basis for such new trial. It is from the granting of such motion for new trial that this cause is before us on appeal.
The record discloses, that following the filing of the claim by petitioner, the attorneys for the Estate filed interrogatories requesting names of persons having knowledge of the facts relating to the claim. The name of Dorothy McGrath, who testified at the trial, was not included. There was a showing at the trial that such witness was not known to claimant's attorneys at the time the interrogatories were answered. The trial was originally set for November 30, 1966, but claimant moved for a continuance because of the illness of one of its witnesses, namely, Dorothy McGrath. Claimant's attorneys stated in court in presence of the attorneys for the Estate that this witness, Dorothy McGrath, would testify that she lived next door to the decedent for two years before the death of decedent and that she observed services being performed by the claimant. The continuance was granted and the trial was held on December 14, 1966, as heretofore indicated.
*225 Three witnesses testified for the claimant. Joe Fox testified that he had lived three doors from decedent and had known the decedent from 1942. Prior to the death of decedent's wife, both of decedent's legs had been amputated below the knee. While decedent's legs required some attention, he was still able to get around on artificial legs and would drive his car to where claimant lived near the Moline Public Hospital, and each evening when she got out of work at the hospital and on her days off he would pick her up. DePover's wife died in 1957 and decedent never remarried. Witness Fox testified that he had seen claimant doing general housework, washing, scrubbing floors, washing dishes, cleaning, etc. around decedent's house from the late 1950's until the time of decedent's death. He specifically stated that he saw the claimant doing this work about two times a week but that he was never in decedent's house during the evening. Another witness, David Morgan, testified that after the death of decedent's wife, in 1957, he saw the claimant, Mrs. Runowicz performing general services the two or three times a month he visited decedent's house. He specifically testified as to the improved condition of the house when the claimant began working there and that he never observed anyone else doing any of the housework.
Dorothy McGrath, a witness, testified that she lived next door to the decedent and had observed the claimant perform various services for the decedent. She specified the activities which ranged from housework to cleaning and yardwork and cooking. She also testified as to her opinion as to the value of such services in the community being $1.25 to $1.50 an hour. On cross-examination, Dorothy McGrath testified that she had known the decedent for about 2 1/2 years before his death, ever since she had moved next door. When she was questioned by the court as to exactly when she moved next door to decedent, the witness, apparently attempting to recall the specific time, testified that she moved there in June 1963.
*226 In an amended motion for a new trial filed by the Estate following the entry of the judgment in the sum of $3,120, it was contended that newly discovered evidence would show that Dorothy McGrath had in fact moved next door to the decedent in June of 1964 instead of June of 1963 as she had indicated in her testimony. Attached to the motion was an affidavit of an attorney for the Estate stating that he would also introduce two signature cards from the Rock Island Bank and Trust Company (the bank which was administrator of the Estate) and various gas company records and city directories to show when Dorothy McGrath moved. Also attached to the motion was an affidavit of the previous owner of the home now occupied by Dorothy McGrath in which affiant indicated that she did not move until 1964. As a result of such motion, the trial judge granted a new trial. The issue before us is whether the trial judge in such instance abused his discretion in granting a new trial on the basis of "newly discovered evidence."
[1] The allowance of the claim by the trial court which resulted in the judgment was based upon the fact that there was no family relationship between claimant and the decedent and that the decedent had accepted and retained the beneficial results of the claimant's services which were rendered at his request where no reason was disclosed for him to suppose that the services were gratuitous. The record in fact implies to the contrary. The law, therefore, implied a liability for the reasonable worth of such services (Floyd v. Estate of Smith, 320 Ill. App. 171, 50 NE2d 254).
[2-4] The determination of whether or not a new trial should be granted in this cause is governed by the same rules as would apply generally to the granting of a motion for a new trial. In the cause before us the respondent does not contend that the evidence is insufficient to support the judgment, nor is there any claim of procedural error by which a just result was precluded. The *227 sole ground advanced for a new trial was the existence of the "newly discovered evidence." To justify the granting of a new trial, certain conditions should be met by the moving party. As stated in Powers v. Browning, 2 Ill. App. 2d 479, 119 NE2d 795, at pages 486-487, the general test which is to be applied by the trial court is outlined as follows:
"As the court said in People v. Dabney, 315 Ill. 320: `Applications for new trial on the ground of newly discovered evidence are not looked upon with favor by courts but such applications are to be subjected to close scrutiny. The burden is on the applicant to rebut the presumption that the verdict is correct and to show that there has been no lack of due diligence. (People v. LeMorte, 289 Ill. 11.) The evidence must fulfill the following requirements: First, it must appear to be of such conclusive character that it will probably change the result if a new trial is granted; second, it must have been discovered since the trial; third, it must be such as could not have been discovered before the trial by the exercise of due diligence; fourth, it must be material to the issue; and fifth, it must not be merely cumulative to the evidence offered on the trial ...'"
As indicated in the outline of conditions which must be shown before a new trial is granted, requests for new trials on the basis of newly discovered evidence are not looked upon with favor by the Illinois courts (Henderson v. Shives, 10 Ill. App. 2d 475, 135 NE2d 186; Bezark v. Kostner Manor, Inc., 29 Ill. App. 2d 106, 172 NE2d 424). The court in Chicago & A.R. Co. v. Raidy, 203 Ill. 310, 67 N.E. 783, at page 317, pointed out specifically:
"It cannot be the practice of courts to allow important matters to go to trial, and because one party is not satisfied with the results of it, let him go out and try *228 to get facts which will enable him to do better at another trial, and rely upon such after-ascertained matters as a basis for a new trial. In such case the courts require that the newly discovered evidence shall be material and shall not be cumulative, and that due diligence has been exercised to procure it."
[5] While respondent does not dispute the law and the requirements for granting a new trial, it contends that a new trial was justified on the ground that the testimony of Dorothy McGrath was the only foundation for the judgment in this cause. One of the basic requirements for granting of a new trial as a result of a motion founded upon newly discovered evidence, is that the new evidence should relate to the merits of the controversy and be so decisive in character as to be conclusive thereof. In the cause before us, the issue before the court was whether the claimant performed services for the decedent, and, if so, the reasonable value of such services. Whether witness McGrath lived next door to the decedent for one year instead of two years as she had testified would not be material to claimant's right to be compensated. If Dorothy McGrath was the only witness who testified to seeing the services performed, this might make a difference. There were, however, two other witnesses in the instant case who testified for the claimant and the one witness who testified for the Estate failed to rebut the showing of work performed by the claimant. The testimony of Dorothy McGrath as to the value of the services obviously would not be affected by the fact that she lived next door to the claimant for one years or two years.
[6] It is apparent also that in order to establish a new trial on the basis of newly discovered evidence, there must be a showing that the newly discovered evidence is not merely evidence seeking to impeach a witness who testified at the trial. It is implicit from the motion and the record in this cause that the primary purpose of the *229 evidence which was sought to be introduced would be for the purpose of impeaching the testimony of the witness Dorothy McGrath. As stated in Morsovillo v. South Suburban Safeway Lines, 49 Ill. App. 2d 219, 199 NE2d 643, at pages 221-222, where the newly discovered evidence involved evidence purporting to establish the genuineness of a witness's signature, the court stated:
"Since this evidence could be used only to impeach Ronald, we believe the trial court properly denied this motion on the authority of Chicago & E.I.R. Co. v. Stewart, 203 Ill. 223, 224, 67 N.E. 830:
"`It has been often decided by this court that a new trial will never be granted on the ground of newly discovered evidence merely for the purpose of impeaching a witness who testified upon the trial.'"
This principle is also affirmed in Smith v. Carter, 302 Ill. App. 235, 23 NE2d 738.
[7] The only effect, on the basis of the record before us, of such newly discovered evidence (that Dorothy McGrath resided next door to decedent for only one year) in the instant case would be to impeach the testimony of Dorothy McGrath. This is not sufficient ground for a new trial, on the record before us.
On appeal in this court respondent-Estate cites Moyer v. John Hancock Mut. Life Ins. Co., 6 Ill. App. 2d 1, 126 NE2d 157, in support of the action of the trial court in granting the new trial. We note, however, that in the Moyer case, a new trial was refused for the reason that the reviewing court did not agree that newly discovered evidence would have been of a conclusive character or material to the issues (page 7). Respondent also cites Leonard v. Jacobs, 42 Ill. App. 2d 261, 192 NE2d 304. In that case a new trial was also denied by the court on review for the reason that (pages 265-266):
*230 "Applying the basic requirements as outlined in the Henderson v. Shives case to this case, assuming that the petitioner has been diligent and that the evidence could not have been discovered before the trial, the two questions that must be answered are, (1), is the evidence of such character that it will probably change the result if a new trial is granted?; (2), is the evidence merely cumulative? Giving every consideration and full weight to the pictures and the evidence of the private investigator, it is the opinion of this court that the answer to the first question is `No' and to the second question is `Yes.'"
The newly discovered evidence in the Leonard v. Jacobs case consisted of about 45 minutes of film showing the plaintiff walking around and moving after the trial in a manner in which he had earlier testified he could not move.
[8, 9] The burden of showing the basic requirements for a new trial, where the motion is premised on newly discovered evidence, is on the party seeking the new trial. As stated by the court in Henderson v. Shives, 10 Ill. App. 2d 475, 135 NE2d 186, at 486:
"The burden is on the applicant to rebut the presumption that the verdict is correct and to show that there has been no lack of due diligence."
In the case before us, the Estate clearly failed to sustain this burden. The testimony of the witnesses Fox and Morgan, coupled with testimony as to the value of services by witness McGrath, even if the testimony of witness McGrath was restricted to a one-year period, would have been sufficient to sustain the judgment. On the basis of the record before us, the motion was not legally sufficient to justify the granting of the new trial and the order granting such new trial was, therefore, improper and should be set aside.
*231 The order of the Circuit Court of Rock Island County granting the new trial is, therefore, reversed and this cause is remanded to the Circuit Court of Rock Island County with directions that the judgment in the sum of $3,120 and costs in favor of petitioner and as against respondent be reinstated.
Reversed and remanded with directions.
STOUDER, P.J. and HOFFMAN, J., concur.

=== CASE 2225209 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:40.277645+00 ===

141 Ind. App. 694 (1968)
232 N.E.2d 619
LYNCH CORPORATION
v.
REVIEW BOARD OF THE INDIANA EMPLOYMENT SECURITY DIVISION.
No. 967A63.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
Filed January 9, 1968.
*695 Busby, Austin, Cooper & Farr, of Anderson, for appellant.
John J. Dillon, Attorney General, and William E. Matheny, Deputy Attorney General, for appellees.
No Petition For Rehearing Filed.
COOK, P.J.
Appellant's assignment of errors filed in this court seeks a judicial review of a proceeding and decision of the Review Board of the Indiana Employment Security Division relating to the eligibility of twenty-five claimants, the individual appellees herein, employees of appellant Lynch Corporation, for benefits under the Indiana Employment Security Act. (Burns' Ind. Stat. § 52-1525 et. seq.)
The rights of the parties to this review are controlled by a contract between appellant, Lynch Corporation, and U.A.W. *696 Local Union No. 777. The contract provides that vacations shall be taken between July 1 and June 30 of the following year. The contract also gives the appellant the "option" of closing its plants "for a vacation period not in excess of two consecutive weeks in July or August," provided the corporation gives notice to the union on or before the preceding March 15.
Twenty-two of the individual appellees were eligible for a two week vacation and they elected to take their vacations after the appellant corporation posted notice on March 15 that the plant would shut down for vacation during the last two weeks in July. The other three individual appellees were not eligible for vacation due to the shortness of their employment period.
The individual appellees filed separate requests for an appeal to the Review Board from a decision of the referee holding that they were not available for work during the period of plant shutdown, and therefore not entitled to unemployment compensation.
The Review Board reversed the referee's decision, and decided that the claimants-appellees were involuntarily unemployed and were entitled to compensation, during this two week period.
Appellant Lynch Corporation now asserts that the decision of the appellee Review Board is contrary to law.
The vacation rights of the parties are defined by the following pertinent part of a union-company contract:
"Section 3. Vacations shall be taken between July 1 and June 30 of the following year and due regard consistent with the Company's work requirements shall be given to the preferences of employees on the basis of their seniority standing in the classification in which employed.
Employees will be required to state on forms provided for these purposes their vacation preference not less than twenty-one (21) calendar days prior to the beginning of *697 the first week of their vacation. In the event the employee does not schedule his vacation for the full amount of time to which he is entitled on a continuous basis, he shall submit the beginning date or dates for the balance of his vacation at the time he submits his first vacation preference form. Vacation preference forms shall be obtained from the employee's foreman and four copies made out and returned to the foreman for approval.
The copies will be distributed one each to employee, committee, payroll, and the foreman.
Although it is intended that the vacation schedule once approved shall be adhered to, it is also recognized that circumstances may arise which will necessitate a change in the schedule.
The Company shall have the option to shut down the plants for a vacation period not in excess of two (2) consecutive weeks in July or August. The Company shall give notice to the Union, in writing, of such shutdown not later than the March 15 preceding the announced shutdown. Such notice shall be posted on the bulletin boards and shall state the dates of the shutdown period."
We believe our review must adhere to the principles announced in Adams v. Review Board of the Indiana Employment Security Division (1957), 237 Ind. 63, 143 N.E.2d 564, in which the court quoted with approval from Moen v. Director of Division of Employment Security (1949), 324 Mass. 246, 85 N.E.2d 779. In Adams, our Supreme Court said:
"The company in the Moen Case shut down the plant for two weeks to enable its employees to take vacations. In holding that claimants who were not eligible for vacation pay were also not entitled to unemployment compensation benefits, the court, at page 781 of 85 N.E.2d, said:
`To be sure the agreement grants vacations expressly only to those who are eligible and is silent as to employees such as the claimant whose period of employment makes them ineligible for vacations with pay. But it would not, as the claimant concedes, have been feasible for the company to offer employment to him during the shutdown. Thus as to him and employees similarly situated the shutdown was in effect a vacation without pay or leave of absence, although not designated as such in the agreement. *698 If that results in a hardship to the claimant it arises from the agreement rather than from a failure on the part of the company to provide work.'"
This holding clearly refutes the claims of the three employees who were not entitled to any vacation because of the limited period of their employment.
We follow the reasoning of Adams to the conclusion that where the governing contract permits a plant shutdown for a vacation period of two weeks as it did here, the employees are not "unemployed" within the meaning of the Indiana Employment Security Act during the period of such a shutdown. This principle applies to the twenty-two employees who disregarded appellant's timely notice relating to the vacation period and chose to take their vacations at a time other than during the plant shutdown. Such contract violations preclude any recovery by appellees for the period here involved. See also: Ball Brothers Company, Inc. v. Review Board of Indiana Employment Security Division (1963), 135 Ind. App. 68, 73, 189 N.E.2d 429; American Central Mfg. Corp. v. Review Board of Indiana Employment Security Division (1949), 119 Ind. App. 430, 88 N.E.2d 256.
The individual appellees elected to take two week vacations with pay, after they knew the plant vacation shutdown had been scheduled. They should not be permitted to receive an additional two week vacation with pay, in the form of unemployment compensation. Such a result would not be in harmony with the declared policy of the Indiana Employment Security Act; nor would such a wind-fall equate favorably with the position of appellant's other employees who complied with the clear terms of the union contract.
Finding the decision of the Review Board contrary to law, the decision is reversed, with instructions to sustain the findings and decision of the referee.
Judgment reversed.
*699 Carson, C.J., and Bierly, Pfaff, Smith, Cooper, and Prime, JJ., concur.
Faulconer, J., dissents.
NOTE.  Reported in 232 N.E.2d 619.

=== CASE 9740884 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:44:04.395637+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE DRUCKER delivered the opinion of the court. Plaintiffs appeal from a dismissal of their amended complaint. According to the amended complaint, plaintiffs were in the cartage business under the name of Ogden Cartage Company. One of the plaintiffs, Carmen Senese, was employed by the City of Chicago as a tree trimmer. The City invited bids, as set out in Exhibit A,1 for the hire of truck services; on April 22, 1964, the plaintiffs submitted sealed, written proposals (the form of which was set out in Exhibit A) 1 which were accepted by the defendants; pursuant to the terms and conditions of these proposals a priority of call was established by defendants, and plaintiffs were assigned priority numbers for three different types of truck services. Plaintiffs performed until July 8, 1964, when they were informed that because of a conflict of interest on the part of Carmen Senese, one of the plaintiffs and an employee of the City of Chicago, the City would no longer do business with plaintiffs. The prayer of the amended complaint was for a declaration that no conflict of interest exists and that the court declare the right of the plaintiffs to submit proposals, be assigned a priority on the basis of said proposal, and to be called from said priority list. Since Exhibit A was not attached to the amended complaint defendants could have moved for a dismissal under section 45 of the Civil Practice Act for failure to set out the written instrument sued on. Instead, defendants moved to dismiss on the same grounds stated in their motion to dismiss the original complaint. (The amended complaint was a restatement and exact reiteration of the original complaint except that in Count II an allegation of fraud was added.) The motion stated in pertinent part: 1. That the theory of the complaint is founded on a contract by which on the face of the complaint fails to state a competent covenant for the following reasons: (a) That it is patent on the face of the complaint and exhibit attached thereto that there was no offer and acceptance under the rule of law encompassing bids. (Emphasis supplied.) (b) That it is patent on the face of the complaint there is no consideration. (c) That it is patent on the face of the complaint that the plaintiff never circumscribed any of his future actions. (d) That the complaint failed to allege any specific work to be performed. On appeal one of defendants’ theories of the case is that plaintiffs’ amended complaint fails to state a cause of action because it is in violation of section 36 of the Civil Practice Act in that it does not set forth the written instruments upon which plaintiffs’ claim is founded. In Clegg v. Gould, 314 Ill App 670, 42 NE2d 315, the court held that a contention that plaintiff failed to attach to his complaint a copy of the written contract upon which the action was based, not having been raised in the trial court, cannot be urged on appeal. Under section 45(2) of the Civil Practice Act the motion to dismiss “must specify wherein the pleading . . . is insufficient.” In Admiral Oasis Hotel v. Home Gas Industries, 68 Ill App2d 297, 216 NE2d 282, the court stated on page 304: Several decisions have held that a motion to dismiss cannot be allowed where specific grounds are not set forth. Hitchcock v. Reynolds, 278 Ill App 559 (1935); Central Illinois Electric & Gas Co. v. Scully, 17 Ill2d 348, 161 NE2d 304 (1959). An obvious companion to such a rule is that grounds not specified in the motion to dismiss cannot be urged on appeal.  In the instant case defendants failed to specify in their motion to dismiss that the written instrument sued on was not attached to or recited in the amended complaint and therefore the point cannot be considered on review.  Defendants next contend, according to their theory of the case in our court, that the contract alleged in said amended complaint is void for want of mutuality, and that the period of the duration of said alleged contract is indefinite and said contract was therefore terminable at the will of either of the parties, and was in fact terminated by defendant City of Chicago, hereinafter referred to as City, and cannot be the basis of a cause of action. Once again we must point out that neither of these objections was raised in the trial court and cannot be urged for the first time on review. Although it seems that defendants have abandoned the grounds set forth in their motion to dismiss in the trial court, we have examined the complaint to ascertain if it should have been dismissed. It recites that a contract was entered into (which has never been denied by defendants), that plaintiffs performed under that contract and that the contract was terminated by the defendants for the stated reason of a conflict of interest. It sought a declaration that no conflict of interest exists and that plaintiffs be reinstated on the priority list. In Kita v. Young Men’s Christian Ass’n of Metropolitan Chicago, 47 Ill App2d 409, 418, 198 NE2d 174, Justice McCormick in a learned dissertation on pleading quoted from Clark on Code Pleading (2nd Ed 1947), pages 56-57. It bears repetition : It is perhaps doubtful if we are now prepared to go to the complete lengths of brevity urged by the proponents of notice pleading, except in isolated cases. But without so doing we may properly put the emphasis where they do. This, it seems, is in effect the modern tendency. The aim of pleadings should be therefore to give reasonable notice of the pleader’s case to the opponent and to the court. This does not go as far as the technical notice pleading, since it requires notice of the pleader’s entire cause, not merely that he has a claim. The notice to the court is perhaps the more important, for in general the opponent knows enough about the case to relieve us of worry about him. In fact we have spent altogether too much thought over the danger of surprising a defendant. If his case is prepared at all adequately he will not be surprised. Our solicitude for him will simply result in giving him opportunities to delay the case and harass his opponent. The main purpose of the pleadings should therefore be to give the trial court a proper understanding of the case. If the trial court is adequately informed of the issue by the pleadings, it means that the parties are likewise so informed. It is for the court, not the litigants, to vindicate pleading rules.  We find that the amended complaint, without Exhibit A (the form of Invitation To Bid and Proposal and Truck Hire Agreement) 2 stated a cause of action and that the trial court erred in dismissing the complaint. The judgment is reversed and the cause remanded for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion. Reversed and remanded. ENGLISH, P. J., concurs.   Exhibit A which included the form of Invitation and Proposal Truck Hire Agreement was not attached to the amended complaint although it was attached to the original complaint.    In Morphet v. Morphet, 19 Ill App2d 304, 152 NE2d 492, a garnishment action against an insurance company, garnishee’s defense was founded on a written instrument but a copy was not attached. Plaintiff therefore contended that garnishee’s pleading had been properly stricken under Section 36. The Appellate Court said at page 308: “This contention is untenable for the garnishee’s amended answer recited the relevant terms of the contract on which the garnishee relied. This is a sufficient compliance with the statute. (Darst v. Lang, 367 Ill 119.)”

=== CASE 9740885 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:44:04.400756+00 ===

McCORMICK, J., dissenting: I must respectfully dissent from the majority opinion. In the first count of the complaint the plaintiffs state that both parties are bound by the provisions of the defendants’ invitation for bids and the plaintiffs’ acceptance of the proposal as indicated in Exhibit A; that the defendants, subsequent to April 22, 1964, did answer plaintiffs’ proposal and did establish a priority of call as provided for in the invitation and proposal, and assigned the plaintiffs priority numbers for certain classes of trucks. It is further alleged that the plaintiffs “held themselves out as being ready, willing and able to perform the undertakings required by them to be performed, and did perform . . . ; the defendants have refused and continue to refuse to honor the plaintiffs’ position on said priority lists, and have called and continue to call those bidders having higher priority numbers assigned than the plaintiffs.” The plaintiffs then pray for declaratory judgment under section 57.1 of the Civil Practice Act: “(a) That the Court declare that no ‘conflict of interest’ exists . . . “(b) That the Court declare the right of the plaintiffs to submit proposals, be assigned a priority on the basis of said proposal, and to be called from said priority list Count II realleges the allegations contained in Count I, and in effect prays for damages for a breach of contract on the part of the defendants. Count I is based on the Declaratory Judgment Act (SHA c 110, § 57.1, p 222). It is impossible for the writer of this dissent to understand how a declaratory judgment could be properly sought in this case. The plaintiffs could bring an action only for breach of contract. In Stern v. Material Service Corp., 44 Ill App2d 198, 194 NE2d 511, we questioned whether or not a suit for declaratory judgment was properly brought, and cited Trossman v. Trossman, 24 Ill App2d 521, 165 NE2d 368, where it was held that the action under the Declaratory Judgment statute was not designed to supplant existing remedies. Declaratory relief as a general rule will not be granted for a cause of action which has already accrued and which is justiciable in a well-recognized form of action. 16 ILP, Declaratory Judgments, § 2. In the Notes to the Declaratory Judgment Act it was pointed out that the remedy was not designed to supplant existing remedies or to afford a new choice of tribunals. Even if the plaintiffs here had properly alleged a valid contract, and if the defendants had refused to comply with its terms, a complaint for declaratory judgment would not lie. In any case it is hard to understand why the plaintiffs should (as prayed in the complaint) be given the right to now submit proposals, be assigned a priority on the basis of such proposals, and be called from the priority list. In the majority opinion it is stated that the prayer of the amended complaint was “that the court declare the right of the plaintiffs to submit proposals, be assigned a priority on the basis of said proposal, and to be called from said priority list.” All of these questions could have been raised and passed on in a suit for breach of contract. The plaintiffs should rely on their second count, setting out a breach of a now existing contract. In the majority opinion the view is taken that while Exhibit A was not attached to the amended complaint, the failure to so attach was not properly raised in the motion to dismiss. With that contention (which, in the opinion of the writer of this dissent, is immaterial) there is no disagreement. Assuming that Exhibit A was properly attached to the complaint, the plaintiffs are in no way helped thereby. The exhibit specifically provides that “The truck hire agreement shall consist of the following parts: Legal advertisement attached hereto, Terms and Conditions of the Invitation for Bids, proposal, and priority list posted by the Purchasing Agent.” In the proposal it is provided that if there is a proper bid and acceptance there will be a priority of call established. That paragraph also provides the following: “Using departments and agencies when ordering trucks through the Truck Pool shall order out trucks, when required, in the priority scale as established by the Purchasing Agent, provided that such trucks shall in the opinion of the Using Department meet the operating needs for the particular assignment in their department, bureau, division or section and provided that the Contractor is available for the time requested.” There is no allegation in the complaint that the trucks of the plaintiffs did meet the operating needs for the particular assignment, nor is there any allegation that the plaintiffs’ trucks were available for service at the time the City passed over the priority numbers of the plaintiffs and called the trucks of firms having higher priority numbers. In Exhibit A there is this further provision: “All truck hire agreements shall be extensions at the option of the City, for periods as shown in the legal advertisement and may be extended for the periods as shown in the legal advertisement by written notice by the Purchasing Agent to the contractor.” This provision, without the legal advertisement, is wholly meaningless. The legal advertisement, which was a vital part of the negotiations, does not appear in the pleadings or in the exhibit filed by the plaintiffs. Without the advertisement, which is neither alleged in substance nor attached as a part of Exhibit A, there is nothing in the complaint to show that the contract was not terminable at will. In Stein v. Isse Koch & Co., Chicago, Inc., 350 Ill App 171, 112 NE2d 491, the court properly held that “A contract calling for continual performance and containing no provision for its duration is ordinarily terminable at will.” Nor can it be said that the complaint can in any way be helped by Kita v. Young Men’s Christian Ass’n of Metropolitan Chicago, 47 Ill App2d 409, 198 NE2d 174. In the majority opinion it is stated that the amended complaint, without Exhibit A, stated a cause of action; with that statement I cannot agree. The majority opinion also states: “Defendants next contend, according to their theory of the case in our court, that the contract alleged in said amended complaint is void for want of mutuality, and that the period of the duration of said alleged contract is indefinite and said contract was therefore terminable at the will of either of the parties, and was in fact terminated by defendant City of Chicago, hereinafter referred to as City, and cannot be the basis of a cause of action. Once again we must point out that neither of these objections was raised in the trial court and cannot be urged for the first time on review.” However, the motion to dismiss states: “1. That the theory of the complaint is founded on a contract by which on the face of the complaint fails to state a competent covenant for the following reasons: “ (c) That it is patent on the face of the complaint that the plaintiff never circumscribed any of his future actions. “(d) That the complaint failed to allege any specific work to be performed.” In Kita it was said: “The main purpose of the pleadings should therefore be to give the trial court a proper understanding of the case.” In the opinion of the writer of this dissent, the motion to dismiss accomplished just that. The objection was properly raised. It is also the opinion of the writer that the trial court properly dismissed the complaint for failure to state a cause of action, and the judgment of the Circuit Court of Cook County should be affirmed.

=== CASE 9741353 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:54:04.931017+00 ===

MORGAN, Justice
(dissenting).
I dissent.
The issue of sufficiency of service by publication as opposed to personal service hinges on knowledge by appellees of any claim or appearance on record of any interest or estate in the premises as described in the complaint.* I will deal with the moving parties separately.
As to the motion of appellant Boyles, I do not find the trial court’s findings of fact clearly erroneous. The trial court found that the property described in the deed, “all interest the grantors may have in all that land south of and adjacent to said Lot eight and Outlot 22 above described, beyond the river bluff,” had never been platted. That description is a nullity. It does not describe a governmental subdivision, nor any specific portion thereof. It is not even a metes and bounds description. There is absolutely nothing for a register of deeds to use to index such a description. A title examiner would have no means of ascertaining if the transfer had been made, short of reviewing every deed in the register. That hardly falls within the “reasonable means” test. The findings clearly support the trial court’s conclusion of law “that a diligent *397search of the records in the office of the Register of Deeds, County Auditor and Yankton County Treasurer’s Office [sic] could not have produced the names of E.W. Boyles or Elloween G. Boyles as property owners.”
As to the motion of appellant Biegelmeier, we have a different problem. No one argues that the County Deed conveying the property to Biegelmeier was not on record. Therefore, the trial court was right insofar as it found that the Register of Deed’s records showed that the property was still in the name of Yankton County, which incidentally was made a party to the action. The trial court erred, however, when it neglected to find that the sale of county-owned tax property was on record in the office of the County Auditor as per SDCL 10-25-29 through 10-25-39, inclusive. The conclusion of law entered on such inadequate finding was therefore unsupported. However, I have a serious problem that was raised by appellants in support of their motion before the trial court, when they included in their record a plat (Boyles Exhibit No. 1) which clearly shows that the land owned by Biegelmeier by virtue of the County Deed is not any part of the premises described in the complaint. The Biegelmeier land lies south of the centerline of an abandoned railroad siding, while the premises in question, at least in that proximity, lies north of that centerline. I do not see where Biegelmeier is prejudiced by the quiet title decision, and I find no standing whatever for him to challenge it.
I would then dispose of the other two issues raised by appellants in this manner. First, the procedural issue of entry of findings of fact and conclusions of law was not raised before the trial court. No motion was made to vacate the findings in order to give the trial court an opportunity to correct any error, if there was one. Second, the suggestion that by taking the evidence it did the trial court impliedly vacated the quiet title judgment is wholly unsupported by the record. At the motion hearing, the transcript repeatedly refers to the only issue being a question of law as to whether the proper parties were served. The trial court clearly had to take notice of the descriptions of the various parcels claimed by the parties to determine that question. I see no hint of an implied vacation of the judgment.
I would therefore affirm the order of the trial court as to both appellants.
See SDCL 21-41-1.

=== CASE 9740541 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:37:00.530173+00 ===

Gordon, J.
(concurring). Racing upon a highway was made illegal by the legislature. Sec. 346.94 (2), Stats. If racing is to be relied upon as a basis for negligence, the pleadings must allege such claim. Giemza v. Allied American Mut. Fire Ins. Co. (1960), 10 Wis. (2d) 555, 560, 103 N. W. (2d) 538, 106 N. W. (2d) 609. The legislature has not, however, proscribed two drivers from going to a prearranged place, but this court in a case in which the issue was not pleaded nevertheless now announces a rule which declares that one driver who speeds to a common destination with another may be charge*136able with the latter’s negligence and be found equally at fault as a matter of law.
I agree that the judgment should be affirmed; under the “great weight and clear preponderance of the evidence” rule, the finding of the trial court that Mr. Laufenberg and Mr. Avina were equally negligent is entirely sustainable. However, the majority opinion adopts a new and debatable concept of equal negligence for “tandem drivers” which I believe to be unnecessary to this decision.
I am authorized to state that Mr. Justice Heffernan joins in this concurring opinion.

=== CASE 9740542 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:37:00.533221+00 ===

Currie, C. J.
(dissenting). I respectfully dissent from the opinion of the court.
First, I am one of the minority mentioned therein who would hold Pintar negligent as a matter of law in failing to make any adequate observation to calculate the speed of the Laufenberg car before entering upon the arterial highway.
Secondly, absent any pleading or finding of racing on the part of Avina and Laufenberg, there is no basis for finding Avina guilty of the same percentage of causal negligence as Laufenberg. I join Mr. Justice Gordon and Mr. Justice Heffernan in disagreeing with the basis upon which the majority opinion grounds its af-firmance of the trial court’s finding in this respect. If this basis as well as that of racing is eliminated, there is no credible evidence to sustain the trial court’s finding of causal negligence on the part of Avina which contributed to the death of Mrs. Ogle. This is because the contact between the Avina and Ackerman cars was minimal with only a scraping of paint.
I agree that, if two motor vehicles successively collide with a third vehicle in close proximity of time and someone is injured or killed in the latter vehicle, and either *137collision standing alone would be sufficient to cause the injury or death, negligence of the drivers of the first two vehicles should be held causal in a situation where it is impossible to determine which collision caused the injury or death. However, that is not the case here because there was insufficient contact between the Avina and Ackerman cars to bring this rule into play.

=== CASE 9740543 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:37:01.319081+00 ===

Murphy, Justice.
This is an appeal from an order of the trial court which granted a new trial on the issue of damages unless defendant should consent to an additur to the jury award. Although the defendant filed consent to the additur, plaintiff regarded the award as still inadequate and has appealed. *231Thereafter, defendant filed a notice of review pursuant to Minn. St. 605.065.1
Plaintiff, Joseph Warren Walser, and his wife, Gloria, commenced separate actions against defendant, Lloyd Joseph Vinge. They sought recovery of damages for personal injuries sustained in an automobile collision caused by the defendant’s negligence. The actions were tried together. An award of $1,024.20 was returned in favor of plaintiff’s wife; she did not appeal. The plaintiff, awarded $5,375.80, made a motion for a new trial on the issue of damages or on all issues. The trial court denied the motion on the condition that defendant should consent to an additur of $10,000, making a total award of $15,375.80. In his memorandum attached to the order the trial court said:
“There is clear evidence of Defendant’s negligence here and the jury found for the Plaintiff so nothing is to be gained by a duplicate trial on the issue of negligence. Olson v. Christiansen, 230 Minn. 198, 41 N. W. 2nd 248. In addition, it is also clear that the verdict was not a compromise between the right of recovery and the amount of damages, so there is no right to a new trial on all of the issues. Blacktin v. McCarthy, 231 Minn. 303, 42 N. W. 2nd 818.
“The Court is satisfied that the verdict was clearly inadequate under the evidence and was a result of passion and prejudice on the part of the jury and considers the fact that Plaintiff’s counsel in his closing argument requested the sum of $5,375.80 (the exact amount of the jury verdict) for Plaintiff’s past medical expenses alone from the jury as convincing evidence of this inadequacy and prejudice.” 2
*232It appears from the record that at the time of trial the plaintiff was 40 years of age, married with two children. On September 11, 1962, accompanied by his family, he was proceeding in his automobile in a northerly direction on Highway No. 35W in the right-hand lane behind traffic which had stopped because of an accident ahead. After his car had come to rest, the plaintiff applied his emergency brake. About 20 or 30 seconds later he was struck from behind by defendant’s automobile forcing plaintiff’s car forward 16 or 17 feet. The plaintiff sustained an injury to the lower back region and was examined at a hospital within a few hours after the collision. He continued his regular work as a linoleum mechanic or layer, installing linoleum floors, counter tops, bathroom tiles, and the like over a period of approximately 4 weeks before consulting a physician. During this interval he had discomfort and increased difficulty in sleeping. Medical opinion was that he had sustained a herniation of the lumbosacral disc. He was hospitalized on four different occasions between October 28, 1962, and February 1964. In November 1962, he submitted to surgery as a result of which degenerative disc material was removed from the lumbar disc area and the lumbosacral disc area. A second laminectomy operation was performed during a confinement between December 1962 and January 1963. Later, as part of the course of treatment, he was placed in a cast which extended from hips to chest. He complained of pain and discomfort during most of the course of treatment.
The record would indicate that after the plaintiff returned to work his efficiency was substantially impaired, and it was found that he was slower, suffered from pain, and was emotionally distressed. Where he was formerly a proficient workman paid a premium wage, it was now found necessary to provide him with less strenuous work. During the 12-month period in 1961, he earned approximately $8,600, of which about $1,000 was attributable to overtime. In 1962, over a 9%-month period ending October 11, he earned approximately $7,000, of which $1,000 was attributable to overtime. In 1963, he worked a total of about 230 hours and, from January 1, 1964, to February 6, 1964, immediately prior to *233the trial, he worked a total of approximately 137 hours. The plaintiff’s medical expert testified that the plaintiff sustained a permanent injury resulting in a 20-percent loss of the back on an organic basis. The defendant’s medical expert testified that plaintiff’s condition at the present time could not causally be connected with the accident but was attributable to prior diseases and injuries.
With reference to damages, the record establishes that the plaintiff incurred doctor and hospital expenses in the sum of $5,353.30. This is almost the exact amount of the verdict. The verdict did not include compensation for loss of wages during the time of the plaintiff’s disability which would roughly approximate $8,800 on the basis of straight time and an additional $1,000 if anticipated overtime were included. No allowance was made for pain and suffering or for permanent injuries which the plaintiff allegedly sustained.
The issue presented is whether the trial court erred in not unconditionally granting a new trial because of inadequate damages. It may be admitted at the outset that there is no serious question as to the issue of liability. The plaintiff was entitled to a reasonable amount of damages for the injuries which he sustained. The jury returned a verdict based on passion and prejudice which did not come close to approximating the damages to which plaintiff was entitled. This fact was recognized by the trial court in substantially increasing the verdict by additur.
This court in Genzel v. Halvorson, 248 Minn. 527, 80 N. W. (2d) 854, approved the use of an additur in the trial court’s discretion and expressed the view that there may be circumstances when that practice is in the interest of the sound administration of justice and avoids the necessity of a new trial with its accompanying expense and delay. We also noted that if the plaintiff is not satisfied by the award made by the trial court, he may appeal as provided by Rule 59.01(5), Rules of Civil Procedure, at which time this court will have the benefit of the trial court’s judgment as to what may constitute an adequate verdict.
The few authorities which have considered the precise question which the record presents hold that a verdict is invalid which awards the exact amount of medical expenses and at the same time disallows dam*234ages for other elements of loss which have been properly proved. Annotation, 20 A. L. R. (2d) 276.
Among the more recent cases reviewed by this court which relate to the inadequacy of verdicts allegedly resulting from passion and prejudice of the jury are Hurr v. Johnston, 242 Minn. 329, 65 N. W. (2d) 193; Seydel v. Reuber, 254 Minn. 168, 94 N. W. (2d) 265; Dziuk v. Loehrer, 266 Minn. 153, 123 N. W. (2d) 86; Stacy v. Goff, 241 Minn. 301, 62 N. W. (2d) 920; and Krueger v. Knutson, 261 Minn. 144, 111 N. W. (2d) 526.
In Hurr v. Johnston, supra, we pointed out that where there does not appear to have been a compromise between the right of recovery and the amount of damages, there is no right to a new trial on all issues and that therefore, if the verdict is inadequate, a new trial should be ordered on the issue of damages alone. We also held that where the injuries and damages incurred, both general and special, were a direct result of the accident and the size of the verdict appears inadequate and indicates that it was the result of a compromise between the right of recovery and the amount of damages, then if a new trial is ordered it must be on all issues. We there said (242 Minn. 337, 65 N. W. [2d] 197):
“The plaintiffs here were either entitled to recover the actual special damages proved and something more than what might be termed a nominal amount for general damages or they were not entitled to recover at all. Where general damages are substantial, an award of nothing therefor, or a mere nominal award, will not suffice.”
We pointed out in Seydel v. Reuber, 254 Minn. 168, 173, 94 N. W. (2d) 265, 269, that “an additur increasing the verdict will not cure the deficiency if the amount of the recovery, in spite of the additur, still remains less than the amount of the special damages proved” and that a “mere nominal award will not suffice if substantial general damages are proved.” While we recognized in Seydel that the granting of a new trial on the ground of inadequacy of damages apparently given under the influence of passion and prejudice is largely within the discretion of the trial court, we held nevertheless that the “failure on the part of the jury *235to give the case impartial and conscientious consideration” required a new trial on the issue of damages only.
As we have indicated in Hurr and Seydel, where a jury awards recovery for pecuniary damages, they necessarily find the defendant negligent and responsible for all damages sustained. They are accordingly bound to take into consideration all of the elements of damage which are proved. It is manifest in this case that the jury unfairly and arbitrarily failed to take into consideration proven damages resulting from pain and suffering, loss of wages, and impairment of earning capacity. Because of the apparent unfairness of the jury and its disregard of the court’s plain instructions, it is our view that the plaintiff should have a new trial on the issue of damages. The right to a jury trial means the right to a fair and impartial jury. The record in this case is so fatally infected with bias and prejudice as to be beyond repair by additur.
New trial granted on issue of damages only.
Minn. St. 605.065 provides: “A respondent may obtain review of a judgment or order entered in the same action which may adversely affect him by serving a notice of review on all parties to the action who may be affected by the judgment or order. The notice of review shall specify the judgment or order to be reviewed and shall be served upon the other parties within 15 days after service of the notice of appeal on that respondent and thereafter shall be filed with the clerk of the supreme court.”
We gather that the trial court’s action was prompted by the belief that the jury was influenced by collateral facts which tended to reflect unfavorably on the personal life of the plaintiff. These collateral facts, which we do *232not discuss, should not have influenced the jury in passing upon the merits of the plaintiff’s claims.

=== CASE 9740544 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:37:01.323137+00 ===

Otis, Justice
(dissenting).
I concur in holding that the damages awarded by the jury were inadequate as a matter of law but do not agree that the additur of $10,000 should be set aside in favor of a new trial on the issue of damages.
This matter required 8 days of trial and resulted in a transcript of nearly 1,000 pages, the greater part of which was devoted to the medical testimony of 9 witnesses. We have consistently encouraged trial courts to rectify verdicts which reflect an improper award of damages, and in my opinion the court here acted correctly in pursuing that policy.1
“* * * To warrant the granting of a new trial by this court on the ground of inadequate or insufficient damages, the record must indicate a clear abuse of discretion on the part of the trial court in denying the motion for a new trial.” Krueger v. Knutson, 261 Minn. 144, 156, 111 N. W. (2d) 526, 534.
While it is true that plaintiff claimed special damages exceeding $10,000, the record supports the conclusion implicit in the jury’s verdict *236and in the additur of the trial court that a substantial part of plaintiff’s damages resulted from causes unrelated to the accident. He worked every day for a month following the accident, during which time he did not consult a physician. For many years he had suffered from an illness which the jury could find contributed to his disability. In addition he sustained a prior injury to his back in 1957 and the effect of these disabilities the trial court was entirely competent to assess.
Where the court has exercised the discretion we have urged it to assume 2 and the adjustment is well within the reasonable limits of what the evidence supports, if the adverse party has consented to the revision of the award, in my opinion the interests of justice require that the matter be laid to rest. I would affirm.
“This practice [additur] avoids the necessity of a new trial with its accompanying expense and delay.” Genzel v. Halvorson, 248 Minn. 527, 534, 80 N. W. (2d) 854, 859.
In Colgau v. Raymond, 275 Minn. 219, 225, 146 N. W. (2d) 530, 534, filed herewith, we held: “As we have said in many cases, we must be influenced by the fact that the trial court is in a much better position than are we to pass upon the question of whether a verdict is excessive or inadequate.”

=== CASE 9740545 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:37:01.908834+00 ===

OPINION
BAKER, Judge.
Appellant-defendant Kenneth R. Myers, the former personal representative of the estate of his uncle, John Powner, appeals the amount of restitution that the trial court ordered him to pay to Powner’s estate following his guilty plea to Perjury,1 a class D felony, regarding his theft of funds from the estate. Specifically, Myers claims that the amount was excessive because a portion of the restitution had already been repaid to the estate as the result of a judgment that had been entered against him in a civil matter.
While we conclude that the trial court properly ordered Myers to make restitution, the total amount reflected in the order — $101,672.97—must be offset by $68,000, which is the amount that the estate has recouped from Myers in the civil judgment regarding his theft of the estate funds. Thus, we affirm the trial court’s decision to order restitution, but we remand with instructions that the trial court modify the restitution order to reflect a total amount of $33,672.97.
*1109
FACTS
Myers was the sole heir and the former personal representative of Powner’s estate. At some point between 2001 and 2002, while serving as personal representative, Myers perjured himself regarding his disposition of estate funds. Specifically, in June 2001, Myers testified that he had used over $75,000 of estate funds to pay personal bills. Myers also testified in September 2002 that he had given over $65,000 of the estate funds “to people on the street.” Appellant’s Amended App. p. 12. It was alleged that Myers had embezzled various funds from the estate by placing large amounts of stock and money into his wife’s name and into various businesses that he had created.
The State charged Myers with perjury and theft. Thereafter, on March 22, 2004, Myers pleaded guilty to perjury in exchange for the State’s dismissal of the theft count. The sentencing recommendation set forth in the plea agreement provided that Myers would pay restitution for perjury as well as the theft charge.
At the sentencing hearing, Ward Miller, the successor personal representative of Powner’s estate, testified that he was able to “trace some $101,672.97 that Mr. Myers stole from the ... estate.” Tr. p. 9. Miller acknowledged that the estate had “made some recoveries from Mr. Myers,” but that those funds had been applied to a treble damages judgment that had been entered against Myers in a civil suit that the estate had brought against him. Tr. p. 9. In particular, the evidence showed that $51,000 had been paid to purge Myers from a civil contempt charge. Miller specifically confirmed that the estate had recouped these funds, along with $13,000 from the sale of Myers’s real estate by a trustee in bankruptcy court and $4,000 that had been seized from a bank account.
When Myers was sentenced, the trial court found that Myers had lied about the disposition of the funds and, as “a result of Myers’s perjury, the estate was out $101,672 and change.” Tr. p. 14. Thus, the trial court ordered restitution in this amount, and Myers now appeals.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
Myers contends that the trial court erred in ordering him to pay restitution in the amount of $101,672.97. Specifically, Myers argues that this amount should have been offset by $68,000, which represents the amount that the estate had already recovered from him in the civil action. Therefore, Myers argues that the trial court should have ordered him to pay only $33,672.97 in the restitution order.
In resolving this issue, we first note the relevant provisions of our restitution statute, Indiana Code section 35-50-5-3:
[I]n addition to any sentence imposed under this article for a felony or misdemeanor, the court may ... order the person to make restitution to the victim of the crime, the victim’s estate, or the family of a victim who is deceased. The court shall base its restitution order upon a consideration of: (1) property damages of the victim incurred as a result of the crime, based on the actual cost of repair (or replacement if repair is inappropriate)....
In construing this statute, this court has determined that the amount of restitution ordered must reflect the actual loss incurred by the victim. Little v. State, 839 N.E.2d 807, 810 (Ind.Ct.App.2005). Moreover, the entry of a restitution order is within the trial court’s discretion, and it will be reversed only upon a finding of an abuse of that discretion. Green v. State, 811 N.E.2d 874, 877 (Ind.Ct.App.2004). An abuse of discretion occurs when the trial court misinterprets or misapplies the law. Id.
*1110In support of Myers’s position that the amount of restitution should have been offset by the funds he paid toward the satisfaction of the civil judgment, he directs us to Haltom v. State, 808 N.E.2d 761 (Ind.Ct.App.2004). In Haltom, the victim, who was seriously injured when the defendant crashed his vehicle while driving while intoxicated, signed an agreement that provided for the release and discharge of the defendant from any and all past, present, and future claims, damages, and demands that arose from the injuries he sustained as the result of the defendant’s actions. Id. at 763. We held that the victim’s execution of a release of all claims in exchange for a settlement payment of $100,000 from the defendant’s insurer precluded the trial court from subsequently ordering restitution in the amount of $27,956.99 to pay for the victim’s medical expenses and lost earnings. Id. at 764.
However, our Supreme Court subsequently granted transfer in Haltom and determined that while criminal courts are permitted to take note of agreements entered into in civil court, such settlements do not prevent a criminal court from ordering restitution. Haltom v. State, 832 N.E.2d 969, 972 (Ind.2005). More specifically, the Haltom court noted that
By our holding today, we do nothing to constrain the ability of parties to settle civil disputes prior to the commencement or conclusion of collateral criminal proceedings. Parties remain free to enter into agreements to settle civil matters, and we are confident that they will do so. But the civil courts, not the criminal courts, are the proper venue to adjudicate these matters. See Ramsey v. Hicks, 174 Ind. 428, 91 N.E. 344, 354 (1910) (noting that it is the prerogative of the civil courts to determine the meaning and legal effect of civil contracts). An aggrieved party, including a criminal defendant, remains free to seek enforcement of the terms of a release in civil court. Our criminal courts are permitted to take note of these agreements in deciding whether to order restitution and in what amount, but these agreements in no way preclude a criminal court from ordering restitution when appropriate under statute.
Id. In essence, the Haltom court upheld a restitution order in the amount of the victim’s medical expenses and lost earnings even though the victim had also received $100,000 — the limit of Haltom’s policy— from Haltom’s insurer. See also Crawford v. State, 770 N.E.2d 775, 781 (Ind.2002) (holding that civil settlements have no bearing on decisions of criminal punishment, and imposition of a restitution order is a form of punishment and part of a criminal sentence). We are mindful, however, that elementary principles of tort law command that a plaintiff is entitled to only one recovery for a wrong. Thus, payments that are made in partial satisfaction of a claim must be credited against the remaining liability to prevent a double recovery. Manns v. State Dep’t of Highways, 541 N.E.2d 929, 933 (Ind.1989), superseded by statute on other grounds.
Turning to the circumstances here, we note that there was no agreement or release between Powner’s estate and Myers that affected the amount of restitution that was due in the criminal matter. However, the evidence presented at the sentencing hearing established that Myers had made payments toward the satisfaction of the civil judgment that had been ordered against him. Tr. p. 9. Specifically, the successor personal representative acknowledged that the funds that had been recouped by the estate have been applied toward the penalty portion of the civil judgment entered against Myers. Appellant’s Amended App. p. 34. The estate collected $13,000 from the sale of the real *1111estate, and $4,000 had been seized from a bank account. Appellant’s App. p. 8, 21. And it was further established that the largest portion of the amount that had been paid — $51,000—was used to “to purge the Defendant from a civil contempt charge relative to a Superior Court Order.” Appellant’s Br. p. 6, 9. As a result, because it was shown that the estate had already recouped a total of $68,000 that Myers was ordered to pay as a result of the civil judgment that had been entered against him, the restitution order must be offset by that amount so as to prevent a recovery by the estate over and above its actual loss. See Manns, 541 N.E.2d at 933. Therefore, although we affirm the trial court’s decision to order restitution in the case, we must remand the cause to the trial court with instructions that it modify its order to reflect a credit to Myers in the amount of $68,000, which represents the amount that he has already paid to the estate in satisfaction of the civil judgment that had been entered against him. Hence, on remand, the trial court should enter an order reducing the amount of restitution in this matter to a total of $33,672.97.
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded for a modification of the restitution order.2
MAY, J., concurs.
SULLIVAN, J., dissents with opinion.
. Ind.Code § 35-44-2-1.
. As an aside, we note that if there is further dispute regarding the allocation of the particular funds that Myers has paid toward the satisfaction of the civil judgment, the resolution of such disputes are better left to the trial court in the civil matter. Similarly, we leave it to the trial court in the civil cause to discern whether any additional funds that Myers has paid toward the satisfaction of that judgment should work as a further "credit” to Myers.

=== CASE 9740546 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:37:01.913301+00 ===

SULLIVAN, Judge,
dissenting.
The restitution ordered in this case was tied specifically and exclusively to the conviction for perjury. The perjury for which Myers was convicted was for lying “about disposition of the funds” which he had misappropriated. The misappropriation itself was the subject matter of the theft charge which was dismissed as a part of the plea bargain.
I do not read the plea bargain as does the majority. In other words, I do not see that it provides that “Myers would pay restitution for perjury as well as the theft charge.” Op. at 1109. Rather the plea agreement covered “Restitution as appropriate.” App. at 24.
I do not view that restitution for the perjury is “appropriate.” The funds for which Myers was ordered to make restitution were not lost to the estate by Myers’s lying about his disposition of those funds. Rather they were lost by reason of the misappropriation itself.
It is well established that restitution may be ordered only where the injury, harm or loss is “a direct and immediate result” of the criminal act. Reinbold v. State, 555 N.E.2d 463, 470 (Ind.1990), overruled on other grounds by Wright v. State, 658 N.E.2d 563, 570 (Ind.1995) (emphasis supplied); Martin v. State, 784 N.E.2d 997, 1014 (Ind.Ct.App.2003); Utley v. State, 699 N.E.2d 723, 729 (Ind.Ct.App.1998), trans. denied.
The loss to the estate here was not a direct and immediate result of Myers’s perjury. I would reverse and remand with instructions to vacate the restitution order.

=== CASE 9740547 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:37:02.756916+00 ===

Snell, J.
This is an action at law brought by a tenant against his landlord for injuries sustained as a result of an explosion of gas in the basement of a home rented by the tenant.
The jury returned a verdict for plaintiff and from the judgment thereon and all rulings inhering therein defendant has appealed.
Defendant is the owner of a rental six-room residence located on a city size lot in Polk City.
On May 24, 1962, plaintiff and his wife by oral agreement rented the premises and with their children moved in the next day. There is no claim of any agreement by the landlord to repair. The house had been newly decorated. The house was equipped with a gas furnace and gas water heater located in the basement and fueled with LP (bottle) gas. Under the rental agreement the tenants were to pay for their own fuel.
There was direct testimony by a former tenant from which the jury could find that the landlord (defendant) knew that the water heater had caused trouble and a gas explosion resulting in personal injury to a previous tenant. Defendant told plaintiff nothing about previous trouble.
After moving in plaintiff contactéd Mr. Glen Stanley, who was in LP gas business, to fill the gas tank and turn on the utilities. Mr. Stanley testified:
*1242“When the Wrights moved in the company driver filled the tank and I hooked up the stove, furnace and water heater. There was no plumbing to do, it was a matter of turning them on. I turned on the gas at the tank and I went to the basement and the gas was going through the hot water heater, and when I shut it off it stopped, so I lit the furnace. Mr. Wright said he had to have hot water so I finally lit the heater for him and told him to get ahold of Mr. Peterson, that it was absolutely unsafe. I could hear the gas escaping when I first went down into the basement. I checked the hot-water valve and the gas was going through the valve rather than out. I didn’t want to mess with the heater. It shut on and off all right unless the pilot was out and the thermocouple was cool, then, it absolutely wouldn’t shut off. When the pilot light was out the gas came on through and it would leak into the combustion chamber and the basement. * *
“I went ahead and lit it and told him if he was going to use it he ought to shut it down — let it run awhile, then shut it off, but it absolutely wasn’t too safe. * * *
“q. * * * What did you tell Mr. Wright about the condition of this particular gas water heater ? A. I told him he had better get ahold of Mr. Peterson and get a new control on it; that it wasn’t very safe that way; that it was dangerous, might blow him and his wife and family all over Polk City.
“Q. You told him that it was dangerous? A. Yes, sir.
“Q. Did you tell him that there was a danger of an explosion? A. Yes, sir.
“Q. At anytime while you were out there did you suggest that it not be lit and turned on ? A. Before I ever lit it I told him he ought to — it should be fixed, but he said he had to have hot water, so we lit it then. * *
Although their recollections of this conversation varied somewhat from Mr. Stanley’s testimony both plaintiff and his wife admitted hearing Mr. Stanley’s warning that the heater was dangerous. From Mr. Stanley’s testimony it would appear that there would be trouble only when the pilot light was out. Mrs. Wright testified:
“I heard what was said and Glen Stanley told my husband *1243that the heater was dangerous and that it had flared up or blown up before. That the pilot light had a habit of going out. He told us to keep it turned down low. He told us to watch it and call Mr. Peterson because it was potentially dangerous. We tried to call Mr. Peterson but we couldn’t get ahold of him. Mr. Stanley lighted the heater at that time.”
Mr. Wright testified that Mr. Stanley “lit the hot water tank and told me to get in touch with Mr. Peterson because the hot water tank was defective. * * * We did not light it the week that we were there.”
Mrs. Wright testified concerning the explosion:
“We moved into the property on May 25, 1962, a Friday. The gas was hooked up the next morning, on Saturday. The explosion occurred on May 31, 1962, a Thursday. We had not been home from before 7:30 a.m. until 2:30 or 3:00 in the middle of the afternoon on that day. We had been in Ottumwa the day before on Decoration Day and had been at the hospital with our daughter most of the week before that Thursday. * * *
“On the day of the explosion we came home late in the afternoon and when I went to wash my dishes the water was warm at first and then it turned cold. I told my husband that there wasn’t any hot water and he said he would go and look at the heater and he said if the tank is out I’ll go get G-len Stanley to light it. He went out the door that opens off the living room and onto the porch and raised the trapdoor to the basement and then there was a loud boom and the house filled with black smoke. My family and children were in the house at the time. I went to the back porch and the smoke was there too and the windows were all blown out and my husband was on the basement floor spread-eagled out on his stomach. His face was all red and dark and his hair and eyebrows were singed and he told me not to touch him. His arms were dark colored and was peeling. There was no flame.”
Mr. Wright’s testimony as to what happened was substantially the same.
Plaintiff was severely injured and his personal property in the house was damaged.
*1244Plaintiff was 39 years old when injured in May 1962. This ease was tried in March 1965.
For the problems before us further review of the evidence is unnecessary.
I. There is no claim by plaintiff that the landlord retained control of the premises or any part thereof or agreed to repair. Under such circumstances it is the general rule and the rule in Iowa that the landlord is not liable for injuries to the tenant occurring on the premises. Casey v. Valley Savings Bank, 231 Iowa 19, 24, 300 N.W. 733; Stupka v. Scheidel, 244 Iowa 442, 447, 56 N.W.2d 874; 32 Am. Jur., Landlord and Tenant, section 662; 52 C. J. S., Landlord and Tenant, section 417.
“This general rule, however, is subject to an exception in regard to hidden or latent defects which existed at the time the lease was consummated and where the defect was known to the lessor (or through the exercise of reasonable care the lessor should have known of it) and he actively concealed it from the tenant or failed to call it to his attention.” 10 Drake Law Review 132; 52 C. J. S., Landlord and Tenant, section 417.
Defendant-appellant concedes in his argument that there is such an exception to the general rule but contends that plaintiff neither pleaded nor proved such a defect. Plaintiff’s petition included among the specifications of alleged negligence the failure to inform the plaintiff of the defective condition of the water heater after discovery of the defect. There was testimony from which the jury could find knowledge of the defect and failure to disclose on the part of defendant. Relative thereto the court instructed the jury:
“You are instructed that it is the law of this state that a landlord is not required to repair the property under lease in the absence of an express agreement to make such repairs, and the landlord is not liable for damage from defects in property, except where at the time the lease was entered into there was a defect known to the landlord and he concealed it from the tenant or failed to call it to his attention.
“As applied to this case, you are instructed that there was no duty on the part of defendant Peterson to repair the premises *1245after Wright took possession, since there was no express agreement to do so, and he would not be liable for damages to plaintiff Wright unless you further find from all the evidence that the gas water heater in question was defective on the date the oral lease agreement was made, and that said defective condition was on that date known to defendant Peterson by previous notification and he, Peterson, failed to call it to the attention of plaintiff Wright, or concealed it from him, and under such finding your verdict would he for the plaintiff. Further, if you find from all the evidence that defendant Peterson had no knowledge nor had been notified of the defective gas hot water heater, then your verdict would be for the defendant.” (Emphasis added.)
The words “under such finding your verdict would be for the plaintiff” were improper in this instruction. Such a finding would support plaintiff on the first proposition he was required to establish but standing alone would not entitle plaintiff to a verdict. An instruction immediately preceding listed four propositions on which plaintiff had the burden of proof. They were the usual instructions and listed (1) proof of negligence as alleged; (2) proximate cause; (3) freedom from contributory negligence, and (4) damage and the amount thereof. The instruction concluded as follows:
“If the plaintiff has established each of the foregoing propositions by a preponderance of the evidence, then you will return a verdict in plaintiff’s favor.
“But if the plaintiff has failed to establish by a preponderance of the evidence one or more of the foregoing propositions, then your verdict will be for the defendant.”
When the instructions are viewed as a whole it appears that the error noted was an oversight. The particular words were not objected to but we cannot approve contradictory or confusing phraseology.
Except as noted the issue of breach of duty by defendant was properly submitted to the jury.
II. Appellant argues that plaintiff was contributorially negligent as a matter of law. We do not agree. Generally, questions of negligence, contributory negligence, and proximate cause *1246are for the jury; it is only in exceptional cases that they may be - decided as matters of law. Citations are unnecessary. See rule 344(f) (10), Rules of Civil Procedure.
In a previous instruction contributory negligence had been properly defined. The first part of Instruction No. 7 properly told the jury that plaintiff must establish by a preponderance of the evidence “that he was free from any negligence which in any manner or degree contributed directly to the accident and damages, if any, sustained by him.” The instruction then continued:
“As applied to this ease, if you find from all of the evidence that- the plaintiff had knowledge of a defective and dangerous condition of the gas heater before his injuries and failed to use ordinary care under all of the circumstances, he would be guilty of negligence, and cannot recover herein, and your verdict should be for the defendant. Further, if you find from all of the evidence herein that the plaintiff had the said Stanley light said heater and continued using the same, under all the circumstances shown by the evidence, and used the care of an ordinarily prudent person, then you are directed to return your verdict in accordance with all other instructions herein.” (Emphasis added.)
The instruction that if he was negligent he could not recover was improper. Negligence alone would not bar recovery.
It is doubtful if this contradiction had any effect on the jury’s deliberations but such possible confusion should be avoided.
Except as noted the issue was properly submitted to the jury. Tucker v. Tolerton & Warfield Co., 249 Iowa 405, 409, 86 N.W.2d 822.
III. Defendant by amendment to his answer affirmatively pleaded assumption of risk. There was evidence sufficient to require the submission of the issue. Defendant requested and the court refused to give an instruction on assumption of risk. Under the circumstances the court should have given a proper instruction thereon.
Assumption of risk is an affirmative defense defendant had the burden to prove. It does not apply unless plaintiff *1247had actual knowledge of the danger involved. Stupka v. Seheidel, supra, loe. cit. 451 of 244 Iowa.
The court submitted to the jury a special interrogatory as follows: “Do you, the jury, find that the plaintiff had knowledge of the defective condition of the gas hot water heater, prior to its explosion?” The jury answered “yes.”
There was evidence from which it could be found that plaintiff assumed the risk incident to use of the water heater. It does not follow that as a matter of law he assumed the risk of injury by opening the basement door. The question is, did he as a reasonably prudent man have a right to believe, and did believe, that he could enter the basement in safety by exercising proper care. Dillehay v. Minor, 188 Iowa 37, 42, 175 N.W. 838, 11 A. L. R. 106.
In Marean v. Petersen, 259 Iowa 557, 144 N.W.2d 906, we discussed assumption of risk at length. We need not repeat here. In that case we were considering situations arising from the use of an automobile. For the most part the doctrine has been recognized in eases brought under our gratuitous guest statute and those involving a master-servant or principal-agent relationship. However, we have not held the doctrine limited to such eases. The doctrine was clearly available to defendant as a defense in the case at bar.
Assumption of risk is discussed at length in Restatement of the Law, Torts 2d, chapter 17A, section 496A et seq. We quote a few excerpts therefrom:
“A plaintiff who voluntarily assumes a risk of harm arising from the negligent or reckless conduct of the defendant cannot recover for such harm.” Section 496A.
“* * * a plaintiff who fully understands a risk of harm to himself or his things caused by the defendant’s conduct or by the condition of the defendant’s land or chattels, and who nevertheless voluntarily chooses to enter or remain, ■ or to permit his things to enter or remain within the areá of that risk, under circumstances that manifest his willingness to accépt it, is not entitled to recover for harm within that risk.” Section 496C.
“In the third type of situation, the defendant has already *1248violated his duty to the plaintiff, by creating a dangerous condition or situation, which continues after the defendant’s conduct has terminated. If the plaintiff is injured before he discovers the danger, the defendant will be liable to him. When, however, the plaintiff discovers the danger, and voluntarily proceeds in the face of it, he is barred from recovery by his assumption of the risk.” Section 496C, comment f.
“In all three situations, the plaintiff’s conduct may be entirely reasonable under the circumstances; or it may be unreasonable, and so subject him also to the defense of contributory negligence.” Section 496 C, comment g.
In the case at bar there was a question of fact as to what if any risk plaintiff may have assumed and whether the defense had been sufficiently established to bar recovery.
IV. Plaintiff was 39 years old when injured on May 31, 1962. Trial of this case began March 17, 1965.
Over defendant’s objections the mortality table showing the normal life expectancy of a person plaintiff’s age to be 33.07 years was received. This is the listed normal expectancy of a person 39 years old. Plaintiff was nearly three years older at time of trial. The court’s instruction was based on expectancy at 39. Defendant objected thereto. The instruction stated that the evidence was received “solely for the purpose of aiding you in determining the extent, in time, of the permanent injuries, if any, received by the plaintiff as the result of the accident herein involved.”
The instruction as given followed Iowa Uniform Instruction No. 3.16a published by the Iowa State Bar Association, except for the insertion of plaintiff’s expectancy. Except for the use of the wrong figure in this case the instruction is not attacked. In this case reference to plaintiff’s age at the time of injury caused duplication of the elements making up plaintiff’s measure of damage.
Plaintiff’s claim as submitted to the jury included: (We summarize)
1. Medical and hospital expense.
2. Loss of time “in the past.”
*12493. Pain and suffering “in the past and up to the present time.”
4. Disfigurement.
5. Functional disability, if any, including impairment of earning capacity in the future.
6. Referred to damage to personal property not material here.
The proper use of the mortality table has been approved many times. The elements constituting plaintiff’s measure of damage were within the issues. However, the first four brought the computation of damages for plaintiff’s personal injury up to the date of trial and use of plaintiff’s expectancy at the time of his injury caused duplication. If plaintiff’s damages are separately computed to the date of trial the projection of damage into the future should be from the date of trial.
A physician, called by defendant, examined plaintiff and testified that he found some scarring but no functional disability.
From the record we doubt that the use of the wrong figure in the mortality table instruction had any effect on the amount of the jury’s verdict. We would be reluctant to reverse on that ground alone, but we caution that when a claim for damage is projected into the future care should be used to avoid duplication.
Y. For the reasons stated the case is reversed and remanded for a new trial. — Reversed and remanded.
Garfield, O. J., and Larson, Thornton, Stuart and Mason, JJ., concur.
Becker, Moore and Rawlings, JJ., dissent.