=== CASE 9741301 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:58.9497+00 ===

WUEST, Circuit Judge.
This is an appeal from an order denying a reduction in child support payments and termination of alimony. We affirm.
The parties hereto were divorced in 1973 after seventeen years of marriage. There is no transcript of the original trial or any findings of fact and conclusions of law inasmuch as they were waived. It does appear that neither party had much property when they were married. After the marriage, appellant finished his training as a chiropractor and commenced a practice which he maintained with the help of appellee until the divorce. They accumulated property worth $200,000, which the trial court divided nearly equally. The decree further awarded appellee custody of the two sons with child support payments of $250 per child per month, and the additional sum of $600 per month for alimony. In addition, the court ordered a college trust fund of $20,000 per child, which was established. Appellee contributed $26,000 to the trust fund, and appellant contributed $14,000. In 1974 appellant applied for a termination of *918alimony and reduction in child support. The reduction in alimony was denied; however, the child support for the oldest boy was eliminated because he had married. In 1976 appellant again applied for a termination of alimony and a reduction in child support. Appellant asserted as changed circumstances for termination of alimony and reduction in child support payments appel-lee’s employment income; appreciation of the assets awarded to appellee by the divorce decree; appellant’s reduction in income; and appellant’s health problems involving the use of his hands.
Appellant has severe osteoarthritic changes at the base of both thumbs at the metacarpal trapezoidal joint which is aggravated by his profession, in which he has to do a great deal of manipulation and massage. The thumbs remain swollen and his work causes increasing pain. X rays show that there has been loss of cartilage so that bone is rubbing on bone at the base of both thumbs. His physician has recommended fusion or locking the joint at the base of the thumb on each hand with two pins, and the building of a bone bridge with bone from another part of the body. This surgery would disable appellant from his profession for at least a year. This condition was urged as a changed circumstance at the 1974 hearing, the 1976 hearing, and at the last hearing now on appeal. As a result of the 1976 hearing, the court reduced the alimony payments to $250 per month but left the child support payment at $250. Neither party appealed.
As changed circumstances since the 1976 hearing, appellant has alleged appreciation of appellee’s property awarded in the divorce decree; rental income of appellee’s property and employment income of appel-lee; redaction of appellant’s income; and sale of appellant’s practice due to the condition of his hands. Appellant now lives in Arizona and no longer practices, although he has Arizona and California licenses. Evidence introduced at the most recent hearing established that there was no change in the condition of appellant’s hands since 1974. Appellant maintained his practice until 1979, when it was sold.
The trial court held that there had not been a sufficient change of circumstances since 1976 to justify a reduction in support payments and termination of alimony. This Court has consistently held that there must be a change of circumstances to justify a change in alimony and child support payments. Blare v. Blare, 302 N.W.2d 787 (S.D.1981); Guindon v. Guindon, 256 N.W.2d 894 (S.D.1977); Jameson v. Jameson, 90 S.D. 179, 239 N.W.2d 5 (1976). This Court does not sit as a trier of fact and will not disturb the decision of the trial court on questions of alimony and child support unless there is an abuse of discretion. Stenberg v. Stenberg, 90 S.D. 229, 240 N.W.2d 100 (S.D.1976); Guindon v. Guindon, supra.
The term “abuse of discretion” refers to “a discretion exercised to an end or purpose not justified by, and clearly against, reason and evidence.” Root v. Bingham, 26 S.D. 118, 120, 128 N.W. 132, 133 (1910), quoting from Murray v. Buell, 74 Wis. 14, 41 N.W. 1010 (1889).
Applying these principles to the case at bar, we are unable to say that the trial court abused its discretion. The condition of appellant’s hands has remained unchanged since the hearings in 1974 and 1976. It is true that appellee’s property has appreciated since 1976, but this has resulted largely through inflation, which has also affected the cost of rearing appellant’s son. It is true that appellant has sold his practice and that he is not presently practicing his profession, resulting in reduced income; however, appellant has Arizona and California licenses, and there was some testimony that he may re-establish a practice in Sioux Falls. A person cannot voluntarily reduce his income in order to avoid alimony and support payments. Simmons v. Simmons, 67 S.D. 145, 290 N.W. 319 (1940). The evidence in this case does not show that appellant is unable to maintain a practice; to the contrary, it shows that appellant did continue practicing from 1974 until 1979.
The order is affirmed. Appellee’s motion for attorney fees and costs is denied.
*919WOLLMAN, C. J., and MORGAN and FOSHEIM, JJ., concur.
HENDERSON, J., dissents.
WUEST, Circuit Judge, sitting for DUNN, Justice, disqualified.

=== CASE 9741302 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:58.953671+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(concurring in part, dissenting in part).
I would reverse the trial court’s order denying appellant a reduction in alimony. A review of the economic posture of the respective parties clearly indicates that ap-pellee is not a needy recipient of alimony. On the contrary, her monetary status greatly exceeds that of her ex-husband.
First, as the trial court noted, appellant has experienced a “drastic reduction” in income since the 1976 proceedings. This reduction was caused by the necessity of appellant selling his chiropractic practice due to the chronically severe crippling of his hands. Appellant’s present income consists of $828 per month from payments received on realty which appellant was forced to sell to support himself, his estranged wife and their child. Appellant also receives $551 as monthly accrued interest on savings accumulated during the years he was able to practice his profession. Between October of 1979 and October of 1980, appellant received one-third of the fees collected from his former patients through the chiropractor who purchased his practice. Currently, appellant is not a practicing chiropractor and, due to the arthritic condition of his hands, appears to have reached the end of his professional career.
In its correspondence to the parties’ attorneys in December of 1979, the trial court stated that “it appears [appellant’s] income level has dropped below $3,000 per month— and on the most conservative basis may have dropped below $2,000 per month. That is a substantial change in circumstances from 1976.” I agree that a substantial change in circumstances has occurred since 1976, and point out that a mere change in circumstances is sufficient for a modification of alimony to occur. Blare v. Blare, 302 N.W.2d 787 (S.D.1981).
It is true, as the majority points out, that surgery might alleviate much of appellant’s discomfort and possibly enable him to resume his chiropractic practice. I find it hard to fathom, however, the “voluntary” nature of appellant’s income reduction. Agreed, appellant apparently does not wish to undergo the rather complex surgical procedure and resulting year of incapacitation. But does appellant’s decision not to have surgery at the age of sixty necessarily mean he “voluntarily” reduced his income? Did appellant “voluntarily” cause the joints in his trained hands to swell-up, thereby inflicting upon himself such pain that work became a painful daily exercise in his profession? The answer to these questions is an obvious “no.”
It is absurd to believe that appellant would avoid surgery merely to reduce his income, thereby possibly reducing his alimony obligation. This Court long ago concluded that the ability of the alimony obligor to pay is a paramount consideration in determining whether alimony obligations should be reduced. Vert v. Vert, 3 S.D. 619, 54 N.W. 655 (1893). “The fact that the husband has suffered a serious impairment of health or physical condition ... since the entry of a decree for alimony or maintenance may authorize a reduction, suspension, or termination of alimony payments where his condition affects his ability to pay.” Annot. 18 A.L.R.2d 45 (1951). See also Silver v. Silver, 269 Ala. 517, 113 So.2d 921 (1959); Lewis v. Lewis, 213 Ark. 262, 209 S.W.2d 874 (1948); Martin v. Martin, 79 Cal.App.2d 409, 179 P.2d 655 (1947); Berkowitz v. Berkowitz, 239 Ga. 1, 236 S.E.2d 7 (1977); Bulmer v. Bulmer, 28 Ill.App.3d 406, 328 N.E.2d 622 (1975); Siders v. Siders, 227 Iowa 764, 288 N.W. 909 (1939); Slagle v. Slagle, 205 La. 694, 17 So.2d 923 (1944); Altenbach v. Altenbach, 162 S.W.2d 361 (Mo.App.1942); 24 Am.Jur.2d Divorce and Separation § 678 (1966). It is unconscionable to require appellant to ply his profession with proficiency and pain (bone rubbing on bone) so as to enable appellee to enrich her already comfortable economic status.
*920Coupled with appellant’s decreased ability to provide alimony is the fact that appellee cannot realistically be said to require alimony. Appellee is currently employed and grossing approximately $14,560 annually. Furthermore, she owns $209,306 worth of assets, including certificates of deposit which alone total over $100,000. At the hearing on the motion for modification, ap-pellee testified that it cost her $8,336 per year to raise and adequately provide for the parties’ son. When appellee’s own income is added to appellant’s child support obligation of $250 per month, appellee’s yearly income comes to $17,560. It is significant that this total does not entail any interest and/or earnings accrued from appellee’s stock, certificates of deposit, rental income, savings, or mutual funds. The record simply does not reflect that appellee needs alimony.
As the trial court stated, appellee’s income and capital assets have increased since 1976. The trial court also pointed out, however, that inflation has offset this increase. If this be true, would not the same inflationary factors have even more severely eroded appellant’s income, in light of the fact that appellant’s income had decreased, not increased, over the same period of time? The answer is clearly a resounding “yes.”
As I have recently expressed, the economic need of an alimony recipient must be considered when reviewing the equity of such an award. Lanphear v. Lanphear, 303 N.W.2d 576 (S.D.1981) (Henderson, Justice, concurring in part, dissenting in part); Herrboldt v. Herrboldt, 303 N.W.2d 571 (S.D.1981) (Henderson, Justice, dissenting). “The fact that the wife has acquired a substantial amount of property, or that her property has increased in value, after the entry of a decree for alimony or maintenance is an important consideration in determining whether and to what extent the decree should be modified.” Annot. 18 A.L. R.2d 74 (1951). See also Hornbaker v. Hornbaker, 25 Ariz.App. 577, 545 P.2d 425 (1976); Brady v. Brady, 94 Cal.App.2d 1, 210 P.2d 69 (1949); Anderson v. Anderson, 333 So.2d 484 (Fla.App.1976); Broday v. Broday, 43 Ill.App.3d 628, 2 Ill.Dec. 151, 357 N.E.2d 128 (1976); Loyacano v. Loyacano, 358 So.2d 304 (La.1978); Eaton v. Eaton, 237 S.W. 896 (Mo.App.1922); Sayland v. Sayland, 267 N.C. 378, 148 S.E.2d 218 (1966); Lines v. Lines, 69 S.D. 299, 9 N.W.2d 705 (1943).
In conclusion, I must agree with the Kentucky Court of Appeals when it stated that “[theoretically, alimony or maintenance is based in part on a consideration of the needs of the parties as well as their respective abilities to meet them.” Gann v. Gann, 347 S.W.2d 540, 542 (Ky.App.1961). Applying this basic theory of equity to the particulars of this case, leads me to the inevitable conclusion that the trial court abused its discretion when it denied appellant’s motion for a termination of alimony.

=== CASE 9741306 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:08.781191+00 ===

JUSTICE MILLER delivered the opinion of the court: Plaintiff, Congregation of the Passion, Holy Cross Province, brought suit against the defendant, Touche Ross & Company, in the circuit court of Cook County alleging damages resulting from defendant’s preparation of financial statements for plaintiffs use. The jury returned verdicts in favor of plaintiff and against defendont for $3.9 million on the negligence count and $1.5 million on the breach of contract count. A directed verdict in favor of defendant had previously been entered on a fiduciary duty count. The trial court entered judgment against defendant for $3,819,352, and the appellate court affirmed. (224 Ill. App. 3d 559.) We allowed defendant’s petition for leave to appeal (134 Ill. 2d R. 315), and now affirm the judgment of the appellate court. Plaintiff is a corporate entity and an order of the Roman Catholic Church. It operates monasteries, retreat houses, and schools. Plaintiff meets its operating expenses by use of contributions and investment income. Rather than make its own investment decisions, plaintiff hires investment advisors to manage its accounts. Defendant is an accounting firm with offices in Chicago and in many other cities throughout the world. In 1973, plaintiff decided to replace its previous accounting firm with defendant. Touche Ross. Plaintiff and defendant executed an "engagement letter” which listed the services defendant would render for plaintiff. The engagement letter was for a term of one year. On or about June 30 each year, when plaintiff’s fiscal year ended, defendant presented a new engagement letter to plaintiff. In each of the engagement letters, defendant agreed to prepare an unaudited financial statement for plaintiff’s use for the fiscal year just ended. Between defendant’s preparation of the 1975 and 1976 fiscal year financial statements, plaintiff appointed Cranford D. Newell of San Francisco, California, as an investment advisor. Plaintiff committed two funds to Newell’s control: the "retirement fund” and the "permanent fund.” Each fund initially consisted of approximately $1 million. By written agreement, Newell was given full discretionary authority over all investment decisions regarding the two funds. Newell dealt mainly in government bonds with fixed interest rates. Newell employed a modified "arbitrage” trading strategy. He would buy a bond issue that seemed to be trading lower than government bonds generally, and simultaneously sell short an issue trading higher than securities with similar coupons and maturities. If the market stabilized as Newell anticipated, market forces would move each issue price closer to the prices of other government bonds. The transaction could then be liquidated at a profit. Newell entered into these transactions through accounts held with numerous securities dealers. These transactions were highly leveraged, and although plaintiff had entrusted to Newell only $2 million, Newell held positions on behalf of plaintiff totaling $44.5 million on June 30, 1976. The only cash required by Newell to enter into these transactions was the amount of the purchase less the amount of the short sale. This initial difference between the two amounts is called "margin” or "cost,” hereinafter referred to as "cost.” The reports that Newell submitted to plaintiff recorded "open arbitrage positions” at cost. Plaintiff’s internal bookkeepers also recorded Newell’s arbitrage positions at cost. While the cost figure accurately reflected the market value of an arbitrage position at the moment the transaction took place, any future changes in the market values of the bonds would not be reflected in the cost figure. Hence, any unrealized losses or gains occurring due to fluctuations in market prices would not be reflected in the cost figures which were reported in the annual financial reports. Defendant first encountered the Newell investments in the course of preparing plaintiff’s 1976 financial statement. The accountants assigned by defendant to prepare plaintiff’s 1976 financial statement left in their work papers the following note regarding the Newell investments: "3) Arbitrage — when Newell determines that there is a temporary fluctuation in the price of a government security in relationship to other government securities he buys or sells long that security and purchase [szc] or sells short another government security at the same time. When the fluctuation is eliminated he reverses his previous purchase and short sale and takes a profit (or loss). These arbitrages are generally for over $1 million dollars [szc] and a small fluctuation (1/s2 of 1%) can involve a substantial amount of money. The only money actually invested by the Congregation is for margin [cost] required by the dealers (typically the amount of the purchase less the amount of the short sale). The risk is minimized since only U.S. government securities are traded and the chance of default is small. At June 30, 1976 the Congregation had open arbitrages aggregating $22.25 million at par value and short positions in the same amount. Since the trades in these securities involve minor fluctuations in price (1/s2 or even 1/e4 of a point) and there is no source which can tell us market value closer than 1 point ($222,500) it was decided not to gross up the balance sheet to reflect these items at market. Instead footnote disclosure will be made of the total amounts involved and only the margin [cost] outstanding on these arbitrages will be included in investments. W. Cornfield 10/4/76” During the preparation of the 1976 financial report, the partner of defendant in charge of plaintiff s account, Philip Melchert, called plaintiffs assistant treasurer, Brother James Kent, to inquire about the Newell investments. Plaintiff claims Melchert recommended that the Newell investments be recorded at cost. Melchert purportedly explained that cost was approximately equal to market value. Plaintiff claims that Brother James did not understand the Newell investments and that in agreeing that the investments be recorded at cost, Brother James deferred to defendant’s expertise. Defendant denies that Brother James did not understand the Newell investments. Defendant claims that Melchert and Brother James mutually agreed to report the Newell investments at cost, and that Brother James fully understood the import of that decision. After defendant completed its work at plaintiff’s offices in 1976, Melchert met with plaintiff’s governing body, the Provincial Council (the Council), to discuss the annual report. The 1976 financial report contained a footnote which specified that Newell’s investments were carried at cost rather than market value. Plaintiff claims Melchert explained this footnote by again stating that cost was essentially equal to market value. By reporting arbitrage transactions at cost, defendant reported the Newell investments at $2,166,322 in the 1976 financial report. The actual market value of the investments on June 30,1976, the date of the report, was $1,951,520. By reporting the transactions at cost, there was a discrepancy between the market value of the Newell investments and the figure reported by defendant in plaintiff’s financial reports for each fiscal year from 1976-79. The amounts of the discrepancies are shown in the following chart: Figure Reported Actual Market Fiscal Year by Defendant in Report Value at Time of Report Discrepancy 1976 $2,166,322 $1,951,520 ($ 214,802) 1977 1,795,346 1,471,720 (323,626) 1978 1,792,748 878,638 ( 1,472,887) 1979 2,226,014 319,861 ( 1,347,376) Kenneth Witt, an employee of defendant, did the field work for plaintiff’s 1980 financial statement. Witt prepared a draft of the 1980 financial statement which defendant sent to plaintiff in September 1980. The 1980 draft reported the Newell accounts at approximately $3.6 million. Because the $3.6 million cost figure did not reflect unrealized losses, the actual market value of Newell’s investments was later shown to have been approximately $1.2 million at the time of the report. Prior to defendant’s submitting to plaintiff a final report for 1980, Melchert contacted Witt and asked him where the $3.6 million reported in the draft financial report was located. Witt was unable to answer the question. Melchert then began an independent investigation of the Newell investments and their values. In October 1980, Melchert contacted Newell and requested information regarding plaintiff’s funds. Newell was unable to furnish the material that Melchert requested. Melchert next contacted the securities dealers with whom Newell held accounts on plaintiff’s behalf. By January 1981, Melchert had received June 30, 1980, market values for the Newell accounts totaling approximately $1.2 million. When Melchert called Newell with this information, Newell informed him that the $1.2 million figure rather than the $3.6 million cost figure reported in the 1980 draft financial report could be the total market value of Newell’s accounts with plaintiff. On February 11, 1981, a week after Melchert spoke with Newell, Melchert attended a meeting of the Council. Plaintiff claims that Melchert informed the Council that the market value of Newell’s accounts was approximately equal to cost; however, recent events had, according to Melchert, caused him to question whether there were unrealized losses. Melchert allegedly offered limited details and promised to investigate the matter further. Defendant contends that Melchert informed the Council he had reason to believe that the market value of the Newell investments was approximately $1.2 million. Approximately two months after the February 11, 1981, Council meeting, a security dealer made a "margin call” on an account managed by Newell. Newell called plaintiff and requested an additional $500,000 to cover the margin call. Newell explained that if the dealer closed out plaintiff’s accounts, substantial "unrealized losses” could be recognized. At the time of the margin call, plaintiff still had in its possession the draft 1980 financial report in which defendant had reported New-ell’s account at approximately $3.6 million. Plaintiff had not heard anything further from defendant since the February 11, 1981, Council meeting. After a meeting with Newell during which Newell explained the negative consequences of not meeting the margin call, plaintiff’s investment officer recommended to plaintiff that the additional $500,000 be forwarded to Newell. On April 14, 1981, plaintiff transferred the additional sum to Newell. After plaintiff forwarded the additional funds to Newell, plaintiff received from defendant a letter in which defendant stated that the market value of the Newell accounts on June 30, 1978, was $319,860, and not the $1,792,748 cost figure reported in the 1978 financial report. Defendant offered in the letter to discuss the matter further if plaintiff desired. Late in April 1981, defendant sent plaintiff a copy of the final 1980 financial report. According to the report, the market value of the Newell accounts on June 30, 1980, totaled $1,286,411. "Note H” to the report stated, in part: "Since the Congregation carries investments at market value, the amounts reported previously [for the Newell accounts] have been restated to include unrealized gains and losses as follows: Previously Reported Adjustment As Restated June 30, 1978 $1,792,747 ($1,472,887) $319,860 June 30, 1979 2,226.014 ( 1,347,376) 878,638” Shortly after plaintiff received the final 1980 financial statement from defendant, it closed its accounts with Newell. The accounts had not only been substantially depleted, but due to a shift in interest rates, several of the security dealers with whom Newell dealt claimed plaintiff owed them additional sums. After plaintiff settled all claims with the security dealers, plaintiff sustained net losses on the Newell accounts in the amount of $3,819,352. In addition to testimony regarding the actual conduct of the parties, both defendant and plaintiff presented expert testimony concerning the propriety of defendant’s recordation of the Newell investments. Plaintiff’s witness, Vincent Sparrow, a certified public accountant and partner of Peat, Marwick & Mitchell, testified that defendant’s method of recording Newell’s investments violated Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). Sparrow further stated that the market values of Newell’s investments were readily ascertainable from the Wall Street Journal. Defendant called as a witness Leonard Savoie, the chairman of the department of accountancy and a professor at the University of Notre Dame. Savoie testified that the footnote disclosures contained in plaintiff’s reports were clear in explaining that Newell’s investments were not carried at market value. Savoie further testified that this type of footnote disclosure and recordation was in accordance with GAAP. Prior to filing the complaint here, plaintiff filed a complaint in Federal court against Newell and four securities dealers alleging Federal security law violations. The dealers counterclaimed for amounts due after the liquidation of plaintiff’s accounts. In May 1982, plaintiff amended its Federal complaint to join Touche Ross as a defendant, claiming that Touche Ross aided and abetted the security law violations. Plaintiff also asserted State law claims against Touche Ross. In September 1984, the district court granted the defendants’ motion for summary judgment on the security law claims and the aiding and abetting claim. The court declined to exercise pendent jurisdiction over plaintiff’s State law claims against Touche Ross, and dismissed those claims without prejudice. Plaintiff appealed the district court’s decision, and the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed. Congregation of Passion, Holy Cross Province v. Kidder Peabody & Co. (7th Cir. 1986), 800 F.2d 177. After the adverse ruling in Federal district court, plaintiff filed the instant action in the circuit court of Cook County. Plaintiff’s complaint consisted of three counts. The first count alleged that defendant was guilty of professional negligence in the manner in which the Newell investments were reported in plaintiff’s financial statements. The second count alleged that defendant breached a fiduciary duty it owed to plaintiff by not properly investigating plaintiff’s investments and by failing to take appropriate action after it learned of errors contained in the financial statements. The final count alleged that defendant breached its contract with plaintiff by failing to report certain investments in plaintiff’s financial statements at market value. Prior to trial, defendant presented motions to dismiss and for summary judgment. The motions alleged that plaintiff’s claims were barred by collateral estoppel because of the findings in the prior Federal litigation, and that the negligence count of plaintiff’s complaint was barred by the economic loss doctrine expressed in Moorman Manufacturing Co. v. National Tank Co. (1982), 91 Ill. 2d 69. The trial court denied these motions. After plaintiff presented its evidence and rested its case, defendant moved for a directed verdict on all three counts of plaintiff’s complaint. The circuit court denied defendant’s motion as to each of the three counts. At the close of all evidence, defendant renewed its motion for a directed verdict on all three counts of plaintiffs complaint. The circuit court denied the motion as to the negligence and breach of contract counts, but granted the motion as to the fiduciary duty count. In its proofs and closing argument, plaintiff sought total damages in the amount of $3,819,352. The jury returned verdicts in favor of plaintiff for $3.9 million on the negligence count and $1.5 million on the breach of contract count. The jury found plaintiff not guilty of any contributory negligence. Because neither the $3.9 million nor the $1.5 million verdict accurately reflected damages sustained by plaintiff, the trial court ordered a remittitur to $3,819,352 on the negligence count and to $0 on the breach of contract count. Plaintiff agreed to the remittitur on the negligence count, but refused to consent to remittitur on the breach of contract count. The trial judge entered what he called a "judgment of liability” on both counts and entered an award of damages in the amount of $3,819,352 on the negligence count only. The appellate court affirmed the judgment of the trial court on the condition that plaintiff agree to a remittitur of the contract claim to $0. (224 111. App. 3d 559.) If plaintiff refused to consent to the remittitur, the case was to be remanded to the trial court on the question of damages. Plaintiff consented to the remittitur. We allowed defendant’s petition for leave to appeal to this court. 134 111. 2d R. 315. Defendant alleges here several points of error which it claims are grounds for reversal. First, defendant claims plaintiff was collaterally estopped from contesting issues that were necessary to the result in the parties’ prior Federal litigation. Defendant claims that several findings of fact necessary to the result in the Federal litigation were inconsistent with defendant’s liability in the present case. Defendant further claims that the lower court judgment awarding damages for purely economic losses in tort is contrary to Moorman Manufacturing Co. v. National Tank Co. (1982), 91 Ill. 2d 69. Defendant further contends that the appellate court erred in applying the negligent misrepresentation exception to the economic loss doctrine in affirming the trial court. Finally, defendant claims that the trial court erred in a number of pretrial and evidentiary rulings. Defendant also alleges that because the verdicts did not conform to the evidence, the trial court should have set aside the verdicts. Plaintiff contends that the judgments below are correct and should be upheld. In the event, however, that this court should determine that further proceedings are required, plaintiff requests the following cross-relief: (1) that the breach of contract verdict be amended to allow full recovery on the contract count; (2) that plaintiffs consent to remittitur on the breach of contract count be rescinded; and (3) that the directed verdict entered in favor of defendant on plaintiffs breach of fiduciary duty count be reversed. DISCUSSION I. Collateral Estoppel In 1981, plaintiff brought suit in Federal district court against its former investment advisor, Cranford D. Newell, and several securities dealers alleging security law violations. Plaintiff later added Touche Ross as a defendant, alleging Touche Ross aided and abetted the security law violations. Plaintiff also alleged State law claims against Touche Ross. Defendants filed a motion for summary judgment, and the Federal district court granted the motion on the security law claims and the aiding and abetting claim. The court, however, declined to exercise pendent jurisdiction over plaintiffs State law claims, and dismissed those claims without prejudice. Plaintiff appealed the district court’s grant of summary judgment on the security law claims and the aiding and abetting claim, and the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit affirmed. Congregation of the Passion, Holy Cross Province v. Kidder Peabody & Co. (7th Cir. 1986), 800 F.2d 177. Defendant argues that the doctrine of collateral estoppel precludes plaintiff from relitigating those issues decided in the Federal adjudication. Defendant alleges that plaintiff advanced contentions in the present case which directly contradicted the Federal court findings. Plaintiff, on the other hand, claims that those questions decided during the Federal adjudication are not relevant to the present case. The appellate court believed that because no determination on the merits of the pendent State claims was made by the Federal court, collateral estoppel could not apply. We agree that collateral estoppel does not preclude plaintiffs claims here, but for reasons different from those advanced by the appellate court. Three factors are necessary for the application of collateral estoppel: (1) the issue decided in the prior adjudication must be identical with the one presented in the case in question; (2) there must have been a final judgment on the merits; and (3) the party against whom the estoppel is asserted must be a party, or in privity with a party, to the prior adjudication. Ballweg v. City of Springfield (1986), 114 Ill. 2d 107, 113. While the Federal court’s dismissal of plaintiffs State law claims against defendant was not a final judgment on the merits, collateral estoppel could apply to findings made by the Federal courts while ruling on the security law claims. Plaintiff was a party to the Federal litigation, and there was a final judgment on the merits regarding the security law claims. "Summary judgment *** is the procedural equivalent of a trial and is an adjudication of the claim on the merits.” (Paulos v. Reda (1987), 165 Ill. App. 3d 793, 801.) Plaintiff, therefore, is precluded from relitigating any findings that were made during the Federal court’s adjudication of the security law claims. Defendant claims that the following findings of fact were made during the Federal adjudication: (1) Newell was plaintiff’s agent; (2) Newell had total discretion to act as plaintiff’s agent in executing arbitrage transactions; (3) Touche Ross made no misrepresentations to plaintiff; (4) plaintiff was fully aware of the Newell transactions and the type of risks they involved; (5) New-ell acted within his authority; (6) plaintiff relied only on Newell and plaintiff’s business advisory board in making investment decisions; (7) plaintiff was able to and did follow the Newell transactions; (8) plaintiff and defendant agreed to report the Newell investments on a cost, not market, basis; and (9) plaintiff was responsible for the losses incurred. Several of the findings defendant relies on in its collateral estoppel claim are not relevant to plaintiff’s theories of recovery here. Accordingly, these findings could have no effect on the judgment rendered in this case. That Newell was plaintiff’s agent, that Newell had discretion to invest plaintiff’s funds and acted within his authority, that plaintiff was aware of the risks involved in Newell’s investments strategy, or that plaintiff relied only on Newell and its own business advisory board in making plaintiff’s investment decisions have no bearing on whether defendant is liable to plaintiff for the manner in which defendant recorded the Newell investments in plaintiff’s financial report. We do not believe that the remaining points urged by defendant as findings were actually decided in the Federal adjudication. The doctrine of collateral estoppel applies only to controlling facts or questions material to the determination of both causes. (Housing Authority v. Young Men’s Christian Association (1984), 101 Ill. 2d 246, 252.) As we explain below, none of the remaining points were necessary to the Federal adjudication, and thus collateral estoppel cannot apply. Whether plaintiff agreed with defendant to report Newell’s investments at cost in plaintiff’s financial reports was not necessary to the Federal adjudication. The Federal security law claims were based on alleged misrepresentations by Newell and the securities dealers. Defendant was accused of aiding and abetting the security law violations. Once the Federal court determined, however, that no misrepresentations were made by the securities dealers to plaintiff, communications between plaintiff and defendant became irrelevant to the Federal claim. The Federal courts found that defendant could not be guilty of aiding and abetting if no primary violation of the security laws had been established. Any agreement between the plaintiff and defendant, therefore, was not necessary to the Federal adjudication. For the same reason, any misrepresentations by defendant to plaintiff were not relevant to the Federal claims. Defendant further alleges that the Federal courts found plaintiff was able to track the Newell investments. In its opinion, however, the Seventh Circuit stated that plaintiff’s ability to track the Newell investments was not necessary to its decision. (Congregation of the Passion, 800 F.2d at 182 n.4.) As we have stated, Housing Authority holds that collateral estoppel will not attach to this type of finding. Regarding this point, the dissenting justice asserts the Federal district court found that plaintiff was able to "track” Newell’s investments. The quotation contained in the dissent appears in the transcript of the April 30, 1985, hearing at which the district court granted the securities dealers’ motions for summary judgment on counterclaims they had brought against the Congregation to collect sums they were owed as a result of Newell’s transactions. In opposition to the motions, the Congregation argued that Newell and the dealers had engaged in unauthorized transactions using funds lent by the dealers to Newell. The judge rejected the Congregation’s theory, determining that the Congregation was aware of, or could "track,” each one of New-ell’s investments as it was made, that the funds invested by Newell belonged to the Congregation, and that New-ell was acting within the scope of his authority in making those investment decisions. With respect to the Congregation’s awareness of Newell’s activities, the district judge stated at the April 1985 hearing: "Simply put, Newell had broad discretion and the plaintiff had knowledge of his activities which it cannot deny. During the years 1975 through 1981, plaintiff was able to track the investments through confirmation slips and accurate reports of the transactions which the dealers supplied. Plaintiff received the statements of its United California Bank account and also had before it those statements, the cash sheets and the ticket numbers assigned by Newell for each transaction. The cash transfers were not going into the agent’s hands while the principal remained unaware. In this case, the funds in question were flowing in and out of the plaintiff’s own bank account. Therefore, plaintiff was not without knowledge of Newell’s transactions during this period of further losses. The documents and the transactions were complex, confusing and ultimately unwise, but the plaintiff had the ability to follow them and to have review of them for themselves or by another specialist other than Newell.” Examination of the district court’s entire statement shows that the judge, in speaking of the plaintiff’s ability to "track” the investments, was referring only to the plaintiff’s knowledge of the particular transactions New-ell was entering into on plaintiffs behalf — not that the plaintiff knew the actual extent of Newell’s investment losses. As stated earlier in this opinion, both Newell and the securities dealers sent plaintiff confirmation slips accurately detailing all of Newell’s transactions. Of course, the confirmation slips showed only the value of the investments when they were made. Future fluctuations in market price were not reported to plaintiff by Newell or the securities dealers. Instead, plaintiff retained defendant to value Newell’s investments. The district judge acknowledged that plaintiff could obtain review of Newell’s investments by an outside specialist, and it is the asserted negligence of the outside specialist retained for that purpose — defendant, Touche Ross— that is at issue here. In sum, we do not believe that the negligence verdict against defendant in the present case is inconsistent with the statement of the Federal district court regarding plaintiff’s ability to "track” Newell’s investments. Finally, defendant points to a statement in the Seventh Circuit opinion that the Congregation must be "responsible for the deficit created when [Newell’s] investments lost money.” (Congregation of the Passion, 800 F.2d at 184.) While this statement may be true when applied to third parties dealing with plaintiff through Newell, it is clearly taken out of context when applied to plaintiff’s relationship with defendant. We do not construe this statement as expressing a view on whether plaintiff could recover from defendant for defendant’s independent breach of contract or negligent acts. We do not believe that any of the issues urged by defendant in support of its collateral estoppel claim are relevant to the present case. The doctrine of collateral estoppel, therefore, does not bar plaintiffs claim here. II. Economic Loss Doctrine In count I of its amended complaint, plaintiff alleged defendant owed it a common law duty of due care in the preparation of plaintiffs financial reports. Defendant allegedly breached this duty by reporting the Newell investments at their initial cost rather than at market value at the time of the annual financial reports, and by misstating to plaintiff that the cost of the Newell investments was a reliable indicator of the market value of the investments. In 1978, for example, the Newell investments were reported at their $1,792,747 cost figure rather than their $319,860 market value at the date of the report. Plaintiff claims that defendant’s negligence in reporting these values caused it to maintain its accounts with Newell longer than it otherwise would have had it known the market value of the Newell investments. Newell eventually lost $800,000 of the funds he managed for plaintiff, and incurred additional liability of approximately $3 million on plaintiff’s behalf. Count I of plaintiff’s amended complaint sought recovery in tort for the depletion of the funds in New-ell’s control as well as the additional liability incurred by Newell on plaintiff’s behalf. Defendant claims that damages alleged by plaintiff in count I of its complaint constitute economic damages and are not recoverable in tort. The issue before us, therefore, is whether the economic loss doctrine bars recovery in tort for accountant malpractice. We find that it does not. The economic loss doctrine found its roots in Seely v. White Motor Co. (1965), 63 Cal. 2d 9, 403 P.2d 145, 45 Cal. Rptr. 17, authored by Justice Traynor. In Seely, plaintiff purchased a truck manufactured by defendant. Shortly after the purchase, plaintiff noticed that the truck bounced violently. Despite his efforts, plaintiff was unable to get the problem fixed. Approximately 11 months later, while plaintiff was driving it, the truck overturned. The truck was damaged but plaintiff was not physically injured. After plaintiff repaired the truck, he stopped making payments on the truck. The seller then repossessed the truck, and plaintiff sued defendant on the theories of breach of express warranty and strict liability in tort. Defendant sought damages for the repair of the truck, for money paid on the purchase price and for profits lost by virtue of the truck’s unsuitability for normal use. Regarding plaintiff’s damages for money paid on the truck’s purchase price and for profits lost by virtue of the truck’s unsuitability for normal use, the court stated that these economic losses were not recoverable under strict liability in tort. (Seely, 63 Cal. 2d at 18, 403 P.2d at 151-52, 45 Cal. Rptr. at 23.) The court explained that products liability grew from the public policy judgment that persons who are injured by dangerous products need more protection than that afforded by the law of warranty. (Seely, 63 Cal. 2d at 15, 403 P.2d at 149, 45 Cal. Rptr. at 21.) The Seely court believed that if the products liability tort theory were allowed to progress without limitation, however, tort law would wholly engulf contract law. In order to preserve a proper role for the law of warranty and to allow the parties to bargain for the terms of their agreements, the court precluded tort liability in those situations where a defective product caused purely economic losses. (Seely, 63 Cal. 2d at 15-16, 403 P.2d at 150, 45 Cal. Rptr. at 22.) The Seely court noted that ”[t]he distinction that the law has drawn between tort recovery for physical injuries and warranty recovery for economic loss is not arbitrary and does not rest on the ’luck’ of one plaintiff in having an accident causing physical injury.” (Seely, 63 Cal. 2d at 18, 403 P.2d at 151, 45 Cal. Rptr. at 23.) "The distinction rests, rather, on an understanding of the nature of the responsibility a manufacturer must undertake in distributing his products.” Seely, 63 Cal. 2d at 18, 403 P.2d at 151, 45 Cal. Rptr. at 23. This court first addressed the economic loss doctrine in Moorman Manufacturing Co. v. National Tank Co. (1982), 91 Ill. 2d 69. In Moorman, the plaintiff (Moor-man) purchased a grain storage tank from the defendant (National Tank). When a crack developed in the grain storage tank, Moorman sued National Tank for strict liability in tort to recover the cost of repairing the tank and for loss of the tank’s use. National Tank argued that Moorman’s tort counts were barred because they sought recovery for purely economic loss. The trial court dismissed the tort counts, but the appellate court reversed. In reversing the appellate court and affirming the trial court’s dismissal of the tort count, this court noted that the law of sales had been carefully articulated in the Uniform Commercial Code to govern the economic relationship between a seller and buyer. (Moorman, 91 Ill. 2d at 78.) The court then stated that application of the rules of warranty to liability prevent a manufacturer from being held liable for damages of unknown and unlimited scope, and that a purchaser is able to allocate the risk of unsatisfactory performance by bargaining for a warranty. (Moorman, 91 Ill. 2d at 79.) Accordingly, this court denied Moorman’s recovery in tort, stating: “Tort theory is appropriately suited for personal injury or property damage resulting from a sudden or dangerous occurrence ***. The remedy for economic loss, loss relating to a purchaser’s disappointed expectations due to deterioration, internal breakdown or nonaccidental cause, on the other hand, lies in contract.” Moorman, 91 Ill. 2d at 86. In Moorman, this court adopted the reasoning of Seely that tort law would, if allowed to develop unchecked, eventually envelop contract law. Contract law serves a vital commercial function by providing sellers and buyers with the ability to define the terms of their agreements with certainty prior to a transaction. Where the duty of a seller has traditionally been defined by contract, therefore, Moorman dictates that the theory of recovery should be limited to contract although recovery in tort would be available under traditional tort theories. This court applied the economic loss doctrine in a real estate context in Redarowicz v. Ohlendorf (1982), 92 Ill. 2d 171. In Redarowicz, the plaintiff alleged that the defendant was responsible for faulty construction of the plaintiff’s residence. The defendant builder completed the house in 1976, and the plaintiff purchased the house from the original owner in 1977. Soon after the purchase, the plaintiff discovered that the chimney and adjoining wall were beginning to pull away from the rest of the house. The court stated that "[a] buyer’s desire to enjoy the benefit of his bargain is not an interest that tort law traditionally protects.” (Redarowicz, 92 Ill. 2d at 177.) The court found Redarowicz analogous to Moorman, and affirmed the dismissal of the tort count of the plaintiff’s complaint. Redarowicz, 92 Ill. 2d at 177. In Anderson Electric, Inc. v. Ledbetter Erection Corp. (1986), 115 Ill. 2d 146, this court extended the economic loss doctrine to the furnishing of services. Codefendant Ledbetter retained plaintiff, Anderson, to perform electric work on goods manufactured by codefendant C-E Walther, Inc. Pursuant to a contract between Walther and Ledbetter, Walther was required to inspect and approve Anderson’s work. Anderson claimed Walther negligently performed the inspection and approval of Anderson’s work, and that as a result of that negligence, Anderson was wrongfully required to redo a substantial amount of work. The court held that Anderson was seeking purely economic damages, and that the economic loss doctrine precluded Anderson’s recovery in tort. Anderson, 115 Ill. 2d at 153.) The court reached this result even though Anderson did not have a cause of action in contract. "A plaintiff seeking to recover purely economic losses due to defeated expectations of a commercial bargain cannot recover in tort, regardless of the plaintiff’s inability to recover under an action in contract.” Anderson, 115 Ill. 2d at 153. A provider of services and his client have an important interest in being able to establish the terms of their relationship prior to entering into a final agreement. The policy interest supporting the ability to comprehensively define a relationship in a service contract parallels the policy interest supporting the ability to comprehensively define a relationship in a contract for the sale of goods. It is appropriate, therefore, that Moorman should apply to the service industry. Just as a seller’s duties are defined by his contract with a buyer, the duties of a provider of services may be defined by the contract he enters into with his client. When this is the case, the economic loss doctrine applies to prevent the recovery of purely economic loss in tort. In 2314 Lincoln Park West Condominium Association v. Mann, Gin, Ebel & Frazier, Ltd. (1990), 136 Ill. 2d 302, this court employed the economic loss doctrine to deny a client’s tort claim against an architecture firm. The plaintiff, Lincoln Park, hired the defendant to design condominium units. Lincoln Park alleged that after the units were completed, the windows and doors were loose, the roof leaked, the garage was settling, and the utilities were inadequate and did not function properly. Lincoln Park brought suit against the defendant on both tort and contract theories. In holding that the economic loss doctrine prohibited Lincoln Park’s recovery in tort, this court stated "that the concept of duty is at the heart of distinction drawn by the economic loss rule.” (Lincoln Park, 136 Ill. 2d at 314.) Because the defendant architect’s responsibility originated in its contract, the court found its duties should be measured accordingly. In dicta, the court noted that Lincoln Park should not be interpreted to stand for the end of all recovery for malpractice in tort. As an example, the court noted that, historically, legal malpractice claims had gone forward in tort because Illinois courts had found that attorneys owe an extracontractual duty which arises not from contract, but from the traditional responsibilities a lawyer owes to a client. Lincoln Park, 136 Ill. 2d at 318. In Collins v. Reynard (1992), 154 Ill. 2d 48, this court squarely addressed the issue of whether the economic loss doctrine applies to attorney malpractice. This court held that a complaint against a lawyer for professional malpractice may be couched in either contract or tort. The concurring opinion stated that an attorney’s duty of competence exists "without regard to the terms of any contract of employment entered into by a lawyer and a client.” The concurrence went on to explain that "[t]he cases in which Moorman has been applied are grounded on the notion that the complaining party, if he wished protection against the particular type of harm suffered, could have bargained for a guarantee or warranty against it.” Collins, 154 Ill. 2d at 56 (Miller, C.J., specially concurring, joined by Bilandic, Freeman & Cunningham, JJ.). The evolution of the economic loss doctrine shows that the doctrine is applicable to the service industry only where the duty of the party performing the service is defined by the contract that he executes with his client. Where a duty arises outside of the contract, the economic loss doctrine does not prohibit recovery in tort for the negligent breach of that duty. The present case involves professional malpractice by an accounting firm. The underlying issue is whether the duty an accountant owes to his client is defined by his contractual obligations, or is extracontractual. While a client contracts with an accountant regarding some general matters, an accountant must make his own decisions regarding many significant matters, and the final decision he makes is not necessarily contingent on the contract he executes with his client. An accountant may offer different levels of service, such as audited or unaudited preparation of financial statements, but within these levels of service, the client is not required or expected to be able to direct the conduct of the accountant through contractual provisions. A client should know that an accountant must make certain decisions independently, and the client has the right to rely on the accountant’s knowledge and expertise when those decisions are made by the accountant. This knowledge and expertise cannot be memorialized in contract terms, but are expected independent of the accountant’s contractual obligations. An analogy to the accountant-client relationship can be found in the attorney-client relationship. In both cases, the ultimate result of the relationship between the professional and client is something intangible. Whether the professional produces a legal brief or a financial statement, the value of the services rendered lies in the ideas behind the documents, not in the documents themselves. In contrast to the relationship between an attorney or accountant and their client, the relationship between an architect and his client produces something tangible, such as a plan that results in a structure. The characteristics of a tangible object are readily ascertainable, and they can be memorialized in a contract and studied by the parties. The characteristics of something intangible, however, are much more amorphous than the characteristics of something tangible. It is not necessary or generally possible to memorialize all the elements of "competent representation” in a contract. What is necessary to competently represent a client will normally vary with different situations and cannot be anticipated before performance begins. Further, the law has not traditionally required that these elements be included in the retention contract. Application of the Moorman doctrine limiting recovery of purely economic losses to contract, therefore, is inappropriate where a relationship results in something intangible. "Accountants have long been held to be members of a skilled profession, and liable for their negligent failure to observe reasonable professional competence.” (P. Kelly, An Overview of Accountants’ Liability, 15 Forum 579, 583 (1979).) This duty to observe reasonable professional competence exists independently of any contract. The economic loss doctrine does not bar recovery in tort for the breach of a duty that exists independently of a contract. Although the question of economic loss was not addressed in Dail v. Adamson (1991), 212 Ill. App. 3d 66, the court allowed recovery for accountant malpractice in either tort or contract. (See also First National Bank v. Brumleve & Dabbs (1989), 183 Ill. App. 3d 987, 992-93 (tort count for accountant malpractice held to state a valid cause of action).) Tort law has traditionally afforded an avenue of recovery for accountant malpractice, and Moorman does not persuade us to reach a different result in the present case. Further, application of the Moorman doctrine supports our conclusion allowing recovery in tort for accountant malpractice. Plaintiff alleges that defendant committed malpractice by the method it used to record the Newell investments in plaintiff’s financial statements. This would be a breach of the extracontractual duty of reasonable professional competence which defendant owed plaintiff. Allowing plaintiff to recover its losses in tort, therefore, is consistent with the economic loss doctrine announced in Moorman. In view of this result, we need not consider defendant’s additional contention that plaintiff cannot recover under a negligent misrepresentation theory. III. Other Errors Alleged Defendant summarily alleges the occurrence of a number of other errors that it believes entitles it to a new trial. We have examined defendant’s contentions and fail to find any grounds for reversal. A. Pretrial Rulings Prior to trial, plaintiff filed a motion in limine attempting to preclude defendant from making any reference to plaintiff’s investments other than those investments made by Newell. The trial judge granted the motion over defendant’s objection. Defendant contends that plaintiff’s other investments show that plaintiff knowingly employed investment advisors who utilized highly speculative investment strategies, and the risk of plaintiff’s investment strategy is relevant to whether plaintiff was contributorily negligent in its dealings with Newell. We note that during arguments on the motion in limine, defendant contended that plaintiff had a history of retaining investments which were initially unprofitable. Defendant, however, does not pursue that theory here, and we therefore do not address this argument. Plaintiff asserts that its investment strategy bears no relevance to its claims that defendant negligently valued the Newell investments or that defendant breached its contract with plaintiff. We agree with plaintiff that the trial court properly allowed the motion in limine. Plaintiff’s claims relate to the manner in which defendant recorded the Newell investments and not to the risks inherent in those investments. We believe, therefore, that the risks involved in plaintiff’s other investments had no relevance to plaintiff’s claims. Defendant next alleges that the circuit court committed reversible error by limiting the scope of voir dire. Prior to voir dire,. defendant proposed that the venire be asked the following questions: "(1) Is there anyone here who has made a financial contribution to the Roman Catholic Church or to any order or institution of the Roman Catholic Church including hospitals, monasteries or schools? (2) Have you or any member of your family ever made a financial contribution to the Passionist Fathers?” The trial judge rejected these questions. The jurors, however, were asked questions concerning membership in, or employment by, any religiously affiliated institution or organization. Prospective jurors were also asked whether they would give more weight to the testimony of persons who belonged to a religious order. Finally, potential jurors were made aware of the identity of the parties and asked if there was any reason they could not be fair and impartial. The appellate court found no error in the trial court’s actions regarding voir dire. In support of the trial judge’s ruling, plaintiff contends that the proposed voir dire questions were improper because they could have caused potential jurors to reveal their religious affiliation. Plaintiff argues that the other questions asked during voir dire were sufficient to disclose the venire’s prejudices, and that the additional inquiry suggested by defendant was not necessary in this case. Under our Rule 234 (134 Ill. 2d R. 234) the primary responsibility for initiating and conducting the voir dire examination lies with the trial judge, and the scope and extent of the inquiry rests within the discretion of the judge. (Kingston v. Turner (1987), 115 Ill. 2d 445, 464.) When a proposed voir dire question could uncover religious affiliation, therefore, it is within the trial court’s discretion whether to allow the question. Generally, when religious affiliation is relevant to potential prejudice, subjects related to religious affiliation are proper subjects of inquiry on voir dire. See Casey v. Roman Catholic Archbishop (1957), 217 Md. 595, 143 A.2d 627. We believe, however, that the suggested question regarding contributions to the Catholic Church was too remote from plaintiff’s losses to be a proper subject for voir dire in this case. Any relationship between a potential juror’s contribution to the Catholic Church and plaintiff’s losses would be indirect. The trial judge did not abuse his discretion in refusing to ask defendant’s first question. With regard to defendant’s second proposed question, concerning contributions to plaintiff itself, defendant argues that a juror might be biased if the juror believed that a portion of the money lost had been contributed to plaintiff by the juror or a member of the juror’s family. We agree. Where a juror’s contributions to plaintiff could have been included in the funds at issue in the case, the juror’s impartiality might be questioned. We believe that the better procedure would have been for the trial judge to ask the venire whether they had made contributions to the Congregation. We do not believe, however, that the trial judge’s refusal to ask potential jurors about contributions to plaintiff denied defendant its right to a trial before a fair and impartial jury. All potential jurors were made aware of the identity of the parties and asked whether they could be fair and impartial. Potential jurors were also asked whether they were members of, or employed by, any religiously affiliated institution or organization, and whether they would give more weight to the testimony of priests and brothers. Finally, we note that the evidence of defendant’s liability was overwhelming. Under these circumstances, we do not believe that the trial judge’s failure to ask the second question proposed by defendant warrants reversal. B. Evidentiary Rulings During trial, plaintiff was allowed to introduce, over defendant’s objection, evidence that Newell had been declared bankrupt. Defendant argues that Newell’s bankruptcy had no bearing on the issues involved in the present case and that this evidence was highly prejudicial. In support of the trial judge’s ruling, plaintiff contends that defendant characterized Newell in both the opening statement and closing argument as having caused plaintiff’s losses. Plaintiff claims, therefore, that defendant "opened the door” to evidence of Newell’s bankruptcy, so that the jury could be told why Newell was not a defendant at trial. Our review of the record reveals that defendant did not attempt to hold Newell responsible for plaintiff’s losses. We do not believe, therefore, that defendant "opened the door” for plaintiff to introduce evidence of Newell’s bankruptcy. The circuit court erred in admitting this evidence, which was not relevant to the present case. We believe, however, that any error in allowing evidence of Newell’s bankruptcy was harmless. Plaintiff did not attempt to foster jury bias by portraying defendant as its last possible avenue of recourse. The trial in the present case lasted nearly four weeks, and the trial transcript consumed more than 5,000 pages. The jury was presented with overwhelming evidence on which to find defendant liable. Given the strength of the evidence presented to the jury on the question of defendant’s liability, we do not believe that the admission of this evidence denied defendant a fair trial. Defendant also contends that the trial court improperly allowed the redaction of plaintiff’s financial statements to exclude references to investments not made by Newell. Defendant argues that to avoid jury confusion these documents should have been admitted into evidence in their entirety. The appellate court found that the redaction was proper. We agree. Defendant cites Beech Aircraft Corp. v. Rainey (1988), 488 U.S. 153, 172, 102 L. Ed. 2d 445, 465, 109 S. Ct. 439, 451, in which the Court stated "that when one party has made use of a portion of a document, such that misunderstanding or distortion can be averted only through presentation of another portion, the material required for completeness is ipso facto relevant.” Defendant has made no showing of how redacting the documents could have confused the jury. The admission of evidence is within the sound discretion of the circuit court, and its ruling should not be reversed absent a clear showing of abuse. (People v. Ward (1984), 101 Ill. 2d 443.) We find no error in admitting the redacted documents into evidence. Finally, defendant argues that plaintiff was improperly allowed during trial to characterize defendant as a large international accounting firm with offices throughout the world. Prior to trial, the trial judge denied defendant’s motion in limine to exclude any reference to defendant’s size. Defendant maintains that the only purpose of identifying it in this manner was to suggest to the jury that defendant had ample resources with which to compensate plaintiff for its losses. Plaintiff argues that the references to defendant’s size did not make reference to defendant’s wealth. Plaintiff further claims that it relied on defendant’s expertise, in part, because of defendant’s size and resources, and that defendant’s size was relevant to the question of plaintiff’s reliance on defendant’s advice and financial reports. We agree. Plaintiff, as part of its case in chief, asserted that it had relied on defendant to give advice regarding the manner in which Newell’s investments were recorded. Plaintiff accepted this advice although its members did not understand the underlying transactions involved. The reasonableness of plaintiff’s reliance could have been considered by the jury in determining whether plaintiff was contributorily negligent. Because plaintiff contends that defendant’s size and reputation were the basis of its reliance on defendant, the trial court acted properly in allowing reference to evidence related to this issue. C. Jury Verdicts Defendant alleges that the jury’s verdict of $3.9 million on the tort count of plaintiff’s complaint was against the manifest weight of the evidence. Specifically, defendant argues that the evidence clearly shows that it was not responsible for the loss of $500,000 entrusted to Newell in April 1981. Defendant alleges that plaintiff entrusted an additional $500,000 to Newell after plaintiff was fully informed of Newell’s losses. It is not contested that plaintiff entrusted an additional $500,000 to Newell in April 1981. There was conflicting testimony, however, concerning whether plaintiff was fully informed of New-ell’s losses at that time. Defendant claims that Melchert informed plaintiff of Newell’s losses at a meeting of the Council on February 11, 1981. Plaintiff, however, insists that Melchert provided only limited details to the Council at that time, and that Melchert stated he still believed the "cost”, of the Newell investments was approximately equal to their market value. Further, it was established at trial that both the letter containing the correct 1978 market values of the Newell investments and the final 1980 financial report were delivered to plaintiff after it had forwarded the additional $500,000 to Newell. At what point plaintiff became aware of Newell’s losses is a question of fact, the determination of which depended heavily on the credibility of the witnesses. The credibility of witnesses and the weight to be given their testimony are matters for the jury to determine, and unless the jury’s determination is manifestly against the weight of the evidence, its verdict will not be disturbed on appeal. (Albaugh v. Cooley (1981), 87 Ill. 2d 241, 249-50.) For the reasons mentioned, we do not believe that the inclusion of the additional $500,000 in plaintiff’s award of damages was against the manifest weight of the evidence. Defendant also contends that the jury verdicts returned on the tort and contract counts of plaintiff’s complaint were inconsistent and did not conform to the evidence. The jury returned verdicts in favor of plaintiff for $3.9 million on the tort count and $1.5 million on the breach of contract count. Plaintiff’s total damages, however, were only $3,819,352. The trial court ordered remittitur to that amount on the tort count, and $0 on the breach of contract count. Plaintiff consented to remittitur on the tort count, but not on the breach of contract count. The trial court then entered a judgment of liability on both counts, and awarded damages of $3,819,352 on the tort count only. Plaintiff agreed to remittitur to $0 on the breach of contract count in the appellate court as a condition for the appellate court’s not remanding the cause for a new trial on the issue of damages. Defendant contends that the verdicts are irreconcilable and should be set aside. Plaintiff alleges that the jury clearly intended to compensate the Congregation in full for its losses, and that the jury’s apparent confusion over awarding damages on each separate count does not warrant reversal. "[A] verdict must be set aside where the amount of the verdict bears no relationship to the loss suffered by the plaintiff.” (Churchill v. Norfolk & Western Ry. Co. (1978), 73 Ill. 2d 127, 148.) Verdicts are to be liberally construed, however, and may be amended to conform to the pleadings and evidence contained in the record whenever the intention of the jury is clear. (Churchill, 73 Ill. 2d at 148.) Although the $3.9 million verdict returned by the jury on the tort count of the complaint is slightly greater than the amount of the losses suffered by plaintiff, we believe that the relatively minor deviation from plaintiff’s actual damages shows that the intent of the jury was to award plaintiff the full amount of its damages on the tort count. The $1.5 million verdict returned by the jury on the contract count does not bear any ascertainable relationship to the loss suffered by plaintiff. Where plaintiff recovered the full amount of its damages on the tort count, however, the amount of damages awarded on the contract count should not affect its recovery. It is well established that a plaintiff may have only one satisfaction for an injury. (McLane v. Russell (1989), 131 Ill. 2d 509, 523.) Both the tort and contract counts were based on the same facts and sought recovery for the same injury. Plaintiff, therefore, could not recover under both counts. Plaintiff acknowledges this limitation on recovery of damages and concedes that $3,819,352 is the maximum amount of its allowable recovery. Because the jury’s intent regarding damages on the tort count of plaintiff’s complaint is clear, and damages awarded on the contract count could not affect plaintiffs recovery, we do not believe that the conflicting verdicts warrant reversal of this case. CONCLUSION For the reasons given, we affirm the judgment of the appellate court. Accordingly, we need not consider plaintiff’s request for cross-relief. Affirmed. JUSTICE NICKELS took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.

=== CASE 9741307 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:08.786939+00 ===

JUSTICE FREEMAN, specially concurring: The majority narrowly holds that the economic loss doctrine does not bar a tort claim for accountant malpractice. I agree with the result. The majority reaches this result by concluding that a contract for accountant services, like that for attorney services, has some extra-contractual duties, which are not capable of memorialization. The presence of these duties, reasons the majority, distinguishes accountants and attorneys from other professionals, such as architects, where the professional’s obligations may be memorialized in the contract. The rule which the majority here espouses is that "[w]here a duty arises outside of the contract, the economic loss doctrine does not prohibit recovery in tort for the negligent breach of that duty.” (159 Ill. 2d at 162.) That being the case, an accountant, like an attorney, may be liable in tort for the failure to competently perform his extracontractual duties. I agree that the extracontractual-duties analysis provides a proper rationale for the holding in this case. This same rationale was offered in the concurring opinion in Collins v. Reynard (1992), 154 Ill. 2d 48, 52 (Miller, C.J., concurring), with respect to tort claims for attorney malpractice. I write separately, however, because this rationale appears to me to have broader implications than the majority suggests. A professional is one with specialized skill and expertise. In any agreement for professional service, there is an unwritten expectation that the professional will perform competently. And, the failure to exercise a reasonable degree of professional care and skill constitutes malpractice. (159 Ill. 2d at 164.) These general propositions hold true regardless of the nature of the profession or that a tangible product results from the professional-client relationship. To the extent that ex-tracontractual duties are defined as the expectation of "reasonable professional competence,” such duties are present and are implicit in every professional-client contract. Acceptance of the extracontractual-duties rationale clears the way for tort claims in professional malpractice cases in general. The majority, having concluded that the nature of the recovery here is dictated by the existence of extra-contractual duties, is confronted with 2314 Lincoln Park West Condominium Association v. Mann, Gin, Ebel & Frazier, Ltd. (1990), 136 Ill. 2d 302, an architect malpractice case. In Lincoln Park, this court barred the plaintiffs recovery in tort for architectural malpractice, finding that the plaintiffs recovery was confined to contract damages. The majority apparently recognizes that the extracontractual analysis creates an unnatural tension between this case and Lincoln Park. To reconcile the two cases, the majority attempts to distinguish Lincoln Park, by adding another layer to the professional malpractice analysis. The majority holds that because something tangible resulted from the architect-client relationship, the plaintiff was only entitled to contract damages. Because I believe that the architect in Lincoln Park owed the client the extracontractual duty to design the structure competently, I disagree that the majority’s tangible/intangible distinction makes any difference. Even had no structure resulted from the relationship, the extracontractual expectation of competent performance was present, and under the analysis applied in this case, the plaintiffs cause of action could lie either in tort or contract. In my view, Lincoln Park is irreconcilable with this case, and to the extent that its holding is inconsistent with the holding here, it should be expressly overruled. By failing to simply conclude that architects, like any other professional, owe their clients extracontractuai duties, the majority has effectively created the need for a case-by-case determination of which professionals owe such duties. Further, considering that a product resulting from the professional-client relationship may be only incidental to the relationship, the majority’s tangible/intangible distinction is tenuous at best. Under the majority’s analysis, no matter how incidental the tangible end product js to the service provided, the existence of such a product will serve to bar a tort claim for malpractice. In my view, it is sufficient to say that in the context of a professional malpractice claim, where the duty to perform extracontractual obligations competently has been breached, the professional may be liable in tort.

=== CASE 9741308 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:08.791787+00 ===

JUSTICE HEIPLE, dissenting: I dissent from the majority opinion for three reasons. First, several material issues were decided in the Federal litigation which should have precluded their relitigation in State court. Second, the inconsistent jury verdicts cannot be glossed over. Finally, today’s opinion fails to provide guidance in an unnecessarily murky area of law. Once again, this court has plunged into the quagmire known as the Moorman doctrine and dredged up yet another ill-conceived exception to add to the current confusion. Standing alone, the earlier Federal litigation, giving rise to estoppel, should have resulted in a judgment for the defendant. Even if estoppel were not applied, the defendant deserves a new trial as a result of the inconsistent verdicts. Finally, the majority opinion is incoherent in its discussion of the Moorman doctrine. The majority opinion has further muddled rather than clarified Moor-man. FACTS In 1975, plaintiff, the Congregation, created a "retirement fund” for its members initially valued at $1 million. In 1976, the Congregation established a "permanent fund” also valued at $1 million. The purpose of the permanent fund was to provide for the ongoing needs of the religious and lay personnel who assisted the Congregation. Plaintiff’s Business Advisory Board (BAB), a lay advisory board of businessmen, accountants, and experienced securities and commodities traders provided investment and general business advice to the plaintiff. In the course of developing an investment strategy, the Congregation retained Cranford D. Newell Associates (Newell) as its investment manager. By written agreement, the Congregation’s retirement and permanent funds were committed to Newell’s full discretionary authority. In order to meet the Congregation’s high return expectations of 12% to 15%, Newell engaged in arbitrage transactions in government securities. These arbitrage investments were first made in the 1976 fiscal year. Arbitrage is the buying of stocks, or in this case, government securities having different maturity dates and interest rates in one market and simultaneously selling them in another market, in order to profit from a price discrepancy. Trades frequently involve more than $1 million and even minor fluctuations 07s2 or 1hi of a point) can mean large sums of money. It is an investment strategy that entails great risks. In other words, arbitrage is a fancy name for big time gambling. Newell’s trading strategy was highly leveraged in that the only cash required to establish an arbitrage position was the difference between the amount obtained from the sale and what was needed to pay for the buy. The reports that Newell submitted to the Congregation reflected the open arbitrage positions at what Newell called "margin,” in other words, net cash paid, not at the market value of the securities. The Congregation engaged Touche Ross to perform unaudited reviews of the Congregation’s financial statements for the fiscal years 1974 through 1980. The Congregation engaged Touche Ross prior to turning over its funds to Newell, and Touche Ross was not specifically engaged to consult with plaintiff regarding the arbitrage transactions. Each year through 1979 Touche Ross sent the Congregation an engagement letter, accepted by the plaintiff, which described the anticipated services that Touche Ross would provide to the Congregation. This form of letter was drafted before Newell’s arbitrage trading began. Unbeknown to Touche Ross, there were mounting problems with the arbitrage trading accounts managed by Newell in 1976 and 1977. In the fall of 1980, during the Touche Ross review of plaintiff’s June 30, 1980, unaudited financial statements, Philip Melchert, the Touche Ross engagement partner, raised a question concerning the assets supporting the $3.6 million year-end balance which Newell had reported to the Congregation. After numerous requests to the plaintiff and Newell for additional information concerning these accounts, Melchert was finally provided with the information he needed in January 1981. The information Melchert received from Newell and the dealers indicated that the market value of the Newell accounts as of June 30, 1980, was $1.2 million, or $2.4 million less than the investment value reported to the plaintiff by Newell. During a conference call on February 4, 1981, involving plaintiff’s investment officer, Melchert, and James Hart, a trader on the Chicago Board of Options Exchange and a member of the plaintiff’s BAB, Newell confirmed that the market value of these accounts on June 30, 1980, was $1.2 million and that the impairment in value appeared to be permanent. On February 11, 1981, at a Provincial Council meeting, Melchert advised members of the Provincial Council of the information he had obtained concerning the June 30, 1980, market value of the Newell managed accounts. Despite this information, the Congregation took no action to eliminate arbitrage trading, to close the accounts, or to transfer the management of these accounts to someone other than Newell. Instead of liquidating the accounts, on or about April 14, 1981, more than two months after the Congregation had been advised that the value of the Newell managed accounts on June 30, 1980, was $2.4 million less than the investment value reported by Newell, plaintiff decided to invest an additional $500,000 as requested by Newell. Only after the first week in May 1981, when the equity in the Newell accounts had been completely depleted and substantial debts to certain dealers had been incurred, did the plaintiff act to close its accounts. In June 1981, the Congregation sued its agent, New-ell, and four government securities dealers in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois, alleging Federal securities law violations. The dealers counterclaimed for amounts allegedly owed after liquidation of the Congregation’s accounts managed by Newell. In May 1982, plaintiff amended its Federal complaint to join Touche Ross as an additional defendant, charging it with aiding and abetting the dealers and Newell’s alleged securities law violations and with breach of fiduciary duty and breach of contract. In September 1984, the district court granted the defendants’ motions for summary judgment, holding that neither Newell nor the dealers had violated the securities laws and that Touche Ross had not aided and abetted Newell or the dealers. The remaining counts were dismissed for want of Federal jurisdiction. In rendering its decision, the district court made specific findings that (1) Newell was plaintiff’s agent acting within the scope of his authority, (2) the plaintiff was able to "track” and understand the Newell transactions and (3) the plaintiff’s "reliance was on Newell.” Specifically, Judge Charles P. Kocoras stated: "Simply put, Newell had broad discretion and the plaintiff had knowledge of his activities which it cannot deny. During the years 1975 through 1981, plaintiff was able to track the investments through confirmation slips and accurate reports of the transactions which the dealers supplied. Plaintiff received the statements of its United California Bank account and also had before it those statements, the cash sheets and the ticket numbers assigned by Newell for each transaction. The cash transfers were not going into the agent’s hands while the principal remained unaware. * * * The documents and the transactions were complex, confusing and ultimately unwise, but the plaintiff had the ability to follow them and to have review of them for themselves or by another specialist other than Newell.” Congregation of the Passion, Holy Cross Province v. Kidder Peabody & Co. (N.D. Ill. April 30, 1985), No. 81 — C—3159 (transcript of proceedings). The Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed. 0Congregation of the Passion, Holy Cross Province v. Kidder Peabody & Co. (7th Cir. 1986), 800 F.2d 177, 184.) That court concluded that "[t]he record on summary judgment *** establishes, as a matter of law, that the Congregation authorized and was aware of the type of transactions which created the debts in the accounts maintained with the dealers.” After the adverse ruling in Federal district court, the plaintiff refiled its complaint against Touche Ross in the circuit court of Cook County. The complaint was based upon the same facts and transactions as were the subject of the Congregation’s Federal lawsuit. Plaintiff’s complaint consisted of three counts. Count I, a professional malpractice-negligence count, alleged, in essence, that defendant, inter alla, negligently "failed to report and describe accurately the market value of the Newell investments.” Count II alleged that defendant breached its fiduciary duty to the Congregation in "failing to report and describe accurately the market value of the Newell investments.” Count III, a breach of contract count, alleged that Touche Ross breached its express and implied contractual obligations to plaintiff by "failing to report and describe accurately the market value of the Newell investments.” In other words, while there were three legal theories for recovery, the underlying allegations were identical. Before trial, Touche Ross presented motions to dismiss and for summary judgment which contended that the Congregation’s claims were barred by collateral estoppel and that the negligence count was barred by the Moorman doctrine. These motions were denied. After plaintiff presented its evidence and rested its case, defendant moved for a directed verdict on all three counts of plaintiff’s complaint. The circuit court denied defendant’s motion as to each of the three counts. At the close of all evidence, defendant renewed its motion for a directed verdict on all three counts of plaintiff’s complaint. The circuit court denied the motion as to the negligence (count I) and breach of contract (count III) counts, but granted the motion as to the fiduciary duty count (count II). In its proof and closing argument, the plaintiff sought total damages of exactly $3,819,352. These damages consisted of $3,293,350.41 in amounts paid to the dealers in satisfaction of their claims against plaintiff and (b) $526,001.59 in other losses. These damages included the $500,000 invested by the Congregation after the February 11, 1980, meeting in which Newell’s losses were fully disclosed. The jury returned separate and inconsistent verdicts for plaintiff in the amount of $3.9 million on count I, the negligence count, and $1.5 million on count HI, the breach of contract count. The jury reached this result despite the fact that both the tort and the contract counts were based on the same facts and alleged the identical failures on the part of the defendant. The trial court ordered a remittitur to $3,819,352 on count I and to $0 on count III. The Congregation agreed to the remittitur on count I, but refused to consent to a remittitur on count III. The trial court then entered a "judgment” of liability on both verdicts, ignored the $1.5 million verdict on count III, and entered a "final judgment,” in tort alone, of $3,819,352. The appellate court affirmed the judgment of the trial court on the condition that plaintiff agree to a remittitur of count III, the contract claim to $0. APPEAL TO THIS COURT On appeal to this court, defendant argues that the doctrine of collateral estoppel precludes plaintiff from relitigating those issues decided in the Federal adjudication. Defendant claims that the Federal courts fully considered and decided: (1) that Newell was plaintiff’s agent; (2) that because Newell had total discretion to act as the Congregation’s agent in executing its arbitrage transactions and because plaintiff was aware of each transaction at the time of its execution, the Congregation was liable on the counterclaims of the dealers; (3) that defendants made no misrepresentations to plaintiff; (4) that the plaintiff was fully aware of the transactions and the type of risks involved; (5) that Newell acted within the scope of his authority; (6) that the Congregation relied only on Newell and its own advisory board in making its investment decisions; (7) that the Congregation was able to and did track the Newell arbitrage investments and was aware "as a matter of law” of the transactions in which Newell was engaged; (8) that the Congregation and Touche Ross agreed to report the arbitrage investments on a cost, not market, basis and Touche Ross included a footnote in the financial statements reflecting that agreement; and (9) that the Congregation itself, rather than Touche Ross or the dealers, was responsible for, and the cause of, the losses incurred. Touche Ross argues that the trial court’s failure to give effect to the Federal court findings allowed plaintiff to advance contentions directly contrary to those findings — leading to the adverse judgment. Without discussion, the majority states that the several findings that Touche Ross relies upon for its collateral estoppel claim are not relevant to plaintiff’s theory of recovery. Therefore, these findings could not have affected the judgment rendered in this case. Specifically, the majority finds it inconsequential: (1) that Newell was plaintiff’s agent, (2) that Newell had discretion to invest plaintiff’s funds and acted within his authority, (3) that plaintiff was aware of the risks involved in New-ell’s investment strategy, and (4) that plaintiff relied only on Newell and its own business advisory board in making plaintiff’s investment decision. 159 111. 2d at 153. The majority’s finding that none of these issues are relevant to the current theory of recovery is both erroneous and completely conclusory. The plaintiff’s theory in this case is that Touche Ross reported the Newell transactions in a negligent fashion, thereby causing plaintiff’s losses. As part of this claim, plaintiff must demonstrate that Touche Ross’s negligence proximately caused plaintiff’s losses. The Federal court finding that plaintiff relied only on Newell and its own business advisory board in making its investment decisions goes directly to the issue of proximate cause. There is no question that Newell and the Board understood the Newell transactions. If the Congregation relied solely on Newell and the Board for the Congregation’s investments, how Touche Ross recorded the Newell transactions is irrelevant because Newell and the Board did not base their investment decision on the Touche Ross year-end reports. Had the trial court given proper weight to the Federal court findings, this case should never have gone to trial. The majority further finds that the other issues Touche Ross claims to have been litigated previously were not necessary to the Federal court proceedings, thus collateral estoppel does not apply. In particular, the majority finds that the Federal courts did not need to decide whether or not the Congregation could track the Newell investments. (159 Ill. 2d at 154.) For support of this conclusion, the majority cites a footnote in the Seventh Circuit opinion in which that court stated: "While it is not necessary to our decision, we note that there is at least some evidence to indicate that the Congregation could follow the transactions. Sister Flaherty testified that she never made an entry on the ledger unless she was satisfied that confirmation tickets agreed with cash reports from the United California Bank. Dep. Tr. at 169-70. In addition, the Congregation’s Business Advisory Board and an outside firm carefully examined Mr. New-ell’s investments.” Congregation of the Passion, Holy Cross Province, 800 F.2d at 182 n.4. The majority, however, fails to mention that the Federal district court specifically determined that "the plaintiff had the ability to follow [the transactions] and to have review of them for themselves or by another specialist other than Newell.” That court also determined that the "[investment decisions were made by plaintiffs investment adviser Newell — in whom [the Congregation] had entrusted full discretion — and were tracked by plaintiffs officers and other advisers.” Congregation of the Passion, Holy Cross Province v. Kidder Peabody & Co. (N.D. Ill. April 30, 1985), No. 81 — C— 3159 (transcript of proceedings). The majority offers no reason why it ignored the Federal district court’s determinations for collateral estoppel purposes. The mere fact that the Seventh Circuit found the defendants not liable on a different basis than the Federal district court does not expunge the correctness of the district court’s finding. The State courts should have barred the relitigation of this issue and dismissed plaintiff’s case. THE INCONSISTENT JURY VERDICTS Apart from the collateral estoppel issues, I am also bewildered at the nonchalance with which the majority has trivialized the confused and inconsistent jury verdicts in this case. While it is understandable that a lay jury may be moved by a sympathetic plaintiff, it troubles me greatly to speculate that a majority of this court may have been similarly swayed. In count I of its complaint, plaintiff claimed that it was injured and that it sustained damages when Touche Ross negligently failed to, inter alia: "(a) report and describe accurately the market value of the Newell investments; (b) promptly advise [the Congregation] of any material change in the nature and/or balance of such investment ***• » (c) physically inspect or confirm by direct correspondence with independent custodians the Newell investments; (d) test the market value of the Newell investments by reference to published market quotations; (e) assure accurate Reports on the nature of the Newell investments; ***.” With respect to the contract count, count III, plaintiff incorporated verbatim the same allegations alleged in the negligence count. Under these circumstances, if plaintiff proved its case, the amount of recovery under either theory should have been the same. Indeed, plaintiff never claimed that its damages would be different depending on the theory of recovery. Plaintiff claimed the same damages, $3,819,352, for both the negligence malpractice and the contract count. Nonetheless, the jury managed to return two inconsistent verdicts. The jury awarded plaintiff $3.9 million on the malpractice count, and $1.5 million on the contract count. These verdicts should have been set aside. It is true that verdicts are to be liberally construed and may be amended to conform to the evidence. (Churchill v. Norfolk & Western Ry. Co. (1978), 73 Ill. 2d 127, 148.) In order for a court to amend a jury verdict, however, the intent of the jury must be clear. (Churchill, 73 Ill. 2d at 148.) In this case, it is impossible to discern the intent of the jury. Taken individually, neither verdict is so far removed from the actual loss claimed as to elicit concern. A court could reasonably interpret the $3.9 million malpractice award as the jury’s attempt to fully compensate the plaintiff for its entire claim. On the other hand, a court could conclude that the $1.5 million award logically represents the jury’s intent to deduct a given amount from plaintiff’s claimed losses due to contributory negligence or failure to mitigate damages. These two verdicts, however, are impossible to justify when taken together. As the majority points out, "[b]oth the tort and contract counts were based on the same facts and sought recovery for the same injury.” (159 Ill. 2d at 172.) Rather than remanding for a new trial, however, the majority finds that the jury’s intent regarding damages on the tort count is clear, thus the conflicting verdicts do not warrant a reversal. The fatal error in the majority’s opinion stems from its individualized and faulty analysis of the verdicts. The majority first finds that the $3.9 million award demonstrates that the "intent of the jury was to award plaintiff the full amount of its damages on the tort count.” (159 Ill. 2d at 172.) Next, without explanation, the majority finds that the "$1.5 million verdict returned by the jury on the contract count does not bear any ascertainable relationship to the loss suffered by plaintiff.” (159 Ill. 2d at 172.) This latter finding, however, completely overlooks the possibility that the jury may have found the plaintiff partly responsible for its losses. Indeed, the $1.5 million verdict bears no ascertainable relationship to the loss suffered by plaintiff only if the $3.9 million award is viewed as demonstrative of the jury’s intent. There is, however, no proof that this is so and the majority does not offer a rationale for its conclusion. It appears that the majority finds that the $3.9 million award bears a truer relationship to the amount lost only because it analyzed that verdict first. Had the majority decided to analyze the $1.5 million award first, perhaps it would have found that the $3.9 million award bears no relationship to the loss. In fact, this would make more sense as the plaintiff asked for $3,819,352, not $3.9 million. Even if we were to ignore the collateral estoppel problem, given the irreconcilable discrepancy in the verdicts arising from the same facts and issues, I would remand this cause for a new trial on that issue alone. MOORMAN DOCTRINE Finally, I dissent from the majority’s disposition of the Moorman doctrine issue. With today’s opinion, the majority has infused further confusion into an area of law already inundated with uncertainty. Rather than clearly defining the relationship between professional malpractice and Moorman, the majority opinion puts litigants and trial judges in a position of having to guess what the exception of the month is. Yesterday it was attorneys. Today, it is accountants but not architects. Tomorrow, who can say? At the heart of the economic loss doctrine is the proposition that contract law, and not tort law, provides the appropriate set of rules for the recovery of purely economic damages. As originally defined by this court, economic damages were those " 'damages for inadequate value, costs of repair and replacement of the defective product, or consequent loss of profits — without any claim of personal injury or damage to other property.’ ” (Moorman Manufacturing Co. v. National Tank Co. (1982), 91 Ill. 2d 69, 82, quoting Note, Economic Loss is Products Liability Jurisprudence, 66 Colum. L. Rev. 917, 918 (1966).) The rationale for this tort-contract dichotomy originally stemmed from a reluctance of courts to expose manufacturers to open-ended liability for unfore.seeable consequential damages. (See generally Way, Note, The Problem of Economic Damages: Reconceptualizing the Moorman Doctrine, 1991 U. Ill. L. Rev. 1169.) Thus, in the Moorman case, this court denied recovery in negligence for a defective grain storage tank. This court noted that the Uniform Commercial Code specifically allowed sellers to disclaim warranties for qualitative defects and that to allow for the recovery of such defects in tort law would eviscerate the UCC scheme. Moorman, 91 Ill. 2d at 79. While Moorman was decided with products liability and the UCC warranty provisions in mind, this court soon extended the reach of the economic loss doctrine to claims for services performed negligently. (Anderson Electric, Inc. v. Ledbetter Erection Corp. (1986), 115 Ill. 2d 146.) The subsequent extension of Moorman to professional malpractices was then predictable. In 2314 Lincoln Park West Condominium Association v. Mann, Gin, Ebel & Frazier, Ltd. (1990), 136 Ill. 2d 302, this court took the next step. In Lincoln Park, a condominium association sought damages from the architectural firm of Mann, Gin, Ebel & Frazier. The association alleged that the architects had negligently designed the condominiums that the association’s members had purchased from a third party. This court held that the claim was barred under the economic loss rule. This court found that the association’s claim concerned the owner’s expectation — a difference of quality — and determined that the architect had no duty in tort to protect the unit owners from that type of loss. Lincoln Park, 136 Ill. 2d at 317. Subsequent to Lincoln Park, this court was presented with the question of whether the economic loss rule applied to attorneys, thereby barring malpractice suits in tort for purely economic damages. In Collins v. Reynard (1992), 154 Ill. 2d 48, this court created an exception to the general rule and held that a complaint for malpractice may be couched in either contract or tort and that recovery may be sought in the alternative. The opinion, however, stated that this particular ruling was grounded more in historic precedent rather than logic — citing the fact that attorneys have always been sued in tort. The opinion specifically limited the ruling to attorney malpractice cases. Collins, 154 Ill. 2d at 52. The majority now seeks to create a new exception to the economic loss doctrine. While I do not find it overly disturbing that accountants can be sued in tort for purely economic damages, I am concerned by the fact that the majority has adopted a piecemeal approach for determining what services are not protected by Moor-man. The majority submits that the doctrine only applies to those service industries where the "duty of the party performing the service is defined by the contract that he executes with his client. Where a duty arises outside of the contract, the economic loss doctrine does not prohibit recovery in tort for the negligent breach of that duty.” (159 Ill. 2d at 162.) Applied to this case, the majority contends that the "issue is whether the duty an accountant owes to his client is defined by his contractual obligations, or is extracontractual.” (159 Ill. 2d at 162.) The majority suggests that because an accountant’s "knowledge and expertise cannot be memorialized in contract terms, but is expected independent of the accountant’s contractual obligations,” an accountant can be held liable in tort. 159 Ill. 2d at 163. Having concluded that accountants can be held liable in tort, the majority was still left with the impossible task of distinguishing this case from Lincoln Park. That is, why does the Moorman doctrine prevent recovery in tort for the professional malpractice of architects, but not the professional malpractice of accountants? The majority offers the suggestion that because the relationship between an architect and his client produces something tangible, the duties of an architect, unlike those of an accountant, can be memorialized in contract. The majority further suggests that, in the case where an intangible product is involved, "[i]t is not necessary or generally possible to memorialize all the elements of 'competent representation’ in a contract.” (159 Ill. 2d at 163.) This purported explanation, however, is not an aid to understanding. What are these extracontractual duties? If these duties cannot be articulated in a contract, how is it that the client is able to articulate that they have been breached in a complaint. Why is it that a client cannot require, in the contract, that the accountant exercise the knowledge and expertise of the reasonable certified public accountant? Indeed, it appears that in this case, the parties have done just that. The engagement letter from Touche Ross specifically states: "We will review the statements of assets and liabilities of the Congregation of the Passion *** and the related statements of support and revenue, expenses, capital additions and changes in fund balances for the years then ended, in accordance with standards established by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants.” (Emphasis added.) It should be apparent that the parties have anticipated what would be deemed competent representation, prior to performance. As for the majority’s attempt to distinguish architects from accountants, I submit that the majority has set up the proverbial distinction without a difference. Whether the professional / client relationship creates a tangible or an intangible object is completely irrelevant with reference to whether a professional has competently performed his or her duties. Furthermore, to the extent an architect/client relationship can be memorialized with a general catchall clause requiring competent performance, so can an accountant /client relationship. I am not suggesting, however, that the plaintiff in this case should be barred from suing the accountants in tort. On the contrary, I feel that this court should take this opportunity to reevaluate the application of Moor-man and remove its protection for all types of professional services, rather than engage in a case-by-case determination of whether a given profession owes some undefinable extracontractual duty to clients or not. In mapping the future course of the economic loss doctrine, this court should consider the policy behind it. The purpose behind the doctrine, as embodied in Moor-man, was to protect manufacturers from unforeseen liabilities. To accomplish that result, jurists determined that when a plaintiff’s injury consists of disappointed expectations in a product, contract law and not tort law should apply. Unlike contract law, tort law does not ask whether the full extent of the injury was foreseeable, only whether some injury would occur. Thus, a tort remedy for defeated consumer expectations would expose the manufacturer to open-ended liability from all consequences that follow from a given incident. This open-ended liability seems particularly unjust in products cases where the purchasers communicated their needs only to dealers or retailers but not to the manufacturer. This line of analysis, however, does not pertain to professional services. In the professional / client relationship, the professional is aware, or should be aware, of any potential liability. For example, attorneys should be able to comprehend their client’s situation to the extent where they recognize their potential liabilities if they perform their services in a negligent fashion. The same could be said of accountants and architects. Thus, if a client asks an architect to design a building with specific characteristics and the architect negligently fails to do so, the architect should not be able to claim that the damages caused by his or her negligence were unforeseeable. If one agrees that damages in professional malpractice cases are foreseeable, what theory a plaintiff brings a suit under becomes irrelevant. The extent of damages should be the same in tort or contract. This is borne out in the case sub judice where the claimed loss for breach of contract is identical to that for accountant malpractice. One must also keep in mind that a suit in tort does not mean that a plaintiff suing for purely economic or commercial loss has automatically won. The plaintiff still has to establish the elements of a tort. That is, the burden of proving duty, breach of duty, causation, and damages remains a prerequisite to recovery. Indeed, if the economic loss doctrine were ignored for those cases outside the products liability context, the result in those cases leading up to the present state of the law would have been the same. The difference lies only in the fact that this court would not now have to determine whether a defendant owed a plaintiff an ex-tracontractual duty. For instance, recall that in Lincoln Park, a condominium association brought suit against the architects of the condominium. They alleged that the architects had negligently designed the condominiums that the association members had purchased from a third party, Equity Realty. Plaintiffs sought compensatory damages for repairs that the owners were forced to make. Rather than analyzing this case in terms of the economic loss doctrine, ask whether defendants owed plaintiffs a duty, whether that duty was breached, and whether that breach was the proximate cause of ascertainable damages. In that case, one would have to conclude that the architects did not owe the association members a duty to protect them from these losses. The scope of the architects’ duties cannot be interpreted to include disappointed expectation interests of third parties and subsequent buyers. While this language may sound hauntingly similar to Moorman, it is different in a significant manner. This analysis does not bar recovery for economic damages in tort in all cases — only in those cases where the liability is outside the scope of the duty defendant owes plaintiff. Thus, while architects cannot be held liable for the disappointed expectation of subsequent purchasers, they should be held liable for those of their clients. Had this court taken this path originally, this court would never have had to engage in its incoherent, indeed, impossible task of determining which professionals owe their clients an extracontractual duty and are thus outside the protection of Moorman. When viewed in this light, there appears to be no reason, other than the improvident extension of the Moorman case, to prevent professional malpractice suits for economic damages to go forward in either tort or contract. Extension of Moorman into the arena of professional malpractice should be written off as a failed experiment and the economic loss doctrine should be re-confined to cases involving products liability. For all the foregoing reasons, I respectfully dissent from the majority. JUSTICE HARRISON joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 9741309 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:09.066515+00 ===

Clinton, J.
This action was brought in the District Court for Douglas County by the plaintiff, Robert I. Kully, against the defendant, William A. Goldman, asking the court to temporarily and permanently enjoin Goldman from withholding “the transfer to plaintiff’ annually of season tickets to four specific seats to the University of Nebraska varsity football games and from doing anything to prejudice Goldman’s “future ability to receive such tickets from the University.” The prayer further asked that Goldman be declared trustee of said tickets for Kully’s use.
The action is based upon an oral agreement alleged to have been made in 1961 in which Goldman agreed to acquire for Kully four season tickets as well as four for himself. The action is founded upon the alternative theories of (1) a trust, either express, resulting, or constructive; (2) an agreement of agency to annually purchase and transfer the tickets; and (3) a breach of contract to annually purchase and transfer the tickets.
The petition prayed for special relief as to the tickets for the remainder of the 1979 season (the action being tried in the early fall of 1979), and asked for immediate relief so that Kully might use those tickets pending final determination.
The trial court found that as to the tickets for the *762remainder of the 1979 season, the parties had entered into an accord and satisfaction and denied the requested relief. As to tickets for future seasons, it found that an implied trust existed and that upon execution by Kully of an undertaking with sufficient sureties in the sum of $500, Goldman be mandatorily enjoined, on being tendered by Kully the actual retail price then charged Goldman by the University of Nebraska to obtain from the university the described tickets “for all future seasons of the University of Nebraska varsity football team home games for the use and benefit of Plaintiff.”
We affirm the judgment insofar as it pertains to the 1979 tickets. As to the balance of the judgment, we reverse and direct dismissal of the action. In so doing, even though this matter is tried de novo in this court, we accept the factual findings of the trial court that in about 1961 the parties made an agreement that Goldman would obtain from the University of Nebraska Athletic Department four season tickets for his own use and four for the use of Kully; that ticket reservations were made in Goldman’s name; and that from the time the agreement was made in about 1961 until 1979, with the exception of the year 1972, Goldman purchased the four tickets and was paid annually by Kully either before or after the tickets were obtained.
The reason for the partial reversal is that the record establishes that there exists no legally recognized res which may be the subject of a present resulting trust and, secondly, no continuing annually resulting trust could arise where the promise is not supported by consideration. Furthermore, specific performance of an agreement ought not to be granted if it can be made nugatory by the action of a third party.
It is fundamental that in order for a present trust, whether express, resulting, or constructive, to be created, there must be a defined interest or ascertainable object of ownership. Bogert, Trusts and *763Trustees §§ 111, 113 (2d ed. 1965), and § 451 (Rev. 2d ed. 1977). An agreement to create a trust in the future in order to be specifically enforceable must be supported by a consideration. Op. cit. § 113 at 578-79; Restatement (Second) of Trusts § 26, Comment m (1959). In order for a resulting trust of the purchase money type to arise, the trust claimant must prove payment of the purchase money at the time of or before title is acquired by the trustee. Bogert, Trusts and Trustees § 456 (Rev. 2d ed. 1977).
In this case the evidence shows that Goldman had no contractual right with the university which bound it to annually, for any period of time, sell him tickets upon tender by him of the purchase price. Because Goldman was on the list of annual purchasers, his prospect of obtaining the same seats and the same number of seats each year was good. It was not, however, a property right which he could enforce. The university could, at any time if it chose, refuse to sell tickets to Goldman. Although it is undoubtedly true that the university, barring some change in circumstances, was most likely to continue to sell Goldman tickets, it was not required to do so. In 1971 Kully sought to have the four season tickets transferred to his own name. The university’s agent declined to do so, saying: “At the time I talked to you, I did not realize that the seats in question were in the east stadium.
“Several years ago we were faced with the problem of the ever increasing student body, and upon direction of the Board of Regents agreed not [to] reassign any seats in the east stadium, but rather to hold them for the students. In this way it has been possible to continue throughout the last few years without taking seats away from old season ticket holders.
“For this reason I cannot comply with your request to transfer the seats in section 104 to you.” (Emphasis supplied.) This clearly indicates that the university considered itself as having the option not to honor *764future reservations. No attempt was made by Kully to prove otherwise and his own testimony acknowledges the fact that Goldman had no contractual rights to tickets in future seasons.
In a memorandum accompanying its order the court impliedly found that there was no consideration for Goldman’s promise to Kully to acquire tickets. The court, in its memorandum, stated: “Consideration is not a legal requirement of implied trusts.” Kully introduced no evidence that there was an agreement to pay a consideration for Goldman’s services.
It appears to be the universal rule that mere expectancies cannot be held in trust. Restatement (Second) of Trusts § 86 (1959); Bogert, Trusts and Trustees §113 (2d ed. 1965). The courts have uniformly held that no trust can be created unless there exists some property interest which may be held by the trustee for the claimant. American Sodium Co. v. Shelley, 51 Nev. 344, 276 P. 11 (1929) (a revocable permit); Voelkel et al. v. Tohulka et al., 236 Ind. 588, 141 N.E.2d 344 (1957) (a mere expectancy); Hise v. Grasty, 159 Va. 535, 166 S.E. 567 (1932) (an idea); Edgar v. Fitzpatrick, 377 S.W.2d 314 (Mo. 1964) (an interest not yet in existence). In New England Trust Co. v. Sanger, 337 Mass. 342, 348, 149 N.E.2d 598, 602 (1958), the court said: “It is equally plain that there can be no trust unless there is an existing trust res (Restatement: Trusts, § 74), and that an interest which has not come into existence cannot be held in trust. Bennett v. Littlefield, 177 Mass. 294, 300. Restatement: Trusts, § 75.”
In order for equity to recognize a promise to create a trust in the future when a property or property interest comes into existence, the promise must be supported by a consideration. Restatement (Second) of Trusts § 75, Comment b, § 86, Comments b and c (1959). If no consideration exists the promise is not specifically enforceable. Restatement of Contracts § 366 (1932). The authors of the Nebraska annota*765tions to the Restatement cite in support of the foregoing proposition cases of options to purchase which are not supported by a consideration. See Annot. to § 366 (Supp. II 1933).
The above principles are implicit in our holding in Valentine Oil Co. v. Powers, 157 Neb. 71, 59 N.W.2d 150 (1953). That was an action to compel specific performance of an escrow agreement for the delivery of certain oil and gas leases upon compliance with certain conditions. The documents themselves, although still held in escrow, had terminated because there had been a failure to pay delay rentals or to commence the drilling of a well within the required time period. We there said at 86-87, 59 N.W.2d at 160: “‘Based on the general equitable doctrine that equity will not render a decree which it is impractical to carry out, and because equity will not do a vain thing, a decree for the specific performance of a contract will not be granted if it would be, or could be made, nugatory ....’”
In the case before us, the court’s decree directing specific performance was improper because there was no existing res which could be the subject of a present trust and because, insofar as a promise related to acquisition of tickets for “all” future seasons, it was unsupported by a consideration. Without question, of course, where one person furnishes money to another to purchase tickets for him and the latter does so, the purchaser does hold the tickets in resulting trust for the one furnishing the funds and such trust could, in otherwise appropriate circumstances, be specifically enforced. Kully’s two other theories of recovery are not supportable because of the absence of consideration and lack of proof of monetary damage. In addition, a contract to act as agent is not usually specifically enforceable in equity. Bethlehem Engineering Export Co. v. Christie, 105 F.2d 933 (2d Cir. 1939); Ice Cream Co. v. Dept. of L.C., 154 Ohio St. 357, 96 *766N.E.2d 203 (1950); The Case of Mary Clark, 1 Blackf. 122, 12 Am. Decs. 213 (1821).
Affirmed in part, and in part reversed with DIRECTIONS TO DISMISS.

=== CASE 9741310 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:09.070862+00 ===

Reimer, District Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent from the majority opinion, and would have affirmed, in part, the decision of the District Court and remanded the matter to the District Court with directions to partition in kind the subject matter of the litigation and set over to the plaintiff whatever right to renew the tickets for the four seats plaintiff has used for the past 17 years as might exist in the defendant.
In this case, the majority makes much of the absence of a monetary consideration, but in the past has not expressed so great a concern. In Litz v. Wilson, ante p. 483, 304 N.W.2d 48 (1981), a nominal recitation of a $1 downpayment was sufficient monetary consideration for a $100,000 contract; and in Kinkenon v. Hue, 207 Neb. 698, 301 N.W.2d 77 (1981), a “live-in” arrangement which had already been performed by the promisee was sufficient consideration for transfer of a home for life use. The real consideration in each of the referenced cases is the mutuality of the promises exchanged, and the same is true in the instant case with some 17 years of recognition.

=== CASE 9741311 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:09.835316+00 ===

White, J.
Appellants own adjacent tracts of land in Chase County, Nebraska, and in Phillips County, Colorado. A well physically located on the Nebraska tract pumps ground water for the purpose of irrigating crops on both the Nebraska tract and the Colorado tract. Defendants’ predecessor in title registered the well with the State of Nebraska on January 18,1971, as required by Neb. Rev. Stat. § 46-602 (Reissue 1978). However, neither the defendants nor their predecessor in title applied to the Nebraska Department of Water Resources for a permit to transport ground water from the Nebraska well across the border into Colorado as required by Neb. Rev. Stat. § 46-613.01 (Reissue 1978).
The State of Nebraska brought this action in the District Court of Chase County to enjoin defendants from transporting Nebraska ground water into Colorado without a permit. After trial on the merits, the *705District Court issued the injunction, holding that § 46-613.01 does not violate the commerce clause of U.S. Const, art. I, § 8, since under Nebraska law water is not an article of commerce. The District Court also held that even if ground water is an article of commerce, the statute does not impose an unreasonable burden on interstate commerce. We affirm. ■ — /
We start our analysis with the assumption that if' the commerce clause is to apply to a state statute regulating the interstate transfer of a commodity, that commodity must be an “article of commerce.” The term “commerce” implies that the commodity must be capable of being reduced to private possession and then exchanged for goods or services of the same or similar economic value. An analysis of Nebraska case law and statutes demonstrates that Nebraska law has never considered ground water to be a market item freely transferable for value among private parties, and therefore not an article of commerce.___
The first Nebraska case to consider the overlying landowner’s proprietary interest in water under his land is Olson v. City of Wahoo, 124 Neb. 802, 248 N.W. 304 (1933). The Olson court specifically rejected the “English rule” of rights in ground water, which recognizes absolute ownership of ground water in the overlying landowner. Instead, the court adopted a slightly modified version of the more restrictive American' rule of “reasonable use”: “The American rule is that the owner of land is entitled to appropriate subterranean waters found under his land, but he cannot extract and appropriate them in excess of a reasonable and beneficial use upon the land which he owns, especially if such use is injurious to others who have substantial rights to the waters, and if the natural underground supply is insufficient for all owners, each is entitled to a reasonable proportion of the whole, and while a lesser number of states have adopted this rule, it is, in our opinion, supported by the better reasoning.” Id. at 811, 248 N.W. at 308. The “pure” American rule, *706as stated by other authorities at the time, did not include the concept of sharing in times of shortage, and the Olson court’s inclusion of that concept demonstrates its view that water is a unique commodity subject to state regulation to assure that it is available to everyone in the state in relation to their need, rather than their ability to pay for it.
The Nebraska Constitution declares water for irrigation purposes in the State of Nebraska to be a natural want. Neb. Const, art. XV, § 4. The decades of the 1930s and 1940s saw a quantum expansion in Nebraska of the use of ground water for irrigation. See Aiken, Nebraska Ground Water Law and Administration, 59 Neb. L. Rev. 917 (1980). Legislative recognition of the state’s power and the corresponding need to manage the state’s ground water resources began in 1957 when the Legislature declared “that the conservation of ground water and the beneficial use thereof are essential to the future well-being of this state.” Neb. Rev. Stat. § 46-601 (Reissue 1978), and enacted statutes requiring well registration, well-spacing, and filling of abandoned wells. Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 46-602 and 46-609 (Reissue 1978).
Transfer of ground water was considered by the Legislature in 1963. Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 46-638 through 46-650 (Reissue 1978), enacted that year, and § 46-654, enacted in 1965, granted only to cities, villages, and municipal corporations the right to transport ground water out of its basin of origin for the purpose of supplying urban water needs. Since the Nebraska common law of ground water permitted use of the water only on the overlying land, legislative action was necessary to allow for transfers off the overlying land, even for as pressing a need as supplying urban water users.
Metropolitan Utilities Dist. v. Merritt Beach Co., 179 Neb. 783, 799-800, 140 N.W.2d 626, 636 (1966), confirmed that “[underground waters, whether they be percolating waters or underground streams, are *707a part of the waters referred to in the Constitution as a natural want. . . [I]t is becoming more important and extremely necessary that regulation and control of all sources of water supply be attained.” That court held that it is “the right of the Legislature, unimpaired, to determine the policy of the state as to underground waters and the rights of persons in their use.” Id. at 801, 140 N.W.2d at 637. The opinion clearly held that the Legislature has the power to determine public policy with regard to ground water and that it may be transferred from the overlying land only with the consent of and to the extent prescribed by the public through its elected representatives.
Only a year after the decision in the Metropolitan case, the Legislature enacted the statute at issue in this case, § 46-613.01, dealing with transfer of Nebraska ground water across state lines. The statute allows such transfers conditioned on the receipt of a permit from the director of the Department of Water Resources, who may grant the permit if the transfer “is reasonable, is not contrary to the conservation and use of ground water, and is not otherwise detrimental to the public welfare,” and if the receiving state “grants reciprocal rights” providing for transfer of ground water from that state into Nebraska.
The parties concede that Colorado forbids the transfer of ground water outside its borders and has no reciprocity provision in its statute. Neither the courts nor the Legislature of Nebraska have considered Nebraska ground water as an article of commerce. Free transfer and exchange of ground water in a market setting have never been permitted in this state, since the water itself is publicly owned. The public, through legislative action, may grant to private persons the right to the use of publicly owned waters for private purposes; but as the Olson opinion demonstrates, with its emphasis on sharing in times of shortage, the public may limit or deny the right of private parties to freely use the water when it de*708termines that the welfare of the state and its citizens is at stake. Even where it appears that water itself is being marketed, as in municipal water supply arrangements, it is the value of the cost of distributing the water that is the basis of the rate structure and not the value of the water itself. See K. S. B. Tech. Sales v. North Jersey Dist. Water Supply, 75 N.J. 272, 381 A.2d 774 (1977).
Appellants in their brief place great reliance on the case of City of Altus, Oklahoma v. Carr, 255 F. Supp. 828 (W.D. Tex. 1966), aff’d per curiam 385 U.S. 35, 87 S. Ct. 240, 17 L. Ed. 2d 34 (1966), which held that a Texas statute forbidding interstate transfers of water without legislative permission placed an unconstitutional burden on interstate commerce. However, at the time of Altus, Texas law treated ground water much differently than Nebraska. Texas recognized the absolute ownership of subterranean water in the overlying landowner. This is in sharp contrast to the narrowly circumscribed right of reasonable use only on the overlying land recognized in Nebraska. In addition, the Altus court noted that, in Texas, “after the water has been appropriated, the landowner, his lessee or assign, has the right to sell the water to others for use off of the land and outside the basin where produced, just as he could sell any other species of property.” Id. at 840. In sum, said the Altus court, “the general law of the State of Texas . . . recognizes water that has been withdrawn from underground sources as personal property subject to sale and commerce . . . .” Id. at 840. Since the only transfers, prohibited by Texas law were interstate transfers, Altus found that Texas considered ground water to be an article of commerce, subject to the commands of the commerce clause of the U.S. Constitution. However, intrastate transfers of ground water in Nebraska are permitted only under carefully prescribed conditions and do not resemble a free-market setting. Ground water use is not an unlimited private property *709right in Nebraska law. The decision in Altus is not controlling. Nebraska ground water is not an article of commerce and thus not subject to the strictures of the commerce clause.
Since the Altus case was affirmed without opinion by the U.S. Supreme Court, we must assume that the high court had no quarrel with the District Court’s application of the law to the particular facts of Altus. However, we need not and do not assume, as appellants would have us do, that Altus “overruled sub silentio” the 70-year-old holding in Hudson Water Co. v. Mc-Carter, 209 U.S. 349, 28 S. Ct. 529, 52 L. Ed. 828 (1908), that a state may, under its police power, forbid or condition the interstate transfer of its water resources without running afoul of the commerce clause. The Hudson case upheld the constitutionality of a New Jersey statute prohibiting the transfer of New Jersey surface water out of the state. The court noted that “[a] man cannot acquire a right to property by his desire to use it in commerce among the States,” and emphasized that the state as “quasi-sovereign and representative of the interests of the public has a standing in court to protect the atmosphere, the water and the forests within its territory, irrespective of the assent or dissent of the private owners of the land most immediately concerned. ... It finds itself in possession of what all admit to be a great public good, and what it has it may keep and give no one a reason for its will.” Id. at 355-57.
There have been other U.S. Supreme Court cases limiting the rights of individual states to put conditions on the interstate transfer of natural resources other than water, such as natural gas and minnows. Penna v. West Virginia, 262 U.S. 553, 43 S. Ct. 658, 67 L. Ed. 1117 (1923); Oklahoma v. Kansas Nat. Gas Co., 221 U.S. 229, 31 S. Ct. 564, 55 L. Ed. 716 (1911); Hughes v. Oklahoma, 441 U.S. 322, 99 S. Ct. 1727, 60 L. Ed. 2d 250 (1979). However, we note that the natural resources dealt with in those cases have historically *710been market items, reducible to private possession and freely exchangeable for value. This has never been the case with underground water in Nebraska. Further, since water is the only natural resource absolutely essential to human survival, the application of rules designed to facilitate commerce in less essential resources to the transfer of water must be done, if at all, with extreme caution. It is this caution which prevents us from holding that Nebraska ground water is an article of commerce. Because the ground water in this case is not an article of commerce, the commerce clause considerations do not apply to the Nebraska statute at issue here.
Appellants also urge that § 46-613.01 violates the due process provisions of the fifth and fourteenth amendments to the Constitution of the United States, which prohibit the United States or an individual state from depriving an individual of life, liberty, or property without due process of law. Although the arguments in the “due process” section of appellants’ brief are actually equal protection arguments, we note that conditioning a landowner’s right to transfer ground water either within or without Nebraska does not deprive him of a property right, since, under Nebraska common law, ground water may not be transferred off the overlying Nebraska land at all unless the public, owners of the water, grant that right. Not being at liberty to transport ground water without public consent and having no private property right in the water itself, appellants are deprived of neither liberty nor property by § 46-613.01.
Nor does the reciprocity provision of § 46-613.01 violate constitutional guarantees of due process, as appellants claim, by delegating legislative authority to the legislature of another state. The Nebraska Legislature has exercised its legislative authority by determining the public policy of the state with regard to ground water and enacting that determination into law. It has not delegated to any other state’s legislature *711the right to determine Nebraska public policy. The reciprocity provision is merely one of several conditions to be satisfied before a permit to transport water out of state may be granted. As stated in Lennox v. Housing Authority of City of Omaha, 137 Neb. 582, 590, 290 N.W. 451, 457 (1940): “The providing of such contingencies upon which the law might properly be limited to take effect does not constitute a delegation of legislative power. The applicable rule is: The legislature cannot delegate its powers to make a law, but it can make a law to become operative on the happening of a certain contingency or on an ascertainment of a fact upon which the law intends to make its own action depend.”
In State v. Padley, 195 Neb. 358, 237 N.W.2d 883 (1976), the statute at issue set a 55-mile-per-hour speed limit on the portion of Interstate 80 crossing Nebraska, but declared that when the President terminates the Emergency Highway Energy Conservation Act such speed limit will revert to 75 miles per hour. The Padley court held that: “In so doing the Legislature has not delegated its power to make the law but has designed its alternative provision to become effective on the happening of a certain contingency.” Id. at 360, 237 N.W.2d at 885. That court also stated that the rule set out in Lennox “is a well-recognized rule of law.” Id. at 360, 237 N.W.2d at 885. The granting of a permit to transport water for irrigation out of state is contingent upon, among other things, the receiving state granting its landowners the same right. Each state is free to determine its own public policy with regard to ground water transfers and to condition the right to transfer on one or more contingencies. Thus, there has been no unconstitutional delegation of legislative power by the Nebraska Legislature.
Appellants finally argue that § 46-613.01 violates the equal protection clause of the fourteenth amendment to the U.S. Constitution' by virtue of an unreasonable classification. The class upon which *712§ 46-613.01 operates consists of those persons wishing to transport Nebraska ground water out of state for irrigation purposes. It is plain from the language of the statute that the classification is reasonable. It is related to a legitimate state interest in preserving, for the beneficial use of its citizens, Nebraska’s underground water supply, and it operates equally on all members of the class. Any person wishing to transport ground water out of state for irrigation purposes must apply for a permit to do so and the director of the Nebraska Department of Water Resources is to use the same guidelines in every instance in determining whether or not the permit may issue. That the statute does not apply to irrigators who do not wish to transport ground water out of state hardly makes it violative of equal protection.
The judgment of the District Court is affirmed.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9741312 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:09.839623+00 ===

Krivosha, C.J.,
concurring in part, and in part dissenting.
While I generally concur with the majority’s conclusion that establishing legislative criteria to control the transfer of water from the State of Nebraska to an adjoining state is not a violation of the commerce clause of the U.S. Constitution, I must respectfully dissent from that portion of the majority’s opinion which holds that the statutory prohibition against the issuance of the permit, if the adjoining state does not grant reciprocity, is a constitutionally valid act of the Legislature. I believe that that portion of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 46-613.01 (Reissue 1978) which prohibits the Director of Water Resources from issuing a permit solely on the basis that the adjoining state does not grant reciprocity is an unreasonable classification and violates both the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Nebraska.
Were the statute in question to provide that no person, firm, city, village, municipal corporation, or any other *713entity, including a citizen of the State of Nebraska, could use water from this state on land owned by such entity in both this state and an adjoining state unless and until the Director of Water Resources found that the water request was reasonable, was not contrary to the conservation and use of ground water, and was not otherwise detrimental to the public welfare, I would have no difficulty with the statute. But the statute as it currently exists provides that even though the director might find that the request is reasonable and that to deny it would be unreasonable, that the request is not contrary to the conservation and use of ground water in this state and, to the contrary, is in furtherance of the conservation and use of ground water in this state, and that it is not otherwise detrimental to the public welfare, but in fact is beneficial to the public welfare, he, nevertheless, cannot issue such permit, solely on the basis that the adjoining state does not permit entities, including its own citizens, to transport water into this state.
The issue here is not whether reciprocal legislation is constitutional, but whether a citizen of the State of Nebraska can be prohibited from using water on land owned by that citizen in both this state and in an adjoining state solely on the basis that the adjoining state would not reciprocate. If one were to extend this statute to its logical conclusion, one could find that even though there was an abundance of water in an area in Nebraska, so much so that flooding was imminent, the water could not be transferred to adjoining land because the adjoining state refused to grant reciprocity. It occurs to me that what this statute attempts to do is to absolutely prohibit the transfer of water, without regard to its need or availability, based solely upon the acts of another state over which citizens of this state have no control.
To permit citizens of one part of the state to care for their land situated both in this state and an adjoining state because the adjoining state permits *714reciprocity, though it may not have water which can be transferred, while denying that privilege to other citizens of this state solely on the basis of the action of an adjoining state and without regard to either the reasonableness of the prohibition at a particular moment or its need, strikes me as being a violation of Neb. Const, art. Ill, § 18, and art. I, § 3, and the fifth and fourteenth amendments to the U.S. Constitution. I would have struck down that portion of § 46-613.01 which denies authority to the director if the adjoining state does not otherwise grant reciprocity.

=== CASE 2226828 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:20.420088+00 ===

305 N.W.2d 10 (1981)
208 Neb. 647
STATE of Nebraska, Appellee,
v.
Virgil E. SLIVA, Appellant.
No. 43665.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
April 24, 1981.
*11 R. Steven Geshell, Robak & Geshell, Columbus, for appellant.
Paul L. Douglas, Atty. Gen., and Harold Mosher, Lincoln, for appellee.
Heard before KRIVOSHA, C. J., and BOSLAUGH, McCOWN, CLINTON, BRODKEY, WHITE and HASTINGS, JJ.
KRIVOSHA, Chief Justice.
The appellant, Virgil E. Sliva (Sliva), appeals from an order originally entered by the county court of Polk County, Nebraska, and subsequently affirmed by the District Court for Polk County, Nebraska. For reasons more particularly set out hereinafter, the appeal is dismissed as being untimely.
The record discloses that Sliva was originally charged in the county court of Polk County, Nebraska, under a two-count complaint. Count I charged that on or about the 24th day of November 1979, in the County of Polk, Nebraska, Sliva operated or had in his physical control a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic liquor, in violation of Neb.Rev.Stat. § 39-669.07 (Reissue 1978). Count II of the complaint charged that Sliva had previously been convicted of driving while under the influence of alcoholic liquor on February 13, 1970, and that this, therefore, was his second offense.
At the hearing held on December 20, 1979, Sliva appeared with his attorney, Cleo F. Robak, and entered a plea of guilty to the charge. He thereafter reappeared before the county court of Polk County, Nebraska, on February 22, 1980, at which time the court, having previously accepted his plea of guilty, sentenced Sliva to serve a sentence of 10 days in the county jail, pay a fine of $500, and have his driver's license revoked for 1 year, during which time he was ordered not to drive. After the sentence was imposed, the court announced that the matter was adjourned.
The record then reflects that sometime later the same day the parties again appeared before the county judge and asked that the sentence be vacated because apparently Sliva, through inadvertence or mistake, did not understand an option that was offered to him by the trial court and which was rejected by him. The offer had to do with his drinking and required him to submit himself to evaluation by the Eppley Center in Omaha, Nebraska. The court acceded to the request of Sliva and set the sentence aside, although the plea of guilty remained.
The record then reflects that on April 25, 1980, Sliva and his attorney, R. Steven Geshell, a partner of Mr. Robak, appeared before the county court of Polk County, Nebraska. At this time the court again sentenced Sliva to pay a fine, serve a jail sentence, and have his license and driving privileges revoked for 1 year. Notice of appeal was filed on April 30, 1980, an appeal bond having already been filed on April 25, 1980. The difficulty with all of this, however, is that the sentence which was originally imposed on February 22, 1980, was a final judgment and one which the trial court was not at liberty to vacate. We recently held in the case of State v. Cousins, 208 Neb. 245, 247, 302 N.W.2d 731, 732 (1981): `"The rule is that a sentence validly imposed takes effect from the time it is pronounced and that a subsequent sentence fixing a different term is a nullity.'" The rule is not new, having previously been declared by this court in State v. Snider, 197 Neb. 317, 248 N.W.2d 342 (1977). Furthermore, in State v. Williams, 194 Neb. 483, 484, 233 N.W.2d 772, 773 (1975), we held: "An order by a District Court purporting to suspend a sentence legally pronounced in a criminal action for the purpose of placing a defendant on probation is a nullity." We perceive of no rule or reason *12 which would distinguish a sentence imposed by a District Court from one imposed by a county court. It must be kept in mind that the court did not grant a new trial for errors occurring at trial, but merely vacated a valid sentence. Sliva was required to perfect his appeal from the county court to the District Court within 10 days from the rendition of the judgment on February 22, 1980. Neb.Rev.Stat. § 24-542 (Reissue 1979). Having failed to do so, his appeal to the District Court was untimely and the District Court was without jurisdiction to review the matter. See Edward Frank Rozman Co. v. Keillor, 195 Neb. 587, 239 N.W.2d 779 (1976). The judgment imposed by the county court on February 22, 1980, must, therefore, be reinstated in all respects, including the payment of the fine of $500.
APPEAL DISMISSED.

=== CASE 9741313 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:10.992381+00 ===

JUSTICE SLATER delivered the opinion of the court: The claimant, Daniel W. Wajerski, filed an application for adjustment of claim pursuant to the Workers’ Compensation Act (the Act) (111. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 48, par. 138.1 et seq.). Claimant sought to recover benefits for an injury he sustained while working as an ironworker for the employer, Forest City Steel Erectors. The arbitrator found that the claimant’s injury arose out of and in the course of his employment and that as a result of the injury he was temporarily totally disabled for 80s h weeks. The arbitrator also found that the claimant was permanently incapacitated from pursuing the occupation he was engaged in at the time of the injury and awarded him $380.53 per week for the duration of his disability pursuant to section 8(d)(1) of the Act (111. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 48, par. 138.8(d)(1)). The Industrial Commission (the Commission) affirmed the arbitrator’s decision but modified the amount awarded to $313.51 per week. The circuit court confirmed the Commission’s decision. The employer now appeals and the claimant cross-appeals. We affirm. The record shows that the claimant was hired by the employer in September of 1988 to work as a journeyman ironworker. In November claimant was promoted to foreman. Claimant earned $19.27 per hour while working as an ironworker and an additional $1 per hour while working as a foreman. During the 14-week period that claimant worked for the employer prior to his injury, he worked an average of 44.7 hours per week, and his average weekly wage was $807.70. On December 27, 1988, claimant slipped and fell while walking down a ramp at a jobsite, fracturing his left ankle. There is no dispute that, as a result of his injury, the claimant is unable to perform his regular duties as an ironworker. Two witnesses testified at arbitration regarding the amount of work available to ironworkers. Frank Pauley, secretary-treasurer of local number one of the Iron Workers’ Union, testified that a normal work week for a journeyman ironworker is 40 hours of work. According to Pauley, the job of an ironworker is full-time, not seasonal, work and ironworkers can work 52 weeks per year. Franklin Miezio, who had worked as a foreman for the employer, testified that claimant questioned him in October of 1988 regarding the amount of work available and whether he would be kept on the job. Miezio told claimant that the employer had "10 months to a year’s work” available. Miezio also signed a letter at claimant’s request indicating that the employer had work available for at least one year and that Miezio had requested that claimant remain employed for that period. In addition to the testimony related above, a document entitled "Employee Pension History File List” was admitted into evidence. According to Pauley, the document was prepared by the pension fund office of the union and it shows the years in which the claimant worked as an ironworker and the number of hours worked in those years. That information is summarized as follows: Year Hours 1971 1,057.00 1972 1,826.00 1973 1,880.00 1974 1,975.00 1975 1,594.00 1976 781.00 1977 710.00 1978 1979 1,230.00 1980 503.00 1981 857.00 1982 887.00 1983 43.00 1984 490.50 1985 549.00 1986 1,580.00 1987 1,046.50 1988 1,240.00. As a result of his inability to return to work as an ironworker, claimant’s employer arranged for job counseling and he sought other work. In July of 1990 claimant began working as a "pole man” on a surveying crew, earning $6 per hour. Claimant was still engaged in this occupation at the time of the arbitration hearing. The arbitrator, in addition to awarding temporary total disability benefits, which are not at issue here, found that the claimant was entitled to a wage differential award under section 8(d)(1) (111. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 48, par. 138.8(d)(1)). The arbitrator awarded the sum of $380.53, which represented 662/s% of the difference between the amount claimant would have been able to earn as an ironworker ($20.27 per hour x 40 hours per week $810.80) and the amount he was earning as a "pole man” ($240). On review, the Commission modified the amount of the award of section 8(d)(1) benefits to $313.51 per week. The Commission found that section 8(d)(1) awards are subject to the same maximum limitation as permanent partial disability awards under section 8(b)(4). As noted above, the circuit court confirmed the Commission’s decision. The employer raises two issues on appeal. First, it contends that the Commission erred in awarding section 8(d)(1) wage differential benefits without considering the claimant’s prior work and earnings history. Employer notes that claimant’s pension records establish that in 17 years as an ironworker he worked an average of 1,073.40 hours per year, and he was therefore only a part-time ironworker. Employer argues that to allow a section 8(d)(1) award to be based upon an assumption that claimant would work full time creates a windfall for claimant and, in Professor Larson’s words, "turn[s] a part-time able-bodied worker into a full-time disabled worker” (2 A. Larson, Law of Workmen’s Compensation § 60.21(d), at 10 — 707 (1992)). We disagree.  Section 8(d)(1) provides: "If, after the accidental injury has been sustained, the employee as a result thereof becomes partially incapacitated from pursuing his usual and customary line of employment, he shall, except in cases compensated under the specific schedule set forth in paragraph (e) of this Section, receive compensation for the duration of his disability, subject to the limitations as to maximum amounts fixed in paragraph (b) of this Section, equal to 662/s % of the difference between the average amount which he would be able to earn in the full performance of his duties in the occupation in which he was engaged at the time of the accident and the average amount which he is earning or is able to earn in some suitable employment or business after the accident.” (Emphasis added.) 111. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 48, par. 138.8(d)(1). Words used in a statute are to be given their plain and commonly understood meaning (Bohannon v. Industrial Comm’n (1992), 237 Ill. App. 3d 989, 606 N.E.2d 527), and where the language of a statute is clear and unambiguous, the courts are obligated to enforce the law as enacted by the legislature (see Illinois-Iowa Blacktop, Inc. v. Industrial Comm’n (1989), 180 Ill. App. 3d 885, 536 N.E.2d 1008). The language emphasized above clearly evidences the legislature’s intent that section 8(d)(1) awards are to be based on the number of hours constituting "full performance” of a particular occupation. Based on the facts of this case, we conclude that this claimant has demonstrated "full performance” of the duties of his occupation.  We also note that the interpretation of section 8(d)(1) advocated by the employer would, in effect, repeal Public Act 79 — 79 (Pub. Act 79 — 79, eff. July Í, 1975), which amended section 8(d)(1). Prior to amendment, section 8(d)(1) provided for wage differential benefits based on the "difference between the average amount which [claimant] earned before the accident” and the average amount he is earning after the accident. (Emphasis added.) (HI. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 48, par. 138.8(d)(1).) Public Act 79 — 79 replaced the language emphasized above with the current language referring to full performance of the claimant’s occupational duties. Changes in wording and phrasing are presumed to have been deliberately made (In re Marriage of Sutton (1990), 136 Ill. 2d 441, 557 N.E.2d 869), and when the legislature amends an act by deleting certain language, it is presumed that the legislature intended to change the law in that respect (In re Summary Suspension of Driver’s License of Rakers (1989), 187 Ill. App. 3d 27, 542 N.E.2d 1311; Smith v. Industrial Comm’n (1988), 170 Ill. App. 3d 626, 525 N.E.2d 81). This court must give effect to the amended law in a manner consistent with the amendment. (General Electric Co. v. Industrial Comm’n (1986), 144 Ill. App. 3d 1003, 495 N.E.2d 68.) Accordingly, we find that it was proper for the Commission to calculate the section 8(d)(1) benefits without regard to claimant’s earnings prior to the accident. Finally, we note that our decision here is consistent with previous decisions construing section 8(d)(1). In Old Ben Coal Co. v. Industrial Comm’n (1990), 198 Ill. App. 3d 485, 555 N.E.2d 1201, the claimant, a "grade 5” employee, was injured in two separate incidents. Claimant returned to work after the first injury at a different job classification and lower rate of pay because there had been a general layoff. After claimant sustained his second injury, the parties stipulated that his average earnings during the year preceding his injury had been $429.08 per week as calculated pursuant to section 10 of the Act (see HI. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 48, par. 138.10). Claimant was subsequently awarded wage differential benefits based upon what he would have earned as a grade 5 employee ($117.72 per day), rather than on his actual earnings the previous year. On appeal, the employer argued that the award should have been based on the amount of stipulated prior earnings because the claimant had not established that he was capable of earning more than the stipulated amount. The employer also contended that the award was speculative, because it did not take into account days off from work due to sickness, injury, absenteeism, layoffs or strikes. In response, the court stated: "[T]he statute provides that a wage differential should be calculated on the presumption that but for the injury, the employee would be in the full performance of his duties. Accordingly, we hold that the Commission properly elected to compute the wage differential award based in part on the petitioner’s classification at the time of the original injury, rather than on the stipulated amount that he had actually earned.” (Emphasis added.) Old Ben Coal, 198 Ill. App. 3d at 493, 555 N.E.2d at 1207. See also General Electric, 144 Ill. App. 3d 1003, 495 N.E.2d 68.  The employer next contends that the Commission erred in failing to consider the fact that the claimant’s wages as a "pole man” may increase each year. Specifically, employer contends that since the claimant’s wages could increase each year, the wage differential would automatically decrease and, as such, the Commission should have taken this fact into account when it calculated the award. It is axiomatic that liability under the Act cannot be premised on speculation or conjecture but must be based solely on the facts contained in the record. Similarly, an award for loss of earnings cannot be based on speculation as to the particular employment level or job classification which a claimant might eventually attain. See Deichmiller v. Industrial Comm’n (1986), 147 Ill. App. 3d 66, 497 N.E.2d 452. In this case, we note that on cross-examination of claimant, the employer asked claimant if he had discussed raises with his employer. This line of questioning was objected to as hearsay, as well as being speculative. The arbitrator sustained the objection and employer made an offer of proof indicating that the claimant would testify that his new employer told him that he would receive a raise of $3 per hour after each of his first three years on the job. Any testimony by the claimant recounting what his employer told him would clearly be hearsay and was therefore inadmissible. (See In re Estate of Holmgren (1992), 237 Ill. App. 3d 839, 604 N.E.2d 1092.) Furthermore, whether claimant’s salary would in fact increase is highly speculative, since any number of circumstances may prevent such an occurrence. We also note that while the employer is barred from bringing a new action should the claimant’s wages increase, the claimant is also barred from bringing an action should his wages decrease. (See Petrie v. Industrial Comm’n (1987), 160 Ill. App. 3d 165, 513 N.E.2d 104.) Thus, both the claimant and the employer equally share the risk of changes in the claimant’s income. As such, we find that the Commission properly declined to speculate that a wage increase would occur.  We now consider the issue raised by the claimant in his cross-appeal. The claimant argues that the Commission erred in reducing his wage differential award. Specifically, claimant maintains that benefits awarded under section 8(d)(1) should not be subject to the same maximum amount limitation as that applied to permanent partial disability awards under section 8(b)(4). Claimant contends that the maximum benefit award under section 8(d)(1) should be 100% of the State’s average weekly wage. On the other hand, the Illinois State Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations, in its brief as amicus curiae, argues that the maximum rate should be 1331/s % of the State’s average weekly wage. We note, and the claimant concedes, that this issue has recently been addressed by this court in both Bohannon v. Industrial Comm’n (1992), 237 Ill. App. 3d 989, 606 N.E.2d 527, and Fernandes v. Industrial Comm’n (1993), 246 Ill. App. 3d 261, 615 N.E.2d 1191. We decline the invitation to reconsider those decisions and we find that the Commission did not err in limiting the claimant’s wage differential award pursuant to section 8(b)(4). For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court is affirmed. Affirmed. McCULLOUGH, P.J., and RAKOWSKI and WOODWARD, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9741314 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:10.996832+00 ===

JUSTICE RARICK, specially concurring: While I am in agreement with the majority’s resolution of the two issues raised by the employer in the present appeal, I feel compelled to write separately. The language of section 8(d)(1) clearly demonstrates that awards thereunder are to be based on the number of hours constituting "full performance” of claimant’s occupation, and that an individual claimant’s work history is not determinative of what constitutes full performance on a case-by-case basis. With respect to the employer’s argument that claimant’s wages might increase each year, there is no proper evidence of this in the record. I also agree with the majority’s resolution of the issue raised by the claimant in his cross-appeal, but with great reluctance because, as the Illinois State Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (ISFL) points out in its brief amicus curiae, the law as presently drafted and interpreted could result in a monumental loss of earning potential for certain workers and in economic ruin for the worker and his family. Section 8(d)(1) of the Act provides: "If, after the accidental injury has been sustained, the employee as a result thereof becomes partially incapacitated from pursuing his usual and customary line of employment, he shall, except in cases compensated under the specific schedule set forth in paragraph (e) of this Section, receive compensation for the duration of his disability, subject to the limitations as to maximum amounts fixed in paragraph (b) of this Section, equal to 662/s% of the difference between the average amount which he would be able to earn in the full performance of his duties in the occupation in which he was engaged at the time of the accident and the average amount which he is earning or is able to earn in some suitable employment or business after the accident.” (Emphasis added.) (820 ILCS 305/8(d)(1) (West 1992).) Under section 8(d)(1), an employee who becomes partially incapacitated may receive compensation equal to 662/s% of the difference between what he would have been able to earn had he not been injured, and what he is earning or could earn after the injury, subject to the limitations set forth in section 8(b). Unfortunately, section 8(b) contains more than one maximum limitation provision. Section 8(b)(4) provides in pertinent part: "All weekly compensation rates provided under subparagraphs 1, 2 and 2.1 of this paragraph (b) of this Section shall be subject to the following limitations: The maximum weekly compensation rate from July 1, 1975, except as hereinafter provided, shall be 100% of the State’s average weekly wage in covered industries under the Unemployment Insurance Act, that being the wage that most closely approximates the State’s average weekly wage. The maximum weekly compensation rate, for the period July 1, 1984, through June 30, 1987, except as hereinafter provided, shall be $293.61. Effective July 1, 1987 and on July 1 of each year thereafter the maximum weekly compensation rate, except as hereinafter provided, shall be determined as follows: if during the preceding 12 month period there shall have been an increase in the State’s average weekly wage in covered industries under the Unemployment Insurance Act, the weekly compensation rate shall be proportionately increased by the same percentage as the percentage of increase in the State’s average weekly wage in covered industries under the Unemployment Insurance Act during such period. The maximum weekly compensation rate, for the period January 1,1981 through December 31,1983, except as hereinafter provided, shall be 100% of the State’s average weekly wage in covered industries under the Unemployment Insurance Act in effect on January 1, 1981. Effective January 1, 1984 and on January 1, or each year thereafter the maximum weekly compensation rate, except as hereinafter provided, shall be determined as follows: if during the preceding 12 month period there shall have been an increase in the State’s average weekly wage in covered industries under the Unemployment Insurance Act, the weekly compensation rate shall be proportionately increased by the same percentage as the percentage of increase in the State’s average weekly wage in covered industries under the Unemployment Insurance Act during such period. From July 1, 1977 and thereafter such maximum weekly compensation rate in death cases under Section 7, and permanent total disability cases under paragraph (f) or subparagraph 18 of paragraph (3) of this Section, and for temporary total disability under paragraph (b) of this Section, and for amputation of a member or enucleation of an eye under paragraph (e) of this Section shall be increased to 1331/s % of the State’s average weekly wage in covered industries under the Unemployment Insurance Act.” (Emphasis added.) 820 ILCS 305/8(b)(4) (West 1992). Previous decisions by this court have addressed this issue. In General Electric Co. v. Industrial Comm’n (1986), 144 Ill. App. 3d 1003, 495 N.E.2d 68, the employer argued that section 8(d)(1) wage differential awards were subject to the limitation set forth in section 8(b)(2). The court held that General Electric waived this issue by failing to assert it in the circuit court, but nevertheless went on to express its disagreement with General Electric’s position. Citing United Airlines v. Industrial Comm’n (1980), 89 Ill. App. 3d 387, 411 N.E.2d 1009, the court stated that while section 8(b)(2) fixes minimum levels of certain compensation in various alternative situations, it did not fix the maximum amount of earning loss benefits which may be awarded under section 8(d)(1). The court then concluded that the limitations as to maximum amounts of wage differential awards referred to in section 8(d)(1) are set forth in sections 8(b)(4) and 8(b)(5). In Bohannon v. Industrial Comm’n (1992), 237 Ill. App. 3d 989, 606 N.E.2d 527, we rejected claimant’s argument that the proper maximum rate applicable to wage differential awards was the TTD rate rather than the PPD rate, and held that "[t]he proper maximum rates in determining permanent disability benefits are found in section 8(b)(4) of the Act.” Bohannon, 237 Ill. App. 3d at 994, 606 N.E.2d at 530. In Fernandes v. Industrial Comm’n (1993), 246 Ill. App. 3d 261, 615 N.E.2d 1191, this court reversed the Commission’s finding that while section 8(d)(1) referred to the limits found in section 8(b), the language of section 8(b) was ambiguous as to which limit therein was applicable, and that section 8(b) could not be read as limiting a claimant’s award to the maximum allowed for permanent partial disability. In so doing, we stated: "In looking at section 8(b), sections 8(b)(1) and (b)(2.1) are concerned with calculating and setting minimum rates for temporary total disability and compensation rates for awards under sections 8(c), (d)(2) and (e) of the Act. Section 8(b)(2) covers compensation in all cases other than those covered by sections 8(b)(1) and (b)(2.1); that is, sections 8(d)(1) and 8(f). Section 8(b)(4) establishes the maximum weekly compensation payable under awards referred to in sections 8(b)(1), (b)(2) and (b)(2.1). Therefore, as stated in General Electric, we find the maximum rate contained in section 8(b)(4) applies to section 8(d)(1) awards.” Fernandes, 246 Ill. App. 3d at 269, 615 N.E.2d at 1197. Taken together, these cases stand for the proposition that while sections 8(b)(1), 8(b)(2), and 8(b)(2.1) establish minimum compensation amounts, section 8(b)(4) sets the maximum amount. Section 8(d)(1) incorporates the maximum limit set forth in section 8(b)(4), but section 8(b)(4) sets forth several maximum limits and section 8(d)(1) does not specify which limit is applicable. Sections 8(b)(1), 8(b)(2) and 8(b)(2.1) provide rates of compensation for temporary total disability awards; awards other than those under sections 8(b)(1), 8(c), 8(d)(2) (i.e., 8(d)(1) and 8(f)), and 8(e); and awards under section 8(c), 8(d)(2), and 8(e), respectively, and set minimum rates of compensation for each. Section 8(b)(4) sets the maximum rate of compensation available under sections 8(b)(1), 8(b)(2), and 8(b)(2.1). Therefore, under sections 8(b)(1) and 8(b)(2), a claimant is entitled to compensation equal to 662/s% of his average weekly wage, but not less than the amounts set forth in the schedule therein and not more than the following máximums: From July 1, 1975, through December 31, 1980 — 100% of the State’s average weekly wage. From January 1, 1981, through December 31, 1983 — 100% of the State’s average weekly wage in effect on January 1, 1983. From January 1, 1984, through June 30, 1984 — 100% of the State’s average weekly wage in effect on January 1, 1983, increased by a percentage equal to the percentage increase in the State’s average weekly wage for the preceding 12 months. From July 1, 1989, through June 30, 1987 — $293.61 From July 1, 1987, to the present — $293.61, increased by a percentage equal to the percentage increase in the State’s average weekly wage for the preceding 12 months. Likewise, under section 8(b)(2.1), a claimant is entitled to 60% of his average weekly wage, but not less than the schedule set forth in section 8(b)(2.1) and not more than the máximums set forth above. After June 30, 1977, a claimant receiving an award under section 8(b)(1), 8(f), or 8(e) is entitled to compensation at the rate of 662/3 % of his average weekly wage up to a maximum of 1331/s % of the State’s average weekly wage. It appears, therefore, that the rate of wage differential awards under section 8(d)(1) is equal to 662/s% of the difference between the employee’s average pre-injury earning potential in his occupation and his average postinjury earning potential, up to the limits set forth in section 8(b)(4). As the ISFL points out, however, there are a great many workers who, because of talent or industry, earn well in excess of the average weekly wage. These workers become accustomed to, and reliant upon, such wages and assume long-term economic commitments based thereon. When such a worker suffers a disabling accident, a compensation award limited to the State’s average weekly wage can still leave him unable to meet these obligations. This is exacerbated in cases such as the present, because the maximum amount of the award is even further limited by the provisions of section 8(b)(4). In the present case, the arbitrator awarded the claimant $380.53 per week, this being 662h% of the difference between $810.80, the amount he could earn as an ironworker, and $240, the amount he was able to earn as a "pole man.” At the time of his injury, the State’s average weekly wage was $425.23. The Commission was required to reduce the award to $313.51 because of the limitations set forth in section 8(b)(4). We are bound by the language of the statute, and so I must reluctantly agree with the majority in affirming the Commission’s decision to reduce claimant’s award to $313.51 per week, but I believe that the arbitrary limits imposed by section 8(b)(4) are not in keeping with the remedial nature of the Act. Clearly, limiting a worker’s recovery to a percentage of the State’s average weekly wage, be it the 100% figure advocated by the claimant, or the 1331h% figure urged by the ISFL in its amicus brief, will not fully compensate those workers who earn considerably more than the average weekly wage, but either would better serve the purpose of the Act. At present, a worker who is totally disabled can receive up to 1331/3% of the State’s average weekly wage, and if the disability is permanent, he can receive incremental supplements to those benefits through the "Rate Adjustment Fund” pursuant to section 8(g) (820 ILCS 305/8(g) (West 1992)). Together, these provisions provide additional economic relief for those whose weekly wage substantially exceeds the State’s average weekly wage. No such protection exists, however, for a worker who is injured but retains some residual abilities and associated minimal earning potential. Such a worker, seeking wage differential benefits under section 8(d)(1), has his award limited by the provisions of section 8(b)(4). As occurred in the present case, not only will he suffer an economic loss by virtue of the fact that his weekly wage exceeds the State’s average weekly wage, he suffers even further loss because of the arbitrary limits imposed by section 8(b)(4), limits which make the maximum award even less than the State’s average weekly wage. In my view, this can work a substantial hardship on a partially disabled worker seeking benefits under section 8(d)(1) where his residual earning potential is minimal. I also believe that this hardship is best ameliorated by setting the maximum at 1331h% of the State’s average weekly wage, as advocated by the ISFL. This would give the Commission the flexibility to more adequately compensate those workers whose average wage substantially exceeds the State’s average weekly wage and those whose residual earning potential does not adequately make up the difference, and better effectuate the purpose of the Act. Such a move, however, cannot be made by the courts, but must be made by the legislature.

=== CASE 2226833 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:20.507584+00 ===

636 N.E.2d 100 (1994)
263 Ill. App.3d 367
200 Ill.Dec. 909
Lucille MOTLEY, Petitioner,
v.
The ILLINOIS HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION, the Illinois Department of Human Rights, and Central Illinois Public Service Company, Respondents.
No. 4-93-0474.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Fourth District.
June 23, 1994.
Joseph A. Duesterhaus and James L. Palmer, Scholz, Loos, Palmer, Siebers & Duesterhaus, Quincy, for petitioner.
C. Daniel Karnes, John R. Spitzig, Burke, Weaver & Prell, and Roland W. Burris, Atty. Gen. State of Ill., Chicago, Rosalyn B. Kaplan, Sol. Gen. and Daniel N. Malato, Mary E. Welsh, Asst. Attys. Gen., for respondent.
Justice KNECHT delivered the opinion of the court:
Lucille Motley appeals from the dismissal, by the Illinois Human Rights Commission *101 (Commission), of charges of discrimination and constructive discharge. Motley alleges the Commission erred in determining there was a lack of substantial evidence in support of her charges. We disagree and affirm.
FACTS
Motley began working for the Central Illinois Public Service Company (Company) as a customer information clerk in April 1985. Motley was one of four individuals employed in such a capacity. Motley is black, the other three individuals are white. The guidelines for the classification of the clerks are as follows:
"C-02 CashierAll new full-time and part-time employees with [a high school diploma] will enter in this salary grade.
C-03 CashierFull-time and part-time cashiers at the C-02 level may be considered for promotion to the C-03 level after one year of service (2000 hours for part-time employees). The primary consideration is progress and performance.
C-04 CashierCashiers at the C-03 level may be considered for promotion to C-04 after a total of [three] (3) years experience in the cashier's positions. Service time accrued as a part-time cashier would also be included. The primary consideration is job knowledge and performance. Performance shall be in work of somewhat greater complexity, e.g., handling accounts payable (Emergency Orders, Purchase Orders, Petty Cash, RFP's), customer financial transactions (J.O.'s, Customer Charge Tickets, gas and electric extensions); routine billing errors; data entry on business systems and district office correspondence. C-05 CashierCashiers at the C-04 level will be eligible for consideration of promotion of C-05 after [two] (2) years of service in that grade. Consideration shall be based predominantly on job knowledge and performance. The employee's performance would be in the areas of greatest complexity, e.g., preparing and data entry of Payroll (time, overtime, expenses); preparing P*O*S*T* records and reports; handling complicated billing errors; preparing deferred payment agreements; handling district administrative reports (Personnel, Automotive, Affirmative Action); and assisting the Bookkeeper with some of their duties or relieving in their absence.
New full-time or part-time cashiers with prior Company experience, other prior work experience, or advanced education beyond high school may enter at a higher level than C-02. Depending on the amount and quality of that education and experience, they could enter in any of the top three cashier grades. Entry at the grades of C-04 or C-05 must be approved by the Vice President-Division Operations."
The clerk's rate of compensation is based on his or her classification. When Motley was hired, she was classified as a "part-time cashier, clerk II." In February 1988 Motley was promoted to a "clerk III." The other three clerks were classified as "clerk V" because they had over 10 years of experience and service.
On Motley's August 9, 1989, employee evaluation, completed by her supervisor, Merle Brogdon, Motley received an overall "meets expectation" rating. She also was rated as "below expectation" on volume production. The Company contends other employees were also asked to increase their production.
After receiving her evaluation, Motley approached Reginald Ankrom, the area superintendent. Motley told Ankrom she had a communication problem with Brogdon and was dissatisfied with her evaluation. On August 29, 1989, Motley resigned her position. Ankrom and Brogdon requested Motley reconsider her decision or accept another position with the Company. Motley rejected both suggestions. Motley's job was filled by another black woman, Monica Hawkins, who was transferred from another position in the Company. Due to Hawkins' experience and her assumption of other duties in addition to those previously performed by Motley, she was classified as a "clerk V."
On September 25, 1989, Motley filed a complaint with the Commission. In this complaint Motley alleged she did not receive equal pay, she was discriminated against due *102 to her race, and she was constructively discharged as she resigned her position due to harassment by Brogdon. With respect to the harassment, Motley alleged:
"Mr. Brogdon criticized my performance and my speech. On one occasion, he suggested that I needed to take a course in English. Prior to August, 1989, all of my evaluations had been good. In the evaluation done on August 2, 1989, my performance was not satisfactory. Mr. Brogdon made comments about my husband and my mother. He also said that I irritated him every time I passed his office. He said that he timed me every time I talked to another black employee."
During the Commission's investigation of Motley's complaint, Motley told the Commission Brogdon had stated "you irritate me everytime you go by my office," and "it probably bothers you that your husband is sitting at home all day since he is retired." Motley additionally alleged Brogdon timed her on one occasion when she was socializing with another employee on company time. Finally, Motley stated that on one occasion she complained to Brogdon a customer called her a "nigger," and Brogdon replied he had come from a small town also and what did Motley want the customer to call her. Motley stated the "last straw" was being rated "below expectation" on her evaluation.
Motley admitted Mary Klossing, another supervisor, spoke with her in early August, at Brogdon's request. Klossing told Motley she was doing a good job and should not resign. Klossing also told Motley Brogdon had communication and personality problems with the other clerks as well, but things ultimately worked out.
Ankrom told the Commission Motley had not been requested to take an English Communication course because she is black. Rather, 10 of the 12 employees in positions comparable to Motley's position had taken the class. Of these 10 employees, 8 are white and 2 are black. Additionally, Brogdon himself had taken the course. Ankrom additionally stated Motley's job performance was generally acceptable, although she had been asked to refrain from socializing during working hours.
The Commission found the Company provided a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason for the difference in salary earned by Motley and the other clerks. The Commission additionally found there was a lack of substantial evidence to support Motley's contention she had been harassed. Accordingly, the Commission dismissed Motley's complaint. Motley appeals.
DISCUSSION
The legislature has provided for direct review of final orders of the Commission by the appellate court. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 68, par. 8-111(A)(1).) The reviewing court will not disturb the Commission's findings of fact unless they are found to be against the manifest weight of the evidence. (Ill.Rev. Stat.1989, ch. 68, par. 8-111(A)(2).) The Commission is empowered to dismiss a complaint if, after investigation, it determines there is a lack of substantial evidence to support the complainant's charge. (Ill.Rev. Stat.1989, ch. 68, par. 7A-102(D)(2).) It is within the Commission's discretion whether to dismiss a charge for lack of substantial evidence. On review, the dismissal will be reversed only if it was arbitrary and capricious or an abuse of discretion. Castillo v. Human Rights Comm'n (1987), 159 Ill. App.3d 158, 162-63, 111 Ill.Dec. 168, 171, 512 N.E.2d 72, 75.
Motley contends she performed the same duties as her white coworkers, yet they were classified as "clerk V," while she was classified as "clerk III," with the result she earned a lower wage than her white coworkers. Motley's argument implies her coworkers were elevated to "clerk V" status because they were white, while she remained classified as a "clerk III" because she is black. Sections 2-102(A) and 1-103(Q) of the Human Rights Act (Act) make it unlawful for an employer to make promotional decisions regarding an employee on the basis of race. Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 68, pars. 2-102(A), 1-103(Q); see Board of Regents for Regency Universities v. Human Rights Comm'n (1990), 196 Ill.App.3d 187, 195, 142 Ill.Dec. 632, 638, 552 N.E.2d 1373, 1379.
*103 In analyzing employment discrimination claims, a three-part analysis is employed. First, the employee must establish a prima facie case. Once a prima facie case is established, a presumption arises the employer unlawfully discriminated against the employee. Second, in order to rebut the presumption, the employer must articulate a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason for the challenged action. (Board of Regents, 196 Ill.App.3d at 195, 142 Ill.Dec. at 638, 552 N.E.2d at 1379.) If the employer does so, the presumption of discrimination drops. In the third stage, the employee must prove by a preponderance of the evidence the employer's articulated reason was a pretext for unlawful discrimination. This burden merges with the employee's burden of persuading the trier of fact the employer unlawfully discriminated against the employee. Board of Regents, 196 Ill.App.3d at 196, 142 Ill.Dec. at 639, 552 N.E.2d at 1380.
In order to prove a prima facie case of discrimination the complainant must show: (1) she is a member of a group protected by law; (2) she was treated in a certain manner by the employer; and (3) she was treated differently than similarly situated employees who are not members of the protected group. (Warren Achievement Center, Inc. v. Human Rights Comm'n (1991), 216 Ill.App.3d 604, 607, 159 Ill.Dec. 122, 124, 575 N.E.2d 929, 931.) Motley has not satisfied the third element, namely, that she was treated differently than similarly situated white employees. Motley's term of employment was significantly shorter than the terms of employment of the other clerks. Motley was employed by the Company for 4 years while the other clerks had been employed for over 10 years. This is significant because length of employment is a component of the Company's written advancement policy.
The Act specifically states an employer may properly apply different standards of compensation, or different terms, conditions or privileges of employment pursuant to a merit or retirement system provided such system or its administration is not used as a subterfuge for, or does not have the effect of, unlawful discrimination. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 68, par. 2-104(A)(5)(a).) The Company's written advancement policy is essentially a merit system comprised of two components: (1) job knowledge and performance and (2) length of service. Employees satisfying these components are advanced to higher classifications and receive a corresponding increase in compensation. Motley, who was employed by the Company for four years, had not satisfied the length of service component which would enable her to be classified as a "clerk V." Her coworkers, conversely, had each been employed by the Company for more than 10 years and had satisfied the length of service component. Therefore, they are eligible for "clerk V" classification. The record indicates Motley received less compensation than her coworkers, not because of differences in their races, but because of a written, nondiscriminatory merit system.
Motley alleges the written guidelines ought not be accepted as a legitimate explanation for the disparity in compensation paid to herself and her coworkers. She contends although her advancement, and therefore her rate of compensation, was governed by the guidelines, the guidelines were not applied to all other employees. We reject this contention as Motley has neither alleged nor established other employees were permitted to advance from one level of classification to the next without satisfying the length of service requirement.
We are unable to accept Motley's contention the guidelines were disregarded because Motley's replacement, Monica Hawkins, was classified as a "clerk V." This classification does not represent a departure from the guidelines. According to the guidelines, a new cashier/clerk may be initially classified at a level higher than "clerk II" if the new cashier/clerk has prior Company experience. The record reflects Hawkins was transferred to the cashier/clerk position from another position within the Company. Thus, Hawkins had prior Company experience and was, therefore, eligible for initial cashier/clerk classification at any of the levels.
Moreover, we note Hawkins, like Motley is a black female. Motley's argument she was classified as a "clerk III" because she is *104 black while others are classified as "clerk V" because they are white is weakened by the fact Hawkins, a black employee, was classified as a "clerk V."
Accordingly, the record indicates Motley received less compensation than her white coworkers, not because she is black, but because her coworkers had more seniority. Motley, therefore, failed to establish she was treated differently than similarly situated employees. Since Motley did not establish a prima facie case of discrimination, the Commission's dismissal of her claim was not an abuse of discretion.
We also find the Commission did not abuse its discretion in dismissing Motley's constructive discharge claim. Constructive discharge occurs when an employee's working conditions are made so intolerable by the employer that the employee, acting as a reasonable person, is compelled to resign. (Steele v. Illinois Human Rights Comm'n (1987), 160 Ill.App.3d 577, 581, 112 Ill.Dec. 568, 570-71, 513 N.E.2d 1177, 1179-80.) The Illinois Appellate Court has previously relied upon Federal cases arising under title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. § 2000a et seq. (1976)). Steele, 160 Ill.App.3d at 581, 112 Ill.Dec. at 560, 513 N.E.2d at 1179.
The focus in a constructive discharge case is whether a reasonable person in plaintiff's position would feel compelled to leave her job. In the course of most, if not all, people's employment, a wide variety of disappointments, and possibly some injustices, occur. Most of these are normal incidents of employment that would not lead a reasonable person to quit. An employee may not be unreasonably sensitive to his or her working environment. (Phaup v. Pepsi Cola General Bottlers, Inc. (N.D.Ill.1991), 761 F.Supp. 555, 570.) In Phaup, the court noted, reasonable people endure disappointments such as stares, criticism of performance, and now and then an unfortunate statement such as that a person is too heavy for the job. None of these disappointments, either separately or combined, create working conditions so intolerable as to force a reasonable person to quit. The court concluded, even if a supervisor were considered a heavy-handed manager who dealt poorly with subordinates, that kind of manager is, unfortunately, not a rare breed, and simple mismanagement does not constitute constructive discharge. Phaup, 761 F.Supp. at 571.
To create a hostile environment, the misconduct "must be sufficiently severe or pervasive `to alter the conditions of [the victim's] employment and create an abusive work environment'." (Saxton v. American Telephone & Telegraph Co. (N.D.Ill.1992), 785 F.Supp. 760, 765, quoting Meritor Savings Bank v. Vinson (1986), 477 U.S. 57, 67, 106 S.Ct. 2399, 2405, 91 L.Ed.2d 49, 60.) In Saxton, the employee claimed her supervisor harassed her by not speaking to her, acting in a condescending manner, and teasing her about her personal relationship with another employee. (Saxton, 785 F.Supp. at 762.) The court found, accepting the employee's allegations as true, they were inadequate to establish a hostile work environment. Saxton, 785 F.Supp. at 765.
Similarly, in Harriston v. Chicago Tribune Co. (N.D.Ill.1991), 771 F.Supp. 933, 938-39, the court rejected an employee's claim she had been constructively discharged. The court noted constructive discharge is established only when an employer makes an employee's working environment so intolerable the employee is forced into an involuntary resignation. The working conditions must have been so onerous or demeaning the employee has effectively been fired in place and compelled to leave. (Harriston, 771 F.Supp. at 938.) Harriston was employed in the defendant's advertising department. After her first year of employment, Harriston was evaluated and received an overall rating of "satisfactory," but was criticized regarding her level of sales. Approximately one year later, after sales had continued to decline, Harriston's supervisor sent her a memo stating his dissatisfaction over the situation. The memo did not threaten Harriston's job status, but included a three-week deadline for Harriston to respond to the various criticisms in the memo. Instead of responding, Harriston resigned. (Harriston, 771 F.Supp. at 936.) Harriston alleged she had been constructively discharged because her supervisor *105 engaged in a harassment campaign which included making it difficult for her to sell advertising, reprimanding her more seriously than white salespersons when her sales figures declined, excluding her from office activities, and failing to adequately respond when her car was vandalized in a company parking lot. (Harriston, 771 F.Supp. at 938-39.) The court found Harriston's allegations were insufficient as a matter of law to establish a constructive discharge. Harriston, 771 F.Supp. at 939.
Motley alleges she was compelled to resign because Brogdon made inappropriate comments to her, requested her to take an English Communication course and rated her "below expectation" with respect to her volume of production. Accepting all of Motley's allegations as true, we are unable to find the working conditions were intolerable and a reasonable person would resign as a result. Being asked to take a course which the majority of other employees, regardless of their race, are also requested to take does not result in the creation of intolerable working conditions. Nor does a "below expectation" rating in one area cause intolerable working conditions. As noted by the courts in Phaup and Harriston, criticism of performance is merely one of the disappointments which one must endure during the course of employment. Finally, while Brogdon's comments may not have been models of propriety and examples of effective communication, they are not adequate to establish an intolerable work environment. The Commission did not abuse its discretion in dismissing Motley's complaint of constructive discharge.
The order of the Commission is affirmed.
Affirmed.
COOK and STEIGMANN, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2226957 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:23.164785+00 ===

636 N.E.2d 1007 (1994)
264 Ill. App.3d 650
201 Ill.Dec. 575
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Lamont WARE, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 1-92-3685.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Second Division.
June 7, 1994.
*1008 Jack O'Malley, State's Atty., Chicago (Renee Goldfarb, Celeste Stewart Stack and Catherine Chaskin, of counsel), for appellee.
Rita A. Fry, Public Defender, Chicago (Evelyn G. Baniewicz, of counsel), for appellant.
Justice HARTMAN delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant appeals his convictions by a jury on two counts of first degree murder. He questions whether the circuit court erred in (1) denying his motion to quash his arrest and suppress evidence; (2) barring evidence that a witness submitted to a polygraph examination; and (3) allowing certain photographs to be published to the jury.
On November 12, 1990, David Williams, an employee at McDonald's Fishery opened the store and found the bodies of Ulysses McDonald (McDonald), who owned the fishery, and Leroy Taylor (Taylor), who cleaned and slept at the store. Each had died from single gunshot wounds to the head. The bullet removed from Taylor's head was .32 caliber; the bullet fragments removed from McDonald could not be identified. Both bullets were mangled and could not be linked to a particular weapon.
On December 25, 1990, Luther Ware, defendant's uncle, told the police about an argument he had with defendant in which defendant stated that he had killed somebody and did not want to kill again. When the police questioned defendant, he confessed to murdering McDonald and Taylor, claiming he shot McDonald over a $15 debt.
Defendant's confession revealed he had known McDonald since 1987 and helped cook and sell food at the store. On November 10, 1990, defendant went to the fishery and spent the day cooking, drinking and smoking a marijuana and cocaine mixture with McDonald and Taylor. He felt that McDonald was taking more than his share of the marijuana. Later in the evening, McDonald removed a .32 caliber handgun from his waistband and placed it in a drawer. When McDonald left the room, defendant took the handgun from the drawer and put it in his own pocket, hiding it there for approximately one-half hour to an hour because he needed time to decide whether to shoot McDonald. Defendant was angry with McDonald because the latter had forced him to engage in oral sex with him in April, 1988. Defendant confessed that "everything began to come down on him" and when the opportunity came "he would have to do what he had to do." Sometime between 12:30 a.m. and 1:00 a.m., he shot McDonald once in the head from a distance of three feet. Taylor, who had been asleep, awoke and defendant shot him once in the eye. Defendant claimed that he shot Taylor because he did not want to be identified later.
Defendant wiped off every thing that might have his fingerprints, left, locked the front door and threw away the keys, as well as the two expended bullet shells. He then walked to 61st and Calumet nearby and attempted to sell the handgun, but was arrested for unlawful use of the weapon. At the time of his arrest, the bodies of McDonald and Taylor had not yet been discovered. Defendant repeated his confession to an assistant state's attorney and told her that he knew he had committed premeditated murder "because he thought about what he did ahead of time." Defendant chose to have his statement recorded by a court reporter but the statement *1009 was terminated when he requested an attorney. After terminating the statement, the police photographed defendant.
On January 28, 1992, the circuit court heard defendant's motion to quash his November 11, 1990 arrest and suppress the handgun. Chicago police officer David Lemieux testified that on November 11, at approximately 1:30 a.m., he and his partner responded to a radio call reporting a disturbance at 6121 South Calumet Street. Lemieux was familiar with the location because the police frequently made weapon and narcotic arrests at that address. When the officers arrived, Lemieux saw defendant walking quickly out of the vestibule of the building located at that address. Lemieux approached defendant, intending to talk to him. From five feet away, he noticed a bulge in defendant's pocket. Lemieux announced "Police," conducted a protective pat-down of defendant, and felt the outline of a handgun. He reached into defendant's pocket and removed a .32 caliber black revolver. Parenthetically, he added at trial that the revolver contained four, silver-tipped, hollow point bullets.
Defendant testified that as he came out of the vestibule, Officer Lemieux exited his unmarked squad car and called him over. Defendant walked to the police car and voluntarily placed his hands upon it. Lemieux did not ask any questions before searching him. According to defendant, Lemieux found the handgun in the pocket of defendant's inside jacket. After the search, Lemieux told defendant that he knew defendant was carrying a gun. Defendant claimed he purchased the weapon for $40 from a man at the building.
The circuit court denied defendant's motion to quash the arrest and suppress the evidence, finding that Officer Lemieux had a sufficient, articulable suspicion to detain and search defendant.
At trial, Brenda Abbott, McDonald's sister, identified the .32 caliber handgun recovered from defendant as the gun McDonald kept at his store. Louis Munoz, a Chicago police detective, testified that the police found a brown holster and ammunition in a drawer in McDonald's store but did not locate a handgun on the premises. At the close of all the evidence, defendant's objections to the publication to the jury of certain exhibits were overruled. The jury convicted defendant on two counts of first degree murder and he was sentenced to natural life imprisonment.
I.
Defendant argues that the circuit court erred in denying his motion to quash his arrest and suppress evidence of the handgun because Officer Lemieux lacked specific and articulable facts to justify the stop and frisk.
In Terry v. Ohio (1968), 392 U.S. 1, 88 S.Ct. 1868, 20 L.Ed.2d 889, the Supreme Court recognized that a police officer may, in appropriate circumstances, approach a person to investigate possible criminal behavior even without probable cause to make an arrest. In Illinois, the Terry exception to the probable cause requirement has been codified in section 107-14 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (725 ILCS 5/107-14 (West 1992)), which provides in pertinent part as follows:
"A peace officer, after having identified himself as a peace officer, may stop any person in a public place for a reasonable period of time when the officer reasonably infers from the circumstances that the person is committing, is about to commit or has committed an offense as defined in Section 102-15 of this Code, and may demand the name and address of the person and an explanation of his actions."
To justify an investigative stop, the police must identify specific articulable facts which, when taken together with natural inferences, make the intrusion reasonable. (Terry, 392 U.S. at 21, 88 S.Ct. at 1880, 20 L.Ed.2d at 906, People v. Scott (1992), 148 Ill.2d 479, 503, 171 Ill.Dec. 365, 594 N.E.2d 217.) The facts need not meet probable cause requirements, but they must justify more than a mere hunch. (Scott, 148 Ill.2d at 503, 171 Ill.Dec. 365, 594 N.E.2d 217; People v. Long (1983), 99 Ill.2d 219, 228, 75 Ill.Dec. 693, 457 N.E.2d 1252.) The facts should be considered from the perspective of a reasonable officer at the time the situation confronted him rather than viewed with analytical hindsight. (Long, 99 Ill.2d at 229, 75 Ill.Dec. 693, 457 N.E.2d 1252.) The circuit *1010 court's determination on a motion to suppress will not be overturned unless it is manifestly erroneous. People v. Galvin (1989), 127 Ill.2d 153, 162, 129 Ill.Dec. 72, 535 N.E.2d 837.
In the present case, a number of specific, articulable facts support the circuit court's judgment that the stop of defendant was reasonable. At the time of the stop, Officer Lemieux and his partner were responding to a disturbance call at 6121 S. Calumet where the police previously had made weapon and narcotic arrests. Lemieux personally had made arrests at that location for weapon violations. The officers arrived at the building at approximately 1:30 a.m. and observed defendant exiting the precise address to which they had been called. Defendant's behavior in walking quickly from that address was another factor influencing Lemieux's actions. Defendant contends that since the radio call provided the officers with no information, they lacked a specific, articulable basis to stop him. The very fact that the call was ambiguous, however, could have been considered as heightening the officers' suspicions, particularly given their experience with that location, the early morning hour, and defendant's conduct in hurrying from the exact address to which they were called.
Defendant mistakenly relies upon People v. McGowan (1977), 69 Ill.2d 73, 12 Ill.Dec. 733, 370 N.E.2d 537, for support. In McGowan, defendant and his companion were stopped and frisked at 12:50 a.m. in a deserted commercial and industrial area that had been plagued by burglaries. (McGowan, 69 Ill.2d 73, 75-76, 12 Ill.Dec. 733, 370 N.E.2d 537.) Both men were dressed in black. (McGowan, 69 Ill.2d at 75,12 Ill.Dec. 733, 370 N.E.2d 537.) Although it characterized the case as a close one, the Illinois Supreme Court found the stop reasonable given the area, hour and defendant's dress. (McGowan, 69 Ill.2d at 78-79, 12 Ill.Dec. 733, 370 N.E.2d 537.) The facts in the present case provide a stronger articulable basis for a stop than the facts in McGowan. Here, like McGowan, the time of day and the officer's experience in patrolling the area were articulable facts justifying this stop. Moreover, the police were responding to a report of a disturbance at the exact address from which defendant was hurrying. The report of possible criminal activity as well as defendant's suspicious conduct make the instant case factually stronger than the "close call" in McGowan. Accordingly, the circuit court's ruling was not against the manifest weight of the evidence since these articulable facts and their natural inferences justified the police stop of defendant.
Defendant insists that the frisk was also invalid. Section 108-1.01 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (725 ILCS 5/108-1.01 (West 1992)), provides in pertinent part as follows:
"When a peace officer has stopped a person for temporary questioning pursuant to Section 107-14 of this Code and reasonably suspects that he or another is in danger of attack, he may search the person for weapons. If the officer discovers a weapon, he may take it until the completion of the questioning, at which time he shall either return the weapon, if lawfully possessed, or arrest the person so questioned."
A police officer is not always required to ask questions before frisking a suspect legitimately stopped pursuant to Terry; the right to frisk, however, does not automatically follow the right to stop. (People v. Galvin (1989), 127 Ill.2d 153, 165, 129 Ill.Dec. 72, 535 N.E.2d 837.) The officer need not be absolutely certain that the individual is armed. The issue is whether a reasonably prudent person in the circumstances would be warranted in the belief that his safety or that of others was in danger. Terry, 392 U.S. at 27, 88 S.Ct. at 1883, 20 L.Ed.2d at 909; Galvin, 127 Ill.2d at 165, 129 Ill.Dec. 72, 535 N.E.2d 837.
In the case at bar, it was reasonable for Officer Lemieux to suspect that he and his partner were in danger. When he approached defendant, Lemieux noticed a bulge in defendant's pocket. Given that bulge as well as Lemieux's knowledge that weapon arrests frequently took place at the address defendant had exited, it was reasonable for Lemieux to conclude that defendant was armed. A reasonably prudent person would be warranted in suspecting danger from an armed individual hurrying at that hour from *1011 a notorious location that was the focus of a disturbance call. Therefore, the circuit court's finding that the frisk was reasonable was not manifestly erroneous.
II.
Defendant next contends that the circuit court erred in granting the State's motion in limine to exclude evidence of a polygraph test because it limited his examination of a critical witness. The State counters that defendant has waived this issue.
The facts concerning this issue were adduced at trial as follows. David Williams, an employee of McDonald, opened the store on November 12, 1990, and found the bodies. When questioned by detectives, Williams said that he drove by the fishery on November 11, 1990 between 1:45 p.m. and 2:15 p.m. Williams claimed that he saw McDonald inside the store at that time and that McDonald waved to him. At trial, Williams admitted that he lied and never saw McDonald alive the afternoon of November 11, 1990. Williams changed his story after a polygraph test indicated that he was lying. Prior to trial, the court granted the State's motion in limine to exclude reference to the polygraph test. Although defendant did not object to the motion at the time it was presented, defendant challenged the court's ruling during trial, arguing that the fact Williams took the test should be admitted to show his state of mind in changing his statement. The circuit court ruled that defense counsel could inquire into why Williams changed his mind and if Williams mentioned the polygraph, the judge would allow this testimony. Defense counsel twice attempted to elicit from Williams the reason he changed his story, but Williams testified that nothing in particular caused him to change his mind.
Both a contemporaneous objection and a specific allegation in a post-trial motion are necessary to preserve an error for review. (People v. Enoch (1988), 122 Ill.2d 176, 119 Ill.Dec. 265, 522 N.E.2d 1124.) Responsibility for preserving and presenting a sufficient record of the asserted error falls upon the party who makes the assertion of error. (People v. Smith (1985), 106 Ill.2d 327, 334-35, 88 Ill.Dec. 42, 478 N.E.2d 357.) Therefore, any doubts arising from the incompleteness of the record will be resolved against the appellant. Foutch v. O'Bryant (1984), 99 Ill.2d 389, 392, 76 Ill.Dec. 823, 459 N.E.2d 958.
In the instant case, defendant failed to object to the State's motion in limine to exclude the polygraph examination when it was originally heard by the court. Defendant also failed to raise this issue in a post-trial motion. Finally, defendant did not include in the record on appeal a report of the initial proceedings at which the circuit court granted the State's motion in limine. Accordingly, defendant has waived this issue for purposes of review.
Defendant acknowledges that he failed to preserve this issue for review, but insists that the exclusion of the polygraph examination constitutes plain error. A limited exception to waiver is the plain error doctrine (People v. Carlson (1980), 79 Ill.2d 564, 577-78, 38 Ill.Dec. 809, 404 N.E.2d 233), which is applied where the evidence is closely balanced or the error was of such magnitude as to have deprived defendant of a fair trial. Carlson, 79 Ill.2d at 576-77, 38 Ill.Dec. 809, 404 N.E.2d 233; People v. Young (1989), 128 Ill.2d 1, 47, 131 Ill.Dec. 86, 538 N.E.2d 461.
Defendant's argument that the circuit court's decision to limit polygraph evidence constitutes plain error has no precedent. Instead, the admission into evidence of polygraph testing of witnesses constitutes plain error. (Emphasis added.) (People v. Gard (1994), 158 Ill.2d 191, 198 Ill.Dec. 415, 422, 632 N.E.2d 1026, 1033.) The circuit court did not err by granting the State's motion to exclude this evidence.
III.
Defendant's final argument is that the circuit court abused its discretion in allowing two sets of photographs to be submitted to the jury.
A.
Defendant first contends that two post-arrest photographs taken of him on December 25, 1990 were not probative of any issue *1012 before the jury. The State counters that defendant waived any error regarding a post-arrest photograph taken on November 11, 1990. Although defendant does not contest the November 11 photograph, the State accurately notes that defendant waived any issue with regard to this particular exhibit by failing to either object to its publication at trial or to specifically mention it in his post-trial motion. (People v. Enoch (1988), 122 Ill.2d 176, 119 Ill.Dec. 265, 522 N.E.2d 1124.) The State also asserts that publication of the two post-arrest photographs taken on December 25, 1990 were relevant to rebut any inference that defendant's confessions were coerced.
Evidence is relevant where it tends to prove a material fact in issue and its probative value outweighs its prejudicial effect. (People v. Kannapes (1990), 208 Ill.App.3d 400, 404, 153 Ill.Dec. 419, 567 N.E.2d 377.) The responsibility of weighing the probative value and potentially prejudicial effect of photographs rests with the circuit judge, and his decision as to which evidentiary items should be taken into the jury room will not be disturbed absent a clear showing of abuse. People v. Lucas (1989), 132 Ill.2d 399, 439, 139 Ill.Dec. 447, 548 N.E.2d 1003.
Here, defense counsel raised the issue of the number of hours defendant was in custody prior to his confessions. The photographs, which were taken after defendant confessed, were relevant in rebutting any inference that the confessions were coerced. Moreover, any error in submitting these exhibits to the jury was harmless considering the overwhelming evidence of defendant's guilt. The circuit court did not abuse its discretion in submitting these photographs to the jury.
B.
Defendant also claims that the circuit court abused its discretion in allowing the jury to view ten pictures of the victims taken at the crime scene.
Whether or not a jury should be allowed to see photographs of a decedent is a decision to be made by the circuit court in the exercise of its sound discretion. (People v. Henderson (1990), 142 Ill.2d 258, 319, 154 Ill.Dec. 785, 568 N.E.2d 1234.) Such photographs may be probative of the nature and extent of injuries and the force needed to inflict them; the position, condition, and location of the body; the manner and cause of death; to corroborate a defendant's confession; and to aid in understanding the testimony of the witnesses. (Henderson, 142 Ill.2d at 319-20, 154 Ill.Dec. 785, 568 N.E.2d 1234.) Photographs showing the amount of blood on the premises and the condition of the crime scene may also be probative of the circumstances related to the crime. People v. Bunch (1987), 159 Ill.App.3d 494, 511, 111 Ill.Dec. 359, 512 N.E.2d 748.
In the present case, the record suggests that the circuit court did not submit to the jury two of the ten photographs that defendant alleges were prejudicial. The other eight crime scene photographs show the position, condition and location of the bodies inside McDonald's store. The circuit court could have deemed them relevant and assistive to the jurors in deciding whether the physical evidence corroborated defendant's confession and in depicting the crime scene. The circuit court found the blood probative of time of death. Accordingly, the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in submitting these crime scene photographs to the jury.
For the foregoing reasons, we find no bases upon which to disturb defendant's conviction in this case and, accordingly, affirm.
Affirmed.
DiVITO, P.J., and McCORMICK, J., concur.

=== CASE 9741342 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:57.875484+00 ===

Clinton, J.
Plaintiff Eich brought this action in the District Court for Douglas County, Nebraska, against State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Company and David J. Wojcik, an uninsured motorist, to recover damages, for personal injuries received in a collision between an automobile driven by the plaintiff and one operated by Wojcik.
In order that the assignments of error hereinafter considered be seen in proper perspective, it is necessary to first summarize more of the background information than is ordinarily required.
State Farm insured the plaintiffs automobile and, in one or more other separate policies, other automobiles in the Eich household. The amended petition upon which the case was tried made the necessary allegations to state a cause of action against Wojcik founded upon his negligence, and further alleged the issuance of two policies of insurance by State Farm which provided uninsured motorist coverage for Eich.
State Farm filed a demurrer to the petition on the ground of misjoinder of causes of action and of parties defendant. This motion was overruled and State Farm was directed to answer.
State Farm, after first denying Wojcik’s negligence and alleging contributory negligence on the part of the plaintiff, later filed an amended answer in which it admitted'that Wojcik was negligent and *716that such negligence was a proximate cause of the accident. It admitted the existence of one certain policy of insurance which afforded uninsured motorist coverage to Eich and admitted that Wojcik was an uninsured motorist. At the same time it filed an offer to confess judgment in the amount of $15,000.
Wojcik defaulted. However, in a deposition he admitted that he drove through a stop sign and collided with the Eich automobile and that he had been drinking at the time. This deposition was later received in evidence at the trial.
The court directed a verdict against Wojcik and State Farm on the issue of liability and left to the jury only the question of the amount of damages proximately caused by the collision. It instructed the jury that State Farm had in force at the time of the accident three policies of insurance under which it was obligated to pay all sums which the plaintiff had sustained as damages, not to exceed $45,000. It further instructed the jury that the amount of the insurance was not a factor to be considered by them in determining the amount of damages to which the plaintiff was entitled.
The form of the verdict prepared by the court for the use of the jury in rendering its verdict was in the following form: “We, the jury duly impaneled and sworn in the above entitled cause, do find for the said plaintiff and assess the amount of plaintiffs recovery as to defendant State Farm in the sum of $_, and as to defendant David J. Wojcik in the sum of $__”
The jury returned a verdict in which it placed in each of the blank spaces in the form the sum of $17,500. The jury was discharged on December 12, 1979. The court entered judgment on the verdict as follows: “Pursuant to verdict of December 12, 1979, ordered, that plaintiff have and recover from the defendants jointly and severally, the sum of $17,500.00, plus plaintiffs taxable costs.”
On December 18, 1979, the plaintiff filed a motion in the following form: “Comes now the plaintiff and *717respectfully requests the Court to correct a ministerial error of the judgment entry to accurately reflect the intentions of the jury as it was their intention to totally award the plaintiff the sum of $35,000.00 in damages for the injuries sustained as supported by the attached affidavit which is marked Exhibit ‘A’ and attached hereto.” Exhibit A referred to in the motion was an affidavit of the foreman of the jury which stated that it was the intent of the jury panel to award the plaintiff the total amount of $35,000.
The plaintiff filed an alternative motion in the following form: “Comes now the plaintiff and alternatively requests the Court to reassemble the jury to correct or amend their verdict as to the form.”
On December 27, 1979, the trial judge reassembled the jury, interrogated each of the jurors, and then entered the following order on the verdict form: “The court orders clerk to correct verdict form to read as follows: ‘We, the jury duly impaneled and sworn in the above entitled cause, do find for the said plaintiff and assess the amount of plaintiffs recovery as to defendant State Farm in the sum of $35,000.00 and as to defendant David J. Wojcik in the sum of $35,000.00.’ Pursuant to verdict, ordered, that judgment entered December 13, 1979, be and the same is hereby vacated. It is further ordered that the plaintiff have and recover from the defendants, jointly and severally, the sum of $35,000.00, plus plaintiff’s taxable costs. Jurors are discharged, /s/ (Buckley)”
State Farm appeals to this court and urges, among other things, that the trial court erred: (1) In overruling the demurrer, based on misjoinder of causes of action and of defendants; (2) In instructing the jury on the policy limits; (3) In giving an instruction which permitted the “stacking” of three policies affording uninsured motorist coverage; and (4) In receiving the jurors’ affidavits, and in reassembling the jury and entering a modified verdict.
We sustain the assignments in part, and reverse *718and remand for a new trial on the issue of damages only.
We will discuss the claims of error in the order listed.
Could the plaintiff, under the Nebraska statutes governing joinder clauses, combine in one action her cause against her own insurer and the cause against the uninsured motorist? This question is presented to this court for the first time.
Because of inherent and unavoidable conflicts of interest which arise between the insured and the insurer where recovery is sought under uninsured motorist coverage, many procedural problems, including that related to joinder, arise. The courts of the various jurisdictions have not been able to resolve these problems in a uniform way. See Widiss, Uninsured Motorist Coverage §§ 7.2 to 7.15 (1969). Indeed, because of the unique nature of uninsured motorist coverage, it is difficult to resolve these problems by applying logic to established principle. Sometimes merely pragmatic solutions must be reached, and that is what we do in this case.
We conclude, for reasons hereinafter set forth, that the court erred in overruling the demurrer. However, we also conclude that, since there must be a retrial for other reasons and because liability has been admitted by State Farm and clearly established by the evidence against Wojcik, the error in joinder is essentially harmless because, on retrial, the cases may be separately docketed and retrial on the tort action will be on the issue of damages only.
Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 25-701 and 25-702 (Reissue 1979) lay down the rules as to joinder of causes. Those sections permit joinder only within certain described classes, and with one exception not here applicable the causes united must affect all parties to the action and not require different places of trial. Insofar as the causes before us here are involved, the only classes described in the statute which we must consider are: “(1) The same transaction or transactions connected with the *719same subject of action; (2) contracts, express or implied; (3) injuries with or without force____” § 25-701.
The action against Wojcik clearly sounds in tort and comes within class (3). The cause of action against State Farm is clearly founded on contract and comes under class (2). Its contractual obligation depends, however, upon establishing Wojcik’s tort liability. At least one court has held that joinder in cases such as this is permissible because the causes relate to the “same subject of action.”
Section 25-702 lays down the further requirement that the causes of action so united must affect all the parties to the action. Although it is true that the action against Wojcik affects State Farm, the contractual action against State Farm does not directly affect Wojcik. See Fuchs v. Parsons Constr. Co., 166 Neb. 188, 88 N.W.2d 648 (1958).
We hold that under the above statutes governing joinder, the joinder in a single action of the cause against the uninsured motorist with the insurer carrying the uninsured motorist coverage for the claimant is not permissible. State ex rel. Cozean v. Meyer, 449 S.W.2d 377 (Mo. App. 1969) (identical statute and the same relationship of the parties as in the case before us); Wells v. Hartford Accident and Indemnity Company, 459 S.W.2d 253 (Mo. 1970); State v. James, 263 S.W.2d 402 (Mo. 1953).
On remand, the plaintiff shall be permitted to file separate petitions, which shall be separately docketed under the provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 25-809 (Reissue 1979), and the causes shall proceed without further service.
This opinion should not be understood to hold that the insured may never sue his insurance company without having first obtained a judgment against the uninsured motorist. There are probably instances in which the tort liability may be determined in an action against the insurance carrier, e.g., under “hit- and-run” coverage or in cases where service cannot *720be obtained on the uninsured motorist.
As already noted, however, the error in refusing to overrule the demurrer does not require a retrial on all issues. Any prejudice resulting from the prior joinder may be cured simply by trying the damage issue only in the cause against Wojcik. The direction of the verdict on liability against Wojcik was correct. The insurer had its day in court on that issue. The interest of the insurer on the damage issue may properly be protected by its intervention in that action. This court long ago established the method by which the insurer’s interest may be protected, and that is by intervention. Heisner v. Jones, 184 Neb. 602, 169 N.W.2d 606 (1969). The cause can be retried without disclosing to the jury the insurer’s participation in the trial. The court should not instruct the jury as to the existence of the liability insurance or the monetary limits of coverage. Walls v. Horbach, 189 Neb. 479, 203 N.W.2d 490 (1973).
Did the District Court err in permitting the uninsured motorist coverage in each of the three policies in which plaintiff was an insured to be “stacked”?
Coverage U of the State Farm policy provided: “To pay all sums which the insured or his legal representative shall be legally entitled to recover as damages from the owner or operator of an uninsured motor vehicle because of bodily injury sustained by the insured, caused by accident and arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of such uninsured motor vehicle----” Then follow provisos which require the issues of liability and damages to be determined by submitting to arbitration if agreement cannot be made between the insured and the claimant; that judgment against an uninsured motorist is not conclusive against the company; and a requirement that consent of the company be obtained before the claimant can sue the uninsured motorist. All of these provisos we held void in Heisner v. Jones, supra. Then followed various exclusions, among which is the following: “(b) TO BODILY INJURY TO AN INSURED WHILE *721OCCUPYING OR THROUGH BEING STRUCK BY A LAND MOTOR VEHICLE OWNED BY THE NAMED INSURED OR ANY RESIDENT OF THE SAME HOUSEHOLD, IF SUCH VEHICLE IS NOT AN OWNED MOTOR VEHICLE.” Owned motor vehicle, as used in the exclusion, is defined as meaning “the motor vehicle ... described in the declarations____” The remainder of the definition is not relevant to the question before us.
Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-509.01 (Reissue 1978) requires that all policies issued contain uninsured motorist coverage. The statute, however, gives the insured the option to reject such coverage.
In support of its position, State Farm relies upon our holdings in Shipley v. American Standard Ins. Co., 183 Neb. 109, 158 N.W.2d 238 (1968), and Herrick v. Liberty Mut. Fire Ins. Co., 202 Neb. 116, 274 N.W.2d 147 (1979). In Herrick, the exclusion was as follows: “Exclusions This policy does not apply: * * * Under the Uninsured Motorists Coverage, (q) to bodily injury to an insured while occupying a highway vehicle (other than an insured automobile) owned by the named insured or by any person resident in the same household who is related to the named insured by blood, marriage or adoption, or through being struck by such a vehicle; * * *.” In Shipley, the exclusion was of similar import. In both of the above cases the insured claimant was operating an owned uninsured motorcycle. In the first case, the claimant owned an insured automobile. In the second, the claimant was an insured in an automobile owned by his parents. Policies in both cases included uninsured motorist coverage. We there upheld the exclusion. The rationale is expressed in the following language from Herrick, supra at 119, 274 N.W.2d at 149: “It is difficult to find a policy in the statute to protect one uninsured motorist from another uninsured motorist. This is what the Shipley case referred to when it stated: ‘An overriding public policy of protecting an owner-operator who inexcusably has *722no applicable bodily injury liability coverage is not presently discernible.’
“In Holcomb v. Farmers Ins. Exchange, 254 Ark. 514, 495 S.W.2d 155, the court stated: ‘It is a matter of common knowledge that in most automobile use related injuries two automobiles and drivers are involved. Under the broad coverage insisted on by the appellants, by the purchase of single coverage on one automobile an owner could protect himself and his entire family against financial loss caused by uninsured motorists while each of them are themselves driving uninsured . . . automobiles.’”
We believe the controlling decisions of this court are Bose v. American Family Mut. Ins. Co., 186 Neb. 209, 181 N.W.2d 839 (1970); Protective Fire & Cas. Co. v. Woten, 186 Neb. 212, 181 N.W.2d 835 (1970).
The language of the exclusion in the case before us is somewhat different from that in Protective Fire, supra, and Bose, supra, in that it defines owned automobile as one described in the declarations, while in the two above cases the''policy referred to an owned automobile (other than an insured automobile).
It is to be noted that in the present case the automobiles are each automobiles described in the declaration of the policy covering the particular vehicle. Each, therefore, was an insured automobile. A premium was paid in each case for uninsured motorist coverage. Had the plaintiff been a pedestrian struck by an uninsured motorist, she would clearly have had coverage under each of the three policies. Logically, State Farm’s argument would, in that case, mean that the plaintiff had to elect, when she filed suit, the policy under which she wanted to be covered. We think that Bose, supra, and Protective Fire, supra, in principle cover the present case.
In Protective Fire, supra, the deceased was a guest passenger in an insured automobile. The deceased claimant also had uninsured motorist coverage by reason of being an insured in the policy covering the *723family car. In Bose, supra, the two claimants were both covered by insurance on two family cars, each in a separate policy. The sum of the damages for personal injuries suffered by each claimant exceeded the minimum coverage afforded to each ($10,000) by a single policy. The defense was “the excess escape” clause. We held it did not apply and permitted recovery under both policies.
Our holding in Pettid v. Edwards, 195 Neb. 713, 240 N.W.2d 344 (1976), is, in my judgment, logically irreconcilable with Bose, supra, and Protective Fire, supra. Nonetheless, even if we adhere to the distinction there made, i.e., multiple car coverage in a single policy as opposed to multiple car coverage in separate policies, that case would not govern here.
The final assignment of error pertains to the reassembling of the jury after its discharge, interrogation of the jury by the judge as to the verdict it intended to render, and modification of the verdict by the judge based upon the interrogation.
Neb. Rev. Stat. § 25-1123 (Reissue 1979) provides: “The verdict shall be written, signed by the foreman, and read by the clerk to the jury, and the inquiry made whether it is their verdict. If any juror disagree, the jury must be sent out again; but if no disagreement be expressed, and neither party requires the jury to be polled, the verdict is complete, and the jury discharged from the case. If, however, the verdict be defective in form only, the same may, with the assent of the jury before they are discharged, be corrected by the court.”
This court has long held, without reference to the foregoing statute, that where a defect in a verdict is in form only, the court may direct the jury to amend it, or it may be amended by the court without the consent of the jury before it is discharged. Davis v. Neligh, 7 Neb. 78 (1878). Defects which are matters of substance must be corrected before the jury is *724discharged. Forslund v. Swenson, 110 Neb. 188, 192 N.W. 649 (1923).
It is clear that the amendment in this case was more than a matter of form. It was one of substance. It related to the amount of the verdict against defendants and whether the verdict was several or a joint judgment for a single amount. The plaintiffs claim against the uninsured motorist personally is not limited to the amount of uninsured motorist coverage under his own policy. The liability of the insurer, of course, is limited by the amount of the coverage, as well as by the damages determined to have been actually incurred. It is true, of course, that generally speaking a verdict against the uninsured motorist for more than the amount of the uninsured motorist coverage is uncollectable. However, that is not a limitation on the rights of the claimant against the tort-feasor.
Other jurisdictions under identical or virtually identical statutes have held that, after acceptance of a jury verdict and discharge of the jury, the court is without authority to change the verdict. M & P Stores v. Taylor, 326 P.2d 804 (Okla. 1958); Quarring v. Stratton, 85 Wash. 333, 148 P. 26 (1915). See, also, Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railroad Co. v. Speth, 404 F.2d 291 (8th Cir. 1968).
The judgment is reversed and the cause remanded for further proceedings in accordance with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded for further proceedings.
Boslaugh and White, JJ., concur in result.

=== CASE 2226839 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:20.663454+00 ===

305 N.W.2d 635 (1981)
208 Neb. 740
Elmer SALTZ, Appellant,
v.
SCHOOL DISTRICT OF NORFOLK, IN the COUNTY OF MADISON, in the State of Nebraska, a political subdivision, Appellee.
No. 43311.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
May 8, 1981.
*636 Theodore L. Kessner and Mark D. McGuire of Crosby, Guenzel, Davis, Kessner & Kuester, Lincoln, for appellant.
Jewell, Otte, Gatz, Collins & Domina, Norfolk, for appellee.
Heard before KRIVOSHA, C. J., and BOSLAUGH, McCOWN, CLINTON, BRODKEY, WHITE, and HASTINGS, JJ.
CLINTON, Justice.
This is an appeal from the Commission of Industrial Relations. The plaintiff, Elmer Saltz, is a certificated teacher employed by the School District of Norfolk, in the County of Madison, in the State of Nebraska. During the 1978-79 contract year, the plaintiff's employment was governed by the terms and conditions of an agreement negotiated by the labor organization, of which he was a member, and the school district.
The plaintiff filed a petition with the Commission of Industrial Relations in which he sought an order of the CIR finding that he was entitled to 1 day of paid personal leave taken in accordance with the negotiated personal leave policy of the school district, and for an order directing the school district to pay to the plaintiff 1/186th of his 1978-79 salary allegedly wrongfully withheld as a result of the school district denying a day of paid personal leave. He also sought an order directing the school district to remove from his personnel file a letter of reprimand. Personal leave policy was governed by the terms of the negotiated labor agreement.
The CIR dismissed the action because it did not have jurisdiction under our holding in Transport Workers of America v. Transit Auth. of City of Omaha, 205 Neb. 26, 286 N.W.2d 102 (1979). The plaintiff appeals to this court and urges that Transport Workers of America be overruled. Among other arguments made, the plaintiff points out that in the case of Minshull v. School Dist. of Sutherland, 198 Neb. 418, 253 N.W.2d 45 (1977), this court affirmed a judgment of the CIR involving a matter similar to that here involved and in principle the same. We simply point out that in Minshull, no jurisdictional question or issue as to the definition of industrial dispute was raised by the parties and that decision preceded our decision in Transport Workers of America.
In Transport Workers of America we held: "The Commission of Industrial Relations' authority to resolve disputes concerning terms, tenure, or conditions of employment is limited to situations in which the parties have not yet reached agreement. Once an agreement is reached and a subsequent breach is alleged to have occurred, the parties are required to litigate their dispute in a competent court having jurisdiction of the matter." (Syllabus of the court.)
We adhere to that holding. The order of the Commission of Industrial Relations dismissing the plaintiff's petition is affirmed.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 9741315 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:16.222032+00 ===

Dreben, J.
Five month old Jeremy Rahilly died at the Baystate Medical Center (Baystate) in Springfield on August 10, 1988. There was a question whether the child had been abused — the medical examiner’s opinion was that “the manner of death was homicide.” Jeremy’s father was charged with murder. He was acquitted, and thereafter brought this action, as administrator of Jeremy’s estate, alleging medical malpractice against North Adams Regional Hospital (North Adams), Baystate, numerous physicians, nurses, a respiratory therapist, and New England Life Flights, Inc. His offer of proof included, among other materials, grand jury testimony and testimony from his criminal trial. A medical malpractice panel, convened pursuant to G. L. c. 231, § 60B, concluded that the plaintiff’s offer of proof, if substantiated, while sufficient as to some of the defendants, was not “sufficient to raise a legitimate question of liability appropriate for judicial inquiry” as to others. Judgments of dismissal entered as to the latter defendants, the plaintiff having failed to file a bond. The plaintiff’s appeal from those dismissals raises the question of the sufficiency of his offer of proof. We affirm the judgments of dismissal against some of the defendants but reverse as to others.
We take our facts from the materials in the plaintiff’s offer of proof. At about 11:30 p.m. on August 5, 1988, the plaintiff saw that his son Jeremy was having difficulty breathing while sleeping in his crib. When he lifted his son out of the crib, the breathing stopped. He called the North Adams police department arid began artificial respiration. The police arrived within five minutes, by which time the child had resumed *716very slow breathing, but the ambulance, which the police had called, was unable to find the plaintiffs house and did not arrive for about one-half hour. The child was driven to the North Adams Regional Hospital. On arrival, he was “limp and pale, breathing at the rate of four respirations a minute” (a very slow rate), and could not focus his eyes. An attempt to intubate Jeremy was unsuccessful, the endotracheal tube was inserted into his esophagus rather than the trachea, and air was administered to his stomach rather than to his lungs.* 3
Dr. Michael Sussman, Jeremy’s pediatrician, arrived at the hospital at about 12:50 a.m., and assumed responsibility for his care. He examined the child, spoke to the father, and ordered Jeremy transferred by helicopter via New England Life Flights to Baystate, which had a pediatric intensive care unit. The discharge diagnosis at North Adams included: “Respiratory Arrest. . . . Possible hypoxic cerebral injury.”
The child arrived at Baystate “marginally responsive” at 3:24 a.m. A second-year resident in pediatrics, Dr. Paul Marz, after discussions with the director of the pediatric intensive care unit, Dr. Stephen Lieberman, performed a lumbar puncture. The puncture showed bleeding, and Dr. Marz ordered a CT scan.
No CT scan had been performed at North Adams and none was performed at Baystate until 8 a.m. on August 6, more than four and one-half hours after the child’s arrival at Baystate. The 8 a.m. CT scan showed intracranial bleeding4 as well as findings “consistent with generalized anoxia” (lack of oxygen). The scan showed no evidence of increased in-tracranial pressure. The child died at Baystate on August 10. Baystate’s records state the final diagnosis as: “Anoxic brain damage. Intracranial Hemorrhage. Aspiration Pneumonia.” That record also states that the child was “found to have a significant intracranial bleed along with anoxic brain damages, verified by CT scan.”
*717The plaintiff’s offer of proof rested in large part on a letter of Dr. Robert Buscho, a physician who had a specialty, among others, of emergency medicine. The offer also included, in addition to grand jury and trial testimony from the father’s trial, the report of Dr. Richard Otis, an anatomic pathologist, records of the hospitals, and of New England Life Flights, the helicopter transport service.
Dr. Buscho’s report, insofar as it relates to the defendants in this appeal, is set forth as an Appendix to this opinion. He was provided with most of the medical records. His introductory discussion, prior to delineating the negligence of specific individuals, states: “It is my opinion that a number of individuals who treated Jeremy Rahilly failed to meet accepted medical standards and contributed to his eventual injury and death. Furthermore, there are many elements of medical negligence in this case. I have divided this letter into separate sections in order to more clearly delineate those individuals and entities whose care fell below the standard of care.”
In reviewing the offers of proof found insufficient by the tribunal, we will follow the order of Dr. Buscho’s letter. The standard we must adopt is “comparable to that applied to a defendant’s motion for a directed verdict, and appraisal of the weight and credibility of the evidence is impermissible.” Gugino v. Harvard Community Health Plan, 380 Mass. 464, 468 (1980). Thus, the evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the plaintiff.
1. Sufficiency of the offer of proof as to Dr. Sussman. “To succeed against a physician, the plaintiff’s offer of proof must show that: (1) a doctor-patient relationship existed; (2) the doctor did not conform to accepted medical standards in performing his duties with regard to the patient; and (3) damage resulted from this failure to conform. Kapp v. Ballantine, 380 Mass. 186, 193 (1980).” Perez v. Bay State Ambulance & Hosp. Rental Serv., Inc., 413 Mass. 670, 676 (1992). Since a doctor-patient relationship was shown between Jeremy and Dr. Sussman, we turn to the remaining two requirements. Dr. Buscho opined first that Dr. Sussman deviated from the “standard of care” by failing to perform and docu*718ment a complete history and medical examination of the child. Had he done so, “it is possible [he] would have found the scalp contusion* ***5 indicating that the child had a head injury”; had that been appreciated, “it would have led the physicians to perform a CT scan”; the scan would have “shown the intracranial bleed and changed the entire therapeutic care for this baby.” There were, in Dr. Buscho’s opinion, strong indications to perform an emergency CT scan at North Adams. “Not only was there clinical evidence of a head injury that was not appreciated, but also in any unconscious and unresponsive child, a CT scan should be performed to rule out a number of intracranial conditions.”
The foregoing discussion stating that a CT scan should have been performed is an opinion as to the course of action that a physician reasonably exercising the care and skill of an average pediatrician should have followed. See Bradford v. Baystate Med. Center, 415 Mass. 202, 207 n.6 (1993).6 This evidence was sufficient to meet the directed verdict standard on the issue of Dr. Sussman’s negligence.
Dr. Buscho explained the significance of the failure to perform the scan. Hypoxia and intracranial bleeding each cause intracranial pressure. “A CT scan would have given this di*719agnosis, and treatments would have then been undertaken to lower the intracranial pressure.”
Dr. Sussman’s contention, adopted by the dissent, stresses that the first CT scan which was taken at 8 a.m. on August 6 at Baystate does not show increased intracranial pressure. From that fact, Dr. Sussman (and the dissent) argue that the factual assumptions essential to Dr. Buscho’s opinion are not supported by the plaintiffs offer of proof. This is too grudging a reading of Dr. Buscho’s letter. A reasonable “meaning” of Dr. Buscho’s letter, open to a jury, see Kopycinski v. Aserkoff, 410 Mass. 410, 418 (1991), is that, had the hypoxia and intracranial bleeding, which were both shown on the CT scan, been diagnosed by Dr. Sussman, the “entire therapeutic care” would have been “changed” — in-tracranial pressure would have been anticipated and treated preventively.
Testimony at the father’s trial7 as well as Dr. Otis’s opinion letter on the cause of the baby’s death8 support the conclusion that hypoxia (shortage of oxygen) and anoxia (the complete absence of oxygen) lead to swelling (edema), i.e., intracranial pressure, thus reinforcing the need for early diagnosis and treatment.
*720Dr. Buscho’s opinion, buttressed by that of Dr. Otis, was that the failure to recognize and aggressively treat the intracranial pressure “contributed to Jeremy’s brain damage.” Fairly read, this evidence, when coupled with his statement that “in the evolution of the care of this infant, it is my opinion that there are many areas of negligence which eventually led to the child’s brain death” (see Appendix, infra at 724) was sufficient to meet the causation standard set forth in Bradford v. Bay state Med. Center, 415 Mass. at 208-209.
Dr. Buscho also considered Dr. Sussman’s decision to transfer the critically ill child, before he was stabilized and without accompanying medical records, “below the standard of care.”9 Although Dr. Sussman argues there is no evidence to support the claim that the medical records were not transported to Baystate with the child, the offer of proof supports the inference that the records were not sent. Dr. Lieberman’s testimony before the grand jury, reproduced in the margin, reveals the limited information that he had, strongly suggesting that he did not have the medical records of North Adams.10 Another reasonable inference from Dr. Lieberman’s testimony is that the absence of the records led to the lumbar puncture to rule out infection, and contributed to the *721further delay in performing the CT scan and preventive treatment.
2. Sufficiency of the offer of proof as to nursing staff and respiratory therapist at North Adams Regional Hospital. Dr. Buscho’s letter faults the nursing staff for taking only one set of complete vital signs in the course of two and one-half hours for this critically ill child. The offer of proof does not indicate whether any of the five named North Adams staff persons were present and participated in the care and treatment of the child, i.e., the offer of proof does not, as required, establish that a nurse-patient relationship existed, nor does it appear that the obligation to take more frequent vital signs for Jeremy was a duty to be undertaken independently by anyone on the nursing staff without orders from a physician. For these reasons, the judgment of dismissal is affirmed with respect to the nonphysician defendants on the staff of North Adams.
3. Sufficiency of the offer of proof as to New England Life Flights, Inc., and the physician and the nurse aboard the helicopter. New England Life Flights, Inc., the company providing helicopter service, is not within the definition of a health care provider under G. L. c. 231, § 60B, for the reasons set forth in Perez v. Bay State Ambulance & Hosp. Rental Serv., Inc., 413 Mass. at 675-676. The claim against it is not, therefore, one to be considered by the tribunal.
The doctor and the nurse, however, are within the statute. As discussed earlier, Dr. Lieberman’s testimony reasonably raises the inference that the hospital records were not sent with the child. Such an omission was below the standard of care in Dr. Buscho’s opinion. Our discussion concerning Dr. Sussman’s failure to send the records also applies to Dr. Muse and nurse LaPlante who transported Jeremy in the helicopter. Accordingly, the offer of proof was sufficient as to these two individuals.
4. Sufficiency of the offer of proof as to Dr. Marz, Dr. Lieberman, and Baystate. Dr. Buscho faulted Dr. Marz and Dr. Lieberman in two respects: for performing a lumbar puncture prior to making certain (by means of a CT scan) *722that the child did not have increased intracranial pressure, and for not procuring immediately a CT scan once the lumbar puncture showed blood.
We need not discuss the inappropriateness of the lumbar puncture, as Dr. Buscho’s opinion as to the delay in taking the CT scan is sufficient as an offer of proof that the procedures followed by the physicians did not conform to accepted medical standards. Under Kapp v. Ballantine, 380 Mass. at 192 (1980), the tribunal’s function is limited to the ascertainment whether the offer of proof is sufficient as to any one of the theories of recovery.
Once the lumbar puncture showed intracranial bleeding, Dr. Buscho stated there was a neurologic emergency and the CT scan should have been done immediately, not several hours later. The delay contributed to the brain injury in that it delayed institution of measures to lower pressure. Although the offer with respect to Drs. Marz and Lieberman is more marginal, for substantially the same reasons that we held the offer of proof sufficient as to Dr. Sussman, we consider the offer of proof adequate as to these two doctors. As with Dr. Marz, we need not consider the other claims against Dr. Lieberman. See ibid.
A few final comments are in order. The reader will observe that the majority and the dissent have a different view of the medical records. The majority, as the foregoing discussion indicates, considers that there is factual support in the medical records upon which Dr. Buscho was entitled to rely in forming his opinion. The dissent does not find such factual support. Dr. Buscho was given most of the medical and other records, and based thereon, concluded that a CT scan was called for. No speculation is required to infer that his interpretation of the North Adams hospital record was that the child, if not unconscious, was at least unresponsive.11 Simi*723larly, no speculation is required that he inferred that the contusions shown on the autopsy report (an autopsy report which, after all, considered the manner of death to be homicide) should have been visible earlier. That there is evidence in the record, cited by the dissent, that other doctors did not see the contusions is not determinative. “Any factual dispute as to the ‘meaning’ of the record is for the jury.” Kopycinski v. Aserkoff, 410 Mass. at 418. Thus, whether Dr. Buscho misinterpreted the records or what weight is to be accorded his opinion in relation to contrary evidence are questions that belong to a later stage of the proceedings. Kilmartin v. Lowell Gen. Hosp., 23 Mass. App. Ct. 901, 902 (1986). See also Booth v. Silva, ante 16, 22 (1994).
The judgment of dismissal is affirmed with respect to the nonphysician members of the staff of North Adams Regional Hospital.12 The judgments of dismissal are vacated and the determinations of the tribunal as to Dr. Sussman, Dr. Muse, nurse LaPlante, Dr. Marz, and Dr. Lieberman (and Baystate insofar as its liability would be based on the conduct of Dr. Marz and Dr. Lieberman), are to be replaced by a decision that the plaintiff’s offer of proof, if properly substantiated, is sufficient to raise a legitimate question of liability appropriate for judicial inquiry. The judgment of dismissal as to New England Life Flights, Inc., is vacated and the plaintiff may proceed with his claim against New England Life Flights, Inc., as G. L. c. 231, § 60B, does not apply to it.
So ordered.
*724Appendix.
Robert F. Buscho M.D. F.A.C.E.P.
Mr. Edward Spence III 1/25/90
RE: Jeremy Rahilly Case Dear Mr. Spence,
I have reviewed the medical records you supplied to me so as to form an opinion as to whether the care and treatment of Jeremy Rahilly was appropriate and consistent with accepted medical standards.
You provided me with the following records:
1. Ambulance record of North Adams Ambulance Service, Inc., for the transportation of Jeremy Rahilly to the North Adams Hospital.
2. Emergency Room Record and Nurse’s Notes, from the North Adams Regional Hospital.
3. Record of the Life Flight Helicopter transportation of the child from the North Adams Regional Hospital to the Baystate Medical Center.
4. Record of the Baystate Medical Center for Jeremy Rahilly.
5. Autopsy report for Jeremy Rahilly following his death.
It is my opinion that a number of individuals who treated Jeremy Rahilly failed to meet accepted medical standards and contributed to his eventual injury and death. Furthermore, there are many elements of medical negligence in this case. I have divided this letter into separate sections in order to more clearly delineate those individuals and entities whose care fell below the standard of care.
North Adams Ambulance Service, Inc., and its EMTS [omitted]
Karen Burke, M.D.
[omitted]
Karen Burke, M.D. and Michael Sussman, M.D
At North Adams Hospital Emergency Department the infant was evaluated by Drs. Sussman and Burke. Neither physician performed and docu-*725merited a complete history and physical examination. The proper format for a complete history and physical examination includes:
I. History:
Chief complaint, present illness; past illness; family history.
II. Review of systems.
III. Physical examination:
general appearance, skin, head, ears, eyes, nose, mouth, throat, neck, chest, heart, abdomen, genitalia, extremities, and neurologic exam.
In a critically ill child, it is the standard of care to perform a thorough examination, following this format, and to document the results. Had the physicians performed a thorough and systematic exam it is possible they would have found the scalp contusion indicating that the child had a head injury. If it was appreciated that the child had had a head injury, it would have led the physicians to perform a CT scan. A CT scan at North Adams would have shown the intracranial bleed and changed the entire therapeutic care for this baby.
It is my opinion that there were strong indications to perform an emergency CT scan at North Adams Hospital. Not only was there clinical evidence of a head injury that was not appreciated, but also in any unconscious and unresponsive child, a CT scan should be performed to rule out a number of intracranial conditions.
The significance of not performing a CT scan at North Adams Hospital is this: the child’s brain injury was caused by increased intracranial pressure, caused by hypoxia. Intracranial bleeding, caused by a head injury, also causes elevated intracranial pressure and injures the brain. The physicians at North Adams Hospital failed to diagnose the increased intracranial pressure in this child. A CT scan would have given this diagnosis, and treatments would have then been undertaken to lower the intracranial pressure.
Increasing intracranial pressure must be diagnosed and treated aggressively to decrease brain damage. This is a neurologic emergency. In-tracranial pressure can be lowered. Intubation with hyperventilation to lower arterial carbon dioxide pCo2 to 25-30 torr will lower intracranial pressure. Mannitol 0.25 to 2.0 gm/Kg IV should also be given and repeated every 4 to 6 hours. Corticosteroids, although controversial, should be considered.
*726The physicians at North Adams Hospital failed to recognize and aggressively treat this infant’s increased intracranial pressure. It is my opinion that this further contributed to the brain damage the baby sustained.
The decision was made to transport the infant by New England Life Flight, to Baystate Medical Center in Springfield, MA, where there was a pediatric intensive care unit. In every case in inter-hospital transfers, all arrangements should be carefully coordinated between the two institutions by the physicians. The only acceptable reason for transferring a patient is the lack of ability to care for a patient’s particular medical problem at the sending hospital. All inter-hospital transfers must be undertaken when a patient has been stabilized. It is my opinion that the baby was not stabilized when transferred. The baby’s increased intracranial pressure had not been diagnosed, was not being treated, and probably was worsening while the baby was being transported.
The transfer was not coordinated in another serious respect. The medical records from North Adams were not transferred with the patient. This is below the standard of care. The medical records carry important diagnostic and therapeutic information that the receiving hospital must know in order to continue the care of the child. Because the records were not transferred between the two hospitals, the infant was subjected to a dangerous procedure (a lumbar puncture) that probably worsened the baby’s condition. This will be discussed below. Thus, Drs. Burke and Sussman’s decision to transfer a critically ill child, before he was stabilized, and without accompanying medical records, was below the standard of care.
Nursing Staff: North Adams Regional Hospital
Another criticism I have about the care the baby received at North Adams Regional Hospital concerns the nursing care. The baby was critically ill, but during 2.5 hours only one set of complete vital signs was taken. When a patient has increasing intracranial pressure, there can be characteristic changes in the vital signs. A rise in the blood pressure and a fall in the pulse is a response to increased intracranial pressure, called “Cushing’s Reflex.” Had serial viral [s/c] signs been taken, which is the standard of care in critically ill patients, the Cushing’s Reflex may have been noted, pointing the medical staff to the diagnosis of increased intracranial pressure. This then would have led to aggressive early intervention to lower the child’s intracranial pressure. It is below the standard of care to not monitor a critically ill patient more frequently.
*727New England Life Flight, Inc.
It is my opinion that the personnel of New England Flight, Inc. should not have left North Adams without being sure that they were taking the medical records. New England Life Flight, Inc. performs inter-hospital transports all the time and the crews know the importance of transferring medical records. They should have checked to be sure that the records were transferred with the baby.
Paul Marz, M.D.
The resident physician at Baystate Medical Center, Paul Marz, M.D. performed a lumbar puncture shortly after the baby’s arrival. Performing a lumbar puncture in the face of increased intracranial pressure can cause brain herniation and brain death. Performing the lumbar puncture was inappropriate and should have been avoided. In the records, it is noted that the child had a long hypoxic period, and hypoxic brain injury was a major clinical concern. Most physicians would not perform a lumbar puncture in the face of the possibility of increased intracranial pressure for fear of causing brain herniation. If the physicians at Baystate had had the records from North Adams Emergency Department they would have appreciated the possibility that the baby had increased intracranial pressure.
When baby Rahilly arrived at Baystate Medical Center, Dr. Marz performed a lumbar puncture. About 5 hours later, a CT scan was finally performed. It is my opinion that the lumbar puncture should not have been performed until a CT scan was done, and it was certain that the child did not have increased intracranial pressure. Despite the fact that Dr. Marz did not have the medical records from North Adams, it is my understanding that he knew the facts of the case. Thus he should have reasoned that because of the child’s respiratory arrest and periods of hypoxia, it was probable that the child.was developing increased intracranial pressure, and a CT scan should have been done before doing the lumbar puncture.
Baby Rahilly did sustain a brain herniation. I feel performing a lumbar puncture contributed to the herniation of the infant’s brain. It cannot be said that the herniation was solely caused by the lumbar puncture, but it contributed to the child’s brain injury.
Paul Marz, M.D. and Stephen Lieberman, M.D.
Even when Dr. Marz and Dr. Lieberman, the attending physician at Bays-tate, recognized that the child had sustained an intracranial bleed, as was shown by the lumbar puncture, it took hours to perform a CT scan to diagnose exactly the condition. This was a neurologic emergency. The CT *728scan should have been done immediately. This delay contributed to the child’s brain injury in that it delayed institution of definitive measures to lower the child’s intracranial pressure.
Stephen Lieberman, M.D. and Baystate Medical Center personnel,
Pediatric Intensive Care Unit
I also question the neurologic care the child received after the CT scan was obtained. The most important way to lower the intracranial pressure in a patient is to lower the arterial carbon dioxide by hyperventilating the patient. The baby’s serial arterial carbon dioxide concentrations for 8/7 were as follows:
Time pCo2 0350 24 0930 34 1010 20 1050 25 1210 32 1330 32 1520 35 1630 32 1720 33 1900 46 1930 39
The pCo2 should have been kept below 30. As can be seen, for seven hours the medical staff at Baystate were unable to hyperventilate the child to the recommended arterial carbon dioxide concentration for lowering the in-tracranial pressure. This is below the standard of care in my opinion. The child had a prolonged period where his intracranial pressure was not treated by recommended standards. In fact, the CT scan taken on 8-6:0800 and 8-7:0938 showed progressive deterioration of the child’s brain.
Stephen Lieberman, M.D.
Pediatric Neurology consultation was obtained on August 8, 1988, at 8:00 a.m. Stephen Lieberman, M.D., as the attending and primary physician, should have called for Pediatric Neurosurgical consultation on an emergent basis on August 7, after the results of the CT scan were known. Neurosurgeons have the most experience in treating patients with increased intracranial pressure, and they utilize a number of devices to accurately monitor it. I believe these would have been helpful in monitoring the *729results of treatment in this child. I think the standard of care at Baystate would have been to obtain Neurosurgical consultation expeditiously.
In conclusion, in the evolution of the care of this infant, it is my opinion that there are many areas of negligence which eventually led to the child’s brain death. I hope that this letter will be helpful in clarifying some of these areas.
If I can be of further assistance in this matter or if you have further questions, please contact me at any time.
Sincerely yours,
Robert F. Buscho MD FACEP
The offer of proof against the physician who attempted the intubation was deemed sufficient by the tribunal.
The CT scan reported “acute blood seen layering in the posterior horns of the lateral ventricles bilaterally.”
The autopsy report in the portion entitled “Evidence of Injury” lists the following injuries:
“There are two adjacent superficial brown zones in the midline of the forehead. The largest measures 5/16 x Vs inch .. . The second is Vs inch in diameter nearly round lesion just below this also in the midline of the forehead. There is a % inch long red line of congestion in the skin within the hair-bearing area above the left ear . . . The occipital scalp somewhat to the right of the midline shows a faint contused [bruised] zone measuring about V/2 x 2 inches, . . . When the scalp is reflected a % inch diameter zone of hemorrhage into the soft tissues in the subgaleal regions only is seen. This is located over the left half of the occipital bone . . . .”
To require, as suggested in note 2 of the dissent, that a plaintiff’s expert must state his opinion in formulaic terms, i.e., “fell below the standard of care” of the specialty involved, ignores the majority opinion of Bradford, as expressed in n.6 at 415 Mass. 207, ignores also the standard by which the record is to be read, i.e., most favorably to the plaintiff, and, by limiting experts to procrustean pat phrases, may also undercut the value of such opinions to the medical malpractice tribunal.
Dr. Karen Burke, the physician who had attempted the endotracheal intubation, was questioned as follows at trial:
Q. “Do I understand that what you’re saying is that when the brain has experienced some kind of damage from either anoxia or a severe hypoxic episode, is that there are now processes ongoing that are changing the brain?”
A. “Yes.”
Q. “And one of those processes that is going on is cerebral edema?” A. “Yes.”
Q. “And cerebral edema is swelling of the brain; is that right?”
A. “Yes.”
Dr. Otis indicated that in his view the cause of death which accounted for the massive brain swelling (cerebral edema) was severe hypoxic ischemic injury with edema and encephalomacia.
“It is my opinion as an anatomic pathologist that Jeremy Rahilly died as a direct result of massive anoxic brain damage. . . . Events described by Dr. Buscho in his letter are totally consistent with the findings on autopsy of severe anoxic brain injury and I am in basic agreement with his identification of events which caused the massive anoxic brain damage.”
Dr. Burke’s testimony at the father’s criminal trial indicated that “in a general way” it was Dr. Sussman’s responsibility to make sure that the records went with the baby.
Q. “You had the information from North Adams Regional Hospital as to how the baby was brought into the hospital and the reason for it; that it had been choking, that perhaps it had gotten some food caught in its windpipe or something along those lines?”
A. “That was about all I knew. They had a team that had come out from the University of Massachusetts in a helicopter and picked the baby up, communicated very briefly with Dr. Marz; and the communication consisted just of about that and nothing else really. The baby had choked and had apparently swallowed some of the formula and that was really about the extent of it.”
Q. “Based on that limited information and your observations of the CAT scan, regarding the oxygen starved nature of the brain, was the history consistent with what you saw in the CAT scan?”
A. “No . . . The CAT scan indicated a much greater insult in terms of deprivation of oxygen . . . than what was described to Dr. Marz.”
As indicated in the text, the discharge diagnosis in the North Adams records listed “possible hypoxic cerebral injury.”
For us to conclude that a limp, pale, flaccid child, breathing at the rate of four respirations a minute, is or is not “unresponsive” is surely to engage in an appraisal of the weight and credibility of the evidence, an exercise not permitted to us or the tribunal. The standard is clear, the evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable to the plaintiff. We also note that there are other described symptoms in the North Adams hospital rec*723ord, not comprehensible to us as lay persons, which may have bearing on Dr. Buscho’s interpretation of the facts.
Diane Gagne, Marianne Bastían, Jane Soucie, Harold Kline and Donna Rayner.

=== CASE 9741316 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:16.228067+00 ===

Gillerman, J.
(dissenting). I dissent, respectfully, because I conclude that the claims against the appellees are frivolous, and that permitting the prosecution of such claims defeats the legislative purpose in enacting G. L. c. 231, § 60B. See Paro v. Longwood Hosp., 373 Mass. 645, 651 (1977); Denton v. Beth Israel Hosp., 392 Mass. 277, 280 (1984).
1. Dr. Sussman. Dr. Buscho writes that “[h]ad . . . [Dr. Sussman] performed a thorough and systematic exam [of the child] it is possible they would have found the scalp contusion indicating that the child had a head injury.” The fact is that this record does not reveal any direct evidence that there was a head injury prior to the time the child was admitted to the North Adams Regional Hospital (NARH), or that any contusion, if there was one on August 6, was observable on that day.
Sussman, the child’s regular pediatrician, conducted a physical examination of the child in the early morning hours of August 6, 1988. The plaintiffs offer of proof admits it, and the hospital records substantiate it. No clinical evidence of a head injury is recorded. Sussman also took a history from the child’s father, the plaintiff in this case. The father said that the child had taken his formula at 11:30 p.m. A *730short while later the father noticed that the child was having difficulty breathing. As he lifted the child out of bed, the child stopped breathing, and the father began mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. The child vomited cereal, and the police were called. There is nothing of a head injury in this history; Buscho’s speculation of a head injury is contradicted by his client, the plaintiff.
The child was examined again upon arrival at the Baystate Medical Center by Dr. Marz. He testified before the grand jury (the transcript of a portion of which is in the plaintiff’s offer of proof) that he found that there “were no outside marks to indicate any head trauma. . . .”
Dr. Buscho does not identify the source for his statement that there was a “scalp contusion” to be seen on August 6, 1988, but the majority of the panel speculates in note 5, supra, that Buscho may have referred to a “scalp contusion” which appears in the report of the autopsy conducted on August 11, 1988, one day after the date of death and six days after the date of the original injury. The report states a finding of “a faint contused zone measuring VA x 2 inches.”
Solely on the basis of the August 11 autopsy report establishing a “faint contused zone” as of that date, Buscho constructs his edifice of malpractice: the contusion noted on August 11 means there was a head injury on or before August 5, 1988; the contusion was there to be seen by Sussman on August 6, but Sussman negligently failed to see it; had Suss-man seen the contusion he would have “appreciated that the child had had a head injury”; that information was enough to call for a CT scan; the scan would have shown an in-tracranial bleed, and that would have “changed the entire therapeutic care of the baby,” for the intracranial bleed is what causes increased intracranial pressure which, in turn, causes brain damage, and ultimately, death.
Quite aside from the fact that the child’s father did not report any head injury, and that neither Sussman nor Marz saw a contusion (if it was there on August 6), what is missing is any reason to believe that the characteristics of the contusion seen on August 11 lead to the conclusion that *731(i) the contusion probably existed, and could have been seen, on August 6, and (ii) that the contusion probably reflected a head injury on August 5 or earlier. Buscho did not opine as to this in his report. And certainly the majority is not qualified to draw the inferences.
Marz testified that the first indication of the possibility of any head trauma was revealed by the lumbar puncture on August 6; the lumbar puncture is what prompted the CT scan done at 8 a.m. on August 6. But this scan on August 6 showed no evidence of any increased pressure within the infant’s brain. The increased intracranial pressure did not appear until the CT scan done on August 7 at 9:30 a.m. Thus, Buscho’s charge that there were “strong indications” that a scan on August 6 at NARH would have revealed increased intracranial pressure has no basis in the record.1 The majority replies that had Sussman diagnosed the intracranial bleeding early on August 6, the later developing increased intracranial pressure “would have been anticipated and treated preventively.” But the assumption of intracranial bleeding in the early morning hours of August 6 at NARH (before the lumbar puncture at Baystate) is the purest conjecture; it is based on the further assumption that there had been a serious head injury prior to August 6, which, in turn, is based on the assumption that the contusion seen on August 11 was evidence of that serious, prior head injury. This is not a “grudging” reading of Buscho’s letter. It is, perhaps, a *732careful reading, but that, I believe, is what the statute calls for.
Buscho makes the additional charge against Sussman that the child was transferred to Baystate before he had been “stabilized.” The difficulty, according to Buscho, was that the “increased intracranial pressure had not been diagnosed, was not being treated, and probably was worsening . . . .” But, again, there was no evidence in this record of any increased intracranial pressure until one full day after the transfer to Baystate. Buscho clings to his assumption that there had been an early serious head injury, but the plaintiff himself refutes Buscho’s gratuitous claim, and there is nothing in the record that supports Buscho’s position.
Buscho also charges that the medical records from NARH were not transferred with the child, and that this is “below the standard of care.” Nowhere does Buscho identify who was responsible for making certain that the records were on board with the child, but because the charge is included in the paragraphs of the letter dealing with Sussman we are left to surmise that Sussman must be the one who failed. But conjecture as to professional responsibility is precisely what is not permitted.2
2. Dr. Muse and nurse LaPlante. The offer of proof as to these two defendants is alleged to be their failure to make sure that the medical records were on board the helicopter flight. Assuming the records were not on board — an issue left vague in this record — Buscho’s argument is that with the records in hand the Baystate physicians “would have appreciated the possibility that the baby had increased in-tracranial pressure.” What in the records creates that possibility? Even the majority looks to the autopsy report of August 11 for evidence of a head trauma, and there is simply nothing else. Indeed, Buscho faults Sussman for not discovering the supposed increased intracranial pressure.
*7333. Dr. Marz, Dr. Lieberman, and Bay state. The majority, conceding difficulties with Buscho’s opinion, in the end faults Marz and Lieberman only for the delay of several hours in the performance of a CT scan. This charge cannot be sustained. The plaintiffs written offer of proof notes that the lumbar puncture was performed between 3:30 a.m. and 5 a.m., following which “Dr. Marz requested a CAT scan, ‘as soon as possible.’ ” In fact the scan was not performed until 8 a.m. What reason is there to believe that either Marz or Lieberman was responsible for the delay? What reason is there to believe that the scan was not done “as soon as possible?” If there were answers to these questions they are not to be found in this record, in Buscho’s opinion letter, or in the opinion of the majority.3
The medical tribunal rightly concluded that the plaintiffs offer of proof failed as to the appellees, and I would affirm the judgment.
Buscho’s letter states that there were “strong indications to perform an emergency CT scan at North Adams Hospital” based upon the “clinical evidence of a head injury that was not appreciated, but also in any unconscious and unresponsive child . . . .” The NARH hospital record states the following: “Admitted in arms of EMT w/oral airway in place. Infant flacid — cried very small amount. Did attempt to withdraw when IV was — tube inserted by Dr. Burke.” It is plain that the child was neither unconscious nor unresponsive upon admission — and I have discussed the absence of any clinical evidence of a head injury in the text. Finally, the statement that there were “strong indications to perform an emergency CT scan” is hardly a statement that Sussman failed to conform to the required standard of care. See Bradford v. Baystate Med. Center, 415 Mass. 202, 206 n.5 (1993) (physician liability cannot be based upon generalities in the reports of the plaintiffs expert).
The majority attempts, in note 9, supra, to resolve the difficulty by relying on testimony which suggested that the responsibility was Sussman’s “in a general way.” That is hardly a basis upon which a medical malpractice suit should be prosecuted.
This case is not controlled by Booth v. Silva, ante 16, 21 & n.7 (1994). In Booth, the opinion of the expert was not substantiated by the evidence in the offer of proof; in this case the expert’s opinion is contradicted by the evidence in the offer of proof.

=== CASE 2226846 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:20.787357+00 ===

636 N.E.2d 1285 (1994)
Jean COPLEN As Guardian of the Estate of Edward R. Coplen, Appellant (Defendant below),
v.
OMNI RESTAURANTS, INC., an Indiana Corporation, Appellee-Cross Appellant.
No. 79A04-9302-CV-69.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Fourth District.
July 6, 1994.
Mary K. Reeder, Michael P. Dugan, Riley Bennett & Egloff, Indianapolis, Michael E. Douglas, Frankfort, for appellant.
Sidney Mishkin, Mishkin & Fall, Indianapolis, for appellee.
MILLER, Judge.
Fourteen-year old Jennifer Farley was seriously injured in an accident while a guest passenger in step-father Edward R. Coplen's car. Jennifer's medical bills, totalling $34,600.12, were paid by her father's (James Farley's) health insurance which he obtained through his employer, Omni Restaurants, Inc. Omni believed that it suffered a separate, compensable injury when it had to pay Jennifer's medical bills and brought suit against Coplen's Estate despite language in our guest statute providing that the operator of a motor vehicle "is not liable for loss or damage arising from injuries to or the death of [his stepchild] unless the injuries or death are caused by the wanton or willful misconduct of the operator." Ind. Code 9-3-3-1. The parties stipulated that Coplen was negligent but was not guilty of willful or wanton *1286 misconduct. After a bench trial, the court entered judgment in favor of Omni on its damage claim of $34,600.12 plus pre-judgement interest of $5,997.36, but denied Omni's request for attorney fees.
We find that our guest statute precludes claims against a host driver for loss or damages arising from injuries to statutorily enumerated passengers absent willful and wanton misconduct. In addition, we find that because of our decision, Omni is no longer the prevailing party  which is a requisite for recovery of attorney fees under the statute relied upon by Omni. Therefore, we reverse with instructions to enter judgment rejecting Omni's claim.
DECISION
I. Guest Statute
Since the facts are not in dispute, the only question before us is whether Indiana's guest statute shields Coplen from liability for any losses or damages arising from injuries to Jennifer. When the only allegation of error is that the trial court misapplied the law, our task on review is to correctly apply the law to the undisputed facts. Lee v. Estate of Cain (1985), Ind. App., 476 N.E.2d 922, 923.
Guest statutes "limit the liability of the owner or operator for injury to or the death of an invited gratuitous guest to cases where the injury or death was intentional on the part of the owner or operator, or resulted from the owner's or operator's heedlessness or reckless disregard of consequences, or from reckless or willful or wanton disregard of the rights of others." 7A Am.Jur.2d, Automobiles and Highway Traffic § 537, p. 768. An extensive analysis by the Utah Supreme Court in 1984 found that during the late 1920's and in the 1930's, thirty-three states enacted automobile guest statutes. Malan v. Lewis (1984), Utah, 693 P.2d 661, 663. Its survey indicated that twenty-four of the original guest laws had been repealed, declared unconstitutional, or overruled, and four had been substantially modified. Id. at 664. Utah and Indiana were two of the "five remaining states with an unmodified guest statute." Id.
Indiana's original guest statute was held constitutional in Sidle v. Majors (1976), 264 Ind. 206, 341 N.E.2d 763, which found its purposes were 1) to eliminate the possibility of collusive lawsuits between family members; 2) to protect host drivers and their insurers from the "`Robin Hood' proclivity" of juries; and 3) to foster hospitality by insulating generous drivers from lawsuits by ungrateful guests. Eight years after Sidle, our legislature amended the guest statute, which had originally barred all guest passengers from recovery against the host driver, absent willful and wanton misconduct. The revised statute only "retain[ed] the guest statute as it applies to close family members" and hitchhikers. Davidson v. Davidson (1990), Ind. App., 558 N.E.2d 849, 851 (upholding constitutionality and rejecting child's claim against noncustodial stepmother driver). Davidson cited the approved purposes of the former statute set out in Sidle, and additionally focused upon the "promotion of family harmony"[1] as justifying the classifications of the amended statute.
Indiana's guest statute at the time of the Coplen accident, I.C. 9-3-3-1,[2] provided:
(a) As used in this section:
"Hitchhiker" means a passenger who has solicited a ride in violation of IC 9-4-1-91(a).
"Child" or "stepchild" includes a child or stepchild of any age.
(b) The owner, operator, or person responsible for the operation of a motor vehicle is not liable for loss or damage arising from injuries to or the death of:
*1287 (1) His parent;
(2) His spouse;
(3) His child or stepchild;
(4) His brother;
(5) His sister; or
(6) A hitchhiker;
resulting from the operation of the motor vehicle while the parent, spouse, child, or stepchild, brother, sister, or hitchhiker was being transported without payment therefor in or upon the motor vehicle, unless the injuries or death are caused by the wanton or willful misconduct of the operator, owner, or person responsible for the operation of the motor vehicle.
(Emphasis added.)
In construing our guest statute, we do not have the luxury of guidance from past decisions; however, we are cognizant of the cardinal rule of statutory construction that a statute clear and unambiguous on its face need not and cannot be interpreted by a court, which must hold it to its plain meaning. Grove v. Thomas (1983), Ind. App., 446 N.E.2d 641, 643 (quoting Economy Oil Corp., v. Indiana Dep't of State Revenue (1974), 162 Ind. App. 658, 321 N.E.2d 215, 218); Seymour Nat'l Bank v. State (1981), Ind., 422 N.E.2d 1223, 1226, modified 428 N.E.2d 203, and appeal dismissed 457 U.S. 1127, 102 S. Ct. 2951, 73 L. Ed. 2d 1344 (1982). In Davidson, supra at 852, the court stated that the "words of the [guest] statute" must "be accorded their commonly accepted meaning unless a different purpose is clearly manifest from the statute itself," and further that "I.C. 9-3-3-1 clearly states that an operator of a motor vehicle is not liable for loss or damage arising from injuries to a stepchild resulting from the operation of that vehicle, unless the driver engaged in willful or wanton behavior."
Omni notes that because the guest statute is in derogation of the common law, it must be strictly construed. Strict construction is "a close and conservative adherence to the literal or textual interpretation." Lagler v. Bye (1908), 42 Ind. App. 592, 85 N.E. 36, 37. The literal, textual wording of the guest statute provides that a host driver is not liable for loss or damage arising from injuries to an enumerated passenger transported without payment, absent wanton or willful misconduct. The phrase "arising from" has been defined as connoting the source, relating back to and tying up with the origin, basis or cause. Whitley v. White (1940), 176 Tenn. 206, 140 S.W.2d 157. Thus, the statute does not prohibit only the enumerated passengers from maintaining a cause of action against the driver. Its language is broader  by stating that the driver is not liable for those losses or damages that arise from injuries to enumerated passengers, the statute precludes claims for "loss or damage" that originate from or have as their source "injuries to" the persons enumerated in the statute, absent willful or wanton misconduct on the part of the driver.[3]
In the present case, there is no dispute that Omni's damage claim for $34,600.12 arises from the injuries Jennifer sustained as a result of her step-father's negligent driving. Coplen is not liable for loss or damage which arose from injuries his step-daughter sustained as a result of his negligent driving.
Omni claims it is stepping into the shoes of its subrogee, Jennifer's father, who may maintain an independent cause of action to *1288 recover medical expenses because he was damaged when the medical providers who treated Jennifer sought payment from him. It does not matter into whose shoes Omni steps. Under our guest statute, Coplen is not liable for loss or damage arising from Jennifer's injuries  no matter who attempts to recover them.
II. Attorney Fees
In its cross appeal, Omni argues the trial court erred in denying its claim for attorney fees. Omni's complaint against the Coplen Estate sought to recover payments made for Jennifer's medical treatment and "to recover attorneys' fees under I.C. XX-X-XX-X" because refusal of Omni's demand for payment was "frivolous, unreasonable, and groundless." R. at 11.[4] Omni's complaint was filed October 29, 1990. Two days before the March 12, 1992 trial date, the parties agreed to the stipulation of Coplen's negligence. Omni's attorney fee issue on appeal focuses on its claim for $3,366.25 (an amount itemized at trial) in fees directly attributable to attaining the stipulation of negligence from the Coplen's automobile insurance carrier.[5]
Our statute governing the award of attorney fees in certain instances, and pursuant to which Omni claims fees here, provides in pertinent part:
(b) In any civil action, the court may award attorneys fees as part of the cost to the prevailing party, if it finds that either party:
(1) brought the action or defense on a claim that is frivolous, unreasonable, or groundless;
(2) continued to litigate the action or defense after the party's claim or defense clearly became frivolous, unreasonable or groundless; or
(3) litigated the action in bad faith.
Ind. Code 34-1-32-1 (emphasis added). Prevailing party means "a party who successfully prosecutes his claim or asserts his defense." Strutz v. McNagny (1990), Ind. App., 558 N.E.2d 1103, 1110.[6]
Because of our ruling, Omni is no longer the prevailing party in this action; therefore, the issue of awarding Omni attorney fees is moot and need not be addressed.
Reversed.
CHEZEM and HOFFMAN, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  The court quoted Sidle's statement that "[n]otwithstanding that there may be no direct financial loss arising from it, a lawsuit is not an experience which endears a plaintiff to the defendant."
Sidle also recognized that "[g]reat tolerance for the errors and human frailties of one's family ... is [] the norm and motivates the vast majority of us to accept the burdens that they may occasionally inflict upon us, rather than to seek legal redress." Sidle, supra, 341 N.E.2d at 771.
[2]  The guest statute, now located at Ind. Code 34-4-40-3, remains essentially the same as former I.C. 9-3-3-1 and continues the limitation to close family and hitchhikers.
[3]  Had our legislature intended to bar only the enumerated passengers from maintaining a cause of action against the host driver, it could have employed the narrow language used in other guest statutes. Omni relies on Naber v. Thompson (1976), 274 Or. 309, 546 P.2d 467, in which the Oregon Supreme Court interpreted its guest statute which read:
No person transported by the owner or operator of a motor vehicle, ... as his guest without payment for such transportation shall have a cause of action for damages against the owner or operator for injury, death, or loss in case of accident... .
(Emphasis added). Plaintiff Naber was the husband of an injured passenger and brought an action for his loss of consortium. Because Naber "was not an occupant of the vehicle ... nor ... seek[ing] damages for injury to an occupant," the Oregon court concluded that "the guest statute, strictly construed" did not bar a non-passenger husband's claim for loss of consortium against the host driver. Id., 546 P.2d at 468. That the language of the Oregon statute was strictly construed as permitting a guest passenger's spouse to successfully bring an action for loss of consortium is not helpful here as our statute is differently worded.
[4]  As a general rule, attorney fees are not recoverable unless there is a statute or contract stipulating that such fees may be recovered. Matter of Fitton (1992), Ind. App., 605 N.E.2d 1164.
[5]  Both Coplen and the other driver in the accident were insured by the same carrier.
[6]  Omni has submitted as "additional authority" in support of its request for attorney fees a citation to Ind.Trial Rule 37(C). "Additional authority" under Ind.Appellate Rule 8.4(B) is support for "contentions previously argued in proponent's brief." Kenneth M. Stroud, Indiana Practice, § 7.9 at 103 (1990). T.R. 37(C) provides that when a party fails to admit to the truth of a matter which is thereafter proven, "he may apply to the Court for an order requiring the other party to pay him" attorney fees for "making that proof." (emphasis added.) This indeed provides a mechanism for recovery of expenses incurred upon a violation of discovery, but the mechanism provided is not support for an appellate argument for attorney fees claimed pursuant to Ind. Code 34-1-32-1. Since Omni did not make the T.R. 37(C) argument in his appellate brief nor seek an order for T.R. 37(C) sanctions at trial, Omni has waived this theory of recovery.

=== CASE 9741317 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:17.094771+00 ===

Wilkins, J.
This case involves the tension between a statutory mandate that a landlord not discriminate against unmarried couples in renting accommodations and a landlord’s sincerely held religious belief that he should not facilitate what he regards as sinful cohabitation.
The defendants, who are brothers, own a four-unit apartment house in the Turners Falls section of the town of Montague. Paul and his wife jointly own two other apartment buildings in Turners Falls which have a total of twenty-one residential units. In August, 1989, Paul, acting for himself and his brother, declined to consider leasing an apartment in the four-unit building to Mark Lattanzi and Cynthia Tarail, *319an unmarried couple, because they would be cohabiting there.2
The defendants have a policy of not leasing an apartment to any person who intends to engage in conduct that violates their religious principles. The defendants’ sole reason for declining even to consider Lattanzi and Tarail as tenants was that religion-based policy. The defendants, who are Roman Catholics, believe that they should not facilitate sinful conduct, including fornication. Since developing the policy at least a decade earlier, the defendants have applied it ten or more times to deny tenancies to unmarried couples.
General Laws c. 151B, § 4 (6), as in effect in August, 1989, provided, in part, that it shall be an unlawful practice for the owner of a multiple dwelling “to refuse to rent or lease ... or otherwise to deny to or withhold from any person or group of persons such accommodations because of the race, religious creed, color, national origin, sex, age, ancestry or marital status of such person or persons” (emphasis supplied). G. L. c. 151B, § 4 (6) (1988 ed.).3 We shall conclude that the defendants violated the provisions of this statute and that, therefore, we must consider the defendants’ argument that enforcement of the statute against them violates their rights under the State and Federal Constitutions.
In September, 1989, Lattanzi and Tarail filed a housing discrimination complaint with the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination (MCAD), claiming that because of their marital status they were denied available housing in violation of G. L. c. 15IB, § 4 (6). After the MCAD had found probable cause, Lattanzi and Tarail filed a notice seeking a judicial determination of the matter in the Superior *320Court, pursuant to G. L. c. 15IB, § 5 (1992 ed.). On October 4, 1990, the Attorney General, as was his obligation under G. L. c. 15IB, § 5, commenced this action on behalf of the complainants in Superior Court in Franklin County.
A judge of the Superior Court decided the case on cross motions for summary judgment. He allowed the defendants’ motion for summary judgment and denied the Attorney General’s. The motion judge correctly ruled that the defendants had violated G. L. c. 15IB. He then ruled that, on the summary judgment record, application of the statute to the defendants in this case would be unconstitutional. We granted the Attorney General’s application for direct appellate review. We conclude that, on the record before us, neither party was entitled to summary judgment and that the summary judgment for the defendants should be vacated.
1. The defendants argue that they are not discriminating on the basis of marital status but rather on the basis of conduct and that consequently they are not discriminating in a way forbidden by G. L. c. 15IB, § 4 (6). There is no merit to this argument. This court’s opinion in Worcester Hous. Auth. v. Massachusetts Comm’n Against Discrimination, 406 Mass. 244 (1989), makes clear that the prohibition in G. L. c. 15IB, § 4 (6), against discrimination in leasing because of marital status applies to discrimination against an unmarried woman and an unmarried man seeking to rent an apartment for their joint occupancy. Moreover, analysis of the defendants’ concerns shows that it is marital status and not sexual intercourse that lies at the heart of the defendants’ objection. If married couple A wanted to cohabit in an apartment owned by the defendants, they would have no objection. If unmarried couple B wanted to cohabit in an apartment owned by the defendants, they would have great objection. The controlling and discriminating difference between the two situations is the difference in the marital status of the two couples.
2. We consider first the protections provided by art. 46, § 1, of the Amendments to the State Constitution. Article 46, § 1 (“No law shall be passed prohibiting the free exer*321else of religion”) parallels the First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States (“Congress shall make no law . . . prohibiting the free exercise of religion”). See Commonwealth v. Nissenbaum, 404 Mass. 575, 578 (1989).
Despite the similarity of the two constitutional provisions, this court should reach its own conclusions on the scope of the protections of art. 46, § 1, and should not necessarily follow the reasoning adopted by the Supreme Court of the United States under the First Amendment. Indeed, after the release of our Nissenbaum opinion, the Supreme Court substantially altered its standard for determining whether conduct was protected under the free exercise of religion clause by its decision in Employment Div., Dep’t of Human Resources of Or. v. Smith, 494 U.S. 872 (1990), a much criticized opinion that weakened First Amendment protections for religious conduct. See The Supreme Court, 1992 Term — Comment, The Resurrection of Religious Freedom?, 107 Harv. L. Rev. 118 & 118 n.3 (1993).4
In interpreting art. 46, § 1, we prefer to adhere to the standards of earlier First Amendment jurisprudence, such as we applied in Alberts v. Devine, 395 Mass. 59, 74-75, cert, denied sub nom. Carroll v. Alberts, 474 U.S. 1013 (1985), and Attorney Gen. v. Bailey, 386 Mass. 367, 375, cert, denied sub nom. Bailey v. Bellotti, 459 U.S. 970 (1982). In each opinion, we used the balancing test that the Supreme Court had established under the free exercise of religion clause in Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406 U.S. 205, 215-229 (1972), *322Sherbert v. Verner, 374 U.S. 388, 406-409 (1963), and subsequent opinions. See Alberts v. Devine, supra at 73-74; Attorney Gen. v. Bailey, supra at 375. See also Employment Div., Dep’t of Human Resources of Or. v. Smith, supra at 894-895 (O’Connor, J., concurring in the judgment). By applying the balancing test as we do, we extend protections to the defendants that are at least as great as those of the First Amendment. No further discussion of rights under the First Amendment is, therefore, necessary.5
Our tasks are to determine whether the defendants have shown that the prohibition against housing discrimination based on marital status substantially burdens their free exercise of religion, and, if it does, whether the Commonwealth has shown that it has an interest sufficiently compelling to justify that -burden. See Alberts v. Devine, supra at 73-74, citing Wisconsin v. Yoder, supra at 215-229, and Sherbert v. Verner, supra at 403-409. See also L.H. Tribe, American Constitutional Law § 14-12, at 1242 (2d ed. 1988) (“In order to gain the exemption, the claimant must show (1) a sincerely held religious belief, which (2) conflicts with, and thus *323is burdened by, the state requirement. Once the claimant has made that showing, the burden shifts to the state. The state can prevail only by demonstrating both that (3) the requirement pursues an unusually important governmental goal, and that (4) an exemption would substantially hinder the fulfillment of the goal” [footnotes omitted]).
Because it is unchallenged on the summary judgment record, we must accept that the defendants sincerely believe that their behavior must in all respects conform to their religious beliefs and that, in their view, the operation of rental housing is not independent of those beliefs. Conduct motivated by sincerely held religious convictions will be recognized as the exercise of religion. Supreme Court free exercise of religion cases have accepted, either implicitly or without searching inquiry, claimants’ assertions regarding what they sincerely believe to be the exercise of their religion, even when the conduct in dispute is not commonly viewed as a religious ritual. See, e.g., Hobbie v. Unemployment AppealComm’n of Fla., 480 U.S. 136, 137 (1987) (refusal to work Sabbath hours); United States v. Lee, 455 U.S. 252, 257 (1982) (abstention from participating in government social security program); Thomas v. Review Bd. of the Ind. Employment Sec. Div., 450 U.S. 707, 715 (1981) (refusal to work in weapons production). See also Tribe, supra at § 14-12, at 1243-1244. Our opinions concerning the free exercise of religion have also recognized action based on religious beliefs as the exercise of religion. See, e.g., Fedele v. School Comm. of Westwood, 412 Mass. 110, 116 (1992) (right to maintain religion includes “freedom to believe” and “freedom to act on that belief’); Murphy v. I.S.K.Con. of New England, Inc., 409 Mass. 842, 851, cert, denied, 502 U.S. 865 (1991) (“Both this court and the United States Supreme Court have recognized that the concept of free exercise of religion involves both belief and activity”; teaching of religious beliefs is protected activity); Attorney Gen. v. Bailey, supra at 375-376 (threshold question satisfied because operation of school was activity “motivated by a sincerely held religious belief’).
*324The next question is whether the prohibition against discrimination based on marital status substantially burdens the defendants’ exercise of their religion. The extent of any burden will become important if and when it comes time to balance any such burden against the interests of the Commonwealth in eliminating marital status discrimination in housing. We first consider whether there is any burden at all on the defendants’ free exercise of religion. We have said that the government’s failure to provide a child with subsidized transportation to a private sectarian school does not burden the child’s free exercise of religion. Fedele v. School Comm. of Westwood, supra at 116.6 Here, the situation differs because the government has placed a burden on the defendants that makes their exercise of religion more difficult and more costly. The statute affirmatively obliges the defendants to enter into a contract contrary to their religious beliefs and provides significant sanctions for its violation.6
7 Moreover, both their nonconformity to the law and any related publicity may stigmatize the defendants in the eyes of many and thus burden the exercise of the defendants’ religion. Four State appellate courts, on similar but not identical facts, have dealt recently with the question of a substantial burden on the free exercise of religion under their respective State Constitutions, and all four concluded that a marital status antidis*325crimination law imposed such a burden. See Swanner v. Anchorage Equal Rights Comm’n, 868 P.2d 301, 308, reh’g granted, withdrawn from bound volume, modified, and reissued per curiam, 874 P.2d 274 (Alaska 1994); Smith v. Commission of Fair Employment & Hous., 25 Cal. App. 4th 251, modified, 39 Cal. App. 4th 877 (1994); Donahue v. Fair Employment & Hous. Comm’n, 2 Cal. Rptr. 2d 32, 42 (Ct. App. 1991), review granted, 5 Cal. Rptr. 2d 781 (1992), review dismissed granted, 23 Cal. Rptr. 2d 591 (1993); State by Cooper v. French, 460 N.W.2d 2, 10 (Minn. 1990); id. at 15 (Popovich, C.J., dissenting).
The fact that the defendants’ free exercise of religion claim arises in a commercial context, although relevant when engaging in a balancing of interests, does not mean that their constitutional rights are not substantially burdened. This is not a case in which a claimant is seeking a financial advantage by asserting religious beliefs. See cases cited in note 6 above. The defendants’ right to free exercise of religion is substantially burdened by the operation of G. L. c. 15IB, § 4 (6).
We must, therefore, consider whether the record establishes that the Commonwealth has or does not have an important governmental interest that is sufficiently compelling that the granting of an exemption to people in the position of the defendants would unduly hinder that goal. The general objective of eliminating discrimination of all kinds referred to in the relevant version of § 4 (6) (“race, religious creed, color, national origin, sex, age, ancestry or marital status”) cannot alone provide a compelling State interest that justifies the application of that section in disregard of the defendants’ right to free exercise of their religion. The analysis must be more focused. At the least, the Commonwealth must demonstrate that it has a compelling interest in the elimination of discrimination in housing against an unmarried man and an *326unmarried woman who have a sexual relationship and wish to rent accommodations to which § 4 (6) applies.8
Earlier in this opinion we pointed out that four other appellate State courts had recognized, as we do in this opinion, that a marital status antidiscrimination law such as ours substantially burdens the free exercise of religion by a landlord who does not believe in leasing premises to unmarried cohabitants. Judicial unanimity disappeared, however, when the role of a compelling State interest in the balancing of interests was considered. None of these opinions, majority or dissenting, provides reasoning that is particularly instructive in deciding the issue that we are now discussing.9
*327As the motion judge correctly ascertained, marital status discrimination is not as intense a State concern as is discrimination based on certain other classifications. Article 1 of the Massachusetts Declaration of Rights, as amended by art. 106, of the Amendments to the Massachusetts Constitution, states that “[e] quality under the law shall not be denied or abridged because of sex, race, color, creed or national origin.” Because there is no constitutionally based prohibition against discriminating on the basis of marital status, marital status discrimination is of a lower order than those discriminations to which art. 1 refers. Moreover, in various ways, by *328statute10 and judicial decision,11 the law has not promoted cohabitation and has granted a married spouse rights not granted to a man or woman cohabiting with a member of the opposite sex.
The defendants argue further that G. L. c. 272, § 18 (1992 ed.), presents a public policy consideration that weighs against the interest stated in G. L. c. 151B against discrimination based on marital status. Section 18 makes fornication *329a crime. This statute is of doubtful constitutionality, at least as applied to the private, consensual conduct of persons over the age of consent. See Commonwealth v. Balthazar, 366 Mass. 298, 302 (1974). It remains, however, as a criminal statute of the Commonwealth, which suggests some diminution in the strength of the Commonwealth’s interest in the elimination of housing discrimination based on marital status.
Without supporting facts in the record or in legislative findings, we are unwilling to conclude that simple enactment of the prohibition against discrimination based on marital status establishes that the State has such a substantial interest in eliminating that form of housing discrimination that, on a balancing test, the substantial burden on the defendants’ free exercise of religion must be disregarded. It is no doubt true that many men and women are cohabiting in the Commonwealth and that numbers have increased in the last twenty years. We have no sense, however, of the numbers of rental units that might be withheld from such people because of the religious beliefs of the owners of rental housing. Although the prohibition against discrimination based on marital status was enacted over twenty years ago (St. 1973, c. 187), this is the first case of this character that has come to our attention.
We have no indication, beyond the facts of this case, whether the rental housing policies of people such as the defendants can be accommodated, at least in the Turners Falls (Montague) area, without significantly impeding the availability of rental housing for people who are cohabiting or wish to cohabit. Market forces often tend to discourage owners from restricting the class of people to whom they would rent. On the other hand, discrimination of the sort challenged here may present a significant housing problem if a large percentage of units are unavailable to cohabitants.
We reject any argument that a general rule must be applied because of problems in determining whether religious beliefs sincerely underlie a landlord’s refusal to lease. The sincerity of such action assertedly founded on religious be*330liefs is open to challenge in a free exercise of religion case. See United States v. Ballard, 322 U.S. 78 (1944). We would, moreover, not readily subscribe to a rule that justified the denial of constitutional rights simply because the protection of those rights required special effort. For similar reasons, in the absence of proof, we would not find a compelling State interest in this case simply because other individuals might assert the right to be exempt from this or some other law on religious grounds and in doing so would make enforcement of that law difficult. Yet the practical problems of administering a law with the exemption that the defendants seek may be shown to be such as to make the operation of such an exemption impractical. Finally, the compulsion of the State’s interest appears somewhat weakened because the statute permits discrimination by a religious organization in certain respects (see note 8 above) if to do so promotes the principles for which the organization was established.
We are not persuaded on the record that the Commonwealth’s interests in the availability of rental housing for cohabiting couples must always prevail over the religion-based practices that people such as the defendants wish to pursue. On the other hand, we cannot say that it is certain that the Commonwealth could not prove in this case that it has some specific compelling interest that justifies overriding the defendants’ interests.
The Commonwealth has the task of establishing that it has a compelling interest in eliminating housing discrimination against cohabiting couples that is strong enough to justify the burden placed on the defendants’ exercise of their religion. A task of this sort has been carried out successfully in some cases and not in others. Compare Bob Jones Univ. v. United States, 461 U.S. 574, 592-593, 604 (1983) (eradication of racial discrimination in education is compelling State interest, superseding any free exercise rights of petitioners); United States v. Lee, 455 U.S. 252, 258-259 & nn.7-9 (1982) (overriding interest in operation of national social security system is compelling) with Thomas v. Review Bd. of the Ind. Employment Sec. Div., 450 U.S. 707, 719 (1981) *331(no compelling State interest established); Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406 U.S. 205, 224-229 (1972) (same); and Sherbert v. Verner, 374 U.S. 398, 407 (1963) (same). Cf. Guiney v. Police Comm’r of Boston, 411 Mass. 328, 332-334 (1991) (generalized sense that there is a drug problem does not alone justify random drug testing of police officers).
The summary judgment record does not establish that there is no disputed material fact bearing on the compelling State interest question. In that circumstance summary judgment is inappropriate. Mass. R. Civ. P. 56 (c), 365 Mass. 824 (1974). Doe v. New Bedford Hous. Auth., 417 Mass. 273, 279 (1994). Flesner v. Technical Communications Corp., 410 Mass. 805, 808-809 (1991). Cruz v. Commissioner of Pub. Welfare, 395 Mass. 107, 115-116 (1985). There are factual circumstances that bear on the question, both as to the existence of a general State interest in the elimination of discrimination in housing based on marital status and as to the existence of a particularized State interest in the Turners Falls area. Uniformity of enforcement of the statute may be shown to be the least restrictive means for the practical and efficient operation of the antidiscrimination law. It should be remembered that the task is to balance the State’s interests against the nature of the burden on the defendants and that we are concerned here with the business of leasing apartments, not with participation in a formal religious activity.
Now that we have defined the nature of the relevant State constitutional rights and the applicable standards, we should not announce that the Commonwealth cannot possibly make its case, but rather we should give it a chance to demonstrate its compelling interest in the application of the statute. In short, on the summary judgment record, we conclude that the uncontested material facts disclose no basis for ruling that the Commonwealth can or cannot meet its burden of establishing that it has a compelling interest that can be fulfilled only by denying the defendants an exemption from G. L. c. 15IB, § 4 (6). Therefore, summary judgment *332should not have been granted to the defendants, and neither side is entitled to summary judgment.
3. We now turn to art. 2 of the Massachusetts Declaration of Rights.12 That article, unaltered since the people adopted it in 1780, has no precise parallel in the Constitution of the United States, although certain of art. 2’s principles are reflected in the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. Article 2 is important to this case only if it grants greater protection to the defendants than do either the First Amendment or the cognate free exercise of religion provision appearing in art. 46, § 1, of the Amendments to the Constitution of the Commonwealth.
“The Constitution of the Commonwealth . . . guarantees to all our people absolute freedom as to religious belief and liberty unrestrained as to religious practices,” provided that the public peace is not disturbed and others are not obstructed in their religious worship. Opinion of the Justices, 214 Mass. 599, 601 (1913). Article 2 of the Declaration of Rights protects religious beliefs by providing that “no subject shall be hurt, molested, or restrained in his person, liberty, or estate ... for his religious profession or sentiments.” As a practical matter, this protection of religious beliefs is substantially absolute under art. 2 as well as under art. 46, § 1, of the Amendments and the First Amendment.13 This aspect of art. 2 is not involved in this case because we are not dealing with any restraint on the defendants’ religious professions or sentiments.
*333Article 2 also protects religious practices by providing that “no subject shall be hurt, molested, or restrained ... for worshipping GOD in the manner and season most agreeable to the dictates of his own conscience.” This protection concerns conduct, the “manner and season” of worshiping God. That conduct may invoke one or both of the exceptions in art. 2: that the conduct must “not disturb the public peace or obstruct others in their religious worship.” Art. 2. If neither exception applies, by its terms, art. 2 gives absolute protection to the manner in which one worships God. No balancing of interests, the worshiper’s, on the one hand, and the government’s, on the other, is called for when neither exception applies.
Our cases concerning art. 2 have not defined the scope of the concept of worshiping God, that is, if neither art. 2 exception applies, that conduct which is constitutionally protected absolutely. They do, however, provide some guidance. See Society of Jesus of New England v. Boston Landmarks Comm’n, 409 Mass. 38, 42 (1990); Commonwealth v. Nissenbaum, 404 Mass. 575, 578-579 (1989).14
*334The court need not pass on the application of art. 2 in this case because whatever protections it offers to the defendants are available to them under art. 46, § 1, which we have already discussed.15 The three Justices who join this opinion reach this conclusion because, even if the defendants’ selective leasing of their commercial property involves “worship-ping GOD in the manner and season most agreeable to the dictates of [their] own conscience,” that conduct in violation of a State statute would disturb the peace (see Commonwealth v. Nissenbaum, supra at 582-583; id: at 592-593 [Liacos, J., dissenting]), and, therefore, there would have to be a balancing of competing interests to decide whether G. L. c. 15IB, § 4 (6), is properly enforceable against the defendants. This balancing process is similar to the task that the three Justices who join this opinion and the Chief Justice in partial concurrence agree must be conducted under art. 46, § 1, on remand on this case. No balancing of competing interests under art. 2 is required in this case because the competing interests standard under art. 2 is no more favorable to the defendants than the requirement under art. 46, § 1, that the Commonwealth demonstrate a compelling State interest in justification of the application of the statute to the defendants.
4. The judgment for the defendants is vacated, and the case is remanded to the Superior Court for further consideration of the question whether art. 46, § 1, bars application of G. L. c. 15IB, § 4, to the defendants in the circumstances of this case.
So ordered.
We shall refer to cohabitation and cohabiting as the act of a man and a woman, not married to one another, living together as husband and wife in a sexual relationship. We recognize that a married couple also cohabits. See Webster’s Third New Int’l Dictionary 440 (1993); Black’s Law Dictionary 260 (6th ed. 1990).
Statute 1989, c. 516, § 9, approved on November 15, 1989, inserted the category “sexual orientation, which shall not include persons whose sexual orientation involves minor children as the sex object” after the category “sex” in the quoted language.
The Supreme Court has continued to adhere to the principle of the Smith case that “a law that is neutral and of general applicability need not be justified by a compelling governmental interest even if the law has the incidental effect of burdening a particular religious practice.” Church of the Lukumi Babalu Aye, Inc. v. Hialeah, 113 S. Ct. 2217, 2226 (1993). Where, however, a law burdening religious practice is not neutral or is not of general application, that law must advance compelling interests and must be tailored narrowly in pursuit of those interests. Id. at 2233. Because this latter test states the standard that we apply under the State Constitution in all circumstances where a law burdens religion, we need not decide whether the law challenged in this case is neutral and of general applicability.
The standard that we apply appears to be the same as that prescribed by the Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993 (42 U.S.C. §§ 2000bb et seq.), signed into law on November 16, 1993, after the decision of the lower court in this case. The intent of the new law was to counteract the standard set in Employment Div., Dep’t of Human Resources of Or. v. Smith, 494 U.S. 872 (1990). See § 2000bb (b) (“[t]he purposes of this Act are [1] to restore the compelling interest test as set forth in Sherbert v. Verner, 374 U.S. 398 [1963] and Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406 U.S. 205 [1972] and to guarantee its application in all cases where free exercise of religion is substantially burdened; and [2] to provide a claim or defense to persons whose religious exercise is substantially burdened by government).”
Under § 2000bb-l (b) of the Act, “Government may substantially burden a person’s exercise of religion only if it demonstrates that application of the burden to the person — (1) is in furtherance of a compelling governmental interest; and (2) is the least restrictive means of furthering that compelling governmental interest.” The Act applies to States and political subdivisions (§ 2000bb 2-[l]), and all State law “whether adopted before or after the enactment of this Act” (§ 2000bb-3 [a]). ■
The defendants have referred to the Act in their supplemental brief here, and, in pleadings filed after remand from this court, they could assert rights under the Act.
See Tony & Susan Alamo Found. v. Secretary of Labor, 471 U.S. 290, 304 (1985) (no burden where no financial disadvantage need result to religious employer from operation of law). See also Jimmy Swaggart Ministries v. Board of Equalization of Cal., 493 U.S. 378, 391-392 (1990) (taxation on sales and use of religious media reduced claimant organization’s income but did not violate religious beliefs or otherwise burden exercise of religion); Hernandez v. Commissioner of Internal Revenue, 490 U.S. 680, 694-700 (1989) (disallowance of tax exemption for cost of religious “auditing” sessions reduced claimants’ disposable income, but did not burden religious activity itself).
The MCAD may award damages and attorney’s fees and costs to a prevailing complainant. G. L. c. 15IB, § 5 (1992 ed.). The MCAD may also assess a civil penalty against one who has engaged in § 5 unlawful housing practices. Id. If a civil action is brought under G. L. c. 151B, § 9 (1992 ed.), the court may award actual and punitive damages, as well as attorney’s fees and costs, and may grant injunctive relief.
The Commonwealth concedes, and we therefore assume for the purposes of this case, that G. L. c. 151B, § 4, provides an exception from all its coverage for a religious institution and for an organization operated for charitable or educational purposes which is in turn operated by a religious organization. The relevant provision in 1989 read as follows:
“Nothing herein contained shall be construed to bar any religious or denominational institution or organization, or any organization operated for charitable or educational purposes, which is operated, supervised or controlled by or in connection with a religious organization, from limiting admission to or giving preference to persons of the same religion or denomination or from making such selection as is calculated by such organization to promote the religious principles for which it is established or maintained.”
General Laws c. 151B, § 1 (11) (1992 ed.), defines multiple dwellings, to which § 4 (6) applies, as dwellings that are rented to three or more families living independently of each other.
The Commonwealth states the issue in this case as whether the exemptions and limitations of G. L. c. 15IB are constitutionally inadequate.
The Minnesota court held that the Legislature obviously did not intend the Minnesota Human Rights Act’s ban against marital status discrimination “to include unmarried, cohabiting couples in housing cases.” State by Cooper v. French, 460 N.W.2d 2, 7 (Minn. 1990) (four-to-three decision). The six Justices of the Minnesota court who discussed the compelling State interest question split evenly on the issue under their State Constitution. See id. at 11 (Simonett, J., concurring as to Part I); id. at 11, 21 (Popovich, C.J., dissenting).
In the earlier California case, a California Court of Appeals divided (two to one) on the question of the State’s compelling interest, holding that the burden of the statute on the prospective landlords’ sincere and legitimate free exercise of religion was substantial and that “the state’s statutory interest in protecting unmarried cohabiting couples from discrimination ranks relatively low in the hierarchy of the state’s governmental *327interests.” Donahue v. Fair Employment & Hous. Comm’n, 2 Cal. Rptr. 2d 32, 46 (Ct. App. 1991). The California Supreme Court then granted a petition for review (5 Cal. Rptr. 2d 781 [1992]), but later dismissed the review as improvidently granted (20 Cal. Rptr. 2d 591 [1993]), and rejected a request for an order directing publication of the opinion of the Court of Appeals. That opinion consequently does not and will not appear in the oEcial California Reports. Under Cal. R. Ct. 977 (a) (1994), unpublished opinions may not be cited or relied on by any court or party within the State of California. Of course, the final judgment is still binding on the parties, but it has been observed that rule 977 effectively prevents an unpublished decision from having any precedential value. See 9 B.E. Witkin, California Procedure § 583, at 574-575 (3d ed. 1985).
In the more recent California intermediate appellate court opinion, the court stated, applying the Federal constitutional principles: “Given our conclusion the policy of protecting unmarried couples against housing discrimination does not rise to the level of a compelling state interest, the application of the statute implementing that policy to plaintiff must give way to plaintiff’s exercise of her fundamental rights.” Smith v. Commission of Fair Employment & Hous., 25 Cal. App. 4th 251, modified, 39 Cal. App. 4th 877 (1994). On the State constitutional question, the court reached the same conclusion, stating that “California has no compelling interest in prohibiting housing discrimination against unmarried couples such as would outweigh plaintiff’s state constitutional free exercise claim.” Id. at 901.
The Alaska Supreme Court also divided on the proper conclusion to reach on the balancing test, holding that the free exercise clauses of the United States and Alaska Constitutions did not entitle the landlord to an exemption from State and local marital status antidiscrimination laws. Swanner v. Anchorage Equal Rights Comm’n, 868 P.2d 301, 312 (four-to-one decision), reh’g granted, withdrawn from bound volume, modified, and reissued per curiam, 874 P.2d 274 (Alaska May 13, 1994).
“There are numerous statutes granting husbands and wives rights which do not extend to unmarried partners. See, e.g., G. L. c. 152, §§ 31-32 (1992 ed.) (workers’ compensation law protecting interests of spouse of worker killed in industrial accident); G. L. c. 175, § 1101 (1992 ed.) (providing for continued health insurance coverage for divorced or separated spouses); G. L. c. 175, § 111G (1992 ed.) (extent of family coverage under motor vehicle insurance policy limited to insured, insured’s spouse, and unmarried dependent children under twenty-three years of age); G. L. c. 175, § 123 (1992 ed.) (for purposes of section dealing with restrictions on issuance of life insurance policies, “members of a family shall mean husband, wife, children, adopted children, or step-children”); G. L. c. 190, § 1 (1992 ed.) (spouse’s right to share of property not disposed of by will); G. L. c. 191, §§ 15, 16 (1992 ed.) (spouse’s right to waiver of will and election of statutory share); G. L. c. 193, § 1 (1992 ed.) (surviving spouse listed first in schedule of persons entitled to appointment to administer intestate’s estate); G. L. c. 229, § 1 (1992 ed.) (right of surviving spouse to bring wrongful death action); G. L. c. 233, § 20 (1992 ed.) (spouse’s testimony ordinarily inadmissible as to contents of private husband-wife conversation; no marital communication privilege for conversations before marriage or between unmarried partners [see Reep v. Commissioner of the Dep’t of Employment & Training, 412 Mass. 845, 854 (1992) (Nolan, J., dissenting)]); G. L. c. 274, § 4 (1992 ed.) (spouse has defense against charge of being an accessory after the fact for harboring, concealing, or assisting spouse before or after spouse perpetrated a felony).
Our cases have made clear distinctions between the legal rights of marital and nonmarital partners. See, e.g., Collins v. Guggenheim, 417 Mass. 615, 617-618 (1994) (long-term cohabitants not entitled to equitable distribution of property); Reep v. Commissioner of the Dep’t of Employment & Training, supra at 851 (married person who leaves work to join spouse is presumed to have satisfied statutory requirement for unemployment compensation eligibility; long-term nonmarital partner could offer proof toward meeting standard, but without benefit of same presumption); Feliciano v. Rosemar Silver Co., 401 Mass. 141 (1987) (nonmarital partners have no right to sue for loss of consortium); Heistand v. Heistand, 384 Mass. 20, 24 (1981) (“Massachusetts does not recognize common-law marriage”); Davis v. Misiano, 373 Mass. 261, 263 (1977) (nonmarital partners have no right to separate support and alimony). '
Article 2 provides: “It is the right as well as the duty of all men in society, publicly, and at stated seasons to worship the SUPREME BEING, the great Creator and Preserver of the universe. And no subject shall be hurt, molested, or restrained, in his person, liberty, or estate, for worship-ping GOD in the manner and season most agreeable to the dictates of his own conscience, or for his religious profession or sentiments; provided he doth not disturb the public peace, or obstruct others in their religious worship.”
The exceptions in art. 2 (disturbing the public peace and obstructing the religious worship of others) are not likely to come into play when only art. 2’s protection of beliefs is involved.
The Nissenbaum opinion imported into art. 2 analysis the balancing test that then applied under the First Amendment’s free exercise of religion provision. See United States v. Lee, 455 U.S. 252, 256-259 (1982); Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406 U.S. 205, 215-229 (1972).
Beyond the Society of Jesus and Nissenbaum cases, there is little that defines the reach of art. 2 as to conduct. In a considerably older opinion, this court held that an obligation to recite the pledge of allegiance to the American flag did “not in any reasonable sense hurt, molest, or restrain a human being in respect to ‘worshipping God’ within the meaning of words in the Constitution.” Nicholls v. Mayor & Sch. Comm. of Lynn, 297 Mass. 65, 71 (1937). That result could not stand today in light of West Virginia State Bd. of Educ. v. Barnette, 319 U.S. 624 (1943). See Opinions of the Justices, 372 Mass. 874, 878 (1977). More recently, we have held that art. 2 was not violated when an employee was discharged because she declined to attend an employer-mandated, nondenominational seminar that used references to Scriptural texts to reinforce and illustrate its teachings. Kolodziej v. Smith, 412 Mass. 215 (1992). The opinion, however, dealt with the beliefs aspect of art. 2, not its worshiping aspects (id. at 220), and treated art. 2 in conjunction with parallel First Amendment considerations.
The three dissenting Justices agree with this conclusion because they decide that art. 46, § 1, absolutely protects the defendants’ right to decline to lease any premises to a cohabiting couple.

=== CASE 9741318 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:17.104682+00 ===

Liacos, C.J.
(concurring). I agree with the result reached by the court today. I agree also with the court’s analysis of the protections provided the people of this Commonwealth *335under art. 46, § 1, of the Amendments to the Massachusetts Constitution, including the court’s statement that under art. 46, “we prefer to adhere to the standards of earlier First Amendment jurisprudence, such as we applied in Alberts v. Devine, 395 Mass. 59, 74-75, cert, denied sub nom. Carroll v. Alberts, 474 U.S. 1013 (1985), and Attorney Gen. v. Bailey, 386 Mass. 367, 375, cert, denied sub nom. Bailey v. Bellotti, 459 U.S. 970 (1982).” Ante at 321. Our Constitution precedes and was, in large measure, the model for the Federal Constitution. In light of this court’s reaffirmation today of its desire to develop further our own constitutional jurisprudence, I cannot but wonder why the court and the dissenting Justices decline to examine more thoroughly the protections afforded by art. 2 of the Declaration of Rights of the Massachusetts Constitution and are unwilling to decide whether art. 2 reaches the activities of the defendants. Thus, I write separately to express my view on the scope of the protection afforded by art. 2.
In declining to address whether art. 2 reaches the conduct of the defendants, the court reasons that “[ajrticle 2 is important to this case only if it grants greater protection to the defendants than do either the First Amendment or the cognate free exercise of religion provision appearing in art. 46 . . . .” Ante at 322. This reasoning puzzles me, as it is unclear to me why art. 46 should be the starting point in an analysis of our Constitution’s protections for religious freedom. As the court notes, conduct falling within the scope of art. 2 and which does “not disturb the public peace, or obstruct others in their religious worship” is protected absolutely. Opinion of the Justices, 214 Mass. 599, 601 (1913). Nicholls v. Mayor & Sch. Comm. of Lynn, 297 Mass. 65, 70-71 (1937). Society of Jesus of New England v. Boston Landmarks Comm’n, 409 Mass. 38, 41-42 (1990). Accordingly, if the conduct of the defendants falls within art. 2’s scope and neither disturbs the public peace nor disturbs the religious worship of others, then the conduct would be protected absolutely.
*336Article 2 of the Declaration of Rights provides that “no subject shall be hurt, molested, or restrained, in his person, liberty, or estate, for worshipping GOD in the manner and season most agreeable to the dictates of his own conscience, or for his religious profession or sentiments', provided he doth not disturb the public peace, or obstruct others in their religious worship” (emphasis supplied).1 The language of art. 2 does not limit the mode or manner of worship to commonly recognized forms of worship.2 On the contrary, the language, “in the manner and season most agreeable to the dictates of [an individual’s] conscience” unambiguously indicates that a *337citizen is free to decide for himself or herself the method by which he or she will worship.3
Our case law supports the notion that this court should not attempt to decide whether a form of worship chosen by an individual based on his sincere religious beliefs is deserving of art. 2 protection. Under art. 2, all citizens are guaranteed “liberty unrestrained as to religious practices, subject only to the conditions that the public peace must not be disturbed nor others obstructed in their religious worship or the general obligations of good citizenship violated.” Opinion of the Justices, 214 Mass. 599, 601 (1913). Nicholls v. Mayor & Sch. Comm. of Lynn, 297 Mass. 65, 70 (1937). Society of Jesus of New England v. Boston Landmarks Comm’n, 409 Mass. 38, 41 (1990). Commonwealth v. Nissenbaum, 404 Mass. 575, 591 (1989) (Liacos, J., dissenting). See Nissenbaum, supra at 582 n.5 (“Any person may worship in the manner he thinks most agreeable to the Deity”), quoting The Popular Sources of Political Authority, Documents of the Massachusetts Constitution of 1780, at 32-33 (O. and M. Handlin, eds. 1966); Society of Jesus, supra at 41 (“The framers and ratifiers understood the right freely to exercise one’s religion to be an uncompromising principle”); id. at 41-42 (“great object . . . was ‘to secure and establish the most perfect and entire freedom of opinion, as to tenets of religion, and as to the choice of the mode of worship’ ”), quoting Adams v. Howe, 14 Mass. 340, 346 (1817).
The decision by an individual as to what form of religious worship constitutes an appropriate vehicle by which to pay homage to a chosen object of that worship can hardly be characterized as anything but a religious belief or sentiment, for it is religious belief which informs, and serves as the *338foundation for, that choice. Accordingly, if this or any court purports to consider whether a practice is truly a form of worship, then in essence the court is inquiring into the validity of a religious belief. No civil court, however, may make such an inquiry. Murphy v. I.S.K.Con. of New England, Inc., 409 Mass. 842, 854, cert, denied, 502 U.S. 865 (1991), quoting Madsen v. Erwin, 395 Mass. 715, 722 (1985). Lewis v. Area II Homecare for Senior Citizens, Inc., 397 Mass. 761, 772 (1986). Alberts v. Devine, 395 Mass. 59, 72 (1985), and cases cited. See Norwood Hosp. v. Munoz, 409 Mass. 116, 124-125 n.5 (1991).4
The court states that this case does not involve “any restraint on the defendants’ religious professions or sentiments” and therefore, the court concludes, art. 2’s protection of “religious profession or sentiments” is not implicated in this case. Ante at 332. The court gives no reason for this conclusion. Thus, the court continues, if art. 2 is applicable at all, only the provision of art. 2 which protects “worshipping” is called into play in this case. I cannot agree. Contrary to the court’s conclusion, which implicitly defines “religious profession or sentiments,” I believe that, in the circumstances of this case, the protection in art. 2 for “religious profession or sentiments” is relevant here.5 While the defendants have ad*339mitted that they in fact have refused in the past to rent to unmarried, cohabiting couples and would have refused to rent to Lattanzi and Tarail, assuming that they would have cohabited, the event immediately precipitating this action was one telephone call made by Tarail.6 The content of the conversation which took place was disputed, but the judge found that Paul Desilets imparted to Tarail that he would not rent to unmarried cohabiters because to do so violated his religion. The conversation then ended without Tarail pressing the matter further.
As I see it, then, the action of the defendant on which this suit was founded was his profession of his religious belief that cohabitation of unmarried persons is a sin.7 Therefore, the facts of this case also implicate the protection afforded to the defendants’ “religious profession or sentiments.” I would not dispose of this issue, as the court does without analysis, ante at 332, by reciting that the protection in art. 2 for religious profession or sentiments is not involved in this case.
In my opinion art. 2 covers the actions of the defendants. As a result, their conduct is deserving of art. 2 protection unless it disturbs the public peace. See Commonwealth v. Orlando, 371 Mass. 732, 734-735 (1977) (disturbance of *340public peace occurs when conduct “tends to annoy all good citizens and does in fact annoy anyone present not favoring it”); Nissenbaum, supra at 592 (Liacos, J., dissenting) (conduct disturbs public peace when it is unreasonably disruptive, and second, did in fact infringe someone’s right to be undisturbed). Although the judge found that there was no disturbance of the public peace, it does not seem to me that the issue was addressed completely by the parties below. I would remand this case for further proceedings and a determination whether the defendants’ actions disturbed the public peace. See Nissenbaum, supra at 591-593 (Liacos, J., dissenting).8 If the judge determines that the defendants’ conduct did disturb the public peace,9 the judge should then balance the State’s interest in maintaining the public peace which was disturbed against the defendants’ rights under art. 2. Id. at 581-583 (court notes that balancing of competing interests is required under art. 2 when disturbance of public peace is found, and court then notes that it performed such a balancing in that case).
The full text of art. 2 provides: “It is the right as well as the duty of all men in society, publicly, and at stated seasons to worship the SUPREME BEING, the great Creator and Preserver of the universe. And no subject shall be hurt, molested, or restrained, in his person, liberty, or estate, for worshipping GOD in the manner and season most agreeable to the dictates of his own conscience, or for his religious profession or sentiments; provided he doth not disturb the public peace, or obstruct others in their religious worship.”
The author of the court’s opinion wrote separately in Commonwealth v. Nissenbaum, 404 Mass. 575, 584 n.l (1989) (Wilkins, J., concurring), that “conduct protected by art. 2 must be conduct commonly regarded as religious conduct.” I note that this statement in Justice Wilkins’s concurrence in Nissenbaum was made despite his position that the constitutional issues in that case need not be addressed, Nissenbaum, supra at 588 n.l (Liacos, J., dissenting), and was made without citation of authority for that proposition. Id. at 584 n.l (Wilkins, J., concurring).
I cannot agree that particular conduct will not be recognized as worship by this court merely because that conduct is not within the conception of worship espoused by a majority of the Justices of this court, past or present. Nor can I agree that conduct must be “commonly regarded as religious conduct” for it to fall within the scope and protection of art. 2 (emphasis supplied). These propositions suggest that only those forms of worship that are acceptable in the opinion of the majority of society will receive consideration under art. 2. In my view, these propositions are contrary to the essence of art. 2, as shown in both the plain language of that provision and in our case law interpreting it.
I do not suggest that an individual may assert any conduct as worship and then be permitted to practice that conduct unchecked. Article 2 itself prohibits an individual from “disturbing] the public peace, or obstructing] others in their religious worship.” Furthermore, an individual must believe sincerely that his conduct is worship, and a court permissibly may examine the sincerity of that belief. See United States v. Ballard, 322 U.S. 781 (1944).
The dictionary definition of “worship” lends to this argument. The verb “worship” means “to honor or reverence as a divine being or supernatural power” or “to perform . . . worship.” The noun “worship” means the “reverence or veneration tendered a divine being or supernatural power.” Webster’s Third New Int’l Dictionary 2637 (1993). Thus, an act of worship could be any act by which a person, in his belief, shows honor or reverence to the object of his worship.
Furthermore, it is not relevant whether the belief is shared by an organized sect or church, or, for that matter, by any other person. See Kolodziej v. Smith, 412 Mass. 215, 220 (1992).
Although the court in Nicholls v. Mayor & Sch. Comm. of Lynn, 297 Mass. 65, 70 (1937), noted that the State Constitution “guarantees ‘absolute freedom as to religious belief and liberty unrestrained as to religious practice,’ ” it went on to conclude that requiring the plaintiff to recite the pledge of allegiance to the flag did not violate that plaintiff’s religious freedom even though his religious beliefs required that he not salute the flag. Id. at 71-73. The court, in effect, interpreted the meaning of the plaintiff’s religious beliefs. I doubt whether the inquiry performed by the court in Nicholls would be permissible today, and in any event, I do not agree with the court’s conclusion in that case.
This court has not had occasion to discuss the meaning of the terms “profession” or “sentiment” as used in art. 2. The common meanings of those words are instructive, however. “Profession,” in the sense it is used in art. 2, is “an act of openly declaring or publicly claiming a belief, faith, or opinion; an avowed statement or expression of intention or purpose.” Web*339ster’s Third New Int’l Dictionary 1811 (1993). A “sentiment” is “an attitude, thought, or judgment permeated or prompted by feeling” or “a specific view or notion.” Id. at 2069. Under the plain meaning of these words, it is clear that, in the telephone conversation giving rise to this action, the defendant professed his religious sentiment.
The record suggests that Lattanzi also may have contacted one of the defendants or the wife of one of the defendants to inquire about an apartment and was told of the policy against renting to unmarried, cohabiting couples.
It is unfortunate that the court unnecessarily reaches out in dictum, to describe G. L. c. 272, § 18 (1992 ed.), which makes fornication a crime, as being a statute of “doubtful constitutionality.” Ante at 328-329. Similar claims of unconstitutionality were made — and rejected — as to the crime of adultery (G. L. c. 272, § 14). See Commonwealth v. Stowell, 389 Mass. 171, 173 (1983). Stowell is an opinion in which the author of the court’s opinion in the case at bar joined. One need not address the constitutional issue as to G. L. c. 272, § 18, to conclude that the Legislature has expressed a public policy which the defendants, for religious reasons, share.
On this record, I could not conclude that the public peace was disturbed merely because a statute allegedly was violated. See Nissenbaum, supra at 591-593 (Liacos, J., dissenting). More importantly, the court’s suggestion that the public peace was disturbed by virtue of a violation of a State statute is based on faulty logic. Our inquiry is whether the application of the statute in this case violates the religious rights of the defendants. If their rights would be violated unconstitutionally by application of the statute to their conduct, then the statute could not be applied to their conduct and, as a result, there would be no violation of the statute which could be the basis for finding a disturbance of the public peace. The underlying conduct, however, could be examined in the manner I outlined, id. at 592.
There is nothing at all in the record which would suggest that the defendants’ conduct interfered with someone else’s worship.

=== CASE 9741319 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:17.109178+00 ===

O’Connor, J.
(dissenting, with whom Nolan and Lynch, JJ., join). In keeping with their sincerely held religious beliefs, the defendants consider an unmarried couple’s living together in a sexual relationship to be an offense against God. Also in keeping with their sincerely held religious beliefs, the *341defendants consider enabling or assisting another in the commission of an offense against God to be itself an offense against Him. Responding to those religious convictions, and out of respect for the will of God, the defendants refused to rent an apartment to an unmarried couple living in a sexual relationship (cohabiting couple). The court now concludes that an evidentiary hearing — a trial — is required before a determination can be made concerning whether the defendants may lawfully be forced to choose between violating their religiously informed consciences or withdrawing from their commercial endeavors. I disagree. No combination of facts that might be found after a trial would legally justify the imposition of such a choice. I would affirm the summary judgment for the defendants.
I agree that,'as applied to this case, (1) art. 46, § 1, of the Amendments to the State Constitution provides at least as much protection to the free exercise of religion as does art. 2 of the Massachusetts Declaration of Rights and the First Amendment to the United States Constitution; (2) the court should reach its own conclusions on the scope of the protections of art. 46, § 1; and (3) in interpreting art. 46, § 1, the court should use the balancing test that the Supreme Court established in Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406 U.S. 205, 215-229 (1972), Sherbert v. Verner, 374 U.S. 388, 406-409 (1963), and subsequent opinions.
Because the defendants’ right to the free exercise of their religion is substantially burdened by the operation of G. L. c. 15IB, § 4 (6), ante at 324, a matter about which none of the Justices seems to disagree, the Commonwealth would be required at trial to prove that “it has an interest sufficiently compelling to justify that burden.” Ante at 322. In reviewing the entry of summary judgment for the defendants, then, the question before the court is whether the defendants have demonstrated “by reference to material described in Mass. R. Civ. P. 56 (c), unmet by countervailing materials, that the [Commonwealth, which will have the burden of proof at trial], has no reasonable expectation of proving an essential element of [its] case.” Kourouvacilis v. General Motors *342Corp., 410 Mass. 706, 716 (1991). In my view, the defendants have succeeded in that regard. It is clear from the summary judgment materials that the Commonwealth can have no reasonable expectation of sustaining its burden of proving at trial an essential element of its case, which is that the Commonwealth has an interest in ensuring the availability of rental housing for unmarried couples with a sexual relationship — a relationship prohibited by G. L. c. 272, § 18 (1992 ed.) — that outweighs the defendants’ interest in conforming their conduct to the will of God without State-imposed penalty.
“[Mjarital status discrimination is not as intense a State concern as is discrimination based on certain other classifications.” Ante at 327. In contrast, the right to free exercise of religion is- a fundamental right. Thus, the Commonwealth’s interest in accommodating cohabitation cannot possibly outweigh the defendants’ interest in conforming their conduct to their religious conviction without penalty, regardless of whether, after a trial, a fact finder might be satisfied that “the rental housing policies of people such as the defendants can [not] be accommodated, at least in the Turners Falls (Montague) area, without significantly impeding the availability of rental housing for people who are cohabiting or wish to cohabit.” Ante at 329. Even if “discrimination of the sort challenged here [were to] present a significant housing problem if a large percentage of units [were to be] unavailable to cohabitants,” ante at 329, that is, even if discrimination of the sort challenged here were to make it difficult or impossible for unmarried couples to cohabit in Turners Falls or elsewhere, neither the court nor the Legislature can constitutionally give preference or priority to a so-called “right” of cohabitation over the moral and other fundamental values recognized in, and promoted by, the Massachusetts Constitution’s clearly articulated guarantees of the free exercise of religion.
The court states that “[t]here are factual circumstances that bear on the question [balancing of the State’s and the defendants’ interests], both as to the existence of a general *343State interest in the elimination of discrimination in housing based on marital status and as to the existence of a particularized State interest in the Turners Falls area. Uniformity of enforcement of the statute may be shown to be the least restrictive means for the practical and efficient operation of the antidiscrimination law.” Ante at 331. The court gives no hint of what circumstances could be shown that would permit a reasonable inference that the Commonwealth’s interest in eliminating discrimination in housing based on marital status can only be served by punishing landlords for holding fast to the commitments dictated by their religious beliefs. I can envision no such circumstances. This case is not even remotely similar to Bob Jones Univ. v. United States, 461 U.S. 574 (1983) (eradication of racial discrimination in education is compelling State interest, superseding any free exercise right of petitioners) or United States v. Lee, 455 U.S. 252 (1982) (overriding interest in operation of national social security system is compelling) cited by Justice Wilkins. Ante at 330.
The court can safely say, and should hold, that it is clear from the submissions in this case that the Commonwealth has no reasonable expectation of proving an essential element of its case. The court should affirm summary judgment for the defendants. If the Massachusetts Constitution is to be effectively amended by giving rights of cohabitation preferred status over an individual’s right to live according to his or her religiously-informed conscience, a result I do not recommend, that amendment should be achieved by lawful procedures for constitutional amendment, not by judicial fiat.

=== CASE 2226852 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:20.918304+00 ===

305 N.W.2d 798 (1981)
STATE of Minnesota, Respondent,
v.
Larry Lee SMITH, Appellant.
No. 51562.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
May 22, 1981.
C. Paul Jones, Public Defender and Robert J. Streitz, Asst. Public Defender, Minneapolis, for appellant.
Warren Spannaus, Atty. Gen., St. Paul, Thomas L. Johnson, County Atty., Vernon E. Bergstrom, Chief, Appellate Section, Michael McGlennen, Thomas A. Weist and Anne E. Peek, Asst. County Attys., Minneapolis, for respondent.
Considered and decided by the court en banc without oral argument.
AMDAHL, Justice.
Defendant was found guilty by a district court jury of charges of third-degree murder and simple robbery. Minn.Stat. §§ 609.195(2) and 609.24 (1980). The conduct forming the basis of the convictions consisted of defendant's binding and gagging the victim in order to silence her and prevent her from interfering with his taking and removing of items from her residence. The victim died as the result of asphyxiation caused by the gagging. The trial court sentenced defendant to a prison term of 25 years for the murder. On this appeal from judgment of conviction defendant contends that he should be given a new trial because certain incriminating evidence which was admitted at his trial was obtained in violation of his constitutional rights. Specifically, defendant raises issues concerning (1) the applicability of Payton v. New York, 455 U.S. 573, 100 S. Ct. 1371, 63 L. Ed. 2d 639 (1980), to his warrantless arrest, the legality of which defendant did not challenge in the trial court and (2) the voluntariness of defendant's confession, an issue which defendant did raise in the trial court. We affirm.
1. In Payton v. New York, the United States Supreme Court held that the fourth amendment prohibits police, absent exigent circumstances or consent, from making a warrantless entry  that is, crossing the threshold  into a suspect's residence in order to make a felony arrest. We do *799 not believe that Payton will or should be given retroactive application. For full discussion of the cases and relevant principles, see 3 W. LaFave, Search and Seizure § 11.5(a) (1978). The arrest in this case antedated Payton and therefore, under the rule of nonretroactivity, the Payton rule would have no application even if defendant had objected to his warrantless arrest at trial, something he failed to do. 3 W. LaFave, Search and Seizure § 11.5(b) (1978).
2. We address defendant's other contention, that his confession was involuntary, since he raised that issue in the trial court. The applicable principles are expressed in State v. Linder, 268 N.W.2d 734 (Minn.1978), and require no repetition here. We have independently determined, on the basis of the facts found by the trial court, that defendant's confession was voluntary and that the trial court therefore properly denied the motion to suppress on this ground.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 2226854 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:20.972111+00 ===

305 N.W.2d 803 (1981)
208 Neb. 785
William P. WINTER, Jr., Appellant,
v.
Harry (Pete) PETERSON, Director of the Department of Motor Vehicles, State of Nebraska, Appellee.
No. 43328.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
May 15, 1981.
*805 Greg C. Harris of Munro & Munro, P. C., Kearney, for appellant.
Paul L. Douglas, Atty. Gen., and Linda A. Akers, Asst. Atty. Gen., Lincoln, for appellee.
Heard before BOSLAUGH, McCOWN, CLINTON, and BRODKEY, JJ., and MARTIN, District Judge.
McCOWN, Justice.
The appellant appeals from a judgment of the District Court for Buffalo County affirming an order of the Director of the Department of Motor Vehicles revoking the appellant's driver's license for 6 months under the implied consent law.
The facts in this case were stipulated and are not in dispute. An officer of the Kearney Police Department placed the appellant under arrest at approximately 1:45 a. m., November 9, 1978, for the offense of driving while under the influence of alcohol. The officer transported the appellant directly to the Kearney police station for the purpose of having the appellant submit to a breath test. Upon arrival at the Kearney police station at approximately 1:50 a. m., the appellant was read the implied consent form and the officer asked the appellant to submit to a Breathalyzer test. The consent form embodied the information required under the implied consent law but did not contain Miranda warnings, nor any reference to any right to counsel. The appellant did not submit to the test at that time but asked permission to call his attorney. Appellant's attorney arrived at the police station shortly thereafter and, after a delay of 5 or 10 minutes, conferred with the appellant, and the appellant then requested that the test be administered and stated that he would sign the implied consent form. The officer then refused to give the test for the reason that the appellant had already refused. It was then 2:25 a. m.
It was further stipulated that the amount of alcohol metabolized by the appellant during the 35-minute waiting time was not more than .009 of 1 percent.
The District Court found that the appellant refused to take the test when requested and that the request was properly made with the required warnings given to the appellant as to the consequences of refusing to submit. The District Court affirmed the order of revocation and this appeal followed. We affirm the judgment of the District Court.
The appellant rests his contentions here on the case of Sedlacek v. Pearson, 204 Neb. 625, 284 N.W.2d 556 (1979). The facts in that case are essentially the same as the facts in this case up to the point at which the driver, after a conditional refusal and a delay to consult counsel, later requested that the test be administered. In Sedlacek the test was administered on the second occasion and Sedlacek was then charged with driving while under the influence of alcohol based on the results of the test, and also with refusal to submit to a test under the implied consent law. This court held that in a proceeding before the Director of the Department of Motor Vehicles under the implied consent law, where the evidence shows that a test was in fact performed which established a blood alcohol content in excess of that prescribed by statute, the sanction prescribed by the statute for refusal to consent to the test should not be imposed. Sedlacek recognized that the preliminary request to consult with a lawyer constituted a conditional refusal to submit to the test, although it recognized the fact that a subsequent request by the driver to take the test might be granted by the police and the test given. Sedlacek does not apply to a case in which no test was given.
*806 This court has consistently recognized that under the Nebraska implied consent statutes a driver is not entitled to consult with a lawyer prior to taking a test, nor is the test required to be delayed by a request of an arrested motorist that he be permitted to contact a lawyer. See, Stevenson v. Sullivan, 190 Neb. 295, 207 N.W.2d 680 (1973); Wiseman v. Sullivan, 190 Neb. 724, 211 N.W.2d 906 (1973).
A single request to submit to a test is sufficient. There is no requirement that a second request be made if the person arrested refuses to submit to the test. Heffernan v. Kissack, 192 Neb. 637, 223 N.W.2d 486 (1974).
A conditional or qualified refusal to take a test to determine the alcohol content of body fluids under the implied consent law is not sanctioned by the act and such refusal is a refusal to submit to the test within the meaning of the act. Wohlgemuth v. Pearson, 204 Neb. 687, 285 N.W.2d 102 (1979).
A refusal to submit to a chemical test occurs within the meaning of the implied consent law when the licensee, after being asked to submit to a test, so conducts himself as to justify a reasonable person in the requesting officer's position in believing that the licensee understood that he was asked to submit to a test and manifested an unwillingness to take it. Wohlgemuth v. Pearson, supra.
To constitute a refusal to submit to a chemical test required under the implied consent statute, the only understanding required by the licensee is an understanding that he has been asked to take a test. It is no defense to refusal that he does not understand the consequences of refusal or is not able to make a reasoned judgment as to what course of action to take. Wohlgemuth v. Pearson, supra.
In the case at bar the appellant's request to consult with an attorney constituted a qualified or conditional refusal to take the test, and the police officer, the Director of the Department of Motor Vehicles, and the District Court all found that there was a refusal to take the test. The only issue here is whether there was a refusal to take the test, and the issue of possible prejudice to the State from the delay is immaterial.
The judgment of the District Court was correct and is affirmed.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 2226858 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:21.054929+00 ===

636 N.E.2d 902 (1994)
264 Ill. App. 3d 310
201 Ill. Dec. 470
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Peter WEBER, Jr., Defendant-Appellant.
No. 1-90-3189.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, First Division.
May 31, 1994.
*903 Office of the State Appellate Defender, Chicago (Michael Pelletier and Martin Carlson, of counsel), David S. Mejia, Oak Park, for defendant-appellant.
Office of State's Atty., Jack O'Malley, Chicago (Renee Goldfarb and Kenneth T. McCurry, Assistant State's Attys., of counsel), for plaintiff-appellee.
Justice MANNING delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant Peter Weber was charged by indictment with first degree murder and concealment of a homicidal death. (720 ILCS 5/9-1, 5/9-3.1 (West 1992).) Following a jury trial, he was found guilty of both offenses and sentenced to twenty five (25) years and five (5) years, respectively, to be served consecutively. On appeal defendant challenges the legal sufficiency of the indictment. Additionally, he raises two other issues: whether the prosecutor's failure to disclose the identity of an expert obtained seven months before trial, but not disclosed until rebuttal, should have resulted in a bar of that expert's testimony and whether the defendant's right to confrontation and cross-examination was violated *904 where the trial court allowed into evidence statements made by the victim to third persons prior to her death. For the reasons which follow, we affirm.
The record reveals that on the afternoon of October 28, 1988, the victim, Marie Pompilio, earlier reported as missing, was discovered in an alley in Skokie, Illinois. Her body was partially clad and lying face down in dense bushes. Her head was covered by a blood-soaked tee shirt and she had a large gaping incise wound to the neck.
In the early morning hours of October 28, 1988, defendant was brought into the Skokie Police Department and questioned. He eventually gave a full statement and repeated it several times. In essence, defendant stated that he and Marie argued on the evening of October 27, 1988. While riding around in his car, she first told him she wanted to date other people. He responded to her that if that was the case, he would not continue to visit her because he did not wish to have that type of relationship. He stated that she then placed her hands on his shoulder and tried to reason with him to agree with having that type of relationship. He pushed her hands from his shoulder, and she began hitting him, scratching him and pulling his hair. In an effort to defend himself from her violent behavior, he placed his hands around her throat and pulled her down onto the seat. He stopped choking her when she became limp and her arms fell to her side. After suddenly realizing that she did not appear to be breathing, he drove Marie into an alley, partially disrobed her and cut her throat with his pocket knife in an effort to cover up the incident.
Defendant was first indicted on November 17, 1988, for "having stabbed and killed Marie Pompilio with a knife." Defendant filed a written motion to dismiss the indictment on the grounds that the State refused to inform the Grand Jury that he never stabbed Marie while she was alive. Prior to the court ruling on the motion, the State Nolle Prossed the original indictment and obtained a second indictment. The second indictment alleged in count one that "... without lawful justification intentionally and knowingly strangled and killed Marie Pompilio with a knife" and in count two that ".... without lawful justification strangled and killed Marie Pompilio knowing such acts created a strong probability of death or great bodily harm to Marie Pompilio." Defendant was arraigned on the second indictment and all motions and orders related to the first indictment were transferred to the second indictment.
On the day the jury trial commenced, the State amended its list of witnesses. However, that amendment did not include the name of Dr. Cleveland. During the State's case-in-chief, several law enforcement personnel testified about their respective roles in the investigation into Marie's murder. Dr. Robert Stein, Chief Medical Examiner of Cook County and a forensic pathologist, who had performed an autopsy on the deceased, testified as to the cause of death. He admitted that he had initially concluded that the knife wounds were the cause of death. However, he stated that after reviewing the police reports, the defendant's statements and after re-examining Marie's clothes, he changed his opinion as to the cause of death and accordingly, amended the death certificate. He changed the cause of death to "manual strangulation in association with an incised wound to the neck."
Marie's friends and her roommate testified about Marie's relationship with the defendant. Heather Dickinson testified that she remembered how Marie and defendant celebrated the day of the month they met with cards and gifts. Marie also had told Heather that she wanted to break up with defendant because she was feeling trapped and overly protected. Marie's roommate, Amanda, testified that defendant visited Marie often and would buy presents, balloons and candy. On the day of the murder, Amanda saw defendant when he arrived on the campus with a pumpkin and a small knife to carve it. She saw him later that evening at which time defendant gave her Marie's keys and told her that he and Marie had an argument and that Marie had gotten out of the car.
Marie's parents, her other relatives and friends, as well as the campus police, testified about their search for her. The campus policeman also stated that he observed scratches on defendant's hands.
*905 The defendant then took the witness stand and testified in his own behalf. He was an excellent student, an athlete and enjoyed a close relationship with his family. He and Marie had met in their senior year of high school and started dating regularly in February of 1988. They were together almost every day and saw each other three or four times a week including the weekends, except for the time during the summer of 1988 in which he served in the U.S. Air Force. Through the week of the incident, their relationship had not changed. Defendant also described what occurred on October 27 and stated that they had an argument and that Marie had attacked him. Defendant explained that he was trying to protect himself and not hurt Marie. After he "tried to push her away and started squeezing" her, he "stopped when her arms fell to her side." He thought Marie was angry and ignoring him when she did not respond to her name. However, once he stopped the car, he felt for her breath but did not feel anything. Defendant believed Marie was dead and because he was scared he took her body to an alley and left her there. He remembered "seeing a cut on her neck ... seeing the knife"; however, he said it was an accident.
Dr. Larry Blum testified as defendant's expert witness. He stated that he examined the physical evidence, considered the autopsy report, the scene and the surrounding circumstances. He concluded that Marie's cause of death was manual strangulation and that the incision wounds to the neck were post-mortem.
On the last day of trial, the State tendered the vitae of Dr. Frank Cleveland, an out-of-state forensic expert. The defense objected to his testimony on the grounds of surprise, prejudice and violation of the discovery rules, specifically Supreme Court Rule 220 and Rule 412. The State responded that Supreme Court Rule 220 governs discovery in civil proceedings but does not apply to criminal trials. Over the defendant's objection, the trial court allowed Dr. Cleveland to testify as a rebuttal witness. He opined that death was caused by external hemorrhage due to incise wounds of the neck. However, the bruises were made anti-mortem, before Marie died. Following closing arguments and instructions, the jury's deliberations resulted in guilty verdicts.
Defendant initially contends that the indictment is insufficient and fails to give him reasonable notice of the charge. He argues that the indictment is phrased disjunctively because it states he committed first degree murder in two separate, distinct ways exclusive of one anotherby strangulation and by knife incision wound to the throat.
Our legislature has set forth the requirements for the form of a charging document in 725 ILCS 5/111-3 (West 1992). That section provides that a charge must: (1) state the name of the offense; (2) cite the statutory provision allegedly violated; (3) set forth the nature and elements of the offense charged; (4) state the date and county of the offense; and (5) state the name of the accused. (725 ILCS 5/111-3 (West 1992); People v. Brouder (1988), 168 Ill.App.3d 938, 942, 119 Ill. Dec. 632, 523 N.E.2d 100.) The purpose of an indictment is to advise the accused of the nature of the charge so that he is adequately able to prepare his own defense. (People v. Godina (1991), 223 Ill.App.3d 205, 216, 165 Ill. Dec. 344, 584 N.E.2d 523.) In order to vitiate a conviction based on a faulty indictment, there must be a variance between the allegations in the charging instrument and the proof at trial. The variance must be material and of such character as to mislead the defendant in preparing his defense or expose him to double jeopardy. (People v. Davis (1980), 82 Ill. 2d 534, 45 Ill. Dec. 935, 413 N.E.2d 413.) If a defendant is sufficiently advised of the charges filed against him, the convictions may be sustained. (People v. Alexander (1982), 93 Ill. 2d 73, 66 Ill. Dec. 326, 442 N.E.2d 887.) When the sufficiency of an indictment has been challenged at trial, the standard of review is whether the indictment states the nature of the offense and adequately sets forth each of the elements of that offense. People v. Young (1991), 220 Ill.App.3d 488, 492, 163 Ill. Dec. 290, 581 N.E.2d 241.
In perusing the indictment filed in this case, we find that it complies with all of the foregoing requirements. The first count charges that defendant "strangled and killed *906 Marie Pompilio with a knife." This language did not require the jury to determine whether the victim died as a result of strangulation or knife wound. Further, the evidence supports the charge. Dr. Stein testified that death was caused by strangulation "in association with incised wound of the neck." The cause of death stated in count two is strangulation.
Moreover, even assuming arguendo that we were to find that cause of death is disjunctively phrased, there is no fatal defect in the indictment. In People v. Coleman (1971), 49 Ill. 2d 565, 276 N.E.2d 721, defendant was charged with the murder of his wife and the original indictment charged murder by stabbing with a knife. (Coleman, 49 Ill.2d at 570, 276 N.E.2d 721.) However, the prosecution amended the indictment to charge that the defendant murdered his wife by stabbing and/or asphy sixating her by use of hands, bed sheet or blanket. On review, the Illinois Supreme Court held the amendment proper because the allegation of the means used to cause death was not an essential part of the indictment. The court found that the language adequately informed the defendant of the charge against him.
Defendant argues that the manner of pleading separate and independent acts in a single count was contradictory, confusing and lacked certainty. He cites People v. Heard (1970), 47 Ill. 2d 501, 266 N.E.2d 340 in support of his argument. However, unlike the Heard case, the indictment in the present case contains no disjunctive allegations in either of the counts at issue. Secondly, the first degree murder statute, unlike the gambling statute involved in Heard, is not one which "names disparate and alternative acts, any one of which will constitute the offense." To the extent any disjunctive allegations exist, they pertain to the nonessential particulars of the offense, rather than a naming of alternative acts, any one of which constituted the offense of murder. Accord, People v. Baugh (1986), 145 Ill.App.3d 133, 99 Ill. Dec. 241, 495 N.E.2d 688; People v. Lewis (1973), 14 Ill.App.3d 237, 240, 302 N.E.2d 157.
Defendant's next contention is that the trial court abused its discretion in allowing the testimony of rebuttal expert witness Dr. Cleveland. The State counters that it did not violate the discovery rules because the witness was disclosed when the prosecution formed the intent to call the witness. The law regarding disclosure of rebuttal witnesses in criminal cases is well settled. Until the prosecutor forms the intent to call the witness, disclosure is not required. (People v. Fox (1988), 177 Ill.App.3d 602, 611, 126 Ill. Dec. 787, 532 N.E.2d 472.) This court has held that "[b]ecause the State may not know if a witness will be called in rebuttal until the defense testimony is heard, the State need not inform the defense of its intention to call a rebuttal witness until that intention is formed." (See, e.g., People v. Jackson (1990), 198 Ill.App.3d 831, 848, 145 Ill. Dec. 1, 556 N.E.2d 619.) When the State fails to make timely disclosure of a rebuttal witness, the trial court is not required to exclude the rebuttal witness' testimony. (People v. Bock (1993), 242 Ill.App.3d 1056, 1068, 183 Ill. Dec. 525, 611 N.E.2d 1173.) In Bock, defendant objected to the State's decision to call a rebuttal witness who was identified on the morning of the trial. Defendant alleged that because the witness was disclosed on the day of the trial he had not had an opportunity to do any investigation. However, defendant did not request a continuance and the court allowed the witness to testify. On appeal the appellate court held that the defendant was not prejudiced by the testimony of the rebuttal witness. (Bock, Ill.App.3d at 1069, 183 Ill. Dec. 525, 611 N.E.2d 1173.) The court reasoned that defendant had an opportunity to interview the rebuttal witness, failed to request a continuance to conduct further investigation and cross-examined the witness during trial.
In the present case, the State argues that the tactical decision to call Dr. Cleveland as a witness depended on the content and effect of defense witness, Dr. Blum's testimony. Moreover, defendant's reliance on Supreme Court Rule 220 is misplaced. Criminal discovery is governed by Supreme Court Rule 412 (137 Ill.2d R. 412(a)(ii)). Supreme Court Rule 412(a)(ii) provides in pertinent part:
"(a) except as is otherwise provided in these rules as to matters not subjected to *907 disclosure and protection orders, the State shall, upon written motion of defense counsel, disclose to defense counsel the following material and information within its possession or control: (ii) any written or recorded statements and the substance of any oral statements made by the accused * * * and a list of witnesses to the making and acknowledgment of such statements. "Supreme Court Rule 412(a)(ii) (137 Ill.2d R. 412(a)(ii). Additionally, counsel was given and took advantage of the opportunity to interview Dr. Cleveland before he testified. Counsel then proceeded to trial without requesting a continuance for further investigation. Finally, even assuming a discovery violation occurred, the error is harmless and does not mandate a new trial. (See, e.g., People v. Cisewski (1987), 118 Ill. 2d 163, 175, 113 Ill. Dec. 58, 514 N.E.2d 970.) This was not a close case and the evidence of murder was overwhelming. Whether defendant choked the victim to death or killed her by cutting her throat, the evidence reveals that defendant murdered Marie, either intentionally or by an act which he knew or should have known created a strong probability of death or great bodily harm. The elements of murder which must be established are: the proof of death and the proof of a criminal agency causing death. (People v. Lopes (1974), 17 Ill.App.3d 986, 990, 309 N.E.2d 108.) Both of these must be established by evidence beyond a reasonable doubt. The evidence must show that defendant's act was a contributing cause to a death such that the death did not result from a source unconnected with the defendant's act. (People v. Dent (1992), 230 Ill.App.3d 238, 171 Ill. Dec. 890, 595 N.E.2d 18.) Among the factors to be considered in determining whether a new trial is warranted where a determination has been made that Rule 412 has been violated are: the closeness of the evidence, the strength of the undisclosed evidence, and the likelihood that prior notice could have helped the defense discredit the evidence. People v. Weaver (1982), 92 Ill. 2d 545, 559, 65 Ill. Dec. 944, 442 N.E.2d 255.
Here, the defendant has not demonstrated to this court how any further investigation of the rebuttal witness would have altered his trial strategy and possibly changed the outcome of this case. Exclusion of the evidence is within the sound discretion of the trial court and will be reversed only on a showing of prejudice to the defendant. (People v. Fauntleroy (1991), 224 Ill.App.3d 140, 162, 166 Ill. Dec. 334, 586 N.E.2d 292.) For the foregoing reasons, we cannot say that the trial court abused its discretion in allowing Dr. Cleveland's rebuttal testimony.
Finally, defendant contends that the trial court improperly allowed in evidence the victim's hearsay statements in violation of his confrontation rights. The State responds that the trial court correctly allowed such testimony in because it was indicative of the victim's state of mind prior to her death and was relevant to establish that the victim carried out her intention to tell defendant of her change of heart regarding the relationship, to establish the relationship between the victim and the defendant, and to rebut the defense of accident.
Here, Marie's statements to others that she intended to tell defendant that she wanted to date other people were properly admitted to show that she made such statements to him. (See, e.g., People v. Reddock (1973), 13 Ill.App.3d 296, 300 N.E.2d 31; see also People v. Adams (1981), 102 Ill.App.3d 1129, 58 Ill. Dec. 325, 430 N.E.2d 267.) Further, the testimony in this case was relevant to dispute defendant's statements that there had been no change in the relationship. (Accord, People v. Lang (1982), 106 Ill.App.3d 808, 62 Ill. Dec. 510, 436 N.E.2d 260.) The State is permitted to bolster its case with corroborative evidence to the extent such evidence is otherwise relevant, and the possible prejudice of any unnecessary accumulation of repetitive testimony is a matter for the discretion of the trial court. (People v. Frazier (1984), 129 Ill.App.3d 704, 711, 84 Ill. Dec. 787, 472 N.E.2d 1183.) Moreover, even if the statements were improper, any error was harmless since the defendant himself testified and told police that Marie said she wanted to date others. This statement or one that she wanted to break up with defendant both were sufficient to generate an altercation between the two and to establish a motive for the murder. Accordingly, evidence *908 of the victim's statements was merely cumulative and any error was harmless. People v. Griffin (1988), 175 Ill.App.3d 111, 118, 124 Ill. Dec. 746, 529 N.E.2d 727.
Accordingly, the judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
Affirmed.
BUCKLEY and O'CONNOR, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2226860 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:21.11137+00 ===

636 N.E.2d 616 (1993)
263 Ill. App. 3d 1010
201 Ill. Dec. 184
Zack STAMP, Director of Insurance for the State of Illinois, as Liquidator of Pine Top Insurance Company, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
Ralph E. BATASTINI, W. Carroll Bumpers, Milton D. Faber, James R. Grimm, Frank L. Nageotte, David A. Nielsen, Alex R. Seith, and John W. Teets, Defendants-Appellees (Touche Ross & Co., et al., Defendants).
No. 1-89-3214.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Fifth Division.
February 26, 1993.
Rehearing Denied March 26, 1993.
*618 Sidley & Austin, James R. Stinson, Richard J. O'Brien Robert T. Biskup (Garry L. Smith, Chief Gen. Counsel, Office of the Sp. Deputy, of counsel), for plaintiff-appellant.
Fox and Grove, Chicago (Shayle P. Fox, Wm. Henry Barrett, Joshua D. Holleb, of counsel), for defendants-appellees.
Presiding Justice GORDON delivered the opinion of the court.[*]
Plaintiff, as Director of Insurance for the State of Illinois and as Liquidator of Pine Top Insurance Company ("Pine Top"), appeals from the trial court's dismissal under section 2-315 (Ill.Rev.Stat.1987, ch. 110, par. 2-615), of his action for negligence and breach of fiduciary duty against the defendants who were outside, i.e., non-management, directors of Pine Top.
This action arises from the insolvency of the Pine Top Insurance Company, a stock property, casualty and fire insurance company organized under the laws of the State of Illinois. Plaintiff, as Director of Insurance for the State of Illinois and as Liquidator for Pine Top, brought an action against, among others, the former officers and directors of Pine Top, alleging negligence and breach of fiduciary duty in the management of Pine Top. The defendants who are parties to this appeal are former Pine Top directors. None were officers of the company.
In count I of his complaint, plaintiff alleged that each of the defendants owed a fiduciary duty to Pine Top "to administer Pine Top's affairs for the common benefit of its policyholders, claimants, and other creditors, and to exercise his best care, skill, and judgment in the management of the corporate business solely in the interest of Pine Top." Specifically, plaintiff alleged that the defendants failed to discharge their fiduciary duty in that they:
"(a) Failed to develop and implement adequate underwriting procedures and controls;
(b) Consistently underpriced reinsurance and insurance business written by Pine Top;
(c) Failed to develop and implement adequate procedures and controls with respect to establishing reserves;
*619 (d) Failed to increase reserves when loss experience demonstrated the inadequacy of reserves;
(e) Failed to set appropriate reserve liabilities for incurred but not reported claims;
(f) Understated the reserves that were necessary to satisfy claims and claims administration expenses in Pine Top's Annual Statements for the years ending December 31, 1981, 1982, 1983, 1984, and 1985;
(g) Failed to plan for or control a large premium growth, both through lack of management controls and inadequate staffing;
(h) Paid excessive commissions to managing general agents;
(i) Failed to oversee the performance of managing general agents and to monitor the quality of underwriting performed on Pine Top's behalf by such agents or the quality of reinsurance placed on Pine Top's behalf;
(j) Failed to develop and implement adequate procedures for the collection of balances due from managing general agents;
(k) Failed to require managing general agents to maintain adequate books and records;
(l) Failed to place Pine Top's ceded reinsurance book of business with financially secure reinsurers;
(m) Failed to develop and implement adequate procedures for the collection of balances due from reinsurers;
(n) Failed timely to draw down on letters of credit posted by reinsurers on Pine Top's behalf;
(o) Abdicated or wrongfully delegated to Pine Top's parent corporations (Greyhound and Whitney) the management responsibilities of Pine Top and its subsidiaries Pine Top Services and Pine Top Syndicate;
(p) Failed to properly manage and supervise the affairs of Pine Top's subsidiaries, Pine Top Services and Pine Top Syndicate;
(q) Failed to keep correct and accurate books and records of accounts for Pine Top in violation of * * * Ill. Rev.Stat. ch. 73, ___ 745;
(r) Failed to report accurately the foregoing acts, omissions and circumstances to the Illinois Department, as required by Ill.Rev.Stat. ch. 73, ___ 613 et seq., and particularly Ill.Rev.Stat. ch. 73, ___ 745, 746, and 748;
(s) Failed to accurately disclose Pine Top's true financial condition in its Annual Statements, as required by Ill.Rev.Stat. ch. 73, ___ 748."
As a result of these breaches of fiduciary duties, the plaintiff alleged that damages in excess of $100,000,000 were suffered.
In count II, entitled "Negligent Mismanagement," plaintiff alleged that each of the defendants owed a duty to Pine Top to use ordinary care in the discharge of his management duties. Plaintiff further alleged that this duty was breached by the acts enumerated above in regard to count I. Damages caused by defendants' negligence were again alleged to be in excess of $100,000,000.
Defendants Faber and Seith filed a motion to dismiss plaintiff's complaint against them pursuant to section 2-615 of the Code of Civil Procedure. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1987, ch. 110, par. 2-615.) Faber and Seith sought dismissal on two independent grounds. First, the duties allegedly owed by them were not, as a matter of law, duties owed by outside, i.e., non-management, directors to an Illinois insurance company. The second ground was that even if they owed such duties the business judgment rule protected them from any liability.
In arguing their motion to dismiss before the trial court, defendants postured their arguments attacking the legal sufficiency of the complaint in the following manner:
"More significantly than what is pled in this case is what is not pled. There is no allegation of fraud, illegality, or self-dealing. It is nowhere in the complaint. What we have in reading from what has been pled and what has not been pled is that the inattention to details of operation are claimed to subject disinterested and honest directors to $150 million worth of liability.
* * * * * *
We do not dispute the contention that Faber and Seith owed a fiduciary duty to Pine Top. At this point in the proceedings, *620 we are bound by the complaint allegations that they were inattentive in those areas charged in the complaint."
The court, relying upon Shlensky v. Wrigley (1968), 95 Ill.App.2d 173, 237 N.E.2d 776, held that since the complaint did not charge defendants with any wrongdoing bordering on fraud, illegality, or conflict of interest, the business judgment rule protected defendants from liability for honest errors or mistakes in judgment. Accordingly, the court granted the motion and dismissed Faber and Seith as defendants on October 2, 1989. In its dismissal, the trial court never addressed whether plaintiffs' complaint was factually sufficient to establish a cause of action for negligence.
On November 6, 1989, six additional defendants, Ralph C. Batastini, W. Carroll Bumpers, James R. Grimm, Frank L. Nageotte, David A. Nielsen, and John W. Teets, the other appellees here, filed their motion to dismiss the action as to them. These defendants adopted the arguments previously made by Faber and Seith, and plaintiff stood on the arguments opposing dismissal previously advanced against Faber and Seith. This motion was granted on November 9, 1989, by an order which also provided that the court found no just reason to delay enforcement or appeal of the November 9, 1989, order or of the order it had entered on October 2, 1989, in regard to Faber and Seith. At no time did plaintiffs seek leave to file an amended complaint in the trial court.
Plaintiff appeals the trial court's decision and asks this court to reverse and remand this case for further proceedings "with leave to amend if appropriate."
OPINION
There are two issues before this court on appeal. The first is whether plaintiff's complaint states a cause of action against these defendants. The second is whether plaintiff should be allowed to amend his complaint even though he failed to offer an amended complaint in the trial court.
Upon review of a ruling dismissing a complaint under section 2-615, we must determine whether the complaint has alleged facts sufficient to state a cause of action. (Dilanjian Taxi Services, Inc. v. City of Chicago (1990), 203 Ill.App.3d 300, 148 Ill. Dec. 598, 560 N.E.2d 1195.) In examining plaintiff's complaint, we must accept as true all well-pleaded facts and reasonable inferences therefrom, but not conclusions or inferences of the pleader unless supported by specific facts. (Knox College v. Celotex Corp. (1981), 88 Ill. 2d 407, 426-27, 58 Ill. Dec. 725, 430 N.E.2d 976.) "The complaint is deficient when it fails to allege the facts necessary for the plaintiff to recover." (People ex rel. Fahner v. Carriage Way West, Inc. (1981), 88 Ill. 2d 300, 308, 58 Ill. Dec. 754, 430 N.E.2d 1005; Fanning v. LeMay (1967), 38 Ill. 2d 209, 212, 230 N.E.2d 182.) Accordingly, we must determine what facts are necessary to state a cause of action against corporate directors for breach of fiduciary duty and negligent mismanagement.
Directors owe a fiduciary duty to their corporations and to its shareholders. (Graham v. Mimms (1982), 111 Ill.App.3d 751, 760-61, 67 Ill. Dec. 313, 444 N.E.2d 549.) "It is their duty to administer the corporate affairs for the common benefit of all the stockholders and exercise their best care, skill and judgment in the management of the corporate business solely in the interest of the corporation. * * * It is a breach of duty for the directors to place themselves in a position where their personal interests would prevent them from acting for the best interests of those they represent." (Emphasis in original.) Shlensky v. South Parkway Building Corp. (1960), 19 Ill. 2d 268, 278, 166 N.E.2d 793, quoting Dixmoor Golf Club, Inc. v. Evans (1927), 325 Ill. 612, 616, 156 N.E. 785.
In addition to their fiduciary duty to the corporation, directors must exercise in the management of corporate affairs the degree of care which prudent men, prompted by self-interest, would exercise in the management of their own affairs. (Fields v. Sax (1984), 123 Ill.App.3d 460, 463-64, 78 Ill. Dec. 864, 462 N.E.2d 983.) If they exercise such care, they will not be held liable for honest errors in judgment. (Lower v. Lanark Mutual Fire Insurance Co. (1983), 114 Ill. App. 3d 462, 467, 70 Ill. Dec. 62, 448 N.E.2d *621 940.) Under this standard of care, directors have a duty to attend and to participate in regular board meetings (Fields v. Sax), and the duty to inform themselves of the material facts necessary to exercise their judgment. Gaillard v. Natomas Co. (1989), 208 Cal. App. 3d 1250, 256 Cal. Rptr. 702 (directors may not close their eyes to what is going on about them in corporate business, and must in appropriate circumstances make such reasonable inquiry).
The business judgment rule acts to shield directors who have been diligent and careful in performing their duties from liability for honest errors or mistakes of judgment. (Lower v. Lanark Mutual Fire Insurance; see generally 3A W. Fletcher, Cyclopedia of the Law of Private Corporations, sec. 1039 (perm. ed. rev. 1986).) Under this rule, the "judgment of the directors of corporations enjoys the benefit of a presumption that it was formed in good faith and was designed to promote the best interests of the corporation they serve." (Shlensky v. Wrigley, 95 Ill.App.2d at 178, 237 N.E.2d 776, quoting Davis v. Louisville Gas & Electric Co. (1928), 16 Del. Ch. 157, 142 A. 654, 659.) Consequently, absent allegations of "bad faith, fraud, illegality or gross overreaching, courts are not at liberty to interfere with the exercise of business judgment by corporate directors." Fields v. Sax, 123 Ill.App.3d at 467; 70 Ill. Dec. 864, 462 N.E.2d 983; see also Shlensky v. Wrigley, 95 Ill.App.2d at 181, 237 N.E.2d 776 ("unless the conduct of the defendants at least borders on one of the elements [fraud, illegality or conflict of interest], the courts should not interfere").
The plaintiff correctly points out that the shield of the business judgment rule is unavailable to directors who fail to exercise due care in their management of the corporation. (Lower v. Lanark Mutual Fire Insurance Co. (1983), 114 Ill.App.3d 462, 467, 70 Ill. Dec. 62, 448 N.E.2d 940 ("To come within the ambit of the [business judgment] rule, directors must be diligent and careful in performing the duties they have undertaken"); 3A W. Fletcher, Cyclopedia of the Law of Private Corporations, sec. 1040 at 56, (perm. ed. rev. 1986) (the business judgment rule "does not apply where the loss is the result of failure to exercise proper care, skill and diligence.").) The exercise of due care is a prerequisite to the applicability of the business judgment rule and consequently directors may still be held liable for damages caused by their lack of due care in carrying out their duties. If due care is exercised, however, then the business judgment rule is applicable to preclude director liability for erroneous judgments absent conduct involving fraud, illegality or conflict of interest. (Fields v. Sax; Shlensky v. Wrigley.)
Plaintiff contends that the trial court's ruling that the business judgment rule required dismissal of the instant complaint stands for the proposition that directors can completely ignore their responsibilities to the corporation without incurring liability so long as they do not defraud the corporation, steal from it, or engage in criminal conduct. We disagree. Although the trial court did not specifically address the insufficiency of the pleadings in establishing a cause of action predicated upon negligence, lack of due care, inattentiveness, or the failure to make an informed decision, we agree with the contention of the defendants on appeal that the complaint is wholly insufficient in that regard.
The specific allegations of breach of fiduciary duty and of negligent mismanagement, as set out in detail above, pertain to actual decisions or determinations of judgment made by defendants. This is evident from the language of the complaint itself. For example, in subparagraph (a), defendants are charged with failure to develop "adequate" underwriting procedures and controls, from which it may be reasonably inferred that they did develop some underwriting procedures and controls although, in plaintiff's opinion, they were inadequate. In subparagraph (b), defendants are charged with "underpricing" reinsurance and insurance business, again inferring that they made some pricing decisions. Similarly, in subparagraph (c), defendants are charged with failure to develop "adequate" controls. The allegations of subparagraphs (d), (e), (f), (h), (j), (k), (l), (m) and (n) are similar in nature.
*622 The allegations which come the closest to establishing plaintiff's cause of action are those contained in subparagraphs (g), (i), (o), and (p). These allegations charge defendants with failing to oversee the performance of managing general agents, wrongful delegation of responsibility, and failure to properly manage and supervise. Contrary to plaintiff's contention, these allegations, as currently framed, attack no more than the defendants' actual exercise of their business judgment and are consequently within the protected parameters of the business judgment rule. Plaintiff has not alleged that any such failure was by reason of inexcusable unawareness or inattention or lack of good faith on part of the directors.
Plaintiff contends that the complaint adequately pleads the absence of business judgment so as to make the business judgment rule inapplicable and that "the defendants' failure to make business judgments is the crux of his complaint." We disagree. Nowhere in the complaint does plaintiff allege that the defendants did not make informed judgments or use due care in arriving at those judgments, facts which are essential for the plaintiff to recover for negligence. Likewise, there are no allegations that the decisions made involved any fraud, illegality, conflict of interest or bad faith on the part of defendants. Nor does the complaint allege that defendants acted other than in the best interest of the corporation, a fact necessary to recover for breach of fiduciary duty. Instead, plaintiff's complaint questions those decisions which defendants made. This is exactly the type of second-guessing which the business judgment rule was designed to preclude.
Plaintiff relies on Lower v. Lanark Mutual Fire Insurance Co. (1983), 114 Ill.App.3d 462, 70 Ill. Dec. 62, 448 N.E.2d 940, to argue that the applicability of the business judgment rule should not be decided on a motion to dismiss. In Lower v. Lanark Mutual Fire Insurance, the trial court granted summary judgment for the defendant directors because plaintiff had not alleged illegality, fraud or personal gain by defendants, and therefore the business judgment rule protected the directors from liability. The appellate court reversed, finding there to be a genuine issue of material fact as to whether the directors had acted in good faith, stating at 114 Ill.App.3d at 468, 70 Ill. Dec. 62, 448 N.E.2d 940:
"The record is replete with depositions of the various directors wherein they admit to varying degrees of knowledge or ignorance about the service fee/compensation matter. An inference could be drawn from these facts that they had acted in good faith and had not breached their fiduciary responsibility so that their actions in exercising their judgment on December 16, 1978, were within the business judgment rule, or the contrary inference could be drawn."
Unlike Lower v. Lanark Mutual Fire Insurance, however, this case is before us on review of a ruling dismissing the complaint under section 2-615 (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 110, par. 2-615), and the question is not whether there is a genuine issue of material fact, but rather the sufficiency of the pleading. (People ex rel. Fahner v. Carriage Way West.) As discussed above, we conclude that the complaint is insufficient.
Although pleadings are to be liberally construed (Ill.Rev.Stat.1987, ch. 110, par. 2-603(c)), "a complaint which does not allege facts, the existence of which are necessary to enable a plaintiff to recover does not state a cause of action and [] such deficiency may not be cured by liberal construction or argument." (In re Beatty (1987), 118 Ill. 2d 489, 500, 115 Ill. Dec. 379, 517 N.E.2d 1065, quoting People ex rel. Kucharski v. Loop Mortgage Co. (1969), 43 Ill. 2d 150, 152, 251 N.E.2d 211.) In the absence of factual allegations to the contrary in the complaint, we must presume that defendants acted in good faith and with due care, and as a result the business judgment rule precludes their liability. In so holding, we nonetheless recognize that the complaint may have well been amendable to state a cause of action if repled to allege facts which establish that the alleged harmful decisions of the directors were not errors in judgment but were a result of a lack of due care, such as inattentiveness or the failure to make informed decisions.
*623 As presently pleaded, however, the thrust of plaintiff's complaint attacks the actual decisions made by the defendants. It is not enough, however, to question the decisions. The trial court was correct in holding that the complaint was insufficient in that it lacked allegations of fraud, illegality or conflict of interest on the part of the directors. Absent such allegations, decisions made by corporate directors are protected by the business judgment rule, and may only be attacked by alleging facts showing lack of due care in the making of those decisions. To charge these defendants with negligence, plaintiff would be required to plead facts relating to the manner in which the alleged erroneous decisions were reached.
In his reply brief, plaintiff asks that this court remand this matter to the trial court with directions to allow leave to amend even though he failed to seek such leave before the trial court. The general rule is that where the trial court dismisses a complaint and plaintiff does not ask for leave to amend, the cause of action must stand or fall on the sufficiency of the stricken pleading. Mlade v. Finley (1983), 112 Ill.App.3d 914, 68 Ill. Dec. 387, 445 N.E.2d 1240; see also Teter v. Clemens (1986), 112 Ill. 2d 252, 497 Ill. Dec. 467, 492 N.E.2d 1340 (where no indication in record that plaintiff sought leave to file amended complaint in circuit court and proposed amended pleadings do not appear in record on appeal, remand denied).
Plaintiff concedes that he did not offer a proposed amended pleading to the trial court for its consideration, but argues that he should be allowed to amend his complaint because of the unusual posture of this case. Specifically, plaintiff points to the fact that the trial court dismissed his complaint on the grounds that it was legally insufficient in that it failed to plead fraud, illegality or conflict of interest without addressing the complaint's factual sufficiency. Plaintiff argues that he had no reason to believe at that point that the trial court would sustain his action if negligence were pleaded without pleading fraud, illegality, or conflict of interest. Moreover, plaintiff contends that in the argument before the trial court, defendants virtually conceded that "inattentive[ness]" was pleaded, but urged that it was not actionable by itself unless the conduct of the directors was dishonest. Plaintiff therefore contends that it would have been futile for him to move for the right to amend his pleading to establish lack of due care because the trial court appeared satisfied with the factual sufficiency of his pleading, but predicated its ruling on the erroneous legal premise that only fraud, illegality, or conflict of interest were actionable.
We agree that a plaintiff cannot use an appellate forum to test the sufficiency of his pleading without sustaining the consequences of finality. A party should not ordinarily be permitted to stand on his pleadings before the trial court and then seek leave to amend in the appellate court after the dismissal of the trial court is affirmed. Clearly, if after plaintiff's pleadings were stricken, he asked for and was granted leave to amend, an appeal at that time would be premature. (Kawa v. Harnischfeger Corp. (1990), 204 Ill.App.3d 206, 149 Ill. Dec. 483, 561 N.E.2d 1179 (if plaintiff is granted leave to amend, order which dismisses complaint is not a final and appealable order); Branch v. European Autohaus, Ltd. (1981), 97 Ill.App.3d 949, 53 Ill. Dec. 593, 424 N.E.2d 6.) Therefore, a party should ordinarily not be permitted to circumvent the rule against interlocutory appeals by first seeking to amend his pleadings after the appeal is filed. See Mlade, 112 Ill.App.3d at 917, 68 Ill. Dec. 387, 445 N.E.2d 1240 ("when the trial court strikes a complaint and the plaintiff does not ask for leave to amend, this is considered an election `to stand by his complaint' [citation] and if the lawsuit is dismissed the cause of action `must stand or fall upon the contents' of the stricken pleading"); see generally Voss v. Lincoln Mall Management Co. (1988), 166 Ill.App.3d 442, 116 Ill. Dec. 841, 519 N.E.2d 1056.
However, careful analysis of the facts of this case once again confirms the adage that the exception often proves the rule. Where as here, the climate in the trial court was inhospitable to plaintiff's theory of action and where as here the opposing party virtually conceded, at least for purposes of argument, the factual sufficiency of the *624 pleading with respect to that theory, but urged that plaintiff's theory is legally insufficient, it would be manifestly unfair to prevent plaintiff from having an opportunity under those circumstances to amend his complaint once the legal sufficiency of his theory is affirmed.
Here, plaintiff purported to premise his actions upon negligent mismanagement. Defendants urged that mere negligence was a legally insufficient basis. Instead defendants argued that fraud, illegality, or conflict of interest must be shown to recover. The trial court in its ruling apparently adopted defendants' position. On appeal, we reasserted that the business judgment rule "does not apply where the loss is the result of failure to exercise proper care, skill and diligence." (3A W. Fletcher, Cyclopedia of the Law of Private Corporations, sec. 1040 at 56, (perm. ed. rev. 1986).) Nevertheless it was our obligation to determine whether the ruling of the trial court was sustainable upon the record before us, even if on grounds other than those articulated. (White Fence Farm, Inc. v. Land & Lakes Co. (1981), 99 Ill.App.3d 234, 54 Ill. Dec. 467, 424 N.E.2d 1370; In re Application of County Treasurer of Cook County (1976), 35 Ill.App.3d 449, 342 N.E.2d 249.) Accordingly, we upheld the determination of the trial court on the grounds of the factual insufficiency of the complaint. Under these exceptional circumstances it would be unduly harsh and manifestly unfair to deny plaintiff an opportunity to amend his pleadings on remand simply because of factual insufficiencies in the pleadings which were not addressed by the trial court.
The court's decision in Johnson v. Lincoln Christian College (1986), 150 Ill.App.3d 733, 103 Ill. Dec. 842, 501 N.E.2d 1380, is particularly persuasive. In Johnson, the plaintiff's seven count complaint was challenged by seven separate motions to dismiss filed by the codefendants each of which alleged one non-amendable defect for each count. After hearing arguments, the trial court dismissed the plaintiff's complaint in a one sentence order which simply stated that all the motions by the defendant were allowed.
The appellate court allowed plaintiff to amend his complaint even though he did not seek leave to amend from the trial court. The Johnson court rejected defendants' contention that the plaintiff waived his right to present an amended complaint to the trial court, stating that "[r]epleading under these circumstances would indeed have been futile, leading to a needless delay in the administration of justice." (Johnson, 150 Ill.App.3d at 749, 103 Ill. Dec. 842, 501 N.E.2d 1380.) The court then invoked its powers of amendment under Illinois Supreme Court Rule 366 (134 Ill.2d R. 366) and allowed plaintiff to amend his complaint stating, "We hereby exercise our power [under Supreme Court Rule 366] to make an order that should have been made by the circuit court and allow Johnson to amend his complaint * * *." (Johnson, 150 Ill.App.3d at 749, 103 Ill. Dec. 842, 501 N.E.2d 1380.) Cf. In re Estate of Pirie (1986), 141 Ill.App.3d 750, 97 Ill. Dec. 225, 492 N.E.2d 884. There, plaintiff's legal theory survived challenge at the trial level, but was held invalid for the first time on appeal. Thereafter, the appellate court determined that there were sufficient facts of record to have upheld a cause of action under the correct legal theory and invoked its powers under Rule 366. The court stated, "We do not think plaintiffs should be denied the opportunity to amend their complaint merely because the invalidity of their legal theory was determined first in the reviewing court rather than at the trial level." Pirie, 141 Ill.App.3d at 771, 97 Ill. Dec. 225, 492 N.E.2d 884.
Like the plaintiff in Johnson, plaintiff's complaint was dismissed on a non-amendable ground. It would have been futile for the plaintiff to seek leave to amend in the trial court to factually support his legal theory of negligence which the trial court appeared to reject as non-actionable. Moreover, the factual sufficiency of plaintiff's complaint in support of the legal theory urged by plaintiff was never really challenged or explored. Consequently, we determine that plaintiff should have the opportunity to amend his complaint on remand in spite of his failure to seek leave to amend in the first instance in the trial court. Cf. Fleener v. Fleener (1970), 133 Ill.App.2d 118, 122, 263 N.E.2d 879 ("[p]laintiff's contention that the complaint *625 fails to state a cause of action was not made in the trial court and although courts of review have considered such assignments of error when made for the first time in a court of review if the error may be obviated without prejudice the ends of justice are better served by permitting the amendment"); see also O.K. Electric Co. v. Fernandes (1982), 111 Ill.App.3d 466, 67 Ill. Dec. 225, 444 N.E.2d 264 (raising new grounds on appeal in support of its motion to dismiss would deny plaintiff the opportunity to cure a defect by amendment in the trial court).
Accordingly, we remand this case to the circuit court of Cook County for further proceedings consistent with the views expressed in this opinion.
Affirmed and remanded.
McNULTY and MURRAY, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[*]  An earlier opinion was filed in this cause but has been withdrawn by order of this court on February 24, 1993. This revised opinion now stands in its place.

=== CASE 2226862 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:21.148088+00 ===

636 N.E.2d 479 (1994)
159 Ill. 2d 193
201 Ill. Dec. 47
Susan HOEM, Appellee and Cross-Appellant,
v.
Michael J. ZIA, M.D., et al., Appellants and Cross-Appellees.
Nos. 75100, 75159 and 75168.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
March 24, 1994.
Rehearing Denied May 27, 1994.
*480 Richard F. Record, Jr., Craig & Craig, Mattoon, for appellant and cross-appellee J. Steven Arnold.
Kehart, Shafter, Hughes & Webber, P.C., Decatur (Michael J. Kehart and Albert G. Webber, of counsel), for appellants and cross-appellees Michael J. Zia and Central Illinois Lung Associates, S.C.
John E. Fick, Samuels, Miller, Schroeder, Jackson & Sly, Decatur, for appellant and cross-appellee Decatur Memorial Hosp.
Alexandra de Saint Phalle, Londrigan, Potter & Randle, P.C., Springfield, for appellee and cross-appellant.
Justice HEIPLE delivered the opinion of the court:
In March 1990, plaintiff, Susan Hoem, filed this medical malpractice action against defendants, Dr. Michael Zia, Dr. J. Steven Arnold, Decatur Memorial Hospital, and Central Illinois Lung Internists Associates. In her complaint, plaintiff alleged that defendants failed to diagnose and prevent the impending heart attack of her husband, Richard Hoem, that resulted in his death in November 1988. After a trial, the jury rendered a verdict for defendants.
On appeal, plaintiff argued that the trial court (1) erred by admitting testimony barred by the Dead-Man's Act (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1991, ch. 110, par. 8-201); (2) improperly limited plaintiff's rebuttal witness' testimony; (3) failed to instruct the jury that the negligence of a subsequent party does not exonerate a prior act of negligence; (4) should have granted summary judgment for plaintiff on the issue of whether Dr. Arnold was an agent of the hospital; (5) erred in several evidentiary rulings; and (6) erroneously denied plaintiff's motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict. The appellate court reversed and remanded for a new trial. 239 Ill.App.3d 601, 179 Ill. Dec. 986, 606 N.E.2d 818.
We allowed defendants' petition for leave to appeal (134 Ill.2d R. 315), and now affirm the judgment of the appellate court, although for reasons different from those stated by the appellate court.
I. BACKGROUND
Richard Hoem underwent a physical examination in March 1988. An electrocardiogram test (EKG) done as a part of this examination revealed no signs of heart problems.
During the summer of that year, Hoem began to develop problems with his endurance. Thinking that his problems might be related to a previous lung condition, Hoem consulted Dr. Zia, a specialist in pulmonology. Dr. Zia had last treated Hoem in 1984 when Hoem failed a work-related lung test.
On October 31, 1988, Dr. Zia administered a series of tests designed to detect lung problems. He also scheduled Hoem to undergo a cardiopulmonary stress test on November 11, 1988, to measure lung capacity and fitness.
Because Dr. Zia was on vacation on November 11, 1988, his partner, Dr. Arnold, administered the test. During the test, Hoem exercised on a stationary cycle while an EKG monitored his heart rate as he *481 breathed into a tube that monitored his lung capacity, strength, and endurance. The test also monitored blood pressure.
On November 21, Dr. Arnold notified Hoem that he had found a "blockage" on the test and had scheduled Hoem to meet with a cardiologist, Dr. Krishan Patel, a week later, on November 29, 1988. The day prior to that meeting, however, Hoem collapsed after walking up a flight of stairs and later died.
Plaintiff then brought suit against defendants, Dr. Michael Zia, Dr. J. Steven Arnold, Decatur Memorial Hospital, and Central Illinois Lung Internists Associates. Plaintiff's principal allegation of negligence was that Drs. Zia and Arnold had failed to recognize, and treat on an emergency basis, Hoem's cardiac condition.
During plaintiff's case in chief, she presented the expert testimony of Dr. Dan Fintel, a cardiologist. Dr. Fintel testified that the EKG and medical charts showed clear signs of a prior heart attack and clear warnings of an impending heart attack. Dr. Fintel testified that when Hoem visited Dr. Zia on October 31, 1988, Hoem was describing angina to Dr. Zia, which is an undisputed symptom of heart disease. He testified that based upon the information that Dr. Zia recorded in his office notes, Dr. Zia should have recognized Hoem's complaints as angina, and hence initiated a program of cardiac diagnosis and treatment.
Defendants responded by calling themselves and three other doctors as medical experts: Dr. Patel (the cardiologist whom Hoem was scheduled to see), Dr. William Buckingham (a board-certified internist and pulmonologist), and Dr. Patrick Sullivan (a board-certified internist).
Over plaintiff's Dead-Man's Act objection, Dr. Zia testified concerning his examination of Hoem on October 31, 1988. Dr. Zia stated that the pain which Hoem described to him was not consistent with angina, but rather was consistent with musculoskeletal pain. Therefore, Dr. Zia did not suspect Hoem was suffering from heart disease, and did not initiate treatment for it.
Among other things, Dr. Patel testified that the medical results from Hoem's test did not present an urgent medical condition. He added that, if he had read the charts and results from Hoem's test immediately after Hoem took the test, he would not have done anything differently than Dr. Arnold had done.
Dr. Buckingham and both defendants testified that although Dr. Fintel may know the standard of care for a cardiologist, he did not testify to the applicable standard of care for pulmonologists. All three testified that although cardiologists might notice subtle, but life-threatening, heart problems from Hoem's medical data, pulmonologists would not notice these subtle problems. Dr. Sullivan and both defendants testified essentially to the same standard of care regarding internists.
In rebuttal, plaintiff attempted to present Dr. Robert Schoene, a board certified pulmonologist, to testify that Dr. Fintel had accurately stated the applicable standard of care for pulmonologists. The trial court, however, restricted the extent to which plaintiff could do so under the general theory that plaintiff could have presented Dr. Schoene in her case in chief, but failed to do so.
On appeal, plaintiff argued that the trial court (1) erred by admitting testimony barred by the Dead-Man's Act (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1991, ch. 110, par. 8-201); (2) improperly limited plaintiff's rebuttal witness' testimony; (3) failed to instruct the jury that the negligence of a subsequent party does not exonerate a prior act of negligence; (4) should have granted summary judgment for plaintiff on the issue of whether Dr. Arnold was an agent of the hospital; (5) erred in several evidentiary rulings; and (6) erroneously denied plaintiff's motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict.
The appellate court reversed and remanded. That court found that the trial court erred in allowing Dr. Zia to testify to what Hoem told him during Hoem's visit because such testimony violated the Dead Man's Act (Ill.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 110, par. 8-201). The appellate court further held that the trial court had erroneously restricted the rebuttal testimony of Dr. Schoene. The appellate court found no error in the last four claims of error by plaintiff.
*482 II. APPEAL TO THIS COURT
A. The Dead-Man's Act
On appeal to this court, defendants first argue that the trial court was correct in allowing Dr. Zia's testimony concerning his examination of Richard Hoem. Defendants submit that this testimony was permissible under the Dead-Man's Act because plaintiff waived the bar of the Act by earlier eliciting testimony from her expert witness, Dr. Fintel, about the meaning of Dr. Zia's office notes concerning the October 31, 1988, medical examination and introducing the notes themselves into evidence.
The first office note, prepared October 31, 1988, in Dr. Zia's handwriting, states:
"10/31/88 AugC spine SXSOB
NowTight across
chestc exercise
No palpitationsor wheeze"
The other note in question reads as follows:
"Patient comes for follow-up today. He is complaining of pain and tightness in the upper chest area. This occurs primarily with exertion and does seem to radiate down his arms. He was initially evaluated by Dr. Hubbard for cervical arthritis and arthralgias and this has not been a problem recently. He is having no fevers, chills, sweats, palpitations, heart irregularity, wheezing, sputum production or other complaints.
On exam today he has blood pressure 144/100, states this is frequently high on visits to the doctor but is otherwise normal. He does not have any wheezing. The diaphragms appear to move well bilaterally. Cardiac exam is entirely normal. He has no peripheral edema or peripheral findings.
Based on the above we have ordered a chest x-ray and asked x-ray to check for diaphragmatic motion. He has had previous left pleural thickening on a somewhat idiopathic basis. We have also ordered a complete pulmonary function with methacholine challenge and possible cardiopulmonary stress test depending on the above. We will call him after the above results and schedule any additional testing that is necessary."
Based on the information found in these note, Dr. Fintel, plaintiff's expert in her case in chief, testified that because Hoem complained of chest pains and tightness, Dr. Zia should have explored possible heart problems.
During defendants' case in chief, Dr. Zia testified that Hoem did not complain of chest pain during this October 1988 visit. Dr. Zia testified as follows:
"[Defense Counsel]: I think I had asked you, Doctor, did Mr. Hoem say the reason he was back?
[Dr. Zia]: Yes, he did.
[Defense Counsel]: What did he say?
[Dr. Zia]: As Mrs. Hoem had mentioned earlier, he had come back for a follow up on his lung condition and his shortness of breath.
[Defense Counsel]: What did Mr. Hoem tell you by way of history, Doctor?
[Dr. Zia]: His symptoms he mentioned began about August and there was a C spine symptom; that was my abbreviated way of describing it. Pain which was C spine pain, in the back of the neck, and tightness in the posterior thorax or back of the chest upper chest, just below the neck. That symptom did seem to radiate into his arms, as many people have described. He did notice it more with exertion * * *. He said that this symptom had already been evaluated, had initially been evaluated by Dr. Hubbard because someone had told him he had cervical spine muscular spasm symptoms, that medicine being Flexeril as documented in our medication list. And he said that that worked and that had not been a problem recently. The chest, posterior chest tightness, neck pain going down his arm[,] had not been a problem recently."
The appellate court found that this testimony was improperly admitted, in violation of the Dead-Man's Act.
We disagree. The Dead-Man's Act provides:
"In the trial of any action in which any party sues or defends as the representative *483 of a deceased person * * *, no adverse party or person directly interested in the action shall be allowed to testify on his or her own behalf to any conversation with the deceased * * * or to any event which took place in the presence of the deceased * * *, except in the following instances:
(a) If any person testifies on behalf of the representative to any conversation with the deceased * * * or to any event which took place in the presence of the deceased * * *, any adverse party or interested person, if otherwise competent, may testify concerning the same conversation or event." (Ill.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 110, par. 8-201.)
We find that the testimony of Dr. Fintel and the introduction of Dr. Zia's office notes opened the door to Dr. Zia's testimony.
During Dr. Fintel's direct examination, the following took place:
"[Plaintiff's counsel]: Doctor, did you formulate any opinions to a reasonable degree of medical certainty based upon your review of Plaintiff's Exhibit A, pages 1, and 37, as well as based on the results of the x-ray and other tests that were notations for the day of October 31, 1988?
[Dr. Fintel]: Yes, I have.
[Plaintiff's counsel]: Doctor, what is it in those records that leads you to express the opinion that Mr. Hoem had exertional chest pain?
[Dr. Fintel]: I base this on reading what is a very well-documented and legible typed note, that which we all see on our right. Looking at the second line where I read, `he,' referred to Mr. Hoem, `is complaining of pain and tightness in the upper chest area. This occurs primarily with exertion and does seem to radiate down his arms.'
That to me suggests that Dr. Zia recognized that the principal reason why the patient came to the office for evaluation was for evaluation and treatment of this problem."
From these statements, it may be argued that Dr. Fintel is merely interpreting the note. He is, however, doing more than that. Rather than merely translating Dr. Zia's note for the benefit of the jury. Dr. Fintel has put his gloss on the notes. Taking Dr. Fintel's statements together, he is clearly insinuating that Hoem visited Dr. Zia specifically for the treatment of a heart related problem. Under these facts, we find that Dr. Fintel's testimony fails within subsection (a) of the Act (Ill.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 110, par. 8-201(a)) and that plaintiff has waived the bar of the Dead-Man's Act.
The purpose of the Dead-Man's Act is to remove the temptation of the survivor to a transaction to testify falsely and to equalize the positions of the parties in regard to the giving of testimony. (M. Graham, Cleary & Graham's Handbook of Illinois Evidence § 606.1, at 314-15 (5th ed. 1990).) In this case, allowing the representative of the deceased to introduce her version of why Hoem went to Dr. Zia, without giving an equal opportunity to Dr. Zia, would not advance the policy behind the Act. Under these circumstances, we find it fundamentally unfair to deny Dr. Zia an opportunity to explain his view of what happened. Left unchallenged, Dr. Fintel's comments would have remained with the jury as the only testimony regarding the conversation between Dr. Zia and Hoem.
B. The Scope of Dr. Schoene's Testimony
Defendants next contend that the appellate court improperly held that the trial court had erroneously restricted the rebuttal testimony of Dr. Schoene. We disagree and affirm the appellate court decision.
Originally, plaintiff only named Dr. Fintel as her expert. In August 1991, defendants filed a motion for summary judgment based on their claim that because plaintiff's only named expert, Dr. Fintel, was a cardiologist, he could establish neither the standard of care for a pulmonologist nor any deviation therefrom. Thus, in her September 1991 response to defendants' summary judgment motion, filed two months before the November 1991 trial, plaintiff asked the trial court to add Dr. Schoene to the list she previously disclosed under Illinois Supreme Court Rule 220 (134 Ill.2d R. 220) of expert witnesses she intended to call in her case in chief.
*484 The trial court denied defendants' motion for summary judgment and held that Dr. Fintel's testimony could suffice to establish the appropriate standard of care and any deviation therefrom because Dr. Fintel and defendants were all board-certified internists, and because of the close relation between the fields of pulmonology and cardiology and Dr. Fintel's experience in both. The court, however, refused to the permit Dr. Schoene to testify in plaintiff's case in chief because plaintiff did not originally disclose him as an expert in her case in chief. The court explained that the ensuing delays from allowing plaintiff to add Dr. Schoene as an expert in her case in chief would be unnecessarily burdensome.
At trial, plaintiff relied on Dr. Fintel to establish the standard of care in her case in chief. After plaintiff rested, the trial court denied defendants' motion for a directed verdict, thus indicating that it found Dr. Fintel's testimony legally sufficient. Defendants then countered in their case in chief with testimony to the effect that although Dr. Fintel probably correctly stated the applicable standard of care for cardiologists, he did not correctly state the applicable standard of care for pulmonologists. They further testified that the medical records and information that Dr. Zia received would not have signaled Hoem's impending heart condition to a pulmonologist, especially because pulmonologists are trained to notice mostly lung conditions.
Plaintiff then offered Dr. Schoene in rebuttal to testify that Dr. Fintel did correctly state the applicable standard of care for pulmonologists, and that a pulmonologist such as himself would have noticed Hoem's impending heart condition and sent Hoem immediately to obtain treatment for it. Defendants object to Dr. Schoene's testifying in rebuttal, and the trial court sustained that objection. The trial court held that Dr. Schoene could not testify to the general standard of care for pulmonologists because plaintiff should have presented that evidence in her case in chief.
On appeal, the appellate court found that the trial court erred in restricting Dr. Schoene's testimony in rebuttal. That court found that defendants' experts had seriously impeached Dr. Fintel and that it was an abuse of discretion to prohibit the plaintiff from rebutting this testimony.
On appeal to this court, defendants argue that the trial court properly restricted the scope of Dr. Schoene's testimony. They maintain that plaintiff committed a fundamental tactical error in the preparation of her case for trial by retaining an inappropriate expert and should not be allowed to rectify this mistake through rebuttal.
We cannot agree with this tactical error analysis. To adopt the defendants' view on this issue would be tantamount to requiring a plaintiff to anticipate and present all conceivably relevant evidence in her case in chief, because, otherwise, she would be barred from presenting that evidence in rebuttal in the event defendants presented evidence in their case in chief that plaintiff needed to counter. As stated by the appellate court in this case, such a rule would be "antithetical to the concerns expressed by all involved in our civil justice system about its present costs, wastes, and delays." 239 Ill.App.3d at 619, 179 Ill. Dec. 986, 606 N.E.2d 818.
Defendants further argue that Dr. Schoene's testimony would not be proper rebuttal evidence. They argue that there is scant evidence from the record which would indicate that defendants had impeached Dr. Fintel on the standard of care issue.
Contrary to defendants' contention, there is evidence in the record indicating that defendants had impeached Dr. Fintel. Specifically, defendants' expert, Dr. Buckingham, testified that from his perspective as a pulmonologist, the stress test results did not require an immediate referral to a cardiologist. When asked whether he had any disagreement in whole or in part with Dr. Fintel's statements on that aspect of the case, Dr. Buckingham responded:
"My disagreement was in whole. I looked at the same cardiogram. Dr. Fintel is a cardiologist, and I'm a pulmonologist. I looked at the cardiogram-tracings and did *485 not see anything I as a pulmonologist would identify as abnormalities."
Dr. Buckingham further stated:
"As I say, you can have as many interpretations as you have interpreters, and they may not always agree, but certainly a cardiologist might look at an electrocardiographic tracing differently than a pulmonologist would, but I don't think the pulmonologist could be held to the standard of the cardiologist because he's a pulmonologist."
This testimony could have left the jury with the impression that plaintiff's expert had expressed an inappropriate standard of care with regard to reading the test results. Given these circumstances, we find that plaintiff was entitled to have Dr. Schoene's testify on rebuttal.
III. PLAINTIFF'S CROSS-APPEAL
Aside from the two issues raised by defendants, plaintiff raises several issues on crossappeal with regard to certain adverse rulings by the appellate court. We find, however, that these issues have been fully covered by the well-considered opinion of the appellate court, and we agree with and adopt the reasoning and findings stated therein.
IV. CONCLUSION
In conclusion, we find that the trial court properly admitted the testimony of Dr. Zia over plaintiff's Dead-Man's Act objection but find that the trial court abused its discretion in restricting the rebuttal testimony of Dr. Schoene. The judgment of the appellate court is affirmed.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 2226864 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:21.178113+00 ===

83 N.Y.2d 898 (1994)
636 N.E.2d 1386
613 N.Y.S.2d 853
In the Matter of Wesley M., a Person Alleged to be a Juvenile Delinquent, Respondent.
Court of Appeals of the State of New York.
Argued April 27, 1994.
Decided May 12, 1994.
Paul A. Crotty, Corporation Counsel of New York City (Helen P. Brown and Larry A. Sonnenshein of counsel), for appellant.
Carol Goldstein, New York City, Elynn C. Lambert and Lenore Gittis for respondent.
Chief Judge KAYE and Judges SIMONS, TITONE, BELLACOSA, SMITH, LEVINE and CIPARICK concur.
*899MEMORANDUM.
The order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed, without costs.
After a hearing held in response to respondent's motion to suppress physical evidence, Family Court, finding the arresting officer's testimony unreliable, granted the motion and dismissed the juvenile delinquency petition. The Appellate Division affirmed.
In order to establish a prima facie case against a juvenile, a petition must contain "`[n]on-hearsay allegations * * * [that] establish, if true, every element of the offense charged and the [accused's] commission of the offense'" (Matter of Jahron S., 79 N.Y.2d 632, 637; see, Family Ct Act § 311.2 [3]; Matter of Rodney J., 83 N.Y.2d 503). The petition in this case is jurisdictionally defective and must be dismissed as it fails to make out a prima facie case against respondent for criminal possession of a controlled substance. The supporting deposition of Officer Perino and the laboratory report attached to the petition do not contain nonhearsay allegations establishing that the substance in question was heroin. Officer Perino's supporting deposition alleges that he observed respondent in possession of 54 decks of heroin. In Jahron S., this Court held that a petition, taken together with the supporting deposition of a police officer who attested to his experience and expertise in dealing with illicit narcotics, and who personally observed the juvenile in possession of crack cocaine, was legally insufficient to establish a prima facie case of possession in the absence of a laboratory report identifying the substance seized as cocaine. Thus, Officer Perino's supporting deposition, which *900 does not even attest to his expertise in dealing with illicit narcotics, does not serve to render the petition in this case jurisdictionally sufficient on its face.
Nor does the police laboratory report annexed to the petition contain the requisite nonhearsay allegations establishing that the substance in question was heroin. As in Rodney J. (supra, at 507), the report in this case "purports only to be a copy of the original report, and gives no indication that it was signed by the person who tested the [drugs] and prepared that original report." The laboratory report here contains the signature of S. Girgis, a chemist; but that person certified only that the report was a true and full copy of the original and did not actually attest to any personal knowledge regarding the substance seized (id.). Accordingly, the petition must be dismissed as jurisdictionally defective on its face due to the absence of nonhearsay allegations establishing every element of the offenses charged (id.).
We need not reach the other issues presented in this appeal.
Order affirmed, without costs, in a memorandum.

=== CASE 2226871 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:21.336315+00 ===

305 N.W.2d 482 (1981)
STATE of Iowa, Appellee,
v.
Thomas J. LETO, Appellant.
No. 64359.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
May 13, 1981.
*484 Martha Shepard, Des Moines, for appellant.
Thomas J. Miller, Atty. Gen., John P. Messina, Asst. Atty. Gen., and Dan L. Johnston, Polk County Atty., for appellee.
Considered by HARRIS, P. J., and ALLBEE, McGIVERIN, LARSON and SCHULTZ, JJ.
LARSON, Justice.
The defendant Thomas J. Leto has appealed from his conviction of second-degree theft under sections 714.1(4) and 714.2(2), The Code 1979, arising from his possession of a stolen van. He contends the court erred in (1) refusing to suppress evidence seized under a search warrant; (2) refusing to sustain his motions for mistrial and to strike, based upon the State's introduction of evidence of his inculpatory statements not divulged prior to trial, as required by Iowa Rule of Criminal Procedure 13; and (3) admitting evidence of other crimes. We affirm the trial court.
I. The Search Warrant.
The search warrant was issued on the application of Officer Paul Womack, who furnished his own affidavit and statements of Paula Mohr, an informant. Various items of evidence relating to stolen vehicles were seized under the warrant. The defendant challenges the search warrant on two grounds: (1) the facts contained in the search-warrant affidavit of Officer Womack were insufficient to establish probable cause because no illegal activities were described, and there was no evidence that the items to be seized were located at the defendant's residence at the time of the search; and (2) it allowed the searching officers to conduct a general search.
A. Probable cause.
In addressing the question of the sufficiency of the underlying facts shown for the issuance, we first note the well-established principles which apply. An unlawful search will preclude the use at trial of all evidence obtained in the search or through leads uncovered by the search. Wong Sun v. United States, 371 U.S. 471, 484-85, 83 S. Ct. 407, 415-16, 9 L. Ed. 2d 441, 453 (1963). Because the defendant contends the search warrant was invalid under the fourth amendment, this court's scope of review is de novo, and we make an independent evaluation of the totality of the circumstances. State v. Hall, 297 N.W.2d 80, *485 89 (Iowa 1980). Probable cause exists for the issuance of a search warrant "when the facts and circumstances presented to the judicial officer are sufficient in themselves to justify the belief of a reasonably cautious person that an offense has been or is being committed." State v. McManus, 243 N.W.2d 575, 579 (Iowa 1976); accord, State v. Post, 286 N.W.2d 195, 199 (Iowa 1979); State v. Easter, 241 N.W.2d 885, 886 (Iowa 1976). While probable cause requires more than a "mere suspicion" of criminal activity, State v. Swartz, 244 N.W.2d 553, 554 (Iowa 1976), State v. Birkestrand, 239 N.W.2d 353, 357 (Iowa 1976), or "innocent-appearing activity", State v. McManus, 243 N.W.2d at 579; State v. Post, 286 N.W.2d at 200, "there is a large difference between" proof of guilt and proof of probable cause, Brinegar v. United States, 338 U.S. 160, 173, 69 S. Ct. 1302, 1309, 93 L. Ed. 1879, 1889 (1948); Locke v. United States, 7 Cranch 339, 348, 3 L. Ed. 364, 367 (1813) ("the term `probable cause' . . . means less than evidence which would justify condemnation"). In marginal cases a search conducted pursuant to a warrant may be constitutional even though one conducted without a warrant may be invalid. United States v. Ventresca, 380 U.S. 102, 106, 85 S. Ct. 741, 744, 13 L. Ed. 2d 684, 687 (1965) ("[a]lthough in a particular case it may not be easy to determine when an affidavit demonstrates the existence of probable cause, the resolution of doubtful or marginal cases in this area should be largely determined by the preference to be accorded to warrants").
Officer Womack, in his affidavit accompanying the search-warrant application of June 21, 1979, stated:[1]
1. On 6/12/79 I personally observed at 5758 N.E. 29th Street, Polk County, four complete stolen vehicles and parts of bodies from numerous others; specifically, a dark brown 1976 CJ5 Jeep, VIN J6F83AA014054, which had been reported stolen four days earlier; license plate attached to same registered to Thomas L. Wagner.
2. Also observed at above address, a 1978 silver Ford van stolen from Ankeny, Iowa, 7/6/78, Serial No. E14HHCF3241; said vehicle parked next to the above-listed jeep.
4. That affiant's investigation reveals that Mr. Leto operates a body repair business including painting and welding of damaged vehicles.
5. That personal observation of numerous vehicles recovered at 5758 N.E. 29th Street revealed that many parts of same had been welded and interchanged.
6. Arrest warrants have been issued for Mr. Proctor of 5758 N.E. 29th and Mr. Wagner whose license plate was discovered on the stolen jeep recovered at Proctor's residence.
Additional information was provided by Paula Mohr, an informant, whose evidence was related by Officer Womack in his application:
1. That Paula Mohr is registered owner of 1976 CJ5 Jeep (listed above). That she had same repaired by Mr. Leto at address listed herein on or about June 4, 1979.
2. That said jeep was stolen on or about June 8, 1979.
3. That on May 25, 1979, she was a passenger in a van driven by Mr. Leto to Wisconsin. During said trip, Mr. Leto stated that van was recently acquired and that he had rebuilt it from salvage. She observed a CB radio and tape deck wired together attached to the cigarette lighter.
4. That on or about 6/13/79 she identified her stolen 1976 CJ5 Jeep, which was in police custody, and she also advised police that the van referred *486 to above was also in their custody, along with the Jeep.
5. That after arrival with Leto to Wisconsin in van, Leto introduced her to Proctor (all supra).
The defendant argues that the facts related in the application were insufficient for issuance of the warrant because they create only a "mere suspicion" of criminal activity. See Spinelli v. United States, 393 U.S. 410, 414, 89 S. Ct. 584, 588, 21 L. Ed. 2d 637, 642-43 (1969). He notes the absence of any evidence in the affidavit that he had "knowledge of the van's heritage," viz., that the van was stolen by Wagner almost a year earlier. It is true that section 714.1(4) requires the State to prove at trial that Leto knew or had reasonable cause to believe the property was stolen. However, the element of knowledge need not be "proven" in the application. As stated above, the test for probable cause is whether the facts shown justify the belief of a reasonable, prudent person that a crime has been committed; the supporting affidavit need not contain sufficient information to sustain a conviction. See Brinegar v. United States, 338 U.S. at 173, 69 S. Ct. at 1309, 93 L.Ed. at 1889.
The defendant also argues that the facts alleged were innocent in appearance, and therefore presumed to be innocent, citing State v. Boer, 224 N.W.2d 217, 221 (Iowa 1974). Boer, however, did not hold that innocent-appearing activities must be disregarded in assessing probable cause; it held that they could not supply the requisite independent support of an officer's conclusory statements of grounds for the issuance of the warrant. Id. at 220-21. That is not the case here. The affidavit shows a large-scale auto theft operation involving Wagner and Proctor. Leto's involvement in it can be inferred from his possession of the stolen van and his suspect statement to Mohr concerning his acquisition and rebuilding of it. Also, Leto is shown by the affidavit to be a body repairman, a skill necessary to an auto theft operation, and that he worked on Paula Mohr's jeep within one week of its theft.
When viewed in a "common sense" manner, United States v. Ventresca, 380 U.S. at 108, 85 S. Ct. at 746, 13 L.Ed.2d at 688; State v. Paschal, 300 N.W.2d 115, 118 (Iowa 1981), we believe the facts set out in the affidavit were sufficient for issuance of the warrant. When they are viewed collectively, the facts create more than "mere suspicion." They are sufficient to justify the belief of a reasonably cautious person that an offense has been committed.
The warrant was issued and executed for the defendant's residence and curtilage. The defendant claims there was no showing that the items to be seized were located at his residence at the time of the search. Probable cause must exist to search the particular premises: there must be a "nexus between the items to be seized and the place to be searched," as may be culled from "the type of crime, the nature of the missing items, the extent of the suspect's opportunity for concealment, and normal inferences as to where a criminal would be likely to hide stolen property." United States v. Spearman, 532 F.2d 132, 133 (9th Cir. 1976) (quoting United States v. Lucarz, 430 F.2d 1051, 1055 (9th Cir. 1970)); see State v. Post, 286 N.W.2d at 199; State v. Iowa District Court, 247 N.W.2d 241, 248-49 (Iowa 1976) (reasonable inference that stolen property kept at suspect's residence). Leto's repair shop was located at his house: It was reasonable to infer the stolen property would be located there.
B. Scope of the warrant: the particularity requirement.
The warrant permitted a search for these items:
Red 1979 Bronco, VIN U15SLDG9487 Bronco or parts thereto, VIN U15HLDG0619
Motor vehicle titles from stolen or salvaged vehicles
Towing bills and receipts
V.I.N. tags
License plates
Vehicle registrations
Bills of sale; this and all of the above from stolen or salvaged vehicles *487 Stereo radio and VIN Tag J6F83AA014054 from a 1976 jeep, CJ5 Custom made stereo speakers to above-listed stereo
CB radio and tape deck jointly wired for use with the cigarette lighter
The defendant contends the warrant was too general and, in effect, was a fishing license for his premises. He relies on Stanford v. Texas, 379 U.S. 476, 85 S. Ct. 506, 13 L. Ed. 2d 431 (1965), which held that a warrant authorizing a search for "books, records, pamphlets, cards, receipts, lists, memoranda, pictures, recordings and other written instruments of the Communist Party in Texas" was too general. Concluding "[t]he indiscriminate sweep" of the warrant was "constitutionally intolerable", the Court in Stanford, id. at 485, 85 S. Ct. at 511, 13 L.Ed.2d at 437, emphasized that "when the `things' [to be seized] are books, and the basis for their seizure is the ideas they contain," the particularity requirement "is to be accorded the most scrupulous exactitude." (Emphasis added.) Thus, "[t]he point is that it was not contraband [e. g., "weapons, narcotics, or `cases of whiskey'"] which was ordered to be seized, but literary material." Id. at 486, 85 S. Ct. at 512, 13 L.Ed.2d at 437 (emphasis added). Thus, Stanford is to be distinguished on its facts: in that case the warrant permitted the seizure of nearly 300 books and pamphlets including some written by Karl Marx, Paul Satre, Theodore Draper, Fidel Castro, Earl Browder, Pope John XXIII, and Mr. Justice Hugo Blackas well as the defendant's private documents and papers. Id. at 479-80, 85 S. Ct. at 508-509, 13 L.Ed.2d at 434. Unlike Stanford, the search warrant under consideration here did not involve "literary materials," or "private documents and papers."
In State v. Hamilton, 236 N.W.2d 325, 327-29 (Iowa 1976), this court considered a warrant which authorized a search for "any and all controlled substances." The defendant had contended this language amounted to a "general warrant"; however, relying upon Coolidge v. New Hampshire, 403 U.S. 443, 91 S. Ct. 2022, 29 L. Ed. 2d 564 (1971)[2] and other cases, the court held it did not.
Recent federal cases have addressed the particularity requirement under analogous facts. In United States v. Dennis, 625 F.2d 782, 792 (8th Cir. 1980), the court considered a warrant authorizing the seizure of "certain books and records (or items of evidence) relating to the extortionate credit transaction business." The court held that the warrant was constitutionally sufficient because "[t]he degree of specificity required depends on the type of goods to be seized":
Where the precise identity of goods cannot be ascertained at the time the warrant is issued, naming only the general class of items will suffice because less particularity can be reasonably expected than for goods (such as those stolen) whose exact identity is already known at the time of issuance.
Id. (quoting United States v. Johnson, 541 F.2d 1311, 1314 (8th Cir. 1976)). Given the nature of the crime of loan-sharking, the court concluded that the warrant "set reasonable parameters for the search." Id. In United States v. Williams, 633 F.2d 742, 746 (8th Cir. 1980), the court noted the warrant described the particular types of documents sought and specified that they must relate to the specific crimes under investigation. Thus limited, the warrant was held to be sufficiently detailed to withstand attack. In United States v. Johnson, 541 F.2d at 1314, it was observed that courts have grounded their decisions in "practicality and reasonableness"; accordingly, they
have found no impermissible vagueness in descriptions specifying merely "bookmaking paraphernalia"; "gambling paraphernalia"; *488 "run down sheets . . . and like paraphernalia", or "nine guns" when twenty-six were actually present to be seized.
In view of the principles set forth in these cases, it appears the warrant under consideration here does not suffer from a lack of specificity. All vehicles were identified by their VIN tags; the stereo speakers were "custom made"; and although the license plates, registrations, titles, towing bills, receipts and bills of sale were not specifically referred to by identification number, they were limited to those "from stolen or salvaged vehicles." The warrant was thus limited to a type of item to be seized and limited the scope of seizure to those items relevant to the present investigation. It did not permit the executing officers to rummage through the defendant's private belongings. The description was sufficiently definite for the executing officers "to reasonably ascertain and identify. . . the things to be seized." Id. at 1313; see United States v. Williams, 633 F.2d at 746.
II. Motions for Mistrial and to Strike.
The charge against Leto, arising from alleged possession of the stolen van, required the State to show he knew or had reasonable cause to believe it had been stolen. § 714.1(4), The Code 1979. At trial, Kathy Huffman testified for the State about a prior conversation with Leto. On direct examination she testified:
Q. Now did Tom Leto make any reference to the van?
A. He did.
* * * * * *
Q. [W]hat is the extent of the conversation as you recall it about the van, concerning Mr. Leto and the van?
A. It was that the van had to get off come off the street.
The defendant's counsel then cross-examined Huffman about the events contemporaneous with that conversation but without reference to the statement itself. On redirect examination by the State, Huffman then testified:
Q. When did you have the conversation with Mr. Leto concerning it having to be taken off the street?
A. It was the night [Wagner] was late to come get the van.
Q. So there was reference at that time to the fact that it was a hot vehicle, is that the appropriate way to term it?
A. Yes.
Q. And that was made by (the defendant], is that correct?
A. Yes.
(Emphasis added). The defendant declined to conduct recross-examination of Huffman. After a short recess, the witness was recalled by the State for further redirect examination; then after recross-examination the defendant moved for a mistrial, and in the alternative, to strike Huffman's testimony, on the ground he had not been previously alerted to the inculpatory statement testified to by the witness.
Iowa Rule of Criminal Procedure 13 provides in part:
Upon pretrial motion of a defendant the court shall order the attorney for the state to permit the defendant to inspect and copy or photograph . . . the substance of any oral statement made by the defendant which the state intends to offer in evidence at trial.
Iowa R.Crim.P. 13(2)(a)(1). A companion rule further provides:
If, subsequent to compliance with an order issued pursuant to this rule, either party discovers additional evidence, or decides to use evidence which is additional to that originally intended for use, and such additional evidence is subject to discovery under this rule, the party shall promptly file written notice of the existence of the additional evidence to allow the other party to make an appropriate motion for additional discovery.
Iowa R.Crim.P. 13(5). A pretrial motion for production of evidence had been filed by Leto pursuant to rule 13(2)(a)(1):
*489 Let the State produce for copying and inspection all written or recorded statements or oral confessions or admissions subsequently reduced to writing, or summarized in police reports, made by the Defendant or copieswhether inculpatory or exculpatorythereof, within the possession, custody or control of the County Attorney, the existence of which is known or may become known to the County Attorney. This request includes statements, made to witnesses other than police officers at anytime subsequent to the theft.
While it might be argued the inculpatory statement attributed to Leto fell outside the scope of the motion for production because it was not a "written or recorded statement or oral confession subsequently reduced to writing, or summarized in policy reports," the State apparently concedes the motion was broad enough to cover it. The issue then, is the appropriate remedy to be applied. Rule 13 provides:
If at any time during the course of the proceedings it is brought to the attention of the court that a party has failed to comply with this rule or with an order issued pursuant to this rule, the court may upon timely application order such party to permit the discovery or inspection, grant a continuance, or prohibit the party from introducing any evidence not disclosed, or it may enter such other order as it deems just under the circumstances.
Iowa R.Crim.P. 13(6)(c) (emphasis added). This rule accords considerable discretion to the trial court in enforcing the discovery rules. See ABA Standards for Criminal Justice, Discovery and Procedure Before Trial § 4.7, Commentary at 107 (1970); Fed. R.Crim.P. 16(d)(2), Advisory Committee Note ("Such discretion will permit the court to consider the reasons why disclosure was not made, the extent of the prejudice, if any, to the opposing party, the feasibility of rectifying that prejudice by a continuance, and any other relevant circumstances.") We said recently in State v. Marchellino, 304 N.W.2d 252, 255 (1981) that the preclusion sanction was not available for a defendant's failure to comply with his duty of disclosure under Iowa Rule of Criminal Procedure 12(3) because it was not provided, expressly or by implication, in the rules. Preclusion is, however, among the options provided for failure of the State to comply with its discovery duties. Iowa R.Crim.P. 13(6)(c); State v. Marchellino, 304 N.W.2d at 256. The issue here is whether the trial court abused its discretion in denying the mistrial and the motion to strike the challenged testimony.
In reviewing the record on this issue, we conclude the court did not abuse its discretion in refusing to impose the sanctions requested by Leto. The assistant county attorney acknowledged that he was aware of Leto's inculpatory statement the day before Huffman testified about it. However, according to him, the witness had merely related Leto's statement about getting the van off the street; the embellishment on that statement, that it "was a hot vehicle," did not occur until her redirect examination at trial.
The reasons for failure to provide timely discovery may properly be considered by the court. Fed.R.Crim.P. 16(d)(2), Advisory Committee Note, supra. In explaining his failure to divulge the inculpatory statement, the assistant county attorney said, "[t]here was a reference [in the pretrial interview of Huffman] that the statement was made the vehicle had to be off the street. That was understanding of what was going to be out of [sic] trial. I apparently, at the time, did not think that was important enough to get on the phone to [defense counsel]." The trial court did not state its reasons for denying the defendant's request for sanctions. However, under the circumstances of this case, we do not believe the State's failure to divulge the Huffman statement mandated a mistrial or striking of the testimony.
Moreover, as the State argues, the defendant was required to make timely objection to the State's lack of compliance. It contends the defendant failed to make a "timely application" for an order as required under rule 13(6)(c) to either compel *490 discovery or impose sanctions. We note that in contrast to federal rule 16(d)(2), which is virtually identical to rule 13(6)(c), our rule requires timely application for the order. We assume that language was added for a purpose, and that failure to bring the matter to the court's attention could amount to a waiver. Our rule requires that a motion to strike be made "as soon as the grounds therefor are apparent or as soon as is convenient after the objectionable statements are given by the witness." State v. Whitfield, 212 N.W.2d 402, 410 (Iowa 1973); see State v. Bruno, 204 N.W.2d 879, 887 (Iowa 1973); State v. Smith, 248 Iowa 603, 610, 81 N.W.2d 657, 661 (1957). A similar requirement exists as to a motion for mistrial. State v. Cornelius, 293 N.W.2d 267, 269 (Iowa 1980) ("[a] mistrial motion must be made when the grounds therefor first became apparent"; "the defendant should have asked for a mistrial when the allegedly prejudicial question was asked," no error preserved); see State v. Ware, 205 N.W.2d 700, 702 (Iowa 1973).
Application of this reasoning to the requirement of "timely application" in rule 13(6)(c) points to the conclusion that the defendant failed to properly invoke its remedies. The evidence was admitted without objection on direct and redirect examination; the defendant's motions made following recross-examination were not timely. The defendant offered no explanation for his tardiness in bringing the matter to the court's attention. Accordingly, the court did not abuse its discretion in denying the mistrial motion and motion to strike.
III. Admission of "other crimes" evidence.
At trial, the State introduced evidence tending to show that the defendant was involved in the theft of three pickup trucks, owned by Kenneth Hansen, Craig Warner, and Gary Matthews, in the Des Moines area. The reception of this "other crimes" evidence, he contends, constituted reversible error.
Knowledge that goods in possession are stolen may be inferred from other acts of a similar nature. 2 J. Wigmore, Evidence § 234, at 227-29 (1940). "The reasoning . . . is that the recurrence of a like act lessens by each instance the possibility that a given instance could be the result of inadvertence, accident, or other innocent intent." Id. at 228; see State v. Cott, 283 N.W.2d 324, 326-27 (Iowa 1979); State v. Folkens, 281 N.W.2d 1, 5 (Iowa 1979); State v. McDaniel, 265 N.W.2d 917, 921 (Iowa 1978) (other crimes evidence admissible to show absence of mistake or accident). However, even if such evidence is relevant, the trial court must exercise its discretion in determining whether its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to the defendant. State v. McDaniel, 265 N.W.2d at 921; State v. Johnson, 224 N.W.2d 617, 621 (Iowa 1974).
The defendant argues that the State failed to present "clear proof" that he was involved in the other crimes. State v. Johnson, 224 N.W.2d 617, 621 (1974); State v. Fetters, 202 N.W.2d 84, 92 (1972). This requirement is said to ensure that "the probative value of the evidence . . . outweigh[s] the possibility of prejudice to the defendant." United States v. Broadway, 477 F.2d 991, 995 (5th Cir. 1973). We apply the "clear proof" standard here in assessing the probative value of the "other crimes" evidence. All three of the other thefts occurred within a ninety-day period. Leto possessed a pickup, with an attached camper, which included parts definitely shown to have come from the Hansen and Matthews vehicles. In addition, it was shown to have incorporated several parts which were similar to those from the Warner vehicle, although definite identification was not possible. The search of Leto's residence, moreover, revealed a mutilated license plate from the Warner pickup in a coat sleeve; the VIN plate on the pickup was illegally attached; and Leto and Wagner had been observed working on the pickup in Leto's garage.
This evidence was of substantial probative value; the issue is whether that probative value is "substantially outweighed" *491 by the danger of prejudice. State v. McDaniel, 265 N.W.2d at 921. To the extent the evidence of other crimes went to show Leto's knowledge that the van in question was stolen, it was largely cumulative; Kathy Huffman testified Leto knew it was "hot" and had to be taken "off the street". Because such evidence might improperly tend to show that the defendant had a propensity to commit crime, we must rely upon the trial court's exercise of its sound discretion to weigh probative value against prejudicial effect. Id. The trial court apparently determined the probative value was sufficient to warrant its admission. We note that a limiting instruction was given to the jury to explain the limited purposes for which the other incidents could be considered: "to show intent, knowledge, common scheme or identity." The court did not abuse its discretion in admitting the evidence of other crimes for the purposes as so limited.
We find no reversible error.
AFFIRMED.
NOTES
[1]  The search warrant application also referred to information received from four unnamed informants. The requisite trustworthiness of the informants was not established and the State, on appeal, concedes that information must be disregarded in assessing probable cause. See Aguilar v. Texas, 378 U.S. 108, 114-15, 84 S. Ct. 1509, 1513-14, 12 L. Ed. 2d 723, 729 (1964); State v. Post, 286 N.W.2d 195, 199 (Iowa 1979).
[2]  The Court in Coolidge v. New Hampshire said:
The second, distinct objective [served by the warrant requirement] is that those searches deemed necessary should be as limited as possible. Here, the specific evil is the `general warrant' abhorred by the colonists, and the problem is not that of intrusion per se, but of a general, [exploratory] rummaging in a person's belongings. The warrant accomplishes this second objective by requiring a `particular description' of the things to be seized.
403 U.S. at 467, 91 S. Ct. at 2038-39, 29 L.Ed.2d at 583 (citations omitted).

=== CASE 9741320 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:27.450218+00 ===

Fine, J.
The defendant was convicted of two counts of armed robbery while masked, G. L. c. 265, § 17, arising out *31of a holdup of a bank in Beverly. On appeal, he contends that his motion to suppress three statements used against him at trial should have been allowed. We discuss separately the circumstances in which each of the statements was made and the propriety of its admission. We conclude that admission of one of the statements was error but that it was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. We therefore affirm the convictions.
1. The first statement. The defendant had provided confidential information to Salem police Sergeant Richard Urbanowicz which had helped solve earlier bank robberies. In the weeks following the Beverly bank robbery, the defendant, without indicating his own involvement, provided confidential information to Sergeant Urbanowicz concerning that robbery. Urbanowicz passed the information along to Beverly Detective John Bianchi. Because the Beverly police had information of their own linking the defendant’s car to the robbery, he became a suspect. At Detective Bianchi’s request, Sergeant Urbanowicz revealed the defendant’s identity to the Beverly officers and agreed to try to set up a meeting with the defendant. Although the defendant later said he had become aware that he was a suspect, he agreed to the meeting.
Detective Bianchi and Captain John Cassola, also of the Beverly police, arranged to meet the defendant in his home on a Friday morning about a month after the robbery for the express purpose of questioning him about the robbery. When the police arrived, the defendant was home with his children. The atmosphere was relaxed and the defendant spoke freely. Although he did not reveal that he was a participant, he described how the robbery was carried out, and he named several individuals who had been involved in it. The defendant agreed to allow the officers to take his photograph to include in an array to be shown to bank employees. At no point during the interview did the officers give the defendant the Miranda warnings. When told that the photographs would also be shown to two witnesses who were present when the getaway car was stolen, the defendant made the first statement *32in issue: “I never said I wasn’t there when the car was stolen.”
The defendant moved to have the statement suppressed on the ground that, before making it, he had not been given the Miranda warnings. The judge ruled that the warnings were not required because the defendant was not in custody. See Commonwealth v. Bryant, 390 Mass. 729, 736 (1984). There is ample evidence to support the conclusion that the defendant was not in custody before making the statement, and on appeal there is no contention that the environment in which it was made was coercive. Instead, the defendant focuses on his previous relationship with Sergeant Urbanowicz as a confidential informant and contends that, because of that relationship and the absence of any warnings, the Commonwealth failed to satisfy the requirement that it prove beyond a reasonable doubt, see Commonwealth v. Tavares, 385 Mass. 140, 152, cert. denied, 457 U.S. 1137, (1982), that the statement was voluntary.
The defendant points to the evidence that the meeting was arranged by the officer with whom he had been cooperating, that nothing was said to indicate that the discussion was not confidential, and that no mention was made that he was a target of the investigation. Failure of the detectives to warn him that he might be charged with the crime they were investigating and that any statements he might make could be used to convict him of that crime, he maintains, was, in the circumstances, so deceptive as to make the statement involuntary. See Commonwealth v. Dustin, 373 Mass. 612, 615-616 (1977), cert. denied, 435 U.S. 943 (1978); Commonwealth v. Meehan, 377 Mass. 552, 563 (1979), cert. dismissed, 445 U.S. 39 (1980); Commonwealth v. Nero, 14 Mass. App. Ct. 714, 717 (1982); Commonwealth v. Chandler, 29 Mass. App. Ct. 571, 576-577 (1990); United States v. Rogers, 906 F.2d 189, 192 (5th Cir. 1990). But see Commonwealth v. Wills, 398 Mass. 768, 777 (1986) (suspect need not be advised of his status as such before his statement may be considered voluntary).
We are aware of no decision, and the defendant does not point us to any, holding that the relationship between the po*33lice and a confidential informant guarantees that incriminatory statements made in the course of the relationship may not be used to convict the informant of the crime being investigated. There was no evidence that the police made a deal with the defendant, or that he was intentionally misled. See Illinois v. Perkins, 496 U.S. 292, 297 (1990). There may well be a situation so misleading to an informant that he would reasonably believe that he has nothing to fear from making an incriminatory statement about the crime; such a statement might not meet the test of voluntariness. This, however, is not such a situation. The officers stated their purpose at the outset: to question the defendant about the Beverly bank robbery. They were from a different police department than Sergeant Urbanowicz, and the defendant had never met with them previously. There is no indication that the officers said or did anything to create the impression that they would regard the information the defendant provided as confidential and that they would not use the defendant’s statements to prosecute him for the crime. Contrast United States v. Rogers, 906 F.2d at 191. It was not error, therefore, for the motion to suppress the statement to be denied.
2. The second statement. After they left the defendant’s home midday on Friday, the Beverly police officers showed the defendant’s photograph to two tellers who were in the bank at the time of the robbery. They made positive identifications. Later the same day, Detective Bianchi called the defendant to inform him that his photograph had been selected and asked him to come to the Beverly police station. The defendant arrived in the evening with his wife and a child. He was given his Miranda warnings and placed under arrest. He indicated to the officers that he had been aware all along that he was a suspect. He expressed his fear of the other participants, at least one of whom was being held in jail, and he discussed his need for protective custody, bail, and the possibility of a disposition not involving incarceration. When the defendant asked how he could have been identified if masked, the detectives told him he had been seen going into the bank. The defendant replied by shaking his head and *34commenting as an acknowledgement, “Seen going into the bank.”
The defendant contends that his arrest was unlawful and that the statement should have been suppressed as a product of the unlawful arrest. He bases his claim on the alleged constitutional violations committed in the course of the morning interview. We have decided, however, that there were no such violations. The officers had probable cause to arrest the defendant once his photograph, taken with his consent, had been identified by the tellers, and the Miranda warnings were given before he made the statement in issue. Denial of the suppression motion was not error.
3. The third statement. When asked at the Beverly police station on Friday evening after his arrest if he wanted to cooperate further, the defendant asked for the weekend to think about it. He was unable to raise the required bail and was kept in police lockup over the weekend. On Monday morning, Detective Bianchi approached the defendant and, without repeating the Miranda warnings, asked him if he had decided whether to cooperate. The defendant responded that “he wanted a little more time to think about it.” Detective Bianchi proceeded immediately to discuss protective custody. Then he said, “[W]e would at least like to get the gun back.” The defendant replied with the third statement in issue to the effect that they already had the gun, as it was the same gun they had taken from an individual arrested for another robbery.1
The defendant moved to suppress the statement on the ground that it was the product of interrogation conducted by the police after he had expressed his desire to remain silent and without the benefit of a new set of Miranda warnings. The judge found “beyond a reasonable doubt” that the statement was made “voluntarily and after the Miranda warning was given two days earlier.” On appeal, the defendant contends that he had expressed his desire to cut off questioning *35and that his wish to remain silent had not been “scrupulously honored.” See Michigan v. Mosley, 423 U.S. 96, 104 (1975).
In light of the fact that on Monday morning, after saying he wanted more time to consider whether to cooperate, the defendant discussed his predicament with the officers in a sophisticated manner and did not hesitate to answer the question about the gun,2 had the Miranda warnings been repeated, suppression would not have been required. See Commonwealth v. Gallant, 381 Mass. 465, 466 (1980); Commonwealth v. Bradshaw, 385 Mass. 244, 265-266 (1982); Commonwealth v. Westmoreland, 388 Mass. 269, 278 (1983); Commonwealth v. Pennellatore, 392 Mass. 382, 387-388 (1984). We think it dispositive of the claim, however, that a new set of Miranda warnings was not given. Miranda warnings, once given, “are not to be accorded unlimited efficacy or perpetuity.” Commonwealth v. Cruz, 373 Mass. 676, 687 (1977), quoting from United States v. Hopkins, 433 F.2d 1041, 1045 (5th Cir. 1970), cert. denied, 401 U.S. 1013 (1971). The original warnings, on Friday evening, were insufficient to carry over to the interrogation by Detective Bianchi on Monday morning, see Commonwealth v. Coplin, 34 Mass. App. Ct. 478, 483 (1993), and the period between the warning and the resumption of interrogation exceeded by far those time lapses which have been found insignificant for purposes of determining the validity of the defendant’s knowing, voluntary, and intelligent waiver of his rights. See Commonwealth v. Cruz, 373 Mass. at 685-687 & n.6 (three hours); Commonwealth v. Silva, 388 Mass. 495, 502 (1983) (three hours); Commonwealth v. Harris, 11 Mass. App. Ct. 165, 174 (1981) (less than one and one-half hours). But see Commonwealth v. Sousa, 350 Mass. 591, 598 (1966) (eighteen hours). In the circumstances here, including both the lapse of a considerable period of time and the defendant’s expression of his wish for more time before deciding whether to cooperate, the Miranda warnings should have been repeated before he was questioned further by the *36police. Absent the warnings, there was no showing of a knowing, voluntary, and intelligent waiver, and the statement should have been suppressed. See Commonwealth v. Murray, 359 Mass. 541, 544-546 (1971) (lapse of two days between warning and interrogation not sufficient to establish waiver).
We conclude, however, that the error with regard to the third statement, that the officers had the gun because it was one used in another robbery, was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. See Commonwealth v. Marquetty, 28 Mass. App. Ct. 690, 696 (1990). The statement was not an admission of the defendant’s participation in the robbery, but it did tend to incriminate him as it indicated that he had detailed knowledge about the robbery. However, numerous other statements of his, properly admitted, revealed that he possessed very detailed knowledge of the robbery, including the identity of the participants, how the getaway vehicle was obtained, and where the red-dye soaked money was taken to be cleaned. Moreover, the other evidence of the defendant’s guilt was substantial. Apart from the defendant’s numerous inculpatory statements, properly admitted, two eyewitnesses identified the defendant’s photograph and one identified him in court.3
Judgment affirmed.
The defendant had previously told Sergeant Urbanowicz and the two Beverly officers that the individual from whom they had taken the gun was involved in the Beverly bank robbery in issue.
The Commonwealth does not contend that there was an issue of public safety relating to the gun. See New York v. Quarles, 467 U.S. 649 (1984).
A third witness identified as a passenger in the getaway car an individual who had been named by the defendant as a participant, thus confirming that the defendant knew the details of the robbery.

=== CASE 9741321 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:27.454201+00 ===

Kass, J.
(concurring). To be sure, “Miranda warnings, once given, are not to be accorded unlimited efficacy or perpetuity.” United States v. Hopkins, 433 F.2d 1041, 1045 (5th Cir. 1970), cert. denied, 401 U.S. 1013 (1971). Whether, however, the lapse of time between initial warning and later statement is consequential, depends on answering a further question: “Did the defendant, with a full knowledge of his legal rights, knowingly and intentionally relinquish them?” Commonwealth v. Cruz, 373 Mass. 676, 687 (1977). *37Miller v. United States, 396 F.2d 492, 496 (8th Cir. 1968), cert. denied, 393 U.S. 1031 (1969). United States v. Standing Soldier, 538 F.2d 196, 201 n.5 (8th Cir.), cert. denied, 429 U.S. 1025 (1976). The particular circumstances of the accused’s situation, e.g., psychological pressures, and the accused’s background, experience, and conduct are guides to assessing the voluntariness of a statement. Commonwealth v. Coplin, 34 Mass. App. Ct. 478, 482 (1993).
Here, the defendant is a double agent. He simultaneously participates in bank robberies and reports to the police on that particular specialty in criminal enterprise. He engages freely in conversations with the police, choosing what he wishes to talk about and not talk about. He appears serene in the conviction — mistakenly, as it turns out — that if he is circumspect about what he says, he can safely play a role in the criminal and prosecutorial worlds. In his dialogue with the police, the defendant displays knowledge of police practices, shuts off conversation so that he may reflect on his situation, and bargains for protective custody, bail, and a favorable disposition. Those actions manifest full knowledge by the defendant about his legal rights and a calculated relinquishing of the right to remain silent. When a person is selective in his utterances in this fashion, it is difficult to escape the conclusion that any statements made are spoken while conscious of the right to remain silent. Commonwealth v. Westmoreland, 388 Mass. 269, 278 (1983). It is divorced from reality to suppose that the defendant, acting as he did, had forgotten over the weekend the Miranda warnings administered late on the previous Friday. It is equally implausible that the conduct of the defendant, while he was consciously engaged in maneuver with the police, would have been influenced by a repetition of the Miranda warnings. In the particular circumstances, repetition would have been a formulaic ceremony.
I, therefore, disassociate myself from so much of the court’s opinion as suggests that in this case it was legally necessary in the interview on Monday to refresh the Miranda warnings earlier given to the defendant.

=== CASE 9741322 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:30.545689+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE TULLY delivered the opinion of the court: On April 2, 1991 Toni Preckwinkle and Timothy Evans faced off in an election bid to become the next alderman of the 4th ward in the City of Chicago. Immediately following the election, Preckwinkle was declared the unofficial winner, winning with less than a 5% majority over Evans. On April 4, 1991, less than two days after the election, Evans filed a petition for a discovery recount with the Board of Election Commissioners of the City of Chicago (Board of Elections), wherein he demanded an immediate discovery recount. (See 111. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 46, par. 22 — 9.1.) In accordance with statutory guidelines, the Board of Elections refused to conduct the discovery recount until the official results were proclaimed on April 9, 1991. However, in accordance with statute, Evans was required to file an election contest complaint within five days of the election or on April 8, 1991, which he did. (111. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 24, par. 21 — 27.) Evans’ initial complaint alleged certain irregularities in the election, which he had learned based upon poll watchers and other individuals with firsthand knowledge of events which occurred on election night. With this complaint, Evans concurrently filed a motion for leave to amend pending discovery and the results of the recount. The court continued the motion. The discovery recount process was not complete until April 29, 1991. Preckwinkle was declared to be the winner by a margin of 109 votes. After all but one of the precincts had been counted, Evans presented his first amended complaint, incorporating the results of the recount, on April 24, 1991. On June 5, 1991, the trial court rendered its written judgment order finding that the initial complaint failed to sufficiently allege with specificity at least 109 votes which were mistallied. The initial complaint was, therefore, dismissed with prejudice. Secondly, the first amended complaint was found to be legally insufficient because it was filed beyond the statutory deadline of April 8, 1991. The motion for leave to amend, which was timely filed on April 8, 1991, was also denied.  On appeal, appellant argues that the first amended complaint should not have been dismissed under the election statutes. There are two statutes which must be concurrently read within the context of this case. The first governs the filing of the initial complaint and its legal sufficiency: "Any candidate whose name appears on the ballots used in any ward of the city at any election for alderman, may contest the election of the candidate who appears to be elected *** by filing within 5 days after such election with the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Cook County, a complaint in writing, verified by the candidate making the contest, setting forth the grounds of the contest. *** In case the court shall decide that the complaint is insufficient in law, or that the candidate who appears to have been elected on the face of the return has been duly elected, the complaint shall be dismissed.” (Emphasis added.) Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 24, par. 21 — 27.  "Whether or not a complaint is "legally sufficient” may depend on the interpretation of one or more election laws, including: "A court hearing an election contest pursuant to this Article or any other provision of the law shall grant a petition for a recount properly filed where, based on the facts alleged in such petition, there appears a reasonable likelihood the recount will change the results of the election.” 111. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 46, par. 23 — 23.2. On appeal Evans contends that absent the allowance of his first amended complaint, under the election laws, he is forced to argue his entire case without first availing himself of the fruits of the discovery recount. In election contests other than Chicago aldermanic elections, candidates are given 17 days to file an election contest in court. Chicago aldermen, however, are held to stricter standards and they must file an election contest within five days of the election. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 24, par. 21 — 27; Robinson v. Jones (1989), 186 Ill. App. 3d 82, 542 N.E.2d 127. Evans contends that the trial court’s holding, that an aldermanic pleading may never be amended in order to incorporate the results of a discovery recount, renders the contest statute of the Election Code a nullity. Section 22 — 9.1 of the Election Code, which permits losing candidates to examine all of the election paperwork in one-quarter of the precincts to find errors, applies to all candidates. Such information is made available to the candidate provided he or she files a discovery recount petition with the Board of Election within five days "after the last day for proclamation of the results of any canvass” or within 12 days of the election. Where the count is incorrect, the losing candidate is then given up to 37 days after the election to file a challenge in court. See Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 46, par. 23 — 20. Chicago alderman, however, are treated differently as they must file their election contest within five days of the election. Although Evans filed his initial challenge within the statutory time frame, he then attempted to file a first amended complaint on April 24, 1991, after the expiration of the five-day period. However, within that original five-day period, Evans had filed a motion for leave to amend his original complaint, explaining that he wanted to incorporate the results of the election recount. In support of his argument that his first amended complaint was improperly dismissed, Evans relies on Orbach v. Axelrod (1981), 100 Ill. App. 3d 973, 427 N.E.2d 399. Orbach involved a ward committeeman contest, wherein the election contest was required to be filed within a 10-day period. As in the case sub judice, Orbach sought to incorporate the results of the discovery recount in his election complaint, so he waited until after the expiration of the 10-day period to file. While the court held that the complaint not filed within the statutory time limit must be dismissed, it also found that a petition first filed within the 10 days could always be amended to incorporate the discovery recount: "We believe that the parties could seek to amend a timely filed petition for election contest to incorporate the findings of the discovery recount in time to avoid an adverse ruling from a motion to dismiss based, for instance, on allegations of lack of specificity. Moreover, we note that there is no allegation in the record that either or both parties sought to get the discovery recount commenced within the 10-day period.” Orbach, 100 Ill. App. 3d at 981, 427 N.E.2d at 405. Similarly, in the seminal case of Joyce v. Blankenship (1948), 399 Ill. 136, 77 N.E.2d 325, the court found, in an election contest where there were many irregularities in the election contest complaint and the complaint was dismissed, that the plaintiff should have been permitted to file an amended complaint. The court found: "Even though the complaint was not as complete as it should be, we think sufficient good points of contest were set out, and no doubt if the amendment had been permitted, the objections as made to the complaint would have been obviated. The serious question presented is the denial of plaintiff’s motion to amend. A proceeding to contest an election is statutory and is not a proceeding in chancery, but after the petition is filed the case is to be tried in like manner as cases in chancery. The practice of dismissing a [complaint] is confined to cases where there is a want of equity upon the face of the [complaint], where it is manifest that no amendment can aid it, or where there is a want of jurisdiction. [Citations.]” Joyce, 399 Ill. at 141, 77 N.E.2d at 328. Preckwinkle relies on the cases of Zahray v. Emricson (1962), 25 Ill. 2d 121, 182 N.E.2d 756, and Young v. Washington (1984), 127 Ill. App. 3d 1094, 470 N.E.2d 14, for the proposition that an election contest complaint cannot be amended where the original timely filed petition or complaint cannot withstand a motion to dismiss. In Zahray, the amended petition to contest election was dismissed where the trial court found the plaintiffs had not made out a prima facie case entitling them to a recount. On appeal, the court affirmed finding that the amended petition failed to set forth the number of votes cast in the election or the number of votes received by each of the candidates; nor did it allege that votes cast for one candidate were deserving to another. The petition was drafted in broad and general allegations regarding irregularities in the election process. As to its drafting, the court stated: "And while the pleadings in contest proceedings are not required to comply with the strict technical rules applicable in civil actions, there should be such strictness as will prevent the setting aside of the acts of sworn officials without adequate and well defined cause.” Zahray, 25 Ill. 2d at 124, 182 N.E.2d at 758. In Young, it was held that where a court hears an election contest petition, at some point a preliminary determination must be made as to the sufficiency of the petition. Where the petition is found lacking and the time for filing a suit has lapsed, the court is without jurisdiction to permit the filing of amendments to the pleadings. However, it should be noted that Young is factually inapposite to the case sub judice, since Young involved whether a second amended complaint could be filed. The court implicitly approved of the filing of the first amended complaint which was filed within the statutory deadline for filing an election contest.  In this case, Timothy Evans filed a motion for leave to amend his election contest complaint within the statutory five-day deadline following the election. In this motion, he requested to amend his complaint pending the results of the discovery recount. The trial court eventually dismissed the original complaint as well as the first amended complaint. While the sufficiency of the original complaint has not been raised by appellant, we would simply note that in its findings regarding the "sufficiency” of the original complaint, the trial court availed itself of the findings of the discovery recount in determining whether the original complaint was sufficient. However, pursuant to the guidelines set forth in Young v. Washington and its progeny, this is not the appropriate standard to be applied. The complaint requires a statement which is a positive and clear assertion that a recount will change the outcome of the election. After the election recount there was a difference of 109 votes between the candidates. In his first amended complaint, Evans alleged with specificity: (1) the number of votes cast for each candidate; (2) a specific number of uninitialed ballots cast for Preckwinkle, broken down by precinct; (3) a substantial number of voters who allegedly voted without proper voter identification; and (4) numerous and substantial other voting irregularities for many specified precincts. At the end of the complaint, Evans alleges that Preckwinkle’s total should be reduced by 311.38 votes and that his total should be increased by three votes. While we do not pass on the viability of Evans’ mathematics, as this is the function of the trial court, we find that Evans has drafted a good-faith petition which was timely filed within the statutory deadline. Evans has set forth statements declaring with particularity the specific precincts in which the mistake, fraud or irregularity were believed to have occurred. The mathematical totals also support the possibility of a change in the result of the election. Moreover, because his original complaint was filed within the statutory five-day deadline, any amendment filed outside of the deadline, made promptly and in good faith, should have related back to the original filing date. (See Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 110, par. 2 — 616.) Thus, the trial court should have considered the sufficiency of the second and not the first complaint. Based upon the foregoing facts and case law, we reverse and remand the dismissal of the first amended complaint with instructions that the allegations contained therein should be considered on their merits and a final proclamation as to the winner be made. Reversed and remanded. CERDA, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9741323 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:30.550523+00 ===

JUSTICE GREIMAN, specially concurring: I agree with the majority that plaintiff should have had an opportunity to amend his original petition. Without such an opportunity, the right to contest election results of a race for the office of alderman in the City of Chicago is an empty privilege. For the sake of judicial economy, the parties have asked us to examine the sufficiency of the first amended complaint to determine whether there appears to be a reasonable likelihood that the recount will change the results of the election. The majority has chosen not to make that determination and, although I am prepared to rule upon the several items in the complaint as to whether they constitute proper grounds for changing or adjusting the original count, I do agree with the majority that we should remand this matter to the trial court for the mathematical computation necessary for the ultimate disposition of the controversy. Both parties cite Pullen v. Mulligan (1990), 138 Ill. 2d 21, 561 N.E.2d 585, which has become the leading decision in Illinois for determining the validity of ballots cast. Pullen reminds us that the cutting edge in all of the election cases is the recognition of the proper purpose of the mechanics of election and the importance of giving effect to the voters’ will in certain instances even though there has not been strict compliance with statutory provisions of the Election Code. Generally, statutes that proscribe the duties of election officials are mandatory if they state that noncompliance voids the ballot, but are directory if they do not. (Pullen, 138 Ill. 2d at 46.) Moreover, the failure of officials to do their precise duty under the Election Code should not invalidate a ballot if the spirit of the law has not been violated and the voters’ intention can be fairly ascertained. Pullen, 138 Ill. 2d at 47; Craig v. Peterson (1968), 39 Ill. 2d 191, 233 N.E.2d 345. Pullen has further recognized a distinction between those cases when the petitioner claims that the election is permeated with fraud and those, as in the case at bar, where there is no allegation of fraud. With these principles of construction firmly in mind, I would determine that the following paragraphs of plaintiff’s first amended complaint are appropriate allegations which would support his request for relief: Paragraph 8: In-precinct uninitialled ballots should not be counted; Paragraph 9: An uncounted vote should be added to the Evans’ total; Paragraph 10: The absence of any sworn election judge’s initials on the ballots should render them void; Paragraph 11: The casting of ballots which were prepared for an earlier election is not overcome by the judges’ actions in recasting them. It is difficult to imagine anything that might make election results more suspect; Paragraphs 17 and 24: Votes that are evidenced by neither a binder entry, affidavit nor a poll sheet notation should not be counted; Paragraph 19: The two votes cast by a single voter should be adjusted notwithstanding this voter’s zealous dedication to participate in the electoral process; and Paragraph 23: The trial court must make adjustment for an over-vote in the several precincts where this occurred. On the other hand, the voters’ intentions and their right to cast their ballots in accordance with such intention should not be frustrated by the following allegations in plaintiffs first amended complaint: Paragraph 12: Noting the wrong precinct number on the judge’s oath of office should not invalidate ballots initialled by that judge in the precinct to which she was assigned; Paragraphs 13, 14, 15, and 16: Errors of omission in the affidavits for voters’ assistance should not disenfranchise people who have come to cast their votes despite great personal or physical difficulties; Paragraphs 18 and 20: Wrong or missing addresses should not invalidate the ballots cast where the identity of the voter can be otherwise ascertained by the judges of election; Paragraphs 21 and 22: Printed, rather than cursive, written names and slightly differently spelled names should not be discounted; Paragraph 25: Ballots not received by election day should not be counted; and Paragraph 26: Where there is no fraud alleged, printing the name of the candidate on the ballot cannot be taken as an identifying mark requiring that it not be considered. The parties suggest that we should make these determinations in the "interest of judicial economy”; however, I must wonder whether that statement is somewhat tongue-in-cheek considering that we are still adjudicating the 1991 city elections at a time when politicians, media, an army of consultants and even a few interested citizens are beginning to think about the 1995 city elections. The parties must share some of the blame since it took them a year to complete their briefing. However, as I observed in my dissent in McDunn v. Williams (1992), 247 Ill. App. 3d 935, 947-50, 618 N.E.2d 262, vacated (1993), 156 Ill. 2d 288, 620 N.E.2d 385 (with due apologies for quoting myself), the parties are innocent victims of the process and "[w]hether by new legislative initiatives or supreme court rule, we should consider development of summary and expedited procedures to insure that the will of the electorate is not again frustrated.” McDunn, 247 Ill. App. 3d at 950.

=== CASE 2226887 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:21.675948+00 ===

636 N.E.2d 1129 (1994)
264 Ill. App. 3d 6
201 Ill. Dec. 697
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Clarence WEALER, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 2-93-0034.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Second District.
June 29, 1994.
*1130 G. Joseph Weller, Deputy Defender, Office of the State Appellate Defender, Elgin, Thomas A. Lilien, Asst. Defender, Office of State Appellate Defender, Elgin, for Clarence Wealer.
Michael J. Waller, Lake County State's Atty., Waukegan, William L. Browers, Deputy Director, State's Atty. Appellate Prosecutor, Mary Beth Burns (argued), State's Atty. Appellate Prosecutor, Elgin, for People.
Justice DOYLE delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant, Clarence Wealer, entered a negotiated plea of guilty to the charge of aggravated criminal sexual abuse (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1991, ch. 38, par. 12-16(c)(1)(i) (now 720 ILCS 5/12-16(c)(1)(i) (West 1992))) in the circuit court of Lake County and was sentenced to 8½ years' imprisonment. Following sentencing, the State moved for an order to obtain blood and saliva samples from defendant pursuant to section 5-4-3(c) of the Unified Code of Corrections (Ill.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 38, par. 1005-4-3 (now codified, as amended, at 730 ILCS 5/5-4-3 (West 1992))). Defendant objected, contending that section 5-4-3 mandated the taking of blood and saliva samples in contravention of his right to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures under the fourth amendment to the United States Constitution and article I, section 6, of the 1970 Illinois Constitution. (U.S. Const. amend. IV; Ill. Const.1970, art. I, § 6.) The trial court granted the State's motion, denied defendant's motion to reconsider, and granted defendant a temporary stay of enforcement pending his application to this court for a stay pending appeal. Defendant filed a timely notice of appeal, and this court granted defendant's motion to stay the order for blood and saliva samples pending the outcome of his appeal.
In this case of first impression, we are asked to consider whether section 5-4-3 of the Unified Code of Corrections, which requires persons convicted of certain enumerated sex offenses to submit blood and saliva specimens to the Illinois Department of State Police for analysis and categorization into genetic marker groupings (commonly known as DNA testing), mandates State conduct violative of defendant's Federal and State constitutional rights to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures.
With recent advances in biotechnology, public officials have recognized with increasing *1131 frequency the value and potential of DNA testing in the context of criminal law enforcement. As a result, the Illinois legislature in 1989 amended the Uniform Code of Corrections to mandate that persons convicted of certain sex offenses submit blood and saliva specimens to the Illinois Department of State Police for analysis and categorization into genetic marker groupings. (See Ill.Rev. Stat.1991, ch. 38, par. 1005-4-3 (now codified, as amended, at 730 ILCS 5/5-4-3 (West 1992)).) Section 5-4-3 provides, in relevant part:
"§ 5-4-3. (a) Any person convicted of, or who received a disposition of court supervision for, a sexual offense or attempt of a sexual offense * * * shall, regardless of the sentence imposed, be required to submit specimens of blood and saliva to the Illinois Department of State Police * * *.
* * * * * *
(d) The * * * State Police shall provide all equipment and instructions necessary for the collection of blood and saliva samples. * * * The samples shall * * * be forwarded to the * * * Division of Forensic Services and Identification[] for analysis and categorizing into genetic marker groupings.
* * * * * *
(g) * * * `[S]exual offense' means any violation of Sections 11-11, 12-13, 12-14, 12-15 or 12-16 of the Criminal Code of 1961 * * *." (Ill.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 38, par. 1005-4-3 (now 730 ILCS 5/5-4-3 (West 1992)).)
The sexual offenses enumerated in section 5-4-3 are sexual relations within families (section 11-11); criminal sexual assault (section 12-13); aggravated criminal sexual assault (section 12-14); criminal sexual abuse (section 12-15); and aggravated criminal sexual abuse (section 12-16).
The statute provides further that blood samples may be taken only by a physician authorized to practice medicine, a registered nurse, or other person qualified by the Department of Public Health. (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1991, ch. 38, par. 1005-4-3(d) (now 730 ILCS 5/5-4-3(d) (West 1992)).) Additionally, the genetic marker grouping analysis information is strictly confidential and generally can be released only to law enforcement and prosecutorial agencies. Ill.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 38, par. 1005-4-3(f) (now 730 ILCS 5/5-4-3(f) (West 1992)).
We note that several other States have enacted similar statutes. (See Ariz.Rev.Stat. Ann. § 13-4438 (1993); Cal.Penal Code § 290.2 (West 1993); Colo.Rev.Stat.Ann. § 17-2-201 (West 1993); Ga.Code Ann. § 24-4-60 (1994); Mo.Ann.Stat. § 650.055 (Vernon 1992); Nev.Rev.Stat. § 176.111 (1993); N.C.Gen.Stat. § 15A-266.4 (Supp. 1993); Okla.Stat.Ann. tit. 57, § 584 (West Supp.1993); S.D.Codified Laws Ann. § 23-5-14 (1994); Va.Code Ann. § 19.2-310.2 (Michie 1990); Wash.Rev.Code Ann. § 43.43.754 (West 1994).) As discussed below, two of those statutes have been unsuccessfully challenged on grounds similar to those urged before this court. See Jones v. Murray (4th Cir.1992), 962 F.2d 302 (Virginia); State v. Olivas (1993), 122 Wash.2d 73, 856 P.2d 1076.
Defendant contends that section 5-4-3 violates the fourth amendment to the United States Constitution because the blood and saliva sampling it mandates involves an unreasonable search and seizure. Relying primarily on Schmerber v. California (1966), 384 U.S. 757, 86 S. Ct. 1826, 16 L. Ed. 2d 908 (warrantless nonconsensual extraction of blood supported by probable cause that individual was intoxicated held to be lawful search incident to arrest), defendant maintains that section 5-4-3 allows the State to conduct a search and seizure on the "mere chance" that he might commit a crime in the future and that the stored data might provide evidence which might identify him. Accordingly, because probable cause or individualized suspicion would be lacking relative to some future offense, the statute violates defendant's right to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures.
The fourth amendment to the United States Constitution guarantees that "[t]he right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the *1132 place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized." (U.S. Const., amend. IV.) Its salutary purpose is to ensure "privacy, dignity, and security of persons against certain arbitrary and invasive acts by officers of the Government or those acting at their direction." Skinner v. Ry. Labor Executives' Association (1989), 489 U.S. 602, 613-14, 109 S. Ct. 1402, 1411, 103 L. Ed. 2d 639, 657.
As a threshold matter, we note that neither party disputes that the collection and testing of a blood sample from an individual pursuant to the statute at issue implicates the fourth amendment. (See Skinner, 489 U.S. at 616, 109 S. Ct. at 1413, 103 L.Ed.2d at 659 ("obvious that * * * physical intrusion, penetrating beneath the skin, infringes an expectation of privacy that society is prepared to recognize as reasonable"); Schmerber, 384 U.S. at 767, 86 S. Ct. at 1834, 16 L.Ed.2d at 918 (administration of blood tests constitutes a search of the person and depends antecedently upon seizures of persons within the meaning of the fourth amendment).) Nor do the parties dispute that the taking of saliva samples implicates fourth amendment concerns, although it seems that the level of intrusion necessary to obtain a saliva sample would on its face appear lower than that required for extracting blood. Because defendant focuses his challenge primarily on the extraction of blood, we will assume for the purposes of our analysis that if the statutory taking of blood samples withstands constitutional scrutiny, it would stand to reason that taking saliva samples would likewise be upheld as reasonable.
We are of the view that the statutorily mandated taking of blood samples implicates the fourth amendment in two respects: first, drawing the blood sample intrudes on an individual's bodily integrity; and second, conducting additional analysis on the sample further implicates fourth amendment interests. (See People v. Adams (1992), 149 Ill. 2d 331, 340, 173 Ill. Dec. 600, 597 N.E.2d 574.) Accordingly, it is necessary to consider further whether the DNA sampling procedure satisfies the constitutional requirement of reasonableness.
It is well accepted that "the Fourth Amendment does not proscribe all searches and seizures, * * * only those that are unreasonable." (Skinner, 489 U.S. at 619, 109 S. Ct. at 1414, 103 L.Ed.2d at 661; United States v. Sharpe (1985), 470 U.S. 675, 682, 105 S. Ct. 1568, 1573, 84 L. Ed. 2d 605, 613.) "[T]he permissibility of a particular practice `is judged by balancing its intrusion on the individual's Fourth Amendment interests against its promotion of legitimate governmental interests.'" Skinner, 489 U.S. at 619, 109 S. Ct. at 1414, 103 L.Ed.2d at 661, quoting Delaware v. Prouse (1979), 440 U.S. 648, 654, 99 S. Ct. 1391, 1396, 59 L. Ed. 2d 660, 667-68.
As we noted above, only two jurisdictions, thus far, have considered fourth amendment challenges to statutorily mandated DNA testing of convicted offenders. Although both jurisdictions have upheld the constitutionality of their respective statutes, the analytical basis for doing so has differed not only between the two jurisdictions, but there has also existed a difference of opinion among members of the respective courts.
A reading of Jones, at the appellate and trial level, and Olivas, reveals that three approaches have been espoused as the appropriate constitutional basis on which to uphold the validity of DNA testing statutes similar to the one at issue in the present case: (1) "special needs" analysis (see Jones v. Murray (W.D.Va.1991), 763 F. Supp. 842; State v. Olivas (1993), 122 Wash.2d 73, 856 P.2d 1076 (majority view)); (2) diminished privacy rights of prisoners and probationers (Jones v. Murray (4th Cir.1992), 962 F.2d 302); and (3) "traditional principles" of fourth amendment law (see Olivas, 122 Wash.2d at 103, 856 P.2d at 1091 (concurring opinion); see also Jones, 962 F.2d at 313 (concurring opinion).) We will examine each of these approaches.
As a general principle of fourth amendment jurisprudence, the balance struck between an intrusion on an individual's fourth amendment interests and the promotion of a legitimate governmental interest requires that a search or seizure be conducted under the authority of a warrant issued by a neutral magistrate upon a showing of probable cause. (Adams, 149 Ill.2d at 341, 173 Ill. Dec. 600, 597 N.E.2d 574.) As an exception to the *1133 general rule, "special needs" analysis recognizes that the warrant and probable cause requirements are not always necessary to sustain the validity of a governmental intrusion challenged on fourth amendment grounds. (See Adams, 149 Ill.2d at 341-42, 173 Ill. Dec. 600, 597 N.E.2d 574, citing New Jersey v. T.L.O (1985), 469 U.S. 325, 340-41, 105 S. Ct. 733, 742, 83 L. Ed. 2d 720, 733-34.) Originally set forth in T.L.O., and reiterated in subsequent cases, the exception states that "where a Fourth Amendment intrusion serves special governmental needs, beyond the normal need for law enforcement, it is necessary to balance the individual's privacy expectations against the Government's interests to determine whether it is impractical to require a warrant or some level of individualized suspicion in the particular context." (Emphasis added.) National Treasury Employees Union v. Von Raab (1989), 489 U.S. 656, 665-66, 109 S. Ct. 1384, 1390-91, 103 L. Ed. 2d 685, 702.
Concluding that special needs analysis was the better reasoned approach, a majority of the Supreme Court of Washington, with two justices concurring in the result only, upheld a statute allowing nonconsensual blood extraction from convicted sex offenders for the purpose of DNA identification analysis. (Olivas, 122 Wash.2d at 98, 856 P.2d at 1088.) Following a detailed review of the trial and appellate level decisions in Jones, the majority concluded that special needs analysis was superior because it affirmed general privacy rights by requiring the government to demonstrate a need "beyond normal law enforcement" before it could draw blood from convicted persons without probable cause or individualized suspicion. (Olivas, 122 Wash.2d at 94, 856 P.2d at 1086.) Although the court expressly recognized that the explicit statutory purpose of DNA testing was for future identification and prosecution of criminal offenders, it was apparently persuaded by the district court's opinion in Jones, which identified the establishment of a DNA data bank for use in solving future crimes as a "special" law enforcement need (see Jones, 763 F.Supp. at 845). The court further concluded that the majority rationale set forth by the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit in Jones was deficient because, by not requiring a special need, the appeals court had unnecessarily diminished the privacy rights of convicted persons. Olivas, 122 Wash.2d at 94, 856 P.2d at 1086.
Because defendant raises no significant challenge to the warrantless nature of the search contemplated under section 5-4-3, instead focusing on the quantum of evidence necessary to support the intrusion, it is convenient to categorize the special needs cases into two classes: (1) those that found at least some quantum of individualized suspicion extant or necessary (see T.L.O., 469 U.S. 325, 105 S. Ct. 733, 83 L. Ed. 2d 720 (school teacher's report that student was violating school rule prohibiting smoking); Griffin v. Wisconsin (1987), 483 U.S. 868, 107 S. Ct. 3164, 97 L. Ed. 2d 709 (tip from police officer that probationer's apartment contained guns); O'Connor v. Ortega (1987) 480 U.S. 709, 107 S. Ct. 1492, 94 L. Ed. 2d 714 (need to maintain workplace efficiency justified warrantless searches supported by reasonable suspicion)); and (2) those which have required no particularized suspicion as a predicate to the conduct of a warrantless search (see Skinner, 489 U.S. 602, 109 S. Ct. 1402, 103 L. Ed. 2d 639 (drug testing of railway employees); Von Raab, 489 U.S. 656, 109 S. Ct. 1384, 103 L. Ed. 2d 685 (drug testing of Federal employees)).
The dominant feature of cases utilizing special needs as an exception to the general warrant and probable cause requirements is the court's identification of an administrative justification independent of a law enforcement purpose. (See, e.g., T.L.O., 469 U.S. 325, 105 S. Ct. 733, 83 L. Ed. 2d 720 (school discipline); O'Connor, 480 U.S. 709, 107 S. Ct. 1492, 94 L. Ed. 2d 714. (workplace efficiency); (Griffin 483 U.S. 868, 107 S. Ct. 3164, 97 L. Ed. 2d 709 (supervision of probationers); Skinner, 489 U.S. 602, 109 S. Ct. 1402, 103 L. Ed. 2d 639 (railway safety); Von Raab, 489 U.S. 656, 109 S. Ct. 1384, 103 L. Ed. 2d 685 (integrity of drug interdiction personnel).) This is understandable because the special needs exception appears to be rooted in the administrative search doctrine. (See T.L.O., 469 U.S. at 337, 105 S. Ct. at 740, 83 L.Ed.2d at 731, citing Camara v. Municipal Court (1967), 387 U.S. 523, 536-37, 87 S. Ct. 1727, *1134 1735, 18 L. Ed. 2d 930, 940.) Furthermore, where the court has upheld warrantless, suspicionless searches of bodily fluids, the court has clearly and unambiguously articulated the urgent and compelling nature of an administrative justification independent of a law enforcement purpose. (Skinner, 489 U.S. at 620, 109 S. Ct. at 1414-15, 103 L.Ed.2d at 661-62; Von Raab, 489 U.S. at 666, 109 S. Ct. at 1391, 103 L.Ed.2d at 702.) Moreover, in the employee drug testing cases, the court expressly noted the absence of a law enforcement purpose underlying the particular regulations at issue. See Skinner, 489 U.S. at 620-21, 109 S. Ct. 1415, 103 L.Ed.2d at 662 ("FRA has prescribed toxicological tests, not to assist in the prosecution of employees but rather `to prevent accidents'"); Von Raab, 489 U.S. at 666, 109 S. Ct. at 1391, 103 L.Ed.2d at 702 (urine test results unavailable in a criminal prosecution of employee without employee's consent).
We note that the supreme court has upheld searches under the special needs exception which produced evidence for use in a criminal proceeding. In those cases, however, the use of such evidence was allowed because the evidence was discovered incidental to a constitutionally permissible search under the special needs exception. See, e.g., T.L.O., 469 U.S. at 347, 105 S. Ct. at 745-46, 83 L.Ed.2d at 738 (special need to maintain school discipline allowed school official's search of student's purse for evidence of school rule prohibiting cigarette smoking leading to discovery of controlled substance).
The second approach to examining the nonconsensual extraction of bodily fluids for the purpose of establishing a DNA data bank was articulated by the United States Circuit Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit in Jones v. Murray (4th.Cir.1992), 962 F.2d 302. Declining to apply the special needs exception, as the court below had done to uphold the validity of the statute (see Jones, 763 F. Supp. 842), the fourth circuit rejected a challenge to a Virginia statute which required all convicted felons, including sex offenders, to provide the State with a blood sample for DNA analysis and storage. (962 F.2d at 304.) Viewing the cases which involve the fourth amendment rights of prison inmates as a class of cases separate from those requiring a special need, the court reasoned that the diminished privacy rights of prisoners and probationers combined with the minimally intrusive nature of taking a blood sample were outweighed by the State's interest in determining identification characteristics for the purpose of improved law enforcement. Jones, 962 F.2d at 307.
Although the court indicated in a footnote that it found support for its holding "in the fact that the Supreme Court has not categorically required individualized suspicion" in every search which advances a law enforcement objective, the Jones majority relied principally on Bell v. Wolfish (1979), 441 U.S. 520, 99 S. Ct. 1861, 60 L. Ed. 2d 447, which upheld suspicionless body cavity searches of prison inmates following contact visits with persons from outside the institution (Jones, 962 F.2d at 307 n. 2); Hudson v. Palmer (1984), 468 U.S. 517, 104 S. Ct. 3194, 82 L. Ed. 2d 393, where the court determined that a prison inmate had no reasonable expectation of privacy in his jail cell and thus was afforded no fourth amendment protection from random, suspicionless shakedown searches of his cell; and Griffin v. Wisconsin (1987), 483 U.S. 868, 871, 107 S. Ct. 3164, 3167, 97 L. Ed. 2d 709, 716, which upheld a warrantless search of a probationer's apartment following a tip from a police officer that the probationer's apartment contained guns. In upholding the searches in Bell and Hudson, the court stated that practical considerations related to prison administration necessitated the prison officials' actions. (Hudson, 468 U.S. at 524, 104 S. Ct. at 3199, 82 L.Ed.2d at 401; Bell, 441 U.S. at 546, 99 S. Ct. at 1877-78, 60 L.Ed.2d at 473.) In Griffin, the court determined that the probation system's special need to supervise closely probationers provided sufficient justification to search a probationer's apartment on less than probable cause. Griffin, 483 U.S. at 875, 107 S. Ct. at 3169, 97 L.Ed.2d at 718.
The third approach, articulated in both the Jones and Olivas concurring opinions, relies primarily on the perceived willingness of the United States Supreme Court, under certain circumstances, to relax or eliminate any requirement of probable cause or individualized *1135 suspicion where the nature of the intrusion occasioned by a particular search or seizure is minimal and the government's interest significant. (See Michigan Department of State Police v. Sitz (1990), 496 U.S. 444, 110 S. Ct. 2481, 110 L. Ed. 2d 412; see also Skinner, 489 U.S. at 638, 109 S. Ct. at 1424-25, 103 L.Ed.2d at 673 (Marshall, J., dissenting); Jones, 962 F.2d at 313 (Murnaghan, J., concurring); Olivas, 122 Wash.2d at 104, 856 P.2d at 1091 (Utter, J., concurring).) Under this approach, a reviewing court may balance the government's interest in conducting the search, the degree to which the search actually advances that interest, and the gravity of the intrusion upon personal privacy to determine whether the search is reasonable. (Olivas, 122 Wash.2d at 105, 856 P.2d at 1092, citing Brown v. Texas (1979), 443 U.S. 47, 50-51, 99 S. Ct. 2637, 2640, 61 L. Ed. 2d 357, 362.) We disagree with defendant that Sitz is merely another case applying the special needs exception. In Sitz, the court expressly rejected the defendant's argument that the State was required to demonstrate a special governmental need "beyond normal law enforcement needs" before engaging in a balancing analysis. See Sitz, 496 U.S. at 450, 110 S. Ct. at 2485, 110 L.Ed.2d at 420.
Although this approach has not been applied outside the context of police stops of motorists on public highways, and it requires us to interpret broadly existing precedent, we choose to follow it for several reasons. First, in the absence of a clearly articulated administrative justification independent of a law enforcement purpose, we are reluctant to extend the special needs line of cases to the present statute, which has an ostensible law enforcement purpose. Furthermore, it does not require us to identify some "special" or extranormal law enforcement need "beyond the normal needs of law enforcement."
Second, while the prisoner/probationer cases are instructive on the issue of individual privacy rights, these cases, in our view, are nothing more than special needs cases. (See, e.g., Bell, 441 U.S. 520, 99 S. Ct. 1861, 60 L. Ed. 2d 447 (prison administration); Griffin, 483 U.S. 868, 107 S. Ct. 3164, 97 L. Ed. 2d 709 (probation supervision); see also Skinner, 489 U.S. 602, 109 S. Ct. 1402, 103 L. Ed. 2d 639 (court cites Griffin and Bell as examples of where it was willing to apply special needs exception). But see Jones, 962 F.2d 302 (prisoner/probationer cases are a distinct category).) Furthermore, practical considerations of prison administration, as an underlying justification, cannot be reconciled with the express language of section 5-4-3 which mandates taking samples regardless of whether the convicted sex offender is ultimately incarcerated. See Ill.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 38, par. 1005-4-3 (now codified, as amended, at 730 ILCS 5/5-4-3 (West 1992).
Applying the third approach to the present circumstances, we conclude that the nonconsensual extraction of blood and saliva from persons convicted of the sex offenses enumerated in section 5-4-3 of the Unified Code of Corrections does not offend traditional fourth amendment principles. Although defendant raises no issue directed to the warrant requirement, we will touch upon it briefly in the interest of completeness.
The warrant requirement protects privacy interests by assuring citizens subject to a search or seizure that such intrusions are not random or arbitrary acts of government. (Skinner, 489 U.S. at 621-22, 109 S. Ct. at 1415-16, 103 L.Ed.2d at 663.) It assures a citizen that the intrusion is authorized by law and that the search is narrowly limited in its objectives and scope. (Skinner, 489 U.S. at 622, 109 S. Ct. at 1416, 103 L.Ed.2d at 663.) "A warrant * * * provides the detached scrutiny of a neutral magistrate, and thus ensures an objective determination whether an intrusion is justified in any given case." Skinner, 489 U.S. at 622, 109 S. Ct. at 1416, 103 L.Ed.2d at 663.
Section 5-4-3 adequately addresses the concerns underlying the warrant requirement. The statute provides for an objective determination because it entirely divests a court or public official of any discretion. The statute expressly mandates that "[a]ny person convicted of * * * a sexual offense * * * shall * * * be required to submit specimens." (Emphasis added.) (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1991, ch. 38, par. 1005-4-3(a) (now 730 ILCS 5/5-4-3(a) (West 1992)).) Its scope and objective are narrowly limited because it provides for nonconsensual sampling for the *1136 purpose of maintaining a data bank, and the information is kept strictly confidential and is made available only to law enforcement officials. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 38, par. 1005-4-3(f) (now 730 ILCS 5/5-4-3(f) (West 1992)).) Furthermore, any risk that the statute might be applied in an arbitrary or oppressive fashion is precluded because its application is uniformly applied to a narrow class of individuals (i.e., persons convicted of certain sex offenses). (Ill.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 38, par. 1005-4-3(a) (now 730 ILCS 5/5-4-3(a) (West 1992)).) Accordingly, the requirement of a warrant would provide little, if any, additional protection in addition to the "assurances of certainty and regularity" already inherent in section 5-4-3. See Skinner, 489 U.S. at 624, 109 S. Ct. at 1417, 103 L.Ed.2d at 664.
Having satisfied the warrant requirement, it is necessary to consider further whether the suspicionless nature of the sampling mandated under section 5-4-3 further runs afoul of the general principle requiring that searches and seizures be supported by probable cause. The mere fact that section 5-4-3 mandates warrantless, suspicionless sampling, however, does not necessarily render the search unreasonable because "a showing of individualized suspicion is not a constitutional floor, below which a search must be presumed unreasonable." Skinner, 489 U.S. at 624, 109 S. Ct. at 1417, 103 L.Ed.2d at 664.
The physical intrusion imposed by the testing mandated under section 5-4-3 is relatively slight and poses no threat to the health or safety of the individual tested. (Cf. People v. Adams (1992), 149 Ill. 2d 331, 346, 173 Ill. Dec. 600, 597 N.E.2d 574 (statute mandating that persons convicted of certain offenses undergo blood testing for presence of HIV); see also Schmerber, 384 U.S. at 771, 86 S. Ct. at 1836, 16 L.Ed.2d at 920; Breithaupt v. Abram (1957), 352 U.S. 432, 436, 77 S. Ct. 408, 410, 1 L. Ed. 2d 448, 451.) Furthermore, the collection of samples must be performed in a medically approved manner, and only certain qualified medical personnel are permitted to withdraw blood. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 38, par. 1005-4-3(d) (now 730 ILCS 5/5-4-3 (West 1992)).) Because the blood testing mandated under section 5-4-3 is minimally intrusive, it is necessary to balance the government's interest in conducting nonconsensual blood testing of convicted sex offenders, the degree to which section 5-4-3 furthers that interest, and the magnitude of the intrusion on a convicted sex offender's privacy rights.
It is beyond dispute that the State has a legitimate interest in deterring and prosecuting recidivist acts committed by sex offenders. Its interest is especially compelling when we consider that sex offenders frequently target children as their victims. Additionally, the State has an interest in establishing the identity of convicted sex offenders where traditional methods of identification might prove otherwise inadequate or inconclusive. Moreover, in addition to solving future crimes, the use of DNA evidence can be used to aid identification of repeat offenders who attempt to otherwise conceal or alter their identity. See Jones, 962 F.2d at 308.
The statutorily mandated DNA testing scheme is closely related to the State's interest in deterring and prosecuting recidivist acts committed by sex offenders because it provides an improved technological method for identifying and eliminating potential suspects.
Next, the privacy interest that a convicted sex offender has in his or her identity is minimal. The analogy to fingerprints is convincing because the blood and saliva sampling mandated under section 5-4-3 infringes on similar privacy interests. See Olivas, 122 Wash.2d at 107, 856 P.2d at 1093 (Utter, J., concurring).
"[W]hen a suspect is arrested upon probable cause, his identification becomes a matter of legitimate state interest and he can hardly claim privacy in it. We accept this proposition because the identification of suspects is relevant not only to solving the crime for which the suspect is arrested, but also for maintaining a permanent record to solve other past and future crimes. This becomes readily apparent when we consider the universal approbation of `booking' procedures that are followed for every suspect arrested for a felony, whether or not the proof of a particular suspect's crime will involve the use of fingerprint identification. * * * While we do not accept *1137 even this small level of intrusion for free persons without Fourth Amendment constraint [citation], the same protections do not hold true for those lawfully confined to the custody of the state." Jones, 962 F.2d at 306.
Furthermore, to the extent that they are relevant in the present context, the prisoner/probationer cases lend persuasive support for the notion that convicted persons, although not ultimately incarcerated, maintain a diminished level of privacy rights as compared to free persons. Our supreme court has previously recognized that "offenders necessarily have reduced expectations of privacy." (Adams, 149 Ill.2d at 348, 173 Ill. Dec. 600, 597 N.E.2d 574.) Similar to the HIV testing statute at issue in Adams, section 5-4-3 "operates only at that point in the proceedings when a defendant no longer enjoys a presumption of innocence but instead stands at the threshold of incarceration, probation, or other significant curtailment of personal freedom." (See Adams, 149 Ill.2d at 348, 173 Ill. Dec. 600, 597 N.E.2d 574.) A person convicted of the sex offenses enumerated in section 5-4-3 is not compelled to provide blood and saliva samples unless a previous plea of guilty had been entered or that person was proved guilty of an enumerated offense beyond a reasonable doubt. Accordingly, because we consider the sampling mandated under section 5-4-3 as functionally equivalent to fingerprinting, which also necessarily intrudes a convicted sex offender's diminished privacy interest (Olivas, 122 Wash.2d at 107, 856 P.2d at 1093), we hold that the suspicionless blood and saliva sampling of persons convicted of the sex offenses enumerated in section 5-4-3, regardless of the sentence imposed, does not violate the fourth amendment prohibition against unreasonable searches and seizures. We recognize, however, that persons convicted of criminal offenses may not necessarily surrender all of their constitutional rights (see Canedy v. Boardman (7th Cir.1994), 16 F.3d 183, 185) and accordingly limit our holding to the circumstances in the present case.
Defendant contends next that section 5-4-3 violates article I, section 6, of the Illinois Constitution of 1970. Defendant maintains that the express provision for protection against "invasion of privacy" in article I, section 6, necessarily affords convicted persons greater constitutional protection than the fourth amendment. Defendant cites no authority and presents no compelling argument in support of his contention that convicted sex offenders are afforded greater protection under our State Constitution than that provided under the United States Constitution. Instead, defendant relies solely on King v. Ryan (1992), 153 Ill. 2d 449, 180 Ill. Dec. 260, 607 N.E.2d 154, wherein the court struck down an implied consent statute which required motorists involved in an accident resulting in death or personal injury of any person to submit to suspicionless alcohol and drug testing.
We find King readily distinguishable. Unlike the statute at issue here, which mandates sampling after conviction, the statute in King allowed drug and alcohol testing when a motorist who was involved in an accident was neither charged with an offense nor was there probable cause to believe the motorist was intoxicated. (See King, 153 Ill.2d at 464-65, 180 Ill. Dec. 260, 607 N.E.2d 154.) Additionally, in Adams, wherein HIV testing of certain sex offenders following conviction was upheld on fourth amendment and State constitutional grounds, the court expressed no opinion as to whether article I, section 6, of our State Constitution afforded convicted sex offenders any protection greater than that provided under the fourth amendment.
In the absence of any compelling argument from defendant, we decline to theorize on a question of uncertain constitutional dimension. Because any doubts concerning a statute's constitutionality will be resolved in favor of its validity (Adams, 149 Ill.2d at 338, 173 Ill. Dec. 600, 597 N.E.2d 574), we hold that section 5-4-3 of the Unified Code of Corrections does not violate the prohibition against unreasonable searches or invasions of privacy contained in article I, section 6, of the 1970 Illinois Constitution.
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the order of the circuit court compelling defendant to provide blood and saliva samples under the statutory mandate of section 5-4-3 of the Unified Code of Corrections. Additionally, *1138 this court's order granting defendant a stay of enforcement of the circuit court's order pending appeal is vacated.
Affirmed; motion to stay pending appeal vacated.
McLAREN and PECCARELLI, JJ., concur.