=== CASE 9737095 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:15:45.836326+00 ===

Allen, C.J.
Defendant Hospital corporation appeals from a judgment entered on a jury verdict awarding plaintiff compensatory and punitive damages for negligently granting privileges to a surgeon who performed unsuccessful surgery on her, with resultant injuries. We affirm the judgment on liability and compensatory damages and reverse the award of punitive damages.
Plaintiff alleged that in March 1981 Dr. Arthur Wright performed a gastroplasty (a weight-reduction operation also known as “stomach stapling”) and then failed to treat her properly, though alerted to numerous postoperative symptoms, including persistent vomiting, malnutrition, and coma. Dr. Wright was not an employee of the Hospital, and the theory of liability was based on “corporate negligence” in allowing an incompetent physician to practice medicine and perform surgery within the Hospital.
In a bifurcated trial, the jury first found that Dr. Wright had committed malpractice. The second part of the trial was devoted to plaintiff’s claim that the Hospital was negligent in allowing Dr. Wright to have unlimited privileges at the Hospital, despite what plaintiff called abundant evidence that his professional competency did not merit such trust. Underlying plaintiff’s theory of liability was the argument that peers and staff were aware of Dr. Wright’s record prior to the operation on plaintiff and in fact that Dr. Wright was forced to resign as chief of surgery in March 1980. Plaintiff sought to prove that despite the existence of a Hospital peer-review system, the evident purpose of which was to uncover and rectify incompetence among those with Hospital privileges, the Hospital Board of Trustees (Board) was never notified, and no steps were taken to limit Dr. Wright’s surgical practice at the Hospital prior to the operation on plaintiff.
Plaintiff attempted through discovery to obtain peer-review materials from defendant to show what it knew about Dr. Wright, but defendant at all times asserted, and the trial court upheld, that the so-called peer-review privilege under 26 V.S.A. *88§§ 1441-1443 prevented disclosure.2 Hospital trustees had testified that they never had heard anything that would have caused them to question Dr. Wright’s competence.
Plaintiff then presented testimony aimed at establishing a record of certain of Dr. Wright’s previous cases involving failures of diagnosis, improper treatment, and incompetent surgery. Thereafter, Dr. John Porterfield, an expert on hospital accreditation, testified on how the peer-review process was supposed to work. Based on the earlier testimony regarding Dr. Wright’s record at the Hospital, he testified that in his opinion a hospital administrator and a peer-review committee should have acted in these particular circumstances. He opined that Dr. Wright’s privileges should have been suspended and information about his record transmitted to the Hospital trustees.
Defendant sought to ask Dr. Porterfield whether certain information contained in peer-review material made available to him undercut his opinion since it did indicate that the medical staff had begun an evaluation of Dr. Wright’s cases. Defendant wanted to show that, contrary to the impression created by Dr. Porterfield, Dr. Wright’s case had been under continuous review by the medical staff, beginning in 1980. The court barred cross-examination based on use of peer-review records.
I.
On appeal defendant argues that this line of questioning *89should have been permitted because Dr. Porterfield’s testimony “left the clear impression that nothing had been done by the peer review committees.” Defendant, early in the trial, objected to plaintiff’s attempt to use peer-review material to demonstrate that the Hospital knew about Dr. Wright’s history and that its trustees, officers, and staff failed to react prudently to that knowledge. It was the parties’ apparent understanding that the Hospital could have waived the peer-review privilege and used the materials to counter plaintiff’s attempt to demonstrate a failed peer-review process. That assumption may or may not be correct under our státute3 — an issue not briefed or argued to this Court and not decided herein.
But as viewed by the parties, the issue raised by the attempted use of peer-review materials by defendant in cross-examination is one of whether plaintiff’s examination of Dr. Porterfield referred to peer-review materials in violation of the statutory prohibition and the ground rules established by the court early in the trial and assented to by both sides. Defendant argues first that in arriving at his opinions and conclusions, Dr. Porterfield relied on three documents marked as exhibits which *90“contain peer review material,” a deposition of a physician at the Hospital, an affidavit “referring to remedial steps the hospital took in 1980 and 1981,” according to defendant, and the minutes of a medical staff executive committee meeting. Defendant then concludes that it should have been given “the opportunity to impeach the doctor’s opinion by disclosing the remedial action in fact taken by the hospital as set forth in these documents relied on by Dr. Porterfield.” Other than stating that certain exhibits tainted with peer-review information were known to Dr. Porterfield, defendant offers no support for the proposition that the witness’ testimony relied on or made any wayward reference to peer-review materials. He did not testify that based on his familiarity with peer-review records he knew that the Hospital had not taken prudent steps. His testimony was limited to what the Hospital should have done, based on his expertise in the field and knowledge of the several specific treatment records reflecting negatively on Dr. Wright’s competency.
Nor may defendant argue that Dr. Porterfield’s mere awareness of the peer-review materials ripened into fruit of the poisonous tree, influencing his testimony to the detriment of defendant, whether or not the source of his opinion was revealed to the jury. Dr. Porterfield testified only as to matters whose existence and verifiability did not depend in the slightest on peer-review materials. As one commentator has characterized such evidence with respect to the purposes for which the peer-review privilege exists:
Thus, if the information sought in discovery is independently replicable or of the type whose existence is assured and that is independently verifiable, one of the privilege’s essential criteria is not met: permitting discovery will not curtail the flow of important information. In contrast, the quality of factual data that are neither independently replicable nor verifiable could be adversely affected by discovery.
Note, The Privilege of Self-Critical Analysis, 96 Harv. L. Rev. 1083, 1095 (1983). The commentator adds: “Neither should factual materials that are otherwise discoverable be protected *91merely because they also happen to be contained in a critical self-analysis.” Id. at 1096 n.46. The text of 26 V.S.A. § 1443 makes the same distinction. See O’Connor v. Chrysler Corp., 86 F.R.D. 211, 218 (D. Mass. 1980) (sex discrimination guidelines); Rosario v. New York Times, 84 F.R.D. 626, 631 (S.D.N.Y. 1979) (racial discrimination in employment); Flanagan, Rejecting a General Privilege for Self-Critical Analyses, 51 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 551, 556 (1983) (affirmative action). Dr. Porterfield’s testimony as to what should have been done by the medical staff established nothing more than an objective standard of conduct. It was not offered as proof of what was or was not done by defendant’s trustees, officers, or staff. We agree that it was aimed at allowing the jury to conclude that nothing had in fact been done, but other than noting Dr. Wright’s obvious continued presence at the Hospital as a surgeon with operating privileges after the date that plaintiff’s expert opined that the Hospital should have taken corrective action, plaintiff introduced no evidence as to what the Hospital in fact did concerning his continued presence there and certainly no evidence derived from peer-review materials.
Defendant contends that the present case is similar to State v. Messier, 146 Vt. 145, 499 A.2d 32 (1985), where the trial court allowed the State to introduce suppressed evidence, otherwise inadmissible, to rebut inferences resulting from the use of selected parts of the suppressed evidence by the defendant. Id. at 152-53, 499 A.2d at 38. The difference between Messier and the present case is that here plaintiff introduced no proscribed evidence. To argue that the evidence offered by Dr. Porterfield was tainted, like the suppressed evidence used by the defendant in Messier, is to argue that plaintiff should not have been able to present any case whatsoever.
II.
A.
Defendant next argues that the trial court erred in allowing the jury to consider “future damages” because plaintiff’s expert witnesses did not present sufficient evidence to justify such damages and that in any case the jury instruction on the *92issue was erroneous. The relevant portion of the jury instruction on permanent damages was as follows:
[A]ny permanent injury that the Plaintiff suffered as a result of the Defendant’s negligence in awarding damages for a permanent injury. You should consider all the evidence you think is believable about the Plaintiff’s health, activities, age and life expectancy.
... In awarding damages you must bear in mind that the Plaintiff may recover only for injuries that were proximately caused, as I have defined it, by the defendant’s negligence and not for a physical or mental condition that would have occurred regardless of whether the actions or inactions of the hospital and of Dr. Wright had happened.
Competent expert medical evidence must exist on the record for the jury to reach a verdict that includes permanent damages. Howley v. Kantor, 105 Vt. 128, 133, 163 A. 628, 631 (1933). Defendant centers its attention on the testimony of only one of plaintiff’s witnesses, Dr. Richard Gamelli, whose testimony on permanent damages could be fairly described as inconclusive, due in large part to the absence of what the witness considered adequate baseline information about the condition of plaintiff before her operation. As to this testimony defendant correctly relies on our holding in Howley v. Kantor that conjectural and speculative evidence is inadequate to support a claim for damages. The medical witness in that case had testified as to a possibly cancerous lump, stating that “what it is at this stage is pure speculation.” In the present case, in addition to Dr. Gamelli’s testimony, there was other competent medical testimony that the plaintiff had sustained permanent neurological and psychological damage. It was significant that the. instruction stressed the importance of proximate cause, cautioning the jury not to consider physical or mental conditions that would have occurred irrespective of the actions or inactions of Dr. Wright or of defendant Hospital. The trial court did not err in submitting the issue of permanency to the jury.
*93B.
In its reply brief defendant argues that the court erred in failing to direct a verdict in its favor on the issue of future damage, because defendant “distinctly informed the court that the evidence of future damage was insufficient to support a verdict and that such damage must be proved by a reasonable degree of medical certainty.” In further explaining its claim of error defendant significantly narrows the scope of its assertion, arguing that “[p]laintiff has made no claim before this Court that there was any evidence of injury to Plaintiff’s liver, kidney, heart, lungs, bones, etc. sufficient to submit these elements of future damage to the jury.” (Emphasis supplied.) Defendant, however, does not argue that there was no evidence of both permanent neurological and psychological damage, and, significantly, its motion for directed verdict addressed only the testimony of Dr. Gamelli. So long as there was some evidence supporting permanent damage, denial of the motion for directed verdict was proper. As we stated in Kinzer v. Degler Corp., 145 Vt. 410, 491 A.2d 1017 (1985):
In passing upon the propriety of the granting of a motion for judgment n.o.v., V.R.C.P. 50(b), we must view the evidence in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party, excluding the effect of any modifying evidence. The' question is whether the result reached by the jury is sound in law on the evidence produced.
Id. at 412, 491 A.2d at 1018. Defendant’s motion attempted to eliminate the issue of permanent damage without addressing all of the evidence that might have supported such claim of damage. The court was correct in denying the motion for directed verdict.
C.
Defendant also contends that the jury instruction established the incorrect standard, because it failed to charge the jury that plaintiff must prove damages using the phrase “by a reasonable degree of medical certainty.” The instruction on burden of proof was stated as follows:
*94The plaintiff has the burden of proof to prove the elements of her case by a preponderance of the evidence. In other ■words, for the Plaintiff to prevail on an issue, she must persuade you that the evidence in support of her claim on that issue is more nearly correct than the Defendant’s evidence. To put it another way, if you find that Plaintiff’s claim on an issue is more likely true than not, then the Plaintiff has prevailed on that issue. On the other hand, if you decide that Plaintiff’s claim on an issue is more likely false than true, or you cannot decide one way or the other, then the Plaintiff has not met her burden of proof and your decision on that claim must be in favor of the Defendant.
Defendant does not explain why this instruction, which is a classic rendering of the preponderance-of-evidence standard that governs most issues in civil litigation, see, e.g., Lyndonville Savings Bank & Trust Co. v. Peerless Insurance Co., 126 Vt. 436, 441, 234 A.2d 340, 343 (1967); Neverett v. Towne, 123 Vt. 45, 48, 179 A.2d 583, 585 (1962), is in error or what authority commands a higher standard, such as proof by clear and convincing evidence. At most, the language proffered by defendant is a variant of the preponderance standard and not a higher standard at all. While “reasonable degree of certainty” contains the word “certainty,” which might connote some marginally higher standard of proof than a mere preponderance, the modifier “reasonable” returns the standard to the level of preponderance. In short, what defendant sought was language that might have suggested some higher standard to the jury as a matter of verbal harmonics, but as a matter of law it was not required or supported by any Vermont precedent.
III.
Defendant next argues that the trial court erred in' dismissing a juror who was empaneled without objection, even though she was the mother of Dr. George Lucchina, who had been chairman of the Hospital’s department of medicine in 1981 and who had since died, and even though she was acquainted with a potential witness in the case. During the trial plaintiff offered testimony that it was “inappropriate” for Dr. Wright’s surgical *95privileges to have been approved by the department of medicine, and in rebuttal defendant offered evidence that privileges of all members of the department of surgery were approved by Dr. Lucchina as chief of medicine. When Dr. Lucchina’s name was mentioned, the juror “became emotional,” and plaintiff moved to disqualify her, arguing that she would have been challenged for cause had plaintiff recognized Dr. Lucchina’s signature on the 1981 reappointment document. The trial court granted the motion without allowing defendant a voir dire to determine if the juror could properly continue to sit.4
Plaintiff mistakenly suggests, without support in the record, that a voir dire of this juror was not feasible, citing State v. Shields, 15 Ohio App. 3d 112, 472 N.E.2d 1110 (1984). Defendant correctly argues that a juror should be disqualified only if the juror, under examination, exhibits- a state of mind showing a fixed opinion, bias, or prejudice. Jones v. Shea, 148 Vt. 307, 309, 532 A.2d 571, 573 (1987). However, the trial court did not err in granting the motion. The standard for determining bias that evolves from the events of a trial must accord great discretion to a trial judge. In addition to the theoretical factors that could be brought to light in a pretrial voir dire, the trial itself is a continuous and dynamic environment in which the actual reactions of jurors to the business of the trial may be weighed. Though such events are fortunately rare, when a juror’s strong emotional reaction to the proceedings becomes clear mid-trial, based on subjective personal factors connecting her to the subject matter before her, the judge’s observations can be as critical to a disqualification decision as the words of the juror herself. While a voir dire in such circumstances is still advisable, in the absence of a strong and clear demonstration of prejudice to the party objecting to removal, we will not question the discretion of the trial court. See State v. Kelly, 131 Vt. 358, 360-61, 306 A.2d 89, 90 (1973); State v. Haislip, 237 Kan. 461, 469, 701 P.2d 909, 917-18, cert. denied, 474 U.S. 1022 (1985).
*96IV.
Finally, we agree with defendant that plaintiff’s evidence was insufficient to support an award of punitive damages because she was unable to demonstrate malice.5 Malice can be proven by direct evidence of defendant’s mental state and may be inferred from the nature of his conduct and the surrounding circumstances. Shortle v. Central Vermont Public Service Corp., 137 Vt. 32, 33, 399 A.2d 517, 518 (1979). The trial judge gave no indication that direct evidence supported the potential for malice. The trial court allowed the punitive damage issue to go to the jury because “an argument can be made that so little was done by the Board of Trustees and by the hierarchy of the Hospital to monitor doctors, that it amounts to a callous disregard of patients’ rights.” Plaintiff urges that though the Hospital trustees were uninformed about the numerous cases of alleged malpractice involving Dr. Wright, the trustees were ultimately responsible for management of the Hospital, including management of a system that permitted the forced resignation of the chief of surgery without their knowledge or involvement. We agree. Darling v. Charleston Community Memorial Hospital, 33 Ill. 2d 326, 332, 211 N.E.2d 253, 257 (1965), cert. denied, 383 U.S. 946 (1966); Johnson v. Misericordia Community Hospital, 99 Wis. 2d 708, 723, 301 N.W.2d 156, 170-71 (1981); Purcell v. Zimbelman, 18 Ariz. App. 75, 80-81, 500 P.2d 335, 341 (1972). The Board’s delegation of the function of physical performance review to a self-governing medical staff cannot permanently insulate the Board from the malice or the equivalent of malice exhibited by the medical staff. Nor do we agree with defendant that, without evidence of what the peer-review committee did or did not do, it is virtually impossible to demonstrate malice. However, the record contains no evidence of “conduct manifesting personal ill will or carried out under circumstances evidencing insult or oppression, or ... a reckless or *97wanton disregard of one’s rights.” Shortle, 137 Vt. at 33, 399 A.2d at 518. While reckless and wanton disregard may be the functional equivalent of malice in Vermont, a party seeking to demonstrate behavior which goes beyond negligence to recklessness should offer some testimony that the Hospital operated so far below the norm as to allow the inference of insult, oppression, recklessness, or wantonness, to paraphrase Shortle. That line is a hard one for a lay jury and even for a court to perceive, and the subject deserved plaintiff’s specific attention, which it did not receive.
The judgment on liability and compensatory damages is affirmed. The award of punitive damages is reversed.
26 V.S.A. § 1443 states:
The proceedings, reports and records of committees defined in section 1441 of this title shall be confidential and privileged, and shall not be subject to discovery or introduction into evidence in any civil action against a provider of professional health services arising out of the matters which are subject to evaluation and review by such committee, and no person who was in attendance at a meeting of such committee shall be permitted or required to testify in any such civil action as to any findings, recommendations, evaluations, opinions, or other actions of such committees or any members thereof. However, information, documents, or records otherwise available from original sources are not to be construed as immune from discovery or use in any such action merely because they were presented during the proceedings of such committee, nor shall any person who testifies before such committee or who is a member of such committee be prevented from testifying as to matters within his knowledge, but such witness shall not be asked about his testimony before such committee or about opinions formed by him as a result of such committee hearings.
A strong argument could be made that the Hospital was not empowered to waive the peer-review privilege, since 26 V.S.A. § 1443 does more than provide a privilege, but arguably announces a mandatory policy against disclosure. The section provides that “no person who was in attendance at a meeting of such [peer-review] committee shall be permitted or required to testify in any such civil action.” (Emphasis added.) In West Covina Hospital v. Superior Court, 41 Cal. 3d 846, 718 P.2d 119, 226 Cal. Rptr. 132 (1986), a peer-review committee member was allowed to testify voluntarily, over objections, and the trial court decision was affirmed. The California Supreme Court noted that the statute stated that “no person in attendance at a meeting of any of those [peer-review] committees shall be required to testify as to what transpired at that meeting.” Id. at 850, 718 P.2d at 121, 226 Cal. Rptr. at 132-33. (Emphasis added.) The language “no person . . . shall be permitted” was absent. Three justices dissented on grounds that the majority decision undermined the purpose of the protections offered by the statute.
At least one commentator has noted the distinction between statutes affirmatively barring peer-review testimony and has suggested that language like Vermont’s might be read to preclude the use of peer-review evidence. See Comment, The Medical Review Committee Privilege: A Jurisdictional Survey, 67 N.C.L. Rev. 179, 186 (1988).
Some peer-review statutes expressly provide for waiver, e.g., Ind. Code § 34-4-12.6-2(c) (1986), allowing “prior waiver[s] executed by the committee.”
Because of a stipulation that as few as nine jurors could make up the panel, there was no issue as to the total number of jurors.
In the past we have described the malice necessary to support an award of punitive damages as “actual malice.” In the interest of uniform usage, we now avoid this term in the context of punitive damages. Ryan v. Herald Association, Inc., 152 Vt. 275, 281 n.5, 566 A.2d 1316, 1320 n.5 (1989).

=== CASE 9737097 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:15:50.9567+00 ===

OPINION
BAKER, Judge.
This case presents an issue of priority between the lien of a mortgage on real estate with a residence thereon and a mechanic's lien for the value of a driveway constructed on the property after the mortgage had been recorded. Appellant defendant Provident Bank ("Provident"), the holder of the mortgage lien, appeals the trial court's entry of summary judgment in favor of the appellee-plaintiff TriCounty Southside Asphalt, Inc. ("TriCounty"), the holder of the mechanic's lien. Concluding that the mortgage lien has priority as to the land and buildings, we reverse the trial court.
FACTS
The facts most favorable to Provident, the non-moving party, reveal that on December 9, 1998, April Repass extended a mortgage for her single-family residence located in Indianapolis, Indiana ("the Property"), in favor of Bank One, N.A. ("Bank One"), in the amount of $186,900. Bank One recorded this mortgage on February 5, 1999. On November 5, 1999, Re-pass conferred a second mortgage for the Property in the amount of $229,500. This mortgage is currently owned by Provident and was recorded on December 8, 1999. On June 7, 2000, Repass entered into a contract with Tri-County, whereby TriCounty agreed to pave an asphalt driveway on the Property. On June 18, 2000, Tri-County furnished labor and materials for paving the driveway. Tri-County received no payment for its services, and, on August 11, 2000, it recorded a mechanic's lien on the Property in the amount of $6,296.01.
Tri-County filed a complaint to foreclose on its mechanic's lien and named Bank One and Provident as defendants. Bank One filed its own complaint to foreclose its *163mortgage, naming Provident and TriCounty as defendants. The two actions were consolidated.
Tri-County filed a motion for summary judgment, claiming that no genuine issue of fact remained for trial and that it was entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Bank One also filed a motion for summary judgment. The trial court granted TriCounty's motion for summary judgment but denied Bank One's motion. The trial court's order provided, in relevant part:
[Tri-County] is entitled to judgment on its mechanic's lien in the amount of six thousand two hundred ninety six dollars and 01/100 ($6,296.01). ... Said lien has priority over all but the appropriate tax liens.
Appellant's App. p. 15. Both Provident and Bank One filed motions to correct error, which the trial court denied. Provident now appeals.1
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
I. Standard of Review
We first note that the party appealing from "a summary judgment decision has the burden of persuading the court that the grant or denial of summary judgment was erroneous." Severson v. Bd. of Tr. of Purdue Univ., 777 N.E.2d 1181, 1188 (Ind.Ct.App.2002). Summary judgment is appropriate only if the pleadings and designated evidence show that "there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Ind. Trial Rule 56(C). "On a motion for summary judgment, all doubts as to the existence of material issues of fact must be resolved against the moving party." Owens Corning Fiberglass Corp. v. Cobb, 754 N.E.2d 905, 909 (Ind.2001). When reviewing a trial court's statutory interpretation, however, we use a de novo standard because in such matters we "owe the trial court no deference." Family & Soc. Servs. Admin. v. Schluttenhofer, 750 N.E.2d 429, 432 (Ind.Ct.App.2001).
IIL. Indiana Code Section 32%-21-L-1(b)
The priority of encumbrances on land is governed by Indiana Code section 32-21-4-1(b), which provides that "[a] conveyance, mortgage, or lease takes priority according to the time of its filing." Provident recorded its mortgage lien on December 3, 1999. Our mechanic's lien statute, Indiana Code section 32-28-3-5, states that "[the recorded lien relates back to the date the mechanic or other person began to perform the labor or furnish the materials or machinery." Tri-County began paving the driveway on June 13, 2000. Thus, by virtue of its earlier recordation date, Provident's mortgage lien has priority over Tri-County's mechanic's lien with respect to the land and attached buildings. Greyhound Financial Corp. v. R.L.C., Inc, 637 N.E.2d 1325, 1328 (Ind.Ct.App.1994) (holding that "date on which a mortgage is recorded is dispositive for determining its priority with respect to a me-chanie's lien").
In Zehner v. Johnston, the issue addressed was whether the statute existing at the time-which was nearly identical to the present statute-provided that a me-chanie's lien was "superior to the mortgage lien" of a defendant. 22 Ind.App. 452, 452, 53 N.E. 1080, 1082 (1899). The Zehner court held that a mortgage lien was superi- or to a mechanic's lien if the mortgage was recorded before the mechanic's work was begun or materials furnished. Id. at 458, 53 N.E. at 1082. The facts in that case showed that the owners of real property contracted with Zehner on June 16, 1896, *164to complete work on a greenhouse. Also in June 1896, the owners of the realty executed a mortgage to a third party, who then recorded the mortgage, thereby perfecting the mortgage lien. Zehner began farnishing materials for the greenhouse on August 18, 1896. Meanwhile, the mortgage executed by the owners had been transferred to Citizen's Bank. Because of non-payment, the bank foreclosed on the mortgage. Zehner sought to recover for his labor and materials and argued that his mechanic's lien was senior to the bank's mortgage. Although it is not clear from our reading of Zehner when the mechanic's lien was recorded, the trial court held that Zehner's mechanic's lien was junior to the mortgage. The Appellate Court affirmed the trial court, noting that "the mortgage was executed and recorded long before the work was done and material furnished for which [Zehner] prosecutes this action." Id.
Here, the situation is nearly identical to that in Zehmer. Although Provident recorded its mortgage on December 3, 1999, Tri-County did not begin its work until June 13, 2000. Borrowing from the Zeh-ner rationale, "the mortgage was executed and recorded long before the work was done and materials furnished" by TriCounty. Id. Thus, with respect to the land and buildings, Tri-County's lien is clearly junior to Provident's.
III. Indiana Code Section 32-28-3-22
Keeping in mind the seniority of Provident's mortgage lien over the land and buildings, Indiana Code section 82-28-3-2, our mechanic lien statute, asserts, in relevant part:
(a) The entire land upon which the building, erection, or other improvement is situated, including the part of the land not occupied by the building, erection, or improvement, is subject to a lien to the extent of the right, title, and interest of the owner for whose immediate use or benefit the labor was done or material furnished.
(b) If:
[[Image here]]
(2) the land is encumbered by mortgage; the lien, so far as concerns the buildings erected by the lienholder, is not impaired by forfeiture of the lease for rent or foreclosure of mortgage. The buildings may be sold to satisfy the lien and may be removed not later than ninety (90) days after the sale by the purchaser.
The plain language of this statute protects the mechanic lien holder inasmuch as it protects his priority as to the improvement for which he provided the labor and materials. The statute contemplates that the holder of a mechanic lien may sell the improvements to satisfy the lien and remove them within ninety days of the sale date. Here, Tri-County has priority as to the improvement: the driveway. Thus, under Indiana Code section 32-28-8-2(b), Tri-County could have sold and removed the driveway.
The trial court did not enter findings of fact and conclusions of law but its order essentially adopted Tri-County's argument that its "lien has priority over any mortgages." Appellant's App. p. 57. Such a proposition, however, eviscerates the intent behind Indiana Code section 32-21-4-1(b). The trial court's decision effectively gave a later-recorded mechanic lien priority over a prior-recorded mortgage lien. This was error.
*165When read together, Indiana Code see-tions 32-21-4-1(b) and 82-28-8-2(b) give Tri-County's mechanic lien priority over the - improvement-the - driveway-only. We acknowledge that separate removal of the driveway poses "practical ramifications." Appellee's Br. p. 7. These "practical ramifications" notwithstanding, such is the result envisioned by both Indiana Code sections 32-21-4-1(b) and 32-28-3-2). This result-though perhaps not perfect-effects the intent behind Indiana Code section 32-21-4-1(b), that a prior-recorded lien have priority over a later-recorded lien. Moreover, Tri-County's interest is protected by its priority as to the improvement, as contemplated by Indiana Code section 32-28-3-2(b). This result allows the intent behind both statutes to be fulfilled. See Quakenbush v. Lackey, 622 N.E.2d 1284, 1290 (Ind.1993) ("Where two statutes are in apparent conflict they should be construed, if it can be reasonably done, in a manner so as to bring them into harmony"). In sum, requiring the removal of the driveway may not be the ideal solution. Removal is, however, not impossible and is the solution that effects the intent behind both Indiana Code see-tions 32-21-4-1(b) and 82-28-8-2(b).
IV. Public Policy ~
In addition to the statutory requirement that Tri-County receive priority as to only the driveway, public policy calls for this result as well. Public policy holds that he who is best able to avoid a loss should bear it. The famous case of Phelps v. McQuade, 220 N.Y. 232, 115 N.E. 441 (1917), was the genesis of Uniform Commercial Code section 2-408. In Phelps, Gwynne falsely represented himself to a jewel vendor and obtained jewelry on credit from Phelps. Gwynne then sold the jewelry to McQuade. Phelps filed a claim for replevin of the jewelry, arguing that under common law title did not pass to McQuade. The Phelps court, however, noted that it was the "intention of the person having title to the goods and delivering them to another" that determined whether good title then passed to a purchaser for value. Id. at 442., Thus, the. Phelps court held that Phelps had to bear the economic loss due to Gwynne's false representation because Phelps had dealt directly with Gwynne.
The Uniform Commercial Code drafters incorporated the sound policy behind the result in Phelps. . The drafters noted that U.C0.C. section 2-408 was "predicated on the policy that where a transferor has voluntarily delivered the goods to a purchaser, he, the transferor, ought to run the risk of the purchaser's fraud as against innocent third parties." U.C.C. § 2-403, comment 4.(2002). The policy is just inasmuch as he who deals directly with a person is in the best position to prevent a financial injury. See M & K Corp. v. Farmers State Bank, 496 N.E.2d 111, 112 (Ind.Ct.App.1986) (holding that the "employer is normally in a better position to prevent such forgeries by reasonable care in the selection or supervision of his employees").
'We note that "[rlecording acts were passed for the purpose of providing a place and a method by which an intending purchaser or encumbrancer can safely determine just what kind of a title he is in fact obtaining." State v. Anderson, 170 N.E.2d 812, 815, 241 Ind. 184, 190 (1960) (quoting State v. Young, 238 Ind. 452, 456, 151 N.E.2d 697, 699 (1958)). Thus, just as he who deals directly with a person is in the best position to protect against losses, a mechanic who fears non-payment for his labor and materials may easily determine whether the property upon which he will work is encumbered. Thus, our decision recognizes the reasoning behind our recording statute and gives effect to the *166public policy that places the risk of loss on he who is best able to avoid that loss.
Moreover, we cannot minimize the economic ramifications on the alienation of land were we to hold otherwise. Lenders can currently ensure that mechanics liens will not encumber a property by simply observing the property to determine if work has begun and waiting sixty days prior to making a loan, as a person seeking to establish a mechanic's lien must "file a copy ... in the recorder's office of the County not later than sixty (60) days after the date of the first delivery or labor performed." - Ind.Code § 82-28-3-10(2). Were we to allow Tri-County to receive priority over the entire proceeds of a foreclosure sale, a mechanic's lien filed years after the recording of a mortgage lien could conceivably "jump to the head of the line." A lender would thus have to factor this risk into its lending calculations, the result of which would be unnecessarily increased interest rates and fees.
CONCLUSION
In light of the issues addressed, we conclude that Indiana Code section 82-21-4-1(b) provide Provident with priority over the proceeds from a foreclosure sale. However, Indiana Code section 32-28-8-2(b) provides Tri-County with priority as to the driveway. Thus, we reverse the entry of summary judgment in favor of Tri-County and remand this case to the trial court with instructions that it enter summary judgment in favor of Provident.
The judgment of the trial court is reversed.
BROOK, C.J., concurs.
SHARPNACK, J., dissents with opinion.
. - Bank One is not a party to this appeal.
. This statute, recodified during this litigation, was formerly Indiana Code section 32-8-3-2. P.L. 2-2002 § 128. The statute was not substantively changed.

=== CASE 9737098 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:15:50.961119+00 ===

SHARPNACK, Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent. Tri-County me-chaniec's lien has priority over Provident's previously executed and recorded mortgage to the extent of Tri-County's improvement and to hold otherwise is to not give effect to the legislature's intent.
The parties agree that December 8, 1999, is Provident's priority date, and June 13, 2000, is Tri-County's priority date; however, they disagree with respect to how the dates establish priority in accordance with Ind.Code § 32-28-3-2 (2002). The issue here is less about priority in time than about priority as to the improvement which is the subject of the mechanic's lien.
Ind.Code § 32-28-8-1 (Supp.2008) provides that a contractor or other qualified person may have a lien:
[U]pon the:
(1) house, mill, manufactory, or other building, bridge, reservoir, system of waterworks, or other structure, sidewalk, walk, stile, well, drain, drainage ditch, sewer, cistern, or earth:
(A) that the person erected, altered, repaired, moved, or removed; or
(B) for which the person furnished materials or machinery of any description; and
(2) on the interest of the owner of the lot or parcel of land:
(A) on which the structure or improvement stands; or
(B) with which the structure or improvement is connected,;
to the extent of the values of any labor done on the material furnished, or both, including any use of the leased equipment and tools.
1.C. § 32-28-8-1(b).
Further, Ind.Code § 32-28-3-2 governs the extent of a mechanic's lien:
(a) The entire land upon which the building, erection, or other improvement is situated, including the part of the land *167not occupied by the building, erection, or improvement, is subject to a lien to the extent of the right, title, and interest of the owner for whose immediate use or benefit the labor was done or material furnished. (b) If:
[[Image here]]
a. the owner has only a leasehold interest; or
b. the land is encumbered by mortgage;
[[Image here]]
the lien, so far as concerns the buildings erected by the lienholder, is not impaired by forfeiture of the lease for rent or foreclosure of mortgage. The buildings may be sold to satisfy the lien and may be removed not later than ninety (90) days after the sale by the purchaser.
Statutory interpretation is a question of law, which is reserved for the court. Cullimore v. St. Anthony Med. Ctr., Inc., 718 N.E.2d 1221, 1225 (Ind.Ct.App.1999). "Our objective when construing the meaning of a statute is to ascertain and give effect to the legislative intent expressed within the statute." Id. Where a statute has yet to be construed, our interpretation is controlled by the express language of the statute and the rules of statutory construction. Id. When a statute is clear and unambiguous on its face, we need not interpret the statute. Id. Rather, we give the statute its plain and clear meaning. Id.
In Ward v. Yarnelle, our supreme court addressed the respective priorities between mortgage liens and mechanic's liens. 173 Ind. 535, 549, 91 N.E. 7, 13 (1910), overruled in part on other grounds by Moore-Mansfield Constr. Co. v. Indianapolis, N.C. & T. Ry. Co., 179 Ind. 356, 391, 101 N.E. 296, 309 (1913). There, our supreme court concluded that the statutory precursors to Ind.Code §§ 82-28-3-2, -5 contemplated different seenarios regarding priority and provided the priority for each such scenario. Specifically, our supreme court stated that:
They may be stated, first, as cases where there is no building on the land when the improvement begins, and the land is unineumbered, and so remains. There the liens attach to both realty and the improvement, without distinction or priority among the materialmen or laborers. Second, cases where there is no building, but there is a leasehold or the land encumbered. There the existing incumbrances take priority on the land, and the materialman and labor claimant equally upon the building or improvement. Third, where some labor is performed, or material is furnished prior to the execution of a mortgage, in which event, upon notice being filed within the statutory period, though after the mortgage is given, the lien reaches back of the mortgage to the time when the work is begun or the material furnished, and gains priority both as to the land and the building. Fourth, where the improvement is made after the mortgage is executed, but under a prior contract for the improvement, but no work is done or material furnished until after the mortgage is executed or where the work is all done, and material furnished under the contract later than the mortgage becoming effective as a lien, in which case priority is given on the building alone.
Id. at 549-550, 91 N.E. at 13-14 (emphasis added). Our supreme court added that "[Itlhe history of the legislation on this subject in this state and elsewhere evidences a due regard for prior rights, as conferred by the registration laws, and the object of the legislation was to intervene in *168favor of the mechanic or laborer, and secure to him a return for what he has done in enhancement of the value of the land, and still not injure prior lienholders." Id. at 551, 91 N.E. at 14. Ultimately, in Ward, our supreme court held that a real estate mortgage executed while a building was in the process of construction for the purpose of providing funds to complete the project was entitled to equal priority with the claims of laborers and materialmen who, without prior obligation, furnished labor and materials after execution of the mortgage and with full knowledge of its purpose and effect. Id. at 552-554, 91 N.E. at 15; see also Brenneman Mech. & Elec., Inc. v. First Nat. Bank of Logansport, 495 N.E.2d 233, 242 (Ind.Ct.App.1986) (noting that "where mechanies' lien claimants have notice of a mortgage wherein the money derived from the loan is used in the construction of the improvements the mortgage lien and mechanies' liens have equal priority"), reh'g denied, trans. denied. Because there is no designated evidence indicting that Provident's mortgage was used for the construction or improvement of the Property and that TriCounty was aware of such use, our supreme court's ultimate holding in Ward is not applicable to the facts of this matter.
The United States Bankruptey Court for the Northern District of Indiana also addressed a similar issue in Venture Props., Inc. v. Altite Roofing, Inc., 139 B.R. 890, 895 (Bankr.N.D.Ind.1990). There, the bankruptcy court applied Indiana law to determine whether a properly executed and recorded mortgage had priority over a subsequent mechanic's lien for the same property. Id. at 895. The bankruptcy court likened the matter to Ward and held that the mortgage lien and the mechanic's lien shared equal priority where the purpose of the mortgage loan was to finance the construction. Id. at 897. However, before reaching this conclusion, the bank-ruptey court discussed our supreme court's holding in Ward wherein our supreme court outlined the four seenarios contemplated by the statutory precursors to Ind. Code §§ 32-28-3-2, -5. In discussing the fourth such seenario, the bankruptey court noted that:
[A] mechanic's lien is inferior to a mortgage lien on land (even when the contract for labor or services is executed prior to execution of the mortgage) if the mechanic, laborer, and/or supplier does not perform labor or furnish materials prior to the execution of the mortgage. In such case the mechanic's lien has priority only as to the improvement itself.
Id. at 895 (internal citations omitted); see also Carriger v. Mackey, 15 Ind.App. 392, 394-395, 44 N.E. 266, 267 (1896) (holding that the senior mortgages only had priority as to the real estate as it was at time of the execution of the mortgage); Ind.Code § 32-28-3-2(b). The bankruptcy court also noted that the "Indiana Supreme Court in Ward found that Indiana Code Chapter 32-8-3 failed to address the lien priority between a mortgage executed to raise funds for construction of improvements on property and the mechanic's liens of those who provided the labor and supplies necessary to complete the construction." Venture, 139 B.R. at 895.
In 1999, our legislature amended Ind. Code § 32-28-3-5 and specifically addressed the situation before our supreme court in Ward and again discussed by the bankruptcy court in Venture Ind.Code § 32-28-8-5 provides that:
The mortgage of a lender has priority over all liens created under this chapter that are recorded after the date the mortgage was recorded, to the extent of the funds actually owed to the lender for the specific project to which the lien rights relate. This subsection does not *169apply to a lien that relates to a construction contract for the development, construction, alteration, or repair of the following:
(1) A Class 2 structure (as defined in IC 22-12-1-5). .
(2) An improvement on the same real estate auxiliary to a Class 2 structure (as defined in IC 22-12-1-5).
Ind.Code § 32-28-3-5(d) does not apply to this case because that provision applies only where funds from the loan secured by the mortgage are for the project which gave rise to the mechanic's lien.3 In such an instance, the mortgage lien has priority over the mechanic's liens recorded after the mortgage. An exception is made where the project is for a Class 2 structure, in which instance the mortgage would not be superior to the after recorded mechanic's liens. Here, however, there is nothing to indicate that funds from the mortgages were intended for use in constructing the driveway.
Ind.Code § 82-28-3-5(d) does have some relevance however, as it is consistent with the concept that mechanic's liens would be superior to mortgage liens as to the improvements that are the basis for the mechanics liens. Were that not the case, 1.C. § 82-28-3-5 would be unnecessary to make the prior mortgage superior to the subsequent recorded mechanics liens. |
Here, Tri-County perfected its mechanic's lien on June 13, 2000, approximately seven months after Provident had recorded its mortgage. Tri-County argues that this case is like the fourth scenario in Ward. However, there was no agreement to pave the driveway in place prior to the recording of the mortgage. Rather, their case is most like the second Ward seenar-i0, where the mortgage is in place prior to work on improvements. - Specifically, Ward's second scenario identified situations where "there [was] no building, but there [was] a leasehold or the land enceum-bered. There the existing incumbrances take priority on the land, and the material-man and labor claimant equally upon the building or improvement." Unlike the see-ond scenario, here the mortgage was in place on the land and existing improvements before the driveway was contracted for or constructed. The land with existing improvements here is effectively the same as the vacant land in the Ward second scenario. Accordingly, Tri-County's me-chanie's lien has priority only as to the improvement, ie., the driveway.
The majority opinion relies upon Zehner v. Johnston, 22 Ind.App. 452, 53 N.E. 1080 (1899) for the proposition that a subsequently perfected mechanic's lien is junior to a previously recorded mortgage. While I do agree with the majority that based upon Zehner, Tri-County's mechanic's lien has priority only as to the improvement, ie., the driveway, I do disagree with the majority's application of Zehner when read in conjunction with applicable sections of the Indiana Code. Specifically, Ind.Code § 32-21-4-1(b) must be read and interpreted together with Ind.Code § 82-28-3-2. Although, 1.C. § 32-21-4-1(b) provides that a mortgage takes priority "according to the time of its filing," I.C. § 32-28-8-2 provides that when land is encumbered by a mechanic's lien "the entire land upon *170which the building, erection, or other improvement is situated, ... is subject to a lien." However, when the land that is subject to a mechanic's lien is also encumbered by a prior mortgage, the mechanic's lien "is not impaired by ... foreclosure of mortgage," and in order to satisfy the lien, the mechanic's lien holder may remove the improvement. However, as Tri-County suggests, removal of the driveway is impractical and not economically feasible. The majority holds that although the "removal of the driveway poses 'practical ramifications' ... such is the result envisioned by both Indiana Codes sections 32-21-4-1(b) and 32-28-8-2(b)." I respectfully disagree.
Tri-County's priority can be recognized and enforced by giving priority in foreclosure up to the amount of the lien. Public policy favors this result because this conclusion is consistent with the plain reading of Ind.Code § 32-28-3-1 and Ind.Code § 32-28-8-2. I1.C. § 82-28-3-1 provides that the mechanic's lien is "upon" the improvement and the interest of the owner of the subject land. I.C. § 82-28-3-2(a) provides that the "entire land upon which the building, erection, or other improvement is situated, including the part of the land not cecupied by the building, erection, or improvement" is subject to the mechanic's lien. However, where, as here, the land is also encumbered by a mortgage, IC. § 32-28-3-2(b)(2) provides that "the lien so far as concerns the building erected by the lienholder, is not impaired by forfeiture of the lease for rent or foreclosure of the mortgage." The fact that it is impractical and harmful to remove the improvement does not require that the mechanic lien holder forfeit its priority as to the improvement created by its efforts. Such priority is the economic equivalent of allowing removal and sale of the improvement. This is the effect of the trial court's summary judgment.
Based upon my review of the relevant case law and statutory authority, I conclude that pursuant to the plain reading of Ind.Code § 32-28-38-2(b), - Tri-County's mechanic's lien has priority only as to the improvement, le., the driveway, and Provident has priority with respect to all other interest in the Property. Thus, I would hold that Tri-County may foreclose upon the Property subject to Provident's superi- or mortgage in order to enforce its me-chanie's lien on the driveway and it has priority to the proceeds of the foreclosure sale up to the amount of its interest with respect to the driveway.
. Tri-County also argues that it has priority over Provident's mortgage pursuant to Ind. Code § 32-28-3-5. Specifically, Tri-County argues that because I.C. § 32-28-3-5 does not apply to a single family dwelling, a mechanic's lien on a is senior to a previously recorded mortgage. However, LC. § 32-28-3-5 does not apply to this case because it applies only where funds from the lien secured by the mortgage are for the project which gave rise to the mechanic lien.

=== CASE 2208884 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:34.323029+00 ===

804 N.E.2d 789 (2004)
Donna POPPE, Appellant-Intervener,
James C. Jabaay, Petitioner,
v.
Cecilia JABAAY, Appellee-Respondent.
No. 45A03-0304-CV-139.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
March 10, 2004.
Rehearing Denied June 2, 2004.
*791 James M. Kapitan, Highland, IN, Attorney for Appellant.
Edward R. Hall, Merrillville, IN, Attorney for Appellee.
*790 OPINION
RILEY, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Appellant-Intervenor, Donna Poppe (Poppe), appeals the trial court's post-dissolution order allowing Appellee-Respondent, Cecilia Jabaay (Cecilia), to refinance and purchase the marital residence.
We reverse and remand.
ISSUES
Poppe raises two issues on appeal, which we restate as follows:
1. Whether the trial court abused its discretion by accepting Cecilia's offer to purchase and refinance the marital residence thereby modifying its Decree of Dissolution of Marriage when there was no evidence of fraud; and
2. Whether the trial court abused its discretion by limiting Poppe's damages to attorney's fees and costs when it rescinded, sua sponte, a valid contract for the sale of real estate.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
On May 21, 1999, James C. Jabaay (James) filed his Verified Petition for Dissolution of Marriage. After the entry of provisional orders and pre-trial hearings, the Lake County Circuit Court set the final hearing for April 16, 2002. Subsequently, on June 6, 2002, the trial court entered its Decree of Dissolution of Marriage. This Decree provided, in pertinent part, that:
13. The marital residence located at 10026 Somerset Drive, Munster, IN 46321 is to be sold at a price mutually agreed upon by the parties, but for no less than [the] appraised value of $230,000.00. [Cecilia] is given until June 15, 2002 to effect a sale by owner in which case if successful, she would receive four percent (4%) of the gross sales price as compensation for her efforts. If [Cecilia] is not successful in selling the property by June 15, 2002, same is to be listed with a mutually agreed upon realtor at a mutually agreed upon price. In the event the parties cannot agree on a realtor or a listing price, or if the property does not sell by October 1, 2002, upon written motion of either party, the [c]ourt will appoint a commissioner to effect the sale.
14. [Cecilia] will continue to have exclusive use and possession of the marital residence until sold. Until October 1, 2002, the parties will equally (50%/50%) share responsibility for the mortgage payment. If the house does not sell and close by October 1, 2002, [Cecilia] will be responsible for the entire mortgage payment until the property is sold and closed.
(Appellant's App. p. 98).
On August 2, 2002, James filed a Verified Petition for Rule to Show Cause *792 against Cecilia. After a pre-trial conference, the trial court entered its Order of November 5, 2002, appointing Attorney Karen Szumlanski (Szumlanski) as the trial court's commissioner for the sale of the marital residence. Although both Cecilia and James submitted offers to purchase the home, these were rejected by Szumlanski for noncompliance with the provisions of the dissolution decree. On February 13, 2003, Poppe tendered an offer to purchase the marital residence for $230,000.00. On February 17, Szumlanski accepted Poppe's offer and set a closing date for March 31, 2003.
Subsequently, Cecilia filed a series of motions attempting to both modify the Decree of Dissolution and block the commissioner's sale of the marital residence to Poppe. On February 20, 2003, the trial court ordered Cecilia to submit proof of her financial commitment to refinance and purchase the marital residence to Szumlanski by March 7, 2003. On March 10, 2003, Poppe filed a Motion to Intervene and a Motion to Set Aside Prior Order. On March 13, 2003, Szumlanski stated in her Response to Cecilia's motions that instead of a copy of a loan commitment, Cecilia had merely submitted a loan pre-approval form. On March 14, 2003, pursuant to a hearing on the motions, the trial court granted Poppe's motion to intervene, but denied her motion to set aside the trial court's prior order. On March 21, 2003, the trial court conducted a hearing on the remaining issues. On April 15, 2003, the trial court issued its Order for Sale of Marital Residence, which declared, in pertinent part, that:
1. Both [Cecilia] and [Poppe] have presented offers to purchase the marital residence to [Szumlanski] for the sum of [t]wo [h]undred and [t]hirty [t]housand [d]ollars ($230,000.00). Each offer is ready to close immediately.
2. [Cecilia] was apparently capable of financing the purchase of the marital residence at the time of the hearing held on March 14, 2003 but did not submit the appropriate documents. Moreover, the [c]ourt appointed [c]ommissioner, [Szumlanski], has received written offers from [Cecilia] that did not comport with the Decree entered in this case and has experienced difficulty in dealing with [Cecilia], who has been acting as her own counsel.
3. Through no fault of [Poppe], but due to the conduct of [Cecilia], [Poppe] has incurred attorney fees and expenses regarding her good faith offer to purchase. Such expenses to date equal [o]ne [t]housand [f]our [h]undred and [e]ighty-[s]even [d]ollars and [f]ifty [c]ents ($1,487.50).
4. Cecilia and the parties' daughter still reside in the marital residence.
5. It was always this [c]ourt's intention to provide each of the parties adequate opportunity to purchase the marital residence before an outsider or non-party.
6. It is therefore [o]rdered that the [c]ourt's [c]ommissioner should sell the marital residence to [Cecilia] for the sum of [t]wo [t]housand and [t]hirty [t]housand [d]ollars ($230,000.00). In addition to said sum, [Cecilia] shall also pay [Poppe's] costs of [o]ne [t]housand [f]our [h]undred and [e]ighty-[s]even [d]ollars and [f]ifty [c]ents ($1,487.50) upon closing. [Cecilia] shall also pay [Szumlanski's] fees at the time of closing. Judgment accordingly.
(Appellant's App. pp. 14-6).
Poppe now appeals. Additional facts will be provided as necessary.
*793 DISCUSSION AND DECISION
I. Modification of Decree of Dissolution
First, Poppe contends that the trial court abused its discretion by ordering the sale of the marital home to Cecilia. Specifically, Poppe maintains that, despite the absence of fraud, the trial court nevertheless modified the property division provisions in the original decree of dissolution of marriage. Conversely, Cecilia argues that the trial court did not abuse its discretion because it did not modify the dissolution of marriage decree by awarding the marital residence to her. Further, Cecilia claims that even if the trial court modified its original decree, it was justified in doing so in order to reflect the true intention of the trial court at the time the original judgment was entered.
When reviewing a claim that the trial court improperly divided marital property, we must decide whether the trial court's decision constitutes an abuse of discretion. See Wells v. Collins, 679 N.E.2d 915, 916 (Ind.Ct.App.1997). An abuse of discretion occurs if the trial court's decision is clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and circumstances before the court, or the reasonable, probable, and actual deductions to be drawn therefrom. See id. An abuse of discretion also occurs when the trial court has misinterpreted the law or disregards evidence of factors listed in the controlling statute. See id.
At the outset we note that Ind. Code § 31-15-7-9.1 provides that orders concerning a property division may not be revoked or modified, except in the case of fraud. See I.C. § 31-15-7-9.1; Joachim v. Joachim, 450 N.E.2d 121, 122 (Ind.Ct.App. 1983). A strong policy favors the finality of marital property divisions, whether the court approves the terms of a settlement agreement reached by the parties or the court mandates the division of the property among the parties. See Dusenberry v. Dusenberry, 625 N.E.2d 458, 461 (Ind.Ct. App.1993). One purpose of this policy is to eliminate vexatious litigation which often accompanies the dissolution of a marriage. See Lankenau v. Lankenau, 174 Ind.App. 45, 365 N.E.2d 1241, 1244 (1977).
However, while there is no authority under the statute for the court to modify, rescind, or grant relief from the division of property under a dissolution of marriage decree, the statute does not preclude relief from judgment as provided under Ind. Trial Rule 60(B). See id. at 1243; See also Dusenberry, 625 N.E.2d at 461. Thus, notwithstanding our review of this case under the statutory limitations on the modification of a dissolution decree, we must also consider whether the trial court's order may be sustained under the provisions of T.R.60(B).
A. Statutory limitations
Initially, Poppe contends that the trial court abused its discretion because it modified its original dissolution decree without finding any evidence of fraud, as mandated under I.C. § 31-15-7-9.1. We agree.
In its original dissolution of marriage decree, the trial court stipulated elaborate and detailed instructions for the sale of the marital residence. Our review of the decree reveals that the trial court allowed Cecilia a first opportunity to sell the residence to avoid realtor costs. However, the decree further provided that if Cecilia was unsuccessful in selling the real estate within a specified time period, and the parties failed to agree on a mutually acceptable realtor, the trial court would appoint a commissioner to effect the sale of the marital home.
In its Order of October 2, 2002, the trial court appointed Szumlanski as its commissioner, and stated, in pertinent part, that:
*794 1. [Szumlanski] is appointed commissioner to sell the marital residence as soon as possible for not less than [its] fair market value as appraised of $230,000.00 and to distribute the proceeds pursuant to the parties' Decree of Dissolution. A copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated herein.
2. Commissioner Szumlanski shall have full power and authority to execute any and all documents relative to the sale including, but not limited to, a [r]ealtor's [l]isting [a]greement, [c]ommissioner's [d]eed [c]onveying [t]itle to the [p]roperty, and all related closing documents.
(Appellant's App. p. 96). The record reveals that after Szumlanski accepted her appointment, she solicited offers on the real estate from both Cecilia and James. Although both parties submitted offers, none was accepted; Cecilia's multiple offers were rejected because they did not conform with the provisions of the dissolution decree.
On February 13, 2003, Poppe tendered an offer, in accordance with the property divisions of the dissolution decree, to purchase the marital home. This offer was accompanied by a notice of a deposit of earnest money and a mortgage credit approval letter from Poppe's lender. The following day, February 14, 2003, Szumlanski notified Cecilia of the receipt of an acceptable offer to purchase the residence, and advised her that "[p]er our phone call this date, there is a very strong buyer who has already received mortgage approval. Upon receipt of the $1000 earnest money, unless I receive another offer with earnest money and loan approval, I will be signing the offer to purchase." (Appellant's App. p. 57). The record is devoid of any evidence that Cecilia responded to this letter, let alone, submitted an acceptable offer. As a result, Szumlanski executed Poppe's offer on February 17, 2003.
Our review of the record indicates that, as a result of numerous motions filed by Cecilia, the trial court allowed Cecilia until March 7, 2003, to submit proof of her financial commitment to refinance the marital residence. Although Cecilia failed to comply with this offer of proof, the trial court, nevertheless, in its Order of April 15, 2003, ordered the sale of the marital residence to Cecilia, thereby effectively setting aside the commissioner's acceptance of Poppe's offer. Additionally, the trial court stated that "[i]t was always the [c]ourt's intention to provide each of the parties adequate opportunity to purchase the marital residence before an outsider or non-party." (Appellant's App. p. 15).
We agree with Poppe that the trial court, by its Order of April 15, 2003, materially altered the terms of its original dissolution decree. The property division provisions of the decree clearly intended for the marital home to be sold. The express timeline provide for a continuance of the sale from sale by owner, to a mutually approved realtor, to a court appointed commissioner. By stipulating a sale by realtor and empowering the commissioner to list the house on a realtor's listing, the trial court in effect published the sale of the house to the world at large. As such, the trial court never intended to give Cecilia and James an implied right of first purchase. The trial court's subsequent "clarification" Order of April 15, 2003, providing Cecilia with adequate opportunity to purchase the home before an outsider, effectively modified the property division provisions of its original decree.
Regardless, our review of the record indicates that Cecilia had ample opportunity to purchase the marital home prior to Poppe's offer of purchase. Cecilia had four months prior to the appointment of a *795 commissioner to secure financing. Furthermore, after Szumlanski's appointment, she had an additional three months prior to Poppe's offer to comply with the purchasing terms of the dissolution decree. Thus, Cecilia had adequate opportunity to obtain an acceptable loan commitment.
Therefore, we find that the trial court's "clarification" Order of April 15, 2003 was clearly in violation of I.C. § 31-15-7-9.1, which provides that property division orders can only be modified in the case of fraud. See I.C. § 31-15-7-9.1. The trial court failed to make any findings establishing fraud, nor does our review of the evidence reveal any fraudulent action by the parties. See id. Consequently, we conclude that the trial court's failure to establish the statutory requirement of fraud constituted an abuse of discretion. See Wells, 679 N.E.2d at 916.
B. Relief from Judgment or Order
Next, we need to determine whether the trial court's Order of April 15, 2003, can be sustained under the provisions of T.R. 60(B). Although a court may sometimes modify its property division decree under T.R.60(B), a court may not do so without a motion by a party and without a hearing. See Joachim, 450 N.E.2d at 122; Lankenau, 365 N.E.2d at 1243. One seeking relief from judgment has the burden of showing the relief is necessary and just. See Joachim, 450 N.E.2d at 122. In this case, Cecilia did not file a motion under T.R.60(B). Consequently, the trial court has no authority to modify its decree under T.R. 60(B). See id.
II. Damages
Lastly, Poppe contends that the trial court erred in limiting her damages to attorney's fees and expenses. Specifically, Poppe alleges that after rescinding the valid contract for the sale of the real estate, the trial court should have awarded her specific performance or damages for loss of bargain.
As a matter of course, Indiana courts order specific performance of contracts for the purchase of real estate. See Kesler v. Marshall, 792 N.E.2d 893, 896 (Ind.Ct.App.2003). They do so because each piece of real estate is considered unique, without an identical counterpart anywhere in the world. See id. The decision to grant specific performance is a matter within the sound discretion of the trial court. Ruder v. Ohio Valley Wholesale, Inc., 736 N.E.2d 776, 779 (Ind.Ct. App.2000). The judgment of the trial court is given deference because an action to compel specific performance sounds in equity. Id. We will only reverse a trial court's decision if it is clearly against the reasonable deductions which may be drawn from the facts and circumstances before the court. Claise v. Bernardi, 413 N.E.2d 609, 612 (Ind.Ct.App.1980). To be enforced by specific performance, a contract for the sale of real estate need only be reasonably definite and binding as to its material terms. Humphries v. Ables, 789 N.E.2d 1025, 1034 (Ind.Ct.App.2003). A party seeking specific performance of a real estate contract must prove that the contract obligations of that party have been substantially performed or that an offer to do so has been made. Ruder, 736 N.E.2d at 779.
In the instant case, the trial court's "clarification" Order of April 15, 2003, effectively rescinded a valid, executed contract between Poppe and Szumlanski. In its Order of October 2, 2002, the trial court granted Szumlanski full power and authority to sell the marital home. On February 13, 2003, Poppe tendered an offer to purchase the real estate, which was accepted by Szumlanski on February 17, 2003. The record reveals that earnest money of $1,000 was deposited in Szumlanski's trust *796 account. Accordingly, the trial court's modification of the property divisions of the dissolution decree, awarding the marital home to Cecilia, effectively resulted in a sua sponte rescission of the contract for the sale of real estate between Poppe and Szumlanski.
As we have previously held, rescission of a contract is not automatically available. See New Life Community Church of God v. Adomatis, 672 N.E.2d 433, 438 (Ind.Ct.App.1996). Rather, there must be some basis to support the rescission such as fraud, illegality, or mutual mistake. See id. Here, no such ground exists. The trial court, merely by re-writing the original dissolution of marriage decree, rescinded the valid contract between Poppe and Szumlanski. "The law generally allows competent persons the utmost liberty of contracting, and their contracts, when entered into freely and voluntarily, are enforced by the courts." Id. (quoting Mutual Sec. Life Ins. Co. v. Fidelity & Deposit Co. of Maryland, 659 N.E.2d 1096, 1100 (Ind.Ct.App.1995), trans. denied). The trial court, by rescinding the contract for sale of real estate sua sponte, interfered with and violated this sacred principle of contract law. As a result, we find that the trial court was not at liberty to interfere with the parties' freedom of contract or to rewrite the contract terms. See id.
Further, by depositing earnest money into Szumlanski's trust account, Poppe made a good faith offer to perform the contractual obligations, as specified in the executed agreement for sale of the marital home. See Ruder, 736 N.E.2d at 779. Accordingly, the contract was reasonably definite and binding as to its material terms, and thus, specific performance was warranted. See Humphries, 789 N.E.2d at 1034. Consequently, we hold that the trial court's refusal to grant specific performance was clearly against the reasonable deductions drawn from the facts and circumstances before the court. Claise, 413 N.E.2d at 612. Therefore, we find that the trial court abused its discretion. See Ruder, 736 N.E.2d at 779. We remand to the trial court for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
CONCLUSION
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that the trial court abused its discretion by accepting Cecilia's offer to purchase and refinance the marital residence thereby rescinding the Contract to Purchase Real Estate entered into by the court appointed commissioner and Poppe. We further find that the trial court abused its discretion by limiting Poppe's damages to attorney's fees and costs, instead of awarding her specific performance.
Reversed and remanded with instructions.
DARDEN, J., and BAILEY, J., concur.

=== CASE 2208844 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:33.962794+00 ===

177 Cal.App.2d 93 (1960)
ANTHONY R. SOUZA, Respondent,
v.
JAMES A. RICHARDSON et al., Appellants.
Civ. No. 23831.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. One.
Jan. 12, 1960.
Jorz & Sawtelle and Gary W. Sawtelle for Appellants.
James E. Delwiche, Griffith & Thornburgh, Cavalletto, Webster, Mullen & McCaughey and George D. McKaig for Respondent.
WOOD, P. J.
These two actions for damages were consolidated for trial. The first action was commenced by Anthony Souza against James and Charles Richardson for damages, to person and property, resulting from a collision of automobiles at an intersection of streets in Santa Barbara. In a jury trial in that action the verdict was for plaintiff Souza, against defendants Richardson, for $11,667.
The second action was commenced by John Dentoni, a guest in the Richardson automobile, against Anthony Souza for damages for personal injuries resulting from the collision. The verdict therein was in favor of Souza.
A judgment, in accordance with those verdicts, was entered. A motion, by the Richardsons and Dentoni, for a new trial was denied. They appeal from the judgment. (There was one judgment in the two actions.)
Appellants contend that the amount of damages awarded to Souza was excessive. *95
The collision occurred on June 11, 1957, about 4:30 p.m. Preceding the collision, plaintiff Souza was traveling north, and defendant James Richardson (the driver of Charles Richardson's automobile) was traveling east. The vehicles collided in the southeast quadrant of the intersection. Since the only question on appeal is whether the amount of damages was excessive, it is not necessary to state the details concerning the happening of the collision.
There was evidence that Souza sustained injuries, and received medical treatment, as follows: Two severe lacerations of the scalp--a laceration on the side of his head required eight stitches, and a laceration on the back of his head required nine stitches. Bruises and abrasions on his forehead, cheek, arms, and legs--his arms and legs were covered with bandages. A sprain of the lower back. An extensive wound on the lower back, and a large hematoma developed--an operation was performed in order to remove clotted blood. Sharp pain in the lower back, required sedation. He was in a hospital eight days. His injuries were painful. In the opinion of a physician (called as a witness by Souza) the back sprain "possibly" will cause discomfort during a period of eight or ten years.
Also there was evidence that after Souza left the hospital he was unable to work for four weeks, except that he could supervise his grocery store business.
It was stipulated that the amount of Souza's special damages was $1,867.08.
[1] The question as to the amount of damages was one of fact for the determination of the jury. [2] In Sexton v. Key System Transit Lines, 144 Cal.App.2d 719 [301 P.2d 612], it was said at page 722; "[I]t is not the function of an appellate court to fix the award of damages, even within broad limits, and thus to impose its views upon the trier of the fact. Pain and suffering are not subject to precise measurement by any scale, and their translation into terms of money damages is peculiarly the function of the trier of the facts. [Citation.] Here the trial judge, on motion for new trial, had the opportunity to review the award. In these circumstances, 'an appellate court may interfere only in the event it appears ..., as a matter of law, that the verdict was the result of passion or prejudice.' [Citation.]"
[3] Appellants argue further that certain testimony could reasonably have inflamed the minds of the jurors against appellants. The testimony so referred to is indicated by the *96 following two references to testimony. (1) While defendant James Richardson was testifying on direct examination, his attorney asked him if he had talked with anyone, other than the police and Dentoni, at the scene of the accident; and he replied that he had called his insurance adjuster from his automobile (apparently by two-way radio) and had made a report of the accident. (2) Two physicians, called as witnesses by Dentoni, testified that they thought Dentoni was a malingerer. The point of appellants' argument seems to be that the reference by Richardson to Richardson's insurance, and the reference by Dentoni's physicians to Dentoni as a malingerer, caused the jury to award a large amount of damages. It appears that the reference to insurance was made by one of the appellants, and that the reference to Dentoni as a malingerer was made by witnesses who were called by Dentoni. Appellants did not make a motion to strike the testimony regarding insurance, or make a motion for a mistrial, or request an instruction regarding the reference to insurance. If any prejudice to appellants was caused by such references, it was not attributable to any act on the part of plaintiff Souza.
[4] It does not appear that the amount of damages awarded to plaintiff Souza was the result of passion or prejudice on the part of the jury. It cannot be said as a matter of law that the amount of damages was excessive.
[5] As above stated, the plaintiff Dentoni (the guest in the Richardson automobile) did not prevail in his action against Souza. On his appeal he has not attacked the part of the judgment which was adverse to him, but he has asserted, in conjunction with the appellants Richardson (defendants in the first action), that the amount of damages awarded in favor of Souza and against the Richardsons was excessive. It thus appears that on Dentoni's appeal no contention has been made to the effect that the part of the judgment relating to Dentoni was erroneous. Under such circumstances it will be deemed that the appeal by Dentoni has been abandoned. (See Zanardi v. Pacific Tel. & Tel. Co., 134 Cal.App.2d 3, 11 [284 P.2d 851].)
The judgment is affirmed.
Fourt, J., and Lillie, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2208908 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:34.519655+00 ===

1 N.Y.3d 546 (2003)
804 N.E.2d 399
772 N.Y.S.2d 235
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK, Respondent,
v.
LARRY ANDREW, Also Known as LARRY ANDREWS, Appellant.
Court of Appeals of the State of New York.
Argued November 20, 2003.
Decided December 18, 2003.
*547 De Nice Powell, New York City, and Lynn W.L. Fahey for appellant.
Richard A. Brown, District Attorney, Kew Gardens (Thomas S. Berkman and John M. Castellano of counsel), for respondent.
*548 Chief Judge KAYE and Judges G.B. SMITH, CIPARICK, ROSENBLATT, GRAFFEO and READ concur.
OPINION OF THE COURT
MEMORANDUM.
The order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed.
Defendant was convicted of assault in the first degree, upon a jury verdict, arising from an incident in a rooming house where both he and the complainant resided. Defendant interposed a defense of justification. The trial court admitted complainant's hospital record into evidence, but redacted a notation by a resident physician stating that it was impossible to obtain the complainant's consent to surgery because he was too drunk. Defendant claims that the redaction of this information was error. We note, however, that defendant had the laboratory results, showing complainant's toxicology level, available for his use. Moreover, defendant did not rely on the purported intoxication of the complainant. We therefore conclude that the trial court properly exercised its discretion in redacting the notation.
Finally, the court did not violate defendant's right to be present during the issuance of supplemental jury instructions. Defendant failed to come forward with substantial evidence to rebut the presumption of regularity that attaches to all criminal proceedings (see People v Foster, 1 NY3d 44 [2003]; see generally People v Harris, 61 NY2d 9, 16 [1983]; People v Richetti, 302 NY 290, 298 [1951]).
Order affirmed in a memorandum.

=== CASE 2208913 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:34.549801+00 ===

804 N.E.2d 237 (2004)
Sondra L. RATLIFF, Appellant-Respondent,
v.
Michael K. RATLIFF, Appellee-Petitioner.
No. 07A01-0307-CV-249.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
March 4, 2004.
*239 Thomas M. Barr, David C. Grupenhoff, Nashville, IN, Attorneys for Appellant.
*240 Melinda O'Dell, Mooresville, IN, Attorney for Appellee.
*238 OPINION
SHARPNACK, Judge.
Sondra L. Ratliff Haggard ("Mother") appeals the trial court's order amending Michael K. Ratliff's ("Father") and Mother's child support obligations. Mother raises numerous issues, which we restate as:
I. Whether the trial court's calculation of weekly gross income for child support purposes was clearly erroneous;
II. Whether the trial court's finding that the parties' nineteen-year-old child was partially emancipated was clearly erroneous;
III. Whether the trial court's finding denying Mother's request to credit her litigation expenses against one child's post-secondary education expenses was clearly erroneous; and
IV. Whether the trial court abused its discretion by denying Mother's motion for attorney fees.
We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand.
The relevant facts follow.[1] Mother and Father married in 1989. They have three children: J.B.R., born September 14, 1983, D.R., born December 6, 1984, and A.R., born November 28, 1989.[2] In February 2000, Father filed a petition for dissolution of the marriage. In August 2001, the trial court entered its dissolution decree and awarded physical custody of the children to Mother and ordered Father to pay child support.
In October 2001, Mother married Wayne Haggard ("Stepfather"). In July 2002, D.R. alleged that Stepfather had sexually molested her. The Shelby County Office of Family and Children ("OFC") filed a Child in Need of Services ("CHINS") petition on behalf of D.R., removed D.R. from Mother's house, and placed her with Father. Because of the allegations D.R. made against Stepfather, Father filed an emergency motion for change of physical custody of A.R. on August 9, 2002. The trial court granted a temporary change in physical custody of A.R. from Mother to Father. In December 2002, D.R. recanted her molestation allegations against Stepfather. The trial court then returned physical custody of A.R. to Mother. D.R. remained with Father.
On May 20, 2003, the trial court held a child support modification hearing due to the fact that Father had custody of D.R. At the time of the hearing, Mother worked as a pharmacist at Apria Health Care, earned $35.79 per hour, and worked 40 hours per week; thus, her weekly wages were $1,431.60. Mother also worked some overtime, and at the time of the hearing her year-to-date average weekly gross income, including overtime, was $1,926.40. Father worked at Ingersoll Cutting Tools and earned a base salary of approximately $1,261.00 per week. Father also earned *241 bonuses and commissions, and his income included some reimbursed expenses and allowances. At the time of the hearing Father's year-to-date average weekly gross income, including commission and bonuses, was $2,108.71 per week.
Mother and Father each submitted child support obligation worksheets in order to assist the trial court in calculating their weekly gross incomes. In Mother's child support obligation worksheet, she calculated her and Father's weekly gross income based upon their base pay plus any overtime, bonuses, and commissions, and she proposed that the trial court find that her weekly gross income was $1,926 and that Father's weekly gross income was $2,109. Mother used her and Father's year-to-date pay from their latest 2003 pay stub and divided that amount by the number of weeks reflected in the pay stub. In Father's child support obligation worksheet, he proposed that the trial court find that his weekly gross income was $1,261 and that Mother's weekly gross income was $1,400. Father's calculation of weekly gross income did not include any overtime, bonuses, and commissions. Instead, Father proposed that both he and Mother pay 17% of any overtime, bonuses, and commissions that they earned above their base pay on a quarterly basis.
During the hearing, the trial court also heard testimony regarding pending motions. Father had filed a motion regarding the emancipation of J.B.R. J.B.R. was nineteen years old and lived with Mother. J.B.R., who was home schooled, was classified as a senior in high school but had not completed all his junior level requirements. He worked full-time at Wal-Mart and earned $8.50 to $8.75 an hour. Father argued that he should not have to pay base child support for J.B.R. because he was emancipated.
Mother asked the trial court to order Father to pay her approximately $12,645 in attorney fees and expenses that stemmed from the litigation surrounding Father's motion for temporary custody of A.R. Mother argued that attorney fees were appropriate because Father, who filed the change of custody motion after D.R. alleged that she was sexually abused by Stepfather, should have known that D.R.'s allegations were not truthful. Mother also requested that the trial court credit her litigation expenses stemming from D.R.'s sexual molestation allegations against her post-secondary education expenses for D.R.
On June 4, 2003, the trial court entered its order determining Mother and Father's child support obligation. In calculating the parties' child support obligations, the trial court determined that Mother's weekly gross income was $1,926 and that Father's weekly gross income was $1,685. In its order, the trial court also determined that J.B.R. was partially emancipated, and it denied Mother's request for attorney fees and her request for credit against D.R.'s post-secondary education expenses. The trial court's order provided in pertinent part, that:
1. The parties were able to agree on the majority of the pending issues in this case. The agreement was stated on the record, and counsel for the parties will revise their draft of the agreed entry to reflect all changes and submit the agreement to the Court for review and approval.
2. The contested issues that remained for hearing were the appropriate child support order, whether [Mother] should receive any credit toward her share of [D.R.'s] college expenses, and attorney fees.
Current Support
*242 3. The issues with respect to the parties' current support obligation are: first, the appropriate amount of weekly income to attribute to [Father]; and, second, whether [Father] should be required to pay basic child support for [J.B.R.].
4. [Father] earns a gross annual salary without commissions, bonuses or reimbursed expense of approximately $62,572.00 or $1,261.00 per week. However, he also regularly earns commissions and/or bonuses and receives income consisting of reimbursed expenses. In 2002, he reported an adjusted gross income of $92,375.00. Through April 30, 2003, he had earned a gross income of $35,848.00.
5. [Father] requests the Court to use his basic weekly salary of $1,261.00 in establishing his weekly child support obligation, and also order that he pay a percentage of any bonuses, commissions or other income he receives on a periodic basis. This approach would insure (sic) that he is able to meet the basic child support obligation regardless of the amount he receives from the less certain portions of his income. However, it results in a weekly obligation of much lower than his income would justify, with [Mother] having to wait for the additional support on a quarterly or other regular basis.
6. [Mother] requests the Court to set [Father's] weekly income at $2,109.00, his total income year to date divided on a weekly basis. This approach would insure (sic) that all of [Father's] income would be included in determining the weekly child support obligation, would provide a consistent amount of support for the children, and would be less complicated and time consuming for the parties. However, it runs the risk of overstating [Father's] income.
7. The Court finds that [Father] earns commissions on a regular enough basis to include some amount of commissions in his weekly income. Assigning some additional income to [Father] above his regular earnings, but less than requested by [Mother], would result in a more accurate weekly child support obligation without incurring the risk of overstating [Father's] income. Consequently, the Court will use a weekly income figure for [Father] of $1,685.00, which represents his weekly regular earnings of $1,261.00 plus ½ of the additional weekly income he has received year to date. He will also pay, on a periodic basis, a percentage of any income he earns in excess of $1,685.00 (his "excess" earnings). The percentage will equal the ratio of the basic child support obligation to the combined income of the parties as suggested in the Commentary to Guideline 6 of the Indiana Child Support Guidelines.
8. The parties agreed that they would divide the costs of postsecondary education with each of their children, with each party and the child paying 1/3 of that child's expenses. [Father] argues that while he is willing to pay his share of college expenses for [J.B.R.], he should not be required to pay weekly child support because [J.B.R.] is partially emancipated. The parties' agreement calls for a determination that [J.B.R.] is completely emancipated as of January 1, 2004. [Father] argues that [J.B.R.] is partially emancipated at this time.
9. The evidence showed that [J.B.R.] continues to live with his mother, that he works approximately full time at Wal-Mart earning $8.50 or $8.75 per hour, and that he earned $15,139.82 in 2002. He pays for his own vehicle *243 expenses including insurance, and the expenses for his hair cuts (sic) and cell phone. His mother pays his remaining expenses, including health insurance. The Court finds that based on the evidence presented, [J.B.R.] is partially emancipated. The parties shall be obligated to pay some basic support for [J.B.R.] so long as he continues to live with his mother under the current circumstances, but that obligation shall be in a reduced amount.
10. The Court finds the parties are entitled to a 17% reduction in the basic child support obligation based on [J.B.R.'s] partial emancipation. This reduction equals ½ the difference between the basic child support obligation for one child, and the basic child support obligation for two children. (See Child Support Obligation Worksheet A). Consequently, [Father] will owe a weekly child support obligation for the benefit of [J.B.R.] and [A.R.] in a total amount of $155.00 plus 12% of any gross income earned above $1,685.00 per week. (12% equals the ratio of the basic child support obligation of $397.00 to the parties' combined income of $3,450.00). Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, [Father] will be required to figure the gross income he earns above $1,685.00 per week ($21,905.00 per quarter) and the 12% child support owed on the "excess" earnings on a quarterly basis. He shall provide copies of pay stubs or other employment records as documentation of the "excess" earnings to [Mother].
11. [Mother] will owe child support for the benefit of [D.R.] in the sum of $178.00 per week, resulting in a net difference owed by [Mother] to [Father] of $23.00 per week ($299.00 per quarter) pursuant to the split custody arrangement. (See Child Support Obligation Worksheet B.) Because [Father] will pay the child support obligated by his "excess" earnings on a quarterly basis, [Mother] will not be required to pay any child support to [Father] until after [Father] provides [Mother] with record of his quarterly "excess" earnings. Each quarter, the parties shall ascertain which party owes the other support, depending on whether the $299.00 per quarter owed by [Mother] exceeds or is less than 12% of [Father's] gross earnings in excess of $21,905.00 per quarter. Whoever owes the greater amount of support shall pay the difference no later than two weeks after the support documentation has been provided[.]
12. The Court will also deviate from the guideline division of uninsured health care expenses. The Court orders that any uninsured health care expenses for the children be divided equally between the parties. The Court bases this deviation on the fact that the parties are enjoying split custody of the children, and because once all support is paid by both parties, including the bonuses and commissions earned by [Father], the evidence indicates the parties['] incomes will be relatively equal.
Attorney Fees
* * *
14. Neither will the Court enter an award of attorney fees to [Mother] for [Father's] pursuit of the emergency custody of [A.R.] Both parents incurred additional fees and lost time from work for court hearings and preparation for court hearings as a result of the allegations raised by [D.R.] against [Stepfather]. Despite the fact that [D.R.] has recanted those *244 allegations, the Court cannot say that [Father's] actions in the case, taken during the time the allegations were still being made by [D.R.], were frivolous or unreasonable.
Credit Toward College Expenses
15. Finally the Court must determine whether [D.R.] should bear a greater portion of her college expenses based on the expenditure of funds made by her parents directly related to her allegations against [Stepfather]. [Mother] contends that an order requiring [D.R.] to pay a greater percentage of her college expenses would serve to teach [D.R.] the negative consequences of her actions. The evidence did not show why [D.R.] made the allegations she did. Assuming they are not true in light of her subsequent recantation, the consequences to her are better determined by her parents than by a court order regarding her college expenses. The Court will not order any credit to [Mother] or [Father] for his or her share of [D.R.'s] college expenses as punishment to [D.R.] for her actions.
16. However, the Court recognizes that the parties incurred very real economic consequences as a result of the allegations, and that those economic circumstances will no doubt have an impact on the parties' ability to pay for [D.R.'s] postsecondary education. Consequently, the Court, in anticipated acceptance of the parties[`] agreement that they and the children will each pay 1/3 of the children's college expense, now orders that in determining each party's 1/3 of [D.R.'s] college expenses, any grants, scholarships or other financial assistance obtained by the child and her parents shall be credited equally to [D.R.'s], [Mother's] and [Father's] 1/3 of the expenses.
Appellant's Appendix at 16-21. Mother now appeals the trial court's order.
When reviewing the trial court's findings of fact and conclusions thereon, we consider whether the evidence supports the findings and whether the findings support the judgment. Yanoff v. Muncy, 688 N.E.2d 1259, 1262 (Ind.1997). Findings are clearly erroneous only when the record contains no facts to support them either directly or by inference. Id. A judgment is clearly erroneous if it applies the wrong legal standard to properly found facts. Id. In order to determine that a finding or conclusion is clearly erroneous, our review of the evidence must leave us with the firm conviction that a mistake has been made. Id. Here, the trial court sua sponte entered specific findings of fact and conclusions. Sua sponte findings control only as to the issues they cover and a general judgment will control as to the issues upon which there are no findings. Id. A general judgment entered with findings will be affirmed if it can be sustained on any legal theory supported by the evidence. Id.
I.
The first issue is whether trial court's calculation of weekly gross income for child support purposes was clearly erroneous. Our supreme court has placed a "strong emphasis on trial court discretion in determining child support obligations" and has acknowledged "the principle that child support modifications will not be set aside unless they are clearly erroneous." Lea v. Lea, 691 N.E.2d 1214, 1217 (Ind. 1998).
Mother argues that the trial court erroneously calculated the parties' weekly gross incomes for child support purposes because the trial court included her overtime in her weekly gross income and included only part of Father's commissions in his weekly gross income. The Indiana *245 Child Support Guidelines aid in the determination of the amount of child support that should be awarded and provide a measure for calculating each parent's share of the child support. Lea, 691 N.E.2d at 1217. "There is a rebuttable presumption that the amount of the award which would result from the application of the Indiana Child Support Guidelines is the correct amount of child support to be awarded." Id.
When fashioning a child support order, the trial court's first task is to determine the weekly gross income of each parent. Scott v. Scott, 668 N.E.2d 691, 695-696 (Ind.Ct.App.1996). "Weekly gross income" is broadly defined to include not only actual income from employment but also potential income and imputed income from "in-kind" benefits. Glover v. Torrence, 723 N.E.2d 924, 936 (Ind.Ct.App. 2000). Indiana Child Support Guideline 3(A) provides, in pertinent part:
Weekly gross income of each parent includes income from any source, except as excluded below, and includes, but is not limited to, income from salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, overtime, partnership distributions, dividends, severance pay, pensions, interest, trust income, annuities, capital gains, social security benefits, workmen's compensation benefits, unemployment insurance benefits, disability insurance benefits, gifts, prizes, and alimony or maintenance received from other marriages.
While the guidelines advocate a total income approach to calculating weekly gross income, the Guidelines recognize that determining income is fact-sensitive when irregular income, such as bonuses, overtime, and commissions, is involved. In re A.J.R., 702 N.E.2d 355, 359 (Ind.Ct.App. 1998). The commentary to Ind. Child Support Guideline 3(A) provides:
There are numerous forms of income that are irregular or nonguaranteed, which cause difficulty in accurately determining the gross income of a party. Overtime, commissions, bonuses, periodic partnership distributions, voluntary extra work and extra hours worked by a professional are all illustrations, but far from an all-inclusive list, of such items. Each is includable in the total income approach taken by the Guidelines, but each is also very fact-sensitive.
The Guidelines suggest that one method of treating irregular income is to require the obligor to pay a fixed percentage of the irregular income "in child support on a periodic but predetermined basis (weekly, bi-weekly, monthly, quarterly) rather than by the process of determining the average of the irregular income by past history and including it in the obligor's gross income calculation." Ind. Child Support Guideline 3(A) (Commentary 2(b)).
Mother argues that the trial court erroneously calculated the parties' weekly gross incomes. Mother, however, does not argue that the trial court's calculation of her and Father's weekly gross income fails to comply with the Child Support Guidelines. Indeed, she concedes that there is no error in the method utilized by the trial court to calculate either her or Father's income. Instead, she contends that the trial court erred by including all of her irregular income in her weekly gross income while including only part of Father's irregular income in his weekly gross income.
Mother and Father each submitted child support obligation worksheets to assist the trial court in calculating their weekly gross incomes. In Mother's child support worksheet, she included any overtime, bonuses, and commissions in her weekly gross income calculation and proposed that the trial court find that her weekly gross income *246 was $1,926 and that Father's weekly gross income was $2,109. In Father's child support obligation worksheet, he did not include any overtime, bonuses, and commissions in his calculation of weekly gross income and proposed that the trial court find that his weekly gross income was $1,261 and that Mother's weekly gross income was $1,400. Father proposed that both he and Mother pay 17% of any overtime, bonuses, and commissions that they earned above their base pay on a quarterly basis. Father testified that his bonuses and commissions had significantly decreased and that the income reflected in his pay stubs and W-2 forms included reimbursed expenses and allowances.
The trial court, per Mother's request, included her overtime pay in the calculation of her weekly gross income and determined that Mother's weekly gross income was $1,926. The trial court included some of Father's irregular income in his weekly gross income and determined that Father's weekly gross income was $1,685. The trial court ordered Father to pay a percentage of the remainder of his irregular income on a periodic basis.
We cannot say that the trial court's finding regarding Mother and Father's weekly gross income is clearly erroneous. To the extent that Mother is challenging the inclusion of her irregular income in the calculation of her weekly gross income, she has waived that argument on appeal. When Mother submitted her child support worksheet to the trial court, she expressly recommended to the trial court that her overtime pay be included in her weekly gross income. Thus, any error Mother alleges to exist in the trial court's inclusion of irregular income in her weekly gross income is invited error and not reviewable on appeal. In re Adoption of B.C.S., 793 N.E.2d 1054, 1061 (Ind.Ct.App.2003) (holding appellants waived arguments regarding trial court's consideration of hearsay documents when they offered two of them for admission themselves). In calculating Father's weekly gross income, the trial court determined that Father received commissions consistently enough to include some of them in his weekly gross income, while it ordered Father to pay a percentage of the remainder of his irregular income on a periodic basis. The trial court recognized the fact-sensitive nature of Father's irregular income and followed the Guidelines in determining his weekly gross income. See Ind. Child Support Guideline 3(A). Therefore, we cannot say that the trial court's calculation of Father's weekly gross income was clearly erroneous. See, e.g., Lea, 691 N.E.2d at 1217 (noting that there is a rebuttable presumption that the amount of the award which would result from the application of the Indiana Child Support Guidelines is the correct amount of child support to be awarded); Thomas v. Smith, 794 N.E.2d 500, 506 (Ind.Ct.App.2003), trans. denied (holding that trial court's calculation of weekly gross income was not clearly erroneous). Accordingly, we affirm the trial court's calculation of weekly gross income for child support purposes.
II.
The second issue is whether trial court's finding that the parties' nineteen-year-old child was partially emancipated was clearly erroneous. What constitutes emancipation of a minor child is a question of law, but whether there has been an emancipation is a question of fact. Dunson v. Dunson, 769 N.E.2d 1120, 1123 (Ind.2002). Emancipation of a child cannot be presumed but must be established by competent evidence by the party seeking emancipation. Id. In reviewing a trial court's determination regarding the date *247 of emancipation, we will not set aside the finding of the trial court unless it is clearly erroneous. Connell v. Welty, 725 N.E.2d 502, 504 (Ind.Ct.App.2000).
"[A] parent's child support obligation terminates when a child is emancipated or reaches age 21, except in certain circumstances." Lea, 691 N.E.2d at 1215. Specifically, Ind.Code § 31-16-6-6 (1998) provides:
(a) The duty to support a child under this chapter ceases when the child becomes twenty-one (21) years of age unless any of the following conditions occurs:
(1) The child is emancipated before becoming twenty-one (21) years of age. In this case the child support, except for the educational needs outlined in section 2(a)(1) of this chapter, terminates at the time of emancipation, although an order for educational needs may continue in effect until further order of the court.
(2) The child is incapacitated. In this case the child support continues during the incapacity or until further order of the court.
(3) The child:
(A) is at least eighteen (18) years of age;
(B) has not attended a secondary or postsecondary school for the prior four (4) months and is not enrolled in a secondary or postsecondary school; and
(C) is or is capable of supporting himself or herself through employment.
In this case the child support terminates upon the court's finding that the conditions prescribed in this subdivision exist. However, if the court finds that the conditions set forth in clauses (A) through (C) are met but that the child is only partially supporting or is capable of only partially supporting himself or herself, the court may order that support be modified instead of terminated.
(b) For purposes of determining if a child is emancipated under subsection (a)(1), if the court finds that the child:
(1) has joined the United States armed services;
(2) has married; or
(3) is not under the care or control of:
(A) either parent; or
(B) an individual or agency approved by the court;
the court shall find the child emancipated and terminate the child support.
Mother argues that the trial court erred by finding that J.B.R. was partially emancipated. Specifically, Mother argues that because Father failed to meet his burden of proving that J.B.R. had not attended and was not enrolled in school, see I.C. § 31-16-6-6(a)(3)(B), the trial court erred by finding J.B.R. to be partially emancipated.[3] Although the trial court made no specific finding that it found J.B.R. partially emancipated under I.C. § 31-16-6-6(a)(3)(B), we conclude that the trial court's finding regarding emancipation must be reviewed under that portion of the emancipation statute because it is the only section of the statute that allows for a finding of partial emancipation.
Here, the only evidence presented regarding J.B.R.'s school status was that J.B.R., who was home schooled, was a *248 senior in high school but had not yet completed all his junior level requirements. Father, who had the burden of proving that J.B.R. was emancipated, presented no evidence that J.B.R. had not attended school for the prior four months and no evidence that J.B.R. was not enrolled in school. Although J.B.R. was working full-time, the evidence presented showed that he was still enrolled in school. Thus, the trial court's finding that J.B.R. was partially emancipated is not supported by the evidence and is clearly erroneous. See, e.g., Taylor v. Chaffin, 558 N.E.2d 879, 883 (Ind.Ct.App.1990) (holding that evidence that child was enrolled in and attending school precluded finding of emancipation under section of emancipation statute requiring a showing of the child being eighteen years old, not enrolled in school, and capable of supporting himself). Accordingly, we must reverse the trial court's finding of partial emancipation and remand this issue to the trial court.
III.
The third issue is whether the trial court's finding denying Mother's request to credit her litigation expenses against D.R.'s post-secondary education expenses was clearly erroneous. Upon review of a trial court's order regarding payment of college expenses, we reverse only if the trial court's decision is clearly erroneous. Thacker v. Thacker, 710 N.E.2d 942, 946 (Ind.Ct.App.1999). Educational support orders must take into account the child's aptitude and ability, the child's reasonable ability to contribute to educational expenses, and the ability of each parent to meet these expenses. Gilbert v. Gilbert, 777 N.E.2d 785, 792 (Ind.Ct.App.2002) (citing Ind.Code § 31-16-6-2(a)); see also Ind. Child Support Guideline 6(b), Extraordinary Educational Expenses (2003).
Mother argues that the trial court erred by denying her a credit for her litigation expenses stemming from Father's change of custody motion against D.R.'s post-secondary education expenses. Mother and Father initially agreed that they, along with D.R., would each pay one-third of D.R.'s college expenses. Mother, however, argues that the trial court should have taught D.R. a lesson for making and then recanting molestation allegations against Stepfather by granting Mother a credit for her expenses and ordering D.R. to pay a greater portion of her own college expenses. The trial court denied Mother's request for the credit, finding that any consequences for D.R.'s recanted allegations would be "better determined by her parents than by a court order regarding her college expenses." Appellant's Appendix at 20. The trial court, however, acknowledged that both Mother and Father had incurred expenses as a result of D.R.'s allegations and ordered that any grants, scholarships, or other financial assistance obtained by D.R. would be credited equally to D.R.'s, Mother's, and Father's portion of D.R.'s college expenses. The trial court also considered D.R.'s, Mother's, and Father's ability to contribute to D.R.'s college expenses. Thus, we cannot say that the trial court's decision to deny Mother a credit for her litigation expenses was clearly erroneous. See, e.g., Gilbert, 777 N.E.2d at 795 (affirming the trial court's order regarding payment of post-secondary education expenses).
IV.
The last issue is whether the trial court abused its discretion by denying Mother's request for attorney fees. In post-dissolution proceedings, the trial court may order a party to pay a reasonable amount for attorney's fees. In re Marriage of Tearman, 617 N.E.2d 974, 978 (Ind.Ct.App.1993). A trial court's decision to grant or deny attorney fees is left *249 to the sound discretion of the trial court, and a decision to deny attorney fees will be reversed only for an abuse of discretion. Dunson, 769 N.E.2d at 1127. The trial court abuses its discretion if its decision is clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and circumstances before it. McCullough v. Archbold Ladder Co., 605 N.E.2d 175, 180 (Ind.1993).
When determining whether an award of attorney fees is appropriate, the court may consider such factors as the resources of the parties, the relative earning ability of the parties, and other factors that bear on the reasonableness of the award. Meade v. Levett, 671 N.E.2d 1172, 1179 (Ind.Ct.App.1996). Any misconduct on the part of one party that causes the other party to directly incur additional fees may be taken into consideration. Id. When one party is in a superior position to pay fees over the other party, an award of attorney fees is proper. Reese v. Reese, 671 N.E.2d 187, 192 (Ind.Ct.App.1996), trans. denied. The court need not give reasons for its determination. In re Tearman, 617 N.E.2d at 978.
Mother argues that the trial court abused its discretion by denying her request for attorney fees. Mother argues that Father should pay for her attorney fees stemming from Father's initiation of a change of custody of A.R., which was precipitated by D.R.'s allegations of sexual misconduct against Stepfather. Mother contends that Father's "pursuit of [the change of custody of A.R.] from the outset appears to have been fueled by willful ignorance" and that Father's failure to "take reasonable steps" to investigate D.R.'s allegations entitles her to attorney fees. Appellant's Brief at 26-27.
Here, after D.R. alleged that Stepfather had sexually molested her, OFC filed a CHINS petition on behalf of D.R., removed D.R. from Mother's house, and placed her with Father. Immediately thereafter, Father moved for a temporary change of custody of A.R. to remove her from Mother and Stepfather's house, and the trial court granted Father's motion. After D.R. recanted her allegations against Stepfather, the trial court returned physical custody of A.R. to Mother.
The trial court found that Father's actions in seeking emergency custody of A.R. were not "frivolous or unreasonable." Appellant's Appendix at 20. Although Father moved to change custody of A.R. based on D.R.'s sexual molestation allegations that she later recanted, the trial court did not find nor can we say that Father engaged in misconduct during the course of the proceedings that would entitle Mother to attorney fees. Furthermore, Mother and Father have comparable earning abilities and similar resources at their disposal. Thus, we cannot say the trial court abused its discretion by denying Mother's request for attorney fees. See, e.g., Gilbert, 777 N.E.2d at 795 (holding that the trial court properly denied a father's motion for attorney fees where there was no misconduct by the mother); In re A.J.R., 702 N.E.2d at 364 (holding that trial court abused its discretion by ordering a father to pay the mother's attorney fees where their incomes were similar).
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the trial court's calculation of weekly gross income for child support purposes, denial of attorney fees, and denial of a credit for litigation expenses against post-secondary education expenses. We reverse the trial court's finding of partial emancipation and remand to the trial court.
Affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded.
MATHIAS, J. and VAIDIK, J. concur.
NOTES
[1]  We note that the Statement of Facts section of Mother's appellate brief contains some argument and inappropriate commentary questioning the truthfulness of some of the testimony in the record. Appellant's Brief at 3-10. We remind counsel for the parties that the Statement of Facts section "shall describe the facts relevant to the issues presented for review," is to be a narrative statement of facts, and is not to be argumentative. Ind. Appellate Rule 46(A)(6); Parks v. Madison County, 783 N.E.2d 711, 717 (Ind.Ct.App. 2002), trans. denied.
[2]  J.B.R. and D.R. were Mother's children from a previous marriage, and Father adopted them after he married Mother.
[3]  Mother also argues that the trial court erred in finding J.B.R. to be partially emancipated because Father failed to prove that J.B.R. is capable of partially supporting himself. See I.C. § 31-16-6-6(a)(3)(C). Because we find that the trial court's finding of partial emancipation was clearly erroneous due to a lack of evidence that J.B.R. was not enrolled in school, see I.C. § 31-16-6-6(a)(3)(B), we need not address this argument.

=== CASE 2208914 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:34.556186+00 ===

38 Wis. 2d 305 (1968)
SIKORA, Respondent,
v.
JURSIK and another, Appellants.
Supreme Court of Wisconsin.
February 1, 1968.
February 27, 1968.
*308 For the appellants there was a brief by deVries, Vlasak & Schallert, Stephen C. deVries, and Gerald Bloch, all of Milwaukee, and oral argument by Stephen C. deVries.
For the respondent there was a brief by Eisenberg Kletzke, attorneys, and Jerome F. Pogodzinski of counsel, all of Milwaukee, and oral argument by Sydney M. Eisenberg.
HANLEY, J.
Defendants contend on appeal that (1) the trial court was without jurisdiction on August 7, 2367, to vacate his order from May 16, 1966, for no reason that more than one year had elapsed since the plaintiff had notice of the order, and (2) even if the trial court had jurisdiction to do so, it was in error in holding that a verdict can be found partially defective and partially valid when subjected to the challenge under the five-sixths rule.
Not raised by either party is whether a modification in the way by a subsequent decision of a court of last resort is a proper ground for relief under sec. 269.46 (L), Stats. The trial court was apparently persuaded that its earlier order was based on a mistake of law within the rule of Paschong v. Hollenbeck (2962) 13 Wis. 2d 415, 108 N.W.2d 660. That case, however, held that a litigant's application for relief from a judgment because of a mistake of law on the part of his attorney is a proper subject for the exercise of the trial court's discretion under the statute. The statute itself has reference exclusively *309 to the mistake, inadvertence, surprise, and excusable neglect of a party resulting in a judgment being entered against him which it might be inequitable to enforce. If a point is briefed, argued, and subsequently decided under the law then existing, it cannot be that a subsequent decision of a court of last resort that modifies the applicable law creates one of these situations unless the court is to create a legal fiction. Had the trial court erred in interpreting existing law, it would have no authority under sec. 269.46 (1) to review and reverse its decision. In re Coloma State Bank (1938), 229 Wis. 475, 282 N.W. 568; Scheer v. Keown (1874), 34 Wis. 349. We do not think the statute contemplates the relief desired.
We are of the opinion that a modification in the law by a subsequent decision of a court of last resort is not a proper ground for relief under sec. 269.46 (1), Stats. If such relief were appropriate under sec. 269.46 (1) the result would be the relitigation of many cases following a modification in the law. We believe that retroactive application should be determined on the merits of each individual case.
Having determined that the trial court was without jurisdiction to vacate its order of May 16, 1966, we do not reach the merits of the issues raised by the defendants.
By the Court.Order reversed.

=== CASE 9737101 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:16:01.56854+00 ===

OPINION
SULLIVAN, Judge.
Following a bench trial, Timothy Jarrett was found guilty of Domestic Battery as a Class A misdemeanor,1 Battery as a Class A misdemeanor,2 and Battery as a Class D felony.3 The three counts were "merged" because of double jeopardy considerations, and the trial court sentenced Jarrett on one count. Upon appeal, Jarrett presents three issues for our review:
I. Whether he was sentenced for the proper conviction;
.II. Whether the evidence was sufficient to support his conviction; and
III. Whether the trial court properly entered a no contact order.
We affirm.
The facts reveal that Jarrett was arrested as a result of a fight which he had with his ex-wife, Denise. Jarrett and Denise were married from 1990-1994. . During that time they had a daughter. In 2001, Jarrett moved into the home of Denise and their daughter after he was released from prison. On June 18, 2001, Denise arrived home after working the third shift. She and Jarrett began to argue, which led to a *810physical altercation. During the argument, Jarrett pulled the telephone receiver from the wall when Denise attempted to call the police. Jarrett also grabbed Denise around the neck from behind and choked her. Denise, in an effort to free herself, pushed Jarrett into the wall. She then pushed him backward, and they both fell onto a glass top coffee table. Denise was able to break free and ran upstairs to use the cordless telephone to call the police. Jarrett fled the house.
Three months after the incident, Jarrett was charged with four counts: Count I, criminal confinement as a Class D felony; Count II, domestic battery as a Class A misdemeanor; Count III, battery as a Class A misdemeanor; and Count IV, criminal mischief as a Class B misdemean- or. The State also filed a supplemental part to Count III, which elevated the charge of battery to a Class D felony because Jarrett had previously been convicted of a battery against Denise. A bifurcated trial was held in which the State presented evidence in regard to all four counts, with the exception of Part II of Count III. Jarrett was found guilty of domestic battery and battery but not guilty of criminal confinement or eriminal mischief. The State did not present any evidence of Jarrett's prior conviction for battery until after the trial court found Jarrett guilty of domestic battery and battery. Following the presentation of evidence on the prior conviction, the trial court found Jarrett to be guilty of the elevated battery charge. The trial court informed the parties that the computer program used by the court may list the enhancement charge for battery as a separate count, which in this case would be Count V.4 Nonetheless, the trial court clearly stated for the record that the enhancement was related to Count III, the charge for battery.
At sentencing, the trial court referred to the convictions as Count II, Count III, and Count V. The trial court stated that he had vacated Count III and that all three counts merged. The trial court noted that Count V was battery as a Class D felony. The trial court then sentenced Jarrett to three years executed with no time suspended. As an additional part of his sentence and upon request by the State, the trial court ordered that Jarrett was to have no contact with Denise, which included a prohibition on Jarrett writing letters to his daughter and sending them to Denise's home.
I
Sentencing on Proper Conviction
Jarrett claims that the trial court sentenced him on domestic battery as a Class D felony. He asserts that this is error because he was never charged with domestic battery as a Class D felony. As a result, he requests that the record be corrected so that it shows the he was convicted of domestic battery as a Class A misdemeanor and that he be sentenced accordingly. To support his assertion that he was incorrectly sentenced, he relies upon the trial court's statement that Count III was vacated. Further, he notes that the chronological case summary ("CCS") states that Count III was merged into Count II and that Count V is a charge enhancement for Count II, domestic battery. Finally, he notes that the comments on the abstract of judgment state that Count V is the charge enhancement of Count II, domestic battery as a Class A misdemeanor.
*811Jarrett's claim fails because the record shows that he was appropriately sentenced for his conviction for battery as a Class D felony. Nonetheless, his claim points to errors on the CCS and abstract of judgment which must be corrected. The trial court's statements after the bench trial and at sentencing indicate that the trial court intended to sentence Jarrett for his highest conviction, which was battery as a Class D felony. According to the abstract of judgment, judgment of conviction was entered upon only the charge of battery as a Class D felony. The abstract of judgment showed that conviction to be for Count V, which the trial court earlier explained was Part II of Count III. Consequently, Jarrett was sentenced for a crime for which he was charged and convicted. However, we remand to the trial court to correct the abstract of judgment and CCS to indicate that Count V, battery as' a Class D felony, is the charge enhancement for Count III, battery as a Class A misdemeanor.
II
Sufficiency of the Evidence
Jarrett also claims that the evidence was insufficient to support the trial court's finding that the baﬁtery resulted in bodily injury. He asserts that the photographic evidence which was admitted to show Denise's injuries do not reveal any injuries, only smeared blood which he asserts came from the injuries he suffered when he crashed into the coffee table. Additionally, he claims that Denise's testimony was incredibly dubious.
Our standard of review for a sufficiency of the evidence claim is well settled. We will not reweigh the evidence or judge the credibility of the witnesses. VanMatre v. State, 714 N.E.2d 655, 657-58 (Ind.Ct.App.1999). We will consider only the evidence which supports the conviction and any reasonable inferences which the trier of fact may have drawn from the evidence. Id. at 657. We will affirm the conviction if there is substantial evidence of probative value from which a reasonable trier of fact could have drawn the conclusion that the defendant was guilty of the crime charged beyond a reasonable doubt. Id. at 658. Reasonable doubt is a doubt which arises from the evidence, the lack of evidence, or a conflict in the evidence. Chambers v. State, 551 N.E.2d 1154, 1156 (Ind.Ct.App.1990).
We will not impinge upon the trial court's resolution with regard to the credibility of witnesses unless confronted with testimony of inherent improbability, or coerced, equivocal, wholly uncorroborated testimony of incredible dubiosity. See Heeter v. State, 661 N.E.2d 612, 615 (Ind.Ct.App.1996). overturned only where a victim's testimony is so incredibly dubious or inherently improbable that it runs counter to human experience, and no reasonable person could believe it. Id. A conviction will be °
Jarrett's claim regarding the sufficiency of the evidence is nothing more than a request that we reweigh the evidence. It is true that the photographs do not depict large wounds suffered by Denise during the altercation. Denise admitted that the cuts she suffered were not large enough that they required that she receive stitches. However, the cuts sustained did constitute bodily injury. Additionally, Denise testified that she received injuries other than the cuts. She stated during trial that she had bruises on her neck, body, and legs. From this the trial court justifiably concluded beyond a reasonable doubt that Denise suffered bodily injury.
Jarrett's claim that Denise's testimony was incredibly dubious is also unavailing. Denise testified to the events of *812the altercation as she recalled them. Her recount of the evening was entirely plausible and supported by the photographs. Just because the pictures admitted at trial do not show severe injuries or bruising, we will not conclude that her testimony was inherently improbable and runs counter to human experience.
III
No Contact Order
The final argument presented by Jarrett challenges the propriety of the trial court's order that Jarrett was to have no contact with Denise, which also prevented him from sending letters to kis eight-year-old daughter at Denise's residence. The ree-ord reflects that following trial, but prior to sentencing, the trial court ordered that Jarrett was to have no contact with Denise. At the sentencing hearing Denise testified that Jarrett had sent letters to her home after the no contact order but that she had thrown them away. After the trial court sentenced Jarrett to the Department of Correction, the prosecutor requested that the no contact order be placed into effect during Jarrett's incarceration. The trial court ordered that Jarrett was to have no contact with Denise, including sending letters to his daughter at Denise's residence.
Jarrett claims that the trial court had no authority to enter the no contact order because the sentencing statutes do not give the trial court such authority. Further, he claims that even if the trial court appropriately ordered that he have no contact with Denise, the trial court could not order that he not contact his daughter. In response, the State asserts that the trial court has the implicit authority to enter a no contact order for individuals who are incarcerated because the probation statute authorizes no contact orders and it is absurd to conclude that a defendant could permissibly harass a vietim while incarcerated but be prevented from doing so while on probation. Further, the State claims that the Indiana Civil Protection Order Act ("CPOA"), Ind.Code 34-26-5 (Burns Code Ed. Supp.2003), authorized the trial court to enter a no contact order under the facts of this case, and as such, the trial court did not err in entering the order even though Denise and the prosecutor did not comply with the formal requirements of the statute in seeking the order.
- The authority of the trial court in sentencing is confined to the statutory limits prescribed by the General Assembly. Roach v. State, 711 N.E.2d 1237, 1238 (Ind.1999). Furthermore, we are to strictly construe penal statutes against the State to avoid enlarging them by intendment or implication beyond the fair meaning of the language used. State v. McGill, 622 N.E.2d 239, 240 (Ind.Ct.App.1993). "While the rule of strict construction will not sanction the abridgment of the manifest intention of the legislature, it must be said that doctrine requires the resolution of doubts and ambiguities against the infliction of penalties." Id. The court will not extend the penalties provided therein to classes of persons not embraced within the penal clause of an act, even when there is a manifest omission or oversight on the part of the legislature, where the penal clause is less comprehensive than the body of the act. "Id. "Nothing may be read into the statute which is not within the manifest intent of the legislature as gathered from the statute itself." George P. Todd Funeral Home, Inc. v. Estate of Beckner, 663 N.E.2d 786, 787 (Ind.Ct.App.1996).
Neither party has directed this court to a statute which directly authorizes a trial court to enter a no contact order as part of a defendant's executed sentence to the Department of Correction. Moreover, *813our research has not revealed any direct statutory enactment.5 Nonetheless, we conclude that the trial court's action in entering a no contact order was not inappropriate in this case.
Title 35, Article 38 (Burns Code Ed. Repl.1998 and Supp.20083) of: the Indiana Code sets the perimeters for proceedings following a conviction. It establishes conditions for sentencing and commitment to the Department of Correction. I.C. 85-38-1. It further authorizes that a trial court may require that a probationer refrain from any direct or indirect contact with an individual. Ind.Code § 85-38-2-2.3(a)(17) (Burns Code Ed. Supp.2008). Consequently, Article 38 endows the trial court with the power to enter a no contact order as part of sentencing, albeit when sentencing a probationer.
As the State argues, because the trial court may order an individual convicted of a crime who is sentenced to probation to have no contact with an individual, it leads to an absurd result to say that the trial court may not order that an incarcerated criminal have no contact with an individual, especially the victim of a battery and domestic battery. It seems imperative that a trial court, for the same reasons it may restrict a convicted individual's 'actions while on probation, may restrict that same individual's actions while incarcerated. Nonetheless, we recognize that this is a tenuous position given the manner in which we must interpret the sentencing statutes. Be that as it may, we are not convinced that the sentencing statutes preclude a trial court from ordering that a convicted individual, while incarcerated, have no contact with the victim of his crimes: But given the lack of any directives in the sentencing statutes in this regard, we urge the General Assembly to review the sentencing statutes to determine whether it is necessary to include additional actions which trial courts may take when sentencing an individual to an executed sentence in the Department of Correction.
Although it requires a finespun reading of the sentencing statutes to uphold the no contact order, we are persuaded by the State's argument that the no contact order is valid, in part, because of the CPOA. Indiana Code § 34-26-5-2 authorizes a victim of domestic violence to file a petition to seek a protective order against the individual who committed the domestic 'violence. Although not sentenced for that offense, Jarrett was found guilty of domestic battery against Denise. As a result, Denise could seek protection from the court. Actions which may be prohibited by the CPOA include harassing, annoying, telephoning, contacting, or directly or indirectly communicating with the petitioner. I.C. § 34-26-5-9. When the testimony was introduced by Denise, Jarrett did not dispute that he had sent letters to her home. Clearly, Denise qualified as an individual who was due protection under the CPOA. That a proper petition was not filed in this case as required by the CPOA is concerning. In the future, the proper procedure should be utilized when seeking an order of protection as we do not mean for this decision to eliminate or alter the statutory requirements. How*814ever, given the facts of this case, and the apparent necessity of the trial court to prohibit Jarrett's contact with Denise, we conclude that the trial court appropriately entered the no contact order.6
Jarrett claims that regardless of the propriety of the no contact order as to Denise, the trial court could not properly order that he have no contact with his daughter. While we understand and can sympathize with his request, the fact remains that he was found to have committed a domestic battery and battery against his ex-wife and that he was sentenced for battery as a Class D felony. Further, Jarrett is mistaken in his belief that his daughter was not a victim of this crime. Just because she was not present when the altercation occurred, there is little doubt that a child is a "vietim" when her parents fight and her father is incarcerated for three years as a result of the crime, As the trial court recognized, amending the order so that Jarrett could write to his daughter at Denise's home set the stage for a violation of the no contact order, an order which he had shown that he had not been able to follow. The trial court did not err in restricting Jarrett's contact with his daughter in addition to his contact with Denise.
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed. We remand to the trial court so that the abstract of judgment and CCS may be corrected.
RATLIFF, Sr.J., concurs.
ROBB, J., dissents with opinion.
. Ind.Code § 35-42-2-1.3 (Burns Code Ed. Supp.2003).
. Ind.Code § 35-42-2-1(a)(1)(A) (Burns Code Ed. Supp.2003).
. 1C. § 35-42-2-1(a)(2)(D).
. A computer programming change would seem to be in order.
. - Indiana Code §+-35-50-2-7 (Burns Code Ed. Supp.2003) sets the penalty for a Class D felony at a presumptive term of one and one-half years incarceration and a maximum ten thousand dollar fine. Additional miscellaneous, sentencing provisions allow the court to declare an individual incapable of holding public office, order a fine as an alternative penalty, order restitution to the victim of the crime, the victim's family, or the victim's estate, or order a reimbursement plan. Ind. Code 35-50-5 (Burns Code Ed. Repl.1998 and Supp.2003).
. - An additional argument presented by Jarrett is that no additional authority, either explicit or implied, is necessary for a trial court to enter a no contact order against an incarcerated individual because the CPOA provides such a mechanism. However, by its own limits, the CPOA only applies in situations in which domestic or family violence is involved. LC. § 34-26-5-1. It is logical that a trial court may need to restrict an incarcerated individual's contacts in situations other than those arising out of a domestic or family setting. Consequently, we are not persuaded by this argument.

=== CASE 9737102 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:16:01.572669+00 ===

ROBB, Judge,
dissents with separate opinion.
I respectfully dissent from the mgjority's conclusion that Jarrett and Denise's daughter was a "victim" of Jarrett's crimes and properly the subject of the no contact order. . The testimony at Jarrett's trial was clear that the daughter was not present during this altercation. - Moreover, there was no testimony at the trial that the daughter was even aware of the altercation, and if she was aware, it was most likely through Denise that she was made aware of the incident. Although Denise testified that she had concern for her safety because of Jarrett's behavior, when asked if she bad any concerns for her daughter's safety, all she said was, "I don't want him around my child at all." Tr. at 65. None of the incidents or behaviors to which Denise testified involved the daughter at all. I recognize that the CPOA authorizes a court to issue an order of protection for the petitioner and "each designated family or household member" and also authorizes the trial court to prohibit indirect communication with the petitioner. Ind.Code. § 34-26-5-9(b). - However, as the majority notes, no petition pursuant to the CPOA was filed in this case and there was no testimony regarding the daughter by which she could be considered a "designated family member" requiring an order of protection. We have already stretched the limits of our statutes by allowing the no contact order in this case in the first place. I feel extending it to the daughter is stretching too far.
Moreover, I note that the CPOA further authorizes the trial court to "[s}pecify ar*815rangements for visitation of a minor child by a respondent and require supervision by a third party; or deny visitation; if necessary to protect the safety of a petitioner or child." Ind.Code § 34-26-5-9(c)(2). I acknowledge that we are not in this case dealing specifically with the restriction of visitation-Jarrett's incarceration accomplishes that as a practical matter even without an order of protection. However, the statute clearly indicates a recognition that a no contact order restricting contact between a parent and a child may be appropriate in cases where it is shown to be necessary. In this case, though, there was no evidence to show that such a severe restriction was necessary. The majority notes that the daughter was a victim of Jarrett's behavior because of his incarceration. - However, I believe that she is no less a victim if we uphold the no contact order and restrict Jarrett's ability to be a parent to her in any way during his incarceration. I recognize, too, the majority's concern that allowing Jarrett to contact his daughter is "setting the stage" for a violation of the no contact order for Denise. However, Jarrett is aware of the consequences of a violation and it is not up to us to try to ensure his compliance.
I would reverse that part of the trial court's order which extends the no contact order to the daughter. In all other respects, I concur in the majority opinion.

=== CASE 2208918 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:34.590818+00 ===

9 Mich. App. 176 (1967)
156 N.W.2d 34
DAUER
v.
ZABEL.
Docket No. 1,931.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided December 7, 1967.
Leave to appeal granted March 6, 1968.
Cicinelli, Mossner, Majoros, Harrigan & Alexander, for plaintiff.
Smith, Brooker, Harvey & Cook (A.T. Lippert, Jr., of counsel), for defendant.
Leave to appeal granted March 6, 1968. See 380 Mich. 761, 381 Mich. 555.
HOLBROOK, P.J.
On November 7, 1962, plaintiff filed suit against defendant in the circuit court in Saginaw county, under the provisions of the wrongful death act, CL 1948, §§ 691.581, 691.582 (Stat Ann 1959 Cum Supp §§ 27.711, 27.712)[1] seeking recovery on behalf of the estate of David Anthony Dauer. This action sought damages for the death of deceased, age 5 years, as a result of a motor vehicle accident, May 2, 1962. Trial was had before the court without a jury November 27, 1964. After the plaintiff had completed the presentation on her *178 proofs, defendant made a motion for involuntary dismissal under GCR 1963, 504.2 which the court denied. Defendant then offered an exhibit which was withdrawn when objection was made by plaintiff. Defendant did not present any proofs. Defendant then renewed his motion for involuntary dismissal and for a directed verdict. The court requested briefs which were furnished, and on February 24, 1966, rendered a written opinion granting judgment to plaintiff and against defendant for the sum of $15,721.40 plus interest from date of death of deceased. On February 25, 1966, final judgment was entered.
From this judgment, defendant has appealed raising several questions for review which are hereinafter considered.
1. Did the trial court properly strike defendant's demand for a jury trial when a jury demand was not filed within the time limit specified in GCR 1963, 508?
The defendant's answer was filed on May 24, 1963. Defendant, more than 4 months later, October 10, 1963, filed demand for jury trial and paid the statutory fee.
Const 1908, art 2, § 13, provided for jury trials in civil actions as follows:
"The right of trial by jury shall remain, but shall be deemed to be waived in all civil cases unless demanded by one of the parties in such manner as shall be prescribed by law."
The pertinent portions of GCR 1963, 508.2(1) and 508.4 provide as follows:
"Actions Commenced in Circuit Courts. Any party may demand a trial by jury of any issue so triable of right by filing a demand therefor in writing at any time after the commencement of the action and *179 not later than 30 days after the filing of the answer or a reply filed within the time prescribed. Such demand may be indorsed on a pleading of a party if notice of the demand is included in the entitlement of the pleading. * * *
"4. Waiver; Withdrawal. The failure of a party to file a demand as required by this rule or to deposit the jury fee by the close of the pretrial conference constitutes waiver by him of trial by jury. A waiver of trial by jury is not revoked by an amendment of a pleading asserting only a claim or defense arising out of the conduct, transaction, or occurrence set forth or attempted to be set forth in the original pleading. A demand for trial by jury as herein provided may not be withdrawn without the consent, expressed in writing or in court, of the parties or their attorneys."
The defendant having failed to comply with the court rule, the trial court by order filed June 8, 1964, granted plaintiff's motion to strike defendant's demand for jury trial. Defendant thereupon filed an application for leave to appeal from said order in the Supreme Court. On September 3, 1964, the Supreme Court denied the application for leave to appeal stating "as the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in entering the order from which appeal is sought."
Defendant maintains that the Constitution mandates, by the use of the words "prescribed by law," a legislative act providing the time and manner of demanding a trial by jury.
The only applicable statute, CLS 1961, § 600.2537 (Stat Ann 1962 Rev § 27A.2537), provides:
"In every case where a trial by jury is demanded, the party making the demand shall, at the time of filing the demand, pay to the clerk of the court the sum of $3.00. Failure to pay the fee within the time provided in the court rules constitutes a waiver of the right to a jury trial."
*180 Defendant maintains that he complied with the aforementioned statute and the court rule is not operative and therefore he was wrongfully denied his right to a jury trial.
The 1908 Constitution provided in article 7, § 5 as follows:
"The Supreme Court shall by general rules establish, modify, and amend the practice in such Court and in all other courts of record, and simplify the same." (Emphasis supplied.)
The legislature has specifically given rulemaking power to the Supreme Court in the revised judicature act, CLS 1961, § 600.223 (Stat Ann 1962 Rev § 27A.223) as follows:
"The Supreme Court has authority to promulgate and amend general rules governing practices and procedure in the Supreme Court and all other courts of record, including but not limited to authority".
The manner and time for demanding a trial by jury is procedural within the meaning of the Constitution and RJA, and the adoption of GCR 1963, 508 was a proper exercise of the rulemaking power of the Supreme Court.
One question remains: does GCR 1963, 508 qualify as a law within the meaning of the term "prescribed by law" under Const 1908, art 2, § 13?
In 52 CJS, Law, p 1025, "law" is defined as follows:
"The law of a state is to be found in its statutory and constitutional enactments as interpreted by its courts and, in the absence of statute law, in the rulings of its courts."
In 20 Am Jur 2d, Courts, § 85, p 447, the authors stated:
*181 "Rules of court properly promulgated, and not exceeding the limitation of the court's rulemaking power, have the force of law, and are tantamount in this respect to rules incorporated in statutes."
We conclude that the only effective statute failed to provide the manner and time for demanding trial by jury and therefore GCR 1963, 508 constitutes the law governing the same and satisfies the constitutional requirements.
2. Did the trial court make proper findings of fact in accordance with the requirements of GCR 1963, 517.1?
The provision of the court rule provides:
"In all actions tried upon the facts without a jury or with an advisory jury, the court shall find the facts specially and state separately its conclusions of law thereon and direct the entry of the appropriate judgment. It will be sufficient if the court makes brief, definite, and pertinent findings and conclusions upon the contested matters without over elaboration of detail or particularization of facts. If an opinion or memorandum decision is filed, it will be sufficient if the findings and conclusions appear therein. The clerk shall notify the attorneys for both parties of the findings of the court. Findings of fact and conclusions of law are unnecessary on decisions of motions except as provided in subrule 504.2. The findings of a circuit court commissioner, to the extent that the court adopts them, shall be considered as findings of the court. Requests for findings are not necessary for purposes of review. No exception need be taken to any finding or decision. Findings of fact shall not be set aside unless clearly erroneous. In the application of this principle regard shall be given to the special opportunity of the trial court to judge the credibility of those witnesses who appear before it."
*182 The opinion of the trial court is as follows:
"In this cause plaintiff's decedent, age 5, was killed on May 2, 1962, when the automobile in which he was riding was struck by defendant's automobile on a country road intersection located in Midland county, Michigan. Defendant was proceeding south on Sasse road. The decedent was a passenger in a car traveling west on East Kent road, which is a stop road at this intersection. The case was submitted to the court without a jury and at the close of plaintiff's case defendant made a motion for involuntary dismissal which was denied and then defendant made an offer of proof which was withdrawn. At this point defendant rested and renewed the motion for involuntary dismissal. The motion was taken under consideration and briefs from counsel were requested.
"On consideration of the arguments and briefs submitted, this court is of the opinion that plaintiff has presented a prima facie case and is entitled to a verdict. The parties herein must concede that the testimony is to be considered in the light most favorable to the plaintiff and all of the facts, stated and physical, must be taken into consideration.
"In this type of case we must also take into consideration all of the elements of damage announced in Wycko v. Gnodtke (1960), 361 Mich. 331, and affirmed in Currie v. Fiting (1965), 375 Mich. 440. When this is done, it is the verdict of this court that plaintiff's damage amounts to $15,721.40 plus interest from the date of decedent's passing on.
"A judgment in accordance with this verdict may be entered against defendant."
Now it is true that prior to the effective date of GCR 1963[2] and at the time[3] of the accident upon which this action is based, Court Rule No 37, § 11 (b) (c), (1945) provided:
*183 "No special findings shall be required, but it shall be sufficient for the trial judge to find generally for or against the several parties.
"The trial judge shall sign and file, or dictate to the stenographer, an opinion in which he shall set forth his decision and the substance of the judgment with the concise statement of his reasons therefor, and where he awards damages, the manner in which he has determined the amount."
The trial of this case took place in November, 1964, and GCR 1963, 517.1 is controlling. We find in the authors' comments in 2 Honigman and Hawkins, Michigan Court Rules Annotated (2d ed), p 592, the following:
"Under the former statute, parties might request special findings of fact in cases tried without a jury. CL 1948, § 618.14 (Stat Ann 1962 Rev § 27.994). However, former Rule 37(11) modified the statute by providing that special findings were not required and that it would be sufficient for the trial judge to find generally for or against the several parties. The judge was directed to file an opinion which set forth his reasons for the judgment, but failure to comply was not reversible error, and the Supreme Court on appeal would assume that every fact necessary to support the judgment had been found, if there was sufficient evidence to sustain such a finding.
"In cases tried without a jury, Rule 517 now makes findings of fact by the court compulsory, whereas in former practice such findings were, in effect, discretionary with the trial court. The new Rule continues the option as between making the findings of fact separately or including them in an opinion or memorandum.
"Since Rule 517 is based upon Federal Rule 52(a),[4] it may be presumed that the purpose of the Michigan *184 rule is the same as that underlying the Federal rule. This purpose has been stated as follows:
"`The purpose of Rule 52(a) is to aid the appellate court by affording it clear understanding of the ground or basis of the decision of the trial court. Another purpose of requiring findings of fact and conclusions of law is to make definite just what is decided by the case in order to apply the doctrines of estoppel and res judicata to future cases. Finally, and possibly most important, the requirement that findings of fact be made is intended to evoke care on the part of the trial judge in ascertaining the facts.' Barron and Holtzoff, Federal Practice and Procedure, § 1121, at pp 481, 482."
A careful review of the record reveals that there were facts in the record upon which the trial judge could find liability. However, the facts were in controversy and therefore there was a need for them to be determined.
We conclude that the trial judge was required to make findings of fact under the effective court rule and his failure so to do requires remand for new trial.[5]
Other issues raised by defendant need not be discussed in view of this determination.
Reversed and remanded for new trial. Costs to defendant-appellant, assessment of same to await determination on the merits.
BURNS and WISE, JJ., concurred.
NOTES
[1]  See, currently, CLS 1961, § 600.2922, as amended by PA 1965, No 146 (Stat Ann 1965 Cum Supp § 27A.2922).
[2]  GCR 1963, 14, January 1, 1963.
[3]  May 2, 1962.
[4]  Fed Civ Proc Rule 52(a), 28 USC (1964 ed), App.  REPORTER.
[5]  Inasmuch as Judge O'Neill has retired and this Court does not have power of appointment of the trial judge to complete his work in the case, a new trial has been ordered.

=== CASE 9737103 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:16:03.679517+00 ===

Spencer, J.
Relator, who was charged with the crime of manslaughter, was granted a writ of habeas corpus against the respondent, the sheriff of Dodge County, Nebraska, who prosecutes this appeal.
Relator contended the evidence introduced at thei preliminary hearing before a justice of the peace was insufficient to show that a crime was committed, and further there was no probable cause to believe she committed the offense.
On March 24, 1966, a fire broke out at the home of the relator in Fremont, Nebraska. The alarm was turned *511in at 9:45 a.m. The fire department arrived within 10 minutes thereafter. The firemen broke into the house and removed three children, aged 3% years, 1% years, and 6 months, who were alone in the house. Relator, their mother, was gone, and the door was locked on the outside with a hook and eye fastener to keep the children inside. The 6-month-old baby was found dead in its crib, with severe bums over 80 percent of its body. The autopsy report indicates that the baby was alive and well before the fire. The other two children were hospitalized.
Relator was located by a social worker who telephoned a downtown bar where relator said she was having a bottle of pop. Relator had been leaving the children alone during the early part of the morning for several weeks before the fire. She put the hook on the outside of the door after a social worker had found the children outside the house on a previous occasion. Relator told an investigator that she was waiting at the bar for a cab she had called to' return home. The call for a cab was verified. Subsequently relator admitted that she had been at the apartment of a bartender she had been seeing for sometime, and that she had gone to the bar to call the cab. After she was located at the bar she did not wait for the cab but went directly to the police station where she arrived at 10:30 a.m.
The district court found the evidence insufficient to establish the crime of manslaughter, determined that relator’s statements and admissions secured during the investigative, process were inadmissible at the preliminary hearing, and granted the writ. We first address ourselves to the last point.
A preliminary hearing did not exist at common law. In this jurisdiction it is provided for by statute. Its functional purpose is stated in section 29-506, R. R. S. 1943. A preliminary hearing before a magistrate is not a criminal prosecution or trial within the meaning of our *512Constitution. See Roberts v. State, 145 Neb. 658, 17 N. W. 2d 666.
We have repeatedly held that a preliminary hearing is in no sense a trial of the person charged in regard to his guilt or innocence. Its purpose is to ascertain whether or not a crime has been committed, and whether or not there is probable cause to believe the, accused committed it. Fugate v. Ronin, 167 Neb. 70, 91 N. W. 2d 240. The effect of the foregoing, if found to exist, is to hold the accused for trial in district court, which has jurisdiction to try him. See Dobrusky v. State, 140 Neb. 360, 299 N. W. 539.
In a habeas corpus proceeding instituted for the purpose of testing the sufficiency of evidence taken at the preliminary examination to require a person to be tried on a criminal charge, the court will not weigh the evidence but only inquire as to the existence of evidence to sustain the charge. Neudeck v. Buettow, 166 Neb. 649, 90 N. W. 2d 254.
Evidence that would justify a committing magistrate in finding that probable cause existed for the detention of a defendant need not necessarily be sufficient to sustain a verdict of guilty when he is placed on trial. Rhea v. State, 61 Neb. 15, 84 N. W. 414.
The rule that the accused is entitled to the benefit of any doubt does not apply in preliminary examinations. The test if not whether guilt is established beyond a reasonable doubt but whether evidence worthy of consideration in any aspect for a judicial mind to act upon renders the charge against the accused within reasonable probabilities. Circumstantial evidence may be sufficient basis to bind the accused over to the district court. See 21 Am. Jur. 2d, Criminal Law, § 449, p. 451. In the reception of evidence a committing magistrate is not strictly governed by technical rules applicable on a final trial. Harmer v. State, 121 Neb. 731, 238 N. W. 356. We have held voluntary confessions with slight corroborative evidence sufficient for purposes of a pre*513liminary hearing. Cotner v. Solomon, 163 Neb. 619, 80 N. W. 2d 587. To change this rule when we require prompt preliminary hearings would tend to make the preliminary hearing a trial and could seriously impede criminal prosecutions. As we view the record for purposes of a preliminary hearing, there is sufficient evidence to find that there is probable cause to believe the relator committed a crime if a crime was committed.
This raises the question then whether or not, assuming the evidence to be true, it constitutes a crime. Section 28-403, R. R. S'. 1943, provides: “Whoever shall unlawfully kill another without malice, either upon a sudden quarrel, or unintentionally, while the slayer is in the commission of some unlawful act, shall be deemed guilty of manslaughter; and upon conviction thereof shall be imprisoned in the Nebraska Penal and Correctional Complex not more than ten years nor less than one year.”
Section 38-116, R. R. S. 1943, provides: “It shall be unlawful, and it is hereby declared to be cruelty for any person employing or having the care, custody or control of any child, willfully or negligently to cause or permit the life of such child to be endangered, or the health of such child to be injured, or willfully to cause or permit such child to be placed in such a situation that its life or health may be endangered, or to cause or permit such child to be overworked, cruelly beaten, tortured, tormented or mutilated.”
Relator was in violation of a positive statute, section 38-116, R. R. S. 1943, when she locked her 3 children under 4 years of age in the house and took off on her own pleasure. Her husband left the home before 7 a.m. She got up shortly thereafter and drank some coffee. There is no evidence as to the exact time she left home, but she walked downtown and spent some time in her paramour’s apartment. Relator did state she usually went downtown about 9 a.m. She would get back in time, to get lunch for her husband who came home at noon. In any event, she was unavailable from before 9 a.m. until *514she was located at the bar about 10:25 a.m. The fire alarm was turned in at 9:45 a.m. It must be conceded that the children were incapable of taking care of themselves. Relator was courting trouble. The law holds one so situated that his act may endanger the life of another to a high degree of caution, and he may be criminally responsible for loss of life consequent on his failure to exercise a proper degree of caution. When we apply the test of the reasonable man, we are forced to the conclusion that relator was deliberately jeopardizing the lives and safety of the children. She had a legal duty to see that they were protected, but left them unattended for long periods of time. Such neglect is criminal in its character and where it results in death will sustain a conviction for manslaughter. The negligence on which a charge of involuntary manslaughter is predicated may be the omission of an act which it is a person’s duty to perform. 1 Wharton’s Criminal Law and Procedure, § 296, p. 621.
In Stehr v. State, 92 Neb. 755, 139 N. W. 676, 45 L. R. A. N. S. 559, Ann. Cas. 1914A 573, we said: “For a parent having special charge of an infant child to so culpably neglect it that death ensues as a consequence of such neglect is manslaughter, although death or grievous bodily harm were not intended.” That case involved neglect to seek medical aid for a stepson who had frozen his feet.
The degree of negligence which will make one criminally responsibile for a neglect of duty is difficult to define. Obviously, it is not any slight breach of duty but rather a gross failure to do what is required of one. On the record herein, we cannot say as a matter of law relator could not be guilty of manslaughter. Culpable neglect in omitting to perform a legal duty will sustain a manslaughter conviction. Relator had a legal duty to protect the children. She deliberately locked them in the house alone while she went off to pursue her own pleasures. As a result, one of them was burned to death. *515It is for a jury to determine whether the conduct of relator crosses the line where her breach of duty renders her criminally negligent.
For the reasons given, we reverse the judgment of the trial court and remand the cause with directions to return relator to the custody of respondent to stand trial.
Reversed and remanded with directions.

=== CASE 9737104 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:16:03.684678+00 ===

McCown and Smith, JJ.,
dissenting.
We respectfully dissent. The district judge in granting the writ of habeas corpus here specifically stated the basis for the order. He did not believe the evidence introduced at the preliminary hearing established the crime of manslaughter. Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U. S. 436, 86 S. Ct. 1602, 16 L. Ed. 2d 694, 10 A. L. R. 3d 974, was effective. Objections were interposed and argued on the basis of Miranda, both at the preliminary examination and in the briefs here. The trial judge specifically found that: “* * * substantially all the evidence even if it does establish a crime was obtained in my opinion in violation of the rules set forth in the Miranda decisions and therefore inadmissible * *
It is deemed necessary to review the record with respect to the statements of the defendant, the facts surrounding the taking of them, and which portion of the evidence at the preliminary hearing was established by the defendant’s statements.
Shortly before 10:35 a.m., detective Homes of the Fremont police department was just leaving the police station with a camera to go- to the scene of the fire when he was met by the county attorney on the steps of the police station. The county attorney told him that Mrs. Delay would be coming in to the station and identified Mrs. Delay when she came.
The defendant’s first statement was taken from her by detective Homes at the police station commencing at 10:35 a.m. Detective Homes at that time advised the defendant that she did not have to tell him anything and that anything she said could be used in court against her. *516He typed the statement as he talked to her. This first statement showed that on that morning the defendant had gotten up sometime after 7 a.m., had some coffee, and that the children were still in bed asleep when she left the house; that she had walked downtown and had just run out of the house for a little while; that she had stopped at Saeger’s Bar and had a bottle of pop; that this was the first and only place she went downtown; and that while there, she was contacted by a representative of the welfare department who told her that there had been a fire at her house and she was supposed to call the police department. She hung up the telephone and walked directly to the police department.
At this point appears the only blank line in the statement. The remainder of this first statement deals with her prior habits and customs when she left the children alone and revealed also that she was familiar with and frequently visited at least two local bars. The first statement was completed at approximately 11:15 a.m.
Detective Homes testified that he was conferring with the county attorney on and off all day long; and that he talked to him at noon and gave him the information obtained from the defendant. The defendant was never told at any time that she was free to leave and when she left the room to use the restroom, Mrs. Losee, the police clerk, went with her.
At 2:20 p.m. that afternoon, detective Homes took another statement from the defendant. Essentially, this statement had nothing whatever to do with her actions or conduct on the day of the fire, but dealt only with her conduct in connection writh the children prior to that day. This statement showed that about 2 months before, she had started as a regular thing to leave the children home alone, usually in the mornings; that she never had anyone stay with them; and that the times she left were sometimes before 9 a.m. and her return was sometimes as late as shortly before noon. It also showed *517that a representative of the welfare department had given her “the devil” for leaving the children alone. This statement was concluded and signed by the defendant at approximately 2:50 p.m.
At 3:40 p.m., the defendant asked to consult with a lawyer when she was told she would be held on a charge of manslaughter. She talked to her lawyer briefly by telephone and she and detective Homes were told that he would be there at approximately 5 p.m. The defendant was booked on a manslaughter charge at 5 p.m. and taken to jail. At 9:30 p.m. that night, detective Homes and another police officer went to the jail and again began “visiting” with the defendant. In detective Homes’ words, they were “trying to fix the time she would have left the house.”
At this conversation, the defendant told them that upon leaving the house she had gone to the apartment of a bartender, and that she had been going there for several months; and that she was there that morning after leaving the house, and had gone from the apartment to Saeger’s Bar to call a taxicab and go home at the time she, received the call to contact the police. She also told them that some weeks before she had installed a hook and eye lock on the outside of the one door to the house which was not obstructed. This was after a welfare department representative had found her children running around outside. She also told them that she had been locking the lock for several weeks, and had locked it that morning when she left.
All of these statements of the defendant, both written and oral, were admitted over strenuous objection at the preliminary hearing. At none of them were the required Miranda warnings given, and the last and most damaging one was taken after the officers knew the defendant had a lawyer.
Except for the defendant’s own statements, the evidence at the preliminary hearing established only that there had been a fire at defendant’s house at 9:45 a.m.; *518her children were in the house alone; that no one, including the fireman who testified, knew how the fire commenced nor how long it had been burning; that the defendant was not present; and that her daughter was dead as a result of the fire.
This case is subject to the requirements of Miranda as well as prior and related cases dealing with in-custodial interrogation and the right to counsel. It seems crystal clear that the constitutional requirements applicable to in-custody interrogation of the defendant were not met. If trial had been involved rather than a preliminary hearing, the statements of the defendant could not have been introduced in evidence. Her own statements were the only evidence which might have completed the required proof that a crime had been committed.
In 22 C. J. S., Criminal Law, § 340, p. 879, it is stated: “* * * although the magistrate is not strictly governed by technical rules in the reception of evidence, the admissibility of evidence at the preliminary examination is governed by the same rules as those governing admissibility at trial.” It is also stated: “* * * the principle, stated infra § 345, that less evidence is required to hold accused for trial than is exacted to support a conviction, does not go to the competency, relevancy, or character of the evidence.”
In Cotner v. Solomon, 163 Neb. 619, 80 N. W. 2d 587, we held that the sufficiency of evidence adduced at a preliminary examination to hold an accused to answer for a crime with which he is charged may be raised and tried in habeas corpus proceedings, and also held that even a voluntary confession is insufficient standing alone to prove that a crime has been committed.
At a preliminary hearing we see no justifiable reason why the admissibility of a confession, admission, or statement of a defendant stemming from custodial interrogation should not be governed by the same constitutional rules as those governing its admissibility at trial. This *519is emphatically true where the confession, admission, or statement is necessary to prove the essential requirement at a preliminary hearing that a crime has been committed.
The prosecution at the preliminary hearing only had the burden of establishing a body of facts sufficient to show that the crime of manslaughter was committed and that there was probable cause to believe the defendant committed it. It should' not be permitted to flesh out the bare bones of the factual skeleton with confessions, admissions, or statements of the accused, obtained in violation of her constitutional rights, which would be inadmissible at the trial itself. When such statements are admitted not only to prove probable cause that the defendant was the one chargeable with responsibility, but also to establish the essential foundation fact that a specific crime has been committed, the effect of the error may well be compounded later. From the standpoint of efficient judicial administration, it is far better to correct such an error at an early stage when it may still be remediable.
While we can say nothing favorable as to the conduct of the defendant, either as a mother or otherwise, and this dissent in no way reflects a determination that she was innocent of any crime other than manslaughter, she is entitled to the constitutional rights of every citizen.
The district court found that the evidence introduced at the preliminary hearing in this case did not establish the crime of manslaughter, and that substantially all of the evidence at the preliminary hearing was obtained in violation of the constitutional rights of the defendant and was, therefore, inadmissible. We believe that the determination was correct in all respects and should have been affirmed.

=== CASE 9737105 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:16:03.68894+00 ===

White, C. J.,
concurring.
I thoroughly agree with the majority opinion that there is sufficient evidence to bind the defendant over for trial on the merits to the district court. However, I wish to point out that this determination is in no way *520controlling, or even indicative of the proper disposition of the issue of proximate cause, on the trial of this case. The determination of this issue must abide the exploration of all of the evidence on the trial of the case on its merits. It is not necessary that the evidence at a preliminary hearing be sufficient to support a verdict of guilty or that it show guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. State ex rel. Pribyl v. Frank, 165 Neb. 239, 85 N. W. 2d 328; Neudeck v. Buettow, 166 Neb. 649, 90 N. W. 2d 254. The purpose of a preliminary hearing is not to determine guilt or innocence, but simply to determine whether society is justified in holding a defendant so that the issue of guilt or innocence may be fully explored after an investigation and presentation of all of the evidence on the relevant issues. As soon as this clear demarcation line between the purposes of a preliminary hearing and the trial on its merits is understood, most of the questions presented in this case have cleared up. The purpose of the criminal law is to protect society. The integrity and adaptability of the adversary system of criminal justice to accomplish this purpose and yet protect the rights of defendants is one of the great principles of our constitutional system. It is for the courts to protect the basic principles of fairness, not only to the defendant but also to the State. I do not believe that our adversary system should become distorted into a racing game in which the essential issue of guilt or innocence is not the final objective but rather whether, under the prompt constitutional urgency of an immediate preliminary hearing, society can be forced to produce immediately after arrest all of the competent and relevant evidence necessary to establish the guilt of the defendant beyond reasonable doubt. The concept of fundamental fairness within the due process clause requires, within the framework of our adversary system, that the defendant’s rights are fully protected in all of their developing and burdensome ramifications. By the same token, it should be permitted as a minimum that the *521State, be given a full opportunity to explore, investigate, and present the evidence of guilt in order to carry this increasingly onerous burden. In our laudable constitutional zeal to protect individual rights we should not permit our adversary system of criminal jurisprudence to become distorted and perhaps converted into a device for the escape of the guilty and a mockery of the truth.
The record before us reveals grave questions as to the issue of proximate cause. I fail to see, at this point, how defendant’s clandestine purpose or motivation in visiting her paramour is at all relevant to either the issue of neglect or proximate cause,. This is a manslaughter case, and intent or purpose or motive is immaterial. Her conduct would be neither more nor less culpable or causative if her absence was for the, purpose of visiting her minister, or, for that matter, absenting herself to consult with a social welfare agency about the care of her children. Is the fact that she removed herself from the visual proximity of her children, or the length of time that she so removed herself, the competent producing or proximate cause, of the child’s death? The direct cause of this child’s death was a fire, occurring not more than an hour and a half or two hours after she left the home. Just how the balance of the three or four hour period of time she was gone, is relevant to the establishment of the issues of neglect and proximate cause in this case does not appear at this time. I see considerable difference, even as a matter of law, between a case in which a hungry child after being left alone all day drinks a bottle of poison liquid left exposed, and one, in which a child is killed in a crib as a result of a fire a few minutes after the mother has left (even in her own home) and is out of the visual and hearing proximity of her child for a considerable time later. And, it may be that the detailed facts surrounding the exact location of the child, the previous conduct of the mother, and the possible conditions which might result in danger to the child which were present and should have been *522known to the defendant, all may be highly relevant to determine the crucial issue of guilt and proximate cause in this case. I shall not take the facts as they rather sketchily appear in this record and attempt to relate them precisely to the rationale, of the relevant rules of law as to proximate cause. Intentional misconduct is irrelevant but reasonably foreseeable harm and the legally imposed risk resulting therefrom are highly relevant issues. The close question of whether they may be determined as a matter of law or whether they present a jury question must abide determination of the case on its merits.
Turning now to the dissent, which further extends the thrust of Miranda to preliminary hearings, I feel that something further should be said in this respect. First, the defendant came voluntarily to the police station. Her statement was taken beginning 5 minutes after the, time she arrived. There is not a suggestion or intimation in this record that there was any compulsion, coercion, intimidation, or “psychological pressure” exerted on her. There was a complete absence, as I read the evidence, of any Miranda-declared implied coercion resulting from an “in custody” required interrogation by the police officers. She was not being detained for the purpose of eliciting incriminating admissions. The defendant was not arrested or informed that charges would be presented against her until late in the afternoon, as the majority opinion points out. Investigation was the emphasis and not the accusatory interrogation. The plain implication of the dissenting opinion is to the effect that voluntary disclosure of information to the police, if made at the, police station, is prohibited as an “in custody” interrogation under the Miranda doctrine. This unwarranted expansion we cannot conceive to be the law even under the furtherest reach of the Miranda holding. Unless police interrogation is to be indicted absolutely, there must be some minimum requirement of affirmative action on their part *523over the physical custody and control of a defendant before the implied coercion of an “in custody” interrogation can be held to become operative. Despite the innuendoes and declarations made in many of the United States Supreme Court opinions on this subject, I do mot believe that the courts can or should ever declare that coercion begins at the door of the police station as a matter of law.
Second, the evidence shows conclusively that, despite the voluntary nature of the defendant’s statements, she was affirmatively warned of her right to remain silent and that anything she, might say might be used against her. Is it possible that a voluntary statement, made after such a warning, is so inherently constitutionally evil and objectionable that society and law enforcement may not even use it in the apprehension and detention of an accused?
Third, after all of her statements were made, the defendant consulted with her attorney at the police station at about 5 o’clock in the afternoon on the day in question and after this consultation, and in the presence of the attorney, she stated that she had given the written statements and that they were true. In the light of all this, and giving full scope to the Miranda holding, it seems well-nigh incredible that such conduct on the part of the law enforcement officers could be held to be constitutionally evil.
But, quite as disturbing, is the contention, assuming a violation of Miranda, that such evidence is not admissible at a preliminary hearing to determine the issue of probable cause. Not only is a preliminary hearing not a trial, but our court and the federal courts have repeatedly held that under Nebraska law a preliminary hearing is not a critical stage of a criminal proceeding and that no constitutional rights are in jeopardy as a result thereof. Even the. hallowed and undenied right to counsel or representation at a preliminary hearing is not required, and this is particularly true where, as here, the defend*524ant offered no testimony and made no admissions. State v. Sheldon, 179 Neb. 377, 138 N. W. 2d 428; Burnside v. State, 346 F. 2d 88; Ronzzo v. Sigler, 235 F. Supp. 839; Bird v. Sigler, 241 F. Supp. 1007; Pointer v. Texas, 380 U. S. 400, 85 S. Ct. 1065, 13 L. Ed. 2d 923. It is difficult, if not inconceivable, to understand a contention that there is no constitutional requirement of counsel at a preliminary hearing, but yet that there is a constitutional requirement of counsel being present at the giving and taking of a voluntary statement prior thereto.
Behind the legal structure of this case lie the realities of necessities of law enforcement. It is one thing to say that when society apprehends an individual he must be promptly and perhaps immediately brought before a magistrate for a hearing. It is an entirely different thing to say that society at that time must, in effect, present, in full array, completely sufficient proof of the defendant’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, with all of the technical and burdensome ramifications inherent in our adversary criminal trial procedures. Such a holding would inhibit, if not render useless, post-arrest investigation, and emasculate law enforcement, particularly as to those types of violent crimes where immediate apprehension and detention is imperative if society is to be protected.

=== CASE 2208928 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:34.687463+00 ===

177 Cal. App. 2d 353 (1960)
NESBITT FRUIT PRODUCTS, INC. (a Corporation), et al., Respondents,
v.
DEL MONTE BEVERAGE COMPANY (a Corporation) et al., Appellants.
Civ. No. 18511.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. One.
Jan. 25, 1960.
Francis Heisler, Charles A. Stewart and Patricia Lane for Appellants.
Wyckoff, Parker, Boyle & Pope for Respondents.
BRAY, P. J.
Defendants appeal from a judgment restraining them from using bottles, labels, etc., bearing the trademarks "Nesbitt's of California" or "Nesbitt" or "Sprig," and from bottling, selling or distributing beverages manufactured under authority from plaintiffs.
Questions Presented
1. The validity and effect of an agreement of compromise.
2. Sufficiency of findings.
3. Admission of business records.
Record
Upon the theory that franchises granted defendants by plaintiffs had terminated, plaintiffs, manufacturers of bottling concentrates, brought this action to permanently enjoin defendants from using bottle containers, labels and crowns bearing plaintiffs' trademarks, and from selling or distributing beverages as licensee or purported licensee under plaintiffs' trade names. Defendant Del Monte Beverage Company, a corporation, filed a cross-complaint against plaintiffs and a new party, Coca-Cola Bottling Company, for an injunction restraining plaintiffs from entering licensing agreements with parties other than Del Monte or in the alternative for conspiracy *357 and breach of contract. The court denied Del Monte relief on its cross-complaint, and granted plaintiffs the injunction above mentioned.
Evidence
Plaintiffs own and manufacture beverage bases used in the production of soft drinks bearing the trademarks "Nesbitt's" and "Sprig." December 4, 1956, Nesbitt, in writing, granted to defendant "Nesbitt's Bottling Company, a partnership" purportedly comprised of defendants Melicia and Deasey (the agreement was signed by Melicia and Deasey), the exclusive right to bottle and sell its products in a certain area. About the same time Sprig orally agreed with defendant Nesbitt's Bottling Company to enter into a similar franchise agreement. Although no written agreement was ever executed, the parties conducted themselves as if such an agreement had been executed.
Paragraph 9 of the written contract provided that the contract "automatically terminates in case said holder is a partnership and said partnership is for any reason whatsoever dissolved." Other provisions provided for termination by the licensor for specified causes upon 30 days written notice. While there is some conflict between the testimony of Elliott, plaintiffs' district manager, and that of Melicia, the court apparently believed Elliott's version, which was to the effect that Melicia and Deasey informed him before the contract was entered into that they were purchasing the business of the prior franchise holder; that they intended to operate the franchise as a partnership comprised of themselves and Melicia's mother. Deasey was to be the manager and Melicia was to operate the bottling plant. Plaintiffs were more interested in Deasey than in Melicia because the former had beverage experience. February 19, 1957, Melicia told Elliott that Deasey had not had much time to devote to the business because he was winding up other business activities, but that Deasey would be coming in as active manager. On one or more occasions defendants' checks to plaintiffs in payment of merchandise were dishonored. In June, Elliott learned for the first time that Nesbitt Bottling Company was not a partnership but was Del Monte Beverage Company, a corporation, operating under that name. Melicia told him that Deasey had not been connected with the enterprise as he had not put in his share of the capital and that he was not associated with the organization. *358 Because Melicia was short of capital, some of the equipment, labor and finances which Elliott had stated in the beginning was necessary to hold the franchise, was not available. Melicia could buy bottles and sugar for cash only and nothing had been done to improve the plant or trucks as required by Elliott. June 5, Elliott talked to cross- defendant Coca-Cola to ascertain if it would be interested in obtaining the franchise at a later date. A June 4 order on plaintiff Nesbitt by Melicia for a two weeks' supply of concentrate was filled, but one ordered June 14 was not filled, because plaintiffs believed that the contracts were automatically terminated by the discovery that Nesbitt's Bottling Company was not a partnership and by the fact that on June 17 and 18, plaintiff Nesbitt and plaintiff Sprig respectively had sent registered letters to Nesbitt's Bottling Company stating that since the latter was not operating as a partnership, the franchise was automatically cancelled under paragraph 9 of the agreement.
Defendants' attorney wrote plaintiffs threatening an injunction suit if the franchise were not reinstated. A meeting was had between Elliott, defendants' attorney, Melicia and others friendly to him. The parties were hostile to one another. Melicia was still threatening to sue plaintiffs. After considerable discussion, Elliott suggested that in compromise the franchises which he claimed had terminated be extended for 30 days. Melicia refused to agree to that but finally proposed an extension to October 15. Elliott agreed to consult his principal, who agreed to give Melicia the four months' period to sell the plant or make other arrangements for his bottling.
June 27 an agreement was executed (drawn by defendants' attorney) in which it was stated that Del Monte Beverage Company, a corporation doing business under the name of Nesbitt Bottling Company, "is the owner and holder of a Sprig Bottler's Contract and a Nesbitt's Bottling Contract as Licensee"; that a dispute had arisen between Del Monte, Sprig and Nesbitt "and for the purpose of fully settling and compromising the difference between the parties it is hereby agreed that Del Monte may continue to operate as Licensee under its Sprig Bottler's Contract and its Nesbitt Bottling Contract under the terms and conditions provided in said contracts to and including the fifteenth (15th) day of October 1957, on which date all rights under said bottling contracts shall terminate." Another provision stated: "It is the purpose *359 of this Agreement to settle all disputes between the parties now existing concerning any rights or claims connected with or arising out of any bottling contract franchises or distribution rights, and this Agreement is in full satisfaction of all claims and demands of the parties, each against the other, except as specifically agreed upon by this Agreement, and"
"Provided further that all the terms and conditions of the Sprig Bottler's Contract and the Nesbitt Bottler's Contract shall be complied with between the parties after the date of this Agreement and up to and including October fifteenth (15th) 1957." Plaintiffs later extended the termination date to March 1, 1958. Between June and December, 1957, a series of checks from defendants to plaintiffs were dishonored. December 18 and 27, letters were sent defendants stating that the franchises would expire March 1, 1958. Additional notices to the same effect were sent defendants in February, 1958.
1. Agreement Valid.
[1] Defendants first contend that the agreement was entered into under duress and hence invalid. (See Young v. Hoagland (1931), 212 Cal. 426 [208 P. 996, 75 A.L.R. 654].) They say that plaintiffs were national manufacturers who were in a position to relicense the area while defendants stood to lose their entire investment of approximately $20,000. Further, they contend that plaintiffs knew when the licensing agreements were entered into that defendants were a corporation. While there is some conflict in the evidence on this latter point, there is ample evidence to support the court's finding that plaintiffs at that time and until June, 1957, believed defendants to be a partnership. There is no evidence of duress. Defendants were not properly performing under the contract. They had not provided the additional truck and other matters which it had been agreed they would provide. Their checks had bounced, their credit was impaired; also they brought themselves within the provision to the effect that in case the holder of the franchise was a partnership which had been dissolved the agreement "automatically" terminated.
As bearing upon the question of duress, defendants contend that the contract was one of indefinite duration rather than one terminable on notice. Paragraph 2 provided: "... so long as said Licensee shall comply with the terms of this contract the rights and privileges herein assigned to said Licensee shall remain in full force and effect." Paragraph *360 5 provided that "The term of this agreement and license shall be for the period of one year from the date hereof, and unless canceled shall continue from year to year, except that either party hereto may cancel this agreement by giving the other written notice of such cancellation and termination thirty days prior to the expiration of any year." (Emphasis added.) Other provisions provided for termination by the licensor for specified causes upon 30 days' written notice. It is clear that under paragraph 5 the contract is to run from year to year and that as provided in paragraph 2 during such term the license granted is in effect so long as the licensee complies with the terms of the contract. Plaintiffs, in any event, could have terminated the franchises after giving 30 days' notice as of December 4, 1957.
Even assuming that defendants' construction of the termination clauses is correct, the evidence shows that in good faith plaintiffs believed otherwise and were asserting that belief. Defendants on the other hand were asserting their belief to the contrary and threatening to enforce their construction by a law suit. The parties met, discussed their grievances, both being represented by attorneys, and came to a settlement. Applicable to the situation here is a portion of the article on "Contracts: Restitution and Rescission: Economic Duress and Business Compulsion in California" in 40 California Law Review, 425, 428. After referring to the doctrine of economic duress as laid down in Young v. Hoagland, supra, 212 Cal. 426, the article states (pp. 428-429): "As pointed out in the Young case, whether the payments are made voluntarily or involuntarily is nothing more than a determination of whether plaintiff acted as a reasonable man under the circumstances in submitting to defendant's demands. He is expected to use any available legal remedies adequate to protect his rights against the threatened wrong. A person cannot pay money over to prevent an unwarranted forfeiture of a lease, since he has an adequate remedy through a declaratory judgment. Nor can a person later sue on a contract which he has compromised and released in writing. He should have stood his ground at the time and sued on the contract if the threatened breach occurred. In other words, if plaintiff has an adequate remedy which will either prevent the threats from being carried out, as an injunction or a declaratory judgment, or if he can later obtain damages which will fully repair the loss to his business or property *361 interests if the threats are carried out, he will not have acted as a reasonable man in submitting to the coercion."
So far as loss of defendants' investment is concerned, the evidence shows that the purposes of the compromise agreement and the extension therein and the later extension until March 1, 1958, was to provide defendants time to find a buyer for the business.
The court found and the finding is supported that plaintiffs attempted in good faith to terminate the basic franchise contracts which attempt defendants resisted, and that thereupon the parties intended to and did settle and compromise all disputes between them then existing, and that defendants entered into the compromise agreement voluntarily.
[2] It is not duress or unlawful for a party to threaten to refuse to proceed under a contract nor to threaten to stand suit. (Sistrom v. Anderson (1942), 51 Cal. App. 2d 213, 221 [124 P.2d 372]; Marshall v. Packard-Bell Co. (1951), 106 Cal. App. 2d 770 [236 P.2d 201]; Leeper v. Beltrami, 53 Cal. 2d 195, 204 [347 P.2d 12].)
[3] Defendants also contend that the compromise agreement was without consideration. They argue that it admits that Del Monte, the corporation, holds the franchises and that therefore there could be no consideration in plaintiffs' agreeing to do something which they were already obligated to do, namely, continue the franchises. [4] The mutual cancellation of executory rights is sufficient consideration for a new contract. (Honda v. Reed (1958), 156 Cal. App. 2d 536, 539 [319 P.2d 728].) Thus, assuming as defendants argue, that the basic franchise contracts were still executory on June 27, 1957, the mutual surrender of rights thereunder furnished consideration for the agreement of that date. [5] Moreover, the compromise of disputes or claims asserted in good faith constitutes consideration for a new promise. (Pearsall v. Henry (1908), 153 Cal. 314, 318 [95 P. 154].) "It must be remembered that it is the policy of the law to discourage litigation and to favor compromises of doubtful rights and controversies, made either in or out of court. [Citations.] It is not essential to a valid compromise that the claim in dispute be determined to be a valid one. As long as the claimant is asserting the claim in good faith, a compromise thereof is valid even though it later develops that the claim was not well founded." (Hamilton v. Oakland School Dist. (1933), 219 Cal. 322, 329 [26 P.2d 296].) *362
Grant v. The Aerodraulics Co. (1949), 91 Cal. App. 2d 68 [204 P.2d 683], is readily distinguishable from our case. There although the defendant was indebted to the plaintiff in the sum of $7,000, the parties entered into an agreement of cancellation of the original contract upon the defendant agreeing to pay the plaintiff only $1,000 and to release certain rights which the court found were valueless. The general rule that mutual cancellation of executory rights constitutes sufficient consideration was held inapplicable to a situation in which the rights of one party were practically valueless and those of the other were valuable.
Defendants seem to argue that as the compromise agreement in effect incorporated the provisions of the original agreement by a statement to the effect that all of the provisions of that contract "shall be complied with between the parties after the date of this Agreement and up to and including October fifteenth (15th) 1957," (emphasis added) unless terminated by notice of failure to comply or notice given 30 days before the end of a year, that the franchise did not terminate on October 15, 1957, or the extended date, March 1, 1958. However, the language of the compromise agreement is clear. It states that defendants could operate under the basic franchise contracts up to and including October 15, 1957, "on which date all rights under said bottling contracts shall terminate." Thus, the compromise agreement modified the terms of the original agreement as to termination, and by its express terms the franchise was to terminate October 15.
On October 4, 1957, plaintiff Nesbitt wrote Del Monte in answer to the latter's inquiry as to whether Nesbitt intended to withdraw the franchise on October 15, stating that although Nesbitt had some question as to Del Monte's ability to maintain satisfactory distribution of Nesbitt's and Sprig's products, Nesbitt was "agreeable to extending the agreement which expires October 15th" to March 1, 1958. "This gives you an opportunity to determine what can or cannot be accomplished through the winter months." There is nothing in this letter that in anywise contradicts the terms of the compromise agreement other than extending the time of termination to March 1, 1958.
2. Findings.
[6] Finding VI found that the grounds asserted in the June 17 and 18 letters of cancellation "were not frivolous *363 and were asserted by plaintiffs in good faith." Defendants contend that this finding is unsupported. Elliott's testimony (even though, as claimed by defendants, it may be contradictory and controverted), that plaintiffs did not know of the corporation situation, is alone enough to support the finding. [7a] The fact that a mortgage executed by Del Monte to the prior owners at the time of its incorporation in November, 1956, was then recorded, does not charge plaintiffs with knowledge of either the mortgage or the corporation. [8] The constructive notice provided by sections 2963 and 1213, Civil Code, applies only to subsequent purchasers and mortgagees. [7b] Plaintiffs are in neither category. Finding VI must be taken in connection with finding V to the effect that the facts set forth in the termination notice were unknown to plaintiffs prior to June 4, 1957.
[9] Defendants contend that some of the findings mix conclusions of law and findings of fact. However, a reading of the findings as a whole leaves no doubt or uncertainty as to the basis of the decision. Further, findings of fact or conclusions do not lose their effectiveness merely because misplaced one among the other. (Gossman v. Gossman (1942), 52 Cal. App. 2d 184, 191 [126 P.2d 178].)
Finding IX found that at no time prior to this action did defendants repudiate the compromise agreement or inform plaintiffs they did not intend to be bound by it. Finding XII found that subsequent to March 1, 1958, defendants continued to distribute plaintiffs' products.
The evidence clearly shows that at no time prior to the termination of the compromise agreement as extended to March 1 did defendants indicate any repudiation of that agreement. While finding IX is inconsistent with finding XII insofar as it relates to the time subsequent to March 1, such inconsistency is unimportant as the critical period so far as finding IX is concerned is the period up to March 1. Finding XII deals with the period after March 1 because of its applicability to injunctive relief.
[10] Defendants contend that the court failed to find on the rights of the parties under the original agreement and on whether trade custom prevented cancellation of the basic franchise agreements, both of which the pretrial order stated were issues. As to the first, by finding that the compromise agreement was valid and settled the rights of the parties under the earlier agreements, the court at least impliedly *364 determined the rights of the parties under the earlier agreement. "... while full findings are required upon all material issues a judgment will not be set aside on appeal because of a failure to make an express finding upon an issue if a finding thereon, consistent with the judgment, results by necessary implication from the express findings which are made." (Richter v. Walker, 36 Cal. 2d 634, 640 [226 P.2d 593].)
[11a] Whether trade custom prevented cancellation of the basic franchise agreements without cause was not an issue in the case. Plaintiffs did not rely on termination under the basic franchise agreements, but under the compromise agreement. Termination under the basic franchise agreements was relevant only insofar as the grounds for such termination were not frivolous and were asserted in good faith, upon which consideration for the compromise agreement could have been based. [12] Moreover, custom may not be adduced to vary a contract certain in its terms. (Withers v. Moore, 140 Cal. 591, 597 [74 P. 159].) The termination clause of the compromise agreement as well as of the basic agreement was clear and unambiguous. [11b] No finding on custom was necessary.
3. Admission of Evidence.
[13] The exhibits objected to were reports to his employer prepared by Elliott. He filled out the printed portion during his visits to defendants' plant and added notations later in the evening. They were admitted under section 1953f, Code of Civil Procedure, as reports made in the regular course of business, Elliott testifying that they were a regular part of his duties. [14] That section grants to the trial court a wide discretion in determining whether a proper foundation has been laid. (Cole v. Ames (1957), 155 Cal. App. 2d 8, 18 [317 P.2d 662].) As to two of the reports defendants made no objection. There was no error here. [15] Moreover, the reports were merely cumulative to Elliott's testimony, and if they were erroneously admitted, there was no prejudice to defendants. (See Milton v. Hudson Sales Corp. (1957), 152 Cal. App. 2d 418, 439 [313 P.2d 936], holding that certain hearsay evidence was not prejudicial as it was merely cumulative to the evidence which was properly admitted.)
The judgment is affirmed.
Tobriner, J., and Duniway, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737106 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:16:20.974581+00 ===

OPINION
NAJAM, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
In January 2002, Anna King and Wil-lam and Crystal Stuckey ("the Homeowners") filed their complaint for injune-tive relief seeking an order from the trial court that Eric and Jennifer Ebrens remove a pole barn that the Ebrens had built on their property. The complaint alleged that the pole barn violated a restrictive covenant. The Homeowners and the Ebrens filed cross-motions for summary judgment, and the trial court granted the Ebrens' motion and denied the Homeowners' motion. The Homeowners now appeal and present the following dis-positive issue for review: whether the trial court erred when it entered summary judgment for the Ebrens.
We affirm.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
In 1979, Donald and Elaine Smith purchased a tract of land, containing approximately 101 acres, in Franklin County. A part of the tract fronted on Spaeth and Reservoir Roads, and at the time the Smiths acquired the tract, they intended to divide that part into lots for single family residential development. In 1979, the Smiths did not have a lot configuration in mind, nor did they have a timetable by which the lots were to be sold for development.
In 1980, the Smiths conveyed a lot to Nicholas and Anna King1 by Warranty Deed. The King's Deed contains several restrictive covenants, which provide in relevant part:
RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS
The following restrictive covenants are to run with the land and shall be binding upon all parties and all persons claiming under them until January 1, 2000, at which time said covenants shall be automatically extended for successive periods of ten (10) years unless changed by a vote of the majority of the then-owners of the lots covered by these restrictive covenants.
(1) The real estate shall be used for residential purposes only. Only a single-family dwelling may be erected on the real estate. The dwelling must have an attached garage of sufficient size for a minimum of two (2) cars and a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet.
[[Image here]]
(4) No structure shall be erected or placed on the real estate other than the dwelling above referred to.
[[Image here]]
(18) These restrictions may be modified and exception made thereto, if 80% of *824the owners of similarly-situated land and the grantor, should he own adjacent land, even though unrestricted, so agree.
In 1983, the Smiths conveyed another lot by Warranty Deed, which contained the same restrictive covenants, to William and Crystal Stuckey. Thereafter, the Smiths continued to sell portions of the remaining property in a piecemeal manner. They sold parts of the property that fronted on Spaeth and Reservoir Roads, in addition to other property that did not front those roads. But all property sold that fronted on Spaeth and Reservoir Roads contained the same or similar restrictive covenants as those which appear in King's and the Stuckeys' Deeds.
In 1993, the Smiths sold the remaining three lots that fronted on Spaeth and Reservoir Roads. However, instead of selling the lots in the same piecemeal fashion, the Smiths platted those lots together as the Don Smith Subdivision. They did this to comply with Franklin County's Unified Zoning Ordinance. The Plat of the Don Smith Subdivision contains substantially the same restrictive covenants as those which appear in King's and the Stuckeys' Deeds, including the covenant that "No structure shall be erected or placed on the real estate other than the dwelling above referred to." That Plat was recorded in June 19983. Both King's and the Stuckeys' lots abut lots in the Don Smith Subdivision and appear on the Plat. However, King's and the Stuckeys' lots are not part of the Don Smith Subdivision.
In 1995, the Smiths sold Tract # 2 of the Don Smith Subdivision to Jennifer Ebrens, who at that time was known as Jennifer Weileman.2 The Warranty Deed, recorded in February 1995, described the conveyed real estate in part as, "Tract Number Two (2) in Don Smith Subdivision, ... and subject to the Restrictive Covenants as recorded in Plat Book B page 226-227, Slide No. 187, on June 10, 1998, as appears in the records in the office of the Recorder of Franklin County, Indiana." The Stuckeys' lot is immediately west of the Ebreng' lot, and the southeasterly portion of King's lot abuts the north property line of the Ebreng' lot.
In October 2001, the Ebrens received approval from Franklin County to construct a 30 x 40 foot pole barn on their lot. After the Ebrens began construction, counsel for King sent a letter to the Ebrens advising them that they were in violation of Restrictive Covenant #4, as contained in the Plat. The Ebrens thereafter completed construction of their pole barn.
In January 2002, the Homeowners filed a complaint for injunctive relief3 In April 2002, the Homeowners filed a summary judgment motion, and in December, the Ebrens filed a cross-motion. The trial court issued its Order in May 2003, which provides in relevant part:
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED that Plaintiffs' Motion for Summary Judgment filed April 16, 2002 is hereby denied and Defendants' Motion for Summary Judgment filed on December 6, 2002 is hereby granted.
The Homeowners filed a Motion to Correct Error, which the court denied. This appeal ensued. |
*825DISCUSSION AND DECISION
Standard of Review
When reviewing the grant or denial of summary judgment, we use the same standard used by the trial court. Allstate Ins. Co. v. Smith, 656 N.E.2d 1156, 1157 (Ind.Ct.App.1995). Summary judgment is appropriate only when the evidentiary matter designated by the parties shows that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. Id.; Ind. Trial Rule 56(C). In the context of cross-motions for summary judgment, the trial court must deal with each motion separately, construing the facts and inferences to be drawn therefrom in a light most favorable to the non-moving party. Allstate, 656 N.E.2d at 1157. If the facts are undisputed, our task is to determine the law applicable to those facts, and whether the trial court correctly applied it. Id.
The Homeowners' Standing
The dispositive substantive issue presented is whether the Homeowners, who do not own property in the Don Smith Subdivision, have standing to enforce the restrictive covenant in the Plat that prohibits the Ebrens from erecting a pole barn. The Homeowners assert that they have standing on two grounds. First, they point out that the Homeowners' Deeds contain substantially the same restrictive covenants as those contained in the Plat of the Don Smith Subdivision, and according to covenant number 18, such restrictions may only be modified, or an exception made thereto, if 80% of the owners of similarly-restricted land agree to the modification. _ Stated differently, the Homeowners allege that they have standing to enforce the covenant because their property is "similarly-restricted" to the Eberng'. The Homeowners also contend that they have standing because all of the parties' lots were sold by a common grant- or, the Smiths, who had a common scheme or plan for development, which ereated mutual rights among all of the grantees, not just those grantees who own lots within the Don Smith Subdivision. The Ebrens counter that the Homeowners lack standing because they do not own property in the Don Smith Subdivision. We address their arguments in turn.
A. The Smiths' Amended Affidavit
Initially, we address the dispute over the Smiths' Amended Affidavit, which the Homeowners designated in support of their summary judgment motion. In that Amended Affidavit, the Smiths state, among other things, that after they acquired the 101 acres in 1979, they "had a common and general plan in selling off pieces of the parent parcel for construction thereon of single family residences to provide that each and every tract so conveyed would be subject to the same mutually enforceable restrictive covenants...." The Smiths' Amended Affidavit was executed on April 22, 2002.
Thereafter, on September 9, 2002, the Ebrens' counsel took Don Smith's deposition. During the deposition, counsel asked Smith whether he had a "master plan" for the development of the property that fronted Spaeth and Reservoir Roads. Smith stated that he did not have a master plan. Based on Smith's denial that he had a "master plan" for the property during his deposition, the Ebrens argue on appeal that Smiths' Amended Affidavit should not be considered because it conflicts with Smith's deposition testimony. In support, they cite case law which sets forth the general rule that a party cannot create an issue of fact by submitting an affidavit that contradicts prior deposition testimony. Schlosser v. Rock Industries, Inc., 796 N.E.2d 350, 358 (Ind.Ct.App.2003), (Ga*826boury v. Ireland Road Grace Brethren, Inc., 446 N.E.2d 1310, 1314 (Ind.1983). They also direct us to a case in which the Seventh Cireuit Court of Appeals determined that the same rationale applies where the affidavit is given before the deposition testimony. See Darnell v. Target Stores, 16 F.3d 174, 177 (7th Cir.1994). Further, the Ebrens maintain that the Affidavit contains conclusory statements that are not supported by designated evidence.
But the Ebrens did not raise their objections to the Smiths' Amended Affidavit to the trial court. Rather, they assert for the first time on appeal that the Amended Affidavit should not be considered. It is well settled that arguments not presented to the trial court on summary judgment are waived on appeal. See KPMG, Peat Marwick, LLP v. Carmel Fin. Corp., Inc., 784 N.E.2d 1057, 1063 (Ind.Ct.App.2003). Thus, the Ebrens have waived any challenge to the Smiths' Amended Affidavit.
B. Restrictive Covenant Number 18
The Homeowners first assert that they have standing to enforce the restrictive covenant that prevents the Ebrens from erecting a pole barn based on the language of restrictive covenant number 18, which provides: "These restrictions may be modified and exception made thereto, if 80% of the owners of similarly-restricted land and the grantor, should he own adjacent land, even though unrestricted, so agree." Specifically, the Homeowners contend that because their property and the Ebreng' property are "similarly-restricted," the Homeowners have standing to enforce the covenants.
As an initial matter, the Homeowners are not a party to the restrictive covenants which appear on the Plat of the Don Smith Subdivision and are incorporated by reference in the Ebreng' Deed. Rather, the parties to those restrictive covenants are the Smiths, the grantors, and the owners of the platted lots. See Bob Layne Contractor, Inc. v. Buennagel, 158 Ind.App. 43, 301 N.E.2d 671, 678 (1973) (stating restrictive covenant "is a contract between two parties setting forth certain restrictions upon the use and occupancy of land for consideration."). But the Homeowners claim, in effect, that they are third-party beneficiaries of the restrictive covenants between the Smiths and the Ebrens and, because of that status, they have standing to enforce the covenants against the Ebrens. Based on our review of the language of restrictive covenant number 18 and the Plat as a whole, we cannot agree.
As this court stated in Grandview Lot Owners Ass'n Inc. v. Harmon, 754 N.E.2d 554, 557 (Ind.Ct.App.2001):
One purpose of restrictive covenants is to maintain or enhance the value of land "by controlling the nature and use of lands subject to a covenant's provisions." Restrictive covenants are generally disfavored in the law and will be strictly construed by the courts, which resolve all doubts in favor of the free use of property and against restrictions. Nevertheless, restrictive covenants are a form of express contract recognized under the law. The construction of a written contract containing restrictive covenants is a question of law for which summary judgment is particularly appropriate.
(Citations omitted). In addition, only where the intent of the parties cannot be determined within the four corners of the document do we examine extrinsic facts. Campbell v. Spade, 617 N.E.2d 580, 584 (Ind.Ct.App.1993). We have explained this rule of construction as follows:
The original covenanters' intent must be determined from the specific language used and the situation as it existed at the time that the covenant was made. *827Specific words and phrases cannot be read exclusive of other contractual provisions. Rather, the parties' intentions when entering into the contract must be determined by reading the contract in its entirety and attempting to construe contractual provisions so as to harmonize the agreement.
Grandview, 754 N.E.2d at 557 (citations omitted).
"When lands are granted according to a plat, the plat becomes part of the grant or deed by which the land is conveyed, with respect to the limitations placed upon the land." Id. And "[a] duly recorded plat gives notice to all prospective purchasers of the restrictions contained therein." Id. Here, the Plat was recorded in 19983. Accordingly, in determining the meaning of restrictive covenant number 18, we look not only to the restrictive covenants, but we also look at the Plat.
Restrictive covenant number 18 does not define the term "similarly-restricted land." Nor do any of the other restrictive covenants provide a definition. "Words used in a contract are to be given their usual and common meaning unless, from the contract and the subject matter thereof, it is clear that some other meaning was intended." Grandview, 754 N.E.2d at 559. The common meaning of "similar" is "related in appearance or nature; alike though not identical." Tur American HErrrace Dictionary or tus En-cruise LancuacE 1682 (8d ed.1996).
In addition to the plain meaning of "similar," the Deed of Dedication, which also appears on the Plat, identifies the parties and the property subject to the restrictions in relevant part as follows:
[THE] RESTRICTIONS HERETOFORE STATED ARE TO RUN WITH THE LAND AND SHALL BE BINDING ON ALL PARTIES AND ALL PERSONS CLAIMED UNDER THEM UNTIL JANUARY 1, 2017, AT WHICH TIME SAID RESTRICTIONS SHALL BE AUTOMATICALLY EXTENDED FOR SUCCESSIVE PERLI-ODS OF TEN YEARS UNLESS CHANGED BY VOTE OF A MAJORLTTY OF THE THEN OWNERS OF THE BUILDING SITES COVERED BY THESE RESTRICTIONS IN WHOLE OR IN PART.
(Emphasis added). The term "building sites" in the Deed of Dedication clarifies the term "similarly-restricted land" as used in restrictive covenant number 18. In particular, when the Deed of Dedication is read in conjunction with restrictive covenant number 18, and these provisions are harmonized, - "similarly-restricted - land" means the other "building sites" within the Don Smith Subdivision. See Grandview, 754 N.E.2d at 557 (requiring courts to read contract in its entirety and attempt to construe provisions so as to harmonize agreement).
The Homeowners' lots appear on the Plat, but those lots are identified by deed record and page, not as building sites. Rather, only three platted building sites are identified, namely, Tract #1, Tract #2, and Tract #8. We therefore conclude that, according to the express language of the Plat, only owners of building sites within the Don Smith Subdivision are "owners of similarly-restricted land" for purposes of restrictive covenant number 18. Because the Homeowners do not own one of the three building sites, their reliance on restrictive covenant number 18 to support their standing argument must fail.4
*828Still, in support of their interpretation of restrictive covenant number 18, the Homeowners direct us to a statement in the Smiths' Amended Affidavit which suggests that the Smiths intended the "similarly-restricted" language to mean that the owners of each and every similarly restricted tract, regardless of whether the lot was' contained within the Don Smith Subdivision, would have the right to enforce the restrictive covenants. Accordingly, the Homeowners rely on extrinsic evidence. But as we explained in Roy A4. Miller & Sons, Inc. v. Indus. Hardwoods Corp., T& N.E.2d 1168, 1172-783 (Ind.Ct. App.2002):
We determine the parties' intent when entering a contract from their expressions within the four corners of the written instrument. If the language is clear and unambiguous, we give that language its "plain, usual, and ordinary meaning." If, on the other hand, the language is ambiguous, then we must determine its meaning by extrinsic evidence.
Here, considering, as we must, both the plain meaning of the term "similarly-restricted" and the Plat as a whole, including the Deed of Dedication, we have determined that "similarly-restricted land" as used in restrictive covenant number 18 means other "building sites" within the Don Smith Subdivision. Accordingly, that term is not ambiguous and we need not resort to extrinsic facts.
C. - Common Scheme or Plan for Development
The Homeowners also assert that they have standing to enforee the restrictive covenants against the Ebrens because the evidence shows that the Smiths had a common scheme or plan for development5 of the property wherein all lots sold from the original tract that fronted Spaeth and Reservoir Roads would be subject to the same restrictions, including the restriction that no structure other than a dwelling be erected or placed on the properties. The Homeowners present an issue of first impression in our State, namely, whether a general plan of development exists where the original grantor's entire tract of land is developed in separate sections over time and not as a single unit.
This court recognized the concept of a general plan of development in Elliot v. *829Keely, 121 Ind.App. 529, 98 N.E.2d 374, 379-80 (1951), as follows:
Where a common grantor opens up a tract of land to be sold in lots and blocks, and before any lots are sold, inaugurates a general scheme of improvement for such entire tract intended to enhance the value of each lot, and each lot subsequently sold by such grantor, is made subject to such scheme of improvement, there is created and annexed to the entire tract what is termed a negative equitable easement, in which the several purchasers of lots have an interest, and between whom there exists mutuality of covenant and consideration.
The fact that a general plan was not filed and that the restrictions in the different deeds, although similar, are not identical, is not conclusive, so long as it appears that it was [the] general intent of the grantors to impose restrictions for the benefit of lot owners generally.
[[Image here]]
[Where the original grantors adopt a general plan or scheme of development and restrict it in some manner}, [sluch a restriction not only imposes a liability upon the grantee of each lot as between him and the grantor, but it gives him a right in the nature of an easement, which will be enforced in equity against the grantee of one of the other lots, although there is no direct, contractual relation between the two. Through the common character of the deeds the grantees are given an interest in a contractual stipulation which is made for their common benefit.
(Citations omitted).
Since Elliot, our courts have addressed the common scheme or plan of development doctrine in only a few cases. See e.g., Wischmeyer v. Finch, 231 Ind. 282, 107 N.E.2d 661, 665 (1952) (finding general plan of development where single subdivision plat restricted lots to residential use and type of buildings allowed); Mackiewics v. Metzger, 750 N.E.2d 812, 821 (Ind.Ct.App.2001) (stating trial court did not erv in finding no general scheme or plan of development where different developers platted separate subdivisions and only one subdivision was subject to restrictions at issue), trans. denied; McIntyre v. Baker, 660 N.E.2d 348, 352 n. 2 (Ind.Ct.App.1996) (addressing common scheme or plan in footnote where no dispute between the parties regarding whether common plan existed); Corner v. Mills, 650 N.E.2d 712, 715-16 (Ind.Ct.App.1995) (finding common plan where subdivision was recorded in single plat); Kuchler v. Mark II Homeowners Ass'n, Inc., 412 N.E.2d 298, 300 (Ind.Ct.App.1980) (citing with approval Colorado Court of Appeals' holding that "where grantor's entire tract of land is developed in separate sections and not as a single unit, there is no general plan or scheme which would permit owners in all the subdivisions to enforee restrictive covenants against each other."). While none of those cases is directly on point, our analysis in Kuchier is helpful.
In Kuchier, homeowners who resided in the Mark II Subdivision in Johnson County filed a declaratory judgment action against the Mark II homeowners association, a not-for-profit corporation, questioning the powers of the corporation under a recorded Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions. Id. at 299. The Mark II Subdivision was developed in three see-tions, Sections I, II, and III. The final plat for Section I was recorded in June 1978. After the developer had sold eleven lots in Section I, in 1974 the developer recorded in the Miscellaneous Records a document entitled, "Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions," which contained various re*830strictions and covenants upon all property then owned by the developer and which required a homeowners association to maintain a "common ground" that was located in Section III of the subdivision. Id. In April 1974, the plat was recorded for Section II of the subdivision, and that plat referred to the Recorded Declaration as a restriction on the property. In May 1975, the plat for Section III was recorded without reference to the Recorded Declaration. Id.
In September 1978, the plaintiff homeowners filed their complaint, and one of the issues raised was whether the Recorded Declaration placed restrictions on the homeowners' property. The trial court determined that the Recorded Declaration applied to Section II and that Sections I and III were not burdened by the Recorded Declaration. Id. On appeal, the homeowners argued that after the developer had sold eleven lots in Section I, he could not place further restrictions on Sections II and III. Id. On that issue, we stated as follows: .
Implicit in this argument is the notion that the Mark II Subdivision is an integrated whole. It is true that a preliminary plat of the entire 82[-lacre tract was presented to the zoning board for approval. It is, however, the final plat that is of importance in recording and deeding the property by lot number. See Ind.Code [§ ] 17-3-43-1. And here, there are three separate plats and thus, in effect, there are three separate developments or subdivisions. We note that it has been held that where the gramtor's entire tract of land is developed in separate sections and not as a single unit, there is no general plan or scheme which would permit owners in all the subdivisions to enforce restrictive covenants against each other. Rooney v. Peoples Bank of Arapahoe County, [32 Colo.App. 178, 182, 513 P.2d 1077, 1080 (1973)] (and cases cited therein). If treated, then, as separate entities, we have no problem with the placing of further restrictions on other sections.
Id. at 299-300 (emphasis added).6 We further determined that although none of the deeds for the lots in either Section II or III contained the Recorded Declaration, the recorded plat for Section II incorporated by reference the Recorded Declaration. Thus, all lots in Section II were burdened by the Recorded Declaration and the restrictions and covenants contained therein. But because the plat for Section III did not reference the Declaration, those lots were not so burdened. Id. at 300.
Although in Kuchier we did not expressly adopt the holding in Rooney v. Peoples Bank of Arapahoe County, 32 Colo.App. 178, 513 P.2d 1077, 1080 (1973), we cited that case with approval. And we find Roo-mney analogous to the facts here. Specifically, in Rooney the owners (the Rooneys) of a lot in one subdivision called "Range View, Second Filing," sought to enforce a restrictive covenant against the Bank, which owned a lot in an adjacent subdivision called "Range View Subdivision." Id. at 1079. Both subdivisions were developed and platted by the same grantors, the Buchanans. Id. The Buchanans had owned a large tract of land and over time, they platted five separate subdivisions, two of which were Range View Subdivision and Range View, Second Filing. Both the lot owned by the Bank and the Rooneys' lot were restricted by the same covenants. Id. The issue before the Colorado Court of Appeals was whether the Rooneys could enforce the covenants against the Bank, and the Rooneys argued that they could *831because both subdivisions were part of a general plan or scheme of development. The court disagreed and stated in relevant part:
[The common scheme or plan] rule is applicable to owners of lots within Range View Subdivision. It, appears from the plat of the subdivision, and from the restrictive covenants applicable to the lots in this plat, that Range View Subdivision was developed under a general plan or scheme. However, the rule does not authorize owners of lots in subsequently platted subdivisions to enforce the covenants with regard to lots in other subdivisions unless all five subdivisions were developed as a part of a general plan or scheme for the development of the entire area. - |
The five subdivisions were developed as separate and distinet units. A separate plat was filed for each subdivision. The tract was not developed as a single con-temporameous unit. In similar factual situations, courts of other jurisdictions have held that where the grantor's entire tract of land is developed in separate sections and not as a single unit, there is mo general plan or scheme which would permit owners in all the subdivisions to enforce restrictive covenants against each other.
Id. at 1080 (citations omitted and emphasis added). Thus, the court determined that no general scheme or plan existed and that the trial court correctly determined that the Rooneys could not enforce the covenants against the Bank. Id.
Here, although the Homeowners' Deeds and the Plat of the Don Smith Subdivision share the same restrictive covenants, the undisputed designated evidence establishes that the Smiths did not develop their entire 10l-tract of land "as a single contemporaneous unit." - Id. Rather, they first sold lots to the Homeowners piecemeal and then subsequently platted the Don Smith Subdivision.7 While the evidence shows a common scheme or plan for the Don Smith Subdivision, we cannot conclude that the Smiths had a common scheme or plan for their entire 10l-acre tract, nor for the property that fronted Spaeth or Reservoir Roads.8 Indeed, following the holding in Rooney, we hold that the Smiths did not have a general plan of development for the property that fronted on Spaeth and Reservoir Roads because they sold and developed that land not as a single unit but, at first, in separate lots and, later, by way of a subdivision. Without a general plan of development, the Homeowners, who do not own lots within the Don Smith Subdivision, do not have standing to enforce the restrictive covenants contained in the Plat against the Ebrens. Thus, the trial court properly granted summary judgment for the Ebrens.
Affirmed.
*832MAY, J., concurs.
BAKER, J., dissents with separate opinion.
. Nicholas is now deceased.
. Jennifer later married Eric, and in 2001, a Warranty Deed containing both their names was recorded.
. Mark Kolb was originally a plaintiff in the suit, but in April 2002, he filed a voluntary dismissal under Indiana Trial Rule 41. Kolb was the only plaintiff who owned a lot in the Don Smith Subdivision.
, In a related argument, the Homeowners note that the Plat provides that the three *828Tracts in the Don Smith Subdivision are subject to "all restrictions of record." They appear to suggest that this general provision confers standing on them to enforce the covenants contained in the Plat against owners of homes in the Don Smith Subdivision. However, they do not explain how that general provision supports their standing argument, nor do they provide any citations to authority. Because the Homeowners have failed to present cogent argument on the issue, their argument is waived. See Ind.App. Rule 46(A)(8)(a) (providing appellant must contain contentions on issues presented and each contention must be supported by cogent reasoning, including citations to authority); see also Young v. Butts, 685 N.E.2d 147, 151 (Ind.Ct.App.1997) (stating "court which must search the record and make up its own arguments because a party has not adequately presented them runs the risk of becoming an advocate rather than an adjudicator."). In any event, although the Homeowners' individual lots were restricted of record before the Don Smith Subdivision was platted, neither the individual lots nor the Plat are in each other's direct chain of title. Thus, the general boilerplate provision in the Plat that the platted Tracts are subject to "all restrictions of record" does not incorporate the restrictions in the Homeowners' Deeds by reference or confer standing on the Homeowners to enforce those restrictions against owners of the platted tracts.
. The phrase "common scheme or plan" is also referred to as "general plan." See ReSTATEMENT (Trmirp) or Property: SErvitupss § 2.14 ('Servitudes Implied from General Plan"). We use those phrases interchangeably throughout this opinion.
. Whether the remaining unsold lots in Section I were burdened by the Recorded Declaration was not an issue on appeal. Kuchler, 412 N.E.2d at 300, n. 1.
. We disagree with the dissent's contention that this case is like Corner. While the developers in Corner sold lots in a piecemeal fashion, they did so only after they had divided their original tract into thirty-two individual residential lots and named that development "Christiana Acres." 650 N.E.2d at 713-714. Unlike the Smiths who sold a few lots individually and then platted the Don Smith Subdivision, the developers in Corner developed and platted a single subdivision. Thus, we agree that there was a common scheme or plan of development in Corner because the entire tract was developed as a single contemporaneous unit. See Rooney, 513 P.2d at 1080. But here, the Smiths developed their property in phases over time. Further, and significantly, unlike the Homeowners here, who do not own lots in the Don Smith Subdivision, the plaintiffs in Corner owned lots in Christiana Acres. Id. at 714.
. This opinion does not address whether the Homeowners may enforce the restrictive cov-enarnts 'contained in their deeds against one another. "

=== CASE 9737107 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:16:20.979461+00 ===

BAKER, Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent from the majority's determination that Anna King, William H. Stuckey, and Crystal Stuckey (Homeowners) do not have standing to enforce the restrictive covenants contained in the Plat against the Ebrens. In my view, Corner v. Mills makes it clear that a general scheme or plan of a development exists when "the circumstances and facts of the case, including the language of the deeds and the grantors' actions, reveal an intent by them to create such a plan or scheme." 650 N.E.2d 712, 715 (Ind.Ct.App.1995). It is apparent to me that the evidence, when viewed in the light most favorable to the Homeowners, reveals such an intent on the part of Donald Smith.
The majority cites Corner for the proposition that a common plan will exist where a subdivision is recorded in a single plat. Op. p. 829. The Corner court's decision, however, is based on the idea that the facts of the case can indicate that a grant- or had a common scheme of development in mind when he or she sold off plots of a larger tract of land. Corner, 650 N.E.2d at 715. Specifically, I would note that in Corner, the Shuperts purchased a tract of land in 1942 that was subsequently sold off piece by piece. The first four lots sold had no restrictions. Lot Number 11 was sold off with a list of restrictions, including one that prevented the land from being used for any purpose except for residential use. Two lots were sold after Lot Number 11, but only one of them had the residential use restriction. In 1946, the Shuperts recorded a plat of the tract and named the area Christiana Acres. Thirteen lots were sold after the recording, some included restrictions in their deeds while others did not. Id. at 714.
In 19983, Marie Corner-who owned one of the plots that originally was purchased by the Shuperts-decided to use her plot for commercial purposes. She petitioned the trial court to strike the residential restrictions. The trial court upheld the residential restrictions, finding a common scheme or plan of residential development. Id.
On appeal, Corner argued that the trial court's finding was erroneous because "some of the covenants are ambiguous and ... many of the deeds are not identical in their restrictions." Id. at 715. Corner also argued that "some propérties do not have restrictions on them at all, and ... several lots were conveyed without restrictions before the plat was recorded." Id. We affirmed the trial court, however, noting that "the pertinent focus is on whether the cireumstances and facts of the case, including the language of the deeds and the grantors' actions, reveal an intent by them to create such a plan or scheme." Id. (emphasis added). Furthermore, we noted that:
[Where a common grantor opens up a tract of land to be sold in lots and blocks, and before any lots are sold, inaugurates a general scheme of improvement for such entire tract intended to enhance the value of each lot, and each lot subsequently sold by such grantor, is made subject to such scheme of improvement, there is created and annexed to the entire tract what is termed a negative equitable easement, in which the several purchasers of lots have an interest, and between whom there exists mutuality of covenant and consideration.
Id. at 715-16 (quoting Elliot v. Keely, 121 Ind.App. 529, 539-40, 98 N.E.2d 374, 379 (1951)). The Corner court acknowledged *833that some plots' deeds did not contain the restrictions but also held that this did not "conclusively show the nonexistence of" a common scheme or plan. Id. at 715.
If the Corner court found sufficient evidence to demonstrate a common scheme or plan, then here the Homeowners have at least successfully raised a genuine issue of material fact to preclude the entry of summary judgment. All parties had a common grantor, Donald R. Smith. Additionally, Smith's affidavit stated that he:
[Hlad a common and general plan in selling off pieces of the parent parcel for construction thereon of single family residences to provide that each and every tract so conveyed would be subject to the same mutually enforceable restrictive covenants so as to assure that each tract conveyed would have constructed thereon no more than one single family dwelling with an attached garage.
Appellant's App. p. 48. Even more telling, the King and Stuckey tracts had the same restriction with respect to structures as did the subdivision lots. Appellant's App. p. 19, 20, 23. Finally,; the reason the platted subdivision came into existence was external. The Franklin County Area Planning Commission's executive director stated that "[The Unified Zoning Ordinance of Franklin County, Indianal,] would not have allowed [the Smiths] to convey the [lots later included in the subdivision] as separate building lots which would each be entitled to receive an improvement location permit to allow construction of a residence thereon unless those tracts had been platted into a Subdivision." Appellant's App. p. 52.
I also note that the Ebrens were not without notice. All the parcels at issue here were part of Smith's original tract. The deeds from the lots that made up the original tract could have been inspected to determine which lots were within Smith's original common plan. I would also note that the Eibrensg's answer alleged that they advised William H. Stuckey that the pole barn was going to be erected before construction began. Appellant's App. p. 88. Stuckey did not object to the proposed project. Appellant's App. p. 38. If such an allegation is true, the Homeowners' claim for equitable relief may have been compromised under the doctrine of laches. Black's Low Dictionary 875 (6th ed. 1990) ("Equity aids the vigilant and not those who slumber on their rights").
In short, summary judgment was not warranted here inasmuch as a genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether Smith had a common scheme or plan in mind when he began selling parts of his original tract for homesteads. However, because the Homeowners are seeking equitable relief, I would permit the Ebrens to more fully develop their affirmative defense of laches.

=== CASE 2208967 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:35.023882+00 ===

156 N.W.2d 239 (1968)
Frank Bernard BLACIK, Appellant,
v.
CANCO DIVISION-AMERICAN CAN COMPANY, Respondent.
No. 39775.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
February 16, 1968.
*240 Firestone, Fink, Krawetz, Miley & O'Neill, and James Noonan, St. Paul, for appellant.
A. Laurence Davis and Samuel L. Hanson, Briggs & Morgan, St. Paul, of counsel, for respondent.
OPINION
FRANK T. GALLAGHER, Justice.
Appeal from an order of the municipal court of St. Paul denying plaintiff's motion for a new trial or judgment notwithstanding the verdict.
Plaintiff, Frank Bernard Blacik, entered the employment of defendant, Canco Division-American Can Company, on or about June 14, 1933, at St. Paul. He testified that at that time there was a discussion between an agent of defendant and himself regarding certain employee benefits; that vacation plans were discussed; that it was explained that employees were to work a certain time before becoming eligible for a vacation; and that it was plaintiff's understanding that vacations were deferred for a year. He did not recall that he received any vacation between the time he commenced work in June 1933 and June 1934 but said he received some vacation after he had been with defendant a year.
In 1949 plaintiff was transferred by defendant to St. Louis, where he remained until 1955. He worked at an hourly rate from 1933, except as interrupted by military service, until April 1, 1950, when he was promoted to assistant foreman and became a salaried, supervisory employee. Sometime after plaintiff was employed in 1933 he became a union member, but as a supervisory employee he withdrew from the union.
In 1955, plaintiff was transferred back to St. Paul and in 1960 was transferred to Indianapolis. He remained a supervisory employee until he voluntarily terminated his employment in July 1963, effective August 2, 1963.[1]
In this action plaintiff claims benefits of two kinds: (1) An additional retirement benefit equal to 2 months' pay, claimed to be payable to certain employees who retired between October 1, 1962, and December 31, 1963; and (2) vacation pay.
At the close of plaintiff's evidence the trial court directed a verdict in favor of the defendant on plaintiff's retirement-benefit claim, and at the close of all the evidence it directed a verdict for defendant on the vacation-pay claim.
1. Plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in directing a verdict for the defendant on the issue of separation pay or additional retirement benefits. He contends that the question of whether or not he was entitled to the 2 months' leave pay should have been submitted to the jury.
It is apparent that plaintiff bases his claim for additional retirement benefits upon two letters or memoranda directed to all salaried employees, one of which was received by plaintiff prior to the termination of his employment. It is his position that the plan was under consideration while he was still employed by the defendant. The first memorandum (plaintiff's exhibit B), dated September 28, 1962, contained a general description of a proposed expansion in salaried employees' benefits. The memorandum indicated that the information was preliminary, incomplete, and unofficial since the benefits were subject to government approval. It described in general terms a proposed leave-of-absence benefit to those employees who had 15 years or more of accredited service as of January *241 1, 1964. Plaintiff has made no claim here that he was entitled to any leave-of-absence benefits.
The second memorandum (plaintiff's exhibit C), dated August 7, 1963, indicated that the proposed expanded benefit plan for salaried employees was not yet approved, but went on to describe the additional retirement benefits included in that plan. It stated in part that those employees who were retired on or after October 1, 1962, but prior to December 31, 1963, who have not received leave or leave allowance prior to their retirement and who were otherwise eligible would receive 2 months' pay at their salary level at the time of their retirement, which would be paid during the first pay period of 1964. It is plaintiff's claim that he is entitled to this 2 months' retirement pay.
Plaintiff testified that the benefits available to salaried supervisory employees generally corresponded with those made available to production workers through union negotiations. In this connection the 1962 union contract introduced into evidence by plaintiff provided:
"27.3 An Employee who shall have completed 15 years of Accredited Service on or before October 1, 1963, and is actively employed in 1963 or thereafter shall become entitled to an initial Vested Leave and Leave Allowance as of October 1, 1963 (Vesting Date). Such an Employee shall become entitled to additional Vested Leaves and Leave Allowances every 5 years after that date, provided he is actively employed on or after the applicable subsequent Vesting Date and has at least 15 years of Accredited Service when he is thus actively employed.
"Leave Allowances shall be granted to all employees who shall have retired on pension under the Pension Agreement between October 1, 1962 and September 30, 1963, but shall be payable, as of January 1, 1964." (Italics supplied.)
There was no evidence that the benefits proposed in the September 28, 1962, and August 7, 1963, letters had become effective when plaintiff terminated his services with defendant on August 2, 1963. He testified that he had no knowledge of the plan described in the letters and he did not know if it ever became effective.[2] He said that he knew of one employee who received benefits but he did not know if he got them under the plan under consideration or some other plan. He knew only that the employee retired at 62 years of age. Plaintiff was 49 when he terminated his employment with defendant. He testified that on or about the time he quit, July 12, 1963, he had a talk with defendant's plant manager who, as he recalled, told him he was too young to retire and that he had to be at least 55 years old. As a supervisory employee, plaintiff said that he knew the requirements for employees under defendant's retirement plan for salaried employees, but he would not say flatly that such an employee had to be 65 years old to retire under the normal retirement plan. He did know, however, that the provisions for early retirement of a salaried employee required that he be at least 55 years of age. He said that he was not claiming in this action that defendant had denied him any right regarding annuity benefits after age 65 but his claim was only for the 2 months' separation pay.
It appears undisputed from the record here that plaintiff was entitled to certain *242 other benefits under defendant's retirement plan for salaried employees upon termination of his employment prior to retirement. He could withdraw his contributions, totaling $3,520.96, under the company retirement plan and a prior annuity contract with the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company or he could retain them as a deferred retirement benefit at age 65. He elected to receive the retirement benefit of $220.91 per month commencing at age 65.
The trial court directed a verdict for the defendant on plaintiff's claim for the 2 months' retirement or separation pay. It is our opinion that the trial court's decision on that issue should be affirmed because of the failure of plaintiff to furnish proof of the essential elements of his cause of action. For example, there is no evidence in the record before us that the improvements in salaried employee benefits proposed by the letters of September 28, 1962, and August 7, 1963, were ever made effective. Even if we assumed without convincing evidence that the proposed benefits became effective, plaintiff's evidence fails to show that he was eligible for them. The memorandum of August 7, 1963, states in effect that to be eligible for the 2 months' pay the person claiming those benefits would have to have at least 15 years of accredited service and retire between October 1, 1962, and December 31, 1963. Plaintiff terminated his employment on August 2, 1963, and was only 49 years of age at this time rather than the minimum retirement age of 55.
In the absence of any evidence that the proposed benefits had become effective or that plaintiff was eligible to receive them under the conditions of the plan as proposed, it is our opinion that the trial court was correct in ruling that plaintiff failed to make out a prima facie case and that a verdict should be directed for the defendant on that issue.
2. Plaintiff contends also that it was error for the trial court to grant defendant's motion for a directed verdict on the issue of vacation benefits. It is his position that there was a conflict in the testimony which, taken in the light most favorable to him, created a jury question. He states that when he commenced working for defendant (about June 14, 1933) he was told by defendant's agents that he would be entitled to vacation benefits and that it was his understanding they would be deferred for 1 year so that after 1 year's employment he would be entitled to take his vacation for the preceding work year.
Plaintiff could not recall that he received a vacation during his first year of work but said he received some vacation after being with the company a year. Upon cross-examination, plaintiff could not recall whether he had received a vacation in 1942 or 1946, but he admitted that he had a vacation each year since 1946. He testified that the pattern for supervisory salaried employees with respect to sick-benefit coverage, vacation pay, etc., followed the negotiated union pattern; but on cross-examination he admitted that he knew that there were some differences between the vacations granted salaried and hourly employees.
All three of defendant's witnesses testified that the defendant corporation did not follow a policy of deferred vacations. Mr. William Fairnington, the plant manager at defendant's Indianapolis plant at the time of plaintiff's separation from service, testified that when plaintiff was employed in Indianapolis, an employee was never granted a vacation for work done in a prior year. Mr. Leo Baer, the manager of employee benefits for defendant, whose section administers the vacation policy of the defendant, testified that a vacation cannot be postponed by an employee to a subsequent year, but that an allowance is paid the employee if his vacation is not taken. Mr. Charles Stumpf, supervisor of industrial relations at defendant's Indianapolis plant, who was responsible for the total administration of the vacation policy at the plant, testified that in his experience no employee had received a vacation or vacation pay for work done in a prior year. According to his testimony *243 he conferred with plaintiff with regard to his termination of employment and told him that he would be paid for the 3 weeks of vacation which he had not yet taken during 1963, but the witness denied knowledge of any further conversation with regard to any additional vacation.
At the close of plaintiff's case, defendant moved for a dismissal on the grounds that plaintiff had failed to prove a cause of action. At that time, the court denied the motion as to his claim for vacation pay, holding that plaintiff had made out a prima facie case as to this issue.
At the close of defendant's case, plaintiff moved to amend his claim to include pay for 4 weeks rather than 2 weeks of vacation, which motion was granted. Defendant then moved for a directed verdict on the grounds that there was insufficient evidence to justify a verdict in favor of the plaintiff on the issue of vacation pay. The court granted this motion, holding that when plaintiff became a supervisory employee he became subject to defendant's official written vacation plan for such employees. This plan, defendant's exhibit 2, setting forth the vacation policy for salaried employees, dated January 1, 1963, and in effect when plaintiff terminated his employment, provided:
"Vacations may not be postponed or accumulated by an employee from one calendar year to the next. All employees are to receive either the full number of vacation days for which they are eligible or vacation allowance in lieu of vacation time off * * *."
It is our opinion that under the record here a directed verdict for defendant at the close of the case on the claim for vacation pay was appropriate because plaintiff failed to establish a prima facie case by his own evidence and the evidence as a whole preponderated in defendant's favor. It will serve no useful purpose to attempt to detail all of the evidence relating to this claim. It includes the defendant's official written vacation plan and the testimony of three employees who administered that plan. When that evidence is weighed against plaintiff's vague and speculative testimony concerning his understanding of vacation rights, and his admission that he received a vacation each year since becoming a salaried employee, we believe that the trial court was justified in granting defendant's motion at the close of all of the evidence with respect to the issue of plaintiff's vacation rights.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  On June 12, 1963, plaintiff advised defendant's plant manager that he was retiring on his 30th anniversary with defendant company. At his employer's request he continued through the first week of July 1963. Plaintiff testified that he received a total of 3 weeks' vacation pay after he left the company in July 1963.
[2]  Plaintiff, while testifying, read into the record the second paragraph of defendant's letter dated August 7, 1963: "I regret that we [defendant] still are not able to provide you without qualification all provisions of the plan. This is because of required Federal tax rulings, as yet not received, which if unfavorable, will require considerable alteration of the plan to eliminate a severe tax burden for each eligible employee. At this time, however, we can let you know the basic parts of the program as submitted for Treasury Department ruling, and we will proceed with all plan provisions to the extent possible prior to final approval."

=== CASE 9737108 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:16:21.530843+00 ===

CAVANAUGH, Judge:
Appellant, Ernest Edwards, Jr., was convicted by a jury on eight criminal informations arising out of his activity in the Osage Avenue Redevelopment Project in the City of Philadelphia.1 Following the denial of post-trial motions, appellant was sentenced to an aggregate of six to twelve years imprisonment and ordered to pay restitution of $137,-000.00.
The factual history of the case is summarized in the trial court’s opinion as follows:
On May 13, 1985, in an effort to remove the radical group known as MOVE from 6221 Osage Avenue, the house was fire bombed, causing a holocaust, killing eleven people and completely destroying sixty-one homes. Immediately thereafter, the City Administrators promised reparations: to rebuild the homes and to return the displaced residents to their homes by the end of the year. To this end, the City, which was to provide the necessary construction monies, enlisted the City of Philadelphia Redevelopment Authority (hereinafter “RDA”) to acquire the title to the site, prepare a prototype home and select a developer and the Urban Local Development Corporation (hereinafter “ULDC”) to disburse the 6.7 million dollars the City had allotted for the Restoration. In late June, *553the RDA awarded the construction contract to the developer, Edwards and Harper, Inc. (hereinafter “E & H”), a close corporation in which defendant was one of two principals and which had been specifically incorporated to develop the Osage Project, obligating it to procure a completion bond, hire a general contractor and complete the project in accordance with prototypes prepared by the RDA. E & H would be reimbursed on a percentage-of-work-completed basis on a predetermined line item cost breakdown. Soon after the award, defendant Edwards proceeded on his undertaking. He enlisted the cooperation of Ebony Construction Company, Inc., (hereinafter “Ebony”), a New Jersey corporation, of which defendant Harris was the principal proprietor and defendant Edwards was director, as general contractor. Defendant Edwards requested and received start-up money for the Osage Project and commenced work on July 1, 1985, before obtaining the completion bond. When Ebony proved unbondable, defendant formed Premier Construction Company Incorporated (hereinafter “Premier”) to serve as general contractor. Unsuccessful in having Premier bonded, on September 9, Premier relinquished its position as general contractor to G & V General Contractors (hereinafter “G & V”), which was able to procure bonding, relegating Premier to subcontractor status. On February 10, 1986, both of defendant’s companies (E & H and Premier) were defaulted, leaving G & V, the general contractor, to complete the job, encumbered with over one million dollars of unpaid costs.
Trial Court Opinion 7/10/89 at pages 2-4.
The initial discussion will deal with three separate incidents of alleged theft involving appellant. The Commonwealth has attached to each incident three theft-related labels: Theft by Deception (18 Pa.C.S. § 3922), Theft by Failure to Make Required Disposition (18 Pa.C.S. § 3927) and Misapplication of Entrusted Property (18 Pa.C.S. § 4113). Bills Nos. 3390, 3378 and 3388 allege that, after being advanced $202,400.00 for the mobilization of the *554Project, appellant misappropriated $91,585.41 to his own use. Bills Nos. 3392, 3379 and 3384 allege that appellant double-dipped on transportation expenses in the amount of $4,800.00. Bills Nos. 3391, 3380 and 3383 allege that, after shifting money around from bank account to bank account, appellant mysteriously became $11,300.00 richer. Appellant argues that the evidence presented at trial was insufficient to convict him of these three theft charges and that the verdicts were against the weight of the evidence.
The test for determining the sufficiency of the evidence is whether, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the Commonwealth, and drawing all proper inferences favorable to the Commonwealth, the jury could reasonably have determined all elements of the crime to have been established beyond a reasonable doubt. Commonwealth v. Aulisio, 514 Pa. 84, 522 A.2d 1075 (1987). For a new trial to lie on a challenge that the verdict is against the weight of the evidence, the evidence must be so tenuous, vague and uncertain that the verdict shocks the conscience of the court. Commonwealth v. Reardon, 374 Pa.Super. 212, 542 A.2d 572 (1988). In addition, where the evidence is legally sufficient, it generally meets the test for weightiness. See Commonwealth v. Robinson, 351 Pa.Super. 309, 505 A.2d 997 (1986).2
With these principals in mind we look to the evidence upon which the jury based its conviction of appellant on the various offenses.
*555THEFT BY DECEPTION
[2] Bill No. 3390 charges Edwards with theft by deception of $91,585.41 in connection with the utilization of the mobilization funds paid to E & H by ULDC. 18 Pa.C.S. § 3922 provides:
(a) Offense defined.—A person is guilty of theft if he intentionally obtains or withholds property of another by deception. A person deceives if he intentionally:
(1) creates or reinforces a false impression, including false impressions as to law, value, intention or other state of mind; but deception as to a person’s intention to perform a promise shall not be inferred from the fact alone that he did not subsequently perform the promise;
(2) prevents another from acquiring information which would affect his judgement of a transaction; or
(3) fails to correct a false impression which the deceiver previously created or reinforced, or which the deceiver knows to be influencing another to whom he stands in a fiduciary or confidential relationship.
(b) Exception.—The term “deceive” does not, however, include falsity as to matters having no pecuniary significance, or puffing by statements unlikely to deceive ordinary persons in the group addressed.
After having been selected as the developer on the Osage Project, appellant requested start-up money before the formal signing of the contracts and before the actual construction commenced. ULDC had earmarked one million dollars for the mobilization of the project and Joseph Gaudit, ULDC’s on-site representative, discussed with appellant the items that would be eligible for payment out of that fund. On June 26, 1985, appellant Edwards made his first formal request for $340,000, an amount which was refused because it contained construction costs and construction had not yet begun. A second request for $212,400.00 was also rejected because it contained an improper item for developer’s fees, an expense not allowable at that time. After appellant’s third application for funds, ULDC paid E & H $202,400.00 based on the following line items: project personnel, trailer *556rental, office furniture, equipment and supplies, telephone and utility deposits, layout and survey, insurance, labor, security and fencing, community liaison, equipment rental and legal, architectural and engineering fees. A promissory note was signed by the principals of E & H, appellant Edwards and Beverly Harper. At appellant’s suggestion that some of these items were costs incurred by the general contractor, $108,400.00 was transferred to Ebony’s account which had been specifically opened for receiving mobilization monies. Withdrawals from this account required appellant’s signature. On the very same day of the transfer, a rash of checks were drawn on this Ebony account: $14,-000.00 to appellant Edwards, $2,250.00 to cash (endorsed by appellant), $15,000.00 to Ebony which was deposited in another Ebony account, and approximately $80,000.00 to a host of suppliers for goods which had been provided to Ebony long before the Osage disaster.
Appellant argues that this conduct does not constitute theft by deception. He contends that he made no promise nor stated any intent to use the disbursed money specifically for the purposes outlined in his application. Appellant considered his application to be nothing more than a partial list of categories and estimates which were not binding on E & H. In his view, once ULDC disbursed the money to E & H, it became the property of E & H and could be used in any way the corporation saw fit. The $202,400.00 should be seen as money advanced to “finance” E & H and Ebony, and paying off old creditors and taking some pocket money were forms of “financing.”
The evidence showed that E & H was a redevelopment corporation created for the sole purpose of enabling the City of Philadelphia to rebuild Osage Avenue. ULDC agreed to front the money for the mobilization of the Project in order to allow E & H to begin work immediately, without having to procure private financing.3 It was rea*557sonable for ULDC, relying on appellant’s submitted application, to assume that appellant would use the money in accordance with the terms spelled out in his application. Appellant was aware of the importance of the application because his first two attempts to obtain funding were rejected because of inaccurate proposals.
ULDC’s representative, Joseph Gaudit, testified that no money would have been disbursed if appellant had alerted ULDC that he was going to use the mobilization money to pay old Ebony debts. As it turned out, not one of the checks drawn against the mobilization money deposited in the Ebony account was in payment for expenses related to the mobilization of the Project. We conclude that there was sufficient evidence for the jury to find that appellant obtained the mobilization funds by intentionally creating a false impression which deceived ULDC into believing that the disbursed money would be used for mobilization when, in fact, he intended to use the money to pay old Ebony debts.
Appellant was convicted, in Bill No. 3392, of theft by deception of $4,800.00 worth of transportation expenses. The evidence showed that Beverly Harper agreed that E & H would pay appellant transportation expenses of $800.00 for the monthly payments on a 1985 Jaguar that Edwards was leasing for his use. Appellant received and cashed four E & H checks totaling $4,800.00, purporting to be transportation expense reimbursements. However, payments on the lease of the Jaguar were actually being made from checks drawn on Ebony’s account. Appellant admitted receiving the checks and not spending the money on transportation expenses.
Appellant argues that, since the information lists ULDC as the owner of the stolen property, he cannot be convicted because he was paid the $4,800.00 by E & H. Appellant ignores the fact that E & H obtained the money from ULDC through appellant’s deception. Since the money which E & H controlled had been fraudulently obtained from ULDC, every time appellant converted that money to *558his own use he was effecting an unlawful taking. In short, appellant joined his unlawful taking of the funds with his ongoing deception of ULDC and thereby committed theft by deception.
Appellant was convicted, in Bill No. 3391, of theft by deception in connection with $11,300.00 which was paid to him by Premier. The evidence showed that, at appellant’s request, E & H loaned him $175,000.00. Appellant then placed this money in Premier’s account to create the illusion that Premier was liquid. The following day $150,000.00 was repaid to E & H, with the remaining $25,000.00 remaining in Premier’s account. From this remaining sum, Premier paid out $11,300.00 to appellant.
Appellant argues that this evidence is insufficient to convict him of theft by deception. He contends that the money belonged to Premier and that there was no evidence presented to show that he obtained it from Premier through fraudulent means. Appellant ignores the fact that he was Premier and that he obtained the $175,000.00 from E & H by misrepresenting to Beverly Harper that he would immediately repay the loan on the following day, knowing full well that he had no such intention. Appellant’s deception, in fact, was an ongoing scheme to unlawfully pocket ULDC’s money. Changing checking accounts did not launder the illegally gotten funds.
Appellant also renews his argument that the money in question belonged to Premier and it was free to use it in any way it saw fit. He erroneously contends that ULDC no longer had any interest in the money once it was given to E & H. Appellant is incorrect. The money appellant received from Premier was money Premier obtained from E & H which in turn, was money E & H had received from ULDC, an acquisition made possible by appellant’s initial deception. Premier’s payment of this ill-gotten money to appellant is only another link in the chain of deception and completes another unlawful taking. The evidence showed that E & H, Ebony and Premier were corporations which appellant con*559trolled and used to illegally pocket ULDC’s money. It was sufficient to support the conviction of theft by deception.
THEFT BY FAILURE TO MAKE REQUIRED DISPOSITION
Appellant next argues that the evidence was insufficient in regard to his convictions of theft by failure to make required dispositions. We are still considering the three incidents discussed above, but analyzing them in relation to another theft statute. This particular statute reads as follows:
§ 3927. Theft by Failure to Make Required Disposition of Funds Received.
(a) Offense defined.—A person who obtains property upon agreement, or subject to a known legal obligation, to make specified payments or other disposition, whether from such property or its proceeds or from his own property to be reserved in equivalent amount, is guilty of theft if he intentionally deals with the property obtained as his own and fails to make the required payment or disposition. The foregoing applies notwithstanding that it may be impossible to identify particular property as belonging to the victim at the time of the failure of the actor to make the required payment or disposition.
In Commonwealth v. Crafton, 240 Pa.Super. 12, 16, 367 A.2d 1092, 1094 (1976), this court outlined the four elements of the crime of theft by failure to make required disposition:
1. the obtaining of property of another;
2. subject to an agreement of known legal obligation upon the recipient to make specified payments or other disposition thereof;
3. intentional dealing with the property obtained as the defendant’s own; and
4. failure to make the required disposition of the property-
The Commonwealth contends that appellant obtained the property of ULDC ($202,400.00), subject to an agreement, *560(as expressed in his application) to use the money for the mobilization of the Osage Avenue Redevelopment Project. He then converted portions of the money to his own use and thereby failed to make the required disposition of the property.
Appellant argues that the $202,400.00 was an advance payment on a construction contract with title and ownership of the money passing to E & H. Therefore, he was not dealing with the property of ULDC. In addition, he did not receive the money subject to any agreement to make specified payments. His application request for funds was only a non-binding list of construction categories and estimates. To bolster his position, appellant cites Commonwealth v. Austin, 258 Pa.Super. 461, 393 A.2d 36 (1978), wherein this court reversed a conviction for theft by failure to make lawful disposition of funds received. We find Austin clearly distinguishable.
In the Austin case, a contractor received advance money for the purchase of materials on a construction contract. Austin performed for two months when he realized that he had under-estimated the job. Having run out of money, he stopped work. Although some of the advance money was not spent on materials, the evidence showed that all the money was spent in a manner which could be construed to have been necessary for the completion of the project.
Austin’s conviction was reversed because (1) he had not fraudulently obtained the advance money; (2) the construction contract was not an agreement which compelled Austin to use the money only for the purchase of materials; (3) the money was otherwise spent in furtherance of the proposed project; and (4) the failure to complete the job was not due to Austin’s converting the money to his personal use.
In the instant case, the evidence showed that Ernest Edwards obtained the $202,400.00 from ULDC by convincing the agency that he would use the money to mobilize the Osage Project. Appellant submitted several applications for mobilization funds until ULDC finally agreed that the specifications proposed by appellant satisfied its require*561ments for the loan. Thus, appellant obtained the property of another subject to an agreement that it would be used in the mobilization effort.4 The money appellant received was property in which ULDC had an interest which appellant was not privileged to infringe. This loan agreement encompassed more than a mere promise by appellant to repay the money, as may be the case in a creditor-debtor relationship. In fact it is appellant himself who provides a correct interpretation of the agreement: “To the contrary, the only agreement or known legal obligation concerning the disposition of the mobilization loan proceeds, if any, supported by the evidence, is an agreement to apply the proceeds to the payment of all necessary mobilization expenses.” (Emphasis added). Appellant’s brief at page 23.
Therefore, when appellant intentionally converted some of the proceeds of the loan to his own use by paying off old debts (Bill No. 3378), double dipping on the transportation expenses (Bill No. 3398), and pocketing the money from Premier (Bill No. 3380), he committed a theft by failing to make the legally required disposition of the funds.
MISAPPLICATION OF ENTRUSTED PROPERTY
Appellant was also convicted on the same evidence of the misapplication of entrusted property with respect to mobilization funds ($91,585.41), the falsified transportation expenses ($4,800.00) and the Premier capitalization scheme ($11,300.00). Appellant’s contention that the evidence was insufficient to support these convictions is without merit. The statute in question reads as follows:
§ 4113. Misapplication of Entrusted Property and Property of Government or Financial Institutions,
(a) Offense defined.—A person commits an offense if he applies or disposes of property that has been entrusted to him as a fiduciary, or property of the government or of a financial institution, in a manner which he knows is unlawful and involves substantial risk of loss or detri*562ment to the owner of the property or to a person for whose benefit the property was entrusted.
The statute applies to misappropriation of three separate types of property: property belonging to the government, property belonging to a financial institution, and property entrusted to a fiduciary. An individual who misapplies any of the property as set forth above violates the statute. This construction gives effect to all of the phrases in § 4113(a).
Appellant was a fiduciary for purposes of statute. He had received funds for a stipulated purpose and was obligated to apply the money to that purpose. A fiduciary is defined as: “An executor, administrator, guardian, committee, receiver, trustee, assignee for the benefit of creditors, and any other person acting in any similar capacity.” 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1991. Appellant had been advanced the monies for the specific purpose of mobilizing the project, and he was a fiduciary for purposes of § 4113. E & H only received the advance after the third application, itemizing how the funds would be spent, was approved, and a duty of faithfully carrying out this obligation was imposed.
REMAINING COUNTS
Appellant was convicted of perjury (No. 2786) and false swearing (Bill No. 0190) in connection with the testimony which he gave to the County Investigating Grand Jury on October 18, 1985. This Grand Jury had been impaneled to investigate allegations of bribery, theft and fraud in connection with the Osage Project. The factual basis for the charges is as follows:
Louis Dolente, III, partner in Dolente & Sons, one of the subcontractors engaged in sewer construction work, provides the testimony that resulted in defendant’s conviction on one of the numerous counts of theft. He testified that he was approached by Edwards to submit a bid on storm sewer work not originally included in the contract. Shortly thereafter, when he advised Edwards he could complete the job for $19,000.00, Edwards in*563formed him that the other bids were in the area of $28,000.00 and if Dolente put in such a bid, the two of them could split the $9,000.00 difference. N.T., 5/6/88, pp. 63-70. Simultaneously with his completion of the work, Dolente submitted his bid in the amount of $28,-464.00 to Edwards. G & V paid Dolente & Sons a total of $27,040.00 on December 3, 1985. To cover up the misdeed, on December 10, Edwards presented to Dolente a letter in lieu of an invoice, requesting $4,500.00 in payment for masonry work ostensibly performed at Dolente & Sons garage. Two days later, Dolente & Sons issued a check in the amount of $3,820.40 to Edwards. Defendant admitted receiving the check. Both Dolente and his father testified that they neither contracted with Premier for such work nor was any such work done.
Trial Court opinion 7/10/89 at page 13. Based on this transaction, appellant was convicted of theft, a conviction which he does not challenge. However, he does argue that the evidence does not support his perjury and false swearing convictions arising from the testimony he gave to the Grand Jury regarding this kick-back scheme.
The Information charging perjury and false statements alleges that the statement “work was performed at Dolente’s garage or place of business” was false. The transcript of appellant’s Grand Jury testimony produced at trial was, in pertinent part, as follows:
Question: Now, the money that was paid to you by Dolente and the Union Hall District Council, those monies were paid directly to yourself; is that correct?
Answer: Yes, Ma’am.
Question: As far as Dolente's job was concerned, do you know what the job was exactly?
Answer: No. And I don’t know what was done at the union hall. I don’t know only except that a wall was built.
N.T., 5-6-88, pages 59-60.
Question: Now, there is another area that has been revealed or at least other jobs where some union people *564worked on, one being [Dolente’s] garage. Are you familiar with that?
Answer: I don’t specifically know what was done but I know some people were over there to do some work.
s}¡ * # ^ * *
Question: Under whose direction did they go there?
Answer: You mean other than me telling somebody to do whatever needed to have been done?
Question: Who directed them to go?
Answer: I told you, either Hank or Ray or Manny. You know, Lou needed some work done and I did the same thing for Sam Staten. He needed some work done at the union where somebody was breaking into the labor hall and the men went down there and built a wall and both was [sic] done by Premier Construction Company.
Id,., at pages 55-56.
Appellant argues that there was a material and fatal variance between the allegations of perjury and false swearing contained in the Informations and the proof at trial. Although the Informations need not set forth the exact language alleged to be perjurious, it must sufficiently apprise appellant of the charges he must answer. Commonwealth v. Lafferty, 276 Pa.Super. 400, 419 A.2d 518 (1980). Appellant testified before the Grand Jury that Lou Dolente needed some work done and that it was done by Premier employees. The evidence presented at trial showed that appellant knew that no work was performed for Dolente and that the whole thing was a kick-back scheme. The jury had sufficient evidence to convict appellant of lying to the Grand Jury.
Appellant Edwards also was convicted of Theft By Unlawful Taking, 18 Pa.C.S. § 3921, for removing furniture and equipment valued at $23,383,65 from the construction site immediately before the RDA declared E & H to be in default. Appellant renews his argument that the Commonwealth did not prove that the items were the property of another. He claims that the only interest ULDC had in the *565equipment was that of a security interest and he quotes 18 Pa.C.S. § 3901:
Property in possession of the actor shall not be deemed property of another who has only a security interest therein, even if legal title is in the creditor pursuant to a conditional sales contract or other security agreement.
Appellant then concludes that since the equipment was not the property of another, as required by § 3922, the evidence was insufficient for conviction. We disagree.
The Commonwealth introduced evidence that E & H, through its corporate officer, Ernest Edwards, executed a leasehold mortgage pledging as security its interest in the leasehold Osage property and all the buildings, materials, supplies, tools, equipment and construction facilities and appliances located thereon. In addition to this standard leasehold mortgage, E & H also transferred all of its right, title and interest in, to and under the leasehold, the following mortgaged property: all building materials, tools, fixtures, appliances, machinery, furniture and equipment of any nature whatsoever owned by the mortgager now or at any time hereafter installed in, attached to or situated in, upon or about the real estate. About the only remaining interest that appellant had in the equipment involved in this case was his right to use it on the project. Therefore, when appellant removed the equipment and converted it to his own use, he unlawfully took the property which he had contractually acknowledged belonged to ULDC.
Appellant was also convicted of attempted theft by deception (18 Pa.C.S. § 3922) of a performance bond. Using knowingly false financial statements of Premier’s corporate worth, appellant applied for a $67,000.00 performance bond from two insurance companies. A performance bond was not issued.
“Property” is defined under 18 Pa.C.S. § 3901 as:
Anything of value, including real estate, tangible and intangible personal property, contract rights____
*566A performance bond does comport with this property definition because it represents an insurer’s promise to pay. “An insurer’s promise to pay is intangible personal property, the value of which, %.e., the insurer’s credit and reputation, defendant attempted to steal.” Appellee’s Brief at page 41.
Although a performance bond was not issued by an insurance company, appellant made complex arrangements to deceive the insurance company into issuing a performance bond.
Ebony, which Harris controlled, and which appellant had designated as the general contractor, was unable to secure performance bonds. On August 7, faced with the prospect of procuring a bondable general contractor or being removed himself, appellant established Premier, of which he was the sole proprietor, and set out to qualify it for bonding. Forewarned by Mr. Levy of Levy Redcross and Co., an accounting firm, that any bonding company would require liquidity in the insured, (N.T. 5/4/88, pp. 103-105) he arranged the deceptive illusion of having Premier appear financially sound. Knowing that there were insufficient funds in the E & H account, he convinced his silent partner, Beverly Harper, to draw a check in the sum of $175,000.00 payable to appellant. On August 14, he deposited it into Premier’s account. (N.T. 5/4/88, pp. 110-114). He then prepared a financial statement, and had his accountant, after confirming the deposit, certify it. After having had the financial statement certified, the next day he withdrew $150,000.00 from Premier’s account and returned it to E & H’s account. (Id., pp. 142-144). This was the financial status of Premier, when on August 16, appellant sent the financial statement, along with his application for bonding to Reliance Insurance Company, (Id., p. 66) and to CIGNA Insurance Company. Both companies refused to bond Premier; at no time were they informed of the true financial condition of Premier. (N.T. 5/3/88, pp. 105, 106, 110, 116, 117). From the $25,000.00 left on deposit with Premier, appellant made one cash withdrawal and drew ten checks to *567himself from August 15 to September 26 for a total of $11,300.00. (N.T. 5/4/88, pp. 161-166). Ms. Harper testified that she had expected that the full amount of $175,-000.00 would have been returned to E & H’s account. (N.T. 5/4/88, pp. 112-115).
An attempt to commit a specific crime exists where a person performs an act which constitutes a substantial step towards the commission of that crime. 18 Pa.C.S. § 901. The evidence sustains the conviction of attempted theft by deception of a performance bond.
Appellant was convicted in Bill No. 3375 of Deceptive Business Practices. This Bill contained seven counts, each count restating one of the seven subsections of the statute. The statute reads as follows:
§ 4107. Deceptive Business Practices.
(а) Offense defined.—A person commits a misdemean- or of the second degree if, in the course of business, he:
(1) uses or possesses for use a false weight or measure, or any other device for falsely determining or recording any quality of quantity;
(2) sells, offers or exposes for sale, or delivers less than the represented quantity of any commodity or service;
(3) takes or attempts to take more than the represented quantity of any commodity or service as a buyer he furnishes the weight to measure;
(4) sells, offers or exposes for sale adulterated or mislabeled commodities;
(5) makes a false or misleading statement in any advertisement addressed to the public or to a substantial segment thereof for the purpose of promoting the purchase or sale of property or services;
(б) makes a false or misleading written statement for the purpose of obtaining property or credit; or
(7) makes a false or misleading written statement for the purpose of promoting the sale of securities, or *568omits information required by law to be disclosed in written documents relating to securities.
There is no indication what action of appellant violated which subsection of the statute. The. Commonwealth and the trial court assert that it was § 4107(a)(6), that was violated: a person commits a misdemeanor of the second degree if, in the course of business, he makes a false or misleading statement for the purpose of obtaining property or credit. (Emphasis added). The particular act of appellant which constituted this violation was the attempt at procuring a performance bond.5
Appellant argues that this Bill was defective in that it did not provide him with the barest minimum notice necessary to defend against the seven counts. However, he contends that, even if § 4107(a)(6) is to be the controlling subsection, a performance bond does not qualify as either “property” or “credit”. We disagree. A performance bond is a type of insurance which appellant was required to purchase in order for E & H to serve as the general contractor on the project. A performance bond was obviously a valued property which appellant attempted to buy. § 4107(a)(6) states that a person commits a misdemeanor if he attempts to obtain property or credit by making false or misleading statements. Whether or not that person acquires the desired property or credit is of no consequence; the violation of § 4107(a)(6) is already committed. This statute is similar to 40 Pa.S. § 474, mentioned above, which makes it a crime to attempt to obtain insurance by fraudulent application.
In Bills Nos. 3370 and 3395, appellant was convicted of Theft by Unlawful Taking (18 Pa.C.S. § 3921) and Theft by Deception (18 Pa.C.S. § 3922) in connection with his receiving $6,341.93 for building a wall for a union hall. Appellant used Premier employees, who were being paid by E & H to work on the project, to do outside work for him on a private contract. He made no reimbursement to either *569Premier or E & H for the use of the laborers and simply-pocketed the proceeds from the outside work. Thus, E & H was using ULDC’s money to pay for labor on a non-project related job.
Appellant argues that once ULDC disbursed this money to E & H, and E & H paid it out to Premier, Premier was free to use it to pay its employees and direct them to work in any manner it deemed fit. Appellant again reiterates his position that the loan monies could not be the subject of a theft. We have already held that when appellant converted the funds to his own use—regardless of the manner of conversion—he was guilty of theft. Here, he misappropriated Premier’s labor and deceived E & H into paying salaries for non-Project work, all the while misusing ULDC’s money.
Appellant next argues that trial court erred by prohibiting him from presenting evidence that he took over $23,000.00 worth of equipment from the job site under a claim of right. This issue was not raised by appellant in the lower court and cannot be raised for the first time on appeal. See Pa.R.A.P. 302.
INEFFECTIVENESS OF COUNSEL
Represented by new counsel, appellant alleges several instances of trial counsel’s ineffectiveness. In considering the ineffectiveness claim, we do so under the following standard:
[First,] whether the underlying claim is of arguable merit; that is, whether the disputed action or omission by counsel was of questionable legal soundness. [Second,] whether counsel had any reasonable basis for the questionable action or omission which was designed to effectuate his client’s interest. [Third,] whether counsel’s improper course of conduct worked to his prejudice, ie., had an adverse effect upon the outcome of the proceedings.
Commonwealth v. Davis, 518 Pa. 77, 83, 541 A.2d 315, 318 (1988). (citations omitted). Moreover, claims of ineffective*570ness will not be considered in a vacuum; appellant must allege sufficient facts upon which a reviewing court can assess counsel’s ineffectiveness. Commonwealth v. Durst, 522 Pa. 2, 559 A.2d 504 (1989).
As to trial counsel's failure to submit any points for charge, appellant basically contends that trial counsel should have requested the judge to instruct the jury that the evidence was insufficient, as a matter of law, to convict appellant. Rather than “points for charge”, this argument speaks to a motion for a directed verdict of acquittal. As we have separately found the evidence for conviction to be sufficient, we cannot deem counsel ineffective for failing to make a baseless motion.
Appellant argues the trial counsel was ineffective for failing to present evidence of standard custom and practice in the construction industry. He contends that this would have shown that the line-item estimated expenses, listed in his application, did not constitute an agreement or legal obligation which required him to spend the money in a particular way. Appellant, with many years of experience in the construction industry, testified that what he did with the advanced money was common practice in the industry. He contends that trial counsel should have produced witnesses willing to testify that the practice of pocketing advance money rather than spending it on the job was common in the construction industry. However, as discussed previously, the application between appellant and ULDC by its very terms defined and restricted the uses for the Project money. Therefore, counsel’s failure to call witnesses regarding the supposed common practice in the industry cannot constitute ineffectiveness in a case where the alleged common practice did not apply.
Appellant argues that trial counsel was ineffective for failing to . request the charge that character evidence alone may be sufficient to raise a reasonable doubt, and thus justify an acquittal of the charges. Although trial counsel may not have requested it, the trial judge so in*571structed the jury (N.T., 5/10/89 at pages 22-23) and thus this claim is without merit.
Appellant argues that trial counsel was ineffective for not objecting to the prosecutor’s references to the advanced funds as “taxpayer’s money.” He contends that this label is false in that ULDC was a private corporation and, therefore, the money did not belong to the taxpayers. He further argues that such a reference to the money encouraged the jury to decide the case on their own economic self-interest rather than on the merits. It is clear that the evidence showed that the federal government and the City of Philadelphia were the sources of the construction funds. Although referring to the funds as “taxpayers’ money” may have been technically incorrect, public funds were clearly involved. However, we conclude that the outcome would have been no different if the funds had been called “ULDC’s money.” We find that appellant was not prejudiced by this reference.
Appellant also argues that trial counsel was ineffective for failing to withdraw from the case. Appellant contends that trial counsel was involved in a series of transactions underlying the criminal charges, including negotiating the relevant contracts, advising him that he had a right to the equipment at the construction site, and actually carrying some of the equipment away. However, trial counsel was not the only attorney who represented appellant during the contract negotiations and who advised him on the decision to remove the equipment from the construction site. Rotan Lee, Esq. was co-counsel to appellant regarding the Osage Project and he did testify on behalf of appellant. To what extent trial counsel could have presented favorable testimony in addition to that of Attorney Lee is not specified by appellant and we cannot base a finding of ineffectiveness on bare allegations alone.
Appellant also contends that trial counsel’s fear for his own criminal liability colored the advocacy which appellant received during trial. Appellant, however, offers no basis *572for this reckless allegation. We conclude that trial counsel had no reason to withdraw from this case.
Appellant’s final argument that the sentences imposed should be vacated due to the unreasonable applications of the Sentencing Guidelines and the unreasonable impositions of sentences outside the Guidelines. This issue need not be discussed because it is waived. Appellant failed to provide a separate, concise statement of reasons for allowance of appeal, raising a substantial question as to the appropriateness of the sentence imposed under the Sentencing Code as a whole. Commonwealth v. Tuladziecki, 513 Pa. 508, 522 A.2d 17 (1987).
Judgment of sentence affirmed.
OLSZEWSKI, J., files a concurring opinion.
. Ernest Edwards was tried along with William Harris, who was also convicted on several of the charges lodged against him. Harris’ conviction was affirmed by this court at No. 3410 Philadelphia 1988 on April 10, 1990.
. We note that it has been questioned whether appellate courts in this Commonwealth are still able to review the verdict to determine if it is against the weight of the evidence. See Commonwealth v. Nelson, 514 Pa. 262, 271-72 n. 3, 523 A.2d 728, 733 n. 3 (1987); see also, Commonwealth v. Wallace, 522 Pa. 297, 315, 561 A.2d 719, 728 (1989). In light of the fact that this verdict is supportable under the traditional standard, which states that a verdict cannot stand if it is so contrary to the weight of the evidence as to shock one’s sense of justice, Commonwealth v. Gamber, 352 Pa.Super. 36, 45, 506 A.2d 1324, 1329 (1986), we need not rule specifically on whether this claim is cognizable.. However, we note our recent decision in Commonwealth v. Jenkins, 578 A.2d 960, (1990), that though the practice is limited, a properly raised weight of the evidence issue shall not be denied this court’s review.
. Payment of mobilization costs in advance is not the usual procedure. Normally on a construction project, mobilization occurs and the cost is reimbursed to the contractor.
. 18 Pa.C.S. § 3901 Definitions. "Property of another” includes property in which any person other than the actor has an interest which the actor is not privileged to infringe____
. The Commonwealth gives no explanation why appellant was charged with the other six counts in the Bill.

=== CASE 9737109 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:16:21.536197+00 ===

OLSZEWSKI, Judge,
concurring:
I concur with Judge Cavanaugh’s learned and comprehensive disposition of the issues raised by appellant. I write separately in order to further clarify the proper disposition of the count of misapplication of entrusted funds and the count of attempted theft of the performance bond.
It is argued that 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4113 only applies to situations where the misapplication of funds violates a fiduciary or trust relationship. This construction of the statute would make the clause, “or property of the government or of a financial institution,” superfluous. If the key to the statute is the fiduciary status of the offender, then property of the government or of a financial institution which is entrusted to a fiduciary is clearly a subset of, and contained within, “property that has been entrusted to him as a fiduciary.” 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4113(a). It is a fundamental principle of statutory construction that all elements of a statute are to be given meaning; to adopt the construction that the statute only applies to fiduciaries makes the rest of the subsection unnecessary. To prevent this, the statute must apply to three separate types of property: government property, financial institution property, as well as *573property entrusted to a fiduciary. An individual who misapplies any of these three types of property violates the statute.
It is also argued that affirming the conviction for violation of § 4113 herein is akin to convicting a person for the theft of a public assistance check. No one would dispute that once an individual properly receives a public assistance check, he is free to exercise his own judgment as to how to best spend the money to achieve its beneficial purpose. Such was not the case here; the majority correctly notes that Edwards was not free to spend the advance monies for items not listed in E & H’s application to ULDC. I submit the restrictions placed upon the advance would be more akin to a person using food stamps to purchase inappropriate items. Edwards could purchase items which fit the description in his application but could not treat the funds as his own. Appellant herein received these monies from the government as part of an agreement to apply them to the listed mobilization costs. When he chose to divert them to his own purposes, he violated his agreement with the ULDC and so misapplied the funds in violation of 18 Pa.C. S.A. § 4113.
I also wish to clarify Edwards’ conviction for attempted theft of the performance bond. The bond is the insurer’s promise to pay. “It is intangible personal property, the value of which, i.e., the insurer’s credit and reputation, the defendant attempted to steal.” (Appellee’s Brief at 41). It is argued that because Edwards was not successful in securing the bond he did not make a substantial step toward theft of the value of the bond by deception. I cannot agree.
The majority recognizes that the value of the promise is the insurer’s credit and reputation. It is that value, not the paper bond, which Edwards attempted to secure by deception. While it is technically correct to state that no performance bond ever existed, its value, the credit and reputation, did exist. The mere fact that this property is intangible does not prevent an attempted theft thereof.
*574Under the reasoning advanced by appellant, an attempt at theft by deception, where payment by the victim was to be made by check, would not violate the statute as long as the victim did not write out the check. A check is a promise to pay, backed by the drawer’s credit. The fact that the check is not drawn does not negate the attempt to steal the credit which backs the check. So too, the fact that the bond was not issued does not negate Edwards’ attempt to steal the credit and reputation of the insurer which would have backed the bond.

=== CASE 9737110 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:16:23.441425+00 ===

DOOLING, Acting P. J.
February 8, 1950, the appellant was adjudged a psychopathic delinquent pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code, section 7058, and committed to Mendocino State Hospital. In 1955, he was transferred to Atascadero State Hospital and on July 30, 1957, to the medical facility at Vacaville. On December 20, 1957, he was transferred to San Quentin prison. While incarcerated there, appellant was convicted of violation of section 4502 of the Penal Code, which provides:
*384“Every prisoner committed to a State prison who, while at such State prison or any other State prison or while being conveyed to or from any State prison or while at any prison road camp, prison forestry camp, or other prison camps or prison farms or while being conveyed to or from any such place or while under the custody of prison officials, officers or employees, possesses or carries upon Ms person or has under his custody or control any instrument or weapon of the kind commonly known as a black-jack, slung shot, billy, sandclub, sandbag, or metal knuckles or any explosive substance or any dirk or dagger or sharp instrument, or any pistol, revolver or other firearm, is guilty of a felony and shall be punishable by imprisonment in a State prison for a term not less than five (5) years. (Added Stats. 1943, ch. 173, p. 1068, §2.)”
Appellant does not deny that on January 12, 1958, he had in his possession a homemade sharp knife and a file. His sole ground of appeal is that he was not a prisoner within the meaning of section 4502 but, rather, a patient.
It cannot be successfully argued that appellant was not lawfully committed to San Quentin Prison and there held in custody by due process of law. He was adjudged a psychopathic delinquent pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code, section 7058, which provides for a 90-day period of commitment for observation. The record reflects that the medical superintendent of Mendocino State Hospital, the place of observation, reported appellant to be a psychopathic delinquent. Upon receiving the report the court proceeded with a further hearing as provided in section 7058. Criminal proceedings were suspended and appellant was committed for an indeterminate period as a psychopathic delinquent. Section 7051 of the Welfare and Institutions Code provides that the director of institutions, with the approval of the Department of Finance, may provide one or more institutional units to be used for the custodial care and treatment of defective or psychopathic delinquents. The institutions to which defendant was transferred from time to time were legally designated institutions for the care and treatment of psychopathic delinquents.
We do not agree with appellant’s contention that, having been legally committed as a patient, he was not a prisoner within the meaning of Penal Code, section 4502. A patient may also be a prisoner. The word “prisoner” is defined in Webster’s New International Dictionary as “a person under *385arrest, in custody or in prison; one involuntarily restrained; a captive; as a prisoner of justice, of war or at the bar.” Oxford Universal Dictionary defines “prisoner” as: “One who is kept in prison or in custody; specifically, one who is in custody as the result of a legal process.” Ballantine Law Dictionary defines a prisoner as: “A person deprived of his liberty by virtue of a judicial or other lawful process.” Thus, the significance of the word “prisoner” is not the manner of commitment, but rather the fact of a judicial commitment. If a defendant is in custody at a state prison as the result of due legal process, he is a prisoner within the meaning of Penal Code, section 4502.
People v. Scherbing, 93 Cal.App.2d 736 [209 P.2d 796], is analogous to the case before us. In that case, the appellant had been convicted of a violation of Penal Code, section 4502, but contended that since he had been unlawfully committed to San Quentin, he was not subject to the provisions of Penal Code, section 4502. The court said at pages 742-743:
“. . . The statute was passed to protect the guards and other inmates of the prison. It is a reasonable regulation. The fact that the particular inmate may be unlawfully confined certainly does not confer upon him the right to possess weapons denied to other inmates. If the purpose of the statute is to be achieved, and obviously the purpose is a sound one, it makes no difference why the prisoner has been confined, or that he may be legally entitled to release. While an inmate, necessity requires that the prisoner submit to prison regulations, and certainly section 4502 is a reasonable regulation.” We believe the rationale of Scherbing is applicable to this case, and that any person lawfully committed to San Quentin Prison, who is in custody and subject to restraint by reason of legal process, may be prosecuted for violation of Penal Code, section 4502. This, whether he be a patient, a psychopathic delinquent, or a prisoner convicted of a felony.†
We have concluded that the fact that appellant was under commitment as a psychopathic delinquent did not require the trial judge on his own initiative to investigate his sanity under Penal Code, section 1367, a conclusion with which counsel for appellant agrees. Section 7050, Welfare and Institutions Code, expressly excludes from the definition of a psychopathic delinquent one who is “a proper subject *386for commitment ... to a State hospital as an insane person,” and in People v. Jensen, 43 Cal.2d 572, 578-579 [275 P.2d 25], the court expressly held that no inference of insanity arises from the mere fact of commitment as a psychopathic delinquent under that section.
Judgment affirmed.
Draper, J., concurred.
The opinion up to this point was written by Mr. Justice Stone, pro tem.*
Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

=== CASE 2208927 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:34.668834+00 ===

804 N.E.2d 1067 (2003)
342 Ill. App. 3d 1019
281 Ill. Dec. 772
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Kevin KELLERMAN, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 3-01-0713.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Third District.
September 4, 2003.
*1069 Kenneth D. Brown, Office of the State Appellate Defender, Ottawa, for Kevin Kellerman.
John X. Breslin, Deputy Director, State's Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor, Ottawa, Jeff Tomczak, Will County State's Attorney, Joliet, Gary F. Gnidovec, State's Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor, Ottawa, for the People.
Justice HOLDRIDGE delivered the Opinion of the court:
The defendant, Kevin Kellerman, appealed his conviction for arson (720 ILCS 5/20-1(a) (West 1998)). On March 5, 2003, we reversed the judgment of conviction and remanded for further proceedings (People v. Kellerman, 337 Ill.App.3d 781, 272 Ill. Dec. 60, 786 N.E.2d 599 (2003)). On June 4, 2003, in People v. Kellerman, 204 Ill. 2d 672, 273 Ill. Dec. 403, 789 N.E.2d 303 (2003), the Illinois Supreme Court ordered this court to vacate our March 5, 2003, order and address the State's argument concerning the defendant's failure to supply supporting documentation for his petition under People v. Collins, 202 Ill. 2d 59, 270 Ill. Dec. 1, 782 N.E.2d 195 (2002). This order addresses the Collins issue and otherwise retains our analysis of the issues in the March 5 order.
The defendant pled guilty to arson and was sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment. The defendant did not file a postplea motion *1070 or bring a direct appeal. He filed a pro se postconviction petition (725 ILCS 5/122-1 et seq. (West 2000)) which was dismissed at the first stage of the proceedings. On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in summarily dismissing his petition because: (1) his trial counsel was ineffective by advising him that a police offer of leniency, which led to his confession, had no legal effect; and (2) his trial counsel's ineffectiveness caused his guilty plea to be involuntary. The State contends that (1) we lack jurisdiction because the defendant's notice of appeal was untimely filed; (2) the defendant's arguments are waived because he failed to raise them in a postplea motion or a direct appeal; and (3) the defendant's petition was properly dismissed because it lacked the required supporting documentation and did not state why the documentation was missing (725 ILCS 5/122-2 (West 2000)). We (1) rule that we have jurisdiction; (2) hold that the defendant's arguments are not waived; and (3) reverse and remand for further postconviction proceedings.
BACKGROUND
The defendant was charged with committing arson. At his plea hearing, he proposed to plead guilty pursuant to a fully negotiated agreement with the State. The prosecutor stated that because the defendant previously had been convicted of two burglaries, he was eligible to be sentenced as a Class X offender. The defendant agreed to plead guilty in exchange for the State's recommendation of a 12-year prison sentence.
The State presented its factual basis for the plea. The prosecutor stated that the Bolingbrook Fire Department extinguished a fire at a residence on June 30, 1999. Following the police investigation of the fire, the defendant was arrested for arson and was advised of his Miranda rights. In a tape-recorded statement, he admitted to the police that he had set the house on fire.
The trial judge accepted the defendant's plea under the terms of the agreement. During the sentencing hearing, the defendant's trial counsel stated that she had listened "to a tape where he made statements" to the police. The trial court sentenced the defendant to 12 years' imprisonment. The defendant did not pursue an appeal by filing the requisite postplea motion followed by an appeal from the disposition of such a motion. See 188 Ill.2d R. 604(d).
The defendant filed a pro se postconviction petition. The petition was accompanied by the defendant's own affidavit, but was not accompanied by supporting affidavits, records or other evidence. The defendant did not explain why he failed to supply any supporting documents or other evidence.
In his petition, the defendant alleged that his guilty plea was involuntary because of trial counsel's ineffective assistance. In his "Memorandum In Support" of his petition, he claimed that during his interrogation, the police told him "the State's Attorney was on a phone ready to offer [him] a negotiated plea of three or four years in exchange for a confession." He submitted that the tape of his confession would support this contention.
The defendant claimed that he told his trial counsel about the police offer being recorded on the tape. According to the defendant, his attorney told him that "no police was able to make any negotiations," and that the defendant should accept the State's offer of 12 years' imprisonment because "it was the best offer he would receive." He contended that because of his attorney's ineffectiveness, his guilty *1071 plea was involuntary and that he should be allowed to withdraw his plea.
On August 2, 2001, the trial court dismissed the defendant's petition as "patently without merit and fail[ing] to raise a sufficient constitutional question upon which relief can be granted." On August 23, 2001, the defendant placed a pro se document in the prison mail system titled "Notice of Filing Notice of Appeal." In this document, he stated, "The Defendant wishes to file an Appeal of the Circuit courts [sic] Order of Dismissal August 2, 2001 [sic] in which the Post-Conviction relief and cause was dismissed." The defendant's court-appointed appellate defender also filed a "Notice to Appeal" on behalf of the defendant on September 5, 2001.
ANALYSIS
I. Jurisdiction
The State contends that we lack jurisdiction because the defendant's September 5, 2001, notice of appeal was untimely. The State also argues that the pro se document the defendant placed in the prison mail system on August 23, 2001, was insufficient as a notice of appeal. We disagree with the latter of the State's two assertions.
The timely filing of a notice of appeal is necessary for an appellate court to have jurisdiction over a criminal matter. People v. Blanchette, 182 Ill.App.3d 396, 131 Ill. Dec. 49, 538 N.E.2d 237 (1989). To be timely, the notice of appeal must be filed with the trial court within 30 days of a final order. 188 Ill.2d R. 606(b). A notice of appeal mailed within the 30-day period is timely filed. Blanchette, 182 Ill. App. 3d 396, 131 Ill. Dec. 49, 538 N.E.2d 237.
Supreme Court Rule 606(d) (188 Ill.2d R. 606(d)) lists the elements to be incorporated in a notice of appeal and states that the document should substantially be in that form. Where a deficiency is one of form rather than substance, an appellate court has jurisdiction if (1) the notice fairly and accurately advises the appellee of the nature of the appeal; and (2) the appellee is not prejudiced by the deficiency in form. People v. Clark, 268 Ill.App.3d 810, 206 Ill. Dec. 585, 645 N.E.2d 590 (1995).
The State contends that the document the defendant filed on August 23, 2001, cannot be construed as a notice of appeal. For this proposition, the State cites People v. Sanders, 40 Ill. 2d 458, 240 N.E.2d 627 (1968), and People v. Feigleson, 24 Ill. App. 3d 794, 321 N.E.2d 473 (1975). In Sanders, our supreme court ruled that the defendant's request for a transcript of the trial proceedings was insufficient to function as a notice of appeal. In Feigleson, the appellate court held that the text of the defendant's document, titled "Notice Of Appeal For New Trial," was in the form of a posttrial motion seeking relief from the trial court rather than from the appellate court. Feigleson, 24 Ill.App.3d at 795, 321 N.E.2d at 474.
In this case, the document the defendant placed in the prison mail system on August 23, 2001, cannot be construed as either a request for a transcript or a motion seeking relief from the trial court. Therefore, we find the holdings of Sanders and Feigleson to be inapposite to the present case.
Although the defendant's August 23, 2001, document did not contain all of the elements listed in Supreme Court Rule 606(d), it substantially complied with the rule. The document fairly and accurately advised the State of the nature of the appeal. Furthermore, the State was not prejudiced by the document's deficiency in form. We liberally construe the August *1072 23, 2001, document as the defendant's notice of appeal.
Because the defendant's August 23, 2001, notice of appeal was placed in the mail within 30 days of the order dismissing the defendant's postconviction petition, it was timely filed. Thus, we have jurisdiction to consider the defendant's appeal.
II. Waiver
The State submits that the defendant has waived his arguments by failing to raise them in a postplea motion or a direct appeal. Specifically, the State contends that the defendant previously could have raised his trial counsel's ineffectiveness because the record indicates that his trial counsel heard the tape of his confession. The State infers that if the tape contained the police offer of leniency as alleged by the defendant, his trial counsel would have challenged the voluntariness of his confession in the trial court.
The principles of res judicata and waiver limit the scope of appeals from postconviction proceedings. Issues a defendant could have raised on direct appeal, but did not, are considered waived. People v. Hampton, 165 Ill. 2d 472, 209 Ill. Dec. 189, 651 N.E.2d 117 (1995). The waiver rule does not apply if the factual basis for a claim of ineffectiveness is not contained within the original trial court record and, therefore, could not have been considered on direct appeal. People v. Burns, 332 Ill.App.3d 189, 265 Ill. Dec. 639, 773 N.E.2d 1 (2001). To perfect an appeal from a judgment based on a guilty plea, the defendant first must file an appropriate postplea motion and then appeal from the judgment disposing of that motion. 188 Ill.2d R. 604(d).
In the present case, the defendant contends that his trial counsel was ineffective because she erroneously advised him that the police offer of leniency had no legal effect. The State is correct that the defendant did not raise this issue in a postplea motion or a direct appeal. The threshold question, however, is whether the defendant could have raised this issue in such proceedings.
During the sentencing hearing, the defendant's trial counsel stated she had listened to the tape in which the defendant made statements to the police. However, the record does not indicate whether defense counsel heard a police offer of leniency while listening to the tape and, if so, whether defense counsel advised the defendant that such an offer of leniency had no legal effect. Because the facts regarding the defendant's postconviction allegation of ineffective assistance were not in the trial record, the defendant could not have raised his postconviction arguments in a posttrial motion or a direct appeal. Therefore, the defendant's issues are not waived.
III. Lack of Supporting Documentation
As noted above, the defendant contends that his trial counsel was ineffective by erroneously advising him that the police offer of leniency had no legal effect. The State submits that the defendant's petition was properly dismissed because he failed to attach documentation to support this allegation or explain why the documentation was missing.
A postconviction petition must be accompanied by the defendant's own affidavit. 725 ILCS 5/122-1(b) (West 2000). Additionally, the petition must be accompanied by affidavits, records, or other evidence supporting the defendant's allegations, or state why such documents or evidence is not attached. 725 ILCS 5/122-2 (West 2000); Collins, 202 Ill. 2d 59, 270 Ill. Dec. 1, 782 N.E.2d 195.
In Collins, the defendant pled guilty under a negotiated agreement. His plea *1073 was accepted by the court, and he was sentenced. The defendant did not file a motion to withdraw his guilty plea. He filed a postconviction petition in which he alleged that he told his trial attorney that he wished to appeal. The defendant submitted that his attorney said that he would file an appeal, but never did. The defendant also asked his attorney to file a motion to reconsider the sentence, about which the attorney misled the defendant. The attorney did not file a motion to reconsider. Our supreme court ruled that the defendant's postconviction petition was properly dismissed at the first stage for failure to comply with section 122-2.
The Collins court stated that compliance with the documentation requirements of section 122-2 is mandatory with one narrow exception, citing People v. Williams, 47 Ill. 2d 1, 264 N.E.2d 697 (1970). In Williams, the defendant alleged in his postconviction petition that he was induced to plead guilty by an oral misrepresentation from his attorney concerning the sentence he would receive. His petition was not accompanied by supporting documents and did not say why such documents were lacking. The defendant's petition was dismissed without a hearing.
The Williams court said that even though the defendant did not explain why his postconviction petition was unaccompanied by the proper documentation, the petition contained facts from which it could be inferred that "the only affidavit that petitioner could possibly have furnished, other than his own sworn statement, would have been that of his attorney." The court stated that "[t]he difficulty or impossibility of obtaining such an affidavit is self-apparent." Williams, 47 Ill.2d at 4, 264 N.E.2d at 698. The Williams court reversed the dismissal of the defendant's petition.
In the present case, the defendant's postconviction petition was accompanied by his own affidavit, under section 122-1(b), but was not accompanied by supporting documentation or an explanation concerning its absence, as required by section 122-2. Unlike the defendant in Collins, the defendant in this case did not allege that his trial counsel misled him concerning perfecting his appeal. Therefore, we find this case to be factually distinguishable from Collins.
Furthermore, we find the facts of this case to fit squarely within the Williams exception cited by the Collins court. Like the defendant in Williams, the defendant alleged in his petition that his trial attorney's oral misrepresentations induced him to plead guilty. Obviously, the defendant could not be expected to obtain an affidavit from his trial counsel stating that the attorney was ineffective. Therefore, we hold that under the narrow exception announced in Williams, the defendant's failure to comply with the documentation requirement of section 122-2 did not justify dismissal of his petition.
IV. Postconviction Allegations
A. Ineffective Assistance
The defendant argues that the trial court erred in dismissing his postconviction petition because it stated the gist of a constitutional claim for ineffective assistance of trial counsel.
A postconviction petition may be dismissed at the first stage as frivolous or patently without merit only if the allegations in the petition, taken as true and liberally construed, fail to present the gist of a constitutional claim. The "gist" standard presents a low threshold in which the petitioner need only present a limited amount of detail. The standard of review for the first-stage dismissal of a defendant's postconviction petition is de novo. People v. English, 334 Ill.App.3d 156, 268 Ill. Dec. 232, 778 N.E.2d 218 (2002).
*1074 To determine whether a defendant has been denied his sixth amendment right to effective assistance of counsel, the defendant must show (1) that his counsel's representation fell below an objective standard of reasonableness; and (2) that it is reasonably probable that his case was prejudiced by his counsel's unprofessional errors. Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 104 S. Ct. 2052, 80 L. Ed. 2d 674 (1984); People v. Albanese, 104 Ill. 2d 504, 85 Ill. Dec. 441, 473 N.E.2d 1246 (1984).
If a defendant's confession was not voluntarily given, it is inadmissible at trial. A confession was voluntary if it was made freely and without compulsion or inducement of any sort. To constitute an offer of leniency that renders a confession inadmissible, a police statement must be coupled with a suggestion of a specific benefit that will follow if the defendant confesses. People v. Johnson, 285 Ill. App. 3d 802, 221 Ill. Dec. 51, 674 N.E.2d 844 (1996).
In People v. Heide, 302 Ill. 624, 135 N.E. 77 (1922), the defendant was told by police officers that if he confessed, he would be taken to the State's Attorney, who would do the best for him. The Illinois Supreme Court ruled that the defendant's confession was not admissible.
In People v. Ruegger, 32 Ill.App.3d 765, 771, 336 N.E.2d 50, 54-55 (1975), police officers told the defendant that they would "go to bat" for him on such matters as a recognizance bond and probation if he confessed. The Ruegger court affirmed the suppression of the defendant's confession.
In the present case, the defendant's petition alleges that the police told him that the State's Attorney was on the phone and was prepared to offer him three or four years' imprisonment if he confessed. Taken as true and liberally construed, such a police statement was an inducement for the defendant to confess in exchange for the specific benefit of a State's Attorney's negotiated plea agreement. If the defendant's allegation is true, his confession was involuntarily given and was inadmissible at trial.
If we consider the defendant's postconviction allegations as true, the defendant stated the gist of a constitutional claim for ineffective assistance of trial counsel. If the defendant's confession was involuntarily given, his trial counsel's performance fell below an objective standard of performance and his trial was prejudiced by his counsel's failure to challenge the admissibility of his confession. Therefore, as a matter of law, the trial court erred by dismissing the defendant's postconviction petition at the first stage of the proceedings.
We emphasize that we express no opinion regarding the truth of the defendant's allegations. We only accept his allegations as true and construe them liberally under the "gist" standard for first-stage dismissals.
B. Involuntary Guilty Plea
Because we are reversing and remanding on the basis of the defendant's ineffective assistance claim, we need not address his involuntary guilty plea argument.
CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, we reverse the judgment of the Will County circuit court dismissing the defendant's postconviction petition and remand the matter for further proceedings.
Reversed and remanded.
McDADE, P.J., and LYTTON, J., concur.

=== CASE 9737111 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:16:23.44737+00 ===

STONE, J. pro tem.*
I concur in the majority’s holding that a person legally confined in a state prison is a prisoner within the meaning of Penal Code, section 4502.
I cannot agree with the holding of the majority that the trial court was under no duty to inquire into the mental condition of the defendant pursuant to Penal Code, section 1367. To so hold gives rise to a judicial anomaly, since the record reflects that at the time of the commission of the present offense, the defendant had not been discharged as a psychopathic delinquent nor returned to the committing court. As a matter of law, it must be presumed that defendant’s disability existed during the 11 years he was incarcerated, during which time, he committed the crime now in question. Since he was admittedly a psychopathic delinquent against whom criminal proceedings were then suspended, it is manifestly inconsistent to hold that he was properly convicted of a crime perpetrated during such commitment without the court first satisfying itself of his mental status. The majority cite People v. Jensen, 43 Cal.2d 572 [275 P.2d 25] as authority for their position. A reading of the opinion discloses the following at page 575:
“. . . By order of the court, Jensen was examined by three psychiatrists, each of whom concluded that Jensen was sane at that time and also when the offenses were committed. ...”
Although the court in the Jensen case appointed the psychiatrists because the defendant pleaded not guilty by reason of insanity, the court, faced with the record in this ease, should have appointed psychiatrists on its own motion to determine the mental condition of the defendant at the time the offense was committed and at the time of examination before proceeding to convict and sentence him for the commission of a felony.
Appellant’s petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied March 23, 1960.
Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

=== CASE 9737112 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:16:24.049579+00 ===

KELLY, Judge:
Appellant raises ten separate challenges to judgment of sentence imposed upon convictions arising from his knife point sexual assault of a 12 year old girl. Significant issues are raised regarding privacy claims pertaining to medical records subpoenaed in criminal trials, admissibility of gonorrhea results under the business records exception to the hearsay rule, and the proper application of the Rape Shield statute. We find no merit in any of the claims raised, and affirm judgment of sentence. We also deny allowance of appeal of discretionary aspects of sentence.
Facts and Procedural History
Appellant was arrested, tried, and convicted of rape, involuntary deviate sexual intercourse, and various related offenses arising from his knife point sexual assault of the then 12 year old female victim on July 16, 1987. As the result of the assault, the child victim contracted gonorrhea.
Post-verdict motions were denied, and appellant was sentenced to a term of eight to twenty years imprisonment. A motion to modify sentence was denied. This timely appeal followed.
On appeal appellant raises ten allegations of error. We find no merit in the contentions and will discuss and dispose of each seriatim.
I. Trial Court Questioning
First, appellant argues that the evidence was insufficient to sustain the rape conviction as the Commonwealth failed to elicit evidence that the 12 year old victim was not appellant’s wife. The contention is severally flawed.
*282There was more than sufficient circumstantial evidence to sustain an inference beyond a reasonable doubt that the victim was not appellant’s wife. Succinctly, the victim has testified that she was only 12 years old at the time of the attack, she did not know appellant prior to the attack, she never saw appellant prior to the attack, and she was only able to identify appellant as her attacker as the result of a photographic array supplied by the police. (N.T. 3/8/88 at 26-27, 32, 42-43). There could be no doubt that she was not appellant’s wife. See Commonwealth v. Simpson, 316 Pa.Super. 115, 122, 462 A.2d 821, 824 (1983); Commonwealth v. Schilling, 288 Pa.Super. 359, 368, 431 A.2d 1088, 1092 (1981).
Moreover, any defect in proof of this point was plainly cured when the trial court asked the victim directly whether she was appellant's wife and she responded that she was not. (N.T. 3/8/88 at 53). The trial court’s abundant caution in that respect was commendable. See Commonwealth v. Tharp, 575 A.2d 557, 558-59 (Pa.1990); Commonwealth v. Roldan, 524 Pa. 366, 368, 572 A.2d 1214, 1215 (1990); Commonwealth v. Rasheed, 392 Pa.Super. 280, 290, 572 A.2d 1232, 1239-40 & n. 4 (1990) (Kelly, J., concurring and dissenting); Commonwealth v. King, 378 Pa.Super. 553, 557-58, 549 A.2d 195, 197 (1988); Commonwealth v. Johnson, 355 Pa.Super. 123,139-44, 512 A.2d 1242, 1251-52 (1986). The first contention is without merit.
II. Privacy of Prison Medical Records
Next, appellant contends that his constitutional and statutory rights to privacy were violated when appellant’s prison medical records were seized pursuant to a search warrant issued by a neutral and detached magistrate upon probable cause to believe that evidence of the crime of rape would be discovered, in that the records would confirm that appellant had gonorrhea, as had the victim’s assailant. We find no merit in the contention.
Appellant claims that his right to privacy under the Disease Prevention and Control Law of 1955 (35 P.S. *283§ 521.15), the Patient’s Bill of Rights (28 Pa.Code § 115.27), the Clinical Laboratories Act (28 Pa.Code § 5.53), and the Constitution was violated. None of the statutory restrictions apply by their terms to prison medical records. More importantly, this Court has previously held that even statutorily privileged confidential medical records must be disclosed to the Commonwealth in sexual abuse cases when the presence or absence of venereal disease is relevant to an issue at trial. Commonwealth v. Moore, 378 Pa.Super. 379, 548 A.2d 1250 (1988). Moreover, we find no basis whatsoever for appellant’s amorphous constitutional privacy claim.
Here, the Commonwealth obtained a search warrant for the evidence, rather than following the petition procedure described in Moore. While the petition procedure may be preferable, it is not mandated as yet by statute or by procedural rule. Though the subpoena process may lack safeguards provided by the petition procedure, we nonetheless find it adequate authority upon which the prison may rely in disclosing appellant’s medical records.
Finally, even if the procedures followed were inadequate, exclusion would not be an appropriate remedy. There was no statutory exclusionary rule enacted in any of the statutes cited, and there has been no pattern of willful violations to warrant application of a judicially created exclusionary rule.
Hence, we find no merit in the second contention.
III. Business Records Exception/Medical Tests
Appellant contends that it was error to admit evidence of his positive test result for gonorrhea under the business records exception to the hearsay rule. We cannot agree.
This Court has previously held generally that medical opinions and diagnoses are not admissible as business records, but instead required live testimony by a qualified medical expert. See e.g., Commonwealth v. Hemingway, 369 Pa.Super. 112, 534 A.2d 1104 (1987). However, that general rule does not extend to records of the results of *284standard tests for the presence of spermatozoa in the victim’s vagina or for alcohol in a defendant’s blood. See Commonwealth v. Karch, 349 Pa.Super. 227, 502 A.2d 1359 (1986); Commonwealth v. Seville, 266 Pa.Super. 587, 405 A.2d 1262 (1979). We find standard gonorrhea tests to be sufficiently similar to standard spermatozoa and alcohol tests to fall within the latter precedent, and outside the general rule.
Appellant argues further that even if business records of such standard tests were admissible generally, they should not be here, because the test was performed by an outside testing lab rather than by a prison employee on-site. Appellant seeks to analogize the testing lab to a mere bystander whose information could not properly become part of an admissible business record. Cf Hass v. Kasnot, 371 Pa. 580, 92 A.2d 171 (1952).
The analogy, however, is a false one. Far from being a mere bystander, the testing lab was an independent contractor plainly providing the information included in the business record in the ordinary course of the business relationship. Much information in modern business records may be supplied by suppliers or purchasers, principal contractors or sub-contractors or other business people acting in the interdependent, information oriented context of modern business. It is the business purpose of the record, rather than the employee status of the source, which renders such hearsay evidence specially reliable. Hence, we see no reason to treat an off-site venereal disease blood test results differently than on-site results. See Binder, Hearsay Handbook, § 805, at 150-52 (1983 & 1989 supp.) (collecting cases involving non-employee generated business records). Hence, we reject appellant’s challenge to the admissibility of the business records evidence of the gonorrhea test results.
IV. Contemporaneous Misconduct Evidence
Appellant contends that the trial court erred in failing to declare a mistrial when the police officer, while recounting otherwise admissible portions of appellant’s *285statement to police, noted that appellant had admitted using cocaine on the night in question. We find no merit in the contention.
Evidence of contemporaneous bad acts, such as the use of cocaine, is admissible if it was part of the same transaction, completes or adds to the understanding of the events in question, and is not unduly prejudicial. See Commonwealth v. Billa, 521 Pa. 168, 555 A.2d 835 (1989). The well-known stimulating and disinhibiting effects of cocaine provide a more than sufficient basis to conclude that the contemporaneous criminal conduct was admissible under the res gestae exception in a trial involving charges that the defendant committed sexual abuse on a twelve year old girl while high on cocaine. See MacDonald, et al, Heavy Cocaine Use and Sexual Behavior, 18 J. Drug Issues 437, 437-55 (1988) (reporting stimulating and disinhibiting effects; but, detailing various forms of sexual dysfunction caused by cocaine abuse); Gold, 800-Cocaine, at 18-19 (3rd Ed.1986) (noting disinhibiting and stimulating effects, and potential for sexual dysfunction); Stone, Fromme, & Kagan, Cocaine: Seduction and Solution, at 20-21 (1984) (same). Given the potential of cocaine use to contribute to appellant’s violent sexual aggression against the child victim, appellant’s cocaine use was relevant and admissible.
Regardless, in an abundance of caution, the trial court sustained an objection to the passing, unsolicited remark, and a prompt curative instruction was given. The adequacy of that course of conduct was for the trial court to decide, and we find no abuse of discretion. Commonwealth v. Gibson, 389 Pa.Super. 518, 546, 567 A.2d 724, 738 (1989).
V. Indirect References to Prior Misconduct
Appellant raises two separate allegations of prejudicial suggestions of prior misconduct. He challenges the failure to give a curative instruction following two unsolicited remarks by the nurse witness (who presented the gonorrhea test results) that she worked at a prison. He also challenges the adequacy of a curative instruction given after the police officer’s unsolicited, passing remark that a photo *286array shown to a witness after the crime was comprised of photographs of persons arrested previously. We find no merit in the contentions individually or taken together.
The jury was aware that appellant had been arrested, and so the fact that a prison nurse had mentioned that appellant had been incarcerated when a post -arrest blood test was performed merely disclosed that he had not immediately been released on bail. That fact did not imply prior or unrelated criminal conduct. As the remark was relatively innocuous, we see no reason why the trial court should have drawn undue attention to it.
The disclosure that photographs used in an array were mugshots was improper. Nonetheless, we have no reason to doubt the efficacy of the simple curative instruction given by the trial court. See Commonwealth v. Gibson, supra, 567 A.2d at 737.
VI. Application of the Rape Shield Law
Appellant contends that the trial court erred in refusing to permit him to cross-examine the victim on the issue of other sexual experience in an effort to suggest an alternate source of gonorrhea. We find no merit in the contention.
At common law, evidence of a female rape complainant’s general reputation for morality and chastity was deemed admissible on the issue of consent. The result of this common law rule was notorious abuse of victim witnesses by aggressive defense counsel who essentially put the victim on trial. In response to such unjustifiable abuses, the federal government and the states enacted statutes known as Rape Shield laws. Rape Shield laws were intended to end the abuses fostered by the common law rule by limiting the harassing and embarrassing inquires of defense counsel into irrelevant prior sexual conduct of sexual assault complainants. See Williams, Rape Reform Legislation and Evidentiary Concerns: The Law in Pennsylvania, 44 U.Pitt.L.Rev. 955, 955-75 (1985); see generally White, Evidentiary Privileges and the Defendant’s Constitutional *287Right to Introduce Evidence, 80 J.Crim.L. & Crim. 377, 377-426 (1989); Kello, Rape Shield Paradox: Complain and Protection Amidst Oscillating Tends Of State Judicial Interpretation, 78 J.Crim.L. & Crim. 644, 644-98 (1987); Gavin, Shielding Rape Victims in the State and Federal Courts: A Proposal for the Second Decade, 70 Minn.L.Rev. 763, 763-916 (1986); Haxton, Rape Shield Statutes: Constitutional Despite Unconstitutional Exclusions of Evidence, 1985 Wisc.L.Rev. 1219, 1219-72 (1985); Tall, Evidence—Rape Shield Statutes, 19 Gonzanga L.Rev. 437, 437-51 (1984); Ordover, Admissibility of Patterns of Similar Sexual Conduct: The Unlamented Death of Character for Chastity, 63 Cornell L.Rev. 90, 90-120 (1977).
Though laudable and long-overdue, Rape Shield laws, if rigidly construed, could impermissibly encroach upon a defendant’s right to confront and cross-examine witnesses which is secured by the United States and Pennsylvania Constitutions. The manner in which those counterveiling interests are to be balanced has been the subject of considerable litigation in this Commonwealth and other jurisdictions. See generally Annotation, Constitutionality of “Rape Shield” Statute Restricting Use of Evidence of Victim’s Sexual Experiences, 1 ALR 4th 283, 283-305 (1980 & 1989 Supp.); Annotation, Admissibility in Incest Prosecution of Evidence of Alleged Victim’s Prior Sexual Acts With Persons Other Than Accused, 97 ALR 3d 967, 967-80 (1980 & 1989 Supp.); Annotation, Modern Status of Admissibility, In Forcible Rape Prosecution, Of Complainant’s General Reputation for Unchastity, 95 ALR 3d 1181, 1181-97 (1979 & 1989 Supp.); Annotation, Modern Status of Admissibility, In Forcible Rape Prosecution, Of Complainant’s Prior Sexual Acts, 94 ALR 3d 257, 257-86 (1979 & 1989 Supp.).
In Commonwealth v. Majorana, 503 Pa. 602, 470 A.2d 80 (1983), our Supreme Court construed the Pennsylvania Rape Shield law to intend to exclude only irrelevant and abusive inquiries, and not to exclude inquiries regarding relevant *288evidence which would tend to disprove the allegation. 470 A.2d at 84. In Majorana, the defendant had made a specific offer to prove through the testimony of an identified third person that the semen and sperm detected in the victim’s body, which had been offered as evidence to corroborate the victim’s testimony, had actually come from a separate source. 470 A.2d at 81, 84.
In Commonwealth v. Lyons, 364 Pa.Super. 620, 528 A.2d 975 (1987), this Court held that a defendant had improperly been denied an opportunity to provide an alternate explanation for blood stains on panties offered to corroborate charges of child sexual abuse. A claim that the proffered evidence was too remote was rejected because of the indefiniteness as to when the panties were worn or stained. 528 A.2d at 978. The adequacy of the proffer made in that case was not otherwise discussed.
In Commonwealth v. Black, 337 Pa.Super. 548, 487 A.2d 396 (1985), this Court remanded for an evidentiary hearing as to whether the trial court improperly denied the defendant an opportunity to demonstrate a specific motive for the complainant to bring false charges against the defendant, because the defendant had allegedly thwarted the complainant’s alleged incestuous relationship with her brother by throwing him out of the family home shortly before the challenged charges were brought. While the proffered evidence was deemed potentially relevant, this court, nonetheless, remanded for a hearing to determine whether the specific proffer was relevant, whether the proffered evidence was more probative than prejudicial, and whether alternative (unprivileged) grounds for impeachment existed. 487 A.2d at 401.
Taken together, Majorana, Lyons, and Black demonstrate that the Rape Shield law will bow to a defendant’s right to confront and cross-examine when a specific proffer demonstrates that the proposed inquiry is intended to elicit relevant evidence, which is more probative than prejudicial, and which is not cumulative of other evidence available without encroaching upon Rape Shield law protections. Ma*289jorana, Lyons, and Black, thus, involve limited exceptions to the broad exclusion of the Rape Shield law.
The significance of the required offer of proof is demonstrated in our prior decision in Commonwealth v. Troy, 381 Pa.Super. 326, 553 A.2d 992 (1989). In Troy, this Court held that the defense counsel’s proffer as to the relevance of evidence otherwise inadmissible under the Rape Shield law was too vague and conjectural to warrant even a remand for further inquiry under Black, 553 A.2d at 996-97. The absence of an adequate specific proffer is, thus, fatal to challenges to Rape Shield protections.
It is true that in Commonwealth v. Jorgenson, 512 Pa. 601, 517 A.2d 1287 (1986) (per Zappala, Nix, C.J., and Flaherty, McDermott, JJ., join; Papadakos, J., dissents; Larsen and Hutchinson, JJ., join the dissent), a bare majority of our Supreme Court remanded for an evidentiary hearing despite a vague proffer of an alternate explanation for physical evidence offered in support of sexual abuse charges. By its terms, however, the majority opinion in Jorgenson was of extremely limited prospective precedential value. The failure to provide a specific proffer was deemed excusable because Majorana had not yet been decided, and because the trial court’s express reliance upon Commonwealth v. Duncan, 279 Pa.Super. 395, 421 A.2d 257 (1980), had rendered any question of specificity of the proffer moot. 517 A.2d at 1290. In Duncan, this Court had construed the Rape Shield law broadly, as an essentially absolute bar without exceptions. The dissenting members of our Supreme Court in Jorgenson disagreed with the majority’s conclusion that the absence of a specific proffer was excusable, and emphasized the patent inadequacy of the proffer. 517 A.2d at 1292.
We find that the allowance of remand for an evidentiary hearing in Jorgenson was limited to cases decided in the trial court prior to Majorana, and where the trial court expressly relied upon Duncan. As neither limitation is met here, we find Troy rather than Jorgenson controlling. The *290absence of an adequate proffer here, was therefore fatal to appellant’s claim.
While the procedural defect is sufficient to dispose of the claim, we find it appropriate to note the substantive deficiency of the claim as well. Substantively, a proffer seeking to avoid the Rape Shield law bar must meet the three prong test suggested in Majorana, and expressly set forth in Black: the evidence must be relevant; must be more probative than prejudicial; and may not be merely cumulative of other unprivileged impeachment or rebuttal evidence. Majorana, supra, 470 A.2d at 84-85; Black, supra, 487 A.2d at 401. Several cases have demonstrated the significance of these limitations.
In Commonwealth v. Erb, 524 Pa. 103, 569 A.2d 352 (1990), our Supreme Court reversed an unpublished order of this Court which had granted a new trial based upon the exclusion of excerpt from the complainant’s diary describing her sexual interest in a boyfriend, which had been offered to establish a motive to make false charges of sexual assault against her father, who had allegedly thwarted the relationship between his daughter and the boyfriend by recently moving the family. See Commonwealth v. Erb, 380 Pa.Super. 645, 547 A.2d 436 (1988). The apparent basis for the per curiam reversal and reinstatement of the verdict and sentence was that the Majorana standard of relevance, probative value, and necessity had not been met. 569 A.2d at 352, citing Commonwealth v. Majorana.
In Commonwealth v. Johnson, 389 Pa.Super. 184, 566 A.2d 1197 (1989), this Court held that a proffer regarding a hearsay statement attributed to the complainant suggesting that another had sexually assaulted the complainant on a prior occasion was not sufficient to demonstrate an alternate explanation for the evidence or to demonstrate a motive to raise false charges. This Court agreed with the trial court that the evidence, even if arguably relevant, was nonetheless more prejudicial than probative and so was therefore properly excluded. 566 A.2d at 1202.
*291In Commonwealth v. Appenzeller, 388 Pa.Super. 172, 565 A.2d 170 (1989), this Court held that evidence of prior sexual abuse suffered by a three year old victim offered to provide an alternate source for the young child’s rudimentary knowledge of sexual functions and terms, was not relevant because poor parental supervision of the child victim had made it “highly likely” that she had learned sexual functions and terms through sources other than the alleged sexual assault by appellant. Because the circumstance of that case were deemed not to render the child victim’s rudimentary knowledge of sexual functions and terms incriminating as to Appenzeller, the proffered evidence of an additional alternate source the child victim’s knowledge (through a sexual assault committed by another) was deemed to be more prejudicial than probative. 565 A.2d at 171.
In Commonwealth v. Poindexter, 372 Pa.Super. 566, 539 A.2d 1341 (1988), this Court held that, where the trial court had admitted evidence that the complainant was angry at the accused for filing criminal charges against her boyfriend, the trial court did not err in refusing to permit the accused to inquire as to the level of intimacy involved in complainant’s relationship with her boyfriend. The inquiry was deemed to be focused on evidence which would have been of minimal probative value, but of high potential prejudicial impact. 539 A.2d at 1344.
Finally, in Commonwealth v. Simmons, 355 Pa.Super. 326, 513 A.2d 453 (1986), this Court held that proffered evidence that the complainant had made her allegations against the accused only when she was first confronted by her mother with a rumor that complainant was pregnant did not fall with the bias/motive precedent of Commonwealth v. Black, supra. This Court found that the proffer failed to demonstrate a sufficient motive to falsely accuse the defendant so as to render the evidence more probative than prejudicial, especially when the victim’s delay in reporting the assault had otherwise been fully presented and argued to the jury. 513 A.2d at 454-55.
*292Taken together, Erb, Johnson, Appenzeller, Poindexter, and Simmons demonstrate the substantive limitations on the exceptions to Rape Shield law protections applied in Majorana, Lyons, and Black. These limitations are significant and cannot be ignored.
In summary, while the Rape Shield law must bow to the need to permit an accused an opportunity to present genuinely exculpatory evidence, the Rape Shield law nonetheless remains an effective limitation on abusive inquires addressed to irrelevant personal matters which were formerly conducted to harass and defame the complainant while distracting the jury from the legitimate issues involved in sexual assault cases. There is a delicate balance to be maintained. That balance is to be maintained by requiring a specific proffer and by evaluating the proffer for relevance, probativeness, and necessity. See Commonwealth v. Majorana, supra; Commonwealth v. Black, supra; Commonwealth v. Troy, supra.
Applying the foregoing to the instant case we have no hesitation in finding appellant’s claim to be meritless. First, appellant made no proffer whatsoever. Rather, appellant concedes that he has no idea of whether any relevant evidence would be secured by his proposed inquiry. Indeed, for the inquiry to disclose relevant evidence, it would have to establish not only a separate sexual assault on the 12 year old victim, but a separate assault by a gonorrhea infected assailant within a time period which would account for the state of gonorrhea infection detected in the child victim. In neither the trial court, nor here on appeal, has appellant provided any basis to suggest that such evidence exists. We find no authority for the kind of “fishing expedition” style intrusions on Rape Shield law protections proposed by appellant in the Pennsylvania or United States Constitutions or in our prior case law.
Moreover, even if the inquiry were permitted and such evidence was discovered, such evidence would merely suggest a possible alternate source for the infection; it would not preclude appellant as the actual source of the infection. *293Given the minimal probative value and high potential prejudice of such evidence, we would find no error in its exclusion. Cf. Commonwealth v. Durst, 522 Pa. 2, 559 A.2d 504 (1989); Commonwealth v. Appenzeller, supra, 565 A.2d at 172.1 Hence, we find no error in declining to permit inquiry designed to seek such evidence.
Finally, even if the inquiry was improperly restricted, we would find that other overwhelming evidence rendered any error in the exclusion of this minimally relevant questioning harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Hence, for each of the above reasons we find no merit in appellant’s contention.
VII. Reciprocal Discovery
Appellant next contends that he was prejudiced by the Commonwealth’s failure to comply with the reciprocal discovery mandate of Pa.R.Crim.P. 305(C)(1)(c) when appellant served notice of intent to present an alibi defense. The trial court found that the appellant was well aware of the evidence to be presented to rebut his alibi claim, and that the technical error of the Commonwealth in not submitting a list with the complainant’s name and the name of the police officer to whom prior inconsistent statements had been made by appellant was harmless. Appellant was aware that the victim would contradict his alibi claim, and he was provided with copies of the police reports which recorded his prior inconsistent statements during informal discovery. These facts render Commonwealth v. Jackson, 457 Pa. 79, 319 A.2d 161 (1974) materially distinguishable. The trial court found the purpose of the Rule to have been fulfilled despite the technical violation of its letter, and *294concluded that no relief was appropriate, then or now. We agree. Commonwealth v. Pickford, 370 Pa.Super. 444, 536 A.2d 1348 (1987), appeal granted 520 Pa. 596, 552 A.2d 251 (1988).
VIII. Challenge to Discretionary Aspects of Sentence
Finally, appellant contends that the trial court abused its discretion in imposing concurrent sentences of 8 to 20 years imprisonment for involuntary deviate sexual intercourse and 2lh to 5 years imprisonment for terroristic threats. We deny allowance of appeal as to these issues.
Appellant has failed to include a concise statement of reasons for allowance of appeal. Pa.R.A.P. 2119(f). Moreover, cursory review of the brief and the. record reveals the complete absence of a substantial question. The seriousness of the offense, aggravating circumstances of the victim’s age and appellant’s other offenses2 fully warranted the sentence imposed. Moreover, review of the contents of the Pre-Sentence Report including the Victim Impact Statements was entirely proper. See Commonwealth v. Penrod, 396 Pa.Super. 221, 232, 578 A.2d 486, 491 (1990); Commonwealth v. McLaughlin, 393 Pa.Super. 277, 286, 574 A.2d 610, 614-15 (1990); 42 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 9721, 9731 et seq.; 71 P.S. § 180-9.3(1). No one prevented appellant from subpoenaing witnesses for the sentencing hearing to cross-examine, impeach, or rebut witnesses regarding statements in those reports, or from seeking a continuance to do so. See 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 9721. Hence, the procedural challenge is specious. Because the substantive claim is plainly merit-less, we decline to direct the purposeless act of supplementing the brief to bring it into compliance with Pa.R.A.P. 2119(f).
*295
Conclusion
Based upon the foregoing, we affirm judgment of sentence and deny allowance of appeal of the discretionary aspects of sentence.
JOHNSON, J., filed a concurring and dissenting opinion.
. In this regard, both Majorana is materially distinguishable. Succinctly, in Majorana the physical evidence could have had only one source; consequently, acceptance of the alternate source would disprove the prosecution’s proffered source and would thereby directly and significantly undermine the charges. Here, since appellant and the victim have gonorrhea, and the source of gonorrhea could not be determined even if there were an identified alternate additional potential source, the exculpatory impact of alternate source evidence would be considerably less than that in Majorana.
. Appellant was convicted and sentenced to probation on three robbery counts in 1980. More significantly, this panel has recently affirmed judgment of sentence imposed on appellant’s convictions of rape and terroristic threats in a separate knife point sexual assault on an adult victim. See Commonwealth v. Nieves, 579 A.2d 419 (Pa.Super. 1990).

=== CASE 9737113 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:16:24.056026+00 ===

JOHNSON, Judge,
concurring and dissenting:
I join in the majority’s decision to affirm Nieves’ conviction, and I agree with the majority’s analysis and disposition of the issues regarding the trial court questioning, the contemporaneous misconduct evidence, indirect references to prior misconduct, reciprocal discovery, and the challenge to discretionary aspects of sentencing. However, I do not join in any part of the analysis of the Rape Shield Law issue. I agree with the majority only in that the requested permission to conduct a cross-examination regarding the victim’s prior sexual activity was properly denied.
In this case both Nieves and the twelve-year-old victim had gonorrhea. The victim had been infected less than forty-eight hours before the post-assault examination. Nieves wanted to cross-examine the victim in an attempt to show that she had sexual relations with others, which would be an alternate source of her gonorrhea. He did not have a proffer of specific evidence but rather essentially asked the court to allow him to conduct a fishing expedition. The Rape Shield Law, codified at 18 Pa.C.S. § 3104, provides:
(a) General rule.—Evidence of specific instances of the alleged victim’s past sexual conduct, opinion evidence of the alleged victim’s past sexual conduct, and reputation evidence of the alleged victim’s past sexual conduct shall not be admissible in prosecutions under this chapter except evidence of the alleged victim’s past sexual conduct with the defendant where consent of the alleged victim is at issue and such evidence is otherwise admissible pursuant to the rules of evidence.
*296(b) Evidentiary proceedings.—A defendant who proposes to offer evidence of the alleged victim’s past sexual conduct pursuant to subsection (a) shall file a written motion and offer of proof at the time of trial. If, at the time of trial, the court determines that the motion and offer of proof are sufficient on their faces, the court shall order an in camera hearing and shall make findings on the record as to the relevance and admissibility of the proposed evidence pursuant to the standards set forth in subsection (a).
18 Pa.C.S. § 3104.
The statute is unambiguous, and the legislative intent is clear. In enacting this statute and making evidence of past conduct or reputation for past conduct inadmissible, the legislature “totally rejected]” the notion that the past conduct of the complainant is probative of consent to the act at issue. Commonwealth v. Majorana, 503 Pa. 602, 609, 470 A.2d 80, 83 (1983). The legislature made a strong statement that any use of prior sexual conduct with a third person for the purpose of proving consent or moral defect is prejudicial and of only limited probative value.
The statute allows consideration of whether past conduct evidence is admissible only if the victim and the defendant had past sexual relations, and the defense is consent. In § 3104(b) the statute sets forth a rigorous procedure to determine whether to admit or to exclude the evidence. Preliminarily, the defendant must place consent in issue by an offer of proof of evidence supporting the allegation, and only if the offer is sufficient on its face will the court then conduct an in camera hearing to determine whether the proffered evidence should be excluded pursuant to the rules of evidence; that is, even if logically relevant, the evidence should be excluded if its probative value is outweighed by unfair prejudice. 18 Pa.C.S. § 3104(b); See Commonwealth v. Black, 337 Pa.Super. 548, 487 A.2d 396 (1985).
The Rape Shield Law has withstood challenges to its constitutionality. In Commonwealth v. Quartman, 312 Pa.Super. 349, 458 A.2d 994 (1983) this court decided that *297the Rape Shield Law did not violate the defendant’s right to confrontation, and in Commonwealth v. Strube, 274 Pa.Super. 199, 418 A.2d 365 (1979), cert. denied, Strube v. Pennsylvania, 449 U.S. 992, 101 S.Ct. 527, 66 L.Ed.2d 288 (1980), we decided that the procedure set forth in 3104(b) does not violate a defendant’s constitutional right to due process. In Quartman the court explained that the:
fundamental right to confront witnesses often gives way, however, to certain evidentiary principles. The exclusion of hearsay evidence, for instance, is premised on the idea that such statements often lack the relevancy necessary to outweigh their questionable truthfulness and potential prejudice. In the same way, prejudicial and irrelevant opinion and reputation evidence is often excluded. These varied evidentiary exclusions do not deny an accused his right to a fair trial[,] as his need for the evidence is outweighed by considerations of truth and relevancy. Similarly, there is no constitutional right of the accused in a rape case to introduce evidence that is prejudicial, inflammatory and irrelevant.
Commonwealth v. Quartman, 312 Pa.Super. 349, 353, 458 A.2d 994, 996 (1983).
Our courts have created two additional narrowly-drawn exceptions to the evidence bar in addition to the exception supplied by the statute itself. In Commonwealth v. Majorana, 503 Pa. 602, 470 A.2d 80 (1983), semen was present in the victim after the alleged attack. The defendant’s defense was that there never was an attack but that semen was present because he had consensual sex with the victim two hours before the alleged attack. The Supreme Court distinguished this situation from a consent defense and held that in order to preserve the defendant’s right to confrontation, the Rape Victim Shield Law may not automatically bar evidence that an act other than the charged rape produced the objective signs of intercourse. Such evidence would be directly relevant to negate that there even was a sexual act between the victim and the defendant at the time of the *298alleged attack. However, the court emphasized that the proffered evidence must be:
evidence of an act close enough in time to account for the objective signs of intercourse and is further limited to the purpose of explaining the presence of those objective signs. However, a defendant cannot engage in the wide-ranging and harassing cross examination the statute legitimately prohibits.
Majorana, 503 Pa. at 611, 470 A.2d at 85 (emphasis added).
In Commonwealth v. Black, 337 Pa.Super. 548, 487 A.2d 396 (1985), this court carved out a second exception to the absolute bar of the Rape Shield Law. A father was. convicted of the statutory rape of his thirteen-year-old daughter. In defense, the father sought to introduce evidence that the daughter was having relations with her brother, which the father discovered. The father claimed that his discovery of this relationship triggered the daughter’s retribution through false accusation. We held that the Rape Shield Law cannot unequivocally bar such evidence. The Black court cautioned, however, that:
While we hold that Pennsylvania’s Rape Shield Law may not be used to exclude relevant evidence showing witness’ bias or attacking credibility, we do not hold that all material evidence is necessarily admissible. Although logically relevant, evidence tending to show the victim’s prejudice or lack of credibility may be excluded if “it would so inflame the minds of the jurors that its probative value is outweighed by unfair prejudice.” Commonwealth v. Stewart, 304 Pa.Super. 382, 387, 450 A.2d 732, 734 (1982) (additional citations omitted).
Commonwealth v. Black, 337 Pa.Super. 548, 557, 487 A.2d 396, 401 (1985). Significantly, the court determined that the evidence balancing determination should proceed by the proffer and in camera hearing procedure as mandated by 18 Pa.C.S. § 3104(b).
The majority states that “[tjhough laudable and long-overdue, Rape Shield laws, if rigidly construed, could impermissibly encroach upon a defendant’s right to confront and *299cross-examine witnesses which is secured by the United States and Pennsylvania Constitutions.” Majority Opinion at 9. This statement improperly suggests that a re-evaluation of constitutionality by means of balancing the interests must occur every time the Rape Shield Statute is invoked.
First, the question of the Rape Shield Law’s constitutionality has been resolved by our courts and should not be under consideration in the present case. Further, reasoning from the premise of constitutionality, Majorana and Black create the only two exceptions to the absolute bar of the statute outside of the single exception included in the statute itself. The question of constitutionality, by means of applying a balancing of interests test, should not be revisited in every rape case. No authority approves such an approach. Unless the defendant presents the court with evidence that on its face establishes that either the statutory or one of the two judicially-created exceptions applies, the proffered evidence or requested cross-examination will be excluded on the basis of the Rape Shield Law without further consideration. § 3104; Majorana, supra; Black, supra. That the majority invokes numerous cases that consider whether one of these exceptions applies does not prove the contrary; the discussion only creates a misleading impression that courts always go beyond the plain language of the statute when applying the Rape Shield Law.
No cautious analysis is required in the case before us. Rather, it calls for direct application of the law to a fact situation that has already been considered by our Supreme Court. Nieves wanted to cross-examine the victim about prior sexual activity in order to uncover an alternative source of her gonorrhea. Therefore, under Majorana, if Nieves had proffered evidence that the victim had intercourse with another person infected with gonorrhea within forty-eight hours of the incident in question, the court may have allowed such evidence if, following an in camera hearing, it determined that the probative value of the evidence outweighed introduction of unfair prejudice.
*300However, Nieves offered no specific evidence of prior sexual intercourse of the victim with a particular person or a particular time close to the alleged assault. Opinion, Hon. D. Richard Eckman, President Judge, filed March 10, 1989. Rather, he asked permission to cross-examine the victim about her prior sexual activity generally. Because Nieves asked to cross-examine the victim generally regarding her past sexual activity and did not proffer specific evidence, we never reach the Majorana exception. No balancing is called for. All we must do is to apply the Rape Shield Law. I would hold that the trial court properly denied Nieves’ request for permission to cross-examine the victim regarding her prior sexual experience on the sole basis that the Rape Shield Statute prohibits it.
I would also add to the majority’s analysis of the admissibility of prison medical records and scope of business records exception issues that Nieves’ argument based upon the Disease Prevention and Control Law of 1955, codified at 35 P.S. 521.1 et seq., fails on the basis of the reason given by the trial court, that although the act contains penalties, none of these penalties are exclusion of evidence. Further, I would hold that Commonwealth v. Moore, 378 Pa.Super. 379, 548 A.2d 1250 (1988), alloc, granted 521 Pa. 616, 619, 557 A.2d 720, 722 (1989), which interprets 35 P.S. § 521.1 et seq, defeats both a challenge to the admissibility of the medical records that Nieves had gonorrhea and a challenge to the manner of its admission.

=== CASE 9737114 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:16:24.900791+00 ===

SNELL, Justice.
Defendant has appealed following conviction and judgment under “Chapter 169, Section 7, Subsection 2, of the Acts of the 61st General Assembly of the State of Iowa, 1965” now appearing as part of chapter 155 of our Code relating to pharmacists and wholesale druggists.
Defendant is a licensed pharmacist in the State of Iowa. At the time of the alleged offense he was employed at Strait Pharmacy in Des Moines.
There was uncontradicted testimony that on or about February 2, 1966 defendant sold a quantity of amphetamine sulfate pills, a prescription drug, to Bill Griffiths without a prescription. Bill Griffiths, describing himself as a “bad guy”, was a former “dope addict” and a long time customer of defendant. The purchase was made with $50 in marked $10 bills furnished by the police. Defendant was arrested within a few minutes after the sale. The pills and money were traced and identified. Further review of the evidence is unnecessary. There is no issue before us as to the sufficiency of the evidence of an act illegal under some statute. The issue is the availability of the cited statute to support a conviction here. We think it is not.
I. Chapter 155, Code of Iowa, is headed and relates to pharmacists and wholesale druggists. Section 155.20 provides:
“Restricted prescription drugs. No prescription drug may be sold at wholesale or brokerage for resale to other than licensed pharmacies nor shall any person licensed under this chapter sell or dispense any prescription drug to any person other than a licensed pharmacy or a physician without prescription.”
Defendant is a licensed pharmacist and subject to the provisions of this section. None of the exceptions or exemptions appearing in sections 155.22, 155.23 and 155.25 would appear applicable to defendant.
In 1965 the 61st General Assembly enacted Senate File #285 amending and adding to chapter 155, Code of 1962. The law under which defendant was prosecuted was an addition to the chapter. It appears as chapter 169, section 7, subsection 2, Laws of the 61st General Assembly. With authorized editorial changes it now appears as section 155.30, 1966 Code of Iowa. The pertinent parts are as follows:
“Penalties. Any person who sells or offers for sale, gives away, or administers to another person any prescription drug shall be deemed guilty of violating the provisions of this subsection or any person who violates any provisions of section 155.29 and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars or be imprisoned in the county jail for not more than one year, or both. * * *
“Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent a licensed practitioner of medi*301cine, dentistry, nursing, veterinary medicine, or pharmacy from such acts necessary in the ethical and legal performance of his profession.”
Subsection 1 of section 7 of the Act, now section 155.29 of the Code, lists acts that are proscribed. They all relate to a person attempting to obtain drugs. None relates to defendant and he is not charged with violation thereof.
Nowhere in the statute under which defendant was prosecuted is there any specific reference to pharmacists except to exempt them from its operation when performing “acts necessary in the ethical and legal performance of his profession.”
Without this exception a licensed practitioner would be in the same position as a dope peddler.
Neither need nor logical reason for a new statute to cover pharmacists appears. Their acts were covered by existing statutes.
No explanation as to the purpose or intended scope of the Act appears in connection with the “Bill for an Act” as introduced, the Act as passed or the Senate Journal. However, it does appear from a study of chapter 169, Laws of the 61st General Assembly that the purpose was to make illegal individual acts not otherwise proscribed, make unlicensed persons subject thereto and provide penalties therefor.
We note that the penalty for violation of section 155.20 of the Code is covered by section 155.27. The penalties set forth in the statute involved here are more severe, cover second and subsequent offenses, and the unauthorized sale, gift or administering of a prescription drug to a minor. We also note that the first part of the law, quoted, supra, refers to a violation of “this section” while the part referring to minors is more inclusive by using the words “this chapter.”
II. While not strictly limited to prescribing penalties section 155.30 is basically and essentially a penalty statute.
Chapter 169, Laws of the 61st General Assembly as enacted contained 10 sections and numerous subsections.
Pursuant to section 14.13, Code of Iowa, the Code editor in preparation of the Code divided the sections “so as to give to distinct subject matters a section number but without changing the meaning.” Descriptive headings were also provided for each section.
Although the headings are not a part of the law as enacted (see section 3.3, Code of Iowa) it is interesting to note that the statute involved here is entitled “Penalties.”
If the statute before us is construed as applicable to all persons except those properly licensed and as providing penalties it is not vulnerable to defendant’s attack. That it has a proper purpose, closes a loophole in the law and is workable appears without serious question. When applied to a situation such as we have here an entirely different problem is presented.
III. The last paragraph of section 155.-30 exempts from its operation a licensed pharmacist when performing “acts necessary in the ethical and legal performance of his profession.”
While we view the sale of a large quantity of amphetamine sulfate pills without a prescription with a very jaundiced eye and certainly do not approve of what defendant is alleged to have done, we must consider the statute in its application to licensed practitioners generally rather than to defendant and the simple facts before us.
There is nothing in the record before us to indicate what is or is not necessary and both ethical and legal. Judges and courts should not be so naive as to pretend they do not know what everyone else knows. We are riot suggesting that selling prescription drugs without a prescription is ethical. We are saying that as applied to licensed persons there is nothing in the record before us to indicate what is or is not ethical and legal. We do not know whether there is *302such a thing as a code of ethics for pharmacists. If there is such a code we do not know what it provides. If applied to licensed persons the statute is too vague to be enforced. There is no ascertainable standard of guilt. We do not believe that the legislature intended the enactment of an unnecessary and useless law.
IV. There have been a host of court decisions involving the sufficiency of statutory definitions or designations and they are far from harmonious.
We exhaustively reviewed the authorities in State v. Coppes, 247 Iowa 1057, 78 N.W.2d 10. Repetition here is unnecessary. A few statements therefrom and from International Harvester Co. v. Kentucky, 234 U. S. 216, 34 S.Ct. 853, 58 L.Ed. 1284, and Connally v. General Construction Co., 269 U.S. 385, 46 S.Ct. 126, 70 L.Ed. 322 will suffice.
The International Harvester Company case involved a price fixing statute and a charge of selling above real value pursuant to agreement. The statute was held invalid. Mr. Justice Holmes, in concluding his opinion, said:
“To compel them to guess, on peril of indictment, what the community would have given for them if the continually changing conditions were other than they are, to an uncertain extent; to divine prophetically what the reaction of only partially determinate facts would be upon the imaginations and desires of purchasers, is to exact gifts that mankind does not possess.”
The Connally case involved a statute requiring payment of wages “ ‘not less than the current rate of per diem wages in the locality where the work is performed.’ ” The court reviewed the various uncertainties and concluded:
“The result is that the application of the law depends, not upon a word of fixed meaning in itself, or one made definite by statutory or judicial definition, or by the context or other legitimate aid to its construction, but upon the probably varying impressions of juries as to whether given areas are or are not to be included within particular localities. The constitutional guaranty of due process cannot be allowed to rest upon a support so equivocal.”
Our opinion in State v. Coppes, supra, involved the “reasonable and proper” speed restrictions in section 321.285, Code of Iowa. The statute was upheld against a constitutional attack. After extensive analysis this conclusion appears:
“The words of it are simple and their meaning well known to anyone having, or qualified to have, a motor-vehicle operating license. The section is sufficiently clear and specific to inform all motorists of what conduct on their part will subject them to the penalties of section 321.482 of the Iowa Code of 1954,1.C.A.”
Preceding this conclusion these statements appear:
“The general rule respecting the sufficiency of the statement of statutory crimes— and there are no others in Iowa-is well expressed in Connally v. General Construction Co., 269 U.S. 385, 391-392, 46 S.Ct. 126, 127, 70 L.Ed. 322, towit: ‘That the terms of a penal statute creating a new offense must be sufficiently explicit to inform those who are subj ect to it what conduct on their part will render them liable to its penalties is a well-recognized requirement, consonant alike with ordinary notions of fair play and the settled rules of law. And a statute which either forbids or requires the doing of an act in terms so vague that men of common intelligence must necessarily guess at its meaning and differ as to its application violates the first essential of due process of law. International Harvester Co. [of America] v. [Commonwealth of] Kentucky, 234 U.S. 216, 221, 34 S.Ct. 853, 58 L.Ed. 1284, [1287]’.
“ * * * ‘It is axiomatic that statutes creating and defining crimes cannot be extended by intendment. Purely statutory offenses cannot be established by implication. There can be no constructive offenses. Be*303fore a man can be punished, his case must be plainly and unmistakably within a statute.’ ” (247 Iowa loc. cit. 1061 and 1062, 78 N.W.2d)
On page 1081 of 274 Iowa, on page 14 of 78 N.W.2d, of State v. Coppes, supra, it is noted that the statute being considered was directed primarily to operators of motor vehicles on public highways. The statute had general application to all and operators “know or should know what speed is proper and reasonable under different traffic conditions.”
With that statement we agree but it does not follow that it can be determined with reasonable certainty what is ethical in the practice of “medicine, dentistry, nursing, veterinary medicine, or pharmacy” in the absence of some standard or guide.
We repeat that we do not suggest what defendant is charged with doing could by any stretch of imagination be considered necessary, ethical and legal. However, we must construe the statute as it is written and not according to our reaction to the present situation.
We hold that the statute relied upon by the State is not a proper vehicle to support the charge made here. It is void for unworkability.
In our opinion it was never intended to cover the factual situation disclosed here.
V. Our conclusion that the statute is unworkable for the purpose sought by the State does not vitiate the statute when used where applicable. In Davidson Building Company v. Mulock, 212 Iowa 730, 756, 235 N.W. 45, this appears:
“Our holding that the aforesaid sections of Chapter 205, Acts 43d G. A., are void for unworkability, shall not be construed as affecting the validity of the remainder of said chapter, which is not under attack. It is a rule of universal application that a statute may be valid in part, and invalid in another part, and if the invalid part is severable from the remainder, the portion which is valid may stand while that which is void may be stricken out and rejected, if, after the elimination of the void portion, the remaining provisions are sufficient to be effective and accomplish their purpose in accordance with the legislative intent deducible from the act construed in the light of contemporary events.”
VI. Discussion of other points raised by appellant is unnecessary.
Defendant was prosecuted and convicted under the wrong statute and the judgment entered cannot stand.
Defendant raised the issue at every possible opportunity by demurrer, motion to dismiss, timely renewal of the motion, and motion notwithstanding the verdict.
The case is reversed and remanded with instructions to enter an order of dismissal notwithstanding the verdict.
Reversed for entry of order of dismissal.
LARSON, MOORE, STUART, BECKER and LeGRAND, JJ., concur.
GARFIELD, C. J., and RAWLINGS and MASON, JJ., dissent.

=== CASE 9737115 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:16:24.904892+00 ===

MASON, Justice.
I dissent.
The parties make opposite contentions that the phrase, “legal and ethical performance of his profession” is and is not so vague that due process of law is violated.
In People v. Nunn, 46 Cal.2d 460, 296 P.2d 813, 817-818, certiorari denied and appeal dismissed, 352 U.S. 883, 77 S.Ct. 126, 1 L.Ed.2d 82, the defendant, a physician, was convicted of prescribing narcotics for a person not under his treatment for a pathology and prescribing a narcotic for a person who represented himself to be an *304addict. The statute prohibited prescribing narcotics to or for a person not under treatment for a pathology or condition other than a narcotic condition — “except in the regular practice of his profession.”
On appeal defendant contended: “That section 11163 of the Health and Safety Code is unconstitutional because the term ‘except in the regular practice of his profession’ is too vague, indefinite and uncertain to give notice of what constitutes the act sought to be prohibited.”
In holding the contention to be without merit the court said, “ * * * To comply with the constitutional requirement of due process of law, the crime for which defendant is being prosecuted must be clearly defined, but it is only necessary that the words used in the statute be well enough known to enable those within its purview to understand and correctly apply them. * * * ”
“ * * *
“ * * * Thus the ‘regular practice of his profession’ is a term clearly to be understood from the statutes, and it is well enough known to enable a person practicing as a physician and surgeon to understand and apply it. * * * ” (Emphasis added)
In McKenzie v. State, Tex.Cr., 383 S.W.2d 177, 180, the court upheld a statute proscribing delivery of dangerous drugs by a practitioner except “in the course of his practice.” Defendant insisted the section was so indefinite as to render the statute. void and wholly inoperative because it did not define the phrase “in the course of his practice.”
Relying on the earlier Texas case of King v. State, 166 Tex.Cr.R. 231, 312 S.W.2d 501, the court held the statute was not subject to the objection of indefiniteness as urged by defendant.
In Marks v. Frantz, 179 Kan. 638, 298 P.2d 316, 322, a statute proscribing practice of optometry “in any unethical manner” was upheld as against the contention that the statute was unconstitutional on the ground that it failed to fix any standard or define with any clarity and exactness the term “unethical manner.”
Looking at section 155.30, everyone is prohibited from selling prescription drugs but the general proscription is later made inapplicable to certain professional people, one of whom is a pharmacist. They are exempted from proscription only for sale of prescription drugs when such sale is necessary in the ethical and legal performance of their profession, they should be held accountable for knowledge of the ethics of their own profession. As to what he may legally do in the performance of his profession may not be completely known to him, but by virtue of Code section 155.20’s long standing he knew or should have known he is not to sell prescription drugs to persons not bearing a prescription.
“A statute is passed as a whole and not in parts or sections and is animated by one general purpose and intent. Consequently, each part or section should be construed in connection with every other part, or section so as to produce a harmonious whole. Thus it is not proper to confine interpretation to the one section to be construed.” Sutherland, Third Ed., (by Horack), Statutory Construction, section 4703. See also 16A C.J.S. Constitutional Law § 580 and Connally v. General Construction Co., 269 U.S. 385, 391-392, 46 S.Ct. 126, 127, 70 L.Ed. 322.
I would affirm.
GARFIELD, C. J., and RAWLINGS, J., join in this dissent.

=== CASE 9737116 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:16:25.181802+00 ===

JUSTICE BOWMAN delivered the opinion of the court: This appeal arises from the dismissal of the amended complaint filed by plaintiff, Todd Randieh, against defendants, Pirtano Construction Company, Inc. (Pirtano), and Utility Constructors, Inc. (Utility), alleging negligence and willful and wanton misconduct. We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand. The trial court dismissed plaintiffs amended complaint under section 2 — 619(a)(9) of the Code of Civil Procedure (Code) (735 ILCS 5/2 — 619(a)(9) (West 2000)). Accordingly, the well-pleaded facts from the amended complaint are accepted as true. Zimmerman v. Fasco Mills Co., 302 Ill. App. 3d 308, 311 (1998). The following recitation of the facts is based on the pleadings and the trial court’s order. Defendants are construction contractors. On April 29, 1999, they were working for Western Cable Communications (Western) installing underground television cable along a public utility easement granted to Western at the Wespark housing subdivision in Romeoville. Defendants’ employees laid the cable underground through the use of a directional boring machine. In the process of boring into the ground, defendants’ employees punctured a natural gas main. Northern Illinois Gas Company (NICOR) employees and members of the Lockport Fire Protection District (LFPD) were dispatched to the scene to contend with the gas leak and ensure safety. Plaintiff, an emergency medical technician (EMT), was one of the members of the LFPD sent to the scene. Plaintiff was in the vicinity of the leaking gas when it was ignited by an unknown source within the housing development. A resulting explosion and fire completely destroyed two houses and damaged several others. More important, several NICOR employees and members of the LFPD were injured. Plaintiff was among the members of the LFPD who were injured in the explosion, sustaining “serious and permanent injuries.” On November 14, 2001, plaintiff filed his amended complaint alleging negligence and willful and wanton misconduct on the part of defendants. Specifically, plaintiff’s negligence claim alleges that defendants failed to (1) investigate and ascertain the precise location of underground gas mains in the vicinity where they were operating the directional boring machine; (2) properly expose the gas main by hand digging before boring into the ground; and (3) arrange with NI-COR in advance to turn off the gas prior to digging. Plaintiffs claim of willful and wanton misconduct basically sets forth the same factual allegations as the negligence claim, but adds that defendants acted with actual knowledge that a gas main was located within the utility easement where defendants were conducting their drilling activities. In response, defendants filed a motion to dismiss under section 2 — 619(a)(9) of the Code (735 ILCS 5/2 — 619(a)(9) (West 2000)). The court granted the motion and dismissed plaintiffs claims against defendants on the ground that the fireman’s rule prohibited plaintiffs cause of action. Plaintiff also alleged negligence on the part of NICOR. However, NICOR was not a party to the motion to dismiss. Thus, the court dismissed only the claims against Pirtano and Utility and further found that there was no just reason to delay enforcement or appeal of the dismissal order. Thereafter, plaintiff filed a timely notice of appeal under Supreme Court Rule 304(a) (155 Ill. 2d R. 304(a)), which allows appeals from final judgments that do not dispose of the entire proceeding. On appeal, plaintiff asserts that defendants cannot avail themselves of the fireman’s rule because (1) the rule does not bar actions based on willful and wanton misconduct; (2) defendants are not considered owners or occupiers of Western’s utility easement; (3) public policy and the development of the deliberate encounter doctrine abrogate the fireman’s rule; and (4) the application of the rule violates plaintiffs equal protection rights.  As an initial matter, section 2 — 619(a)(9) allows involuntary dismissal where “the claim asserted against defendant is barred by other affirmative matter avoiding the legal effect of or defeating the claim.” 735 ILCS 5/2 — 619(a)(9) (West 2000). Accordingly, defendants admit the legal sufficiency of plaintiffs amended complaint but assert that the fireman’s rule defeats plaintiffs claims. See Zimmerman, 302 Ill. App. 3d at 311. Our standard of review of a section 2 — 619 dismissal is de novo. Zimmerman, 302 Ill. App. 3d at 311.  The fireman’s rule limits the extent to which firefighters or other public officers are allowed to recover for injuries incurred when, in an emergency, they enter upon an owner’s or occupier’s property in discharge of their duty. McShane v. Chicago Investment Corp., 235 Ill. App. 3d 860, 864 (1992). It provides that “an owner or occupier of land must exercise reasonable care to prevent injury to firemen that might result from a cause independent of the fire, but has no duty to prevent injury resulting from the fire itself.” Vroegh v. J&M Forklift, 165 Ill. 2d 523, 527 (1995). Thus, the rule limits a fireman’s right to recover for injuries arising out of the fire itself. McShane, 235 Ill. App. 3d at 865. The first issue in this case is whether the fireman’s rule bars a cause of action based on willful and wanton misconduct. In Illinois, there is conflicting authority on this issue. Where a legal question has been the subject of decisions with varying results, we will carefully examine what has been said by courts on the subject. Scott v. Instant Parking, Inc., 105 Ill. App. 2d 133, 135 (1969). The fireman’s rule is a creature of case law, and thus the pertinent case law must be analyzed to understand and properly apply the rule. Zimmerman, 302 Ill. App. 3d at 312. Originally, the fireman’s rule developed under the English common law during the existence of the feudal system of landownership. Dini v. Naiditch, 20 Ill. 2d 406, 413 (1960). Under this system, a firefighter was labeled as a licensee to whom the owner or occupant owed no greater duty than to refrain from the infliction of willful or intentional injury. Dini, 20 Ill. 2d at 413-14. In Illinois, the supreme court in Gibson v. Leonard, 143 Ill. 182, 189 (1892), adopted this English common-law rule. Later, in Dini, our supreme court reshaped the fireman’s rule to address what had been characterized as a barbaric formulation of the rule. Dini, 20 Ill. 2d at 414. In Dini, an inadequately constructed wooden staircase in the defendant’s building collapsed and resulted in injury to several firefighters. Dini, 20 Ill. 2d at 412. Our supreme court rejected the common-law rule labeling firemen as licensees, finding it to be an illogical anachronism, originating in a vastly different social order, and pockmarked by judicial refinements. Dini, 20 Ill. 2d at 416. Instead, recognizing that firemen confer on landowners economic and other benefits that form a basis for imposing the common-law duty of reasonable care, the court held: “[A]n action should lie against a landowner for failure to exercise reasonable care in the maintenance of his property resulting in the injury or death of a fireman rightfully on the premises, fighting the fire at a place where he might reasonably be expected to be.” Dini, 20 Ill. 2d at 416-17. Then, in Washington v. Atlantic Richfield Co., 66 Ill. 2d 103 (1976), the supreme court refined the reasonable care standard set forth in Dini. In Washington, firemen were seriously injured in the process of extinguishing a car fire at a service station. Washington, 66 Ill. 2d at 104. The court was faced with the issue of whether the “liability of a possessor of land for injuries to a fireman extends to acts of negligence which cause a fire.” Washington, 66 Ill. 2d at 105. In response, the court held that “while a landowner owes a duty of reasonable care to maintain his property so as to prevent injury occurring to a fireman from a cause independent of the fire he is not liable for negligence in causing the fire itself.” Washington, 66 Ill. 2d at 108. Thus, from Washington, the current form of Illinois’s version of the fireman’s rule was born. It permits a firefighter to recover for injuries that result from an act unrelated to the specific reason he was summoned to the scene, but not for negligent acts that caused the emergency. This then leads to the issue of whether a fireman can recover for willful and wanton misconduct that causes an emergency. As stated above, under the common-law version of the fireman’s rule, as adopted in Gibson, a plaintiff could recover for the infliction of willful or intentional injury. See Dini, 20 Ill. 2d at 416. In Bandosz v. Daigger & Co., 255 Ill. App. 494 (1930), the court affirmed a judgment in favor of an administratrix of an estate of a fireman killed when a building exploded as a proximate result of the defendant’s willful and wanton misconduct. The court recognized the principle that an owner or occupier of property is liable for willful and wanton misconduct to a firefighter in discharge of his duty. Bandosz, 255 Ill. App. 494. In 1975, one year before the supreme court’s decision in Washington was released, the Appellate Court, Third District, in Marquart v. Toledo, Peoria & Western R.R. Co., 30 Ill. App. 3d 431, 432 (1975), addressed a situation in which a firefighter sued to recover for injuries incurred while fighting a fire that began with the explosion of a railroad car containing liquified propane gas. There, the court stated that “a fireman may recover where the injuries were caused by the willful and wanton misconduct of the owner or occupant of premises where the fire occurred.” Marquart, 30 Ill. App. 3d at 434. Contrary to the position taken in Bandosz and Marquart, in Luetje v. Corsini, 126 Ill. App. 3d 74 (1984), the Appellate Court, First District, held that a homeowner was not liable for willful and wanton misconduct where a firefighter alleged that “certain wilful and wanton misconduct on the part of defendants in the maintenance of their building caused the fire in question and that, as a result of the fire, a chimney collapsed, causing injury to plaintiff.” Luetje, 126 Ill. App. 3d at 78. The court noted that the supreme court’s ruling in Washington distinguished between negligent acts that may cause an emergency situation and independent acts of negligence. Luetje, 126 Ill. App. 3d at 79. From this, the court in Luetje reasoned that the nature of a defendant’s conduct is not determinative of the issue of landowner liability to an injured firefighter. Luetje, 126 Ill. App. 3d at 79. Thus, the court concluded that it was irrelevant whether the plaintiffs injuries stemmed from negligent acts or willful and wanton misconduct. Luetje, 126 Ill. App. 3d at 79. If the defendant’s aUeged wrongdoing related to the cause of the emergency, the plaintiff was barred from recovering under the fireman’s rule. Luetje, 126 Ill. App. 3d at 79. In making this logical leap from the holding in Washington, which addressed only a claim of negligence, Luetje relied on Young v. Toledo, Peoria & Western R.R. Co., 46 Ill. App. 3d 167 (1977). Luetje, 126 Ill. App. 3d at 79. The Appellate Court, First District, later affirmed this position in Coglianese v. Mark Twain Ltd. Partnership, 171 Ill. App. 3d 1, 6 (1988). We decline to follow the position taken by the court in Luetje for several reasons. First, Luetje misconstrues the cases it uses to support its position. Luetje states that the court in Young dismissed the plaintiffs willful and wanton misconduct claim because the allegations related solely to the cause of the fire. Luetje, 126 Ill. App. 3d at 79. Rather, the court in Young actuaUy dismissed the plaintiffs willful and wanton misconduct claim because the allegations in the complaint related only “to acts of negligence” and feU “short of stating a cause of action on wilful and wanton misconduct.” Young, 46 Ill. App. 3d at 169. Moreover, we reject Luetje’s contention that it was the intention of the supreme court in Washington to erect a wall separating recovery for willful and wanton misconduct between independent causes of harm and acts that cause the emergency itself. The court in Washington stated: “The question presented by this appeal is whether the liability of a possessor of land for injuries to a fireman extends to acts of negligence which cause the fire.” (Emphasis added.) Washington, 66 Ill. 2d at 105. In reaching its holding, Washington relied on appellate court cases interpreting Dini. Washington, 66 Ill. 2d at 108. The court noted that the position taken in these cases was the same as that taken in virtually every other jurisdiction in which the question had been considered. Washington, 66 Ill. 2d at 108. The court in Marquart also considered the same appellate decisions as the supreme court in Washington and stated that the “recent decisions in cases where a fireman sought to recover for injuries received while fighting a fire have all been actions based on negligence, and do not purport to change the rule which permits recovery based on wilful and wanton misconduct.” Marquart, 30 Ill. App. 3d at 434. We think that the supreme court in Washington merely intended to articulate the current state of the law relating to the fireman’s rule and negligence actions. If the supreme court had intended to create an absolute separation between actions causally connected to an emergency and independent actions, it would have been a simple matter to articulate the rule in such a broad fashion. Rather, we conclude that the holding in Washington did not create a bar to claims of willful and wanton misconduct when they relate to the cause of the emergency. This expression of the fireman’s rule comports with the purpose of the rule as articulated by the supreme court and recognizes that the current trend in the law favors amelioration of the harsh effects of the rule. In Court v. Grzelinski, 72 Ill. 2d 141 (1978), the supreme court held that the fireman’s rule does not protect a defendant from a products liability action. The court observed the public policy considerations that shaped the fireman’s rule in Illinois. Court, 72 Ill. 2d at 148. It stated that “[s]ince most fires occur because of the negligence of the landowner or occupier, it was believed that the imposition of a duty to prevent fires from occurring or spreading on a person’s premise would place an unreasonable burden upon the person who owned or occupied improved land.” (Emphasis added.) Court, 72 Ill. 2d at 148. However, this public policy consideration tended to undermine the duty of reasonable care placed upon a landowner or occupier. Court, 72 Ill. 2d at 148. “A compromise was reached with regard to firemen, recognizing that the risk of harm from fire is inherent in a fireman’s occupation.” Court, 72 Ill. 2d at 148. As the purpose of the fireman’s rule was expressed in Court, the supreme court struck a balance by recognizing that the negligent acts of landowners or occupiers are often the cause of fires and that it is the public function of firemen to absorb the risk of injury stemming from those negligent acts. However, the supreme court has never stated that it is the duty of firemen to absorb the risk created by the willful and wanton misconduct of landowners or occupiers. In fact, as far back as Gibson, the supreme court stated that a fireman could recover for the infliction of willful or intentional injury. See Dini, 20 Ill. 2d at 416. We also note that, under the Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act (745 ILCS 10/5 — 106 (West 2000)), while a firefighter is insulated from liability for his or her negligent acts, a fireman is liable for his or her own acts of willful and wanton misconduct committed while acting within the scope of employment. Furthermore, among other jurisdictions we have surveyed that have adopted the fireman’s rule, most articulate it in the same fashion as our supreme court in Washington. See 62 Am. Jur. 2d Premises Liability § 432 (1990). However, these jurisdictions favor recovery where the owner or occupier is liable for willful or wanton misconduct. See Annotation, L. Scheafer, Liability of Owner or Occupant of Premises to Fireman Coming Thereon in Discharge of His Duty, 11 A.L.R.4th 597 (1982); see also Minnich v. Med-Waste, Inc., 349 S.C. 567, 564 S.E.2d 98 (2002). In fact, Luetje is widely cited but also criticized for the proposition that the fireman’s rule bars suits when a firefighter is injured due to willful and wanton misconduct by an owner or occupier. For instance, in Kelly v. Tucci, 27 Conn. L. Rptr. 649 (2000), the Superior Court of Connecticut cited Luetje and stated: “This court, however, is of the opinion that not allowing officers to sue someone who intentionally injures them is unacceptable in civilized community.” Kelly, 27 Conn. L. Rptr. at 649. In the end, we reiterate the supreme court’s holding from Washington, which provides: while an owner or occupier owes a duty of reasonable care to maintain his property so as to prevent injury occurring to a fireman from a cause independent of the fire, he is not liable for negligence in causing the fire itself. Washington, 66 Ill. 2d at 108. However, we decline to follow Luetje. Rather, we conclude that the immunity of the fireman’s rule does not protect a defendant whose willful and wanton misconduct created the emergency or danger that caused injury to a fireman.  In accordance with our holding, we affirm the trial court’s dismissal of plaintiffs negligence claim against defendants. However, on the matter of plaintiffs claim of willful and wanton misconduct, plaintiff alleges that defendants failed to expose or locate the five gas mains, which they knew were in the same utility easement, before workers began boring into the ground. We find that plaintiffs claim of willful and wanton misconduct is not barred by the fireman’s rule. Accordingly, we reverse the trial court’s dismissal of this claim. We, however, express no opinion on the merits.  The second issue in this case is whether defendants’ status as contractors working on behalf of the landowner/occupier, Western, precludes them from availing themselves of the protections of the fireman’s rule. As we stated above, in Court, the supreme court noted the public policy considerations that shaped the fireman’s rule in Illinois. Court, 72 Ill. 2d at 148. The fireman’s rule rests not merely upon the recognition that the risk of injury is inherent in firefighting, but upon a policy consideration that limits the duty of an owner or occupier. Court, 72 Ill. 2d at 148. Thus, because the rule’s grounding is found in a compromise of rights between firemen and owners or occupiers, the rule cannot be expanded beyond its limited context of landowner/occupier liability. Court, 72 Ill. 2d at 148.  Citing Esser v. McIntyre, 169 Ill. 2d 292, 302 (1996), plaintiff correctly asserts that, in order for someone to be an occupier of land, he must occupy the land with the intent to control it. Plaintiff maintains that defendants do not meet this definition of occupation and, thus, cannot claim the benefits of the fireman’s rule. We believe that plaintiff misses the point on this argument. As the holder of an easement, Western was the owner of an interest in real estate entitled to the protections of the fireman’s rule. See McDermott v. Metropolitan Sanitary District, 240 Ill. App. 3d 1, 20 (1992). The important determination to be made here is whether defendants’ connection with Western allows them to avail themselves of the immunity provided by the fireman’s rule. To make this determination, we look at the Restatement (Second) of Torts, section 383, which states: “One who does an act or carries on an activity upon land on behalf of the possessor is subject to the same liability, and enjoys the same freedom from liability, for physical harm caused thereby to others upon and outside of the land as though he were the possessor of the land.” Restatement (Second) of Torts § 383 (1965). See Corcoran v. Village of Libertyville, 73 Ill. 2d 316, 323 (1978); Delbert v. Bauer Brothers Construction Co., 188 Ill. App. 3d 108, 109 (1989). Defendants’ status as a servant or independent contractor in this matter is irrelevant. See Restatement (Second) of Torts § 383, Comment a (1965). Here, in accordance with section 383, defendants were carrying on their drilling activity to lay cable within the utility easement on behalf of the possessor, Western, and thus they share the same freedom from liability as Western. Accordingly, we conclude that defendants come within the scope of the protections of the fireman’s rule.  Next, plaintiff argues that the development of the deliberate encounter doctrine and public policy considerations abrogate the fireman’s rule. We start by noting that the court in Smithers v. Center Point Properties Corp., 318 Ill. App. 3d 430, 441 (2000), recently rejected these same arguments. Under the deliberate encounter doctrine, a landowner is responsible for an otherwise open and obvious danger where he or she has reason to believe that an invitee will proceed to encounter the danger because the advantages of doing so would outweigh the apparent risk. LaFever v. Kemlite Co., 185 Ill. 2d 380, 391 (1998). In Smithers, the court observed that the duty to deliberately encounter certain dangers is an inherent part of a firefighter’s responsibility. Smithers, 318 Ill. App. 3d at 442, citing Court, 72 Ill. 2d at 148. Thus, the court found that the fireman’s rule subsumes the deliberate encounter doctrine because deliberately encountering dangers is known to firefighters to be an inherent part of their job. Smithers, 318 Ill. App. 3d at 442. We agree. Plaintiff also argues that public policy mandates the abrogation of the fireman’s rule. Specifically, he urges that the rule encourages landowners to be careless in the maintenance of their property and that firemen do not freely interject themselves into danger because they are duty bound to fight fires. As we discussed in depth above, in cases such as Court and Dini, the supreme court has been very cognizant of the public policy considerations underlying the application of the fireman’s rule and has formulated the fireman’s rule accordingly. See Smithers, 318 Ill. App. 3d at 442. Thus, we note that it is the duty of this court to follow the decisions of our supreme court. See Schusse v. Pace Suburban Bus Division of the Regional Transportation Authority, 334 Ill. App. 3d 960, 965 (2002). Moreover, we find that the rule strikes an appropriate balance between the duty of an owner or occupier of property to maintain his or her premises in a reasonably safe condition and a fireman’s assumption of the risk of harm from dangers inherent in a fireman’s occupation. See Smithers, 318 Ill. App. 3d at 442. Last, plaintiff maintains that the fireman’s rule violates his right of equal protection under the law. With respect to this argument, he contends that NICOR employees assigned to confront the leaking gas main were subject to the same risk of harm as himself. Thus, he argues, it is an equal protection violation to extend the rule to him while the NICOR employees involved here are beyond the rule’s scope.  The analysis applied in assessing an equal protection claim is the same under both the United States and Illinois Constitutions. Jacobson v. Department of Public Aid, 171 Ill. 2d 314, 322 (1996). The guarantee of equal protection requires that similarly situated individuals be treated in a similar manner. Jacobson, 171 Ill. 2d at 322. Equal protection challenges not affecting a suspect class or fundamental right are subject to the rational basis test. Jacobson, 171 Ill. 2d at 323. Under the rational basis test, the court simply inquires whether the method or means employed to achieve a particular purpose is rationally related to that goal. Jacobson, 171 Ill. 2d at 323.  The supreme court has announced a clear purpose for placing firemen in a unique class under the fireman’s rule. See Court, 72 Ill. 2d at 148. Firemen come within a special class of public servants who receive specialized training to anticipate and encounter risks associated with fires. Smithers, 318 Ill. App. 3d at 442. Here, plaintiff, an EMT employed in public service with the LFPD, possessed specialized training and unique experience to anticipate and manage risks associated with emergency situations. We believe that placing plaintiff in a different class than NICOR employees who do not possess comparable training or experience is rationally related to the purpose underlying the fireman’s rule. Accordingly, we reject plaintiffs equal protection challenge. For the aforementioned reasons, we affirm the trial court’s dismissal of plaintiffs negligence claim against defendants. However, we reverse the trial court’s dismissal of plaintiffs claim of willful and wanton misconduct. Accordingly, the judgment of the circuit court of Du Page County is affirmed in part and reversed in part, and the cause is remanded. Affirmed in part and reversed in part; cause remanded. O’MALLEY, P.J., and CALLUM, J., concur.

=== CASE 9737117 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:16:25.186658+00 ===

Supplemental Opinion Upon Denial of Rehearing JUSTICE BOWMAN delivered the opinion of the court: In a petition for rehearing, plaintiff has brought to our attention a new statute that may have abolished the fireman’s rule. We use the word “may” because, facially, it is not quite clear to us what the statute intends. The statute may intend to impose a duty of reasonable care upon an owner/occupier where none existed under the common law. Alternatively, it may serve as an attempt to codify the portion of the fireman’s rule that places upon an owner/occupier a duty of reasonable care to maintain his or her property so as to prevent injury to a fireman from a cause independent of the emergency. At the moment, the legislative materials that might ordinarily allow us to gain some insight into the legislature’s intent are not yet available. However, we need not belabor the issue by resorting to a long statutory interpretation. Regardless of which interpretation we give the new statute, the result is the same. Defendants cannot be held culpable for their purported negligent acts in causing the explosion.  The new statute came into effect on July 22, 2003, adding section 9f of the Fire Investigation Act (Pub. Act 93 — 233, § 5, eff. July 22, 2003 (adding 425 ILCS 25/9f)). Section 9f provides: “The owner or occupier of the premises and his or her agents owe firefighters who are on the premises in the performance of their official duties conducting fire investigations or inspections or responding to fire alarms or actual fires on the premises a duty of reasonable care in the maintenance of the premises according to the applicable fire safety codes, regulations, ordinances, and generally applicable safety standards, including any decisions by the Illinois courts. The owner or occupier of the premises and his or her agents are not relieved of the duty of reasonable care if the firefighter is injured due to the lack of maintenance of the premises in the course of responding to a fire, false alarm, or his or her inspection or investigation of the premises.” Pub. Act 93 — 233, § 5, eff. July 22, 2003 (adding 425 ILCS 25/90. Section 9f goes on to state that this provision applies to “all causes of action that have accrued, will accrue, or are currently pending before a court of competent jurisdiction, including courts of review.” Pub. Act 93 — 233, § 5, eff. July 22, 2003 (adding 425 ILCS 25/9f). Defendants maintain that the provision applying section 9f retroactively is unconstitutional.  Recently, in Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Will County Collector, 196 Ill. 2d 27 (2001), our supreme court adopted the approach to retroactivity endorsed by the United States Supreme Court in Landgraf v. USI Film Products, 511 U.S. 244, 128 L. Ed. 2d 229, 114 S. Ct. 1483 (1994). Commonwealth Edison Co., 196 Ill. 2d at 38-40. Under the Landgraf test, a clear expression by the legislature regarding a statute’s temporal reach should be given effect, unless the constitution prohibits it. Commonwealth Edison Co., 196 Ill. 2d at 38. The old approach, as set forth in First of America Trust Co. v. Armstead, 171 Ill. 2d 282, 289 (1996), provided that an amended law could not be retroactively applied if the application of the change in the law would affect a vested right. Vested rights are interests that are protected from legislative interference by Illinois’s due process clause (Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, § 2). Armstead, 171 Ill. 2d at 289. “While a vested right is difficult to define, it has frequently been defined to consist of something more than a mere expectation, based upon an anticipated continuance of the existing law, and it must have become a title, legal or equitable, to the present or future enjoyment of property, or to the present or future enjoyment of the demand, or a legal exception from a demand made by another.” Harraz v. Snyder, 283 Ill. App. 3d 254, 262 (1996). The most factually relevant case to the present matter is Henrich v. Libertyville High School, 186 Ill. 2d 381 (1998). There, a student injured in physical education class sued the school district based on its negligent and willful and wanton misconduct. Henrich, 186 Ill. 2d at 384-85. After his claims were dismissed, the plaintiff challenged the dismissal of his claim alleging willful and wanton misconduct. Henrich, 186 Ill. 2d at 386. In its initial opinion, the supreme court determined that the Tort Immunity Act barred plaintiffs willful and wanton claim. Henrich, 186 Ill. 2d at 395. However, a day before the court issued its opinion, the legislature amended the Tort Immunity Act to permit claims of willful and wanton misconduct against school districts. Henrich, 186 Ill. 2d at 403. The plaintiff argued that the amended statute should be applied, thereby efiminating the school district’s immunity. Henrich, 186 Ill. 2d at 403. In a supplemental opinion, the court decided that the amended statute did not apply because the school district had a vested right to total immunity as provided by the unamended statute. Henrich, 186 Ill. 2d at 404. The court explained that an exemption from a demand or an immunity from prosecution in a suit is as valuable to a party as the right to enforce a demand or proceed with prosecution is to another party. Henrich, 186 Ill. 2d at 404. Thus, a vested ground of defense, like a vested cause of action, is fully protected from being cut off or destroyed by an act of the legislature. Henrich, 186 Ill. 2d at 404-05. The court concluded that the amended statute “cannot reach back and take that vested right away, impose a new duty on the school district, and breathe life into this previously barred claim.” Henrich, 186 Ill. 2d at 405.  Later, in Commonwealth Edison Co., the supreme court expounded upon its original holding in Henrich in light of the fact that it had adopted the Landgraf approach to retroactivity. Commonwealth Edison Co., 196 Ill. 2d at 45-49. In the court’s view, Hen-rich remained relevant insofar as it defined the interests that are protected from legislative interference by the due process clause of the Illinois Constitution. Commonwealth Edison Co., 196 Ill. 2d at 47. However, the court added that there is more to assessing whether the due process clause has been violated than merely determining whether a right is vested or nonvested. Commonwealth Edison Co., 196 Ill. 2d at 47. Rather, the court explained as follows: “ ‘[T]he question of the validity of the application of a statute rests on subtle judgments concerning the fairness or unfairness of applying the new statutory rule to affect interests which accrued out of events which transpired when a different prior rule of law was in force. One fundamental consideration of fairness is that settled expectations honestly arrived at with respect to substantial interests ought not to be defeated. [Citation.] The determination of whether the application of the statute unreasonably infringes upon the rights of those to whom it applies involves a balancing and discrimination between reasons for and against the application of the statute to this class of individuals.’ ” Commonwealth Edison Co., 196 Ill. 2d at 47, quoting Moore v. Jackson Park Hospital, 95 Ill. 2d 223, 241-42 (1983). In the end, the court concluded that Henrich had been correctly decided. Commonwealth Edison Co., 196 Ill. 2d at 48-49. It explained that applying the amendment to the Tort Immunity Act would have meant imposing a period of retroactivity on the school district of almost four years. Commonwealth Edison Co., 196 Ill. 2d at 48. It also would have meant resurrecting a claim that had previously been barred in its entirety. Commonwealth Edison Co., 196 Ill. 2d at 48. Thus, the “subtle judgments concerning fairness” required that the school district’s settled expectations not be disturbed. Commonwealth Edison Co., 196 Ill. 2d at 48-49. In the simplest scenario of the present case, section 9f can be viewed as an attempt by the legislature to codify the portion of the fireman’s rule that places upon an owner/occupier a duty of reasonable care to maintain his or her property so as to prevent injury to a fireman from a cause independent of the emergency. See Washington v. Atlantic Richfield Co., 66 Ill. 2d 103, 108 (1976). Section 9f states that an owner or occupier owes “firefighters who are on the premises in the performance of their official duties *** a duty of reasonable care in the maintenance of the premises.” Pub. Act 93 — 233, § 5, eff. July 22, 2003 (adding 425 ILCS 25/9f). Arguably, section 9f imposes no greater duty than previously existed under the common-law version of the fireman’s rule. For instance, under the fireman’s rule, an owner/ occupier already owed a duty of “reasonable care in the maintenance of the premises.” See, e.g., Dini v. Naiditch, 20 Ill. 2d 406, 416-17 (1960) (stating that “an action should lie against a landowner for failure to exercise reasonable care in the maintenance of his property”). Moreover, section 9f does not expressly declare that the common-law fireman’s rule has been abolished. This is in contrast to other statutes like section 2 of the Premises Liability Act (740 ILCS 130/2 (West 2002)), which expressly abolished the common-law distinction between invitees and licensees. 740 ILCS 130/2 (West 2002). Thus, if section 9f merely codifies the fireman’s rule, it does not impose any additional duties upon defendants. Consequently, it is unnecessary to discuss this interpretation any further.  The important question posed by section 9f is whether the duty of reasonable care extends to the scenario where a lack of proper maintenance causes the emergency situation in which the firefighter is hurt. To answer this question, section 9f can be viewed as imposing a broad duty of care, covering all situations, even where no duty previously existed. The second sentence of section 9f significantly advances this interpretation. There, section 9f states that an owner/occupier is not “relieved of the duty of reasonable care if the firefighter is injured due to a lack of maintenance of the premises in the course of responding to a fire, false alarm, or his or her inspection or investigation of the premises.” Pub. Act 93 — 233, § 5, eff. July 22, 2003 (adding 425 ILCS 25/9Í). Unfortunately, if this language serves as an attempt to abolish the fireman’s rule, section 9f incorporates an incorrect conception of the common-law rule. The fireman’s rule does not “reheve” an owner/occupier of a duty of reasonable care. The word “reheve” suggests that a duty, already in place, is being removed, or that the owner/ occupier is availing himself of a defense to the imposition of a duty. However, “[ujnlike an affirmative defense, the ‘fireman’s rule’ does not presuppose the existence of an otherwise valid cause of action.” Vroegh v. J&M Forklift, 165 Ill. 2d 523, 530 (1995). Rather, the rule “goes to the threshold question of whether an owner or occupier of land has any duty to fire fighters injured while fighting a fire on his premises. Where the rule applies, it means that no duty is imposed by the law.” Vroegh, 165 Ill. 2d at 530. Nonetheless, if section 9f does intend to abolish the fireman’s rule, it cannot be retroactively applied to defendants to impose a duty upon them that did not previously exist. Defendants in this case had a vested right to total immunity from the prosecution of plaintiffs negligence claim. See Henrich, 186 Ill. 2d at 404; see also Harraz, 283 Ill. App. 3d at 256-57 (applying a vested rights analysis where the vested right was derived from the common law, and later taken away by a statute). Under the fairness considerations of Commonwealth Edison Co., plaintiffs cause of action accrued on April 29, 1999, the date of the explosion. Section 9f s effective date was July 22, 2003. We would be imposing a new duty upon defendants approximately four years and three months after the accident occurred. By comparison, in Commonwealth Edison Co.’s examination of Henrich, the court found it unreasonable to retroactively impose a duty where the amendatory statute took effect less than four years after the student’s cause of action accrued against the school district. Commonwealth Edison Co., 196 Ill. 2d at 48. The supreme court further found it unreasonable that a claim that was once barred should be resurrected. Commonwealth Edison Co., 196 Ill. 2d at 48. We have a similar situation in this case. Thus, the “subtle judgments concerning fairness” require that defendants’ settled expectations not be disturbed. See Commonwealth Edison Co., 196 Ill. 2d at 48-49. We conclude that defendants’ due process rights would be violated by retroactively using section 9f to allow plaintiffs negligence claim to proceed. Accordingly, we refuse to do so. O’MALLEY, P.J., and CALLUM, J., concur.

=== CASE 2208981 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:35.138676+00 ===

177 Cal. App. 2d 714 (1960)
THE PEOPLE, Respondent,
v.
VERNEDIA VIVIAN HAWKINS, Appellant.
Crim. No. 1441.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Dist.
Feb. 8, 1960.
Edgar G. Langford and J. Perry Langford for Appellant.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and David B. Allen, Deputy Attorney General, for Respondent.
GRIFFIN, P. J.
Defendant-appellant was charged by indictment in Count I with the murder of Estelle Logans on May 1, 1959, in violation of section 187, Penal Code, and in Count II with the crime of abortion upon one Ruby Love on April 7, 1959, in violation of section 274, Penal Code. A jury verdict of guilty on both counts was returned. The degree of murder was fixed at second degree.
Counsel for defendant, in his brief, states that he makes no contention as to the validity of the conviction of defendant on the abortion charge contained in Count II.
The People's evidence shows that Ruby Love, sister of Estelle Logans, had known defendant for some time; that she (Ruby) became pregnant about January 15, 1959, and six weeks later was examined by her physician on March 3, 1959, for pregnancy and again about March 19 for vaginitis; that Ruby went to defendant's home to "get rid of the baby" about April 1, 1959; that defendant took her into her bedroom, used a speculum and inserted a catheter into the cervix of her uterus. Ruby paid defendant $75 for this service. She was told by defendant to leave the catheter therein and go home. That night she began suffering some pain and hemorrhaging. The next morning Ruby removed the catheter. A week later she again called on defendant. Defendant replaced the catheter and that night bleeding again started. Ruby removed the catheter and hemorrhaging began. She lost so much blood that a doctor was called and she was taken to a hospital. The doctor testified generally that he then examined her; that she was in shock, hemorrhaging and there were incomplete products of conception remaining in the vaginal vault. The placenta was removed manually. Blood transfusions were administered to her. There was no evidence of fetus. In his opinion, an abortion was not necessary to save her life.
Ruby testified her sister Estelle talked with her about Estelle's pregnancy; that Estelle told her she was going to *716 see the defendant herein; that on the next day she visited Estelle in her home and Estelle was having cramps and pains and the following day she was worse; that at Estelle's request Ruby contacted defendant by telephone (giving the unlisted telephone number defendant had given her); that she told defendant Estelle was having cramps and defendant told her to obtain some particular kind of pills to give Estelle for the pain; that about 2 a. m. the fetus passed; that she took Estelle to the hospital; that Ruby then called defendant and talked to her; that defendant said she didn't know what to do and told her not to mention defendant's name "whatever you do" and that Ruby later brought the fetus to the hospital. Photographs of it were received in evidence. The attending physician and pathologist testified generally that on May 5 Estelle was in complete shock; a vaginal examination was made which revealed that the placenta was still inside the uterus; that in an endeavor to obtain her previous history Estelle told him that "someone had slipped something inside of her a few days previously" and she had passed a fetus at home; that she was taken to surgery and they found the membrane to be ruptured and infected and an area of old, dark hematoma, or blood formation, was found. She died the next day. In the doctor's opinion, the cause of her death was an overwhelming infection she had when he first saw her and the introduction of a catheter into the uterus could have caused the membrane to rupture and it might introduce infection, which would lead to death; and that he saw no evidence that would indicate it was a spontaneous abortion that started the process. There was testimony that an abortion was not necessary to save her life.
A witness saw defendant and Estelle in a car together on May 1 at about 1:30 p. m. and talked with them. On the day of Estelle's death, her mother found a rubber catheter while cleaning Estelle's bedroom.
Another witness, who had previously received an abortion from defendant and paid $75 for it, testified that the morning Estelle died she went with the police and pointed out defendant's house. The abortion procedure she described was quite similar to that described by Mrs. Love. Armed with a search warrant, the officers searched defendant's home. Defendant told them she knew nothing about an abortion and had no instruments used for that purpose. They found in a bureau drawer a catheter wrapped inside a newspaper. Defendant told them some lady had left it there. When they *717 were about to search the closet, defendant stepped in front of the officer, pulled out a bag and handed it to him. In it were two vaginal specula, a heavy wire or probe similar to a coat hanger, and several other specula were found in the room. A white sheet with bloodstains on it was found in a back bedroom. At first defendant denied knowing anything about these articles. She claimed some unidentified person left them there. Later she admitted the purse in which one of the specula was found belonged to her. After defendant was placed under arrest for murder, she asked who was involved. The officer mentioned the name Estelle Logans. Defendant replied, "Well, I don't even know the lady" and denied ever seeing her. An examination of the sheet, specula and catheters revealed that they had human blood on them, Type A, the same type as Estelle Logans. Defendant denied she ever performed an abortion on anyone or that she knew how to do it. Later she claimed one Martha Williams brought the instruments to her home in a bag and left them there. Martha Williams said she was in defendant's home once, about three and a half years prior to that time, and that she never took these articles to defendant's home.
Defendant, at the trial, admitted knowing Mrs. Love and later stated that she recognized a picture of Mrs. Logans and that Mrs. Logans did come to her door on one occasion and she, defendant, gave her the bag of instruments here mentioned and that she later returned them. Although thoroughly impeached, there were other witnesses produced by defendant who attempted to corroborate this story. Defendant admitted receiving two telephone calls from Mrs. Love about 1 a. m. on May 2 in reference to her sister being sick and in distress and that Mrs. Love asked her what to do and said she had "taken" the baby and cut the cord with a razor blade. Defendant said she advised Mrs. Love to take her sister to the hospital. She said there was blood on the instruments when they were returned to her and that she washed them.
Defendant claims this evidence was insufficient to establish the corpus delicti because there was no sufficient showing that deceased herself did not insert the catheter which ultimately caused her death.
[1] The usual rule is that we must assume in favor of the verdict the existence of every fact which the jury could have reasonably deduced from the evidence and then determine *718 whether such facts are sufficient to support the verdict. [2] Before a verdict can be set aside on appeal, it must be made clearly to appear that upon no hypothesis is there sufficient substantial evidence to support the conclusion reached in the court below. (People v. Tom Woo, 181 Cal. 315, 326 [184 P. 389]; People v. Peete, 54 Cal. App. 333, 342 [202 P. 51]; People v. Wright, 167 Cal. 1 [138 P. 349].)
[3] With these rules in mind, even apart from the history which Estelle Logans gave to the doctor on admission to the hospital, there are sufficient circumstances in the record which the jury could have relied upon in deciding that the defendant, rather than the deceased, inserted the catheter. Deceased's statement to Mrs. Love that she was "going to go and see Vernedia" was admissible. (People v. Alcalde, 24 Cal. 2d 177, 186 [148 P.2d 627].) This statement, when considered in connection with the telephone calls by Mrs. Love with defendant in reference to Estelle's condition and her recommendation as to treatment; the finding of abortion instruments, etc., in defendant's home, as indicated, and her false explanations accounting for their presence; plus the fact that she had performed an abortion on Mrs. Love and two other women in a similar fashion on previous occasions and being seen with deceased on May 1, clearly demonstrate a consciousness of guilt on the part of defendant, and when considered in connection with the medical testimony, there was sufficient proof of the corpus delicti and sufficient evidence to justify the finding of the jury and the trial court on a motion for new trial that the catheter was inserted by defendant rather than by the deceased herself. (People v. Wayne, 41 Cal. 2d 814, 822 [264 P.2d 547]; People v. Roy, 175 Cal. App. 2d 551, 555 [346 P.2d 415]; People v. Pierson, 69 Cal. App. 2d 285 [159 P.2d 39]; People v. Miner, 96 Cal. App. 2d 43 [214 P.2d 557]; Opper v. United States, 348 U.S. 84 [75 S. Ct. 158, 164, 99 L. Ed. 101].)
[4] The opinion of the attending physician of Mrs. Logans that her abortion was not a spontaneous one, based upon his examination and findings and the history given him by deceased that three or four days previously someone had slipped something inside her, was admissible. (People v. Brown, 49 Cal. 2d 577, 585 [320 P.2d 5]; People v. Wilson, 25 Cal. 2d 341 [153 P.2d 720].)
[5] Defendant objected generally to the admission of this testimony relating to what the deceased, Estelle, said, relying upon People v. Wright, 167 Cal. 1 [138 P. 349]; People *719 v. Thomas, 51 Cal. App. 731, 735 [197 P. 677]; People v. Northcott, 45 Cal. App. 706 [189 P. 704]. The court, in the Wright case, said such declaration is hearsay as direct proof of the commission of the abortion but can be properly admitted as evidence establishing the condition of the woman and the avowed purpose of her visit. Nowhere in the instant case did defendant request the court to instruct the jury that the consideration of this testimony should be limited to this purpose. Ordinarily, unless vital to the correct determination of the case, this point is unavailable on appeal unless a request for such an instruction is made. (People v. Findley, 132 Cal. 301, 306 [64 P. 472]; People v. White, 50 Cal. 2d 428 [325 P.2d 985]; Witkin, California Evidence 741,  709.)
Even if we assume that under the evidence such an instruction should have been given on the court's own motion, we conclude, from an examination of the entire cause, including the evidence and the instructions given, that no prejudicial error resulted. (Cal. Const., art. VI,  4 1/2; People v. Watson 46 Cal. 2d 818, 835 [299 P.2d 243]; People v. Nolan, 126 Cal. App. 623 [14 P.2d 880]; Estate of Hampton, 55 Cal. App. 2d 543 [131 P.2d 565].)
Judgment and order denying new trial affirmed.
Shepard, J., and Coughlin, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737118 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:16:27.816679+00 ===

JUSTICE FREEMAN delivered the opinion of the court: Respondent, Leonard Thomas Timpone, was charged with various violations of the Rules of Professional Conduct (Rules) (134 Ill. 2d R. 1.1 et seq.) in a three-count complaint filed by the Administrator of the Attorney Registration and Disciplinary Commission (ARDC). The Hearing Board found that the Administrator established that respondent: (1) entered into a business transaction with a client without making proper disclosures; (2) converted and commingled funds belonging to another client; and (3) engaged in conduct involving fraud, dishonesty, deceit or misrepresentation. The Hearing Board recommended disbarment as a sanction. The Review Board affirmed those findings and rejected respondent’s plea for a lesser sanction. The matter is now before this court on respondent’s exceptions to the findings and conclusions of the Review Board. I. BACKGROUND Respondent has been licensed to practice law since 1970. In 1993, we suspended him for three years. See In re Timpone, 157 Ill. 2d 178 (1993). The charges in the matter before us now are based on transactions involving two clients, Richard Rzewnicki and Fulton Purnell. We will discuss the facts relating to each client in turn. A. The Rzewnicki Transactions In count I of the complaint the Administrator alleged that respondent engaged in several ethical violations arising from a loan transaction between respondent and Rzewnicki. Among other things, the Administrator alleged that respondent: (1) engaged in conduct involving fraud, dishonesty, deceit, or misrepresentation (134 Ill. 2d R. 8.4(a)(4)); (2) entered into a business transaction with a client without making proper disclosures where the lawyer and client have conflicting interests and the client expects the lawyer to exercise his professional judgment on the client’s behalf (134 Ill. 2d R. 1.8); and (3) engaged in conduct “which tends to defeat the administration of justice or to bring the courts or the legal profession into disrepute” in violation of Supreme Court Rule 771 (134 Ill. 2d R. 771). Respondent represented Rzewnicki in a dissolution of marriage proceeding from 1980 through 1983 and assisted him in the sale of his marital residence in 1987 and 1988. Respondent performed no further legal work for Rzewnicki until 1992, when he defended Rzewnicki on a DUI charge and a building code violation. Approximately two months after the sale of the marital residence, Rzewnicki loaned respondent $35,000 from the proceeds of the sale. The loan was never repaid, and in January 1999, Rzewnicki obtained a default judgment against respondent. The judgment remains unsatisfied. Rzewnicki claimed that he loaned the money to respondent because he trusted respondent as “his lawyer,” and because he was told he would receive a good return. However, in a pretrial deposition, Rzewnicki described the services respondent performed for him in December of 1988 by testifying that he was an “ex-client” and that “[he] had nothing binding at that time.” Respondent argued before the Hearing Board that he and Rzewnicki did not have an attorney-client relationship at the time in question, and that the loan agreement arose out of their friendship rather than the relationship of attorney and client. Therefore, although a debtor-creditor relationship existed with Rzewnicki, his receipt of the loan did not violate any of the provisions of the Rules. The Hearing Board disagreed. Relying on the reasoning in In re Imming, 131 Ill. 2d 239 (1989), the Hearing Board found that respondent and Rzewnicki had an attorney-client relationship at the time of the loan. The Hearing Board also found that respondent violated his fiduciary duty to his client by, among other things: (1) failing to advise Rzewnicki that there were limits on the types of transactions an attorney could enter into with a client; (2) failing to advise him to consult independent counsel before making the loan; and (3) providing no collateral for the loan and giving Rzewnicki no promissory note evidencing the loan or the interest rate until five years after the transaction. The Review Board noted that respondent did not challenge any of the factual findings of the Hearing Board and affirmed all of those findings. B. The Purnell Transactions Counts II and III of the Administrator’s complaint involve respondent’s representation of Fulton Purnell and statements made to the ARDC regarding that representation. In count II, the Administrator alleged that respondent: (1) converted his client’s funds; (2) failed to hold his client’s property separate from his own (134 Ill. 2d R. 1.15(a)); and (3) failed to promptly deliver funds to a client (134 Ill. 2d R. 1.15(b)). In count III, the Administrator alleged that respondent: (1) made a statement of material fact known by the lawyer to be false in connection with a lawyer disciplinary matter (134 Ill. 2d R. 8.1(a)(1)); and (2) induced another to engage in conduct when the lawyer knows that the conduct will violate the Rules of Professional Conduct (134 Ill. 2d R. 8.4(a)(4)). Regarding both counts II and III, the Administrator alleged that respondent engaged in conduct involving fraud, dishonesty, deceit, or misrepresentation, in violation of Rule 8.4(a)(4), and also engaged in conduct “which tends to defeat the administration of justice or to bring the courts or the legal profession into disrepute” in violation of Supreme Court Rule 771. The Hearing Board’s findings on these allegations are not challenged by respondent. Fulton Purnell engaged respondent to represent him in a proceeding to set aside a judgment-by-confession taken against him by Leo Hickman. He was referred to respondent by a mutual friend, John Jordan, who had been represented in the past by respondent. According to respondent, he expended considerable, time and effort in his attempt to set aside the Hickman judgment-by-confession. In September, 1998, respondent received a check for $23,448.94 made out to Purnell in settlement of the Hickman case. This check was deposited in respondent’s client fees account on September 21, 1998. The check was endorsed, “Fulton Purnell Pay to Leonard Timpone.” The handwriting was identified by respondent’s associate, Gail Golub, as that of Gina Biers, respondent’s secretary. Respondent did not have a trust account at the time he deposited Purnell’s check. He maintained a client fees account and an operating account at the same bank and money would be transferred from the fees account to the operating account as checks were written on the operating account. Respondent’s firm did not have a client trust account until 1999. Respondent testified that he, Jordan, and Purnell had a three-way telephone conversation in the early fall of 1998, at the time of a visit by Purnell to Jordan’s home. According to respondent, Purnell authorized him to sign his name to the settlement check and deduct his fee. This account was confirmed by Jordan, but denied by Purnell. Purnell denied ever having a three-way telephone conversation with respondent and Jordan and denied authorizing respondent to sign his name to the check and deduct his fees. In September 1998, Purnell received a letter from respondent enclosing a check for $10,742.19. The letter stated that he had received $23,448.94 in the Hickman matter and had deducted the balance of almost $12,000 in attorney fees. Before Purnell cashed the $10,742.19 check from respondent, the balance in respondent’s client fees account fell under $10,000 on at least three occasions. Respondent denied using Purnell’s funds for his own purposes. In early November 1998, respondent received a letter from the ARDC, requesting a response to allegations raised by Purnell as to the handling of the Hickman settlement check. At respondent’s direction, Golub wrote to the Administrator’s counsel on his behalf, stating, “As for Mr. Purnell’s settlement of funds, the entirety of the settlement remains in our client trust account.” On January 6, 1999, also at respondent’s direction, Golub again wrote to the Administrator’s counsel, advising, “As I stated in an earlier letter to your office, however, the entirety of the [Hickman settlement] check remains in our client fees account.” Based on this testimony, the Hearing Board found that respondent had converted Purnell’s funds, as charged in the complaint. The Board, citing In re Clayter, 78 Ill. 2d 276, 282 (1980), noted that a conversion occurs anytime an account holding funds on behalf of a client drops below the sums due the client, even if the drop in the balance happens inadvertently. The Hearing Board also found Purnell’s testimony that he never gave respondent authority to negotiate the settlement check more credible than the version of events given by respondent. The Board similarly found that respondent failed to hold property of a client separate from his own property in violation of Rule 1.15(a). The Hearing Board likewise found that respondent violated Rule 1.15(b) by failing to promptly deliver to Purnell funds that Purnell was entitled to receive. The Board found that he was not entitled to deduct those funds from the Hickman settlement proceeds without a fee agreement, regardless of whether he was still owed fees for the completed work. Without an agreement, respondent had engaged in conduct involving fraud, dishonesty, deceit, or misrepresentation and conduct “which tends to defeat the administration of justice or bring the courts or the legal profession into disrepute.” 134 Ill. 2d R. 771. The Hearing Board also noted that, although respondent was censured in 1994 for failure to timely file a tax return, he had not yet filed a return for 1998. As to count III, the Hearing Board found that the charged conduct had been proved because the two letters in response to the ARDC inquiry, prepared at the direction and with the approval of respondent, contained false statements known by him to be false. He did not have a client trust account, as stated in the first letter, and the “entirety” of Purnell’s settlement check did not remain in his account, as stated in the second letter. Respondent did not challenge any of these findings and conclusions in his exceptions to the Hearing Board’s recommendations. The findings were, accordingly, affirmed by the Review Board. The Boards’ findings as to the allegations in counts II and III are likewise not challenged in this court. C. Evidence in Aggravation and Mitigation The Hearing Board noted that respondent had been disciplined on two prior occasions. This court suspended him for three years in 1993 for misconduct including conversion and commingling of client funds, failing to maintain complete records of client funds, neglecting client cases, hiding assets from the court, and misrepresenting a matter to the ARDC. In re Timpone, 157 Ill. 2d 178 (1993). In 1994, he was censured for failure to timely file tax returns for the years 1984 through 1988. In re Timpone, M.R. 9862 (March 30, 1994). Relying on In re Levin, 101 Ill. 2d 535, 541-42 (1984), the Hearing Board considered the similarities between respondent’s prior and current misconduct and the length of time between the prior and current acts. The Hearing Board also considered in aggravation the fact that respondent never repaid the loan to Rzewnicki, despite the fact that he earned significant income in the years between the loan in 1988 and his suspension in 1993. Relying on In re Smith, 75 Ill. 2d 134, 142 (1979), the Hearing Board found respondent’s lack of candor and remorse to be an aggravating factor. The Board noted that throughout the course of the disciplinary hearing, respondent justified and minimized his actions rather than accepting responsibility for them. In mitigation, respondent testified that he engaged in community service work and that he took cases for people who could not pay his fees. He also stated that he had “learned his lesson” from failing to document his transactions with Purnell. Golub testified that at the time of the disciplinary hearing, respondent’s firm had one “official” pro bono case and 10 to 20 “unofficial” pro bono cases where the firm was working for reduced rates in order to provide low-income people with representation in domestic relations cases. The Hearing Board found this testimony to be essentially self-serving and insufficient to warrant substantial consideration as evidence in mitigation. The Hearing Board recommended disbarment. Before the Review Board, respondent challenged the disbarment recommendation on the ground that the Hearing Board overemphasized the prior discipline. The Review Board rejected that argument, observing that the type of misconduct proved in this case is serious and, in the absence of any aggravating or mitigating factors, would likely warrant a sanction ranging from a lengthy suspension to disbarment. The Review Board concluded that the timing of the present misconduct, occurring on the heels of the prior suspension, respondent’s lack of candor or remorse, and his continued tax violations despite prior discipline indicate that a lengthy suspension would not induce respondent to rehabilitate himself. Therefore, the Review Board affirmed the findings and conclusions of the Hearing Board and recommended disbarment. Before this court, respondent argues that the Rzewnicki transaction should not be considered because an attorney-client relationship did not exist at the time of the loan. He also argues that a lengthy suspension would be the appropriate sanction for the Purnell transaction. II. ANALYSIS The rules controlling our review of the reports and recommendations of both the Hearing Board and the Review Board are well established. The Administrator bears the burden of proving the allegations contained within the complaint by clear and convincing evidence. 137 Ill. 2d R. 758(b); 166 Ill. 2d R. 753(c)(6). Moreover, the findings of fact made by the Hearing Board are to be treated virtually the same as the findings of any initial trier of fact. In re Parker, 149 Ill. 2d 222, 233 (1992). Deference is to be accorded to the factual findings of the Hearing Board because the Hearing Board is in a position to observe the witnesses’ demeanor, judge their credibility, and resolve conflicting testimony. In re Spak, 188 Ill. 2d 53, 66 (1999). Accordingly, this court will generally not disturb the Board’s factual findings unless they are against the manifest weight of the evidence. In re Ushijima, 119 Ill. 2d 51, 56-57 (1987). We are not, however, bound by the disciplinary recommendations of either the Hearing Board or the Review Board because those recommendations are advisory and the ultimate responsibility for imposing discipline rests with this court. In re Eckberg, 192 Ill. 2d 70, 85 (2000); In re Howard, 188 Ill. 2d 423, 434 (1999). A. Count I: Improper Business Transaction Respondent submits that the conclusion of the Hearing Board, as affirmed by the Reviewing Board, i.e., that an attorney-client relationship existed at the time of the loans, was against the manifest weight of the evidence. Respondent notes that the Hearing Board expressly stated that “no violation of attorney disciplinary rules would be at issue here if respondent entered into a business transaction with Rzewnicki based upon Rzewnicki’s personal friendship with respondent rather than the attorney-client relationship.” Thus, if the Hearing Board’s determination that an attorney-client relationship existed at the time of the loan transaction is against the manifest weight of the evidence, the Rule violations alleged in count I of the complaint were not proved. See In re Smith, 168 Ill. 2d 269, 283 (1995). The Administrator, citing Attorney Registration and Disciplinary Commission Rule 302(f)(5), initially asserts that respondent’s argument concerning the existence of an attorney-client relationship has been waived since it was not expressly argued before the Review Board. Rule 302(f)(5) is similar to Supreme Court Rule 341(e)(7) (177 Ill 2d R. 341(e)(7)), providing that the appellant’s brief to the Review Board must include a section entitled “Argument,” containing the contentions of the party and the reasons therefor, and warns that points not argued are waived. In his brief before the Review Board, respondent essentially contended that the Hearing Board had overemphasized respondent’s prior discipline and argued that a suspension, rather than disbarment, would be the appropriate sanction. According to the Administrator, respondent’s brief contained no specific argument that the Hearing Board erred in finding that an attorney-client relationship existed between respondent and Rzewnicki. Respondent’s brief before the Review Board did, however, contain the following contentions: “Thus we emphasize the following evidentiary facts, as reported by the hearing Board: 1. Though Leonard had represented Richard Rzewnicki before and after his marital home was sold, he did not represent him when the home was sold in late 1988. 2. Leonard did not represent Rzewnicki in any pending legal matter when Rzewnicki loaned him money, which derived from the sale of the home.” Respondent argued before the Review Board that Rzewnicki described himself as an ex-client at the time the loan was made, and pointed out that there was a gap of over four years between the time respondent completed the post-decree work in 1988 and his representation of Rzewnicki on the DUI and building code violation cases in 1992-93. Thus, although not precisely characterized as a point relied on for reversal, it is clear that respondent disputed the Hearing Board’s analysis and conclusion that the loan occurred during the attorney-client relationship. It is well established that the rule of waiver is a limitation on parties and not on reviewing courts. Welch v. Johnson, 147 Ill. 2d 40, 48 (1992). To reach a just result, this court may override considerations of waiver and consider a point not raised below. Welch, 147 Ill. 2d at 48. Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, we decline to apply waiver and will consider respondent’s argument on its merits. Turning to the merits of the argument, the Hearing Board found that respondent was not performing any legal services for Rzewnicki at the exact time the loan transaction took place. However, this court has established that, while an attorney’s relation to a client generally ceases on completion and satisfaction of the matter the attorney was employed to conduct, special circumstances or arrangements may show a continuation of the relationship. Imming, 131 Ill. 2d at 252. The Hearing Board found that such special circumstances existed here. The Review Board affirmed this finding. The special circumstances found by the Hearing Board in this case were as follows: (1) Rzewnicki stated emphatically and without hesitation that he considered respondent to be his lawyer, not his friend; (2) the loan transaction took place, upon the request of respondent, within weeks of respondent’s completion of work on a post-decree matter that generated the funds; and (3) Rzewnicki testified that the funds loaned to respondent were generated by the work respondent performed on his behalf. The Hearing Board found the relationship of Rzewnicki and respondent to be analogous to the eight creditors and the attorney disciplined in Imming. In that case, the respondent was disciplined for breach of his fiduciary duties to eight investors who were, at the time of the investments, either clients or former clients. Imming, 131 Ill. 2d at 253. The Imming court held that the Hearing Board could reasonably have concluded that in the case of four of the investors, the funds in question were the product of respondent’s legal work that was concluded so close in time to the legal services rendered as to induce the client to believe that respondent’s business transactions were a continuation of the attorney-client relationship. Imming, 131 Ill. 2d at 254. In the case of the other four investors, respondent was performing legal services for them at the time of the loan or shortly afterward. Imming, 131 Ill. 2d at 253. While we believe that some differences exist between the facts of the present case and the facts in Imming, we do not believe those differences compel a conclusion opposite to that made by the Hearing Board. We further acknowledge that Rzewnicki’s sworn testimony was at odds with his deposition. However, credibility determinations rest with the Hearing Board. We cannot say that the findings made by the Hearing Board were against the manifest weight of the evidence. We therefore affirm the findings made by the Hearing Board with respect to the Rzewnicki transactions. B. Appropriate Sanction As previously noted, respondent does not challenge the boards’ factual findings as to the allegations in counts II and III. We therefore turn to the issue of the appropriate discipline to be imposed in this case. Supreme Court Rule 771 addresses the types of discipline attorneys may be subjected to in Illinois. 134 Ill. 2d R. 771. The sanctions range from the severest, disbarment, to the most lenient, reprimand. See 134 Ill. 2d R. 771. Respondent argues that suspension, not disbarment, is the appropriate sanction for his misconduct. Although we agree that disbarment is not appropriate in this case, we disagree that a mere suspension in justified under the facts. This court has described disbarment as “the utter destruction of an attorney’s professional life, his character and his livelihood and therefore a court should use disbarment in moderation.” In re Yamaguchi, 118 Ill. 2d 417, 428-29 (1987). Initially, we note that this court has imposed a lesser sanction than disbarment in cases involving transactions similar to those in the case before us. In Imming, discussed earlier, a two-year suspension was imposed for improper business transactions with clients. Imming, 131 Ill. 2d at 261. Similarly, a two-year suspension was imposed for similar misconduct in In re Rosin, 118 Ill. 2d 365 (1987). In In re Joyce, 133 Ill. 2d 16, 32 (1989), we likewise imposed a two-year suspension for commingling and conversion of client funds. In respondent’s earlier disciplinary matter, we imposed a three-year suspension for similar misconduct involving six different clients. Timpone, 157 Ill. 2d at 200. The Review Board noted that the type of conduct at issue in this case likely warrants a sanction ranging from a lengthy suspension to disbarment. Of these cases cited by the Review Board in its written decision, we find distinguishable those where disbarment was ordered. In each of those cases, certain aggravation existed which is notably absent in the case at bar. See In re Feldman, 89 Ill. 2d 7 (1982) (ordering disbarment for intentional misconduct, including converting a client’s funds then wrongfully signing another client’s name on checks to cover up the first conversion); In re Stillo, 68 Ill. 2d 49 (1977) (ordering disbarment for breach of attorney-client relationship to obtain loan from client which was never repaid in addition to settling a case without the client’s consent, and converting client funds). The Administrator argues that our holding in In re Blank, 145 Ill. 2d 534 (1991), strongly supports the boards’ recommendations. In that case, the respondent was found to have neglected three clients’ cases, engaged in dishonesty, and converted funds on two occasions when he allowed his trust account balance to fall to zero while he was supposed to be holding money for a medical provider. The Hearing Board and the Review Board recommended a two-year suspension. Blank, 145 Ill. 2d at 537. This court imposed disbarment, citing the gravity of the misconduct and respondent’s recidivism. Blank, 145 Ill. 2d at 554-55. We agree with the Administrator that respondent’s recidivism is a factor that cannot be ignored in this case. However, in In re Howard, 188 Ill. 2d 423 (1999), we imposed a two-year suspension on a lawyer who had been reprimanded for neglecting criminal cases, who was later suspended for two additional years for misconduct including conversion of client funds, and whose name had been stricken from the roll of attorneys practicing before the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals. Despite his suspension, he continued to practice law and submitted false information to an Alaskan court where he applied for admission pro hoc vice. Noting our holding in Yamaguchi, the majority found disbarment unwarranted, in part because corrupt motives and moral turpitude were not clearly shown. Howard, 188 Ill. 2d at 441-42. This court has held that in determining the quantum of discipline the court will mete out, “the degree of punishment imposed in a disciplinary proceeding is based upon an evaluation of the evidence, the respondent’s past record, his attitude at the disciplinary proceeding, and the best interests of society.” Imming, 131 Ill. 2d at 260. We have also repeatedly stressed that where corrupt motives and moral turpitude are not clearly shown, the proper punishment is suspension rather than disbarment. In re Chapman, 69 Ill. 2d 494, 501 (1978). Taking into account respondent’s recidivism, we cannot say that a “suspension for a specified period of time” (134 Ill. 2d R. 771(d)), however lengthy, as respondent suggests, is appropriate. Respondent does not appear to have grasped the importance of his ethical obligations, particularly when his friends are his clients. For this reason, we believe that a “suspension for a specified period and until further order of court” (emphasis added) (134 Ill. 2d R. 771(c)) serves the purpose of our disciplinary processes. We stress that, after disbarment, this sanction is the most severe that we can impose on an attorney. In our view, the “until further order of court” portion of the discipline reflects our agreement with the Administrator that respondent’s recidivism warrants more than mere suspension. Finally, we feel compelled to address several points raised in dissent. The dissent accuses us of failing to sanction the misconduct at issue in this case consistently with the sanctions imposed in other cases involving similar misconduct. The dissent also criticizes us for failing to take into account respondent’s recidivism. With respect to the cases involving similar misconduct, the dissent states that we distinguish two cases, In re Stillo and In re Feldman, whereas the dissenting justices believe that no meaningful distinction exists between those cases and the case at bar. With respect to Stillo, the dissent states that it is “difficult to discern what aggravating factor was present [there] that is ‘notably absent’ [here] except perhaps, for Stillo’s accepting a settlement offer without prior authorization from his client.” 208 Ill. 2d at 392-93 (Garman, J., dissenting, joined by Thomas, J.). Accepting a settlement offer without client consent is a serious ethical lapse and would be further aggravation to the misconduct that was charged here. We believe that the absence of such misconduct here makes this case distinguishable from Stillo. With respect to Feldman, the dissent fails to note that at least nine check forgeries were also at issue there. Fortunately, the misconduct here, although similar, does not rise to that level. We therefore respectfully disagree that “there is no meaningful distinction to be made between Stillo, Feldman, and the present case and the same sanction— disbarment — should be imposed.” 208 Ill. 2d at 393-94 (Garman, J., dissenting, joined by Thomas, J.). Discipline cases must be judged on their facts, and while the discipline imposed from case to case should be consistent, we must take into account the factual differences that do exist from case to case. In our view, the factual differences between these two cases and the case at bar compel the conclusion that the discipline imposed here need not be similar. As for the other cases involving similar misconduct, we note that the suspension ordered in In re Rosin was for a two-year period. The suspension ordered here, 42 months, is nearly twice as long in duration. The same can be said for In re Joyce, where another two-year suspension was imposed. Clearly, standing alone, the misconduct at issue here does not, in normal circumstances, warrant disbarment. However, this case is not normal in that respondent has had disciplinary action taken against him before, as the dissent correctly notes. Our decision to add the “until further order of court” language to the suspension belies the dissent’s belief that we have failed to take into account respondent’s recidivism. We have considered the recidivism and have decided to suspend respondent, not only for a period of time nearly double in length that had been imposed in similar cases, but also until further order of court. The dissent takes issue with our decision to suspend respondent for a specified period of time and until further order of the court, intimating that the sanction does not give “sufficient attention to our responsibility to protect the public from respondent’s habitual misconduct or to protect the integrity of the profession.” 208 Ill. 2d at 390 (Garman, J., dissenting, joined by Thomas, J.). The dissent suggests that its preferred sanction, disbarment, would accomplish those goals. As noted earlier in this opinion, Supreme Court Rule 771 lists the various forms of discipline that are at this court’s disposal. A popular misconception regarding disbarment in this state is that a disbarred lawyer will never be allowed to practice law in Illinois again. This is not true. Supreme Court Rule 767 provides that “[a]n attorney who has been disbarred *** or suspended until further order of the court may file his verified petition with the clerk of the court seeking to be reinstated to the roll of attorneys admitted to practice law in this State.” 134 Ill. 2d R. 767. Thus, attorneys who are disbarred may seek reinstatement just as those who are suspended until further order of court. In both cases, the disciplined attorney must seek a court order before he or she will be allowed to practice. In the case of a disbarred attorney, he or she must wait until five years after the date of disbarment before seeking reinstatement. 166 Ill. 2d R. 767. In the case of the suspended attorney, he or she may not seek reinstatement until the period of suspension has passed. Critically, both forms of discipline share a common characteristic, i.e., in order to practice again, the disciplined attorney must first seek an order of this court to do so. In light of the foregoing, it is difficult to accept the dissent’s position that the discipline we impose upon respondent somehow fails to “protect the public from respondent’s habitual misconduct or to protect the integrity of the profession.” The public is no more protected under the type of discipline the dissent would impose upon respondent than the sanction that we have chosen to impose today. Likewise, the integrity of the profession is no less protected under our sanction. The only practical difference between the two forms of discipline is that under the dissent’s position, respondent would be ineligible to seek reinstatement for approximately one year longer than under ours. Given the fact that respondent will not practice until this court allows him to do so, this difference is, in our view, negligible. As the dissent itself acknowledges, “our goal [in such cases] is not to punish the attorney.” Howard, 188 Ill. 2d at 434. We have previously noted that disbarment is a form of discipline that should be used in moderation. The sanction we impose today reflects our recognition of that fact while remaining faithful to the goals of attorney discipline that this court has developed over the years. III. CONCLUSION Respondent Leonard Thomas Timpone is suspended from the practice of law for 42 months and until the further order of this court, effective March 26, 2001, the date of his interim suspension pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 774. Respondent suspended. JUSTICE FITZGERALD took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.

=== CASE 9737119 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:16:27.822733+00 ===

JUSTICE GARMAN, dissenting: I agree with the majority that, given the deference that must be afforded to the Hearing Board as the finder of fact (In re Spak, 188 Ill. 2d 53, 66 (1999)), and our prior case law regarding similar misconduct (In re Imming, 131 Ill. 2d 239 (1989)), the findings of the Hearing Board must be affirmed. I disagree, however, with the majority’s decision to reject the recommendations of the Hearing Board, the Review Board, and the Administrator that respondent be disbarred. These recommendations are, of course, purely advisory. This court has the ultimate responsibility for imposing attorney discipline. In re Chandler, 161 Ill. 2d 459, 472-73 (1994). In doing so, we strive to achieve predictability and fairness by imposing sanctions consistent with those imposed for similar misconduct. In re Howard, 188 Ill. 2d 423, 440 (1999). Nevertheless, we approach each case with the understanding that “our goal is not to punish the attorney but rather to protect the public from incompetent or unscrupulous attorneys, to maintain the integrity of the profession, and to protect the administration of justice from reproach.” Howard, 188 Ill. 2d at 434. In my opinion, the majority has not given sufficient attention to our responsibility to protect the public from respondent’s habitual misconduct or to protect the integrity of the profession. Although the majority cites cases in which similar misconduct has not resulted in disbarment (208 Ill. 2d at 384), and cases in which repeat offenders have not been disbarred (208 Ill. 2d at 385), I do not find these cases persuasive because this respondent has been disciplined on not just one but two prior occasions. He was suspended for three years in 1993 for conversion and commingling of client funds, failing to maintain complete records of client funds, neglecting cases, hiding assets from the court, and making misrepresentations to the ARDC. He was censured in 1994 for failure to file tax returns for five consecutive years. 208 Ill. 2d at 378. The majority, however, does not give great weight to respondent’s prior misconduct as a factor in aggravation. Rather, the majority would require proof of corrupt motives or moral turpitude, rather than mere habitual misconduct, before imposing the severe sanction of disbarment. 208 Ill. 2d at 385. Similar Misconduct The majority notes that in Imming a two-year suspension was imposed when the attorney engaged in transactions similar to the loan at issue in Count I. 208 Ill. 2d at 384. The Hearing and Review Boards recommended a two-year suspension for Imming, while the Administrator recommended disbarment. Imming, unlike the respondent in the present case, “had a previously unblemished record for 26 years.” Imming, 131 Ill. 2d at 261. This court noted that the “degree of punishment imposed in a disciplinary proceeding is based upon an evaluation of the evidence, the respondent’s past record, his attitude at the disciplinary proceeding, and the best interests of society.” Imming, 131 Ill. 2d at 260. Further, although “we endeavor to achieve uniformity in imposing discipline, *** we also consider each case on its own merits.” Imming, 131 Ill. 2d at 260. In the end, this court concluded that a two-year suspension “would be sufficient deterrence to impress upon respondent and others the absolute necessity of full disclosure in business transactions with clients and the impropriety of overreaching in the attorney-client relationship.” Imming, 131 Ill. 2d at 261. The facts relevant to determining the proper sanction in the present case are readily distinguishable from the facts in Imming. Respondent does not have an unblemished record; he did not display an attitude of cooperation or remorse at the disciplinary hearing; and he has not been sufficiently deterred from misconduct by a prior three-year suspension. The majority also points to the two-year suspension imposed in In re Rosin, 118 Ill. 2d 365 (1987), for misconduct similar to respondent’s. 208 Ill. 2d at 384. In Rosin, the record was “replete with both aggravating and mitigating circumstances” (Rosin, 118 Ill. 2d at 387), while in the present case, there are aggravating circumstances, but no mitigating circumstances. In mitigation, Rosin received no benefit from his conduct, he did not intentionally defraud his client, and he had no prior history of disciplinary action. Respondent, in contrast, did profit from his misconduct by securing and failing to repay a loan and by retaining funds that should have been promptly disbursed to a client. Further, he has twice been subjected to professional discipline. In aggravation, the Administrator cited uncharged conduct of Rosin’s. Rosin, 118 Ill. 2d at 388. In the present case, respondent’s failure to file recent tax returns, even after a previous censure for the same conduct, is uncharged conduct that the boards and the Administrator considered an aggravating circumstance. In re Joyce, 133 Ill. 2d 16 (1989), in which a two-year suspension was imposed for commingling and conversion of client funds (208 Ill. 2d at 384), is likewise unpersuasive. In Joyce, although the respondent attorney continued to deny any wrongdoing, he had been practicing for almost 20 years with no disciplinary record. The majority distinguishes two cases cited by the Review Board in its written decision on the basis that, in each case, “certain aggravation existed which is notably absent” in the present case. 208 Ill. 2d at 384. In In re Stillo, 68 Ill. 2d 49, 51 (1977), this court ordered disbarment of an attorney who borrowed money from a client and failed to repay it. Later, after the client obtained other representation, Stillo signed a promissory note for the amount borrowed, plus interest. By the time of the disciplinary proceeding, he had paid his obligation in full, including interest. Stillo, 68 Ill. 2d at 52. Stillo also settled a claim for another client without her knowledge. The settlement check, “purporting to bear the endorsement” of the client, was deposited in Stillo’s bank account. Stillo, 68 Ill. 2d at 52. In addition, although Stillo was not charged with giving false testimony, the Hearing Board concluded that he was not truthful in his testimony. Stillo, 68 Ill. 2d at 54. Stillo is, thus, virtually on all fours with the present case except that Stillo, unlike respondent, did repay the improper loan. It is difficult to discern what aggravating factor was present in Stillo that is “notably absent” in the present case except, perhaps, for Stillo’s accepting a settlement offer without prior authorization from his client. The client, however, did not object to the amount of the settlement. She was wronged by Stillo’s conversion of the proceeds. This court concluded that conversion of client funds to one’s own use is “an act involving moral turpitude, and, in the absence of mitigating circumstances, *** is a gross violation of the attorney’s oath, calling for the attorney’s disbarment.” Stillo, 68 Ill. 2d at 54. Later, in In re Feldman, 89 Ill. 2d 7 (1982), this court ordered disbarment of an attorney who converted client funds and then compounded his wrongdoing by signing another client’s name on checks to obtain funds so that he could cover up the earlier conversion. It is the intentional nature of his misconduct, as evidenced by the attempted cover-up, that the majority apparently finds to be a sufficient aggravating factor to justify disbarment. 208 Ill. 2d at 384. However, in Feldman, this court noted that “the offense of conversion is sufficient to justify disbarment” and, further, disbarment has been imposed “in situations involving similar or less flagrant misconduct” than that committed by Feldman. Feldman, 89 Ill. 2d at 11. In addition, Feldman argued that a lesser sanction would be appropriate, given that this was the first instance in which he had been charged with professional misconduct. Feldman, 89 Ill. 2d at 13. As this court accurately observed, however, “the wrong committed does not constitute an isolated incident. Rather, respondent has manifested a pattern of behavior which clearly tends to bring the legal profession into disrepute.” Feldman, 89 Ill. 2d at 13. Respondent in the present case has also manifested a pattern of behavior that brings the profession into disrepute. In my opinion, there is no meaningful distinction to be made between Stillo, Feldman, and the present case and the same sanction — disbarment—should be imposed. Recidivism While the lack of prior discipline is often seen as a mitigating factor (see Imming, 131 Ill. 2d 239; Joyce, 133 Ill. 2d 16; Rosin, 118 Ill. 2d 365), a history of prior discipline may be viewed as a factor in aggravation (see Imming, 131 Ill. 2d at 260 (“respondent’s past record” is relevant to determination of discipline to be meted out)). With regard to this aggravating factor, the majority notes the Administrator’s reliance on In re Blank, 145 Ill. 2d 534 (1991), but does not attempt to distinguish that case. 208 Ill. 2d at 384-85. Instead, the majority relies on Howard, 188 Ill. 2d 423. 208 Ill. 2d at 385. In Blank, both the Hearing Board and the Review Board recommended that the respondent be suspended for two years while the respondent argued that a two-year suspension was excessive. Blank, 145 Ill. 2d at 554. This court, however, ordered him disbarred because, unlike an attorney suspended for 18 months for similar misconduct, Blank was a recidivist. Blank, 145 Ill. 2d at 554, citing In re Fox, 122 Ill. 2d 402 (1988). Attorney Blank had not been previously suspended. In fact, his previous discipline consisted only of a censure in 1984 for mishandling of a client’s funds. Blank, 145 Ill. 2d at 554. Factors supporting disbarment were his recidivism, the gravity of his offenses, and the fact that Blank failed to recognize his improper conduct and attempted to blame his problems on another. Blank, 145 Ill. 2d at 555. I agree with the Administrator that Blank offers sound support for disbarment in the present case. In Howard, the Hearing Board recommended a two-year suspension for an attorney who made a misrepresentation regarding a past suspension in a petition to practice pro hac vice in another state, neglected a criminal appeal, engaged in the practice of law while under a prior suspension, and failed to promptly return unearned fees. The Review Board adopted the Hearing Board’s findings of fact, but reduced the recommended suspension to a period of three months. Howard, 188 Ill. 2d at 425. The Administrator filed exceptions, arguing that the misconduct proven in this case, coupled with Howard’s history of prior misconduct, demanded a sanction “far in excess of the three months” recommended by the Review Board. This court agreed. Howard, 188 Ill. 2d at 440. Three dissenting justices advocated disbarment of Howard, but the majority rejected disbarment, stating that “where corrupt motives and moral turpitude are not clearly shown, the proper punishment is suspension rather than disbarment.” Howard, 188 Ill. 2d at 441. With regard to his recidivism, this court noted that the acts underlying the earlier suspension occurred during the same period of time as the neglect of the criminal appeal that formed a substantial part of the current matter. Howard, 188 Ill. 2d at 441-42. In addition, the previous suspension was for five months so that a suspension for two years, more than four times the duration of the earlier suspension, would be “sufficiently meaningful” to have the desired effect. Howard, 188 Ill. 2d at 442. Finally, there was substantial mitigation based on Howard’s “years of dedicated service to the community, to his church, and to a segment of the population that is often overlooked.” Howard, 188 Ill. 2d at 442. Respondent in the present case did not demonstrate a substantial degree of mitigation. As the majority notes, the Hearing Board found his testimony regarding community service and pro bono representation essentially self-serving and insufficient to warrant substantial consideration. 208 Ill. 2d at 378-79. He expressed no remorse and, indeed, made false statements to the ARDC. In addition, the majority is not imposing a suspension four times as long as the earlier suspension. The 42-month suspension is a mere six months longer than respondent’s three-year suspension, the “until further order” provision notwithstanding. The present case can also be distinguished from Howard on the basis of the timing of the various offenses. The misconduct at issue in count I of the present complaint occurred in 1988, prior to the earlier disciplinary actions. Thus, it is conceivable, I suppose, that the intervening disciplinary actions had such an effect on respondent that he determined never to engage in such conduct again. The facts, however, do not support such an optimistic view. Although respondent solicited the loan from Rzewnicki prior to either of his two earlier disciplinary actions, he did not repay that loan even after his suspension expired and he was again earning sufficient funds to repay his debt. Rzewnicki obtained a default judgment against respondent in January 1999 and, still, respondent made no effort whatsoever to repay the loan. The misconduct at issue in count II of the complaint occurred in 1998, as did the false statements made by respondent to the ARDC, which are the subject of count III. Previous disciplinary actions had no apparent effect on respondent. Indeed, the Hearing Board noted that he tended to justify and minimize his actions, rather than accept responsibility for them. Respondent, however, told the Board that he had “learned his lesson” from his failure to document his transaction with Purnell. This statement should be viewed with skepticism since respondent did not learn his lesson regarding the maintenance of complete records even after a previous suspension. In re Timpone, 157 Ill. 2d 178 (1993). I find the reasoning of the Review Board persuasive. The timing of the misconduct at issue demonstrates that the earlier suspension had no effect on respondent’s conduct. This three-year suspension ended in 1996 and he was again mishandling client funds as early as 1998. Similarly, although respondent was censured in 1994 for failure to file a timely tax return, he had not filed his 1998 return by the time of his hearing before the Hearing Board. His lack of candor and remorse weigh in favor of a severe sanction. The Review Board, thus, concluded that even a lengthy suspension would not alter respondent’s conduct. Corrupt Motives or Moral Turpitude Even when respondent’s repeated offenses are taken into consideration, the majority is reluctant to disbar an attorney in the absence of evidence of corrupt motives or moral turpitude. The cases relied upon are Howard, 188 Ill. 2d at 441 (“where corrupt motives and moral turpitude are not clearly shown, the proper punishment is suspension rather than disbarment”), and In re Chapman, 69 Ill. 2d 494, 501 (1978) (“ ‘Suspension is a proper punishment “where a corrupt motive and moral turpitude are not clearly shown” ’ ”), quoting In re Taylor, 66 Ill. 2d 567, 571 (1977), quoting In re Ahern, 23 Ill. 2d 69, 74 (1961). On the other hand, there are numerous cases in which this court has equated conversion of client funds with corruption. See, e.g., In re Himmel, 125 Ill. 2d 531, 543 (1988) (“It is clear that conversion of client funds is, indeed, conduct involving moral turpitude”) (citing In re Levin, 118 Ill. 2d 77, 88 (1987), and Stillo, 68 Ill. 2d at 54). Although respondent’s conduct is certainly less blameworthy than that of an attorney who sets out to deliberately defraud his clients, it is not the result of mere inadvertence, or a single instance of yielding to temptation, or inexperience, or personal pressures related to family matters or to health. He has demonstrated for more than a decade that he cannot be trusted to conform his conduct to the Rules of Professional Conduct. His recidivism is the evidence of corruption. Conclusion Disbarment is a severe penalty that should be used only in cases of serious misconduct. In re Yamaguchi, 118 Ill. 2d 417, 428-29 (1987) (declining to disbar attorney who aided another in the unauthorized practice of law and imposing six-month suspension recommended by Review Board where respondent had no history of professional discipline, did not profit or attempt to profit from his misconduct, and neither harmed nor intended to harm anyone). Respondent’s pattern of misconduct is serious, repeated, and remorseless. It is this court’s duty to protect the public from such conduct. Respondent should be disbarred. JUSTICE THOMAS joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 2208990 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:35.222538+00 ===

804 N.E.2d 1204 (2004)
Christopher GIST, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 72A01-0308-CR-286.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
March 19, 2004.
*1205 Jason M. Mount, Mount Law Office, P.C., Scottsburg, IN, Attorney for Appellant.
Steve Carter, Attorney General of Indiana, Jodi Kathryn Stein, Deputy Attorney General, Indianapolis, IN, Attorneys for Appellee.
OPINION
VAIDIK, Judge.
Case Summary
Christopher Gist appeals his sentence for conspiracy to commit robbery as a Class B felony. Specifically, he argues that the trial court failed to find several mitigators and that his ten-year presumptive sentence is inappropriate. In light of the State's concession at sentencing that two mitigators are present, it is unclear whether the trial court found no aggravators or mitigators or whether the trial court found aggravators and mitigators but concluded that they balanced. We therefore remand this case to the trial court for a more definite sentencing statement. Furthermore, because Gist was sentenced in accordance with the plea agreement, we conclude that his sentence is not inappropriate.
Facts and Procedural History
In September 2002, Gist worked at Casey's General Store in Scott County. On September 26, Gist and Derrick Coats agreed to rob that store in order to purchase cocaine. Gist obtained a shotgun and dropped off Coats in the vicinity of the store. Coats then entered the store armed with the gun and demanded money from store employees Vickie Lainhart and Veronica Kelley, both of whom had worked with Gist. After the robbery, Gist and Coats split the money.
Coats soon became a suspect in the robbery. Coats eventually turned himself in to the police and gave a statement that he and Gist robbed the store. Gist then turned himself in to the police as well.
In October 2002, the State charged Gist with conspiracy to commit robbery as a Class B felony and robbery as a Class B felony. In June 2003, Gist pled guilty to conspiracy to commit robbery as a Class B felony. Under the plea agreement, the State agreed to limit its sentencing recommendation to the trial court to the presumptive term of ten years. Following a sentencing hearing, the trial court sentenced Gist to ten years. The trial court did not identify any aggravators or mitigators but merely stated that it sentenced Gist to ten years. This appeal ensued.
Discussion and Decision
Gist raises two issues on appeal. First, he contends that the trial court failed to find numerous mitigating factors. Second, he contends that his sentence is inappropriate. We address each issue in turn.
I. Mitigators
Gist contends that the trial court failed to find numerous mitigators when sentencing him to the presumptive term of ten years. It is well established that sentencing decisions lie within the discretion of the trial court. Jackson v. State, 728 N.E.2d 147, 154 (Ind.2000). Sentencing decisions are given great deference on appeal and will only be reversed for an abuse of discretion. Beck v. State, 790 N.E.2d 520, 522 (Ind.Ct.App.2003).
If the trial court finds aggravating or mitigating circumstances, then the court must make a statement of its reasons for selecting the sentence imposed. Ind. Code § 35-38-1-3; Jackson, 728 N.E.2d at 154. However, the trial court does not have to set forth its reasons for imposing the presumptive sentence. Pope v. State, 740 N.E.2d 1247, 1253 (Ind.Ct.App.2000); *1206 see also Jones v. State, 698 N.E.2d 289, 290 (Ind.1998) ("[A] sentencing judge must articulate her reasoning only when she deviates from the statutory presumptive sentence."); Finch v. State, 510 N.E.2d 673, 676 (Ind.1987) ("The sentencing judge need not articulate his reasons for not aggravating or mitigating the sentence when giving a presumptive sentence."). Thus, if the trial court does not find any aggravators or mitigators and imposes the presumptive sentence, then the trial court does not need to set forth its reasons for imposing the presumptive sentence. However, if the trial court finds aggravators and mitigators, concludes that they balance, and imposes the presumptive sentence, then, pursuant to Indiana Code § 35-38-1-3, the court must provide a statement of its reasons for imposing the presumptive sentence.
Here, the trial court did not set forth its reasons for imposing the presumptive sentence. Generally, we would presume that the trial court did not find any aggravators or mitigators. However, the State conceded at sentencing that two mitigators were presentGist's offer to pay restitution to the victims and his remorse.[1] Tr. p. 62. In light of this concession, it is unclear whether the trial court did not find any aggravators or mitigators or whether the trial court found aggravators and mitigators but concluded that they balanced. If the former, then no statement was required. But if the latter, then the trial court was required to make a statement for selecting the sentence imposed. We therefore remand this case to the trial court for a more definite sentencing statement in light of the State's concession.
II. Inappropriate Sentence
Gist next argues that his ten-year presumptive sentence is inappropriate. Indiana Appellate Rule 7(B) provides that we "may revise a sentence authorized by statute if, after due consideration of the trial court's decision, [we find] that the sentence is inappropriate in light of the nature of the offense and the character of the offender." "[W]e exercise with great restraint our responsibility to review and revise sentences, recognizing the special expertise of the trial bench in making sentencing decisions." Foster v. State, 795 N.E.2d 1078, 1092 (Ind.Ct.App.2003), reh'g denied, trans. pending.
Here, Gist pled guilty to conspiracy to commit robbery as a Class B felony. A plea agreement is contractual in nature and binds the defendant, the State, and the trial court. Hull v. State, 799 N.E.2d 1178, 1182 (Ind.Ct.App.2003). The trial court is given the discretion to accept or reject a plea agreement, and, if the trial court accepts the agreement, it is strictly bound by its terms. Id.; see also Ind. Code § 35-35-3-3(e).
The plea agreement in this case provided:
The State of Indiana agrees to limit any recommendation to the Court for the executed portion of any sentence to a term not to exceed the presumptive sentence for a Class B Felony (10 years) and the State of Indiana further acknowledges that this representation is an inducement to the Defendant for the entry of this plea.
Tr. p. 48. By entering into this agreement with the State, Gist necessarily agreed that a ten-year sentence was appropriate.
*1207 If Gist thought that a ten-year sentence was inappropriate, then presumably he would have not entered into the plea agreement in the first place and would have taken his chances at trial without the benefit of a plea agreement. Where, as here, a defendant is sentenced in accordance with a plea agreementan agreement he voluntarily entered into, we cannot say that the sentence is inappropriate. This holding is consistent with Mann v. State, where we said that a sentence that fell within the sentencing range provided for in the plea agreement was not manifestly unreasonable even though the defendant was sentenced at the upper end of that range. 742 N.E.2d 1025, 1026 n. 1 (Ind.Ct.App.2001), trans. denied. Gist's sentence is not inappropriate.
Affirmed in part and remanded in part.
SHARPNACK, J., and MATHIAS, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Gist also argues on appeal that the trial court failed to find the following mitigators: (1) Gist did not have a significant criminal history; (2) Gist is likely to respond to probation or short-term imprisonment; (3) Gist is unlikely to commit another crime; and (4) Gist turned himself in to the police and pled guilty.

=== CASE 2208993 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:35.255795+00 ===

804 N.E.2d 796 (2004)
Ronald W. FRAZIER, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
James A. MELLOWITZ, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 49A02-0305-CV-385.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
March 10, 2004.
*797 Kevin P. Farrell, Marie T. Greer, Cline, Farrell, Christie & Lee, Indianapolis, IN, Attorneys for Appellant.
Larry R. Jackson, Price, Jackson, Waicukauski & Mellowitz, Indianapolis, IN, Attorney for Appellee.
OPINION
NAJAM, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
In April 1999, James A. Mellowitz filed a Complaint for Declaratory Relief against *798 Ronald W. Frazier, seeking a determination from the trial court that Frazier had breached the terms of the parties' litigation referral agreement and that Mellowitz owed Frazier nothing under the terms of that agreement. In June 2002, Mellowitz filed a Motion for Summary Judgment, and on April 10, 2003, the trial court granted that motion. Frazier appeals and presents the following issue for review: whether the trial court erred when it entered summary judgment in favor of Mellowitz.
We reverse and remand.[1]
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
In October 1989, Patrick and Lorrie Skaggs' rented mobile home burned down, causing injuries to Patrick, Lorrie, and their daughter Patricia. Lorrie's daughter, Amber Nicole Mitchell, died in the fire. Fire officials concluded that the fire was caused by an electrical short. The trailer did not have a smoke alarm, and the Skaggs' landlord had wired shut the trailer's back door.
The Skaggs initially hired Joseph Rabb to represent them in lawsuits seeking to recover damages for Amber's death and their own personal injuries. However, Rabb failed to file a lawsuit within the applicable two-year statute of limitations. Our supreme court imposed disciplinary sanctions against Rabb for his handling of the Skaggs' case. See In re Joseph Rabb, 704 N.E.2d 117 (Ind.1998).
The Skaggs then hired Frazier as their attorney. Frazier's representation of the Skaggs was three-fold: (1) he investigated a legal malpractice action against Rabb; (2) he filed a state court action against the Cossell Group, L.P. ("Cossell Group"), the Skaggs' landlord; and (3) he defended the Skaggs in a federal court declaratory judgment action filed by Cossell Group's insurance carrier, Midwestern Indemnity Company ("Midwestern"). Prior to filing suit, Frazier settled the legal malpractice claim for $50,000. The Skaggs settled the claim for that amount against Frazier's advice because they needed the money. Frazier advised the Skaggs at the time of settlement that there was a likelihood that they would not recover anything in their other actions.
In state court, Frazier filed a wrongful death suit against Cossell Group based on an implied warranty of habitability theory. Cossell Group filed a motion to dismiss and argued that the Skaggs' claim was time-barred, but Frazier successfully defended that motion. In the federal court action, Midwestern argued that it was not required to provide coverage for the Skaggs' losses on several grounds.
During the time that Frazier represented the Skaggs, he started his own law practice. Frazier determined that he lacked the time and finances to pursue the Skaggs' cases on his own. In July 1996, Frazier and Mellowitz entered into a litigation referral agreement. The terms of that agreement were set forth in a letter from Mellowitz to Frazier dated July 23, 1996, which provided in relevant part:
This will confirm our agreement that we[2] will pay you a referral fee of 25% of all attorney fees we recover on behalf of Patrick and Lorrie Skaggs, individually and on behalf of their children, Amber, deceased, and Patricia. You have *799 also agreed to pay 25% of all costs and expenses in this matter as they are incurred. Your expenses as well as our expenses will be reimbursed from any recovery which we obtain on behalf of the clients. You have also agreed to act as liaison with the clients and assist us on this matter as it proceeds.
If this does not reflect your understanding of our agreement, please let me know immediately.
(Emphasis added).
Thereafter, Mellowitz assumed primary responsibility for the Skaggs' cases, although Frazier reviewed copies of pleadings he received as they came into his office. Approximately ten months after Frazier and Mellowitz entered into the referral agreement, Mellowitz sent Frazier a letter dated May 21, 1997, which stated in part:
Pursuant to our referral agreement, you agreed to reimburse us for 25% of our expenses as they are incurred. At this time, we have incurred $3,434.00 in advanced expenses and expect to soon receive deposition bills for another $1,000.00 or so. Therefore, I would appreciate it if you would provide us with a check in the amount of at least $1,000.00 to bring this current.
Three months later on August 16, 1997, Mellowitz sent another letter to Frazier, which stated in part:
Just a reminder that we would really appreciate it if you would provide us with a check for $1,000 to keep up your share of the expenses in this case. I have recently located a new witness who was very helpful to confirming the Skaggs' version of events.
When Frazier still had not complied, Mellowitz sent another letter on November 13, 1997, which stated:
This is to follow up on my letter from August 26, 1997, which was my second letter to you about expenses in this case. As you will recall you agreed to pay 25% of the expenses as they are incurred. I would appreciate it if you would live up to your end of the bargain, so that we do not need to consider the referral agreement void. I am quite confident that the outcome of this matter is going to be rewarding.
(Emphasis added). The last letter Mellowitz sent to Frazier regarding payment was dated December 2, 1997, which stated: "We still have not received your check in the amount of $1000 to cover your 25% share of expenses. Is there some problem?"
In December 1998, Mellowitz negotiated a settlement with Cossell Group, in which Cossell Group agreed to pay the Skaggs $600,000 for their personal injuries, $240,000 of which went to pay the Skaggs' attorney's fees. When Frazier learned of the settlement through Patrick Skaggs, he sent Mellowitz a letter, which stated in part:
Congratulations! As you can imagine I was very happy to hear that a portion of this matter has settled. You did a great job!
* * *
I know that I owe a share of the ongoing costs. If you would like payment please send me an invoice. If you want to delay payment until the point in time that the Defendants that have settled out make payment that would obviously be fine with me. Please let me know how you wish to proceed.
This is absolutely great news. When I made the decision way back when to enlist your expertise it was certainly the right decision. It would be greatly appreciated if you could have someone *800 from your office notify me of an approximate date when the settlement monies are to be received. That would assist me greatly in planning.
(Emphases added). In response, Mellowitz sent Frazier a letter dated February 24, 1999, which stated in part:
As you will recall, you agreed to pay 25% of the expenses on this case as they were incurred. You also agreed to assist us on the litigation as it proceeded. Despite my many requests in writing and by phone, you failed to do either, thereby breaching any fee arrangement and rendering it void.
There have been at least four letters sent to you requesting payment of expenses. I have also talked with you on the phone about this, and left several voice mail messages about this that were never answered by you. You never paid any of the expenses in clear violation of your obligation to do so. Your belated offer to do so, made after you learned that settlement had been achieved, is ineffective, since the whole point of you paying a portion of the expenses as the litigation proceeded was to share the risk that this case would never produce any recovery. You assiduously avoided that obligation throughout this litigation.
(Emphasis added).
Mellowitz filed his Complaint for Declaratory Relief against Frazier in April 1999.[3] During depositions, Frazier admitted that he had received all of Mellowitz's letters and that he had not paid his share of the costs and expenses (hereinafter "expenses") as requested. Frazier claimed that he did not have the money to pay Mellowitz and that he did not believe that "it was a serious issue." Regarding his obligations, Frazier did not believe that the "as they are incurred" language in the agreement was material, but he testified that Mellowitz's obligation to pay his share of the expenses as they were incurred was "a material part of the contract." Frazier's understanding was that Mellowitz and his firm had enough money to finance the litigation.
Mellowitz testified in his deposition that Frazier breached the contract in 1997, and Mellowitz considered the contract rescinded at that time. When asked what he would have done had the Skaggs litigation not been successful, Mellowitz indicated that, at that point, he "would have had to make a decision about whether to sue [Frazier] to collect what he owed [Mellowitz] under the contract."
Mellowitz filed a summary judgment motion in June 2002, and Frazier filed his response in October 2002. Mellowitz filed his reply in January 2003, and the trial court heard argument in March 2003. The trial court issued its order granting Mellowitz's summary judgment motion on April 11, 2003. This appeal ensued.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
Standard of Review
Our supreme court explained the well-established standard of review for summary judgment appeals in Owens Corning Fiberglass Corp. v. Cobb, 754 N.E.2d 905, 908-09 (Ind.2001), as follows:
An appellate court faces the same issues that were before the trial court and follows the same process. The party appealing from a summary judgment decision has the burden of persuading the court that the grant or denial of summary judgment was erroneous. When a *801 trial court grants summary judgment, we carefully scrutinize that determination to ensure that a party was not improperly prevented from having its day in court.
Summary judgment is appropriate only if the pleadings and evidence sanctioned by the trial court show that "there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." On a motion for summary judgment, all doubts as to the existence of material issues of fact must be resolved against the moving party. Additionally, all facts and reasonable inferences from those facts are construed in favor of the nonmoving party. If there is any doubt as to what conclusion a jury could reach, then summary judgment is improper.
(Citations omitted). Additionally, "[e]ven if it appears that the nonmoving party will not succeed at trial, summary judgment is inappropriate where material facts conflict or undisputed facts lead to conflicting inferences." Link v. Breen, 649 N.E.2d 126, 128 (Ind.Ct.App.1995), trans. denied. Our summary judgment analysis "proceeds from the premise that summary judgment is a lethal weapon and that courts must be ever mindful of its aims and targets and beware of overkill in its use." Bunch v. Tiwari, 711 N.E.2d 844, 847 (Ind.Ct.App. 1999).
Summary Judgment
In support of the trial court's summary judgment decision, Mellowitz claims that Frazier materially breached the contract when he refused to pay 25% of the litigation expenses as they were incurred. Mellowitz also asserts that he is not required to pay Frazier his 25% share of the attorneys fees recovered in settlement because once Frazier breached, it was Mellowitz's prerogative to treat the contract as terminated. In response, Frazier contends that Mellowitz acquiesced in Frazier's failure to pay the expenses as they were incurred. In addition, Frazier disputes that his failure to pay Mellowitz 25% of the expenses as they were incurred was a material breach. Specifically, Frazier claims that the facts show as a matter of law that his breach was immaterial,[4] or in the alternative, that there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether his breach was material, which precludes summary judgment.[5]
*802 I. Material Breach
Central to the parties' arguments on summary judgment is whether Frazier's failure to pay his share of the expenses as they were incurred constituted a material breach. This court has long held that whether a party has committed a material breach is a question of fact, the resolution of which is dependent on several factors. Titus v. Rheitone, Inc., 758 N.E.2d 85, 94 (Ind.Ct.App.2001), trans. denied; Goff v. Graham, 159 Ind.App. 324, 306 N.E.2d 758, 765 (1974). We have also stated that the factors to be considered in determining whether a party's failure to perform is material are:
(1) The extent to which the injured party will obtain the substantial benefit which he could have reasonably anticipated;
(2) The extent to which the injured party may be adequately compensated in damages for lack of complete performance;
(3) The extent to which the party failing to perform has already partly performed or made preparations for performance;
(4) The greater or less hardship on the party failing to perform in terminating the contract;
(5) The willful, negligent or innocent behavior of the party failing to perform; and
(6) The greater or less uncertainty that the party failing to perform will perform the remainder of the contract.
Tomahawk Vill. Apts. v. Farren, 571 N.E.2d 1286, 1293 (Ind.Ct.App.1991); Goff, 306 N.E.2d at 765 (quoting RESTATEMENT OF CONTRACTS, § 275 (1932)).
However, the six-factor analysis from the Restatement of Contracts was altered in the Restatement (Second) of Contracts (1981). Specifically, Murray on Contracts, § 167 (2d Rev. ed.1974), provides in relevant part:
[Under the Restatement of Contracts], [i]f the failure of one party to perform... is so material that it will or may result in the other party not receiving substantially what he bargained for, the duty of the injured party is discharged and he is, thereby, wholly excused from carrying out his undertaking. On the other hand, if the failure to perform ... is not of that character, the injured party retains his duty to render his promised performance. There is still a breach of contract, but the innocent party must recoup his loss for such an immaterial breach through one of the procedural devises designed for that purpose. The application of this principle prevents unreasonable forfeitures by the defaulter and, at the same time, is not unfair to the other party. The determination of materiality of a failure to perform is not susceptible to mechanical rules. Therefore, the original Restatement listed six "influential circumstances" which were intended to operate as guidelines to courts in making that determination.
* * *
The Restatement of Contracts (Second) has charted a somewhat different course in dealing with the problem of the effects of failure to perform .... Initially, the new Restatement[6] indicates that, "it is *803 a condition of each party's remaining duties to render performances to be exchanged under an exchange of promises that there be no uncured material failure by the other party to render any such performance due at an earlier time." This section emphasizes the fact that a material failure to perform operates as the nonoccurrence of a condition which has two possible effects: (1) preventing the activation of the duty, at least temporarily, and (2) discharging the duty when the condition can no longer occur. The nonoccurrence of a condition does not immediately discharge the duty since there may still be time during which the condition can occur. Even though there has been a failure to perform (or failure to make an offer to perform) at the appointed time, the breaching party may perform or offer to perform shortly thereafter which has the effect of "curing" the breach to the extent that the breach is no longer material.... The new Restatement position differs from the original Restatement in suggesting that an uncured material failure to perform allows the injured party to suspend his performance. The uncured material breach will have the effect of discharging the injured party's performance only when it is too late for performance or an offer to perform to occur, i.e., when the material failure to perform cannot be cured.... The new structure in the Restatement (Second) apparently requires a determination of materiality of failure to perform exclusive of any question of delay in performance. If the determination of materiality is made as to a particular failure to perform, the effect is to suspend the duty of the injured party (assuming there is time remaining for a possible cure). If the time for cure expires (determined by the "circumstances" set forth in the "delay" section), the uncured material failure to perform or offer to perform has the effect of discharging the duty of the injured party.
(Footnotes omitted and emphases added). Accordingly, under the original Restatement of Contracts, once a material breach occurs, the injured party is immediately discharged from any further obligation to perform under the contract. But under the Restatement (Second) of Contracts, an injured party is not discharged from his duty to perform unless (1) the breach is material, and (2) it is too late for performance or an offer to perform to occur. In particular, the Restatement (Second) of Contracts (1981) provides:
§ 241. Circumstances Significant in Determining Whether a Failure Is Material
In determining whether a failure to render or to offer performance is material, the following circumstances are significant:
(a) the extent to which the injured party will be deprived of the benefit which he reasonably expected;
(b) the extent to which the injured party can be adequately compensated for the part of that benefit of which he will be deprived;
(c) the extent to which the party failing to perform or to offer to perform will suffer forfeiture;
(d) the likelihood that the party failing to perform or to offer to perform will cure his failure, taking account of all the circumstances including any reasonable assurances;
(e) the extent to which the behavior of the party failing to perform or to offer to perform comports with standards of good faith and fair dealing.
(Emphasis added). And Section 242 provides:
*804 In determining the time after which a party's uncured material failure to render or to offer performance discharges the other party's remaining duties to render performance under the rules stated in §§ 237 and 238,[7] the following circumstances are significant:
(a) those stated in § 241;
(b) the extent to which it reasonably appears to the injured party that delay may prevent or hinder him in making reasonable substitute arrangements;
(c) the extent to which the agreement provides for performance without delay, but a material failure to perform or to offer to perform on a stated day does not itself discharge the other party's remaining duties unless the circumstances, including the language of the agreement, indicate that performance or an offer to perform by that day is important.
(Emphasis added). Additionally, Comment a. to § 242 regarding "cure" states:
Ordinarily there is some period of time between suspension and discharge, and during this period a party may cure his failure. Even then, since any breach gives rise to a claim, a party who has cured a material breach has still committed a breach, by his delay, for which he is liable in damages. Furthermore, in some instances timely performance is so essential that any delay immediately results in discharge and there is no period of time during which the injured party's duties are merely suspended and the other party can cure his default.
(Emphasis added).
Although neither party addresses Sections 241 and 242 of the Restatement (Second) of Contracts, those sections and the analysis therein apply to the heart of this dispute. In particular, Mellowitz alleges that Frazier's payment of litigation expenses as they were incurred was a material part of the agreement because through timely payment, Frazier would bear his share of the litigation risk. He further contends that that provision was so essential to the agreement that he was entitled to consider his duties under the agreement discharged when Frazier failed to pay in May 1997.[8] He also suggests that when Frazier finally did offer to pay his share of the litigation expenses after the Skaggs litigation had settled, it was too late for Frazier to cure his material breach because at that point, the risk that the parties had agreed to share no longer existed. Frazier, however, disputes that the "as they are incurred" language was crucial to the parties' agreement.
According to the Restatement (Second) of Contracts, to affirm summary judgment in Mellowitz's favor, we must examine the designated evidence and determine that the undisputed facts establish as a matter of law both of the following: (1) Frazier's breach was material in light of the factors *805 under Section 241, and (2) in light of the factors under Section 242, it was too late for Frazier to cure his failure to perform after the Skaggs litigation had settled. While the facts relevant to those determinations are largely undisputed, we conclude that those facts support conflicting inferences, thereby rendering summary judgment improper.
In particular, in support of his contention that the breach was material, Mellowitz directs us to Frazier's deposition testimony in which he admitted that allocation of expenses is one of three "basic components" of a lawyer referral contract. Frazier also stated in his deposition that Mellowitz's obligation to pay his 75% share of the expenses as they were incurred was a material part of the contract.
Still, Frazier points out that Mellowitz has received the attorneys fees for which he bargained under the referral agreement. Based on that evidence, a jury may conclude that Mellowitz has not been deprived of the benefit he reasonably expected under the referral agreement. See RESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF CONTRACTS § 241(a) (extent to which injured party will be deprived of benefit which he reasonably expected). That same evidence suggests that the amount Frazier owed Mellowitz is relatively insignificant and that Mellowitz can be compensated adequately in damages as a result of Frazier's failure to perform, simply by calculating interest on the modest amount owed.[9]See id. § 241(b) (extent to which injured party can be adequately compensated). In addition, in a December 1998 letter to Mellowitz, Frazier offered to pay his share of the expenses, which demonstrates his willingness to cure his failure to perform. See id. § 241(d) (likelihood party failing to perform will cure).
Regarding the extent to which Frazier will suffer forfeiture if the breach is treated as material, see id. § 241(c), a jury could conclude that Frazier brought the clients to Mellowitz, that Mellowitz agreed to pay a referral fee, and that forfeiture of the $110,000 fee would produce a harsh result. But a jury could also conclude that they had agreed to share the litigation risk and that forfeiture is appropriate because Frazier failed to bear that risk when he did not pay his share of expenses "as they [were] incurred."
The facts relevant to whether Frazier's behavior comports with standards of good faith and fair dealing also support conflicting inferences. See RESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF CONTRACTS § 241(e) (extent to which behavior of party who fails to perform comports with standards of good faith and fair dealing). Frazier testified in an affidavit that when Mellowitz contacted him four times in 1997 requesting payment, Frazier informed him of his ongoing financial difficulties and never refused to pay the expenses. But Mellowitz counters, in part, with evidence of Frazier's annual income in an attempt to rebut Frazier's claim that he was unable to pay.
Conflicting inferences may also be drawn from Mellowitz's correspondence to Frazier. First, Mellowitz's arguments suggest that time was of the essence and that payment of expenses as they were incurred was at the heart of the parties' agreement. However, the language of his July 1996 letter to Frazier, which set forth the terms of the parties' agreement, casts doubt on that contention. While the agreement provides that Frazier has "agreed to pay 25% of all costs and expenses *806 in this matter as they are incurred," Mellowitz did not set deadlines for payment, nor did the agreement state that timely payments were of the essence.
Likewise, the four letters Mellowitz sent to Frazier in 1997 requesting payment support conflicting inferences. On the one hand, a jury could infer from those letters that Frazier's payment of his share of the litigation expenses as they were incurred was an important part of the parties' agreement because Mellowitz repeatedly requested payment. On the other hand, a jury could infer from the letters that Mellowitz did not consider Frazier's failure to pay expenses as they were incurred as material because Mellowitz never stated in writing that that contract term was significant, and some of his letters contain language which indicates that the risk of losing the litigation was not as considerable as he contends after-the-fact. Specifically, in one letter Mellowitz warned Frazier to "live up to [his] end of the bargain, so that [they] do not need to consider the referral agreement void." In that same letter, however, Mellowitz told Frazier that he was "confident" that the outcome would be rewarding.
Finally, while Frazier testified that he understood Mellowitz's warning when he wrote that he did not want to have to consider the agreement void, a trier of fact could also conclude that, at the time Mellowitz wrote the four letters, he had not yet considered the agreement void and, instead, was merely encouraging Frazier to perform. And despite Mellowitz's practice of communicating with Frazier about the agreement in writing, he never wrote Frazier to notify him that he considered their agreement void until after Frazier offered payment in December 1998.
Because of the conflicting inferences which may be drawn from the designated evidence, the facts do not lead to only one conclusion on the issues of whether Frazier's breach was material and, if so, whether it was too late for Frazier to cure that material breach in December 1998. See Owens Corning Fiberglass Corp., 754 N.E.2d at 909. Those conflicting inferences should be sorted out by a jury that can both weigh the inferences and judge witness credibility. Thus, we conclude that because the material facts support conflicting inferences and different outcomes, the trial court erred when it granted summary judgment in favor of Mellowitz.
II. Acquiescence
Frazier also argues that summary judgment in Mellowitz's favor was improper because Mellowitz acquiesced in his non-performance. However, Frazier has conceded that he breached a non-material term of the agreement and, accordingly, that Mellowitz is entitled to damages. And we have already determined that under the Restatement (Second) of Contracts, Mellowitz is entitled to damages if either: (1) Frazier's breach was non-material, or (2) Frazier's breach was material but Frazier's offer to perform operated as a timely attempt to cure his breach. See RESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF CONTRACTS § 242 cmt. a (1981). Thus, Frazier's waiver argument comes into play only if a trier of fact determines that: (1) his failure to pay his share of the litigation expenses as they were incurred constituted a material breach, and (2) his offer to cure his material breach in December 1998 was untimely. We therefore conclude that whether Mellowitz acquiesced in Frazier's non-performance is an issue left for another day.[10]
*807 III. Remedies
Although we reverse the entry of summary judgment and remand for trial, we address the remedies available in the event the jury determines that Frazier's breach was material. Frazier contends that Mellowitz's remedies at law are adequate and that damages will make him whole. In contrast, Mellowitz asserts that when Frazier materially breached the contract, he was then entitled to treat the contract as terminated. Again, we conclude that the Restatement (Second) of Contracts clarifies the available remedies in the event of a material breach.
First, if the trier of fact determines that Frazier's breach was either non-material or material but that Frazier's offer to cure was timely, Mellowitz is entitled to recover damages. See RESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF CONTRACTS § 242 cmt. a. ("[S]ince any breach gives rise to a claim, a party who has cured a material breach has still committed a breach, by his delay, for which he is liable in damages."). We agree with Frazier that because Mellowitz has already recovered the amount of litigation expenses Frazier owed through settlement of the Skaggs' claims, his damages would be interest on the amount Frazier owed.
On the other hand, if the trier of fact determines that Frazier's breach was material, that his offer to cure in December 1998 was untimely, and that Mellowitz did not acquiesce in Frazier's failure to perform, then Mellowitz's obligation to pay Frazier his share of the attorneys fees would be discharged. See id. ("[W]hen it is too late for the performance or the offer to perform to occur, the failure ... has the effect of discharging those duties.") (citing RESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF CONTRACTS § 225(2)). In that event, Mellowitz would receive the relief requested in his Complaint, that is, he would owe Frazier nothing.[11]
CONCLUSION
We conclude that the trial court improperly granted summary judgment in favor of Mellowitz because the designated facts, although undisputed, support conflicting inferences regarding whether Frazier's breach was material and, if so, whether his attempt to cure that breach was untimely. We therefore reverse the summary judgment and remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.
ROBB, J., and MATHIAS, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  We heard oral argument on December 15, 2003. We deny Frazier's pending motion to strike Mellowitz's brief, and his motion to strike Mellowitz's response to Frazier's motion for oral argument is denied as moot.
[2]  At that that time, Mellowitz was employed with Price & Barker.
[3]  In November 2000, Mellowitz settled the litigation involving Midwestern for $500,000, with $200,000 in attorney's fees.
[4]  Although he did not file a cross-motion for summary judgment, Frazier asserts that he is entitled to summary judgment on two grounds: (1) Mellowitz acquiesced in his delay of payment; and (2) his breach was nonmaterial. Mellowitz disputes that this court may enter summary judgment in favor of Frazier when he did not file a cross-motion at the trial court and points out that the cases Frazier relies on to support his argument involve parties who filed cross-motions for summary judgment. See LaSalle Cas. Ins. Co. v. American Underwriter, Inc., 148 Ind.App. 675, 269 N.E.2d 563 (1971); Federal Kemper Ins. Co. v. Brown, 674 N.E.2d 1030 (Ind.Ct.App.1997), trans. denied. However, Indiana Trial Rule 56(B) governs summary judgment in favor of a defending party and provides in relevant part, "When any party has moved for summary judgment, the court may grant summary judgment for any other party upon the issues raised by the motion although no motion for summary judgment is filed by such party." Accordingly, if the trial court was authorized to enter summary judgment in favor of Frazier without his filing a cross-motion, it follows that we may order the entry of judgment in Frazier's favor if the facts are undisputed and we determine that the trial court misapplied the law.
[5]  Frazier also raises an equitable unclean hands argument. But we agree with Mellowitz that because Frazier did not present his unclean hands argument to the trial court and, instead, raised it for the first time in his reply brief, he has waived that argument on appeal. See KPMG, Peat Marwick, LLP v. Carmel Fin. Corp., Inc., 784 N.E.2d 1057, 1063 (Ind.Ct.App.2003) (stating arguments not presented to the trial court on summary judgment are waived on appeal); see also French v. State, 778 N.E.2d 816, 826 (Ind. 2002) (stating appellant waived alleged errors not raised in principal brief).
[6]  Murray refers to the 1973 tentative draft of the Restatement (Second) of Contracts. The official sections are referenced later in this opinion.
[7]  Those sections establish, in general, that a material failure of performance operates as the non-occurrence of a condition and that, where performances are to be exchanged simultaneously, each party is entitled to refuse to proceed with the simultaneous exchange until he is reasonably assured that the other party will perform. See RESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF CONTRACTS §§ 237, 238 (1981).
[8]  We disagree with Mellowitz that he would be entitled to discharge of his contract obligations based on Frazier's alleged repudiation. "Repudiation of a contract must be positive, absolute, and unconditional in order that it may be treated as an anticipatory breach." Jay County Rural Elec. Membership Corp. v. Wabash Valley Power Ass'n, 692 N.E.2d 905, 911 (Ind.Ct.App.1998), trans. denied. But Mellowitz did not designate evidence which establishes that Frazier repudiated the agreement as a matter of law.
[9]  According to the Settlement Sheets for the Cossell Group and Midwestern Indemnity litigation, Mellowitz's "reimbursable expenses" were approximately $14,000. Accordingly, Frazier owed 25% of that amount, or approximately $3,500.
[10]  Mellowitz points out that Frazier did not plead waiver as an affirmative defense in his Answer as required by Indiana Trial Rule 8(C). However, Frazier raised his waiver argument during summary judgment proceedings, and Mellowitz did not object.
[11]  In this Complaint, Mellowitz also seeks attorneys fees under Indiana Code Section 34-14-1-10, but that claim becomes relevant only if Mellowitz is the prevailing party at trial.