=== CASE 9739593 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:15.71439+00 ===

JUSTICE STOUDER, specially concurring: I agree with the result reached by my colleagues, but I doubt the applicability of some of the reasoning employed to support the result. In particular I do not believe that the “wrong side of the road rule” as discussed and applied in Sughero v. Jewel Tea Co. (1967), 37 Ill. 2d 240, 226 N.E.2d 28, can be applied to a rear-end collision. The Sughero case applies the rule as it is generally applied where one vehicle crosses into the lane legitimately occupied by a vehicle traveling in the opposite direction. This rule has not been applied, so far as I am aware, to a case such as this, where the collision occurred between vehicles traveling in the same direction in the lane properly used by vehicles traveling in that direction. However, I am content to agree with the holding that the defendant was negligent as a matter of law, but I believe such a conclusion is appropriate without resort to any burden of proof on his part arising from the application of the “wrong side of the road rule.”

=== CASE 9739596 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:18.44601+00 ===

JUSTICE HARRISON delivered the opinion of the court: Sahara Coal Company (Sahara) and Caterpillar Tractor Company (Caterpillar) appeal a judgment entered in the circuit court of Williamson County. The action was brought by Gary Holmes (plaintiff) to recover for personal injuries. Plaintiff’s action against Sahara was predicated on a theory of negligence. Plaintiff’s action against Caterpillar was predicated on a theory of strict liability. Sahara filed a counterclaim for indemnity against Caterpillar, and Caterpillar filed an action for contribution against Sahara. Following a jury trial, judgment was entered in favor of plaintiff against Sahara in the amount of $183,000. Judgment was entered in favor of plaintiff against Caterpillar in the amount of $200,000. The jury returned a verdict in favor of Caterpillar on Sahara’s action for indemnity. Sahara was found liable in contribution to Caterpillar, and judgment was entered in the amount of $120,000. Plaintiff was employed as a field mechanic by Fabick Machinery Company. On November 20, 1978, plaintiff was sent to repair a Caterpillar model 637D tractor-scraper, owned by Sahara. After arriving at Sahara’s mining site, plaintiff proceeded to the working area. Plaintiff was accompanied by Sahara employee Denzel Butler. The tractor-scraper in need of repair was operated by Deon Wallace. Upon being approached by plaintiff and Mr. Butler, Mr. Wallace turned off the machine and left the operator’s compartment. Plaintiff proceeded to work on the tractor-scraper. After approximately 15 to 20 minutes, plaintiff requested that Mr. Wallace start the engine. As Mr. Wallace started the engine, a piece of metal (the bail) located at the front of the tractor-scraper rose and pinched plaintiff’s leg against the bail cylinder. The testimony at trial established that the bail is controlled by a lever which operates in three positions. When the engine is started with the lever in two of these positions (the “cushion ride-bail up” and “lock down-bail up” positions), the bail rises automatically. When the engine is started with the lever in the remaining position (the “lock down-bail down” position), the bail remains down. A decal above the bail lever warned that the lever should be placed in the “lock down-bail down” position when the machine was parked or being serviced, and that injury to persons working under the bail cylinder could result if the engine were started with the lever in the “bail up” position. Additional warnings and instructions were printed in the operator’s manual. A decal in the operator’s compartment directed the operator to read the manual and to lower all raised equipment before starting the engine. Deon Wallace testified that he could not recall reading the warning decal near the bail lever prior to the accident, and that he had never read the operator’s manual. Mr. Wallace knew, however, that the bail would rise automatically if the engine were started with the bail lever in any but the “lock down-bail down” position. Mr. Wallace testified that before starting the engine, he asked plaintiff “if all was clear,” and that he thought plaintiff answered affirmatively. Plaintiff testified that he was familiar with the model 637D tractor-scraper and knew that the bail lever would rise if the engine were started with the bail lever in the “bail up” or “cushion ride” positions. He stated that Deon Wallace said nothing before starting the engine at plaintiff’s request, and that it had not been necessary to position his (plaintiff’s) leg between the bail and bail cylinder in order to repair the machine. Thomas Hrodey, a design engineer employed by Caterpillar, testified that an alternative design of the tractor-scraper would have prevented plaintiff’s injury. The installation of a heavier spring in the bail operating mechanism, according to Mr. Hrodey, would have prevented the bail mechanism from rising. Mr. Hrodey estimated the cost of the spring at $25.  Caterpillar alleges that the trial court erred in denying Caterpillar’s motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict. Caterpillar argues that the evidence established that the model 637D tractor-scraper was, as a matter of law, neither defective nor unreasonably dangerous in light of Caterpillar’s warnings to the operator of the machine. The fact that a manufacturer supplies warning, however, does not mean that the warning is adequate to shift or reduce the risk inherent in a dangerous product. (Palmer v. Aveo Distributing Corp. (1980), 82 Ill. 2d 211, 221-22, 412 N.E.2d 959.) This determination is generally a question of fact for the jury. (82 Ill. 2d 211, 221.) A warning may be found inadequate, for example, if it does not specify the risk presented by the product, if its size or print is too small or inappropriately placed, or if it is unlikely to reach foreseeable users of the product. (82 Ill. 2d 211, 221-22.) In the instant case, the jury reasonably could have inferred that the decals in the operating compartment did not accurately specify the danger of starting the engine with the bail level in the “cushion ride-bail up” position, that the decals were of insufficient size, or even that the decals were inappropriately placed. The jury could also have inferred that the warnings in the operator’s manual were inadequate to warn foreseeable users such as Deon Wallace. Judgment notwithstanding the verdict should be entered only where all the evidence viewed in the aspect most favorable to the opponent so overwhelmingly favors the movant that no contrary verdict based on the evidence could ever stand. (Pedrick v. Peoria & Eastern R.R. Co. (1967), 37 Ill. 2d 494, 510, 229 N.E.2d 504.) The evidence did not so overwhelmingly favor the movant in the instant case.  Caterpillar alleges that the trial court erred in refusing Caterpillar’s jury instruction No. 5 (as originally tendered) and in allowing Sahara’s instruction No. 10. Caterpillar’s original instruction No. 5 concerned the use of verdict forms with reference both to Caterpillar’s claim for contribution against Sahara and to Sahara’s claim for indemnity against Caterpillar. The court gave that portion of instruction No. 5 pertaining to Caterpillar’s claim for contribution. In place of that portion of instruction No. 5 pertaining to Sahara’s claim for indemnity, the court substituted Sahara’s instruction No. 10. Sahara’s instruction No. 10 (Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Civil, No. 500.24 (Supp. 1977)) contained the same language as that portion of Caterpillar’s instruction No. 5 which the court refused. Caterpillar nevertheless argues that the separation of the instructions regarding contribution and indemnity served to confuse the jury. We find no support in the record for this assertion. Caterpillar alleges that the court erred in admitting testimony of an accident occurring in 1974 as a result of a person’s contact with a similar model tractor-scraper. Following Caterpillar’s cross-examination of Fabick mechanic Bill Ollis, during which Ollis stated that he was unaware of any accidents similar to the one involving plaintiff, plaintiff’s counsel was permitted to read into evidence a portion of the discovery deposition of Thomas Hrodey. The following questions and answers were read: “Q: Do you know the reasons for the warnings contained in the decals to be placed on the machine identified as Exhibit 2 about which you have testified, what the reason for those warnings was? A: There was another incident on a 657 size vehicle — it happened prior to this accident — of a mechanic getting pinched under the bail cylinder. Q: What circumstances occurred? Was the bail in a down position and the engine started? A similar set of facts? A: Yes. Q: Or what? Do you know how long that event to which you just alluded took place prior to the — let’s say prior to 1977 when this machine was manufactured? A: I believe somewhere in 1974. Q: How did you learn of that, what I am going to call the 1974 incident? A: We heard of an incident report of a man getting pinched. Now we realized the mechanics could possibly be up there around the bail and they started the engine and he got pinched in there.”  Evidence of prior similar occurrences is admissible for the purpose of demonstrating that a manufacturer possessed knowledge of a defect in a particular product prior to the accident in the litigated case. (Moore v. Remington Arms Co. (1981), 100 Ill. App. 3d 1102, 1110-11, 427 N.E.2d 608.) The issue of Caterpillar’s knowledge of the product’s dangerous propensity was properly before the court, since Caterpillar’s strict liability in tort rested upon its alleged failure to provide adequate warning of the danger. A manufacturer’s knowledge of a product’s dangerous condition must be established in order to impose strict liability for failure to warn. Woodill v. Parke Davis & Co. (1980), 79 Ill. 2d 26, 33, 402 N.E.2d 194.  Caterpillar argues that the 1974 accident is “totally dissimilar” to that in the instant case because the prior accident involved a model 657 tractor-scraper and not, as in plaintiff’s accident, a model 637D. The question of whether a prior occurrence is sufficiently similar to the subsequent occurrence is generally a determination within the sound discretion of the trial court. (Johnson v. Amereo, Inc. (1980), 87 Ill. App. 3d 827, 846, 409 N.E.2d 299.) It is not necessary that the facts and circumstances surrounding the accidents be identical; substantial similarity is all that is required. (Rucker v. Norfolk & Western Ry. Co. (1979), 77 Ill. 2d 434, 440-41, 396 N.E.2d 534.) Plaintiff’s accident in the instant case bore substantial similarity to the 1974 accident which was the subject of Mr. Hrodey’s deposition. The alleged dissimilarity of the equipment is undermined by Mr. Hrodey’s admission that the accident involving a model 657 tractor-scraper prompted Caterpillar to place warnings in the cab and operator’s manual of the model 637D.  Both Sahara and Caterpillar allege that the trial court erred in certain rulings regarding the admissibility of evidence demonstrating Caterpillar’s post-occurrence adoption of a design modification. Before trial, Caterpillar stipulated to the feasibility of an alternate design of the tractor-scraper which would have prevented plaintiff’s injury. Caterpillar then offered a motion in limine precluding the introduction of evidence regarding modification of the tractor-scraper subsequent to plaintiff’s injury. Sahara contends that the court erred in granting Caterpillar’s motion in limine. Caterpillar contends that the court erred in admitting plaintiff’s exhibit No. 32 (a Caterpillar service letter regarding proposed modifications of the bail selector valve and control valve) together with certain cross-examination testimony of Thomas Hrodey regarding such modifications, thus violating the court’s own in limine order. Although evidence of post-occurrence modification of an allegedly defective product is not admissible in an action predicated on negligence, such evidence is admissible where, as in the instant case, the action is predicated on a theory of strict liability. (Burke v. Illinois Power Co. (1978), 57 Ill. App. 3d 498, 514, 373 N.E.2d 1354.) Plaintiff’s exhibit No. 32 and Thomas Hrodey’s cross-examination testimony were, then, properly admitted for the purpose of demonstrating that Caterpillar’s original design was defective, notwithstanding Caterpillar’s stipulation regarding the feasibility of an alternate design. Caterpillar’s stipulation that it was feasible to design a tractor-scraper upon which plaintiff would not have been injured cannot reasonably be characterized as a concession that Caterpillar’s actual design resulted in a defective product; rather, Caterpillar’s stipulation conceded but one element of a necessarily complex determination. Nevertheless, we cannot view the court’s order in limine as reversible error, since the only evidence of the product’s post-occurrence modification which was offered at trial was admitted despite the erroneous in limine order.  Sahara alleges that the trial court erred in directing the jury to find that Deon Wallace was not the “loaned servant” of Fabick. The loaned-servant doctrine is a maxim of agency law which recognizes that the agent or employee of one principal may in fact become the employee of a second principal when the employee is loaned to the second principal for some special purpose. (Heinrich v. Peabody International Corp. (1984), 99 Ill. 2d 344, 351, 459 N.E.2d 935.) The essential criterion for determining the existence of a loaned-servant relationship is that of control over the employee. (Kristensen v. Gerhardt F. Meyne Co. (1982), 104 Ill. App. 3d 1075, 1079, 433 N.E.2d 1050.) The determination of control will depend upon such factors as the context in which the employee was hired, the manner in which the employee is paid, the procedure according to which the employee may be discharged, and the way in which the employee’s work is directed or supervised. Bituminous Casualty Corp. v. Wilson (1983), 119 Ill. App. 3d 454, 460, 456 N.E.2d 696.  The allegation of a loaned-servant relationship usually will present a question of fact for the jury. (119 Ill. App. 3d 454, 460.) In the instant case, however, there was no evidence that Mr. Wallace was hired in a context suggesting control by Fabick. Neither was there evidence suggesting that Fabick was responsible for paying Mr. Wallace, nor that Fabick possessed authority to discharge him. These essential elements of control, then, were not established by the testimony at trial. Mr. Wallace’s act of starting the machine at plaintiff’s behest was not, in itself, sufficient to establish Fabick’s control over Mr. Wallace. The mere fact that an employee in the course of a special service responds to directions or signals given by a purported second principal does not make the employee a loaned servant. (Richard v. Illinois Bell Telephone Co. (1978), 66 Ill. App. 3d 825, 832, 383 N.E.2d 1242.) In the instant case, the evidence did not demonstrate the requisites of a loaned-servant relationship, and the facts were not subject to inferences which would allow a reasoned finding of such a relationship. The trial court did not abuse its discretion by directing a verdict for plaintiff on this issue.  Sahara alleges that the jury’s finding that only 8.5% negligence should be allocated to plaintiff was against the manifest weight of the evidence presented at trial. A verdict is against “the manifest weight of the evidence” only when an opposite conclusion is clearly apparent or when the finding of the jury appears arbitrary and unsubstantiated by the evidence. (Goodrick v. Bassick Co. (1978), 58 Ill. App. 3d 447, 454, 374 N.E.2d 1262.) A reviewing court will not overturn a jury’s verdict unless, considering all evidence in the light most favorable to the party who prevailed at trial, the jury’s conclusion is palpably erroneous and wholly unwarranted. (Lynch v. Board of Education (1979), 72 Ill. App. 3d 317, 326, 390 J.E.2d 526, affd (1980), 82 Ill. 2d 415, 412 N.E.2d 447.) In the instant case, substantial evidence was presented in support of plaintiff’s allegations that Deon Wallace was negligent in his operation of the tractor-scraper, and that the tractor-scraper itself was an unreasonably dangerous product. The precise allocation of the parties’ fault in light of all the evidence was a matter upon which reasonable persons could disagree. Upon reviewing the record, we cannot characterize the jury’s finding as arbitrary or palpably erroneous. Sahara alleges that the jury’s answer to special interrogatory No. 2 entitled Sahara to judgment against Caterpillar both on Sahara’s claim for indemnity and on Caterpillar’s claim for contribution. The question asked of the jury was the following: “Question No. 2: Was the 637D tractor-scraper machine defective and unreasonably dangerous at the time it left the control of Caterpillar, which defective and unreasonably dangerous condition was a proximate cause of the injuries and damages sustained by Gary Holmes?” The jury answered the question in the affirmative. The jury had been instructed that if it should find that the tractor-scraper was in an unreasonably dangerous or defective condition at the time it left Caterpillar’s control, a verdict should then be entered in favor of Sahara on Sahara’s action for indemnity. Caterpillar argues that Sahara failed to state a cause of action, since the concept of implied indemnity has been superseded by the General Assembly’s adoption of the Contribution Among Joint Tortfeasors Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 70, par. 301 et seq.) and, in any event, Caterpillar is entitled to judgment as a matter of law since Sahara neither alleged nor proved the necessary pre-tort relationship between Sahara and Caterpillar.  The question of whether the General Assembly intended the Contribution Among Joint Tortfeasors Act to replace rather than supplement the common law concept of implied indemnity has generated considerable discussion. [E.g., Anich, Implied Indemnity After Skinner & the Illinois Contribution Act: The Case for a Uniform Standard, 14 Loy. U. Chi. L. J. 531 (1983); Appel & Michael, Contribution Among Joint Tortfeasors in Illinois: An Opportunity for Legislative & Judicial Cooperation, 10 Loy. U. Chi. L. J. 169, 192-93 (1979); Ferrini, The Evolution from Indemnity to Contribution — A Question of the Future, If Any, of Indemnity, 59 Chi. Bar. Rec. 254 (1978).) While acknowledging the debate, the Illinois Supreme Court thus far has declined to resolve the issue. (Heinrich v. Peabody International Corp. (1984), 99 Ill. 2d 344, 350-51, 459 N.E.2d 935; Simmons v. Union Electric Co. (1984), 104 Ill. 2d 444, 453-54.) The appellate court, in a thorough and well-reasoned disposition, recently held that the Contribution Act has in fact extinguished actions based on implied indemnity, with two “possible]” exceptions. (Morizzo v. Laverdure (1984), 127 Ill. App. 3d 767, 774, 469 N.E.2d 653.) The possible exceptions noted by the court were cases involving either some pre-tort relationship whereby one party becomes vicariously liable for another (e.g, employer-employee, owner-lessee, master-servant), or, an “upstream” claim of strict liability for an unreasonably dangerous or defective product. (127 Ill. App. 3d 767, 774.) One justice of the Morizzo court reasoned that these proposed exceptions are unfounded. (127 Ill. App. 3d 767, 775 (Downing, J., specially concurring).) “[W]ith the passage of the Contribution Act,” Justice Downing stated, “it is reasonable to conclude that the legislature intended that, without qualification, implied indemnity should no longer exist. I see no reason to distinguish between vicarious liability, indemnity in tort cases, or cases alleging ‘upstream’ strict liability.” (127 Ill. App. 3d 767, 775.) We agree. The right of contribution provides a mechanism whereby each defendant in a tort action may bear the loss according to his responsibility for the tortious act. This apportionment of the burden complements the principles of comparative negligence and comparative fault enunciated by our supreme court. In indemnity, the measure of recovery is all or nothing. (Heinrich v. Peabody International Corp. (1984), 99 Ill. 2d 344, 459 N.E.2d 935.) Allowing one tortfeasor (the indemnitee) to shift the entire loss to another (the indemnitor) imposes upon the indemnitor a burden necessarily disproportionate to the indemnitor’s responsibility for the injury. Such an imposition in the so-called exceptional cases creates a scheme according to which a tortfeasor’s culpability bears no direct relation to his burden of loss in cases involving vicarious liability or strict “upstream” liability, while necessarily determining the tortfeasor’s burden in all other cases. The effect of this scheme is to nullify the equitable equation of the degree of responsibility for the tortious act and the burden of loss for the harm thereby inflicted, thus undermining the basis upon which the right of contribution, as well as the principles of comparative negligence and comparative fault, rest. We cannot, in light of such legislative history as we possess, attribute to the General Assembly an intention in enacting the Contribution Act inconsistent with what would appear to be the principles furthered by the Act. It is our judgment that the Contribution Act has extinguished all actions for implied indemnity, and that Sahara’s complaint thus failed to state a cause of action.  Finally, Sahara alleges that the contribution judgment in favor of Caterpillar should be reduced by 8.5% to account for plaintiff’s comparative negligence. This allegation fails to realize that plaintiff’s action against Sahara was predicated on a theory of negligence, that plaintiff’s action against Caterpillar was predicated on a theory of strict liability, and that the jury’s attribution of 8.5% negligence to plaintiff affects neither Caterpillar’s liability to plaintiff nor Sahara’s liability to Caterpillar. The jury specifically found that plaintiff was guilty of negligence with regard to count I of plaintiff’s complaint, i.e., plaintiff’s action against Sahara. The jury specifically found that plaintiff did not assume the risk of the defective and unreasonably dangerous condition of the tractor-scraper alleged in count II of plaintiffs complaint, i.e., plaintiffs action against Caterpillar. The jury-made the following finding with regard to Caterpillar’s contribution action against Sahara. “We, the jury, found that Caterpillar is entitled to contribution from Sahara and further find the following: Assuming that 100% represents the total combined fault of Sahara and Caterpillar on the claim for contribution, we find the percentage of fault attributable to Sahara is 60% percent, for which Caterpillar should receive contribution.” The trial court correctly entered judgment against Sahara in the amount of $120,000, reflecting 60% of Caterpillar’s obligation to plaintiff. It was the judgment regarding Caterpillar’s liability to plaintiff, unaffected by plaintiff’s negligence, upon which Caterpillar sought contribution from Sahara. The judgment of the trial court is affirmed. Affirmed. WELCH, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739597 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:18.450796+00 ===

KASSERMAN, J., dissenting: I am unable to conclude, as does the majority, that the Illinois Contribution Among Joint Tortfeasors Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 70, par. 301 et seq.) extinguishes all actions of implied indemnity; therefore, I respectfully dissent. In adopting the special concurring opinion of Justice Downing in Morizzo v. Laverdure (1984), 127 Ill. App. 3d 767, 469 N.E.2d 653, the majority in the case at bar overrules the majority of the court in Morizzo in its decision that certain causes of action for implied indemnity are not extinguished by the Contribution Act. The court in Morizzo did, in fact, determine that implied ijdemnity is still viable in Illinois with respect to cases involving some pre-tort relationship between parties which gives rise to a duty to indemnify, such as those involving vicarious liability (lessor-lessee; employer-employee; owner and lessee; master and servant) and “upstream” claims in a strict liability action. In the case at bar, Sahara’s counterclaim against Caterpillar is an “upstream” claim in a strict liability action and, consequently, is embraced within one of the specified instances in which the Morizzo court found that implied indemnity still exists. Such a claim falls squarely within the ambit of the rule announced in Lowe v. Norfolk & Western Ry. Co. (1984), 124 Ill. App. 3d 80, 97, 463 N.E.2d 792, 805, in which this court stated that the Illinois Contribution Act does not prohibit an action for “upstream” indemnity in products liability cases. Applying the above rationale to the instant appeal, it is my conclusion that Sahara’s counterclaim stated a cause of action against Caterpillar for implied indemnity. Furthermore, the jury in its answer to special interrogatory No. 2 found that Caterpillar placed a defective and unreasonably dangerous product in the stream of commerce and that such defective and dangerous condition was the proximate cause of the injuries sustained by plaintiff. Therefore, Sahara would have been entitled to a judgment on its counterclaim against Caterpillar for indemnity; and although “downstream” indemnity has generally been prohibited, Caterpillar should be permitted to seek contribution from Sahara to establish that it is entitled to contribution on the basis that Sahara misused or assumed the risk of the defective product. Cf. Lowe v. Norfolk & Western Ry. Co. (1984), 124 Ill. App. 3d 80, 97, 463 N.E.2d 792, 805. For the foregoing reasons, I would reverse the decision of the trial court and remand this cause for a new trial consistent with this dissent.

=== CASE 9739598 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:18.719061+00 ===

JUSTICE RYAN delivered the opinion of the court: Plaintiff, Mary Jackson, had been employed as a janitor by Commonwealth Edison Company since 1966. Her work hours were from 5 p.m. to 1 a.m. On May 5, 1982, she was discharged for drinking intoxicating liquor on the job. She filed a claim for unemployment compensation, which was denied by a claims adjudicator. Plaintiff appealed this denial, and a hearing was held before a referee, who affirmed the claims adjudicator’s decision and held that the plaintiff was disqualified for benefits. This decision was appealed by the plaintiff to the Board of Review of the Department of Labor, which affirmed the decision of the referee. Plaintiff then filed her complaint in the circuit court of Cook County under the Code of Civil Procedure (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 110, par. 3 — 101 et seq.) (the Administrative Review Law). The circuit court reversed the decision of the Board of Review. On appeal, the appellate court affirmed. (121 Ill. App. 3d 963.) We granted the Board of Review’s petition for leave to appeal. The hearing before the referee was conducted in a very informal manner. Neither the plaintiff nor her employer was represented by counsel. The referee conducted the hearing, asking questions of the employer’s representatives and of the plaintiff alternatively. Two persons were present representing the employer: Dorothy Paige, Supervisor of Industrial Relations, and William Allen, a staff assistant in the office building. The record of this informal interrogation disclosed the following. On the day plaintiff was terminated, an assistant supervisor named Myra found her at 7 p.m. with a half can of beer and a half bottle of vodka. Myra called a supervisor named Stanley, who told plaintiff he had no alternative but to terminate her employment because she had been warned about a week before by Maggie Ritchie, another supervisor, about drinking on the job. Shortly before Ritchie had talked to the plaintiff, Allen had also spoken to her about her drinking problem. She was told that if she was caught drinking, her employment would be terminated. For about a year before plaintiff’s termination, Allen had been aware that plaintiff had been drinking on the job, but because of her years of service, she had been given warnings but had not been disciplined. Her immediate supervisor, Stanley, had given an informal report or memorandum to Allen. This document was not introduced into evidence, but it was referred to at length by the referee, who quoted from its contents in asking questions. The referee referred to specific entries on this memorandum. Although he stated the month and day the entries referred to, he did not state the year and, apparently, did not refer to these entries in chronological sequence. The memorandum stated that on February 10, the plaintiff was asleep in a chair with a beer can on the table. Stanley awakened her and told her to go home. The report stated there was “no sense discussing the situation at the moment. She was tipsy. We discussed the matter the next day.” The report stated on April 6, “Found Mary in room 633 eating lunch drinking beer. Told her she was very close to being terminated.” Under date of January 20 the report stated, “When I walked in she was sitting at the table with a can of beer in her hand and a six pack on the table.” Following her discharge, plaintiff filed a grievance with her union. In her letter to the union, she said she was discharged for drinking a can of beer on the job. At the hearing when she denied she was drinking on the job, the referee pointed out to her that, in her letter to the union, she did not deny the charge or assert that it was untrue. On May 10, a few days after having been discharged, plaintiff entered a hospital and completed a 28-day treatment program for alcoholism. The employer had an alcoholism program, but plaintiff said that she did not contact a representative of that program before she was discharged. She admitted to the referee that she had had a drinking problem for quite some time. Allen informed the referee that it is a violation of company policy to drink while on the job. He also stated that he held a meeting of the employees about every six months, at which meeting he informed the employees that “if anyone was caught drinking alcoholic beverages in the building, they would be terminated. No if, and or buts about it.” Plaintiff admitted to the referee that she had heard some of these announcements. From the evidence presented to the referee, it appears the plaintiff had not been given a written warning concerning her drinking on the job, but there is evidence that she had been verbally warned on several occasions. Plaintiff told the referee that “no one caught me drinking.” She denied that on the day she was terminated she had a half can of beer and a half bottle of vodka. She stated she was collecting aluminum cans and on the day she was discharged she had a beer can and some soda cans. She also denied that she was drinking on the other occasions. She admitted that on one occasion she had had a beer with her lunch and was warned about having beer with her lunch, but insisted that on the occasion when she was discharged she had not been drinking. When the referee reminded her that the evidence was that on the day of her discharge she had a half can of beer and an open bottle of vodka, she stated that was a lie. The referee replied, “Well, that is a matter of credibility,” and reminded her that she had not stated it was a lie in her letter to the union. This case involves the construction of the provision of section 602(A) of the Unemployment Insurance Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 48, par. 432), which states: “An individual shall" be ineligible for benefits for the week in which he has been discharged for misconduct connected with his work ***.” (Emphasis added.) Before considering this provision of the statute in light of the facts of this case, we must point out that every justifiable discharge does not disqualify the discharged employee from receiving employment benefits under the Act. An employee’s conduct may be such that the employer may properly discharge him. However, such conduct may not constitute “misconduct connected with his work” which disqualifies the employee from receiving unemployment benefits. See Annot., 26 A.L.R.Sd 1356, 1358-60 (1969). As noted above, the hearing before the referee was informal, neither party was represented by counsel, and the referee conducted the hearing, asking questions of one party and then the other. Also, as noted, much of the evidence against the plaintiff, as well as some of the plaintiff’s evidence, was hearsay. Although the appellate court in this case noted that most of the evidence against the plaintiff was hearsay, it stated that, because of other facts, it need not be concerned with the hearsay problem. In this court, plaintiff insists that we cannot consider any of the hearsay evidence presented by the employer. Plaintiff argues that “[o]nly the legally competent evidence is properly before this Court on review, and it is only upon this non-hearsay evidence that the Court’s decision can be based.” This is not an accurate statement of the law of this State. The cases cited by the plaintiff as authority for this statement are cases in which hearsay testimony was admitted over the objection of the opposing party, and thus are not apposite in this case, where no objections had been made. (See Grand Liquor Co. v. Department of Revenue (1977), 67 Ill. 2d 195; Russell v. License Appeal Com. (1971), 133 Ill. App. 2d 594.) Also, the cases relied upon by the appellate court in this case, in support of its statement that “[i]t has been repeatedly held that hearsay is ‘inadmissible in an administrative proceeding,’ ” were cases in which hearsay evidence was admitted over objections. See Nendza v. Board of Review (1982), 105 Ill. App. 3d 437; Spaulding v. Howlett (1978), 59 Ill. App. 3d 249. In our case there were no objections to the hearsay evidence. It is well established that when hearsay evidence is admitted without an objection, it is to be considered and given its natural probative effect. (People v. Akis (1976), 63 Ill. 2d 296; People v. Trefonas (1956), 9 Ill. 2d 92; Town of Cicero v. Industrial Com. (1949), 404 Ill. 487; 1 Wigmore, Evidence sec. 18 (Tillers rev. ed. 1983).) An extensive annotation on this subject discloses that the overwhelming weight of authority supports the rule announced in these cases. See Annot., 79 A.L.R.2d 890 (1961). Section 3 — 111(b) of the Code of Civil Procedure provides that technical errors in proceedings before an administrative agency, or its failure to observe technical rules of evidence, cannot constitute grounds for reversal. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 110, par. 3 — 111(b).) This court has held that a similar provision contained in section 8 of the Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1939, ch. 120, par. 447) did not abrogate the fundamental rules of evidence, and held that the hearsay evidence rule was not eliminated from administrative proceedings by this provision. (Novicki v. Department of Finance (1940), 373 Ill. 342.) Thus the hearsay evidence rule applies to the administrative proceedings under the Unemployment Insurance Act, but hearsay evidence that is admitted without objection may be considered by the administrative body and by the courts on review. The appellate court in this case noted that no objection was made to the hearsay evidence “because plaintiff acted pro se.” This fact may explain the reason for the failure to object to the employer’s hearsay evidence, just as it explains the reason for the failure of the employer to object to some statements made by the plaintiff at the hearing which were hearsay. It does not, however, alter the rule. The hearing was conducted by the referee who also was to make the decision in the case. The statements of both the plaintiff and the employer’s representatives were before the referee. It was his prerogative to give those statements whatever weight he thought they should be given. The referee found that the claimant had received prior warnings that drinking on the job was a violation of company rules and grounds for discharge, and in his conclusion stated that, despite prior warnings, the claimant knowingly violated a reasonable company policy prohibiting drinking on the job. Section 3 — 110 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 110, par. 3— 110) provides that the findings and conclusions of the administrative agency on questions of fact shall be held to be prima facie true and correct. There was evidence presented to the referee that, on three occasions prior to the date of her discharge, plaintiff had been drinking on the job and had been warned about such conduct and that on the day of her discharge, she had a half can of beer and an open bottle of vodka. There is also evidence that she had had a drinking problem for some time prior to her discharge. In addition to the warnings on the occasions she had been seen with liquor on the employer’s premises, she had received warnings from Allen when he had met with the employees about every six months. The findings and conclusions of the referee are not against the manifest weight of the evidence. The question then arises whether plaintiff’s conduct constituted “misconduct connected with [her] work” which would disqualify her from receiving unemployment benefits. The conclusion of the referee was that she is subject to disqualification under the Act. Plaintiff contends that an employee’s conduct in violation of work rules, although sufficient grounds to warrant discharge, does not constitute “misconduct” under the Act unless the employer can show some substantial actual harm to its interests from such violations. The appellate court based its decision on its perception that the phrase “misconduct connected with his work” requires a demonstration of some harm or some degree of potential harm to the employer. The appellate court concluded that there was no showing of any harm or potential harm from the plaintiff’s conduct. The Board of Review argues that no harm or potential harm to the employer need be shown and contends that a deliberate violation of a reasonable company rule prohibiting the use of intoxicants on the job constitutes misconduct connected with the plaintiff’s work. This court has not had the occasion to address this question. The parties and the appellate court referred to four appellate court cases in this State that have determined whether the employee’s action constituted “misconduct” connected with the work so as to disqualify the employee from benefits under the Act. (Robinson v. Department of Labor (1983), 118 Ill. App. 3d 986; Winklmeier v. Board of Review (1983), 115 Ill. App. 3d 154; Granite City Steel v. Board of Review (1979), 68 Ill. App. 3d 264; Roundtree v. Board of Review (1972), 4 Ill. App. 3d 695.) A clear holding as to whether harm or potential harm to the employer must be shown cannot be found in these cases. Granite City Steel discusses the tests of misconduct in greater detail than do the other three cases and seems to hold that a person may be disqualified from receiving unemployment benefits (1) for wilful disregard of employment rules, or (2) in situations where the employee’s conduct lacks intent, but includes acts involving such a magnitude of danger to others that to award that employee unemployment benefits would violate the policy of the Act. We do not agree with the plaintiff or the appellate court that to establish misconduct under the Act it is necessary to show harm or potential harm to the employer. The general nature of disqualifying misconduct has been discussed in Boynton Cab Co. v. Neubeck (1941), 237 Wis. 249, 259-60, 296 N.W. 636, 640, in the following language: “[T]he intended meaning of the term ‘misconduct,’ as used in sec. 108.04(4)(a), Stats., is limited to conduct evincing such wilful or wanton disregard of an employer’s interests as is found in deliberate violations or disregard of standards of behavior which the employer has the right to expect of his employee, or in carelessness or negligence of such degree or recurrence as to manifest equal culpability, wrongful intent or evil design, or to show an intentional and substantial disregard of the employer’s interests or of the employee’s duties and obligations to his employer.” Boynton was cited and the above language quoted in Maywood Glass Co. v. Stewart (1959), 170 Cal. App. 2d 719, 724, 339 P.2d 947, 950-51. In Green v. Brown (La. App. 1961), 136 So. 2d 147, 149, the court, although not citing Boynton or Maywood Glass Co., used identical language in defining “misconduct,” stating that the term has been uniformly defined by the courts of Louisiana in that manner. This definition of disqualifying misconduct thus seems to have gained acceptance. Although it is stated in broad and general terms, it has not limited the disqualification to cases in which the employee’s conduct is harmful or potentially harmful to the employer, although conduct which is harmful or potentially harmful to the employer may fall within this definition. For an application of this definition or similar definitions in the various States, see Annot., 26 A.L.R.Sd 1356 (1969). Every violation of a company rule will not constitute misconduct. The rule must be a reasonable rule governing the conduct or performance of an employee. There must be some nexus between the rule and the employment. An example of a rule that does not directly concern the employment, as given by one commentator, is a rule against wage garnishments. (See Packard, Unemployment Without Fault: Disqualifications For Unemployment Insurance Benefits, 17 Villanova L. Rev. 635, 647 (1972).) Thus a reasonable company rule or order governing the conduct and performance of an employee which directly concerns the employment constitutes “standards of behavior which the employer has the right to expect of his employees,” as that phrase is used in the definition of misconduct quoted above. In addition to the existence of such a rule, it must be shown that the breach of the rule is deliberate or its equivalent, as stated in the above-quoted definition. The referee found that the plaintiff violated a reasonable company policy prohibiting drinking on the job. The plaintiff, in her brief, acknowledges that Commonwealth Edison’s rule which prohibits the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the job is reasonable. Her brief states: “In fact, had the record below contained competent evidence that Jackson had repeatedly drunk on the job; that she had been warned about such conduct and nevertheless persisted; and that, as a consequence of her conduct, she had harmed Edison’s interests, this court’s task would be simple.” Thus the reasonableness of the rule and its nexus to the employment are not at issue in this case. Therefore, all this court need consider is whether there was a deliberate violation or breach of the rule, or its equivalent. (See Packard, Unemployment Without Fault: Disqualifications For Unemployment Insurance Benefits, 17 Villavona L. Rev. 635, 647-48 (1972).) There is no requirement that such conduct harm the employer. As noted above, the administrative body and this court need not disregard unobjected-to hearsay evidence. The weight to be given to the evidence and the credibility of the witnesses are within the province of the administrative agency. Under the Code of Civil Procedure, findings and conclusions of fact are prima facie true and correct. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 110, par. 3 — 110.) A reviewing court cannot reweigh the evidence. Its function is to determine whether the administrative agency’s decision is against the manifest weight of the evidence. Nendza v. Board of Review (1982), 105 Ill. App. 3d 437, 442-43. In this case, the record shows that there were several violations by the plaintiff of the employer’s rule against drinking alcoholic beverages on the job. There is also evidence in the record that the plaintiff had been warned several times about drinking on the job. The record plainly reflects deliberate violations of the rule. The conclusion of the referee that “[djespite prior warnings [the plaintiff] knowingly violated a reasonable company policy prohibiting drinking on the job” is not contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. We have dealt here only with the violation of a company rule as constituting disqualifying misconduct. We need not here consider other conduct which does not violate a rule of the employer but which may constitute disqualifying misconduct. See Packard, Unemployment Without Fault: Disqualifications For Unemployment Insurance Benefits, 17 Villanova L. Rev. 635, 646 (1972). The judgments of the appellate court and of the circuit court of Cook County are reversed, and the decision of the Board of Review of the Department of Labor is affirmed. Judgments reversed; Board of Review affirmed.

=== CASE 9739599 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:18.723308+00 ===

JUSTICE GOLDENHERSH, dissenting: I dissent and would affirm the judgment of the appellate court. The majority has taken from a Wisconsin case (Boynton Cab Co. v. Neubeck (1941), 237 Wis. 249, 296 N.W. 636) a definition of the statutory term “misconduct” (105 Ill. 2d at 507), and although I find it amorphous to the point of being meaningless, I accept it for the purposes of this case. I am of the opinion that the record does not support the finding that plaintiff was guilty of misconduct. It is true that plaintiff, on at least two prior occasions, had been cautioned by a superior about drinking on the job and that she had a drinking problem. There is no evidence, however, that she had been drinking beer or any other alcoholic liquor on the night of the occurrence upon which the discharge is allegedly based. She admitted having possession of the beer can but denied having any vodka. Her explanation of why she had the beer can is entirely plausible, and nothing in the record contradicts it. The testimony concerning prior admonitions is vague and confusing. One witness thought plaintiff had been given a written warning but later decided he was in error. The individuals who were present on the night of the occurrence were not called as witnesses, and plaintiff’s unequivocal statement that she had not been drinking on that occasion stands undenied and undisputed in the record. I do not quarrel with the right of the employer to enforce a rule against drinking on the job. I am of the opinion, however, that the deprivation of unemployment compensation to an employee discharged after 16 years of service should be supported by proof that violation of the rule was the actual cause of the discharge. Informality in the proceedings before the claims adjudicator and the referee is, I am sure, commendable, but should not be pursued to the point of completely omitting evidence which sustains the finding upon which the decision is based. CLARK, C.J., and SIMON, J., join in this dissent.

=== CASE 9739600 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:20.888343+00 ===

ON CIVIL PETITION TO TRANSFER
PRENTICE, Justice.
The evidence favorable to the judgment of the trial court is as follows:
On February 22, 1977, at approximately 6:00 a.m., a boxcar in Defendant's (Conrail) freight train heading east toward Guilford, Indiana, derailed approximately one-half mile west of Guilford, punching a hole in the lower east end of a tank car behind it containing 35,000 gallons of acrylonitrile, a hazardous chemical used in the manufacture of plastics. The derailed boxcar and punctured tank car came to rest approximately 1800 feet west of a parking lot on the outskirts of Guilford, adjacent to the railroad tracks. The tank car contents flowed east on the north side of the rail road tracks, then south through a culvert (located 1100 feet west of the parking lot) under the tracks to Tanners Creek; by 9:00 a.m., the tank car was almost empty.
At approximately 7:00 a.m., the train crew notified Conrail's train dispatcher in Indianapolis of the derailment. Shortly thereafter, pursuant to Conrail procedure, Conrail's Indianapolis supervisor of train operation notified Chemtrek, the Bureau of Explosives, State Board of Health and the Environmental Protection Agency concerning this chemical spill. '
Around 9:00 a.m., in response to the Lawrenceburg trainmaster's phone call, 3 representatives of the tank car owner, Monsanto, arrived in Guilford and proceeded to the derailment site. Monsanto's senior representative, the safety superintendent of the Addyston, Ohio plant, after observing the derailment site and tank car from as close as 5 feet, experienced no discomfort from any chemical fumes and did not feel that it was necessary to wear air packs or self-contained breathing apparatus.
At about 11:00 a.m., 3 members of the Indiana State Board of Health Emergency Response Team arrived in Guilford and began monitoring the air for the presence of acrylonitrile vapors. Air sample readings taken by the Emergency Response Team members from the parking lot to the tank car did not indicate the presence of acrylon-itrile vapors until 20 feet east of the tank car, and readings taken over water and chemical filled ditches between the railroad cars and the culvert under the tracks also failed to indicate the presence of chemical vapors. Based upon their findings, the team was of the opinion there was no acryl-onitrile vapor problem and did not recommend, nor feel it necessary under the circumstances to use self-contained breathing apparatus.
The operations officer of the hazardous materials company hired by Conrail to clean up the derailment spill was also of the opinion that masks or self-contained breathing apparatus were not necessary nor needed.
During the afternoon of February 22, the entire train, except for the derailed boxcar, was removed from the Guilford area; by 8:00 p.m., the remaining boxcar had been rerailed and also removed from the area.
The next day, February 23, Plaintiff's decedent, Richard C. Hebel (Hebel), who was a Conrail policeman, was assigned to work at the Guilford derailment site beginning at 4:00 p.m. that day and ending at 4:00 a.m. on February 24. At 4:10 p.m. on February 23 in the parking lot, Hebel asked the Lawrenceburg trainmaster if he (Hebel) needed to go down there and he (trainmaster) said he didn't see any reason why Hebel would have to do down to the derailment site. During Hebel's tour of duty, he was seen only at the parking lot *655on the outskirts of Guilford, 1800 feet east of the actual derailment site. At the end of his shift at 4:00 a.m. on February 24, Hebel called his supervisor and related that the scene was reasonably secure, that there hadn't been any trespassers there, and that in his judgment, it didn't warrant another officer's coming down and relieving him. Hebel did not sound unusual nor did he make any complaint about how he was feeling.
During February 23 and 24 and while Hebel was on duty at the parking lot, there were no persons overcome by the chemical vapors; there were no chemical odors in the parking lot; there was no chemical liquid east of the culvert, and the closest vapor concentration was west of the culvert, which was 1100 feet west of the parking lot. Three people, including two bulldozer operators working at the site of the spill, had been overcome by the fumes and taken to the hospital on the 22nd, following approximately twelve hours of working in the immediate area of the chemical. Conrail did have knowledge of these casualties.
Although Hebel later told his doctor he was off work at least a few days after the "acute incident" ending at 4:00 a.m. on February 24, he missed no work until March 19 when he was off work one day. After that, Hebel worked for the remainder of 1977 missing work only on April 23 and October 25-26 due to sickness. On May 17, 1977, Hebel took his annual physical examination required by Conrail and acknowledged to the examining physician that he had had no medical complaint or problems since his last previous examination on May 24, 1976.
Although Conrail's primary safety rule was that all personal injuries be immediately reported by the employee to his supervisor, Hebel's supervisor was not notified or aware that Hebel was claiming injury as a result of an alleged chemical exposure on February 28-24, 1977, until the supervisor read about the filing of Hebel's suit in October, 1978. In the 1% year period between the Guilford derailment and the filing of his suit, Hebel never informed his supervisor that he was claiming injury as the result of an exposure at the derailment site.
On November 1, 1978, after he filed suit, Hebel gave a history of his alleged chemical exposure to Dr. Brooks, as follows: he was guarding an overturned tank car which contained acrylonitrile; he had to stay there and guard that car; he noted a brownish fog-like emission emitting from around the tank car and was in very close proximity to the car. Based upon what Hebel told him, it was Dr. Brook's opinion that Hebel's underlying peripheral vascular disease was aggravated by the alleged acrylonitrile exposure which accelerated his death, in November, 1979. The doctor also testified, on cross-examination, that it was possible that the progression of Hebel's peripheral vascular disease in 1978 and 1979 could have occurred as it did without exposure to acrylonitrile. Defense witness, Dr. Thomas Bright, a physician and toxicologist, testified that the symptoms reported by Hebel to his doctor were inconsistent with a typical exposure to acrylonitrile. It was also Dr. Bright's opinion that the progression of Hebel's peripheral vascular disease in 1978 to his death in 1979 was not unusually rapid, but was a classic case of the disease of a diabetic smoker, not connected with exposure to the chemical.
This action was brought initially by He-bel on October 12, 1978, in Dearborn Circuit Court under the Federal Employer's Liability Act (FELA), 45 U.S.C. § 51 et seq. Hebel died on November 7, 1979; and on June 80, 1980, Plaintiff, Robert Hebel, as personal representative for Hebel, was substituted as party plaintiff.
Trial by jury resulted in judgment for the Defendant and against the Plaintiff. The Plaintiff appealed and the Indiana Court of Appeals, First District, reversed. Hebel v. Conrail, Inc., (1983) Ind.App., 444 N.E.2d 870 (reh'g denied March 1, 1983). The case is now before us on a Petition to Transfer filed by Conrail on March 21, 1988.
Also on March 21, 1983, twelve railroad companies operating within the State of *656Indiana filed their joint motion for leave to file Brief Amici Curiae in support of Conrail's petition to transfer, which motion was sustained and said brief ordered filed August 3, 1988. On August 8, 1983, the cause was argued orally both on the Petition to Transfer and the merits and taken under advisement.
We have been greatly hampered in our review of this case by reason of Plaintiff's inarticulate briefing and the assignment of numerous alleged errors which, if committed, were, nevertheless, not preserved for review. We address assigned issues V and IV because of our desire to reach the merits of appeals wherever it appears that justiciable issues exist and because these issues were addressed in detail by the Court of Appeals and, in our judgment, decided erroneously.
ISSUE V-STRICT LIABILITY CLAIM
With regard to this claim, Plaintiff, in his "Statement Of The Issues Presented For Review," assigns: "Whether the Trial Court erred in not allowing into evidence, violations of federal safety statutes." In his "Summary of the Argument," Plaintiff charges not that evidence of violations was rejected but rather that the trial court did not allow him "to present the federal safety standard [relative to the presence of] acrylonitrile in the workplace into evidence'"-a charge differing from the one set forth in the statement of issues.
In his argument, Plaintiff launches into a syllogism that the OSHA standards were for the protection of workers in the workplace, including him, that the violation of such regulations was negligence per se under the Federal Employer's Liability Act, and that the trial court erred in directing a verdict upon that issue. This was the thesis of the Court of Appeals; thus, although it appears to us that because of procedural deficiencies, namely that we cannot determine from Plaintiff's brief, or the record, the provisions of the regulations that Defendant allegedly violated, the issue is not before us. Apparently, the Court of Appeals took the burden of making this determination upon itself-an admirable effort to do justice but perhaps one it can ill afford to extend and certainly one beyond the call of its duty.
Transfer is now granted under Appellate Rule 11(B)(2)(b) inasmuch as the Court of Appeals erroneously decided a new question of law in holding that a violation of Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA) regulations was admissible as evidence of negligence per se, thus imposing strict or absolute liability in FELA actions,1 and said decision and opinion of the Court of Appeals is ordered vacated.
The decision herein, upon this issue, is controlled by the following quoted provision of the Act under which the regulation allegedly violated was adopted:
"Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to supersede or in any manner dffect any workmen's compensation law or to enlarge or diminish or affect in any other manner the common law or statutory rights, duties, or liabilities of employers and employees under any law with respect to injuries, diseases, or death of employees arising out of, or in the course of, employment." 29 U.S.C. § 653(b)(4) (Emphasis added.)
The legislative history accompanying OSHA also reflects the proseriptions set forth above.
"The bill does not affect any Federal or state workmen's compensation laws, or the rights, duties, or liabilities of employers and employees under them. In addition, it does not modify other Federal laws prescribing safety and health standards. The bill does not authorize the *657Secretary of Labor to assert authority under this bill over particular working conditions regarding which another Federal agency exercises statutory authority to prescribe or enforce standards affecting occupational safety and health." (1970 U.S.Code Cong. and Adm.News, 5177, 5199) (Emphasis added.)
This issue was addressed in Wendland v. Ridgefield Const. Services, Inc., (1981) 184 Ct. 173, 439 A.2d 954, 956, as follows:
""We proceed, then, to determine . whether the plaintiff, having established a violation of a regulation, was entitled to a jury instruction on negligence per se. Neither party has briefed this issue. Nevertheless, we must address it because to ignore it would be to ignore a clear, plain statutory directive. General Statutes § 81-369(b) provides that '[nljothing in this chapter shall be construed to supersede or in any manner affect any workers' compensation law or to enlarge, diminish or affect in any manner common law or statutory rights, duties, or liabilities of employers or employees, under any law with respect to injuries, diseases or death of employees arising out of and in the course of employment.' Federal law contains a similar provision. 29 U.S.C. § 658(b)(4). [Footnote omitted]. Both statutes refer to the Occupational Safety and Health Act, which is the enabling legislation for the safety regulations at issue in this case. Thus we must decide whether the negligence per se instruction given to the jury in this case is legally correct when measured against these limiting statutes.
L * # * # #
"A negligence per se instruction transforms the character of the factfinder's inquiry. The applicable standard of care is affected by such an instruction. Because the standard of care is the key factor in determining lability, we conclude that the application of a negligence per se instruction affects common law rights, duties and liabilities of employers and employees with respect to injuries of employees arising out of and in the course of employment as those terms are used in 29 U.S.C. § 653(b)(4) and General Statutes § 81-869(b). Thus, the negli-genee per se instruction was erroneous."
In Bertholf v. Burlington Northern Railroad, 402 F.Supp. 171 (E.D.Wash.1975), a FELA action, the employee sought summary judgment where a defect in a hoist was the proximate cause of the accident, and violation of an OSHA regulation requiring regular inspections of such equipment was charged. The court held:
"Further, plaintiff's argument would fail for the additional reason that section 4(b)(4) of OSHA, 29 U.S.C. § 653, upon which plaintiff relies to find an employer violation of a safety statute, expressly limits the operation of OSHA regulations to render them inapplicable to FELA cases:
'Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to supersede or in any manner affect any workmen's compensation law or to enlarge or diminish or affect in any other manner the common law or statutory rights, duties, or liabilities of employers and employees under any law with respect to injuries, diseases, or death of employees arising out of, or in the course of, employment'"
402 F.Supp. at 173.
Another holding is National Marine Service, Inc. v. Gulf Oil Co., 433 F.Supp. 913, (E.D.La.1977) aff'd., 608 F.2d 522 (5th Cir.1979). An action brought under the Jones Act, 41 Stat. 1007, 46 U.S.C. § 688, rendering FELA applicable to seamen. An issue was whether OSHA regulations were applicable to crew members, and it was held that the specific wording of the Jones Act excluded them. The court continued, "Even if there was a violation of OSHA regulations, that violation may not be used to create civil liability, 29 U.S.C.A. § 653(b)(4), although the regulations may be used as guides for the determination of standards of care[.]" (Citations omitted.) 488 F.Supp. at 919.
Hebel relies upon Kernan v. American Dredging Co., (1958) 355 U.S. 426, 78 S.Ct. 394, 2 L.Ed.2d 382 for his proposition that *658under FELA the violation of a safety regulation gave rise to absolute liability in the employer for injuries to the employee proximately caused thereby. Kernan appears to be analogous to the case before us only in that it arose under the Jones Act and the injury resulted from the violation of a Coast Guard Regulation. There, the similarities end. The issue was whether strict liability would arise from the violation of a regulation designed for a purpose other than to protect against injuries of the nature of the resultant one. The regulation required navigational lights on ships to be at a minimum height of eight feet above the water. Its purpose was to maximize visibility by others, as a guard against collision. A seaman lost his life on a tugboat when an open-flame kerosene lamp on board a scow being towed ignited inflammable vapors lying above an accumulation of petroleum spread over the surface of the water. The lamp was approximately three feet above the water's surface rather than at the height established by the Coast Guard Regulation. Following a line of FELA cases, wherein strict liability had been imposed for violation of the Safety Appliance Act and the Boiler Inspection Act, notwithstanding that the injuries had not been of the type the regulations had been intended to prevent, the Supreme Court, in a 5-4 decision, held, upon an evolving public policy of shifting the "human overhead" of the "inevitable deaths and injuries of industrial employment" from workers to industry, that the purpose of the regulation was not relevant.
Clearly the distinguishing factor in Ker-nan is the absence of the OSHA provision, above quoted, proscribing any construction "to enlarge or diminish or affect ... common law or statutory rights, duties, or liabilities of employers and employees under any law."
We have found no case where absolute liability has been imposed for violation of an OSHA regulation against a claim that the express language of OSHA prohibits the creation of liability.
ISSUE V-ORDINARY NEGLIGENCE CLAIM
The trial court directed a verdict for the Defendant upon the question of strict liability but permitted the case to go to the jury upon the issue of negligence, and the jury returned a verdict for Defendant upon that issue. Although it appears to us that Plaintiff has sought review of the rejection of OSHA standards only as it affected his claim of strict liability, two statements from his argument might be viewed as presenting a claim that the standards were admissible as evidence of negligence, even if not as evidence of negligence per se; and Judge Ratliff, in a brief opinion concurring in the result of the decision of the Court of Appeals, agreed that the standards were admissible in evidence for that purpose. We express no opinion in that matter. The OSHA standards do not appear to be in the record. We, therefore, do not know the level of concentration of the chemical that they permit before reasonable care requires exposure precautions to be taken. Neither has Plaintiff informed us of the levels of concentration actually present at the time of the alleged exposure. It therefore appears to us that to find error upon this question would require us to speculate upon both the provisions of the Standards and upon the concentration of acrylonitrile present.
ISSUE IV
The Court of Appeals also held that the admission into evidence of Defendant's Exhibit I was reversible error, a holding with which we also disagree. The exhibit consisted of medical reports relative to He-bel taken from Defendant's file and reflective of Hebel's physical condition from 1957 through May 17, 1977. We are thwarted in our review of this issue by an inadequate statement of the grounds for the objection; and, indeed, the Defendant claims that error, if any, in the admission of the exhibit was waived for want of an objection disclosing the legal principle upon which it was premised. From our review of the record, however, it does appear that the *659Defendant proffered the exhibits under the business records exception to the hearsay rule, and we accept, arguendo, the Plaintiff's objection: "We will just make our objection that [the witness identifying the exhibit] does not know who prepared the forms" as a sufficient objection. We are also of the opinion that the foundation laid did not meet the "business record exception" requirements of Wells v. State, (1970) 254 Ind. 608, 261 N.E.2d 865, in that the cireumstances of preparation of some of the records comprising the exhibit were not such as would assure their reliability. Rather, they were simply documents filed among the Defendant's records in the ordinary course of its business. The trial court did err if it admitted the entire exhibit upon the premise that its entire contents qualified under the exception.
We are also handicapped by Plaintiff's failure to advise us in argument of how the admission of the exhibit harmed him, other than as follows:
"The Plaintiff was irreparably damaged as the jury was given the physical reports without the Plaintiff (sic) having an opportunity of placing Dr. Todd or the other doctors under oath to explain the basis of the reports under cross-examination." (Appellant's Brief p. 34.)
Defendant replied to this argument as follows:
"[The exhibit did impeach the credibility of the Hebels since they contended Richard Hebel was in excellent health before February 28, 1977, and poor health thereafter." (Appellee's Brief p. 21.)
And Plaintiff responded:
"The parties are in agreement that the admission of Exhibit 'T' is of such a decisive nature in this case [Appellee Brief p. 21] that the improper admission of this exhibit requires reversal." (Appellant's Reply Brief p. 19.)
In Gilmore v. State, we stated:
"Appellant's original brief should not only present the issues to be decided upon appeal, but it should be of material assistance to the court in deciding those issues. It is insufficient to merely state that a requested instruction, which has been denied, correctly states the law and that certain other instructions were insufficient to cover the points contained in the refused instruction. This court is entitled to have presented to it in more than summary fashion the reasons why the action of the trial court has prejudiced the appellant."
Gilmore v. State, (1951) 229 Ind. 359, 367, 98 N.E.2d 677, 681.
Before one is entitled to a reversal, he must affirmatively show that there was error prejudicial to his substantial rights. This court, on review will not search the record to find grounds for reversal. Akins v. State, (1981) Ind., 429 N.E.2d 232, 236.
The theory of Plaintiff's case was not that Hebel was in excellent health prior to the chemical exposure. Rather, it was that he was suffering from various health problems, significantly diabetes, hypertension and arteriosclerosis which had been severely aggravated by the exposure and that his worsening condition, accelerated bypass surgery and ultimate death had been the proximate result of the exposure.
Dr. Brooks, Plaintiff's medical witness, testified concerning the classic symptoms of acrylonitrile exposure. "The symptoms of the nausea, vomiting, headache, decreased appetite, perhaps even the shortness of breath, are the classical symptoms of acrylonitrile toxicity." (R. at 303.)
He also testified as to Hebel's statements to him made during his examination had on November 1, 1978, which were that he had been exposed to the chemical and that he developed the aforementioned symptoms almost immediately thereafter.
"He then after twelve hours or so, finished his work and he developed symptoms of a stuffy nose and he noted a decrease in his appetite. He then developed nausea-that is, feeling sick to his stomach. He developed a headache and he developed shortness of breath. He then returned home and after returning *660home he also-and this was the symptoms that I initially related: nausea, shortness of breath and headache, were right at the end of his work shift while be was still at work place. He went home and he developed nausea and vomiting, headache continued, stuffy nose continued, the shortness of breath got worse, he developed some wheezing but not much cough. He had no fever. The symptoms continued the next day and he was particularly short of breath when he exerted himself, such as climbing the stairs. He continued to have a headache and then for the first time, he noted pain in his calves. Now, over the next few weeks his appetite decreased, the shortness of breath-or the decreased appetite continue, the shortness of breath continued, he was still short of breath with exertion, and the pain in his legs and the headache and the weakness and dizziness continued. The symptoms persisted then over the next few months and he noted not only the pain in his legs but the weakness and having difficulty controlling his legs and occasionally he would fall. He stated to me that his legs felt like he was stepping into a hole. He had no actual control. His appetite continued to be poor and he noted a decrease in his sexual functions." (R. pp. 801, 802.)
Hebel's widow and son also testified as to Hebel's having suffered and exhibited many of the aforementioned symptoms beginning immediately following his exposure.
Our review of the exhibit in question reveals but one document that could have been damaging to Plaintiff's case-the record of Hebel's routine physical examination report by a Dr. Todd made on May 17, 1977, which was but three months following the acrylonitrile exposure.
The report forms, including the one of May 17, 1977, are in two parts. The upper portion of the page identifies the examinee and presents twenty-seven questions to be answered by him "yes" or "no'" by making a check mark. That portion of the form bears the signature of the examinee, in this case, Hebel. All responses on that form were in the negative, and among those questions were the following:
"Since your last examination," (May 24, 1976) do you know of any physical or mental condition which might restrict your ability to work? Have you had:
Any illnesses, operations or injuries?
Fainting or dizziness?
Shortness of breath or cough?
Trouble with digestion or bowels?
Numbness, weakness or paralysis?
Weakness or fatigue?
Trouble with hip or knee?
Stiff, swollen or painful joints or muscles?
The aforementioned statements of Hebel were relevant to his physical condition at critical times and to the credibility and weight of the testimony of his widow and son and of Dr. Brooks. They were admissible as the admissions of a decedent against his personal representative.2 Eckert, Admr. v. Triplett, (1874) 48 Ind. 174; Slade v. Leonard, Admr., (1881) 75 Ind. 171, Uebelhack Equipment, Inc. v. Garrett Brothers, Inc., (1980) Ind.App., 408 N.E.2d 136, 138. See 31A C.J.S. EvinenNcr § 39%. Because the portion of the records signed by Hebel were admissible, albeit for a reason other than the one argued by Defendant, and because we find nothing harmful to Plaintiff in the portions of *661the exhibit that were hearsay and should have been rejected, we find no reversible error upon this issue.
Other issues, as assigned by Plaintiff's brief in his "Statement of the Issues Presented for Review" and not considered by the Court of Appeals, are as follows:
"(1) Whether the Trial Court erred in instructing the jury;
(2) Whether the Trial Court erred in sending all the exhibits and instructions with the jury during deliberations;
(8) Whether Plaintiff was denied a fair trial due to violations of the Indiana Trial Rules regarding discovery;
# #k # a * #
(6) Whether the Trial Court erred in not allowing the October 16, 1981 deposition of Dr. Brooks and ruling prior to a hearing;
(7) Whether the Trial Court erred in not allowing Plaintiff to take the rebuttal deposition of Dr. Brooks;
(8) Whether the misbehavior of Defendant by Defendant's counsel deprived Plaintiff of a fair trial; and
(9) Whether the verdict is contrary to the evidence."
ISSUES I, VI, VH
Issues I, VI and VII have been inadequately briefed and will not be considered. Appellate Rule 8.3(A)(7)
Issue I claims error in the refusal of the trial court to give four of Plaintiff's tendered final instructions. However, his brief does not present us with a sufficient statement of the evidence and supporting citations to the record to enable us, with reasonable effort and diligence upon our part, to comprehend the context in which the instructions were tendered. Rather, as urged by Defendant, Plaintiff has merely presented us with a copy of the instructions, a general statement of the theory of the case, statements of general legal principles and his version of the evidence, without citations to the record. Appellate Rule 8.8 requires Appellant arguments to contain those parts of the record that support his contentions and a clear showing of how the issues and the contentions supporting them relate to the particular facts of the case. Without such assistance we are unable to determine whether an omitted instruction was required under the evidence or whether harm was likely to have resulted to the complaining party."
Issue VI claims error in the trial court's ruling quashing the deposition of witness Brooks taken a few days before trial upon but six hours notice to Defendant and in "not allowing Plaintiff to retake this deposition at any other time{,]" (Plaintiff's Brief p. 40) in response to his motion made during trial labeled "Motion for Leave to Supplement" which motion he avers was denied. (Plaintiff's Reply Brief p. 22.) This witness' deposition had been taken many months previously and was published and read into evidence at the trial. Apparently Plaintiff, at a very late date, wished to depose the witness further. Not only do we find no error in the court's ruling and alleged ruling upon these issues, but Plaintiff has again made no attempt to show how he was harmed. There has been no showing of what he proposed to present by additional testimony from the witness. To provide the basis for reversal, excluded testimony must appear in the record. This is done by making an offer to prove. Gurley v. State, (1976) 264 Ind. 552, 557, 348 N.E.2d 16, 20; Chatman v. State, (1975) 263 Ind. 531, 538; 334 N.E.2d 673, 678.
We also note a self contradiction in regard to this question. Although Plaintiff argues at page 40 of his brief that "The Plaintiff was greatly prejudiced by the Court's act," on the preceding page he argued that the desired additional testimony was, "just to clarify some peripherial points." (Plaintiff's Brief p. 39.)
Regarding Issue VIL on another occasion during trial, Plaintiff gave notice to Defendant for an additional deposition of Plaintiff's witness Brooks. This proposed deposition was labeled a "rebuttal deposition," and apparently was for the purpose of rebutting testimony given by defense *662witness Bright. The trial court, on Defendant's motion, quashed the notice. Again, we need not address the issue, as Plaintiff has made no showing of harm.
ISSUES II, III, VIH
Issues II, III and VIII cannot be considered, because error, if any, was not preserved by appropriate action in the trial court.
By Issue ILI, Plaintiff assigns error in the court's having sent the exhibits and instructions with the jury when it retired for deliberations. However, the record reveals no objection to such action having been made at the trial; hence such action is not available for review. Presentation of this assignment, for the first time, by way of the motion to correct errors was not timely. Taylor v. State, (1973) 260 Ind. 264, 278, 295 N.E.2d 600, 608-609, cert. denied, 414 U.S. 1012, 94 S.Ct. 377, 38 L.Ed.2d 250; Gosnell v. State, (1978) 268 Ind. 429, 431, 376 N.E.2d 471, 472; McMinoway v. State, (1973) 260 Ind. 241, 245, 294 N.E.2d 803, 805; Barnes v. State, (1971) 255 Ind. 674, 675, 266 N.E.2d 617, 618.
By Issue III, error has been assigned in that the court permitted Defense Witness Kirk to testify over Plaintiff's objection that the witness' name had not been included upon Defendant's list of witnesses provided in response to discovery. The witness was Vice President for Operations of O.H. Materials, Inc., the company which had been employed by Defendant to clean up the site following the chemical spill. Two and one-half years pri- or to trial, Defendant responded to Plaintiff's request for a list of witnesses and listed, among many others, "Employees and Officers of O.H. Materials, Inc., Find-ley, Ohio." Plaintiff made no request for more particular information regarding the identity of such employees and officers, made no claim of surprise and requested no continuance. We see no error in permitting the witness to testify under such circumstances.
Plaintiff also seeks reversal by reason of Defendant's failure to comply with a tardy request for Defendant to produce certain documents upon which defense witness Bright's testimony would be predicated. Apparently the request was made but two weeks prior to trial and no motion was made to shorten the 80-day response period as anticipated by Trial Rule 34(B). Additionally, no in-trial motion was addressed to the Defendant's failure to comply. He proceeded to allow Bright's testimony, without objection, and to cross-examine him, without protest. See Chustak v. N. Ind. Pub. Serv. Co., (1972) 259 Ind. 390, 394, 288 N.E.2d 149, 152.
With regard to both of the above mentioned claims of error, it can again be noted that Plaintiff has made no showing of how he was harmed. Akins v. State, 429 N.E.2d at 286.
ISSUE IX
Under this assignment, Plaintiff challenges the verdict as being contrary to the evidence under Trial Rule 59(A)(4). As pointed out by Defendant, however, he is appealing from a negative judgment, and such an assignment presents nothing for review on appeal. Considering the assignment as a charge that the judgment is contrary to law, we immediately note that the evidence was in conflict with regard to Defendant's alleged negligence, the alleged causal relation between Plaintiff's exposure to the toxic chemical and his death, and even as to whether he suffered such exposure. Plaintiff had the burden of proof.
This Court will reverse a negative verdict, as being contrary to law, only when the evidence is without conflict and leads to but one conclusion and the trial court reached an opposite conclusion. Warren v. State, (1963) 243 Ind. 508, 517, 188 N.E.2d 108, 112; State ex rel., Flaugher v. Rogers, (1948) 226 Ind. 32, 37, 77 N.E.2d 594, 596; State v. Smithers, (1971) 256 Ind. 512, 519, 269 N.E.2d 874, 878. Also, see Bailey v. Kain, (1963) 135 Ind. App. 657, 192 N.E.2d 486 (transfer denied) *663and 4 Harvey anp TownsEND INDIANA PracTIcE 185 regarding the difference in the positions of the trial court and the appellate court with respect to motions addressed to the correctness of the verdict under the evidence.
By his Reply Brief, Plaintiff has attempted to shift his position upon this issue in his effort to persuade us to reweigh the evidence, citing cases wherein we have acknowledged that a consideration of weight and credibility by the reviewing court is sometimes necessary to a proper determination of whether error that has been found was likely to have harmed the appellant, Miller v. State, (1982) Ind., 436 N.E.2d 1113 and cases there cited. However, this is not such a case.
We find no reversible error. The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
GIVAN, C.J., and HUNTER and PIVAR-NIK, JJ., concur.
DeBRULER, J., dissents with opinion.
. There has been considerable confusion about the impact of statutory violations under the FELA and much of it has resulted from the various courts' difficulty in distinguishing "negligence" from "negligence per se" and "Absolute or strict liability" and initially even res ipsa loquitor. O'Donnell v. Elgin, J & E Ry. Co., (1949) 338 U.S. 384, 70 S.Ct. 200, 94 L.Ed. 187, contains a good historical discussion of this point. >
Also on this subject, see 57 Am.Jur.2d Neg/i-gence § 235.
. "But it is undoubtedly more desirable to accept the traditional distinctions, adopted by Wigmore, and to draw the line clearly between the two exceptions. Under this view, the admissions of a party-opponent come in without satisfying any of the requirements for declarations against interest. The admissions need not have been against interest when made, though it will usually happen that they were. The party making the admission need not be, and seldom is, unavailable. Nor does the party making the admission need to have had personal knowledge of the fact admitted. Accordingly, when the admission of a party, or a party's predecessor in interest, is sought to be introduced, it should be offered as and tested by the requirements for parties' admissions, not those for declarations against interest." (footnotes omitted). McCor-MICK ON Evipence § 276 (1972).

=== CASE 9739601 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:20.894107+00 ===

DeBRULER, Justice,
dissenting.
The requirement of an offer of proof is often based upon the need to specifically identify the material excluded by the court's ruling, and to provide a basis for appellate evaluations of the harm from erroneous exclusion to substantial rights. Marposon v. State (1972), 259 Ind. 426, 287 N.E.2d 857. Here, as is not uncommon, appellee does not contend in its answer brief that there was no compliance with the requirement of an offer of proof, and thus the appellate court is unwittingly drawn into an in-depth research of the merits of the issue only to find at some point in the investigation, often after considerable expenditure of time and effort, that no offer of proof was made. In such situations the parties on appeal are satisfied with the identification of the excluded evidence to be found in the record. When such a situation oceurs, and the appellate tribunal does determine, through an accurate and rational process akin to judicial notice, the exact nature of that which would have been in the omitted offer of proof, as the Court of Appeals did in this case, such appellate tribunal should be accorded the discretion to then go ahead and make a proper resolution of the issue on its merits on the basis of that determination. I see no good reason not to permit that to be done, particularly where the appellee felt no impingement from the lack of an offer. And I certainly see no good reason for this court on transfer to nullify a court of appeals opinion which went so far as to actually and accurately identify the absent proof. On the merits of the ruling, I agree with Judge Ratliff, that the OSHA regulations regarding exposure levels for acrylonitrile, were admissible as evidence of negligence and that it was error to exclude evidence of them and their violation by the defendants.
I likewise cannot agree with the majority opinion wherein it places a burden on the plaintiff below to show exact levels of concentration of dangerous molecules in the air at the precise time of exposure. That is an impossible burden and entirely unrealistic. That requirement would limit recovery to situations where constant monitoring of the workplace was taking place at the time of exposure. That seldom occurs, even in a spill case. The best that is ordinarily available is circumstantial evidence of levels shown by periodic sampling, and the senses of smell and sight and taste of persons in the workplace.
Furthermore, I cannot agree that Issue I cannot be considered because of inadequate briefing. The plaintiff's rejected instructions are set out verbatim; their purpose is described; their legal sources are given; and the harm from the court's rulings is demonstrated in light of the record. The briefing is well within tolerable limits.
While there is more than negligible support for the proposition that the issues were fairly tried and resolved, I am persuaded to vote for a new trial to permit the OSHA regulations to have their sway with the trier of fact. There is some indication in this record that industry standards were no less stringent than the standards in the OSHA regulations.

=== CASE 9739602 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:21.996951+00 ===

JUSTICE REINHARD delivered the opinion of the court: Plaintiff, Brian Teter, appeals from the dismissal of his amended complaint upon the motion to dismiss (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 110, par. 2 — 615) of defendants, Orville and Betty Clemens. Plaintiff, age five at the time of the occurrence, stated in his complaint that he sustained injury resulting from being struck in the eye with a pellet which had been fired from a pellet pump pistol by the defendants’ five-year-old grandson who had come into possession of that pistol from a place alleged to be accessible to the reach of the grandson on defendants’ premises. The issues presented on appeal are whether plaintiff’s three-count amended complaint stated a cause of action, and whether the trial court should have allowed plaintiff leave to amend in the event the amended complaint did not state a cause of action. Plaintiff’s three-count complaint alleged as to all counts that on June 2, 1968, plaintiff was then five years old, that Greg Clemens, the grandson of defendants, was also five years old, that defendants had previously purchased a pellet pump pistol and ammunition, and that defendants knew or should have known that their grandson came upon their premises with playmates. In count I, plaintiff predicates his cause of action against defendants for their negligent entrustment of a pellet pump pistol, alleged to be a dangerous instrumentality, to their grandson, who came into possession of the pistol from a place accessible to the reach of their grandson in their home. He alleges defendants knew or should have known their grandson was a young child not skilled in the use of a pellet pistol and a member of a class notoriously likely to misuse a pellet pistol, defendants knew or should have known he might discharge the pellet pistol and harm could come to plaintiff or other children, defendants placed the loaded pellet pistol “in such a place as to be accessible to the reach of the young grandchild,” and the grandchild came into possession of the pellet pistol and discharged it on defendants’ premises causing injury to the plaintiff. In count II, plaintiff seeks to recover against defendants as owners of the premises for defendants’ failure to warn him of the risk of being on their premises when their grandson was in possession of the pellet pistol which it is alleged created an unreasonable, dangerous condition on the premises. Plaintiff states he was of such an age that he was unaware of the nature of the risk should defendants’ grandson come into possession of the pellet pistol, defendants did not warn him of the risk of being on their premises when their grandson was in possession of the pistol, defendants knew or should have known of their grandson’s possession of the pistol, or should have taken precautions to prevent such possession, and defendants’ grandson’s possession of the pistol on the premises created an unreasonable, dangerous condition requiring defendants to warn plaintiff. Count III sought to set aside a release executed by plaintiff’s parents, which plaintiff now claims was obtained through the mutual mistake of fact as to the permanency of his eye injury. Defendants’ motion to dismiss was pursuant to section 2 — 615 of the Code of Civil Procedure (111. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 110, par. 2 — 615) and alleged the amended complaint was insufficient in law because plaintiff could not recover on a negligence theory and defendants had no duty to supervise the activities in question. The trial court dismissed the amended complaint without providing a basis for the order in the record provided us.  In considering a motion to dismiss for failure to state a cause of action, plaintiff’s pleaded facts are assumed to be true (Collier v. Wagner Castings Co. (1980), 81 Ill. 2d 229, 232, 408 N.E.2d 198), and an appeal from such a dismissal order for failure to state a cause of action preserves for review only a question of law as to the complaint’s legal sufficiency. Gregor v. Kleiser (1982), 111 Ill. App. 3d 333, 334,443 N.E.2d 1162. Plaintiff contends that count I pleads a cause of action based upon a theory of negligent entrustment. He essentially contends that the loaded pellet pistol is an inherently dangerous instrumentality, and, when left on defendants’ premises in a place accessible to a five-year-old who had no experience with any type of firearms, defendants knew or should have known that such person might obtain and misuse the dangerous instrumentality and cause injury to himself or another. Plaintiff cites section 308 of the Restatement (Second), of Torts (1965), which provides: “Permitting Improper Persons to Use Things or Engage in Activities It is negligence to permit a third person to use a thing or to engage in an activity which is under the control of the actor, if the actor knows or should know that such person intends or is likely to use the thing or to conduct himself in the activity in such a manner as to create an unreasonable risk of harm to others.” Plaintiff also refers to comment b of section 308, which provides, in pertinent part, that: “b. The rule stated in this Section has its most frequent application where the third person is a member of a class which is notoriously likely to misuse the thing which the actor permits him to use. Thus, it is negligent to place loaded firearms or poisons within reach of young children or feeble-minded adults.” Relying on the Illinois cases of Semeniuk v. Chentis (1954), 1 Ill. App. 2d 508, 117 N.E.2d 883, and Palm v. Ivorson (1905), 117 Ill. App. 535, and authority from other jurisdictions which have upheld an action based on a negligent entrustment theory under somewhat similar circumstances (see, e.g., Kuhns v. Brugger (1957), 390 Pa. 331, 135 A.2d 395), plaintiff maintains count I adequately sets forth the elements needed to state a cause of action.  It is fundamental that there can be no recovery in tort for negligence unless the defendant has breached a duty owed to the plaintiff (Curtis v. County of Cook (1983), 98 Ill. 2d 158, 162, 456 N.E.2d 116), and the existence of a duty must be determined by the courts as a matter of law. (Pelham v. Griesheimer (1982), 92 Ill. 2d 13, 18-19, 440 N.E.2d 96.) The determination of the question of duty, whether the parties stood in such a relationship to one another that the law will impose upon one an obligation of reasonable conduct for the other’s benefit, is an issue of law. (Linton v. Smith & Wesson (1984), 127 Ill. App. 3d 676, 678, 469 N.E.2d 339.) Whether the law imposes a duty does not depend upon foreseeability alone. The likelihood of injury, the magnitude of the burden of guarding against it and the consequences of placing the burden upon the defendant must be taken into account. Osborne v. Sprowls (1981), 84 Ill. 2d 390, 396-97, 419 N.E.2d 913. We have found no Illinois authority which has addressed the precise factual situation present here, the liability to third persons of one who keeps a loaded pellet pistol in his home which is alleged to be accessible to his five-year-old grandson who obtains it and injures the plaintiff. However, two dated Illinois Appellate Court opinions have recognized a cause of action against a person who places in the hands of a minor a dangerous instrument or article under such circumstances that he has reason to know that it is likely to produce injury or create an unreasonable risk of harm. See Semeniuk v. Chentis (1954), 1 Ill. App. 2d 508, 117 N.E.2d 883 (cause of action stated against seller of air rifle to parents of intended user, a minor under age seven); Palm v. Ivorson (1905), 117 Ill. App. 535 (recognizes a cause of action but concludes no recovery against father of 12-year-old who instructed boy in the use of guns); cf. Van Skike v. Zussman (1974), 22 Ill. App. 3d 1039, 318 N.E.2d 244. There is considerable conflict among the other jurisdictions that have considered the question of the liability of a person either permitting a child to have a gun, or leaving the gun accessible to the child, for injury inflicted by the child on another. (See Annot., 68 A.L.R.2d 782 (1959), and Later Case Service (1984).) As discussed in an annotation, 68 A.L.R.2d 782 (1959), liability for permitting a minor to have a gun or leaving one accessible to him is usually based upon a failure to exercise the required degree of care in regard to a dangerous instrumentality. Prima facie negligence is established by showing that defendant permitted an inexperienced or irresponsible infant to have a dangerous gun or that he left such a gun where he should have foreseen it would come into the hands of such a child. In determining the question of the negligence of one permitting access to a gun, the courts of other jurisdictions have taken into consideration the age of the minor, the type of gun or instrumentality involved, and the place where the gun was kept. See generally, Annot., 68 A.L.R.2d 782 (1959) and Later Case Service (1984).  In the instant case, the allegations of count I set forth that the minor grandson was five years old, that the minor grandson was of a class of persons too young to exercise judgment in the use and control of a pellet pistol, that the defendants placed a loaded pellet pistol in such a place as to be accessible to the reach of their grandson, and that defendants knew or should have known that if the pellet pistol came into the hands of their grandson he might discharge it and injure another minor such as plaintiff. To state a cause of action a complaint must be legally sufficient — it must set forth a legally recognized claim as its avenue of recovery; and it must be factually sufficlent — it must plead facts which bring the claim within the legally recognized cause of action alleged. People ex rel. Fahner v. Carriage Way West, Inc. (1981), 88 Ill. 2d 300, 308, 430 N.E.2d 1005. A cause of action is recognized in Illinois against a person who places in the hands of a minor a dangerous instrument, or an article under such circumstances that he has reason to know that the minor is likely to use the article in such a manner as to create an unreasonable risk of harm to others, and who causes a foreseeable injury to another. (Semeniuk v. Chentis (1954), 1 Ill. App. 2d 508, 117 N.E.2d 883; see Restatement (Second) of Torts sec. 308 (1965).) Similarly, there is a general recognition of authority that a duty in such an action extends beyond the actual placing of the dangerous instrumentality in the hands of the minor and is applicable where such instrumentality is in a place within the reach of young children. See Restatement (Second) of Torts sec. 308 comment b (1965); Annot., 68 A.L.R.2d 782 (1959); Kuhns v. Brugger (1957), 390 Pa. 331, 135 A.2d 395. Lance v. Senior (1967), 36 Ill. 2d 516, 224 N.E.2d 231, relied on by defendants, is not controlling under the facts pleaded here. In Lance, no duty was found to exist upon the defendants to guard against the risk that a nine-year-old boy who was a guest in their house would swallow a needle. We regard the likelihood of injury under the facts alleged in the instant case as far more foreseeable, and the defendants’ burden of guarding against it not sufficiently great to preclude imposition of a duty here.  Thus, we believe plaintiff has alleged a legally recognized claim of recovery, and has alleged sufficient facts which bring the claim within this cause of action. While we do have some concern about the generality of the allegation that the pellet pistol was “in such a place as to be accessible to the reach” of defendants’ grandson, defendants did not move to make the pleading more definite and certain (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 110, par. 2 — 615(a)), and, consequently, we will not require under these circumstances that plaintiff have set out in more detail his evidence. Cf. People ex rel. Fahner v. Carriage Way West, Inc. (1981), 88 Ill. 2d 300, 308, 430 N.E.2d 1005. Our recognition that count I states a cause of action founded on a negligent entrustment theory, is not, of course, a determination that defendants were negligent and plaintiff is-entitled to recover. We do not reach the merits of the cause of action at this stage. Nor can we now define the parameters of the accessibility of the pellet pistol to a child for liability to be imposed or under what circumstances a pellet pistol is a dangerous instrumentality. These ultimately will be mixed issues of law and fact which will be decided at a later point in the proceedings. See Alessi v. Alessi (1984), 103 App. Div. 2d 1023, 478 N.Y.S.2d 396; Glean v. Smith (1967), 116 Ga. Ill, 156 S.E.2d 507.  Having concluded count I states a cause of action under a negligent entrustment theory on the facts pleaded, we do not believe plaintiff’s alternate theory of recovery as pleaded in count II states a proper separate action based on the allegation of failure of defendants, as owners of the premises, to warn plaintiff of an unreasonable, dangerous condition on the premises caused by the possession of the pellet pistol by their minor grandson. The liability of a possessor of land to a child as formulated in Kahn v. James Burton Co. (1955), 5 Ill. 2d 614, 126 N.E.2d 836, and Corcoran v. Village of Libertyville (1978), 73 Ill. 2d 316, 383 N.E.2d 177, is concerned with a condition of the land (see Restatement (Second) of Torts sec. 339 (1965)), and is inapplicable to the facts pleaded here. Count II was properly dismissed.  As count III sought to set aside a release previously executed by plaintiff’s parents and we assume was dismissed as moot because the trial court found no cause of action existed in counts I and II, we necessarily must reverse the dismissal of count III as we are reinstating count I. For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of Kane County is reversed as it pertains to counts I and III, and affirmed as to count II. Affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded. STROUSE, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739603 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:22.001066+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE NASH, dissenting: I respectfully dissent from the extension of the tort theory of negligent entrustment to the facts alleged in count I of this complaint. I have no quarrel with the proposition that one who knowingly permits a five-year-old child to use a dangerous instrumentality may be liable for foreseeable injuries to a third party. I am not persuaded, however, that this court should, for the first time in Illinois, recognize a cause of action against the owner of a potentially dangerous object present in his home who simply was unable or failed to prevent a visiting five-year-old child from reaching it. As noted by the majority, courts in Illinois have recognized a cause of action where a defendant has placed a dangerous instrument in the hands of a minor. (Semeniuk v. Chentis (1954), 1 Ill. App. 2d 508, 117 N.E.2d 883; Palm v. Ivorson (1905), 117 Ill. App. 535.) There are, however, few cases from any jurisdiction, and none from this State, in which liability is premised merely upon leaving a potentially dangerous object where it could be accessible to the child. See Annot., 12 A.L.R. 812 (1921). The issue presented has been most fully discussed in Kuhns v. Brugger (1957), 390 Pa. 331, 135 A.2d 395, which is relied upon by the majority here. I find the thoughtful dissent by Justice Bell in that case to express the best view of the question and would follow it. In Kuhns, the court placed a duty of exercising not simply ordinary, but extraordinary care, upon a possessor of a firearm to prevent harm to others. It did not address whether other objects such as knives, medicines or poisonous substances would also require the same degree of care. In dissent, Justice Bell noted there are always present in any home many dangerous items with which a child may be injured or injure others, and that the standard of care thus imposed upon homeowners was too far-reaching. Absent factual allegations demonstrating that defendant made the pellet pistol available to his grandson, plaintiff has failed to adequately plead the theory of negligent entrustment. The general allegation that defendant’s pistol was in a place in his home accessible to the child’s reach is insufficient.

=== CASE 9739604 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:22.238243+00 ===

SHIELDS, Judge.
Defendant George Saliba (Saliba) appeals his conviction for distribution of obscene matter, a class A misdemeanor under I.C. 85-80-10.1-2-(2) (Burns Code Ed., 1979) re-codified at I.C. 35-49-8-1 (Burns Code Ed., Supp.1984).1 The only issue we address is *1184whether the trial court erred in excluding the results of a public opinion poll 2 on the issue of community standards.
Reversed.
FACTS
Saliba was charged with exhibiting an obscene film in his adult book store in Indianapolis on November 12, 1981. The film which formed the basis for Saliba's conviction depicted three males involved in various homosexual activities. Prior to trial, Saliba employed Dr. Roderick Bell of California to conduct a public opinion poll to determine community standards in Marion County regarding the depiction of sexual activities in movies and publications. At trial and out of the jury's presence, Saliba offered into evidence the results of the poll designed by Dr. Bell. In support of the offer, Dr. Bell testified to his qualifications 3 and explained the general nature of public opinion polls. Dr. Bell then extensively discussed the scientific methodology generally employed in conducting polls and detailed the specific techniques employed in conducting the poll at issue. Based on the design, execution, tabulation and verification of the instant poll, Dr. Bell opined that the poll was a valid measure of the degree of public acceptance of sexually explicit materials in Marion County.
The State objected to the poll's validity and presented the expert testimony of Dr. Brian Vargus. Following Dr. Vargus' examination of the poll during a lunch break on the day of trial, he opined the manner in which the poll was conducted potentially generated 30% "pseudo-opinion". However, Dr. Vargus also testified his opinion depended on whether Dr. Bell had conducted a proper "pretest" and other methodological checks.
After the State renewed its objection to the admission of the poll, the trial judge ruled the poll inadmissible. Saliba then recalled Dr. Bell who testified a pretest was indeed conducted and characterized Dr. Vargus' testimony as merely presenting a methodological dispute between experts. In fact, Dr. Bell testified if the methodology suggested by Dr. Vargus had been used, the results of the poll would have been biased in Saliba's favor. The poll was again offered into evidence but again excluded by the trial court.
DISCUSSION
The State had the burden of proving the film confiscated from Saliba's store was "obscene" as defined by statute. IC. 35-30-10.1-1 (Burns Code Ed., 1979) recodified at IC. 35-49-2-1 (Burns Code Ed., Supp.1984) provides, in pertinent part,
"A matter or performance is obscene for purposes of this article if: (1) the average person, applying contemporary community standards, finds that the dominant theme of the matter or performance, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest in sex;" 4
The determination of obscenity, therefore, depends upon prevailing community standards.
Survey Evidence in Obscenity Prosecutions
As the State contends, the obscene character of materials may be determined by the jury based on a viewing of the allegedly offensive material. The State need not present an expert witness or other *1185evidence of community standards. Hamling v. United States, 418 U.S. 87, 94 S.Ct. 2887, 41 L.Ed.2d 590 (1974); Sedelbauer v. State, 455 N.E.2d 1159 (Ind.App.1983).
However, expert evidence on this issue may be highly relevant. The jurors are not instructed to evaluate obscenity based on their personal opinions but are charged with applying contemporary community standards. Kaplan v. California, 413 U.S. 115, 93 S.Ct. 2680, 37 L.Ed.2d 492 (1973). In the absence of expert testimony, the jury's determination of contemporary community standards runs the risk of incorporating the individual juror's "necessarily limited, hit-or-miss subjective view" "on the basis of his personal upbringing or restricted reflection or particular experience of life." Smith v. California, 361 U.S. 147, 165, 80 S.Ct. 215, 225, 4 L.Ed.2d 205 (1959) (Frankfurter, J., concurring). Consequently, the defendant in an obscenity prosecution is entitled to introduce relevant and appropriate expert testimony on the issue of contemporary community standards. Kaplan v. California, 413 U.S. 115, 93 S.Ct. 2680, 37 L.Ed.2d 492.
Expert testimony based on a public opinion poll is uniquely suited to a determination of community standards. Perhaps no other form of evidence is more helpful or concise: "A properly conducted public opinion survey itself adequately ensures a good measure of trustworthiness, and its admission may be necessary in the sense that no other evidence would be as good as the survey evidence or perhaps even obtainable as a practical matter." Commonwealth v. Trainor, 374 Mass. 796, 374 N.E.2d 1216, 1221 (1978).
The alternative modes of introducing such evidence are less desirable Zippo Manufacturing Co. v. Rogers Imports, Inc., 216 F.Supp. 670 (S.D.N.Y.1963) (leading case on survey evidence). For example, the presentation of in-court testimony from the entire target population or even a representative sample is patently impractical. And the use of an expert witness to testify regarding his or her opinion on community standards is not as direct or accurate as a public poll, even assuming an expert could qualify on the subject. E.g. Sedelbauer v. State, 455 N.E.2d at 1165 (held sex therapist unqualified to testify on county standards). The nature of public opinion polls renders them better suited to demonstrate contemporary community standards.
Admissibility of Survey Evidence
In the instant case, the State objected to the admission of the public opinion poll both on the grounds of relevancy and trustworthiness. Specifically, the State argued the poll's focus on overall community standards did not determine whether the film in question was obscene. Alternatively, the State argued the poll was improperly conducted and therefore unreliable. We will address each contention in turn.
A. Relevancy
At trial, the State argued the degree of community acceptance of "sexually explicit materials" was not relevant to a determination of whether the particular film in question was obscene. However, on appeal, the State argues irrelevancey based upon another theory. On appeal, the State cites two cases from sister states which found allegedly similar surveys irrelevant because those surveys only examined whether the community sanctioned the dissemination of sexually explicit materials to willing adults (ie., community standards) the surveys did not examine whether the community regarded similar materials or the particular materials in issue as obscene. See Flynt v. State, 153 Ga.App. 232, 264 S.E.2d 669, cert. denied 449 U.S. 888, 101 S.Ct. 245, 66 L.Ed.2d 114 (1980); Commonwealth v. Mascolo, 7 Mass.App. 275, 386 N.E.2d 1311 (1979). We address both of the State's arguments of irrelevancy, that at trial and that on appeal, because of our obligation to affirm the trial court's action in excluding the poll if its exelusion was proper on any basis. Fendley v. Ford, 458 N.E.2d 1167 (Ind. App.1984).
Our probe into relevance is therefore two-pronged. Were the questions in the poll relevant to a determination of 1) com*1186munity standards in general and 2) the community's acceptance of viewing the particular film in question.5
1. General Community Standards
We first determine whether the questions in the poll were relevant to a determination of community standards. For example, question seven asked: "Do you personally think it is acceptable or not acceptable for the average adult to see any depiction of actual or pretended sexual activities shown in movies and publications that he or she wants to?" The balance of the questions in the poll merely changed the type and location of access to such materials to movies, books, or magazines and theaters, bookstores, or arcades. The poll therefore questioned the interviewees regarding their view of community acceptance of sexually explicit materials rather than their personal acceptance of such materials.
We must emphasize the majority of the community need not desire to view sexually explicit materials in order to establish community acceptance or tolerance of such materials. Rather, the issue concerns the population's perception of what is
generally acceptable in the community considering the intended and probable recipients of the materials. Pinkus v. United States, 486 U.S. 298, 98 S.Ct. 1808, 56 L.Ed.2d 293 (1978). The questions in the poll parallel the statutorily mandated standard; matter is "obscene" if "the average person, applying contemporary community standards" finds the material as a whole appeals to the prurient interest in sex. IC. 35-30-10.1-1 (Burns Code Ed.1979) recodi-fied at I.C. 35-49-2-1 (Burns Code Ed., Supp.1984). The poll's results were relevant evidence of the community standards which the jury was obligated to apply.
2. Acceptance of Particular Film
We must also determine if the community acceptance of viewing "nudity and actual or pretended sexual activity", as phrased throughout the poll, is relevant to a determination of the acceptance of viewing the film in question. We also answer this inquiry in the affirmative. The poll defines "nudity and pretended or actual sexual activity" as "total male and/or female nudity, and sexual intercourse including all kinds of sexual variation." 6 Appendix A. The *1187sexual activity portrayed in the instant film fell within the definition of "nudity and actual or pretended sexual activity."
Although the poll did not present the interviewees with the ultimate question to be decided by the jury (i.e., whether the particular film was obscene), the poll was relevant to an application of community standards. The court in Carlock v. State, 609 S.W.2d 787 (Tex.Crim.App.1980), cogently addressed this issue in response to an identical objection to another poll conducted by Dr. Bell:
"[IJt is arguable that the survey would have been more probative if it had asked whether the particular magazine in question appealed to the prurient interest of the average person. Even so, this would not authorize the trial court to exclude from evidence the public opinion survey offered in this case. The expert evidence would not be rendered inadmissible simply because more probative questions could have been incorporated into the poll."
Id. at 789-90. The failure to poll the population on the ultimate issue does not negate relevancy. The population's general opinion is probative, although not determinative, of community standards and, consequently, of the population's specific opinion of the film in question.
B. Trustworthiness
Although the poll was relevant, we must also determine whether it was admissible. Relevant public opinion polls and other survey evidence are widely accepted as generally admissible if properly conducted. See generally Zippo, 216 F.Supp. at 682. Objections to admissibility usually arise because the contents of public opinion polls are generally not within the firsthand knowledge of the submitting witness; they may also constitute hearsay.
Several theories, however, have been advanced to justify the admission of public opinion polls. Some authorities classify polis as falling under the state of mind exception to the hearsay rule. Others characterize polls as hearsay but conclude the need for the evidence at trial and the circumstantial guarantees of trustworthiness justify admission. Still other authorities classify survey evidence as non-hearsay, and therefore directly rely on the rules governing admission of expert testimony generally. Id. In any event, it is now generally accepted neither the hearsay rule nor the requirement of firsthand knowledge bars the admission of properly conducted public opinion polls or surveys. As explained in the Advisory Committee's Note to Fed.R.Evid. 703: "Attention is directed to the validity of the techniques employed rather than the relatively fruit less inquiries whether hearsay is involved." 51 F.R.D. 404 (1971).
The admissibility of a public opinion poll depends primarily upon the presence of circumstantial guarantees of trustworthiness. 1 J. Moore, Moore's Federal Practice 2.712 (1982). Public opinion polls are surveys7 designed to elicit the state of mind of a targeted population ("universe") through an examination of a representative portion ("sample") of the universe. Through accepted statistical analysis, the sample data is used to project the opinion of the entire targeted population. In short, the circumstantial guarantees of trustworthiness are premised on 1) the use of generally accepted surveying techniques in conducting the poll and 2) adherence to statistically correct methods in conducting the poll and evaluating the results.
This twofold inquiry has led to the judicial development of six foundational criteria which are generally accepted as scientifically necessary to insure a poll's reliability and, consequently, its admissibility. The proponent of a poll has the burden of establishing: 1) the poll was conducted by an expert in the field of surveying; 2) the relevant universe was examined; 8) a *1188representative sample was drawn from the relevant universe; 4) the mode of questioning was "correct" (mail, telephone, personal interview, etc.); 5) the sample, questionnaire, and the interviews were designed in accordance with generally accepted standards; 6) the data gathered was accurately reported; and 7) the data was analyzed in a statistically correct manner. J. Moore, supra at 188; accord Baumholser v. Amax Coal Co., 630 F.2d 550, 552 (7th Cir.1980).8 The adherence to this generally accepted methodology renders the poll's results admissible in the form of expert opinion.
Once these foundational requirements are established, subject to cross-examination, the poll is admissible. Baumholser, 630 F.2d at 553; Zippo, 216 F.Supp. at 686. Any objection, other than to the lack of foundational requisites, and any testimony challenging the foundational testimony affect the weight accorded the poll, not its admissibility: "Once the offered poll has passed the test of admissibility, the objections to the manner in which it was conducted go to the weight of the polls as evidence." J. Moore, suproe at 139. Given an adequate foundation, questions regarding the technical adequacy of a poll affect the poll's weight only. People v. Thomas, 37 Ill.App.3d 320, 346 N.E.2d 190 (1976).
Accordingly, in ruling on the admissibility of a poll, a distinction must be made between an objection based upon an omission of a foundational requisite and any other objection including an objection which disputes the validity (as opposed to an omission) of a foundation requisite.9 The lack of a complete foundation affects admissibility whereas any other objection affects only the weight to be given an otherwise admissible poll. E.g., People v. Thomas, 37 Ill.App.3d 320, 346 N.E.2d 190, 194. For example, in Thomas, the use of mimeographed cards completed by a majority of patrons of a movie theatre exhibiting "Deep Throat" did not comport with accepted sampling techniques and therefore the foundation was incomplete. Accord Pittsburgh Press Club v. United States, 579 F.2d 751 (8d Cir.1978). Similarly, in Commonwealth v. Trainor, 374 Mass. 796, 374 N.E.2d 1216 (1978), a survey on community standards was excluded where there was no indication the method of selection of the interviewees assured a representative sample. The lack of an adequate foundation again provided grounds for exclusion.
These cases are in contrast to the instant case where Dr. Bell's foundation testimony explained the typical methodology used in conducting opinion polls and described the methodology employed in conducting the instant poll. Dr. Bell identified the "universe" as the adult population of Marion County. This "universe" was sampled by telephone using a random digit dialing technique, the currently preferred method of telephone interviewing.. This technique used a list of telephone numbers randomly generated by computer in proportion to the number of lines for existing telephone prefixes. During the first two weeks of February, 1982, five hundred (500) adults from Marion County were questioned by interviewers from Herron Associates of Indianapolis, a field service.10 The interviewers were instructed and supervised by Dr. Bell. Dr. Bell prepared the questionnaire through the use of extensive "pretesting" techniques designed to insure the questions were understood by the interviewees. The interviewers were instructed to read the questionnaire to the interviewees and record the responses as designated by the accompanying "code sheet" or an*1189swer key. Once the interviews were complete, a subset of the sample was recontacted by the field supervisor to verify the interview took place and the responses were accurately coded. Dr. Bell then drew a subset of the subset to reverify. Dr. Bell testified this form of spot checking is the only accepted verification technique. The raw data was keyed into a computer for tabulation; Dr. Bell also supervised this data input. The results of the poll were 98% repeatable within a margin of error of 3% to 4%. Dr. Bell testified that the definitions, standards and methodologies described were used by "practically all" national polling organizations including Lou Harris. Dr. Bell's testimony alone provided a complete foundation for admission of the poll.
We recognize Dr. Vargus, who was not present for Dr. Bell's testimony, disputed the appropriateness of several methods he assumed were employed in Dr. Bell's poll. Dr. Vargus objected to the clarity of the questions used in the questionnaire, but recognized the validity of the "pretest" technique to detect ambiguities. He also asserted the necessity for built-in cross checks to detect inconsistencies in the responses and alleged the sample was skewed because 60% of the interviewees were women. Dr. Vargus acknowledged the wide acceptance of the telephoning technique but contended personal interviews would have been preferred given the complexity of the poll.
In sum, Dr. Vargus' testimony and the State's objections dispute only Dr. Bell's expert opinion that the poll's results 11 were a reliable index of community standards, i.e., they dispute the methodology used for the poll. Thus, we are only here concerned with the propriety of exeluding the poll based on Dr. Vargus' expert opinion that the poll was methodologically unsound.
Although no Indiana appellate decision has previously addressed the admissibility of a public opinion poll,12 the Indiana Supreme Court has repeatedly favored admission of expert opinion challenged merely for technical inadequacies. The most recent comprehensive decision appears in Martin v. Roberts, 464 N.E.2d 896 (Ind.1984), in which a state trooper's opinion of vehicular speed was held admissible although not based on any formula, calculation or principle. Once the state trooper qualified as an expert witness on the general subject, his failure to use any articulable calculations considering the effect of several possibly relevant factors affected only the weight of his opinion, not its admissibility. Our supreme court explained:
"There are doubtless many formulas and principles which experts use in this field or any other to arrive at their ultimate opinions. The determination of which factors, formulas or calculations are nee-essary, ... to form an expert opinion is within the knowledge and judgment of the expert and, again, is a subject which can be approached and examined in the cross-examination or by bringing forward other expert witnesses."
Id. at 900 (emphasis added). It is not the trial court's function to dispute the validity of an opinion rendered by a competent and qualified expert. Once the basis for an expert's opinion is established, in the instant case the foundational testimony for admission of the poll, the effect of objections or competing expert testimony is restricted to the weight attributed to the opinion by the fact-finder.
*1190We emphasize the basis for an expert's opinion should exhibit professional acceptance and reliability. We would be hard-pressed to admit the opinion of an otherwise qualified expert who nevertheless relied on a Ouija board to compute the speed of a vehicle. There is an assumption that an expert's opinion is based on his or her particular expertise. Fed.R.Evid. 708, which was, in part, designed to facilitate admission of survey evidence, suggests the facts which form the basis for an expert opinion should be "of a type reasonably relied upon by experts in the particular field in forming opinions or inferences upon the subject" (emphasis added). If the data relied upon does not meet this criterion, the data must be independently admissible. Fed.R.Evid. 708. An otherwise properly conducted opinion poll, for example, must employ generally accepted techniques for discerning the data sought. The extent to which an expert's opinion is based upon his opinion as an expert must be distinguished from the extent to which an expert's opinion is based upon his opinion as an individual; the former merely affects the weight of an opinion while the latter may affect its admissibility.
In the instant case, we conclude the trial court erred by weighing and choosing between the opinions proffered by two qualified experts as to the validity of the polling techniques. Both Dr. Bell and Dr. Vargus were qualified as experts in surveying public opinion and the foundation testimony detailing the methodology employed by Dr. Bell comported with generally accepted survey techniques for discerning the data sought. The dispute centered only on whether Dr. Bell chose the most appropriate techniques, in Dr. Var-gus' opinion, to conduct this particular survey. Although Dr. Vargus may have chosen to employ additional or different standard techniques, the poll was nevertheless conducted in accordance with accepted survey methodology. A professional dispute between qualified experts does not provide a basis for exclusion of the poll. The State's objections and Dr. Vargus' testimony merely affected the poll's weight, not its admissibility. The survey was erroneously excluded.13
Judgment reversed and cause remanded for a new trial.14
*1191BUCHANAN, C.J., concurs.
SULLIVAN, J., concurs, with separate opinion.
Appendix A
After obtaining background on each respondent, the interviewer asked the following questions:
Thank you. Now I have just a few questions on the subject of community standards in Indiana. I only need your personal opinions, which will be held in confidence.
*6. In your opinion, have standards in Indiana changed in recent years so that depictions of nudity and sexual activities in movies and publications available only to adults are now more acceptable or less acceptable, or haven't they changed much?
7. Do you personally think it is acceptable or not acceptable for the average adult to see any depiction of actual or pretended sexual activities shown in movies and publications that he or she wants to?
In your opinion, is it now all right or not all right in the state of Indiana for
8. adults who want to view them, to purchase magazines that show nudity and actual or pretended sexual activities?
9. movie theaters, restricting attendance to adults only, to show films that depict nudity and actual or pretended sexual activities for adults who want to attend?
10. bookstores that restrict admittance to adults to sell publications and movies depicting nudity and actual or pretended sexual activities for adults who want to go inside and buy them?
11. arcades that restrict admittance to '- adults only to show films that depict nudity and actual or pretended sexual activities?
*12. adults who want to, in the privacy of their homes, to see movies and publications that depict nudity and actual or pretended sexual activities?
183. Finally, we have used the phrases "nudity" and "sexual activities" in the interview. What we mean by these terms is total male and/or female nudity, and sexual intercourse including all kinds of sexual variation. Is that what you understood we meant, or did you think we meant something else?
. LC. 35-30-10.1-2 provides: "A person who knowingly or intentionally ... (2) offers to distribute, distributes, or exhibits to another per*1184son obscene matter; commits a class A misdemeanor."
. Questions 6 and 12 of the poll were excluded from evidence after a pre-trial hearing on the State's motion to suppress the results of the poll. In his brief Saliba does not challenge the court's exclusion of the responses to these questions; we express no opinion regarding their admissibility. The exclusion of the responses to the remaining questions is the subject of the instant opinion.
. No objection was made to Dr. Bell's qualifications as an expert.
. 1C. 35-30-10.1-1 continues: "(2) the matter or performance depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct; and (3) the matter or performance, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value."
. At trial, the court found the survey was relevant assuming it was properly conducted:
"Since this is a crime where the community determines whether or not it is a crime, a poll is, indeed, a fact that the jury should consider. A poll that gives an indication how this community feels The only problem this Court has with this poll is with question number 13. If question number 13 were asked at the beginning of the interview rather than at the end, the Court would have absolutely no problem allowing this poll to be admitted into evidence. But, that does make a difference in my mind that the question defining the terms was asked at the end rather than at the beginning. And for that reason the Court is going . does not find that this poll should be admitted into evidence."
Record at 513-14. After Dr. Bell testified the poll was extensively pretested, Saliba again offered the poll into evidence. The trial court again excluded the poll, stating:
"Again, as the Court has ruled, the Court does believe that this type of poll, if conducted properly, would definitely be relevant. The Court believes that because of question number 13, defines the terms at the end rather than at the beginning of the poll, and the other evidence that's been introduced through the expert presented by the Prosecutor, the Court does deny defendant's motion."
Record at 523-24.
In the order denying Saliba's Motion to Correct Errors, the trial court stated:
"The Court found that a poll could be relevant if it was properly conducted. (2) the questions were not relevant to the issues before the Court as they ... did not advise the respondent of what level of sexual explicitness was involved until the end of the poll, and even at that time the question was not clear."
Record at 227.
. We note the trial court found the placement of this definition at the end of the poll created an ambiguity in this definition. Given the validity of the poll, discussed infra, we may accept Dr. Bell's explanation a pretest indicated respondents understood the questions as intended. We also note 91% of the respondents understood the terms as defined. Appendix A. In any event, generally, any objection regarding ambiguity of the questions affect the poll's weight, not its admissibility. Carlock v. State, 609 S.W.2d 787 (Tex.Crim.App.1980).
. The term "surveys" usually refers to both "samples" and "polls". "Samples" are generally concerned with collecting objectively observable facts whereas polls are designed to elicit subjective views. See, e.g., J. Moore, Moore's Federal Practice § 2.712 at 133-34 (1982).
. Other authorities indicate the necessity for the poll or survey to be conducted independently of the attorneys involved and without knowledge of the litigation by the interviewers or interviewees. Pittsburgh Press Club v. United States, 579 F.2d 751, 758 (3d Cir.1978); Handbook of Recommended Procedures for the Trial of Protracted Cases, 25 F.R.D. 351, 429 (1960).
. "Technical inadequacy" refers to any alleged insufficiency other than a deficiency in the foundation.
. The use of interviewers from a field service is "almost univrsal". Record at 411.
. A poll's numercial results (the raw data) are more akin to fact than opinion. We make this distinction to emphasize the expert opinion testimony with which we are concerned is limited to expert opinion testimony concerning the methodology of the poll itself. Because the results here were excluded we are not concerned with expert opinion testimony regarding the interpretation of the raw data which may be characterized as the poll's results.
. Only Sedelbauer v. State, 455 NE2d 1159 (Ind.App.1983) and Richards v. State, 461 N.E.2d 744 (Ind.App.1984) address the need for an expert's opinion on community standards. Neither case, however, addresses the admissibility of a public opinion poll. Although not of concern here, these cases also do not address the admissibility of expert opinion of community standards based upon the results of a public opinion poll.
. A similar poll, also conducted by Dr. Bell, was found erroneously excluded in Carlock v. State, 609 S.W.2d 787 (Tex.Crim.App.1980). Similar to the State in the instant case, the State in Carlock alleged the survey questions were possibly misleading or confusing. The Texas court summarily held "[sJuch an argument should be addressed to the jury in its capacity as the exclusive judge of the weight to be given the evidence." Id. at 790 (timing of survey also a question as going to weight, not admissibility).
. Saliba assigns as error the trial court's exclusion of eight magazines offered as comparison materials to demonstrate prevailing community standards. The magazines offered and excluded were Playboy, Penthouse, Hustler, Eros, Velvet, Chic, Oui, and Playgirl. Since this issue may arise again on retrial, but undoubtedly in another posture, we only offer the following guidelines and do not decide the issue.
The admission of numerous allegedly comparable materials may render a trial unmanageable and lengthy. Consequently, the admission of comparison materials is within the broad discretion of the trial court and must meet established criteria. United States v. Womack, 509 F.2d 368, 378 (D.C.Cir.1974), cert. denied, 422 U.S. 1022, 95 S.Ct. 2644, 45 L.Ed.2d 681 (1975).
The foundation for admission of comparison evidence on the issue of community standards is a showing the proffered evidence 1) is similar to the material in issue and 2) enjoys a reasonable degree of community acceptance. Id. at 376.
In the instant case the trial court found the proffered evidence enjoyed a reasonable degree of community acceptance but excluded the proffered magazines because the trial court found the magazines were dissimilar to the film in issue.
At trial, a magazine distributor testified as to the number of copies of the proffered magazines that were sold to various outlets in central Indiana (distribution data). However, he further testified the proffered magazines did not depict sexually explicit acts between males.
Based upon this record we make two observations, First, a showing of sexual explicitness may be sufficient to satisfy the first element of the Womack test. But the function served by comparison of evidence presupposes the materials presented depict the same or similar sexual acts with explicitness of a comparable degree. U.S. v. Pinkus, 579 F.2d 1174 (Oth Cir.1978). Saliba offered, in part, written matter for comparison to a film.
He argued each magazine contained sexually explicit material, either written or pictorial, in*1191cluding homosexual as well as heterosexual conduct. On appeal, Saliba repeats general allegations regarding the contents of the magazines, which span over 1,000 pages. However, the only specific comparisons made by Saliba are two references to columns in Playboy and Penthouse magazines. One of the columns contains letters from readers discussing current social issues such as abortions and nuclear weapons. The other column contains detailed written descriptions of heterosexual, group and lesbian sex; the article does not describe any male homosexual conduct.
We are persuaded a valid basis may exist for excluding written depictions of sexual activity for comparison to sexually explicit films. Even a detailed written depiction leaves much to the reader's imagination; a film does not. Films are commonly, perhaps inherently, more explicit. For example, magazine photographs rarely, if ever, suggest ongoing sexual activity, either heterosexual or homosexual. Thus, the use of different media to depict even sexually explicit matter militates against admission of alleged comparable evidence since even "slight variations in format may well produce vastly different consequences in obscenity determinations." Womack, 509 F.2d at 378; accord U.S. v. Pinkus, 579 F.2d 1174 (9th Cir.1978) (films not comparable to brochures and magazines).
Second, we observe data evidencing the extent of a magazine's distribution in a community may satisfy the second element of the test when it establishes a reasonable degree of community acceptance as opposed to 'mere availability. However, distribution data must be viewed with caution: "a determination of the precise point at which a publication is so widely sold and is so generally available in the community as to warrant a finding of community acceptance is difficult to fix with assurance." United States v. Womack, 509 F.2d 368, 379 (D.C.Cir.1974).
The exclusion of questions 6 and 12 is not in issue. See supra note 2.

=== CASE 9739605 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:22.2435+00 ===

SULLIVAN, Judge,
concurring.
excluded this public opinion poll. I agree that the trial court erroneously As a *1192matter of law, the positioning of Question # 18 did not adversely affect the accuracy of this poll. Therefore, the particular dispute between the experts here as to the accuracy of the poll could not legitimately serve as a basis for excluding the poll.1
However, I must disagree with the majority's distinction between admissibility of evidence of this nature and the weight to be attributed to such evidence.
As the majority herein acknowledges, a poll is admissible if circumstantial guarantees of trustworthiness are present. The majority further acknowledges that the foundational requirements for the admissibility of a poll must be established and may not be assumed. My agreement with this premise prompts my separate opinion.
Establishment of the foundational requirements is essential to the determination of admissibility. Failure to establish those requirements must result in exclusion of the evidence. This threshold determination must be made by the trial court. The determination as to the presence of those guarantees of trustworthiness necessarily falls to the trial court in its ruling as to admissibility. The guarantees therefore affect admissibility in the first instance, even though those same factors thereafter might be considered by a jury in assessing the weight to be given the poll. Nevertheless, the trial court must resolve the question in the first instance and may not avoid the issue upon the premise that those factors go only to the weight of the evidence.
Admissibility is within the sole prerogative of the trial judge. The fact that the disagreement which must be resolved may be within the peculiar realm of the experts does not alter the nature of the determination from one of admissibility to one of the weight to be given the poll. The trial judge under such cireumstances cannot avoid the duty to make a determination as to admissibility even though that determination requires him to weigh the conflicting testimony of two experts.
It may be that matters of this sort are similar to the process followed to determine admissibility of a confession in a criminal case. See Long v. State (1981) Ind., 422 N.E.2d 284 in conjunction with Tanner v. State (1984) Ind., 471 N.E.2d 665.
In any event, I disagree with the implication that once a proponent of evidence has qualified as an expert and has stated that his poll is accurate, such poll must be admitted into evidence.2
The majority would seem to require that the poll be admitted no matter how inadequate the validating procedures, so long as the expert states, that in Ais opinion, the procedures were adequate to establish trustworthiness.
In these aspects of the majority opinion, I find fault, although I agree with the conclusion that this poll was admissible.3
. In the case before us, the experts disagree with respect to whether one of the foundational requirements has been met. In essence, the disa-" greement between Drs. Bell and Vargas is whether the circumstantial evidence of trust worthiness has been sufficiently established to permit the poll to be admitted and to be weighed by the jury. Reduced to its barest essentials the experts are in disagreement with respect to whether the poll is admissible or not.
. The majority would seem to permit the expert to validate his own methodology by merely opining that he has complied with the seven requirements enumerated at pages 1187-88 of the opinion.
. In holding this public opinion poll admissible, I do not believe the majority may properly avoid outright rejection of Richards v. State (1984) 3d Dist., Ind.App., 461 N.E.2d 744, and Sedelbauer v. State (1983) 3d Dist., Ind.App., 455 N.E.2d 1159. See Majority Opinion, p. 1189, n. 12. In holding that no expert testimony is permitted with respect to establishment of a community standard, those cases necessarily preclude the expert testimony necessary to provide a foundation for an opinion poll which might establish the community standard. The import of Richards and Sedelbauer is that the applicable community standard may be established solely by each jury upon a case-by-case basis.

=== CASE 9739606 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:22.788226+00 ===

PIVARNIK, Justice.
Defendant-Appellant James Smith, Jr. was found guilty of Attempted Murder, a class A felony, and Robbery, a class A felony, by a jury in the Marion Superior Court on April 25, 1984. On May 15, 1984, the Honorable Patricia J. Gifford sentenced Appellant to the Department of Corrections for a period of fifty (50) years for each Count, totalling a term of one hundred (100) years. The sentences were ordered to be served consecutively. Appellant now directly appeals and raises the following four issues:
1. the trial court erred by denying Defendant's motion to suppress;
2. the trial court erred by denying Defendant's motion for continuance;
3. the trial court erred by ordering Defendant shackled through the trial; and
4. the trial court erred by allowing Defendant to be convicted of two separate *29crimes and by imposing two separate sentences.
Appellant Smith visited Eve's Garden Massage Parlor in Indianapolis on August 3, 19883. He paid twenty-five ($25.00) dollars for rent on a room with a waterbed and paid masseuse Carry Perry forty ($40.00) for a nude sensitivity session. During the session, Appellant became dissatisfied and demanded his money back. Perry returned the forty ($40.00) dollars but told him he would have to discuss the refund of the room rent with the security guard in the front office. Richard Armstrong, age forty (40), was the security guard stationed in the office where room rent was collected. Appellant requested the refund, but Armstrong politely told him refunds were not permitted. Signs in the lobby area indicated this policy. Appellant left but returned about thirty (30) minutes later. He charged into the establishment with a large caliber handgun, exclaiming to Armstrong, "I'm going to kill you." Before Armstrong could retrieve his revolver, Appellant shot him in the neck, severing Armstrong's motor nerves. Defendant took Armstrong's money and revolver, then pointed his gun at Perry and another masseuse and demanded their money. The other masseuse promptly gave him twenty-five ($25.00) dollars and Perry gave him sixty ($60.00) dollars. As Appellant turned to leave he shot Armstrong onee more, this time in the arm.
Armstrong suffered serious injuries causing a two month hospital stay. He is paralyzed, suffers ongoing muscle spasms along with other side effects, and is permanently confined to a wheelchair.
I
Appellant first claims the trial court erred by denying his motion to suppress. Appellant's motion to suppress alleged that his confession was the result of police harassment, physical abuse, and duress. The record reveals that on February 16, 1984, Appellant's attorney filed a motion to suppress evidence. On February 28, 1984, Judge Gifford set a hearing date of March 3, 1984 on Defendant's motion. The record further indicates a hearing was held March 3, 1984 wherein Defendant's motion to suppress was denied.
Officer John Larkins interviewed Appellant on August 10, 1988 after fully reap-prising Appellant of his Miranda rights. The record reveals that Officer Larkins testified at trial that after reading Appellant his Miranda rights, Appellant stated he wanted to make a statement. A waiver form was executed and introduced at trial. After the form was signed Larkins engaged in a tape recorded conversation with Smith. The transcript of this conversation was read to the jury and presented in the record. In it Appellant admits visiting the massage parlor and returning with a gun with the intent to receive a refund. He claims he shot Armstrong because he thought Armstrong was going to shoot him. He also admits he stole the gun he used to shoot Armstrong from an apart ment security guard. Furthermore, he states he took Armstrong's gun with the intent of reselling it. Larkins testified that Appellant was fully cooperative and nonviolent the day of this conversation and that Larkins never touched Appellant. However, Larkins testified that two days later Appellant became violent and Larkins used force in return to constrain him.
The record reveals that a hearing was held on Appellant's motion to suppress and the trial court thereafter denied Appellant's motion. Appellant now alleges this was error. The record simply does not support Appellant's claim. Appellant has neglected to include in the record any tran-seript of the March 3, 1984 hearing. It was incumbent upon Smith, as appellant, to present a sufficient record to permit an intelligent review of this issue. Smith v. Indiana, (1981) Ind., 422 N.E2d 1179; Jaske v. State, (1978) 269 Ind. 196, 379 N.E.2d 451. Thus, the error which is alleged but not disclosed by the record is not a proper subject for review. Id. Because the record before us contains mere allegations of a coerced confession, and no evidence to support these allegations, we can*30not conclude that the trial court erred by denying Appellant's motion to suppress evidence.
II
Appellant argues the trial court erred by denying his motion for continuance. Because the prosecutor filed additional discovery on the last working day before trial, Defendant sought a continuance. The record shows that at the hearing on Defendant's motion the only additional discovery were two witnesses who were to be called by the State to testify only as to chain of possession. The trial court determined that before each witness testified, Defendant would be granted a thirty (80) minute continuance. Appellant now claims the trial court erred in this ruling.
Denial of a continuance motion is reversible error only where there has been a clear abuse of discretion. Downer v. State, (1982) Ind., 429 N.E.2d 953. Furthermore, Appellant is not entitled to reversal unless he can demonstrate he was prejudiced by the error he asserts. Springer v. State, (1984) Ind., 463 N.E.2d 243; Henderson v. State, (1983) Ind., 455 N.E.2d 1117. Upon review of the record we can find no harm occasioned by Appellant due to the court's denial of his motion for continuance. The trial court did not abuse its discretion by determining Appellant's counsel could adequately question each chain of custody witness for thirty minutes before that witness testified. Therefore, Appellant has demonstrated no error by raising this issue.
HI
Appellant alleges next that the trial court erred by ordering Defendant shackled through trial and by allowing Defendant to appear in court in prison garb. Due to the lack of necessity for such measures, Appellant argues he did not receive an impartial trial.
A trial court is afforded discretion in matters of maintaining order and security for the courtroom and it will be deemed proper to have an accused wear shackles during trial to reach that end. Howard v. State, (1984) Ind., 467 N.E.2d 1, 2. Again the record clearly reveals that such measures were warranted. The trial court found, after a hearing on this matter, as follows:
"... the Court is of the opinion that the (because of the) recommendation of the jail Commander and of the deputies present that the defendant should remain in chains and that he is dressed in the attire that he is dressed in of his own free will and choice and that he does have clothes present to put on any time he wishes to do so and because of the fact that he is a security risk, the Court would order that the defendant remain chained during this trial."
Record at 187.
Also the court asked Defendant more than ence if he desired to put on his civilian clothes and Defendant remained mute on the subject.
Fred Golgart, the Deputy Sheriff of Marion County testified at the hearing and stated the jail commander had ordered that if at any time Appellant's chains were removed a minimum of ten deputies should be present because of the high security risk Appellant posed. Appellant had frequent outbursts of violence in jail and was violent and hostile the morning of the trial. Appellant had held his public defender hostage in jail by holding a sharpened toothbrush in his ear until a SWAT team disarmed him. Additional evidence of Appellant's violent nature was given at the hearing. However, it is quite obvious from this testimony that the court did not abuse its discretion by ordering Defendant Smith shackled during trial The court took whatever precautions it could to have most of the shackling removed from the jury's view. Appellant by choice remained in prison garb. Consequently, no error is presented on this issue.
IV
Finally, Appellant complains the trial court erred in allowing him to be tried, *31convmted and sentenced to separate terms for both attempted murder and armed robbery because the robbery was the underlying felony for the attempted murder. Appellant is correct that an armed robbery conviction merges into a felony murder conviction when the armed robbery is the underlying felony. Anderson v. State, (1983) Ind., 448 N.E.2d 1180; Biggerstaff v. State, (1982) Ind., 432 N.E.2d 34, 37. However, there is a factual distinction between this case and those cases applying the merger doctrine. Here there was no actual killing during the robbery. Rather, Defendant was charged with attempted murder and armed robbery. The merger doctrine is inapplicable in this case. Accordingly, it was not improper for the trial court to impose separate sentences for both crimes for which Appellant was found guilty. Therefore, the trial court did not err as alleged by Appellant.
V
Appellant raised six issues upon appeal. Only four of the issues presented for our review were accompanied by an argument. Ind.R.App.P. 8.3(A)(7) reads in part as follows:
"Each error assigned in the motion to correct errors that appellant intends to raise on appeal shall be set forth specifically and followed by the argument applicable thereto.... Any error alleged in the motion to correct errors not treated as herein directed shall be deemed waived."
Since Appellant failed to present argument on two issues stated in the brief, these issues are waived.
For all of the foregoing reasons, there was no reversible trial court error and the judgment and sentence are affirmed.
GIVAN, C.J., and HUNTER and PRENTICE, JJ., concur.
DeBRULER, J., concurs with separate opinion.

=== CASE 9739607 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:22.792174+00 ===

DeBRULER, Justice,
concurring.
With respect to issue I it is accurate to say that a complete and proper review of the ruling on suppression is not ordinarily possible in the absence of a record of the suppression hearing, and that it is in the first instance the obligation of counsel to file a complete record. However, in a first and direct criminal appeal, it can be better Judicial Administration to sua sponte order completion of the record, particularly where the issue involved is a constitutional one.
I also agree on issue IV that separate sentences are appropriate under the facts of this case for both attempted murder and robbery. Apropos to this issue is our recent case of Bevill v. State (1985), Ind., 472 N.E.2d 1247 (Pivarnik, J., concurring and dissenting) where we held that separate sentences for attempted murder and class A burglary could not stand as violative of the state and federal double jeopardy provisions. There the same stabbing of the victim was the basis of the attempted murder charge and the bodily injury element of the class A burglary. The situation at hand is different. Here, there are two separate onslaughts upon the victim Armstrong. The first occurred when appellant shot him in the neck and took the money and revolver. This provided the basis for the class A robbery sentence. The second occurred after the women were robbed, and appellant there again turned his gun upon Armstrong, shooting him again and striking the arm. This provided the basis for the attempted murder sentence.

=== CASE 9739608 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:25.574342+00 ===

*276Hennessey, C.J.
This is an action by Blanche Spring, individually and as executrix under the will of her husband, Earle Spring (decedent), against the Geriatric Authority of Holyoke (Authority) and ten other defendants concerning incidents that occurred while the decedent was a patient at the Holyoke Geriatric and Convalescent Center (Center), a hospital owned and operated by the Authority.
Earle Spring was seventy-eight years old when he entered the Center on November 8, 1978, and remained a resident of the facility until his death on April 6, 1980. In 1979, his family filed a petition in the Probate Court seeking permission to remove him from life-sustaining kidney dialysis treatments. Following court proceedings, it was determined that dialysis could be withheld. Matter of Spring, 380 Mass. 629 (1980). Upon learning of the court order authorizing the termination of dialysis treatments, nurses Joyce Webster and Cathy McEvady spoke with Spring and asked him a series of questions, including whether he wanted to die, to which he responded, “No.” Shortly thereafter, Webster, McEvady and four medical aides, Maureen Brown, Ardina Talbert, Beverly Chmiel, and Barbara Beckett composed a letter to the local newspaper expressing their opposition to the court order. A transcript of the questions asked the decedent and his answers was also prepared. Prior to taking these documents to the newspaper, the nurses showed their letter to Frederick Mues, administrator of the Center, who approved its contents. Both documents were then published on the front page of the Holyoke Transcript on January 21, 1980.
During the evening of January 20, 1980, the decedent was visited by a nurse, Donna McDonough, and a doctor, Nelson Gillet, neither of whom was affiliated with the Authority or involved in any way with the decedent’s medical care. These visits were approved by Mues; no permission was sought from or given by the decedent’s family or guardian. Nurses Winifred Greany and Joan Walohan were present during these visits, in which McDonough and Gillet questioned the decedent. The latter two then prepared affidavits based upon their observations which were used to support a motion to intervene in the ongoing *277court proceedings involving the termination of the decedent’s dialysis treatment.
On July 30, 1980, the plaintiff commenced this action in the Superior Court. Her complaint and amended complaint alleged: (1) invasion of the decedent’s right of privacy (counts I and II), (2) infliction of emotional distress on the decedent (III and IV) and on the plaintiff in her own right (XI and XII), (3) violation of G. L. c. Ill, § 70E (the Patients’ Rights Statute) (V and VI), (4) breach of contract (VII), (5) breach of an implied warranty of privacy (VIII), (6) violation of the Consumer Protection Act, G. L. c. 93A (IX and X),.and (7) violation of G. L. c. 66A, the Fair Information Practices Act (XIII and XIV).
Before trial, the Authority filed a motion for summary judgment. Upon concluding that the Authority’s tort liability is governed by the provisions of the Massachusetts Tort Claims Act, G. L. c. 258, the judge allowed partial summary judgment for the Authority with respect to the plaintiff’s tort claims of invasion of privacy and infliction of emotional distress (counts I, II, III, IV, XI and XII). The judge granted partial summary judgment to the nine individual defendants as to the plaintiff’s allegations of violations of contract (count VII), of implied warranty of privacy (count VIII), and of G. L. c. 93A (counts IX and X). At the close of all evidence, he directed verdicts for the defendants Paul, Chmiel, Talbert, Brown, and Beckett and allowed motions by the defendants Greany, Webster, McEvady, and Walohan for directed verdicts with respect to their alleged violations of G. L. c. 66A (counts XIII and XIV) and the claims against them for intentional or negligent infliction of emotional distress (counts III, IV, XI and XII). The plaintiff’s G. L. c. Ill, § 70E, claims (counts V and VI), were referred to a medical malpractice tribunal in accordance with G. L. c. 231, § 60B. The tribunal found that the Authority’s alleged violations of the Patients’ Rights Statute were not appropriate matters for their consideration and this finding has not been appealed. At trial, the plaintiff moved for all remaining counts, including the G. L. c. 93A and G. L. c. 66A issues, to be tried by jury. This motion was allowed.
*278The jury returned verdicts for defendants Greany, Webster, McEvady, and Walohan on the plaintiff’s invasion of privacy counts. With respect to the Authority, the jury returned verdicts for the plaintiff and awarded her $30,000 in damages for violations of G. L. c. 93A, $50,000 in damages for breach of contract, and $2,500,000 in exemplary damages for violations of G. L. c. 66A. The judge allowed the Authority’s motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict as to the G. L. c. 93 A claims; reduced the contract damages to a nominal $1; and, finding the G. L. c. 66A award excessive, ordered the plaintiff to remit all but $100,000 or submit to a retrial on the issue of damages. The plaintiff refused to remit and the judge ordered a new trial against the Authority limited to the issue of exemplary damages payable to the plaintiff under G. L. c. 66A.
The sum of all the foregoing proceedings was that all counts against all parties, except the G. L. c. 66A counts against the Authority, had been disposed of either by verdicts of the jury or rulings of the judge.
At the second trial the jury returned a verdict against the Authority for violations of G. L. c. 66A in the amount of $1,000,000. The Authority’s motions for judgment notwithstanding the verdict and for a new trial were denied. In response to the plaintiff’s “motion for clarification,” the judge ruled that prejudgment interest would not be added to the G. L. c. 66A award. The plaintiff’s motion for attorneys’ fees and costs in the amount of $191,727 was allowed.
The Authority appeals from the denial of its motions for a new trial and for judgment notwithstanding the verdict following the second trial as well as from the judgments in both trials. The Authority contends that: (1) G. L. c. 66A does not apply to the Authority; (2) a cause of action under G. L. c. 66A does not survive the death of the injured party; (3) a cause of action under G. L. c. 66A is an equity action and therefore was not properly before the jury in the first trial; (4) the exemplary damages awarded by the jury were excessive and against the weight of evidence; (5) the trial judge erred in limiting the second trial to the issue of damages; and (6) the award of plaintiff’s attorneys’ fees was improper.
*279In her appeal, the plaintiff challenges the remittitur order; the judge’s ruling on interest; his allowance of summary judgment on the plaintiff’s tort claims against the Authority; the judgment notwithstanding the verdicts on the G. L. c. 93A count; the reduction of contract damages to $1; the dismissal of her claim against the Authority for violation of an implied warranty of privacy; and the dismissal of counts against defendant McDonough for lack of jurisdiction. We granted the plaintiff’s application for direct appellate review.
We conclude that the Authority is not subject to suit under G. L. c. 66A. Therefore, judgment for the Authority is required on these counts. On all other issues necessary to reach on appeal, we affirm the rulings of the trial judge.
1. Applicability of G. L. c. 66A.
Although it is undisputed that employees of the Authority released, without permission of the decedent or his family, information defined as “personal data” under G. L. c. 66A (Act),3 the Authority contends that it is not subject to suit under that statute.4 The Legislature created the Authority by special *280act which provides in relevant part: “The Authority shall have the following powers and duties: . . .(b) To sue and be sued, but only to the same extent and upon the same conditions that a city or town may be sued.” St. 1971, c. 554, § 8 (b), as amendedbySt. 1973, c. 1097, § 1. While there is no legislative history available to explain the reasons for § 8(b), it is apparent from reading the special act as a whole that, although the Authority has a semi-independent character, it remains closely tied to the city of Holyoke. See §§ 3, 4, 8 (c) (d) (i) (k) (1) (m) (n), and 10 (A) of the special act, St. 1971, c. 554, amended by St. 1973, c. 1097, § 1. In transferring the operation of Holyoke’s municipal nursing home to the Authority, the Legislature intended to maintain the same level of liability as would apply to the city. See § 8 (b) of the special act.
The plaintiff argues that the Authority may be sued under G. L. c. 66A by reason of that statute’s definition of subject agencies which includes “any authority created by the general court to serve a public purpose, having either statewide or local jurisdiction.” This language would indeed appear to encompass the Authority. However, G. L. c. 66A was not intended to apply to “units of county, city or town governments.” See First Interim Report of the Special Legislative Commission, 1975 House Doc. No. 5417, at 34; Brant, Barron, Jaffe, Graceffa, & Wallis, Public Records, PIPA and CORI: How Massachusetts Balances Privacy and the Right to Know, 15 Suffolk U.L. Rev. 23, 39 n.112 (1981) (excluded from ambit of proposed statute were units of county, city and town government). According to legislative history, the only authorities of “local jurisdiction” that are subject to the Act are “local housing and redevelopment authorities” and, in its report, the legislative commission specifically distinguished these authorities on the *281basis of their regulation by the executive branch. First Interim Report, supra at 34. The scope of the Act’s definition of subject agencies is consistent with its stated purpose: “to provide safeguards for the selection and use of personal information, provide reasonable access by individuals to their records, provide a system of registration and identification of state-operated personal data systems ...” (emphasis added). Id. at 31. The Legislature does not appear to have changed the intended scope and purpose of the Act in any manner relevant to this case when in 1977 it amended the statutory definition of “agency” and inserted the language relied upon by the plaintiff.5 See Amendments and Commentary to the Fair Information Practices Act, 1977 House Doc. No. 6106, at 10-11. By its terms the Act continues to apply to State regulated agencies, not cities and towns. G. L. c. 66A, § 1, as appearing in St. 1977, c. 691, § 6. Torres v. Attorney Gen., 391 Mass. 1, 13 (1984) (“The statute is directed against State agencies that are ‘holders,’ as defined in G. L. c. 66A, § 1”).
Applying the limitation on the Authority’s liability created by the Legislature in § 8 (b) of the special act to the terms of G. L. c. 66A, § 1, we conclude that the Authority is no more subject to suit under G. L. c. 66A than is the city of Holyoke. We do not see an irreconcilable conflict between the two statutes warranting the plaintiff’s contention that by enacting G. L. c. 66A, § 1, the Legislature impliedly repealed § 8 (b) of the Authority’s enabling act. “Such repeals have never been favored by our law. Unless the prior statute is so repugnant to and inconsistent with the later enactment that both cannot stand, then the former is not deemed to have been repealed.” Commonwealth v. Hayes, 372 Mass. 505, 511 (1977), quoting Commonwealth v. Bloomberg, 302 Mass. 349, 352 (1939). Even if the statutes were inconsistent with regard to the Authority’s liability, *282the provisions of the special act, in this case the Authority’s enabling act, would prevail over those of a subsequently enacted general law absent a specific repeal of the earlier act or a clear and strong expression of legislative intention to supersede the special act. Boston Teachers Local 66 v. School Comm. of Boston, 370 Mass. 455, 472 (1976), and cases cited.
We do not know what policy considerations led the Legislature to exclude cities and towns from the coverage of G. L. c. 66A. However, it is clear from the plain language of § 8 (b) of the special act that the Authority is to be treated as a city or town for liability purposes, including liability under G. L. c. 66A. Thus c. 66A does not apply to the Authority. Because of our conclusion that G. L. c. 66A does not apply to the authority, we need not and do not consider the ancillary G. L. c. 66A issues raised by the parties’ appeals.6
2. Plaintiffs Cross Appeal.
Because the plaintiff failed to comply with the presentment and notice requirements of the Massachusetts Tort Claims Act, G. L. c. 258, § 4, as appearing in St. 1978, c. 512, § 15, the judge granted the Authority’s motion for partial summary judgment with respect to the plaintiff’s claims of negligent invasion of privacy and negligent infliction of emotional distress. He also ruled that the plaintiff’s intentional tort claims were barred by G. L. c. 258, § 10 (c), which states that c. 258 does not apply to “any claim arising out of an intentional tort, including . . . intentional mental distress . . . [and] invasion of privacy.” She appeals his rulings, contending that (1) the Authority is not a “public employer” within the meaning of c. 258 and therefore may be sued in tort without recourse to the act’s pro*283visions, and (2) because intentional tort claims are not covered by G. L. c.,258, statutory presentment of such claims is not required.
General Laws c. 258, § 2, as appearing in St. 1978, c. 512, § 15, provides that a public employer is liable “for injury or loss of property or personal injury or death caused by the negligent or wrongful act or omission of any public employee while acting within the scope of his office or employment.” G. L. c. 258, § 2. However, a condition precedent to bringing suit under this chapter is the presentment of the claim “in writing to the executive officer of such public employer within two years after the date upon which the cause of action arose.” G. L. c. 258, § 4. Only if the claim is denied or the executive officer fails to settle, arbitrate, or compromise the claim within six months, may the claimant file suit. § 4. The purpose of the statute’s presentment requirement is “to preserve the stability and effectiveness of government by providing a mechanism which will result in payment of only those claims against governmental entities which are valid, in amounts which are reasonable and not inflated.” Vasys v. Metropolitan Dist. Comm’n, 387 Mass. 51, 57 (1982). If proper presentment is not made within the time allotted, the plaintiff’s complaint is subject to dismissal. Id. at 56. The public employer need not show prejudice to rely upon the plaintiff’s failure of presentment. Weaver v. Commonwealth, 387 Mass. 43, 49 (1982). Clearly recognizing the necessity of properly presenting claims covered by G. L. c. 258, the plaintiff seeks to excuse her noncompliance by arguing that her tort claims are not governed by the act.
We have already discussed the significance of § 8 (b) of the special act which provides that the Authority is subject to suit “only to the same extent and upon the same conditions that a city or town may be sued.” Cities and towns are defined as public employers under the Massachusetts Tort Claims Act. G. L. c. 258, § l.7 The remedies provided under c. 258 are *284exclusive of any common law remedy. G. L. c. 258, § 2. It therefore follows that in tort actions covered by c. 258, the Authority may be sued only if the plaintiff complies with the presentment prerequisites of G. L. c. 258, § 4.
The plaintiff claims the Authority is an “independent body politic and corporate” — and as such is excluded from c. 258’s definition of public employer. G. L. c. 258, § 1. In making this argument she again ignores the import of the plain language of § 8 (b) of the special act. This is apparent by her reliance upon Kargman v. Boston Water & Sewer Comm’n, 18 Mass. App. Ct. 51 (1984), in which the Appeals Court held that the defendant commission was an “independent body politic” within the meaning of G. L. c. 258, § 1. The enabling legislation creating the water and sewer commission, however, does not contain the express limitation on liability appearing in § 8 (b) of the special act. In this decisive respect, the cases are readily distinguishable.
The plaintiff argues, in the alternative, that even if the Authority is a public employer under G. L. c. 258, § 1, and her claims of negligence are therefore barred by her failure to comply with statutory presentment, her intentional tort claims were wrongly dismissed because they are not governed by the act. The plaintiff contends that by virtue of the language in G. L. c. 258, § 10 (c), she is entitled to pursue her intentional tort claims without recourse to c. 258. We disagree. There is no case law in this Commonwealth holding municipalities liable for the intentional torts of their employees. By excluding in*285tentional torts from the scope of G. L. c. 258, the Legislature left open the matter of governmental liability for intentional torts. Consistent with the common law principles of governmental immunity which preceded the Massachusetts Tort Claims Act, we conclude that public employers retain their immunity from suits arising from intentional torts.
In interpreting G. L. c. 258, “we start with the basic principle that the abrogation of the doctrine of governmental immunity by the Act simply removed the defense of immunity in certain tort actions against the Commonwealth, municipalities, and other governmental subdivisions. It did not create any new theory of liability for a municipality.” Dinsky v. Framingham, 386 Mass. 801, 804 (1982).
Prior to c. 258, as a result of the “judicially created common law concept” of governmental immunity, public employers were generally not liable for the torts of their employees. Morash & Sons v. Commonwealth, 363 Mass. 612, 615 (1973). “The customary rule is that if there is tortious injury there is liability, and exceptions may be created to the rule of liability. The inverted rule here creates an immunity, and establishes liability by exception.” Id. at 621. In Morash we urged the abrogation of governmental immunity by legislative action. At the same time, we recognized the importance of retaining limitations on the liability of public employers “based upon considerations of justice and public policy.” Id. at 623. In that regard, we specifically noted that Congress had limited its waiver of governmental immunity by creating exceptions to the Federal Tort Claims Act, 28 U.S.C. § 2680(h) (1982),8 including an exception to liability for “wrongs caused by the wilful conduct of [government] employees.” Id. at 624. The same public policy considerations lead us to decide today that public employers remain immune from intentional tort claims. Therefore the judge was correct to dismiss the plaintiff’s claims *286for intentional infliction of emotional distress and invasion of privacy.
In sum, we conclude that (1) the plaintiff’s claims against the Authority for negligent invasion of privacy and negligent infliction of emotional distress were properly dismissed because the authority is a public employer entitled to notice and presentment under the Massachusetts Tort Claims Act, and (2) the plaintiff’s claims against the Authority for intentional invasion of privacy and intentional infliction of emotional distress were properly dismissed because public employers are immune from such suits.9 Accordingly, we need not decide whether the plaintiff’s claim for invasion of privacy survived the decedent’s death,10 or whether she has shown conduct by the Authority amounting either to an invasion of privacy or to the infliction of mental distress. See Agis v. Howard Johnson Co., 371 Mass. 140, 144-145 (1976) (elements of cause of action for intentional infliction of emotional distress); Ferriter v. Daniel O’ Connell’s Sons, 381 Mass. 507, 517-519 (1980) (elements of cause of action for negligent infliction of emotional distress).
3. G. L. c. 93A Claim.
The plaintiff appeals the allowance of the Authority’s motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict on her G. L. c. 93 A claim. She alleges that the Authority’s violation of the decedent’s privacy rights constituted an unfair or deceptive act or *287practice as defined in G. L. c. 93A, § 2.11 The judge based his ruling on the plaintiff’s failure to allege and prove the existence of a demand letter “identifying the claimant and reasonably describing the unfair or deceptive act or practice relied upon and the injury suffered.” G. L. c. 93A, § 9 (3). The plaintiff concedes that she neither alleged in her complaint the sending of such a demand letter nor introduced such a letter in evidence at trial. We have often held that “[a] demand letter listing the specific deceptive practices claimed is a prerequisite to suit and as a special element must be alleged and proved’ (emphasis added). Entrialgo v. Twin City Dodge, 368 Mass. 812, 813 (1975). See Slaney v. Westwood Auto, Inc., 366 Mass. 688, 704 (1975) (by alleging he sent a demand letter, plaintiff satisfied prerequisite to suit); York v. Sullivan, 369 Mass. 157, 163 (1975) (“The thirty-day requirement, as part of the requirement of a written demand for relief, is a prerequisite to suit, to be alleged and proved”); Linthicum v. Archambault, 379 Mass. 381, 384-385 (1979) (plaintiff’s pleadings must show that a demand for relief was sent thirty days prior to filing complaint). See also Consumer Protection, 1969 Ann. Survey Mass. Law, 157, 168 (sample pleadings under G. L. c. 93A, § 9).
The plaintiff argues that we should find her pleadings and proof sufficient because the Authority “acknowledge^]” receipt of her demand letter.12 She emphasizes the fact that the demand letter was marked for identification and used by the plaintiff’s counsel during her direct examination of Joseph Paul, *288former executive director of the Authority. However, even if we were to assume that the plaintiff adequately alleged and proved the existence of a demand letter, we are not persuaded that the letter sent satisfied the statutory requirements. General Laws c. 93A, § 9, provides that a written demand for relief must “reasonably” describe the unfair practice complained of and the “injury suffered.” The purposes of the letter are twofold: (1) “to encourage negotiation and settlement by notifying prospective defendants of claims arising from allegedly unlawful conduct” and (2) “to operate as a control on the amount of damages which the complainant can ultimately recover.” Slaney, supra at 704. If the defendant makes a reasonable tender of settlement which is rejected by the complainant, the damages recoverable are limited to the amount of tender. If no tender of settlement is made, or the tender is unreasonable in relation to the injury suffered, the complainant may recover either actual damages or nominal damages of $25, whichever is greater. Id. It is therefore essential that the complainant define the injury suffered and the relief demanded in a manner that provides the prospective defendant with “an opportunity to review the facts and the law involved to see if the requested relief should be granted or denied” and enables him to make “a reasonable tender of settlement.” York v. Sullivan, 369 Mass. 157, 162-163 (1975), quoting Slaney, supra at 704-705. In this case the plaintiff’s letter charges the Authority with intentionally “and/or” negligently “breach[ing] the rights of privacy associated with the person of Earle Spring” but does not allege that the decedent was injured in any manner let alone “reasonably” describe the “injury suffered.” G. L. c. 93A, § 9 (3). Cf. Leardi v. Brown, ante 151, 165-166 (1985) (plaintiff seeking nominal statutory damages need only show invasion of legally protected right). The letter is also silent as to the relief requested although the plaintiff’s complaint demands $10,000,000 in actual damages and $30,000,000 in punitive damages.13 Clearly such an exorbitant demand for *289relief is hardly likely to promote negotiation and settlement or to operate as a control on damages. Cf. Brandt v. Olympic Constr., Inc., 16 Mass. App. Ct. 913, 915 (1983) (demand letter was sufficient where compensation owed for injury complained of was apparent from facts alleged). We therefore hold that the plaintiff’s demand letter, even if we treat it as introduced in evidence, does not satisfy the jurisdictional prerequisite to suit under G. L. c. 93A, § 9.
For this reason, we need not confront the other arguments raised by the Authority in opposition to the plaintiff’s G. L. c. 93A claim. However, we note that objections raised with regard to proof of the decedent’s actual damages, the applicability of G. L. c. 93A to the Authority, the survivability of a G. L. c. 93A action, and the submission of the plaintiff’s claim to the jury for determination14 pose additional obstacles to the plaintiff’s case.
4. Breach of Contract Claim.
Next the plaintiff challenges the judge’s action in setting aside the jury’s award of contract damages and entering a finding of nominal damages. The plaintiff alleged that the Authority violated provisions of its contract with the decedent by allowing the dissemination of his confidential medical information and by permitting unauthorized visitors to interview and examine him.15 The jury returned a verdict for the plaintiff, as executrix under the decedent’s will, and awarded her actual damages of $50,000. Finding that the plaintiff had failed to present any evidence of damages suffered by the decedent as a result of the Authority’s breach of contract, the judge altered the verdict pursuant to Mass. R. Civ. P. 59 (e), 365 Mass. 827 (1974), and entered nominal damages of $1.
*290In Page v. New England Tel. & Tel. Co., 383 Mass. 250 (1981), we held that a judge of the Superior Court properly reduced a jury’s contract award from $10,000 to $1 where the plaintiff failed to establish any actual damages caused by the defendant’s breach of contract. The plaintiff argues that this case is distinguishable from Page because the judge allegedly acted sua sponte in changing the jury’s verdict whereas in Page the judge acted in response to the defendant’s Mass. R. Civ. P. 59 (e) motion. We agree with the plaintiff that rule 59 (e) requires the aggrieved party to move within ten days of entry of judgment to alter or amend the judgment. However, while the Authority failed to file properly a rule 59 (e) motion, it did move for a new trial within the same required time period, citing the jury’s unjustified contract award as one ground in its brief supporting the motion. It is clear from the judge’s ruling that he acted in response to this motion. See Sonnenblick Goldman Corp. v. Nowalk, 420 F.2d 858, 859 (3d Cir. 1970) (motion to vacate judgment properly considered Fed. R. Civ. P. 59 [e] motion). We will not overturn the correct result reached by thé judge simply because the Authority committed a procedural error in failing to caption its motion properly.
The plaintiff also contends that she introduced sufficient evidence of damages to warrant the jury’s award. That evidence consisted solely of the cost of the decedent’s care during his year and a half at the Center. According to the plaintiff, the jury could have properly found that the Authority’s breach of the privacy provisions of its contract rendered the entire contract worthless. Citing Parker v. Russell, 133 Mass. 74, 77 (1882), she contends that the $50,000 award compensated the decedent’s estate for the value of his contract with the Authority. However, Parker is inapposite because in that case the evidence showed that the defendant failed to perform her agreement and therefore the contract at issue had been totally violated. Here any provisions violated were severable from the rest of the contract. The plaintiff does not contest the fact that despite the violation the Authority continued to provide the decedent with all the other services for which he contracted until the time of his death. The alleged breach took place over a four-day *291period — January 18, 1980, to January 21,1980. The decedent remained with the Authority for approximately another fifty-five days. Even if we were to assume that there was a total breach of contract during these final days — a conclusion not warranted by the evidence — the jury’s award would still be substantially higher than the cost of the contract during this period.
We conclude that the jury award was not compensatory in nature because no actual damages were proved at trial. Therefore, the judge correctly altered the jury’s verdict to reflect the nominal damages due the plaintiff as a result of the Authority’s breach of contract. See Page, supra (award of $10,000 is not nominal damages).
5. “Implied Warranty of Privacy.”
The judge ordered a directed verdict with respect to the plaintiff’s claim against the Authority for breach of the decedent’s “implied warranty of privacy, personal peace, security and solitude.” When asked by the court to cite legal authority for the existence of such an implied warranty, the plaintiff’s counsel stated that his theory was “grounded . . . [on] some good common sense.” Pressed further, counsel argued that such an implicit warranty for elderly patients derives support from the Patients Rights’ Statute, G. L. c. Ill, § 70E, the Fair Information Practices Act, G. L. c. 66A, the Attorney General’s regulations (under G. L. c. 93A), the law of express contract, and “the common law doctrine of nurse-patient, doctor-patient and hospital-patient relationship.” All these elements provided the basis for claims that were presented to the jury and which we have discussed at some length above. Simply placing a new label on the same cause of action will not change the outcome reached on the plaintiff’s other counts. See Schenker v. Binns, 18 Mass. App. Ct. 404, 406 (1984) (where plaintiff’s negligence counts were barred by failure to comply with the presentment requirement of G. L. c. 258, § 4, contract counts alleging same negligent acts were properly dismissed). It is evident from the record that the plaintiff did not regard her breach of implied warranty claim as a serious one and neither do we. We see no error in the judge’s dismissal of this count.
*2926. Dismissal for Lack of Jurisdiction.
Finally, the plaintiff appeals the dismissal of her tort claims against the defendant McDonough. McDonough’s motion and supporting affidavit cited several different grounds for dismissal including the court’s lack of personal jurisdiction, Mass. R. Civ. P. 12 (b) (2), 365 Mass. 754 (1974), and the plaintiff’s failure to state a claim upon which relief could be granted, Mass. R. Civ. P. 12 (b) (6), 365 Mass. 754 (1974). The plaintiff filed no counter-affidavit. Finding that the plaintiff failed to show facts sufficient to prove that McDonough committed a tortious injury within the Commonwealth, as required to establish jurisdiction under our long-arm statute, G. L. c. 223A, § 3 (c), the judge ordered dismissal. Because his rulings took into account factual material outside the pleadings, i.e., the defendant’s affidavit, we shall treat his order of dismissal as a summary judgment under Mass. R. Civ. P. 56, 365 Mass. 824 (1974). See Mass. R. Civ. P. 12 (b); Cousineau v. Laramee, 388 Mass. 859, 860 n.2 (1983); Mongeau v. Boutelle, 10 Mass. App. Ct. 246, 247 (1980). The plaintiff’s failure to show facts sufficient to support her tort claims, by affidavit or otherwise, despite an eleven-month interim between McDonough’s initial motion and the judge’s ruling, indicates ' that the defendant was entitled to summary judgment and the order of dismissal was correct.
7. Conclusion.
The facts established in this case indicate that employees of the defendant Authority engaged in a socially unacceptable intrusion into the private affairs of the Spring family. Their actions unnecessarily contributed to the publicity surrounding the death of Earle Spring. However, in seeking recovery from the Authority, the plaintiff primarily relied upon G. L. c. 66A, which we have ruled does not apply to the defendant. Where she relied upon causes of action governed by other statutes, the actions required substantial procedural steps that were not taken. The Legislature has made it clear that those procedural steps, i.e., G. L. c. 258, § 4, and G. L. c. 93A, § 9, are not merely technical, but are important conditions precedent to recovery under the statutes. It is our privilege only to interpret and apply these laws, not to rewrite them.
*293Our rulings are summarized as follows. We set aside the jury verdict and reverse the judgment against the Authority for violations of G. L. c. 66A. We direct entry of judgment for the defendant on these counts. We affirm the rulings of the trial judge as to all issues raised in the plaintiff’s cross appeal, specifically (1) partial summary judgment entered for the Authority with respect to the plaintiff’s tort claims; (2) judgment notwithstanding the verdict on the plaintiff’s G. L. c. 93A claims and the altered verdict on the breach of contract counts; (3) dismissal of the plaintiff’s implied warranty of privacy claim; and (4) dismissal of the action against the defendant McDonough. We therefore reverse in part and affirm in part.
So ordered.
The statute prohibits the unauthorized release of “personal data” which are defined in part as “any information concerning an individual which, because of name, identifying number, mark or description can be readily associated with a particular individual; provided, however, that such information is not contained in a public record.” G. L. c. 66A, § 1, as appearing in St. 1977, c. 691, § 6.
General Laws c. 66A, § 2, as amended through St. 1977, c. 691, §§ 7, 8, states in pertinent part: “Every holder maintaining personal data shall: — (a) identify one individual immediately responsible for the personal data system who shall insure that the requirements of this chapter for preventing access to or dissemination of personal data are followed; (b) inform each of its employees having any responsibility or function in the design, development, operation, or maintenance of the personal data system, or the use of any personal data contained therein, of each safeguard required by this chapter, of each rule and regulation promulgated pursuant to section three which pertains to the operation of the personal data system, and of the civil remedies described in section three B of chapter two hundred and fourteen available to individuals whose rights under chapter sixty-six A are allegedly violated; (c) not allow any other agency or individual not employed by the holder to have access to personal data unless such access is authorized by statute or regulations which are consistent with the purposes of this chapter or is approved by the data subject . . . .”
General Laws c. 214, § 3B, as amended by St. 1977, c. 691, § 14, states in pertinent part that any holder which violates any provision of G. L. *280c. 66A “shall be liable to any individual who suffers any damage as a result of such violations, and the individual damaged may bring an action against such holder [of personal data] to recover any damages sustained. Notwithstanding any liability for actual damages as may be shown, such holder shall be liable for exemplary damages of not less than one hundred dollars for each violation together with such costs and reasonable attorney’s fees as may be incurred in such action.”
General Laws c. 66A, § 1, as appearing in St. 1977, c. 691, § 6, defines “[ajgency” as “any agency of the executive branch of the government, including but not limited to any constitutional or other office, executive office, department, division, bureau, board, commission or committee thereof; or any authority created by the general court to serve a public purpose, having either statewide or local jurisdiction.”
The other G. L. c. 66A issues raised by the defendant include whether the plaintiff’s cause of action survived the decedent’s death; whether the plaintiff has a right to a jury trial under G. L. c. 66A; whether exemplary damages awarded were excessive and against the weight of evidence; whether the trial judge erred in limiting the second trial to the issue of exemplary damages; and whether the judge’s award of attorneys’ fees pursuant to G. L. c. 214, § 3B, was improper. The plaintiff cross appealed the judge’s remittitur order and his failure to add prejudgment interest to the jury’s award of exemplary damages.
General Laws c. 258, § 1, as appearing in St. 1983, c. 537, defines “public employer” as: “the commonwealth and any county, city, town, *284educational collaborative, or district, including any public health district or joint district or regional health district or regional health board established pursuant to the provisions of section twenty-seven A or twenty-seven B of chapter one hundred and eleven, and any department, office, commission, committee, council, board, division, bureau, institution, agency or authority thereof which exercises direction and control over the public employee, but not a private contractor with any such public employer, the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority, the Massachusetts Port Authority, the Massachusetts Turnpike Authority, or any other independent body politic and corporate. With respect to public employees of a school committee of a city or town, the public employer for the purposes of this chapter shall be deemed to be said respective city or town.”
Title 28 U.S.C. § 2680(h) reads in pertinent part: “The provisions of this chapter . . . shall not apply to — (h) Any claim arising out of assault, battery, false imprisonment, false arrest, malicious prosecution, abuse of process, libel, slander, misrepresentation, deceit, or interference with contract rights.”
While public employers, like the Authority, may not be held liable for intentional torts committed by their employees, the employees may be personally liable for any harm they have caused. See Morash, supra at 624 n.7; Glannon, Governmental Tort Liability Under the Massachusetts Tort Claims Act, 66 Mass. L. Rev. 7, 12 (1981). Thus the plaintiff’s claims against Authority employees Greany, Webster, Walohan and McEvady for intentional invasion of privacy reached the jury although verdicts were returned for the defendants.
The plaintiff’s claim against the Authority for invasion of privacy was brought solely on behalf of the decedent in the plaintiff’s capacity as executrix. Although we express no opinion as to whether a common law right of action for invasion of privacy exists in this Commonwealth, we observe that in a majority of jurisdictions which recognize such a common law right of action, such an action does not survive the death of the injured party. Loft v. Fuller, 408 So.2d 619, 623 (Ha. Dist. Ct. App. 1982), and cases cited.
Specifically, the plaintiff alleged that the authority violated provisions of the Attorney General’s regulations relating to nursing homes, 940 Code Mass. Regs. 4.00 (1978), promulgated pursuant to G. L. c. 93A, § 2, inserted by St. 1967, c. 813, § 1, which states in pertinent part: “(a) Unfair methods of competition and unfair or deceptive acts or practices in the conduct of any trade or commerce are hereby declared unlawful. . . . (c) The attorney general may make rules and regulations interpreting the provisions of subsection 2(a) of this chapter.”
The plaintiff cites the Authority’s answer to her amended complaint, which includes as an affirmative defense the insufficiency of her purported demand letter, and testimony by Joseph Paul, former executive director of the Authority, that he received said letter.
General Laws c. 93A, § 9 (3), provides for up to three times the amount of actual damages “if the court finds that the use or employment of the act or practice was a willful or knowing violation.”
See Nei v. Burley, 388 Mass. 307 (1983), in which we held that there is no right to a jury trial under G. L. c. 93A.
The express agreement the plaintiff relies upon restricted the release of the decedent’s medical information as well as the procurement of the services of alternative medical personnel. The judge also instructed the jury that they could take into consideration any violations by the Authority of the Patients’ Rights Statute, G. L. c. Ill, § 70E, of G. L. c. 93A, or of G. L. c. 66A as evidence in reaching a verdict on the plaintiff’s breach of contract count.

=== CASE 9739613 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:27.274409+00 ===

JUSTICE HARRISON, dissenting: As recognized by the majority, the distribution of marital property upon a dissolution of marriage rests within the sound discretion of the trial court and will not be disturbed by a reviewing court absent an abuse of discretion. (In re Marriage of Hellwig (1981), 100 Ill. App. 3d 452, 426 N.E.2d 1087.) While a pension distribution of the type made by the trial court in this case might constitute such an abuse under different circumstances, it does not constitute one here. This is not a case where use of the “immediate offset” approach operates to impose an intolerable financial burden on the pension holder; indeed, it seems apparent from the record that respondent can readily comply with that provision of the judgment directing him to pay petitioner $160,000. Moreover, while the majority discusses in detail the problems inherent in determining the present value of pension plans, the fact remains that the parties stipulated to a value here, and thus provided the trial court with an undisputed basis upon which to utilize the “immediate offset” approach. Lastly, as noted by petitioner, an award of the type made here ends the economic ties between the parties and allows them to plan for their futures with a reasonable degree of certainty. In view of these significant factors supporting the judgment, I simply cannot say that it constitutes an abuse of discretion.

=== CASE 2220479 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:44.673463+00 ===

131 Ill. App. 3d 56 (1985)
475 N.E.2d 571
RONALD PAGE, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
THE CORLEY COMPANIES, INC., Defendant-Appellee.
No. 84-177.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District (4th Division).
Opinion filed February 7, 1985.
*57 Serpico, Novelle, Dvorak & Navigato, Ltd., of Chicago (Edwin M. Plaza, of counsel), for appellant.
Wildman, Harrold, Allen & Dixon, of Chicago (Michael J. Grant and Sean P. Kennedy, of counsel), for appellee.
Judgment affirmed.
JUSTICE ROMITI delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiff Ronald Page (Page) appeals from the order of the Cook County circuit court which entered summary judgment in favor of defendant Corley Companies, Inc. (Corley). Page sought recovery for personal injuries he allegedly sustained when he slipped and fell upon a masonite floor covering while working at a construction site for which Corley was general contractor. The sole question for our review is whether the masonite sheets placed on top of a terra-cotta lobby floor were a "support" within the scope of the Structural Work Act (the Act) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 48, par. 60 et seq.). We affirm the *58 trial court's decision that they were not.
Page was an employee of Leader Plumber, a plumbing subcontractor hired by Corley to provide plumbing for a portion of a condominium complex under construction in Northbrook. Roughly two to three weeks prior to his injury, terra-cotta tiles were put in place on the lobby floor of the building at which he was working. When the terra-cotta had hardened a few days later, masonite sheets roughly four feet by eight feet in size and one-quarter inch thick were butted together and taped in place directly on top of the entire lobby floor. This masonite covering was placed over the terra-cotta in order to protect it from damage. Although the building was then approximately 95% completed, some finishing work was still required on the upper floors and as a result the lobby was used by workers as a means of ingress and egress to and from the building.
Page was injured when he walked through the lobby in order to obtain additional tools from his truck, which he had parked outside the building. As he crossed the lobby, his foot caught an edge of the masonite, which had begun to warp and become uneven, causing him to fall and injure his right arm. On December 12, 1980, he filed his one-count complaint against Corley based upon a violation of the Act. After discovery, Corley filed its motion for summary judgment on April 11, 1983. A response and reply were subsequently filed by both parties. On November 9, the trial court granted summary judgment in favor of Corley on the ground that the Act was inapplicable. Page's timely appeal followed.
 1 Page argues initially that there exists a genuine issue of material fact which precluded summary judgment. Specifically, he contends that whether the masonite covering was a support under the Act is a disputed factual issue which should be determined by a trier of fact. We disagree. This contraverted issue is not one of fact but one of law, since the question of whether a certain device is governed by the Act is a matter of statutory construction and thus a question of law for the court to determine. (See, e.g., People ex rel. Rappaport v. Drazek (1975), 30 Ill. App. 3d 310, 313, 332 N.E.2d 532.) Consequently, we must consider Page's second claim that the masonite covering fell within the purview of the Act.
Section 1 of the Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 48, par. 60) provides:
"[A]ll scaffolds, hoists, cranes, stays, ladders, supports, or other mechanical contrivances, erected or constructed by any person, firm or corporation in this State for the use in the erection, repairing, alteration, removal or painting of any house, building, bridge, viaduct, or other structure, shall be erected *59 and constructed, in a safe, suitable and proper manner, and shall be so erected and constructed, placed and operated as to give proper and adequate protection to the life and limb of any person or persons employed or engaged thereon, or passing under or by the same, and in such manner as to prevent the falling of any material that may be used or deposited thereon."
The purpose of the Act is to protect individuals employed in dangerous and extrahazardous occupations on or near a construction site. (McNellis v. Combustion Engineering, Inc. (1974), 58 Ill. 2d 146, 151, 317 N.E.2d 573; Kochan v. Commonwealth Edison Co. (1984), 123 Ill. App. 3d 844, 847, 463 N.E.2d 921.) It is not intended, however, to cover all construction-related injuries. Crafton v. Lester B. Knight & Associates, Inc. (1970), 46 Ill. 2d 533, 536, 263 N.E.2d 817; St. John v. City of Naperville (1982), 108 Ill. App. 3d 519, 522, 439 N.E.2d 12.
 2, 3 Page claims that the masonite covering upon which he fell is a "support" under section 1. The Act does not define this term, and its meaning is not clear and unambiguous since it is usable in many contexts and has various shades of meaning. We note, however, that a "support" is classified in section 1 with other devices such as "scaffolds, hoists, cranes, stays, ladders, * * * or other mechanical contrivances." (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 48, par. 60.) Under the rule of statutory construction of noscitur a sociis, "when two or more words are grouped together, and ordinarily have a similar meaning, but are not equally comprehensive, the general word will be limited and qualified by the special word." (2A Sutherland, Statutory Construction sec. 47.16, at 161 (4th ed. rev. 1984); see Jarecki v. G.D. Searle & Co. (1961), 367 U.S. 303, 307, 6 L. Ed. 2d 859, 863, 81 S. Ct. 1579, 1582 ("a word is known by the company it keeps"); People v. Goldman (1972), 7 Ill. App. 3d 253, 255, 287 N.E.2d 177.) We therefore interpret "support" in its narrower sense such that it is similar in function to the other devices with which it is listed under the Act. In our view, the common characteristic of each of the enumerated structures is to serve as a temporary platform which elevates workers or materials from the permanent floor or ground level in order to perform or accommodate performance of a construction task; the concomitant increased hazard of each is the greater likelihood that workers or materials will fall off of or through the structure more easily, causing personal injuries. Thus, in Louis v. Barenfanger (1968), 39 Ill. 2d 445, 236 N.E.2d 724, for example, the court held that metal girders which formed a permanent part of the building under construction but which were used by the plaintiff worker as a form of temporary support were governed by the Act. In reaching this result, the court quoted *60 with approval (39 Ill. 2d 445, 450) the following passage from the decision of the Wisconsin Supreme Court in Koepp v. National Enameling & Stamping Co. (1912), 151 Wis. 302, 314-15, 139 N.W. 179, 184:
"Much that has been said respecting `repairing' applies to `scaffolding' and `mechanical contrivance.' The scope thereof would reasonably include any temporary structure made up of parts, viewing the term in its broadest scope, used for support while doing any kind of work mentioned in the law,  any kind of an elevated platform for workmen to use in the performance of their duties. Any combination for use in doing any kind of work mentioned in the statute where the servant is dependable thereon for support, in place of an ordinary surface, such as the ground or floor, is a mechanical contrivance. The legislature, in the combination of words, `scaffolding, hoists, stays, ladders or other mechanical contrivance,' viewed in a broad remedial sense in favor of employees, left little, if anything, uncovered which may be used in the work mentioned, where required to be done beyond the reach of one standing on an ordinary surface."
Similarly, in Frick v. O'Hare-Chicago Corp. (1966), 70 Ill. App. 2d 303, 217 N.E.2d 552, the court concluded that a plank upon which the plaintiff worker stood in order to perform assigned construction work and from which he fell was a scaffold, because the plank was several inches high and rested upon boards in a parallel manner which had been placed upon a 14-foot concrete form. More recently, in Ashley v. Osman & Associates, Inc. (1983), 114 Ill. App. 3d 293, 448 N.E.2d 1011, the court determined that a plank across which the plaintiff worker walked and from which he fell while delivering equipment to the jobsite was a support, because it was placed above an area of mud several feet deep. In contrast to these cases, however, courts have concluded that a completed concrete floor area designed for machine equipment was not a scaffold where the plaintiff's injuries resulted from a fall upon the concrete floor while in the act of moving machinery piping from one area of the floor to another (Choi v. Commonwealth Edison Co. (1984), 129 Ill. App. 3d 878), and that a concrete floor was not a scaffold where the plaintiff, while walking across the completed floor area, fell through an opening therein. Tenenbaum v. City of Chicago (1975), 60 Ill. 2d 363, 325 N.E.2d 607; Quinn v. L.B.C., Inc. (1981), 94 Ill. App. 3d 660, 418 N.E.2d 1011.
 4 As these cases demonstrate, courts have looked to three factors to determine whether a structure comes within the scope of the Act: (1) the intended use of the device at the time of the injury; (2) *61 the connection between the injury and the hazardous nature of the device; and (3) the element of danger involved in the use of the structure and whether it was this danger which the legislature sought to alleviate in enacting the statute. Ashley v. Osman & Associates, Inc. (1983), 114 Ill. App. 3d 293, 297-98, 448 N.E.2d 1011.
 5 Upon consideration of these criteria, we conclude that the masonite covering here was not a support under section 1. The masonite did not serve as a working platform about the terra-cotta floor, nor was it intended for this purpose. Instead, it was meant only to protect the finished flooring. Moreover, the hazard of the masonite covering was not that workers would fall off of or through it more easily, but rather that at most they might fall on it, as did Page. Although falling onto masonite floor covering might involve some harm, as Page's injuries demonstrate, such is not the ultrahazardous risk against which the Act seeks to protect.
 6 Page attempts to distinguish the facts presented here from those in Tenenbaum v. City of Chicago (1975), 60 Ill. 2d 363, 325 N.E.2d 607, and Quinn v. L.B.C., Inc. (1981), 94 Ill. App. 3d 660, 418 N.E.2d 1011. In both Quinn and Tenenbaum the courts concluded that based on the facts presented there, the floors upon which the plaintiffs fell and sustained injuries were not scaffolds or supports under the Structural Work Act. Page suggests that Quinn and Tenenbaum are distinguishable because the floors there were completed and left in the form in which they had been designed, while the terra-cotta floor here, although completed, was not left in its finished form but was instead covered with masonite sheets. We find this distinction of no significance, however, as the record establishes that the purpose of the masonite was to serve as a surface floor which protected the terra-cotta directly underneath. "Where, as here, nothing distinguishes a completed floor [and its protective covering] from any other floor as that term is commonly used and understood, but for the fact that a workman chose to stand on it [or walk across it], it is not, as a matter of law, a scaffold [or a support]." Carlson v. Moline Board of Education (1984), 124 Ill. App. 3d 967, 972, 464 N.E.2d 1239.
For the reasons stated, the judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
Affirmed.
JIGANTI, P.J., and JOHNSON, J., concur.

=== CASE 9739614 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:30.36699+00 ===

JUSTICE HEIPLE delivered the opinion of the court: Defendant, Cecil Sutherland, appeals from the denial of his post-conviction petition after an evidentiary hearing in the circuit court of Jefferson County. Because defendant has been sentenced to death, his appeal lies directly to this court. 134 Ill. 2d R. 651(a). We reverse defendant’s convictions and remand for a new trial. FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND Defendant was tried by a jury in 1989 for aggravated kidnapping, aggravated criminal sexual assault, and three counts of murder. The following evidence was presented at'his trial. On July 2, 1987, an oil field worker discovered the nude body of 10-year-old Amy Schultz near an oil lease access road in rural Jefferson County. Amy’s body was lying on its stomach covered with dirt. There were shoeprint impressions on her back. A large, open wound on the right side of her neck exposed her spinal cord. Several pubic hairs were found stuck in her rectal area. On the ground near the body were automobile tire impressions and a shoe impression similar to that on Amy’s back. Her clothes were found strewn along the access road. An autopsy of Amy’s body revealed a wound to the neck extending from her throat to her right ear. Her right eye was hemorrhaged, the base of her ear was torn away from the skin, and her lips were lacerated from compression against her teeth. There were linear abrasions to the outer lips of the vagina and evidence of tearing of the rectal mucosa. Her body also had a fractured rib, torn liver, bruised esophagus, and hemorrhages in the vocal cords and inside the skull. The medical examiner determined that Amy’s attacker had anally penetrated her, strangled her to unconsciousness, slit her throat, and stepped on her body to force exsanguination. Based on her stomach’s gastric contents, the time of death was fixed between 9:30 and 11 p.m. on July 1, 1987. Evidence at trial indicated that Amy was last seen walking alone on a road in Kell, Illinois, at approximately 9:10 to 9:15 p.m. on July 1. Police determined that the tire prints found near the body were consistent with only two types of tires manufactured in North America: the Cooper “Falls Persuader” and the Cooper “Dean Polaris.” Police also ascertained that the shoe prints found on and near the body were made by a boot sold by K mart called the “Texas Steer.” Several months after the crime, police were contacted by law enforcement authorities at Glacier National Park in Montana, where defendant had been arrested for shooting at park rangers. Park authorities reported that defendant’s car had a single Cooper Falls Persuader tire on the right front wheel, and that a pair of Texas Steer boots was found in his possession. Police also discovered that, at the time of Amy’s murder, defendant was living in Dix, Illinois, a few miles from where the body was found. Expert witnesses testified for the State at trial that the tire prints discovered near the body corresponded with the tread from the tire found on defendant’s car in Montana. Expert testimony also indicated that: (1) 34 dog hairs found on Amy’s clothing were consistent with hairs from defendant’s black Labrador and inconsistent with hairs from Amy’s family’s dogs and her neighbors’ dogs; (2) 29 fibers found on Amy’s clothing could have originated from the carpet or upholstery of defendant’s vehicle; and (3) 19 fibers found in defendant’s vehicle could have originated from Amy’s clothing. A forensic scientist also testified for the State that the two pubic hairs recovered from Amy’s rectal area could have originated from defendant, but did not originate from 24 other suspects in the case or from any member of Amy’s family. Defendant’s sister-in-law testified that on the night of the crime, defendant was at her house near Kell until 8 or 8:30 p.m. An expert for the defense testified that most of the clothing fibers recovered from defendant’s vehicle were inconsistent with fibers from Amy’s clothing. The jury convicted defendant on all charges, found him eligible for the death penalty, and determined that there were no mitigating factors sufficient to preclude a sentence of death. The trial court accordingly sentenced defendant to death. On direct appeal, this court held that the prosecution at trial improperly argued before the jury that the hair and fiber evidence conclusively established that Amy Schultz had been in defendant’s car. People v. Sutherland, 155 Ill. 2d 1, 25 (1992). We noted that expert testimony at trial instead indicated merely that hair and fibers from the crime scene were “consistent with” those from defendant’s car. Nevertheless, we held this error to be immaterial because the evidence at trial was not closely balanced. Sutherland, 155 Ill. 2d at 25-26. We thus declined to order a new trial, and affirmed defendant’s convictions and death sentence in all respects. Sutherland, 155 Ill. 2d at 31. Defendant subsequently filed a post-conviction petition in the circuit court raising a variety of claims. The court dismissed most of the claims in the petition, but granted an evidentiary hearing on the following allegations: (1) that defendant’s trial counsel was ineffective in failing to discover and present evidence that defendant’s purchase of “Texas Steer” boots and installation of the Cooper “Falls Persuader” tire on his car both occurred after the date of the crime; (2) that the conviction of Amy’s step-grandfather for sexual abuse subsequent to her death constituted evidence of defendant’s actual innocence; and (3) that the verdict form signed by the jury at sentencing was defective. At the evidentiary hearing, defendant’s mother testified that at the time of Amy Schultz’s murder, defendant wore black lace-up boots that were nearly knee-high. In contrast, she testified, the Texas Steer boots recovered from defendant after his arrest in Montana were tan in color and “above-ankle.” She stated that defendant bought the Texas Steer boots sometime in July after Amy Schultz’s murder, and that she had offered the receipt for this purchase to defendant’s counsel prior to defendant’s original trial. She also testified that defendant changed the two front tires on his car before he left for Montana and after the date of Amy’s murder. The defense called a retired Chicago police officer who testified that at least 75% of homicide victims and child sexual assault victims know their attackers. He testified that in his career as a police investigator, he would typically look for suspects in murder and child sexual assault cases among the victim’s family and friends and among the last persons to have seen the victim alive. He stated that his review of the evidence and the wounds in the instant case had led him to the conclusion that the victim probably knew her attacker. William Willis, Amy Schultz’s step-grandfather, testified that at the time of Amy’s death, he and his wife lived in a house approximately 100 yards from Amy’s house. Because Amy’s parents worked and attended school, he and his wife often took care of Amy and her brothers. On the evening of July 1, 1987, Amy went to Willis’ house to eat blackberries. She was around Willis’ dog that evening. About 8:30 p.m., Amy asked Willis for a ride into Kell, approximately three-fourths of a mile from the house. Willis told her no because he had to go to work and had to do some shopping first. Amy then left, walking on foot toward Kell. A few minutes later, Willis drove over the same road toward Kell, and he waved to Amy as he passed her walking in the same direction he was driving. That was the last time he saw Amy alive. Willis acknowledged that he pled guilty in 1994 to aggravated criminal sexual abuse of a boy in the Boy Scout troop for which he volunteered as a leader. Willis also acknowledged that the presentence investigation report for that crime contained statements from several other minor victims, including Amy’s two brothers, that he had sexually abused them. Willis acknowledged that at his sentencing hearing for the 1994 guilty plea, one of these alleged victims testified that Willis had forced him to have oral and anal sex and that Willis threatened to kill him. Willis testified, however, that there were no allegations that he had ever used weapons or engaged in kidnapping in any of these cases. A mental health counselor and sex offender treatment provider then testified that, based on her research, pedophiles attracted to prepubescent females show a 22% crossover in also molesting males, and those attracted to males show a 62% crossover in also molesting females. She testified that she had reviewed William Willis’ medical and psychological evaluations and had spoken with him briefly. In her opinion, there was a high probability that Willis would cross over from sexually abusing young boys to abusing young girls. She also testified that Willis was prone to outbursts of anger and that when a victim resisted, he used more violent physical force, escalating from fondling to anal rape. Ronald Lawrence, a friend of defendant, testified that he had changed all of the tires on defendant’s car two separate times after Amy Schultz’s death and before defendant left for Montana. Lawrence explained that he and defendant had to change tires frequently because the rock road leading to Lawrence’s house contained metal particles and railroad spikes. Lawrence testified that he told police and the public defender after defendant’s arrest that he had changed the tires on defendant’s car after the date of Amy Schultz’s murder. Lawrence stated that although he was called and did testify as a mitigation witness at defendant’s sentencing hearing, he was not called to testify at the guilt-innocence phase of the trial. Michael Anthis, who investigated the murder of Amy Schultz as captain of detectives for the Jefferson County sheriffs department, testified that he interviewed Ronald Lawrence on July 12, 1988. Anthis testified that, according to his own notes of that interview, Lawrence told him that defendant had been at Lawrence’s house near Iuka, Illinois, from 4 p.m. until 10:30 p.m. the night of July 1, 1987. Anthis testified that he did not provide these notes to either the prosecution or defense attorneys prior to defendant’s trial and that he did not reduce his notes to a typed report because he was aware that defendant had “offered up a different alibi than what Mr. Lawrence was stating.” James Henson testified that he was defendant’s public defender for his trial. Henson testified that although he was aware that authorities in Montana had returned defendant’s Texas Steer boots to defendant’s mother, Henson did not ask for or examine the boots. Henson also testified that although defendant informed him prior to trial that defendant had purchased the boots approximately two months after Amy Schultz’s murder, Henson did not emphasize the boots at trial because he did not think they were important to the case. Henson further testified that before defendant’s trial, he was aware of information, including a statement by defendant’s mother, that the tires on defendant’s car were changed after Amy Schultz’s death, but Henson did not investigate these reports and did not make any arguments at trial concerning the timing of the tires’ installation. Henson also testified that he did not pursue a trial strategy of casting suspicion on William Willis, Amy’s step-grandfather, because he had received a report from the State indicating that the hair and fiber specimens found at the crime scene were inconsistent with samples obtained from Willis. Defendant testified that between July and October 1987, he bought approximately 14 different used tires. He stated that his family lived on a farm and frequently bought used tires for a variety of purposes. In August 1987, he replaced all four of his tires at Ronald Law-pence’s house, and used these tires when he drove to Montana. Defendant also testified that in July of 1987, he typically wore either tennis shoes or over-the-calf engineer boots. In August 1987, before he drove to Montana, he purchased a pair of Texas Steer boots at K mart. Defendant stated that he provided all of this information to his public defender before his trial and offered to provide corroboration of it, such as his receipt for the boots, but the information was not used at trial. The parties agreed to forgo testimony or oral argument on the sufficiency of the verdict form at sentencing and instead to submit only written briefs on that issue. The circuit court subsequently denied the post-conviction petition in all respects, ruling that defendant had failed to establish a substantial deprivation of his constitutional rights. ANALYSIS Defendant contends that the circuit court erred in dismissing the post-conviction petition because his trial counsel was ineffective in failing to present evidence concerning the boot and tire impressions found at the crime scene. Defendant argues that trial counsel should have procured and presented evidence that defendant did not come into possession of the relevant boots and tire until after the crime was committed. Findings entered by a trial court after an evidentiary hearing on a post-conviction petition will be reversed on appeal only if manifestly erroneous. People v. Coleman, 183 Ill. 2d 366, 386 (1998). In order to establish a constitutional claim of ineffective assistance of counsel, a defendant must first show that counsel made errors so serious that counsel was not functioning as the counsel guaranteed by the Constitution. Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 687, 80 L. Ed. 2d 674, 693, 104 S. Ct. 2052, 2064 (1984). Second, defendant must demonstrate a reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been different. Strickland, 466 U.S. at 694, 80 L. Ed. 2d at 698, 104 S. Ct. at 2068. Testimony presented at the post-conviction hearing indicated that, prior to defendant’s trial, defense counsel was aware of evidence that defendant did not own a pair of Texas Steer boots at the time of Amy Schultz’s murder. Specifically, trial counsel testified at the evidentiary hearing that defendant informed him prior to trial that defendant had purchased his Texas Steer boots two months after the crime occurred. Counsel also testified that he was aware that defendant’s mother had the boots in her possession at the time of trial, but that he did not request to examine them. Additionally, defendant’s mother testified that at the time of the murder, defendant typically wore a different kind of boots. The testimony at the post-conviction hearing also indicated that defendant’s trial counsel was aware prior to trial of evidence that defendant had changed the tires on his car after the time of Amy Schultz’s death but before defendant drove to Montana. Specifically, there was substantial testimony presented at the hearing that counsel learned of this information from three different sources: defendant, defendant’s mother, and Ronald Lawrence. Counsel himself acknowledged at the hearing that he was aware of such evidence, but failed to investigate it or present it at trial. We hold that trial counsel was ineffective in failing to investigate and present evidence concerning the boots and tire. Because the State’s evidence at trial consisted primarily of a variety of items introduced to associate defendant with the crime scene, an attack on the suggested links between defendant and the boots and tire could have played a prominent role in the defense. Trial counsel testified at the evidentiary hearing that his main trial strategy was to discredit the expert testimony purportedly tying defendant to the crime. In light of this strategy, it was incumbent on counsel to utilize available means of casting doubt on the physical evidence which the State relied upon. Although counsel sought to convince the jury that the hair and fiber evidence introduced by the State was not conclusive proof of defendant’s guilt, he failed to present the jury with evidence discrediting two of the most salient and significant items in the State’s case. Counsel’s performance thus fell below a reasonable level of assistance. We also find that counsel’s ineffective performance caused substantial prejudice to defendant. Although the State presented numerous items of evidence associating defendant with the crime, none of them was singularly compelling. If counsel had succeeded in raising questions as to whether the boots and tires owned by defendant played any role in the crime committed against Amy Schultz, there is a reasonable probability that the jury also would have doubted at least some of the other physical evidence which the State attempted to link to the crime, and hence quite possibly may have acquitted defendant. CONCLUSION For the above reasons, we conclude that defendant’s convictions must be reversed. In making this determination, we are particularly mindful of our decision in the direct appeal of this case. In that opinion, we held that the prosecution at trial improperly overstated the strength of the fiber-comparison evidence in its arguments to the jury. Sutherland, 155 Ill. 2d at 25. Nevertheless, we held that this error did not warrant reversal because of the substantial evidence linking defendant to the crime. Sutherland, 155 Ill. 2d at 25. The combination, however, of this improper prosecutorial argument and trial counsel’s ineffective assistance now lead us to conclude that the original trial was sufficiently comproraised by error as to vitiate our confidence in its fairness. Because we find the evidence at defendant’s original trial sufficient to support conviction, a second trial will not be barred by constitutional principles of double jeopardy. In so holding, however, we make no conclusion as to defendant’s guilt that will be binding on retrial. See People v. Placek, 184 Ill. 2d 370, 390 (1998). In light of our disposition, we need not address defendant’s remaining contentions on appeal. The judgment of the circuit court is reversed, and the cause is remanded to the circuit court for retrial. Reversed and remanded.

=== CASE 9739615 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:30.372054+00 ===

JUSTICE MILLER, dissenting: The defendant raises a number of contentions in this post-conviction appeal, but the majority considers only two matters, which concern allegations that defense counsel was ineffective for failing to present certain evidence at trial. The post-conviction judge rejected these claims after an evidentiary hearing, and those determinations should be upheld on review unless they are contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. People v. Coleman, 183 Ill. 2d 366, 385 (1998). On the record before us, I do not believe that the defendant has met this standard, and therefore I would affirm the denial of relief under these portions of the defendant’s post-conviction petition. The defendant first argues that trial counsel was ineffective in failing to challenge the State’s contention that he had a preference for the brand of boots whose prints were discovered at the crime scene. The trial evidence showed that the footprints were made by a particular brand, called the “Texas Steer,” sold at K mart stores. The defendant, at the time of his arrest in Montana, was in possession of a pair of Texas Steer boots. Although the latter pair of boots did not make the prints found at the crime scene, the prosecution argued that the defendant’s subsequent ownership of a pair of Texas Steer boots evinced his preference for the brand. The defendant argues, and the majority agrees, that trial counsel should have presented evidence to show that the defendant was wearing boots of a different style and brand around the time of the commission of these offenses. Unlike the majority, I do not believe that counsel’s failure to present the proposed evidence was prejudicial to the defendant under the standard expressed in Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 80 L. Ed. 2d 674, 104 S. Ct. 2052 (1984). A defendant complaining of ineffective assistance of counsel must show both that counsel’s performance was deficient and that the deficiency prejudiced the defendant. Strickland, 466 U.S. at 687, 80 L. Ed. 2d at 693, 104 S. Ct. at 2064. Establishing prejudice requires a defendant to show “that there is a reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been different. A reasonable probability is a probability sufficient to undermine confidence in the outcome.” Strickland, 466 U.S. at 694, 80 L. Ed. 2d at 698, 104 S. Ct. at 2068. Assuming, without deciding, that counsel was deficient in this regard, I do not believe that the defendant has established that he was prejudiced by the asserted error. The relative insignificance of the footprint evidence is apparent from the brief notice it received in this court’s opinion on direct appeal. The court’s opinion mentioned the footprint evidence only once, during a summary of the testimony presented at trial. According to the opinion, the evidence showed that footprints were found on the victim’s back and on the ground nearby, and that the two sets of prints were “similar in design.” People v. Sutherland, 155 Ill. 2d 1, 7 (1992). Notably, in summarizing the trial evidence the opinion did not also mention the defendant’s subsequent possession of boots of the same brand that made the prints, or the prosecution’s theory that the defendant had a preference for boots of that brand. At no other time did the opinion refer to the footprint evidence, and even omitted it from later discussions of the strength of the evidence of guilt in this case. Sutherland, 155 Ill. 2d at 17-18, 25. At trial the State presented strong evidence, apart from that involving the footprints, connecting the defendant to the present offenses. As this court noted on direct review, two pubic hairs removed from the victim’s rectum were consistent in all respects with those from the defendant, but were dissimilar to those of the victim’s family members and 24 other suspects. Gold-colored fibers found on various articles of the victim’s clothing were consistent in all respects with the carpeting in the defendant’s vehicle, but were dissimilar to the carpet samples from the child’s environment. Also, a foreign fiber found in the victim’s shirt was consistent in every respect with fibers from the seat of the defendant’s car, but was dissimilar to sample fibers from the child’s environment. Other evidence showed that fibers found on the front passenger side of the defendant’s vehicle were consistent with fibers from the victim’s shirt and shorts. Dog hairs found on the victim’s clothing were consistent in all characteristics with a standard from the defendant’s dog, and other evidence showed that dog hairs could be found throughout the defendant’s car. Finally, tire impressions found at the crime scene could have been made by the defendant’s car. Sutherland, 155 Ill. 2d at 17-18. The absence from this court’s prior opinion of any discussion of the footprint evidence, beyond an abbreviated reference to the matching prints found at the crime scene, illustrates well its relative lack of importance to the prosecution’s case at trial. Here, the evidence showed only that footprints found at the scene could have been made by a Texas Steer brand boot, and that the defendant was later found to be in possession of a pair of boots of that particular brand. Relying on this evidence, the prosecutor argued that the defendant had a preference for the brand and could have been wearing them when he committed the present offenses. Although there existed evidence that defense counsel could have presented to counter the State’s theory regarding the defendant’s preference for Texas Steer boots, I do not believe that counsel’s failure to introduce this testimony was prejudicial. Because the footprint evidence played only a minor role in the defendant’s trial, and because the remaining evidence provided strong proof of the defendant’s guilt, I would conclude that the defendant was not prejudiced by counsel’s failure to challenge more vigorously the State’s theory about his preferred footwear. In a separate contention, the defendant argues that trial counsel was ineffective for failing to present certain evidence about the tires on his car. At trial, the State introduced testimony showing that tire impressions found at the crime scene were made by either a Cooper “Falls Persuader” or a Cooper “Dean Polaris” tire, and that the tire found on the right front wheel of the defendant’s car at the time of the defendant’s arrest several months later was a Cooper Falls Persuader tire. Investigators were not able to determine whether the defendant’s particular tire had made the impressions. In the present appeal, the majority agrees with the defendant that trial counsel was ineffective for fading to introduce evidence that the defendant changed the tires on his automobile perhaps once, and possibly twice, in the period between the commission of the present offenses and the defendant’s subsequent apprehension in Montana. The evidence presented by the defendant at the post-conviction hearing was contradicted in several important respects, however, and I do not believe that counsel was ineffective for failing to discover and introduce the testimony the defendant now urges. The evidence in question was introduced at the post-conviction hearing through the testimony of Ronald Lawrence, a friend of the defendant. Lawrence testified that he changed a number of tires on the defendant’s car during the period after the commission of the offenses involved here and before the defendant left Illinois for Montana. Lawrence also stated that he had conveyed this same information to defense counsel and to the police some time before trial. In the original proceedings in this case, Lawrence had testified in behalf of the defendant only at the capital sentencing hearing. Officer David Leigh of the Illinois State Police testified that he questioned Ronald Lawrence in October 1987, four months after the present offenses were committed. At that time, Lawrence did not mention changing any tires for the defendant. Leigh questioned Lawrence a number of years later, in 1996, after Lawrence had provided an affidavit stating that he had changed the defendant’s tires. On this occasion, Lawrence said that he had mentioned the changing of the tires to defense counsel, a defense investigator, and a captain with the Jefferson County sheriff’s department. Leigh believed that Lawrence was being prompted by his wife during the interview. The defendant’s trial lawyer, James Henson, testified at the evidentiary hearing that he had one note suggesting that defendant might have purchased tires from someone. Henson denied having any specific evidence to support this, however. A defense investigator, Sherry Gutzler, testified that she did not recall that Lawrence had ever told her that he had changed tires for the defendant. She stated that if he had, she would have attempted to follow up on that lead, regarding it as important. At the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing, the post-conviction judge rejected the defendant’s claims that counsel was ineffective, including the allegation that counsel should have introduced evidence — specifically, Lawrence’s testimony — to show that the defendant had his tires changed at some point after the commission of the present crimes and before his departure for Montana. Lawrence’s testimony did not go unchallenged, and, on this basis, the post-conviction judge could well have concluded that there was reason to doubt the utility of the witness’s testimony at the guilt stage of the proceedings. In addition, there remained strong evidence of the defendant’s guilt. As noted earlier, a post-conviction judge’s determinations made after an evidentiary hearing will be reversed only if they are contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. People v. Coleman, 183 Ill. 2d 366, 385 (1998). I do not see any reason to disturb the post-conviction court’s decision on this issue. Rather than grant the defendant relief on the two questions discussed by the majority, I would uphold those portions of the post-conviction court’s judgment and would consider in this appeal the remaining contentions raised by the defendant but not discussed in the present opinion.

=== CASE 2220490 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:45.016526+00 ===

741 N.W.2d 607 (2007)
STATE of Minnesota, Respondent,
v.
Justin Allen KILMER, Appellant.
No. A06-2052.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
November 20, 2007.
*608 Lori Swanson, Attorney General, St. Paul, MN; and Ronald I. Galstad, Galstad, Jensen & McCann, P.A., East Grand Forks, MN, for respondent.
Thomas V. Omdahl, Omdahl Law Office, Grand Forks, ND, for appellant.
Considered and decided by WRIGHT, Presiding Judge; SHUMAKER, Judge; and STONEBURNER, Judge.
OPINION
SHUMAKER, Judge.
Justin Allen Kilmer appeals from a DWI conviction, arguing that because the arresting officer's only reason for stopping him was that he entered an intersection while the controlling traffic light was yellow, that officer lacked articulable suspicion of criminal activity justifying the stop. The district court held that Minnesota law prohibits drivers from entering an intersection when a traffic light is yellow, and on this basis found the officer's stop was legal. Because we conclude that the district court erred in its reading of the applicable statute, we reverse.
FACTS
In reviewing appellant Justin Allen Kilmer's convictions of driving while impaired and test refusal after a Lothenbach trial, we are asked to determine whether entering an intersection on a yellow traffic signal provides a proper legal basis for a police officer to stop a motor vehicle.
*609 The undisputed dispositive facts show that, at 2:12 a.m. on March 18, 2006, a police officer was parked at an intersection controlled by traffic semaphores in East Grand Forks. The officer watched Kilmer's car enter the intersection while the traffic light for his direction of travel was displaying a steady yellow.
The officer stopped Kilmer and noticed that he smelled strongly of alcohol. After Kilmer failed several field-sobriety tests and a preliminary breath test, the officer arrested him for driving while impaired and charged him with that offense. When Kilmer refused to submit to further testing, he was charged with that offense as well.
The district court rejected Kilmer's challenge of the legality of the stop, concluding that the officer "had probable cause to detain [Kilmer] because [Kilmer] had committed a traffic violation." Relying on a traffic statute and a state supreme court case, the court ruled that Kilmer "could not have entered the intersection lawfully if evidence indicates that he entered the intersection under the yellow warning light."
Kilmer contends that the court's conclusion of law is erroneous because it is not illegal to enter an intersection on a yellow warning light.
ISSUE
Did the district court err by ruling that a police officer had a legally sufficient basis for stopping appellant's motor vehicle when the sole driving conduct the officer observed was appellant's entry into an intersection controlled by traffic semaphores while the signal for appellant's direction of travel was a steady yellow?
ANALYSIS
A law-enforcement officer is permitted to conduct a limited investigatory stop of a motor vehicle if the officer has an objectively reasonable and articulable basis for suspecting the motorist of criminal activity. Berge v. Comm'r of Pub. Safety, 374 N.W.2d 730, 732 (Minn.1985) (citing United States v. Cortez, 449 U.S. 411, 417-18, 101 S. Ct. 690, 694-95, 66 L. Ed. 2d 621 (1981)). Even an insignificant violation of a traffic law can suffice to provide a basis for a legal stop. State v. George, 557 N.W.2d 575, 578 (Minn.1997).
When a stop is premised on an ostensible violation of a traffic law, a mistaken interpretation of that law cannot provide the requisite objective basis for suspecting the motorist of criminal activity, as the Minnesota Supreme Court has held: "Therefore, we hold that an officer's mistaken interpretation of a statute may not form the particularized and objective basis for suspecting criminal activity to justify a traffic stop." State v. Anderson, 683 N.W.2d 818, 823-24 (Minn.2004). This holding applies even if the officer believes, in good faith, that the driving conduct that prompted the stop was illegal. Id. at 824.
We review the district court's determination of the legality of a traffic stop de novo. State v. Britton, 604 N.W.2d 84, 87 (Minn.2000).
The statute on which the district court relied in concluding that Kilmer violated a traffic law when he entered the intersection on a yellow light is Minn.Stat. § 169.06, subd. 5(a)(2)(i) (Supp.2005), which provides that "[v]ehicular traffic facing a circular yellow signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic must not enter the intersection. . . ."
Subdivision 5(a)(2)(i) is one of three directly relevant "traffic-control signal" laws, *610 all found in subdivision 5. Subdivision 5(a)(1)(i) treats the issue of a green light, stating that "[v]ehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left. . . ." And subdivision 5(a)(3)(i) deals with a steady red light, providing that "[v]ehicular traffic facing a circular red signal alone must stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection. . . ."
In concluding that Kilmer violated a traffic law by entering the intersection on a yellow light, the district court erred in two respects. First, the court relied on a case that applied a "yellow-light" statute in effect in 1944, but not in effect at the time of Kilmer's arrest. The court relied on Flitton v. Daleki, 216 Minn. 549, 551, 13 N.W.2d 477, 478 (1944), and quoted its holding that Minn.Stat. § 169.06, subd. 5(b)(1), "prohibits entering an intersection after the yellow or caution light is shown." The version of the yellow-light statute in effect when Flitton was decided contained this prohibitory language: "Yellow alone, or `Caution,' when shown following the green or `Go' signal(1) Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but vehicles within the intersection may be driven cautiously through the intersection." Minn.Stat. § 169.06, subd. 5(b)(1) (1941).
Subdivision 5(b)(1) was amended during the 1947 legislative session, and codified in 1949, to delete the mandate that traffic shall not enter an intersection on a yellow light and to replace it as follows: "Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red or `Stop' signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and such vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red or `Stop' signal is exhibited." Minn.Stat. § 169.06, subd. 5(b)(1) (1949).
The subdivision has been amended three more times since 1947. A 1963 amendment, which was codified in the 1965 Minnesota Statutes, contained warning language that "[v]ehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the intersection." Id. (1965). Unlike the 1949 version, the 1965 version did not prohibit "crossing the intersection when the red or `Stop' signal is exhibited." Id. (1949). In 1969, an amendment retained the language of the 1963 amendment regarding the warning nature of a yellow light but added an exception for proceeding on a red light when a green arrow is exhibited. Id. (1969). Finally, in 2005, the legislature amended the subdivision again but retained all of the language of the 1969 version, except the word "shall" in the phrase "traffic shall not enter the intersection" on a red light was replaced by the word "must." Minn.Stat. § 169.06, subd. 5(a)(2)(i) (Supp.2005).
Thus, the yellow-light statute in effect when Kilmer was arrested, and which is currently in effect, contains no prohibition against entering an intersection on a yellow light but rather discloses the meaning and the advisory-warning nature of that signal.
When a court is called upon to apply a statute to facts, the court must, of course, determine what the statute means. In doing so, the court must simply apply the statute as written when its meaning is plain and clear and free from ambiguity. Minn.Stat. § 645.16 (2006); U.S. Specialty Ins. Co. v. James Courtney Law Office, P.A., 662 N.W.2d 907, 910 (Minn.2003); State v. Soukup, 656 N.W.2d 424, 427 (Minn.App.2003), review denied (Minn. Apr. 29, 2003). Furthermore, statutory *611 language must be viewed in its proper context. See Chiodo v. Bd. of Educ. of Special Sch. Dist. No. 1, 298 Minn. 380, 382, 215 N.W.2d 806, 808 (1974) ("[W]ords of a statute are to be viewed in their setting, not isolated from their context.").
It is true that subdivision 5(a)(2)(i), the yellow-light law, does not indicate expressly whether motorists must stop when a yellow signal is displayed or may continue into an intersection in the face of a yellow-light display. But that omission does not make the subdivision ambiguous, particularly when it is read in the context of its companion green-light and red-light laws. Those laws give the rules for the privilege of proceeding into an intersection and the mandate of stopping before entering the intersection. The yellow-light law is merely advisory, explaining the warning nature of that display. Subject to exceptions provided in the respective subdivisions, motorists can go on green and must not go on red and will receive a warning that a transition from the privilege to go to the mandate to stop is imminent. We find no ambiguity whatsoever in subdivision 5(a)(2)(i), and courts are not permitted to read ambiguities into laws in pursuit of a suggested spirit of the law. Minn.Stat. § 645.16; Mattice v. Minn. Prop. Ins. Placement, 655 N.W.2d 336, 341 (Minn. App.2002), review denied (Minn. Mar. 18, 2003).
Even if subdivision 5(a)(2)(i) might be viewed as ambiguous, making interpretation necessary and appropriate, the task then is to ascertain the legislative intent of the law. Minn.Stat. § 645.16; Conaway v. St. Louis County, 702 N.W.2d 779, 783 (Minn.App.2005); First Nat'l Bank of the N. v. Auto. Fin. Corp., 661 N.W.2d 668, 670 (Minn.App.2003), review denied (Minn. Aug. 5, 2003). Perhaps the history of the subdivision's amendments is the very best indication of legislative intent. Initially, it was illegal to enter an intersection on a yellow light. Minn.Stat. § 169.06, subd. 5(b)(1) (1941). Then the legislature decided to delete that prohibition but added a prohibition against "crossing the intersection when the red or `Stop' signal is exhibited." Id. (1949). Impliedly that law allowed entry on a yellow light but virtually compelled a rapid traverse of the intersection to make it through before the light changed to red. Finally, the legislature enacted the version we have today, which penalizes neither an entry on yellow nor a failure to have completed the crossing before the red signal is displayed. By deleting prohibitory language in those two respects, the legislature evinced its intent not to prohibit such conduct. Thus, we hold that Minn.Stat. § 169.06, subd. 5(a)(2)(i)  the yellow-light traffic law  does not prohibit vehicles from entering an intersection after a steady yellow signal has been displayed. The district court erred in ruling otherwise, and the arresting officer, although without a doubt acting in good faith, was mistaken as to the meaning of the statute upon which he relied for articulable suspicion of criminal activity. Kilmer's convictions must be reversed because the traffic stop that resulted in discovery of the evidence supporting those convictions was improper, and the evidence must be suppressed.
We do not intend to suggest that motorists in all circumstances have a carte blanche privilege to enter an intersection on a yellow light or that there might not be circumstances in which such entry could become illegal. The yellow-light law does not operate in isolation from other traffic laws regarding speed, vehicle control, caution with regard to weather and visibility, following other vehicles, lookout, attention, and numerous other traffic statutes and ordinances. The officer here cited no other driving conduct than Kilmer's entry of *612 the intersection on a yellow light and his failure to cross fully before the light changed to red. That conduct alone, as we hold, is not prohibited.
DECISION
Because we conclude that Minn.Stat. § 169.06, subd. 5(a)(2)(i) (Supp.2005), does not prohibit a driver's entry into an intersection on a steady yellow traffic light, we reverse the district court's determination that a police officer who stopped a car solely on that basis had a legally sufficient reason to make the stop, and we reverse the convictions resulting from the evidence obtained as a result of the stop.
Reversed.

=== CASE 9739616 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:31.674907+00 ===

JUSTICE MILLER delivered the opinion of the court: This appeal considers what procedural rights, if any, a physician has under hospital bylaws when a hospital enters into an exclusive contract with a competing group of physicians for the performance of the same work as the physician performs. In two separate appeals from judgments entered in the circuit court of Cook County, the appellate court concluded that the plaintiff in this case was entitled to notice and a hearing before the hospital entered into an exclusive contract with a competing medical group (Garibaldi v. Applebaum, 273 Ill. App. 3d 536 (1995)), and that the plaintiff may recover damages for the period preceding the hearing that he eventually received on the matter (301 Ill. App. 3d 849). We allowed the defendants’ separate petitions for leave to appeal from the appellate court’s second decision (177 Ill. 2d R. 315(a)), consolidated the appeals for purposes of oral argument and disposition, and now reverse the judgment of the appellate court. The plaintiff, Dr. Abel Garibaldi, is a board-certified cardiovascular surgeon who has had clinical privileges at St. Francis Hospital and Health Center, in Blue Island, since 1981. From 1981 to 1992, the plaintiff was a member of Cardiovascular Renal Consultants (Cardiovascular Renal), a group of physicians who performed, among other services, open-heart procedures at several hospitals in the Chicago area, including St. Francis. Dr. Robert Applebaum, Dr. Tammo Hoeksema, and Dr. Dominic Allocco were also members of Cardiovascular Renal. After internal differences arose over matters involving patient selection, operative procedures, and postoperative care, Cardiovascular Renal dissolved. A new group, defendant Cardiovascular Medical Consultants (Cardiovascular Medical), was later formed by Drs. Applebaum, Hoeksema, Allocco, and others, but it did not include the plaintiff. Dr. Applebaum later entered into an exclusive contract with St. Francis that allowed only Dr. Applebaum, employees of Cardiovascular Medical, and those who subcontracted with Dr. Applebaum to perform open heart surgery at St. Francis. According to the plaintiffs subsequent complaint, the effect of this exclusive contract was to revoke his right to perform open-heart procedures at St. Francis without affording him the benefit of notice and a hearing, in violation of the hospital’s then-current bylaws. Article VII, section 3(c), of the hospital bylaws, “Corrective Action,” states in part: “Actions which limit, reduce, suspend or revoke membership or clinical privileges of a practitioner on the staff of the Hospital or revoke staff membership shall be deemed to be adverse to the practitioner and shall entitle the practitioner to notice and the hearing and appeal procedures as provided in Article VIII. These actions include: (2) Reduction, suspension or revocation of clinical privileges and/or admitting privileges; *** (4) Suspension or revocation of specific clinical privileges or Staff membership; (5) Other similar actions. Such actions constitute a recommendation by the Executive Committee to the Governing Body.” Additionally, article VIII of the hospital bylaws, “Hearing and Appellate Review Procedure,” states in part: “a. Any practitioner against whom an adverse recommendation has been made and which involves corrective action set out in Article VII, Section 3(c) shall have the right to request a hearing on the adverse recommendation under the terms and procedures described in this Article.” The initial exclusive contract between St. Francis and Dr. Applebaum took effect on January 1, 1993. The plaintiff commenced the present action on January 26, 1993, by filing a three-count complaint in the circuit court of Cook County. Count I of the complaint was directed against St. Francis, Cardiovascular Medical, and Drs. Applebaum, Hoeksema, and Allocco and sought declaratory and injunctive relief. Count I alleged that St. Francis, by entering into an exclusive contract with Dr. Applebaum, effectively revoked the plaintiff’s clinical privileges without notice and a hearing, as required by articles VII and VIII of the hospital bylaws. Count II of the plaintiff’s complaint alleged tortious interference with contractual rights and sought damages from Cardiovascular Medical and the defendant doctors. Count III of the complaint alleged breach of contract and sought damages from St. Francis. A judge in the chancery division granted the defendants’ motion for summary judgment on count I and transferred counts II and III to the law division; the judge found no just reason for delaying enforcement or appeal of the judgment entered on count I (155 Ill. 2d R. 304(a)). The plaintiff appealed from the ruling on count I, and the appellate court reversed the entry of summary judgment and remanded the cause for further proceedings. Garibaldi v. Applebaum, 273 Ill. App. 3d 536 (1995). The appellate court found that the hospital’s decision to enter into the exclusive contract with Cardiovascular Medical effectively reduced or revoked the plaintiffs privileges at St. Francis, and the court believed that the plaintiff was therefore entitled to the notice and hearing procedures contained in articles VII and VIII of the hospital bylaws. Garibaldi, 273 Ill. App. 3d at 540. This court denied the defendants’ petitions for leave to appeal. Garibaldi v. Applebaum, 164 Ill. 2d 562 (1995). With regard to counts II and III, a circuit judge in the law division granted the defendants’ motions for summary judgment on those counts. The judge found that the hospital bylaws did not create a contractual relationship between the hospital and the plaintiff. The judge also concluded that, even if the bylaws were applicable, they were not breached when the hospital entered into an exclusive contract with Cardiovascular Medical without first providing the plaintiff with notice and a hearing. The plaintiff appealed from that ruling; the appeal remained lodged in the appellate court until it was later joined by the plaintiffs further appeal after the remand of count I. During the pendency of the plaintiffs appeal from the entry of summary judgment on count I, the legislature amended the Hospital Licensing Act in a manner relevant to this case. See Pub. Act 88 — 654, eff. January 1, 1995 (amending 210 ILCS 85/10.4 (West 1992)). The amendment directed hospitals that contemplate exclusive contracts with professional groups to adopt bylaws that specifically provide for notice and hearing procedures for practitioners whose privileges will be affected by the contracts. 210 ILCS 85/10.4 (West 1996). To comply with the new statutory provision, St. Francis amended its bylaws; the hospital’s governing body approved article IX of the bylaws, “Hearing Opportunity Before Implementation of Exclusive Hospital Contracts,” on July 24, 1995. Article IX states in part: “Section 1. Notice to Other Practitioners When the hospital enters into an exclusive contract with one or more practitioners, it shall give written notice of the effect of the exclusive contract to all other practitioners who hold specific clinical privileges which will, thereafter, be provided pursuant to the exclusive contract. Such notice shall be given not less than sixty (60) days before the exclusive contract takes effect. Section 2. Who Is an Affected Practitioner An Affected Practitioner is any Practitioner who, at the date of the notice: (a) Holds a clinical privilege which shall become subject to the exclusive contract; (b) Has exercised that clinical privilege at the Hospital within one (1) year prior to the notice; (c) Has not been offered the opportunity to exercise that clinical privilege at the Hospital either as a party to the exclusive contract or under an arrangement with the providers who are themselves parties to the exclusive contract ***.” Before the issuance of the appellate court’s mandate in the first appeal, St. Francis notified the plaintiff, on October 12, 1995, that it had entered into a second exclusive contract with Dr. Applebaum, effective December 13, 1995, and that the plaintiff was an affected practitioner under the new provisions of article IX of the bylaws. The plaintiff timely requested a hearing pursuant to article IX. Following the hearing, a panel of three physicians concluded that it was “in the best interest of patient care and hospital administration” for St. Francis to enter into the exclusive contract with Cardiovascular Medical. The report also recommended that, whenever an exclusive contract is entered into, the hospital should exempt from the consequences of the contract practitioners who have had clinical privileges for at least one year before the effective date of the contract. After considering the panel’s recommendations, the hospital’s governing board decided to adopt the exclusive contract without modification and rejected the “grandfather” provision recommended by the hearing panel. After the article IX hearing, and while the cause was on remand from the appellate court’s first decision, involving count I, the trial court allowed the plaintiff to amend his complaint by adding counts IV and Y, which sought injunctive relief prohibiting enforcement of the 1995 exclusive contract and a judgment declaring that St. Francis had no right to reject the hearing panel’s recommendation without explanation. St. Francis filed a motion to dismiss as moot count I, which the appellate court had remanded for further proceedings. Because St. Francis had conducted a hearing on the 1995 exclusive contract in compliance with article IX of the bylaws, the trial court dismissed as moot what the parties termed “the injunction case.” Although the trial judge commented on several questions concerning the nature of the hearing, which was at issue in counts IV and V of the amended complaint, he did not expressly rule on those counts. The plaintiff then appealed. At this point, the plaintiff had two appeals pending in the appellate court: his appeal from the order entering summary judgment on counts II and III of the original complaint, and his appeal from the ruling of the circuit court, on remand from the first appeal, dismissing “the injunction case” as moot. The appellate court consolidated the two appeals. 301 Ill. App. 3d 849. The appellate court affirmed the trial court’s dismissal of the portion of the amended complaint seeking injunctive relief. The appellate court found that the article IX hearing that had been provided to the plaintiff made moot his original request for a hearing under article VIII of the bylaws. 301 Ill. App. 3d at 855. With respect to the plaintiffs claims for damages in counts II and III of the original complaint, the appellate court reversed the law division judge’s grant of summary judgment for the defendants. The appellate court found that the plaintiff was entitled to pursue claims for damages stemming from the hospital’s failure to provide him with notice and a hearing before the hospital and Cardiovascular Medical entered into the original exclusive contract. The appellate court reaffirmed its holding in the first appeal that the hospital bylaws created a contractual relationship and that the plaintiffs staff privileges had been effectively revoked by the hospital’s action in entering into the exclusive contract with Cardiovascular Medical. The appellate court also rejected the defendants’ various contentions that they could not be liable for damages for the failure to provide the plaintiff with notice and a hearing. The appellate court therefore remanded counts II and III of the plaintiffs original complaint to the circuit court for further proceedings. The appellate court did not consider the merits of the remaining counts of the plaintiffs amended complaint, counts TV and V, believing that the circuit court had failed to rule on those counts. The appellate court remanded the cause to the trial court with directions to address those counts. 301 Ill. App. 3d at 856. We allowed the defendants’ separate petitions for leave to appeal. 177 Ill. 2d R. 315(a). We later granted leave to the Illinois State Medical Society and the Illinois Hospital & HealthSystems Association to submit briefs as amici curiae in behalf of the parties. 155 Ill. 2d R. 345. We need not consider in this case whether the hospital’s bylaws are a contract, for we find a threshold issue to be dispositive of this appeal. In the first appeal, the appellate court held that the plaintiffs right to notice and a hearing under articles VII and VIII of the bylaws was triggered by the hospital’s decision to enter into an exclusive contract with Cardiovascular Medical. Garibaldi, 273 Ill. App. 3d at 540. The defendants challenge that conclusion here, arguing that the bylaws, as they then existed, did not provide the plaintiff with any remedy in these circumstances. The plaintiff responds that the appellate court’s first determination is the law of the case and that our consideration of the issue is therefore barred. We do not agree. Contrary to the plaintiffs contention, the law of the case doctrine does not preclude us from reviewing this question, which was resolved by the appellate court in the first appeal but which has not previously been considered on its merits by this court in the course, of this litigation. See Sjostrom v. Sproule, 33 Ill. 2d 40, 41 (1965); Zerulla v. Supreme Lodge Order of Mutual Protection, 223 Ill. 518, 520 (1906). This court explained the operation of the law of the case doctrine in Relph v. Board of Education of DePue Unit School District No. 103, 84 Ill. 2d 436, 442 (1981): “Even if the appellate court were bound by the law of the case it had announced in the first appeals, that limitation would not apply to this court. Although this court denied petitions for leave to appeal in both of the previous appeals of these cases, such action has no precedential effect and in no way amounts to a consideration of the merits of the cases. Nor does it indicate approval of the appellate court’s action. (People v. Vance (1979), 76 Ill. 2d 171, 183.) Therefore, this is the first time these cases have been before us on the merits. Our review may cover all matters properly raised and passed on in the course of litigation. (Weiland Tool & Manufacturing Co. v. Whitney (1969), 44 Ill. 2d 105, 113-14.) In Vendo Co. v. Stoner (1974), 58 Ill. 2d 289, 306, this court held that the law of the case is not applicable to this court in reviewing the judgment of the appellate court.” The present appeal marks this court’s first opportunity to consider, on the merits, whether the hospital’s decision to enter into an exclusive contract with Cardiovascular Medical triggered the plaintiff’s right to notice and a hearing under articles VII and VIII of the hospital bylaws. For the reasons explained in Relph, we do not believe that the doctrine of law of the case precludes us from addressing this issue, even though it was resolved by the appellate court in the plaintiffs first appeal. We now turn to that question. The plaintiff contends that the hospital’s exclusive contract with Cardiovascular Medical effectively revoked his privileges to perform open heart surgery at St. Francis and that the hospital’s actions are subject to judicial review to determine whether he was afforded the necessary notice and hearing procedures in compliance with the hospital’s bylaws. The plaintiff contends further that he may recover damages for the hospital’s failure to provide him with notice and a hearing. In this case, we do not believe that the plaintiff suffered a revocation, suspension, or reduction of his clinical privileges within the meaning of the hospital bylaws. By the terms of the bylaws, clinical privileges are defined as “the permission to provide medical or other patient care services in the Hospital within well-defined limits, based on the individual’s professional license, experience, competence, ability and judgment.” The granting of privileges, therefore, signifies that a doctor is qualified to practice at the hospital. There is no doubt, in this case, that St. Francis has determined that the plaintiff is qualified, and that determination is embodied in the privileges the plaintiff has been granted. The right to exercise those privileges, however, is a separate matter that may be affected by a host of hospital administrative decisions that are wholly unrelated to the doctor’s professional competence or ethics. For example, a hospital may decide, for economic reasons, that it will no longer offer a particular medical specialty. Although the practical effect of that decision may be to curtail or even eliminate a practitioner’s ability to exercise his or her privileges at the particular facility, the hospital’s decision does not also signify that it has reduced or terminated the practitioner’s privileges under its bylaws. Indeed, the hospital’s decision would have nothing to do with the practitioner’s competence to practice, which forms the central inquiry when privileges are reduced or terminated. See Engelstad v. Virginia Municipal Hospital, 718 F.2d 262, 267 (8th Cir. 1983). In this case, the plaintiff fails to distinguish between his privileges and his ability to exercise those privileges in a “closed” environment. This distinction was illustrated by the court of appeals in Collins v. Associated Pathologists, Ltd., 844 F.2d 473, 481 (7th Cir. 1988), which stated: “Dr. Collins also asserts that St. John’s [Hospital] wrongfully removed or reduced his staff privileges in violation of the by-laws of the hospital. However, the record reflects that St. John’s has neither removed nor reduced Dr. Collins’ staff privileges. *** Staff privileges reflect the hospital’s decision that a physician is qualified to practice in the facility, but do not in and of themselves confer employment. Employment as a pathologist at St. John’s was determined by the legal contract between St. John’s and APL [the exclusive contractor], [Citation.] Although without concurrent employment by St. John’s as a pathologist these staff privileges may be of little or no value to Dr. Collins, the fact remains that the privileges were neither removed nor reduced.” Articles VII and VIII of the St. Francis bylaws do not pertain to or control administrative decisions, such as the formation of exclusive contracts, but concern instead matters of professional competence and ethical conduct. More specifically, the remedies afforded by articles VII and VIII are available to a doctor who is facing “corrective action.” Article VII, section 3(c), entitles a practitioner to notice and to the hearing and appeal procedures of article VIII when an action limits, reduces, suspends, or revokes membership or clinical privileges of that practitioner on the medical staff. Article VII, by its terms, applies only to “corrective actions.” Moreover, article VIII specifically states that “[a]ny practitioner against whom an adverse recommendation has been made and which involves corrective action set out in Article VII, Section 3(c) shall have the right to request a hearing on the adverse recommendation under the terms and procedures described in this Article.” Thus, in order for a practitioner to request a hearing under article VIII, both an adverse recommendation and corrective action must be present. In this case, however, the record fails to disclose any “corrective action” initiated by St. Francis against the plaintiff. The hospital’s decision to enter into an exclusive contract cannot be deemed corrective action; rather, that decision affected not only the plaintiff, but also any other physician who had privileges at St. Francis and who was not a member of Cardiovascular Medical or working under subcontract with Dr. Applebaum. For these reasons, we do not believe that the plaintiff was entitled to the notice and hearing procedures provided by articles VII and VIII of the hospital bylaws. Further support for this conclusion may be found in the subsequent addition of the notice and hearing requirements of article IX of the bylaws for actions like the one involved here. As we have found, prior to the legislature’s amendment of section 10.4 of the Hospital Licensing Act (210 ILCS 85/10.4 (West 1994)) and the hospital’s ensuing adoption of article IX, the hospital bylaws did not explicitly grant the plaintiff the right to notice and a hearing in these circumstances. It was only after the legislature amended section 10.4 of the Hospital Licensing Act and the hospital amended its bylaws that notice and a hearing became expressly necessary whenever the hospital entered into an exclusive contract. An amendment to a statute gives rise to a presumption that the amendment was intended to change the law. Illinois v. Mikusch, 138 Ill. 2d 242, 252 (1990). The legislature’s enactment of this particular requirement suggests to us that the legislation effected a change in the law. Because the hospital found it necessary to amend its bylaws in response to the new legislation, one may also infer that the hospital bylaws, prior to that time, did not already contain a similar requirement. Finally, we note that our result in this case is consistent with the results reached by a number of other courts that have addressed similar issues involving a medical staff member’s procedural rights prior to a hospital’s entry into an exclusive contract with a competitor. See Engelstad v. Virginia Municipal Hospital, 718 F.2d 262 (8th Cir. 1983); Dutta v. St. Francis Regional Medical Center, Inc., 254 Kan. 690, 867 E2d 1057 (1994); Bartley v. Eastern Maine Medical Center, 617 A.2d 1020 (Me. 1992); Holt v. Good Samaritan Hospital & Health Center, 69 Ohio App. 3d 439, 590 N.E.2d 1318 (1990). As a rule, courts exercise only a limited form of review in cases involving medical staffing decisions. Barrows v. Northwestern Memorial Hospital, 123 Ill. 2d 49 (1988); Knapp v. Palos Community Hospital, 176 Ill. App. 3d 1012 (1988). In Adkins v. Sarah Bush Lincoln Health Center, 129 Ill. 2d 497, 506-07 (1989), this court explained: “[T]here is, in cases involving private hospital staff privileges, a ‘rule of non-review’ under which, as a matter of public policy, internal staffing decisions of private hospitals are not subject *** to judicial review. [Citations.] An exception exists when the decision involves a revocation, suspension or reduction of existing staff privileges. In such cases, the hospital’s action is subject to a limited judicial review to determine whether the decision made was in compliance with the hospital’s bylaws. [Citations.] The judicial reluctance to review these internal staff decisions reflects the unwillingness of courts to substitute their judgment for the professional judgment of hospital officials with superior qualifications to consider and decide such issues. [Citations.]” Because we conclude that the plaintiff, in this case, has not suffered a revocation, suspension, or reduction of his privileges, we decline to review the internal staffing decision of St. Francis. See Adkins, 129 Ill. 2d at 506-07. Applying the rule of limited judicial review, we conclude the St. Francis substantially followed its medical staff bylaws in existence when the hospital first entered into the exclusive contract. In sum, because plaintiff’s privileges were not revoked, reduced, or suspended by St. Francis entering into the contract, under the rule of non-review, we decline to consider further St. Francis’ decision to enter into that exclusive contract. We make no determination regarding counts IV and V of the plaintiffs amended complaint challenging the fairness of the article EX hearing and the hospital’s refusal to follow the hearing panel recommendation that plaintiff should be exempted from the effects of the exclusive contract. For the reasons stated, the judgment of the appellate court, affirming the trial court’s dismissal of count I, is affirmed. The judgment of the appellate court, reversing the grant of summary judgment on counts II and III, is reversed. The cause is remanded to the circuit court of Cook County for further proceedings to address counts IV and V of the plaintiffs amended complaint. Appellate court judgment affirmed in part and reversed in part; cause remanded. JUSTICE RATHJE took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.

=== CASE 9739617 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:31.679516+00 ===

JUSTICE HEIPLE, specially concurring: I agree with the court’s disposition of this case. However, I further believe that its underlying analysis may need clarification. Plaintiff argued to this court, inter alia, that St. Francis Hospital’s exclusive contract with his former partners effectively revoked his privileges to practice at that hospital, giving rise to a right of notice and hearing on that revocation under St. Francis’ bylaws. The majority rejects this assertion, likening the exclusive contract to a hospital’s decision to discontinue an entire field of medical practice. 194 Ill. 2d at 448-51. My concern is that this analysis, as written, might be read to give carte blanche authority to a hospital to avoid obligations assumed under its bylaws to provide notice and a hearing before revoking a physician’s privileges, simply by entering into exclusive contracts. It is conceivable that, under a different set of facts, a plaintiff doctor might show that an exclusive contract was entered into by the hospital simply to revoke a physician’s privileges, as an end run around the notice and hearing obligations of its bylaws in order to get rid of him. Except for this caveat, I fully join the majority’s opinion. Because the facts in this particular case do not support an impropriety on the hospital’s part, I agree that plaintiff was not entitled to the notice and hearing procedures provided by the hospital bylaws.

=== CASE 2220494 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:45.181712+00 ===

742 N.E.2d 401 (2000)
318 Ill.App.3d 390
252 Ill. Dec. 151
Samantha WROBEL and Kim Borias, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
CITY OF CHICAGO, Defendant-Appellee.
No. 1-99-2867.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Third Division.
December 27, 2000.
*403 John J. Dwyer, Jr., Chicago, Attorney for Appellants.
Mara S. Georges, Corporation Counsel of the City of Chicago, Chicago (Lawrence Rosenthal; Benna Ruth Solomon; and Joseph H. Kim, of counsel), Attorneys for Appellee.
Justice CERDA delivered the opinion of the court:
This action was brought by plaintiffs, Samantha Wrobel and Kim Borias, to recover damages for personal injuries sustained as result of an automobile accident occurring on a state highway maintained by defendant, the City of Chicago. The accident in question was allegedly caused when a third-party, who is not a party to this appeal, lost control of his vehicle after striking a pothole in the roadway, and the vehicle veered into oncoming traffic in which plaintiffs were traveling. Plaintiffs appeal the order of the circuit court entering summary judgment in favor of the City on the ground that it was immunized from liability pursuant to the Local Government and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act (Act) (745 ILCS 10/2-201 (West 1998)). For the following reasons, we affirm.
Plaintiffs were injured on January 14, 1997, when the vehicle that Wrobel was operating and in which Borias was a passenger collided with a vehicle being operated by Joseph Bosh on the 7300 block of South Kedzie Avenue in the Chicago. Immediately before the accident, plaintiffs were traveling south on Kedzie, while Bosh was traveling north. Bosh claimed the accident occurred when his vehicle careened out of control into oncoming traffic after striking a pothole in the road. Bosh did not see the pothole in question before the crash, but upon returning to the immediate area of the accident at some later unspecified date, he observed a four-foot by six-foot depression in the road, which had been patched over. Bosh identified this depression to be the pothole that caused his vehicle to veer out of control.
The 7300 block of South Kedzie is a state highway owned by the State of Illinois. Pursuant to a formal agreement with the State, the City receives state funds to perform maintenance work, including pothole repair, on the area of Kedzie involved in this case, as well as numerous other stretches of state highways within its limits. The record materials show that City workers had repaired potholes in the 7300 block of South Kedzie on January 10, 1997, four days before the accident. City worksheets reveal that the crew conducting repairs on January 10 was headed by foreman Michael Colianne.
During the winter months, crews are deployed by the City to canvass roadways under the City's maintenance and fill potholes in need of repair. These crews generally consist of a foreman, a raker, a roller, and two laborers. A supervisor with the asphalt division of the City's Department of Transportation coordinates the crew foremen and specifies the roadway areas where each crew will conduct pothole repairs. Each foreman then plans the route the crew will undertake through the daily grid and supervises the crew members during their work. The foreman is typically not involved in the physical work involved in repairing any pothole.
The particular asphalt mixture used by the City to repair potholes depends on the time of the year during which the repair efforts are undertaken. In warmer weather, the City fills potholes with a "hot mix." As was explained by various City workers, a hot mixture forms a durable and a relatively long lasting patch. In colder weather, however, the City uses a "cold mix", which is not as durable and dependable as a hot mixture. Depending on a number of *404 various extraneous factors occurring after its application, such as the weather, traffic patterns and frequency of plowing, a cold mix patch may fail quite rapidly. The record testimony of several foremen and crew workers demonstrates that the City elects to utilize a cold mixture instead of a hot mix in winter weather because a hot mixture will typically settle during transportation due to the low temperatures and, as a consequence, are generally unusable. Due to this situation, the City employs cold mixtures in the winter as a temporary fix, and then later uses the more durable hot mix when the weather permits.
The manner in which the cold mixture is applied in winter differs among the various repair crews. In particular part, the crews do not follow any uniform approach of handling asphalt debris and water within a pothole to be repaired. Some crews make no attempt to remove loose asphalt and moisture, particularly water, from a pothole before a cold mixture is applied, while other crews undertake such efforts. For instance, Michael Colianne stated the workers under his supervision specifically attempt to remove residual asphalt, snow, ice, and water from a pothole "as much as possible" before applying a cold mixture. Colianne explained the presence of loose asphalt and moisture will adversely affect the adhesive quality of the patch, and stated that such removal efforts are necessary to ensure a durable repair.
The affidavit of Boris Dragunsky, a licensed engineer with a doctorate degree in construction materials technology, was submitted by plaintiffs to show that Colianne's practice is the proper method of pothole repair. According to Dragunsky, substrate preparation is essential for effective pothole repair. Dragunsky explains that the presence of moisture or water in the substrate will insure the rapid failure of any repair, and that the mixing of old asphalt aggregate with a cold mix will similarly contribute to a rapid deterioration of the patch. Dragunsky maintains that effective repair of a pothole with use of a cold mix requires removal of all moisture, water and residual asphalt aggregate from the pothole.
Plaintiffs' theory of negligence against the City is not entirely clear. Plaintiffs assert that in light of the City's documented repair efforts, no open and unrepaired potholes, especially one measuring four-by-six feet, presumably existed in the 7300 block of South Kedzie at the conclusion of the work day on January 10, 1997. Plaintiffs maintain the pothole purportedly struck by Bosh on January 14, 1997, must then have developed within the four-day period preceding the accident. Plaintiffs claim that "the rapid appearance of the condition gives rise to an inference that a prior repair failed rapidly" and "that, in turn, gives rise to an inference that the repairs were done improperly." According to plaintiffs, the improper repair by the workers ensured the rapid failure of the patch, and consequently caused the dangerous condition confronted by Bosh.[1]
We glean from plaintiffs' assertions two distinct theories of liability. First, plaintiffs seem to claim that the laborers working under Colianne's supervision on January 10, 1997 failed to remove an adequate amount of residual asphalt and moisture from the pothole that was struck by Bosh *405 before applying the cold mix compound. In an apparent alternative theory, plaintiffs seem to contend that the same workers wholly failed in the first instance to follow the application procedure prescribed by Colianne and made no attempt to remove any loose asphalt or moisture.
The purpose of summary judgment under section 2-1005 of the Code is to determine whether there exist any genuine issues of material fact between the parties. Hubble v. O'Connor, 291 Ill.App.3d 974, 979, 225 Ill. Dec. 825, 684 N.E.2d 816, 820 (1997). Summary judgment is appropriate only where the pleadings, depositions, and admissions on file, together with any affidavits, present no issue of material fact and show that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. 735 ILCS 5/2-1005(c) (West 1998); Benamon v. Soo Line Railroad Company, 294 Ill.App.3d 85, 87, 228 Ill. Dec. 494, 689 N.E.2d 366, 369 (1997). Our review of an order granting summary judgment in favor of a party is conducted de novo (Benamon, 294 Ill. App.3d at 88, 228 Ill. Dec. 494, 689 N.E.2d at 369 (1997)), and we will construe all pleadings, depositions and affidavits in a light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Soderlund Brothers, Inc. v. Carrier Corp., 278 Ill.App.3d 606, 614, 215 Ill. Dec. 251, 663 N.E.2d 1, 7 (1995).
In its motion for summary judgment, the City argues, in relevant part, it is immune from the asserted negligence of its workers under sections 2-201 of the Act. That provision provides:
"[e]xcept as otherwise provided by Statute, a public employee serving in a position involving the determination of policy or the exercise of discretion is not liable for an injury resulting from his act or omission in determining policy when acting in the exercise of such discretion even though abused." 745 ILCS 10/2-201 (West 1998).
By virtue of section 2-109 of the Act, immunity is granted to a public entity for the acts or omissions of its employees where the employees are not liable. 745 ILCS 10/2-109 (West 1998).
As explained by our supreme court, the immunity provided by section 2-201 extends to any employee who holds either a position involving the determination of policy or a position involving the exercise of discretion. Harinek v. 161 North Clark Street Ltd. Partnership, 181 Ill. 2d 335, 341, 230 Ill. Dec. 11, 692 N.E.2d 1177, 1181 (1998). For immunity to attach, though, the complained of injuries must have resulted from an act or omission by the employee in determining policy and exercising discretion. The act or omission giving rise to the injuries must be both a determination of policy and an exercise of discretion. Harinek, 181 Ill.2d at 341, 230 Ill. Dec. 11, 692 N.E.2d at 1181.
The term "policy" when used in relation to the decisions of a public entity have been defined as "those decisions which require the municipality to balance competing interests and to make a judgment call as to what solution will best serve each of those interests." Harinek, 181 Ill.2d at 342, 230 Ill. Dec. 11, 692 N.E.2d at 1181, quoting West v. Kirkham, 147 Ill. 2d 1, 11, 167 Ill. Dec. 974, 588 N.E.2d 1104, 1109 (1992); see also Harrison v. Hardin County Community Unit School District No. 1, 313 Ill.App.3d 702, 706, 246 Ill. Dec. 381, 730 N.E.2d 61, 65 (2000) ("policy determination" is one requiring "considered evaluation and judgment by a governmental unit, utilizing its own particular expertise, to formulate principles and procedures directed toward the achievement of common and general goals for the community's benefit" during which "several factors, including the public benefit, the practicability of the plan or procedure, and the best methods to be employed considering available resources, costs, and safety, must be considered").
Acts deemed "discretionary" have been defined as those which are unique to a particular public office (Snyder v. Curran Township, 167 Ill. 2d 466, 474, 212 Ill. Dec. 643, 657 N.E.2d 988, 993 (1995)), and involve *406 the exercise of personal deliberation and judgment in deciding whether to perform a particular act, or how and in what manner that act should be performed. D.M. v. National School Bus Service, Inc., 305 Ill.App.3d 735, 739, 238 Ill. Dec. 950, 713 N.E.2d 196, 200 (1999); Bonnell v. Regional Board of School Trustees, 258 Ill.App.3d 485, 489, 196 Ill. Dec. 612, 630 N.E.2d 547, 549 (1994).
Plaintiffs' first theory of liability focuses on the adequacy of the efforts undertaken by Colianne's workers in removing residual asphalt and moisture from the pothole at issue in this case. Plaintiffs specifically suggest the workers failed to extract a sufficient amount of asphalt and moisture from the depression before applying the cold mixture and, as a result, compromised the durability of the patch. Under the circumstances presented, we find that section 201 of the Act cloaks the City with immunity under this theory.
Contrary to plaintiffs' contention, the laborers in Colianne's crew hold positions that require them to both determine policy and exercise discretion. These workers are directed by Colianne to remove "as much" loose asphalt and existing moisture in a pothole "as possible" before applying the cold mixture. While they are obligated to undertake such measure pursuant to the express directive of their foreman, the workers enjoy discretion in determining how much asphalt and moisture should be actually extracted and whether that amount is indeed adequate to ensure a durable patch.
The decisions of the workers in this regard can also fairly be characterized as policy determinations. When confronted with a particular stretch of roadway, the workers must necessarily be concerned with the efficiency in which they prepare any potholes for repair. Specifically, the workers must allocate their time and resources among the various potholes that will be repaired, and they must ensure that not too much time is dedicated to pothole preparation. The more time and resources the workers devote to preparing potholes for a patch, the less time and resources they have available to repair the other potholes existing throughout their daily grid.
For the same reasons discussed above, the extent of the workers' removal efforts represent both a determination of policy and an exercise of discretion. The degree to which a pothole should be prepared, and specifically how much loose asphalt and moisture will be removed, is a matter of a worker's personal judgment, and encompassed within that judgment are the policy considerations of time and resource allocation during a given workday.
Plaintiffs strenuously argue that the physical acts of the workers are not discretionary but rather ministerial. Only discretionary acts are extended immunity under the Act, and a public entity will not be protected for the acts of their agents that are ministerial in character. The classification of acts as either discretionary or ministerial escape any precise formulation and must be made on a case-by-case basis in light of the particular facts and circumstances presented. Snyder, 167 Ill.2d at 474, 212 Ill. Dec. 643, 657 N.E.2d at 992-93.
Despite the ad hoc nature of this determination, the law deems discretionary acts as those that are unique to a particular public office (Snyder, 167 Ill.2d at 474, 212 Ill. Dec. 643, 657 N.E.2d at 993), and involve the making of a decision about whether or how to perform a particular act following the exercise of personal deliberation and judgment. D.M., 305 Ill.App.3d at 739, 238 Ill. Dec. 950, 713 N.E.2d at 200; Bonnell, 258 Ill.App.3d at 489, 196 Ill. Dec. 612, 630 N.E.2d at 549.
In contrast, ministerial acts are those which a person performs on a given state of facts in a prescribed manner, in obedience to the mandate of legal authority, and without reference to the official's discretion as to the propriety of the act. *407 Snyder, 167 Ill.2d at 474, 212 Ill. Dec. 643, 657 N.E.2d at 993. That is, ministerial acts are those acts that are "absolute, certain and imperative, involving merely the execution of a set task" so that "nothing remains for judgment or discretion." In re Chicago Flood Litigation, 176 Ill. 2d 179, 194, 223 Ill. Dec. 532, 680 N.E.2d 265, 272 (1997), quoting City of Chicago v. Seben, 165 Ill. 371, 377-78, 46 N.E. 244 (1897).
The acts and omissions complained of by plaintiffs cannot be classified as ministerial under the facts and circumstances of this case. As discussed above, the workers enjoy the discretion to determine how much residual asphalt and moisture to remove from potholes. The plaintiffs' correctly note that the workers have no discretion to decide whether or not to follow the preparation approach adopted by Colianne, and are under the obligation to attempt to remove as much asphalt and moisture as possible. However, the amount of asphalt and moisture actually removed and determined to be sufficient is left to the personal judgment of the workers. As noted by our supreme court, depending on the circumstances of the particular case, an act that might be considered a repair can be a discretionary matter. Chicago Flood Litigation, 176 Ill.2d at 195, 223 Ill. Dec. 532, 680 N.E.2d at 273. Plaintiffs' assertion would find stronger support if Colianne directed his workers to remove all loose asphalt and existing moisture from a pothole. But that is not the situation presented by the record. Rather, by virtue of the actual directive given by Colianne, the workers retained a degree of discretion in performing their duties. It is this fact that primarily distinguishes the instant matter from that presented in Herman v. Will Township, 284 Ill.App.3d 53, 219 Ill. Dec. 688, 671 N.E.2d 1141 (1996), upon which plaintiffs place heavy reliance.
Plaintiffs' alternative theory of liability similarly concerns the omissions of the workers, and focuses on the workers initial efforts to undertake the measures prescribed by Colianne. According to this theory, the workers under Colianne's supervision did not make any attempt to remove residual asphalt and moisture from the pothole at issue. As plaintiffs claim, section 2-201 of the Act does not afford the City immunity under this theory since the workers had no discretion in following Colianne's prescribed method of preparing potholes for repair. Once Colianne exercised his discretion and determined that residual asphalt and moisture should be removed, to the extent possible, the workers's initial effort to undertake such measures became ministerial and they were under the obligation to follow Colianne's directives. However, notwithstanding the Act's inapplicability to plaintiffs' alternative theory, we believe summary judgment in favor of the City is nonetheless proper because plaintiffs have failed to present any evidence that would entitle them to a finding in their favor.
To prevail on their negligence claim, plaintiffs are required to prove the existence of duty on the part of the City, the City's breach of that duty, and injury proximately resulting from that breach. Wojdyla v. City of Park Ridge, 209 Ill. App. 3d 290, 293, 154 Ill. Dec. 144, 568 N.E.2d 144, 145 (1991). Even though plaintiffs, as the nonmovants, were not required to prove their case at the summary judgment stage, they had the burden of presenting some factual basis that would arguably entitle them to a judgment. Geraghty v. Continental Western Life Ins. Co., 281 Ill.App.3d 669, 678, 217 Ill. Dec. 421, 667 N.E.2d 510, 516 (1996). If from the materials in the record a plaintiff fails to establish an element of her cause of action, summary judgment is proper. Geraghty, 281 Ill.App.3d at 678, 217 Ill. Dec. 421, 667 N.E.2d at 516. Thus, for plaintiffs to survive summary judgment, they had to present some evidence showing a breach on the part of the City, namely that the workers in Colianne's crew wholly failed to make any attempt to remove residual asphalt and moisture from the pothole *408 identified by Bosh. While the question of whether the City breached its duty to the plaintiffs is normally a factual one, it may properly be resolved by this court as a legal matter when the evidence, such as in this case, presents no genuine issue of material fact regarding that subject. Nowak v. Coghill, 296 Ill.App.3d 886, 892, 231 Ill. Dec. 15, 695 N.E.2d 532, 537 (1998).
Plaintiffs concede the record is devoid of any direct evidence establishing that the workers did not undertake the required repair measures. Rather, plaintiffs seek to establish the requisite breach circumstantially. The law is well established that a party may establish a defendant's negligence through the use of circumstantial evidence. Nowak, 296 Ill. App.3d at 896, 231 Ill. Dec. 15, 695 N.E.2d at 539. Circumstantial evidence is the proof of certain facts and circumstances from which a fact finder may infer other connected facts that usually and reasonably follow according to the common experience of mankind. Parker v. Masonic Warren Barr Pavilion, 299 Ill.App.3d 495, 500, 233 Ill. Dec. 547, 701 N.E.2d 190, 193 (1998). Circumstantial evidence may be used to establish facts necessary to a claim, but is sufficient only when its shows the probability of the existence of the fact. The circumstantial facts must be of such a nature and so related as to make the conclusion reached the more probable, as opposed to possible, one. Block v. Lohan Associates, Inc., 269 Ill.App.3d 745, 757, 206 Ill. Dec. 202, 645 N.E.2d 207, 215 (1993); Stonitsch v. Laredo Construction Co., 221 Ill.App.3d 902, 905, 164 Ill. Dec. 495, 583 N.E.2d 49, 52 (1991).
Here, plaintiffs have not presented sufficient circumstantial evidence to establish that Colianne's workers failed in the first instance to remove loose asphalt and moisture from the pothole in question and apply a cold mix patch. The record materials, including the affidavit of Dragunsky, do not demonstrate the probability of the inference plaintiffs seek to draw. While it may be reasonable to infer that the pothole in question was repaired by the workers on January 10, 1997 by use of a cold mix patch, and that this patch failed before or on January 14, the record does not show that it is more probable than not that this patch broke down as a result of the workers' failure to make efforts to remove residual asphalt and moisture. For that matter, assuming section 2-201 of the Act is inapplicable to plaintiffs' first theory of liability, the record likewise is insufficient to show the probability of the proffered inference that the workers failed to remove an adequate amount of asphalt and moisture from the pothole. These inference may be possible, but they are not probable and thus are insufficient as a matter of law.
Further, the inferences sought by plaintiffs are missing a critical link. To raise a reasonable inference that the workers either failed to make efforts to remove asphalt and moisture from the pothole or undertook such efforts but performed them inadequately, plaintiffs must have presented circumstantial evidence showing that it is more probable than not that the pothole at issue broke down due to the presence of asphalt and moisture. As explained by Dragunsky, the presence of asphalt and moisture may cause the failure of a cold mix patch. Yet, the record also demonstrates that a cold mix patch may break down for various other reasons, including traffic patterns and weather conditions. The evidence in the record merely establishes the possibility that the presence of residual asphalt and moisture caused the failure of the pothole's repair in this case. In fact, the record is devoid of any evidence establishing, or raising a reasonable inference, that the pothole in question contained loose asphalt and/or moisture on January 10, 1997.
CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, the circuit court's entry of summary judgment in favor *409 of the City and against plaintiffs is affirmed.
Affirmed.
HALL, P.J., and BURKE, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Plaintiffs originally alleged the City was negligent by: (1) failing to inspect the 7300 block of South Kedzie for the existence of the pothole which Bosh's vehicle struck; (2) to the extent such an inspection was made, failing to conduct said inspection in a careful and reasonable manner so as to discover the pothole; (3) failing to repair or remedy the pothole; and (4) failing to warn motorists traveling on Kedzie of the pothole's presence. Plaintiffs acknowledge certain City crews were deployed during January 1997 to search out potholes for repair and that crews on January 10, 1997, specifically discovered the pothole at issue in this case. By their acknowledgments, plaintiffs have conceded that the City could not have breached the first two duties claimed in the complaint. Plaintiffs further conceded in the circuit court that the City had no duty to warn under the circumstances.

=== CASE 9739618 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:33.409608+00 ===

JUSTICE MILLER delivered the opinion of the court: This appeal is brought by the State from an order of the circuit court of Cook County granting a motion by the defendant, Luis Ruiz, to preclude the State from seeking the death penalty in the present case. The matter was before the circuit court for a new sentencing hearing, ordered as post-conviction relief. The trial judge concluded that sentencing the defendant to death would be disproportionate to the sentences of natural life imprisonment received by a codefendant, Placido LaBoy, for the same set of offenses. For the reasons that follow, we reverse the order of the circuit court and remand the cause for further proceedings. The present case has a lengthy procedural history, but the major features require only brief recitation. The defendant was originally convicted in a jury trial in 1980 of three counts of murder, three counts of armed violence, and three counts of unlawful restraint for his role in the deaths of three youths who were members of a rival street gang. The defendant waived a jury for purposes of a capital sentencing hearing, and, following a hearing, the trial judge sentenced the defendant to death for the murder convictions. On direct appeal, this court affirmed the defendant’s convictions and death sentence. People v. Ruiz, 94 Ill. 2d 245 (1982). In our initial opinion in this case, the court rejected the defendant’s contention that he could not be sentenced to death because he was guilty of these offenses only under an accountability theory. The court explained: “It was Ruiz who first deceived the three victims by telling them that he was a Latin Eagle when they bragged to him that they had participated in a ‘hit’ on some Latin Queens. It was Ruiz who directed that they all get into the victims’ car and drive to the first alley. Ruiz took Michael [Salcido] down the alley and participated in beating him to the ground. Ruiz told the assistant State’s Attorney that his companions said that they would have to kill the three boys. After learning this, when they stopped in the second alley, Ruiz did not depart but stayed while each of the three was systematically and ruthlessly executed. Arthur Salcido was stabbed a total of eight times in the chest, and his throat was cut completely across, severing his windpipe, as well as the major arteries on either side of his neck. Frank Mussa was stabbed a total of 21 times: three times in the neck, three times in the chest and 15 times in the back. Michael Salcido was stabbed a total of 18 times: 10 times in the face and neck, five times in the abdomen and three times in the back. Ruiz never told either Lopez or the assistant State’s Attorney that he protested while all of these blows were being struck. In fact, nothing in the record shows what he was doing during the considerable time that it took to perform these acts, which must have been accomplished in the face of extreme effort on the part of the victims to preserve themselves and through greater efforts on the parts of the participants to overcome the victims’ defenses. In any event, when all was finished, Ruiz assisted the others in wiping the car free of fingerprints and then walked away from the scene with his companions.” Ruiz, 94 Ill. 2d at 264-65. After this court affirmed the defendant’s convictions and death sentence, the United States Supreme Court denied the defendant’s petition for a writ of certiorari. Ruiz v. Illinois, 462 U.S. 1112, 77 L. Ed. 2d 1341, 103 S. Ct. 2465 (1983). The defendant then commenced post-conviction proceedings, and the case was assigned to the same judge who had presided at trial. The judge dismissed the petition without an evidentiary hearing. On appeal, this court held that section 122 — 8 of the Post-Conviction Hearing Act (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1984 Supp., ch. 38, par. 122 — 8) required that the cause, as a post-conviction matter, be assigned to a judge other than the defendant’s trial judge. People v. Ruiz, 107 Ill. 2d 19 (1985). On remand, the case was reassigned to a different judge, who later denied post-conviction relief without an evidentiary hearing. The defendant appealed from that ruling, and this court affirmed in part and reversed in part, ordering an evidentiary hearing on allegations in the petition challenging counsel’s effectiveness at the capital sentencing hearing. People v. Ruiz, 132 Ill. 2d 1 (1989). The United States Supreme Court later denied the defendant’s petition for a writ of certiorari. Ruiz v. Illinois, 496 U.S. 931, 110 L. Ed. 2d 652, 110 S. Ct. 2632 (1990). Following an evidentiary hearing on the allegations of ineffective assistance, the circuit court granted relief to the defendant on that portion of the post-conviction petition and vacated the defendant’s death sentence, finding that trial counsel had rendered ineffective assistance at the sentencing hearing. The State appealed from that judgment, and this court affirmed the order granting the defendant a new sentencing hearing. People v. Ruiz, 177 Ill. 2d 368 (1997). The cause was then remanded to the circuit court for resentencing. The present appeal arises from an order entered by the circuit court after the latest remand. Prior to the holding of a new sentencing hearing, the defendant moved to bar entry of the death penalty in this case. The defendant argued, among other things, that sentencing him to death would be disproportionate to the three consecutive sentences of natural life imprisonment imposed on a codefendant, Placido LaBoy, for the same offenses. LaBoy had received those sentences after a jury was unable to agree to impose the death penalty in his case. See People v. Caballero, 179 Ill. 2d 205, 212 (1997). We note here the sentences given to the two other offenders involved in these crimes. A second codefendant, Juan Caballero, received the death penalty for these offenses. Caballero’s case is currently before the circuit court for an evidentiary hearing on a claim similar to the one involved here, but raised in the context of a post-conviction proceeding, that his death sentence is disproportionate to LaBoy’s natural life sentences. A third co-defendant, Nelson Aviles, reached a plea agreement with the State under which Aviles testified against LaBoy at LaBoy’s trial, pleaded guilty to these offenses, and received concurrent sentences of 40 years’ imprisonment for the three murders. In the proceedings below, the trial judge granted the defendant’s motion to preclude a death penalty hearing, concluding that the death penalty should not be a possible sentence in this case because it would be disproportionate to LaBoy’s sentences. In reaching this result, the judge found that the defendant was less culpable than LaBoy in these offenses and that the defendant’s prospects for rehabilitation were as good as or better than LaBoy’s. The State brings the present appeal from that ruling. We are met at the outset with a challenge to our jurisdiction. The defendant has moved to dismiss the present appeal, and we ordered the motion taken with the case. The defendant argues that nothing in our rules on appeals in criminal cases authorizes the State to bring the present appeal, and he believes that the present appeal must therefore be dismissed. The State, in response, asserts that the order entered by the circuit court in this case is similar to one that halts a criminal proceeding in the defendant’s favor on grounds that prevent the State from prosecuting the defendant. The State thus believes that it should be allowed to proceed with the appeal under Supreme Court Rules 603 and 604(a)(1) (134 Ill. 2d R. 603; 145 Ill. 2d R. 604(a)(1)). We agree with the defendant that the present appeal does not readily fit within the range of State appeals authorized by our rules. No rule expressly permits the State to bring an appeal from an order like the one entered here. Nonetheless, we believe that it is appropriate to consider the present appeal on its merits. We note that the State could have attempted to obtain review of the challenged order through a motion for a supervisory order, pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 383 (155 Ill. 2d R. 383), invoking our general supervisory authority over the courts of the state (Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, § 16). Contrary to the view expressed by Chief Justice Harrison in his dissent, this court has previously allowed supervisory relief in a number of criminal cases. People ex rel. Baricevic v. Wharton, 136 Ill. 2d 423 (1990); People ex rel. Daley v. Suria, 112 Ill. 2d 26 (1986); People ex rel. Ward v. Moran, 54 Ill. 2d 552 (1973); see also Doherty v. Caisley, 104 Ill. 2d 72 (1984) (supervisory order entered directing circuit judge to vacate orders appointing public defender of different county to represent two inmates in civil actions relating to computation of sentence and denial of parole). And when supervisory orders have been denied, the court has done so without suggesting that supervisory relief is never available in criminal cases. People ex rel. Daley v. Joyce, 126 Ill. 2d 209 (1988); People ex rel. Daley v. Fitzgerald, 123 Ill. 2d 175 (1988); People ex rel. Foreman v. Nash, 118 Ill. 2d 90 (1987). Given the general importance of the issue presented to the development of our law, we consider it appropriate to exercise our supervisory authority in this case and address the merits of the State’s appeal. Notably, dismissing the appeal would effectively bar the State from ever seeking the death penalty against the defendant for these offenses, for the State could not later appeal the entry of a noncapital sentence. We now turn to a consideration of the merits of the question presented here. The State argues that the trial court erred in granting the defendant’s motion to preclude a death sentence here. We agree. We believe that the trial court acted prematurely in attempting to determine whether a sentence of death imposed in this case would be disproportionate to the noncapital sentences imposed on a co-defendant. Our cases have consistently held that evidence of a codefendant’s sentence is irrelevant and thus inadmissible at a capital sentencing hearing. In People v. Emerson, 189 Ill. 2d 436 (2000), this court recently considered whether a defendant was entitled to present, at the second stage of a capital sentencing hearing, evidence of a codefendant’s sentence. This court concluded that the trial judge in that case acted properly in barring introduction to the evidence. The court explained: “It is well established by the precedent of this court that a defendant does not have a right to present evidence of a codefendant’s sentence at the aggravation-mitigation stage of sentencing. See, e.g., People v. Jackson, 182 Ill. 2d 30, 54 (1998). As we explained in People v. Page, 156 Ill. 2d 258, 271-72 (1993), evidence of a codefendant’s sentence is not a relevant mitigating factor at the aggravation-mitigation stage, where the focus is on the defendant’s character and participation in the offense. ‘[Requiring the sentencer to examine and compare the relative culpability of the defendants and the circumstances in aggravation and mitigation applicable to each would unnecessarily complicate an already difficult task.’ Page, 156 Ill. 2d at 272. Thus, while a reviewing court may consider whether a defendant’s sentence is disparate when compared to a codefendant’s sentence, a defendant does not have a right to present the sentencing jury with evidence of a codefendant’s sentence. Jackson, 182 Ill. 2d at 92. Based on this authority, we hold that the circuit court did not err in excluding evidence of Jackson’s sentence.” Emerson, 189 Ill. 2d at 501. In People v. Page, 156 Ill. 2d 258 (1993), this court declined to follow a Florida case that permitted capital sentencers to consider sentences given to codefendants. In addition to the concerns mentioned by the court in Emerson, the Page court explained: “As this court stated in [People v. Perez, 108 Ill. 2d 70 (1985)], ‘the fact that a separate jury found there were mitigating factors sufficient to preclude the imposition of the death penalty as to [a codefendant] does not mean that we must set aside the jury’s determination in the present case that as to [defendant] there was no mitigating factor or factors sufficient to preclude its imposition.’ Perez, 108 Ill. 2d at 93.” Page, 156 Ill. 2d at 272. We believe that the considerations discussed above are applicable in the present case and lead to the conclusion that the circuit court erred in considering the defendant’s sentencing-disparity motion. Just as evidence of a codefendant’s sentence is irrelevant at a capital sentencing hearing and may not be introduced at that stage in the proceedings, that evidence is equally irrelevant prior to the sentencing hearing. If, in fact, a sentence of death is excessive or disproportionate, this court on direct review, or this court or the circuit court in a post-conviction proceeding, may consider that issue. Although comparative proportionality review is not required by the United States Constitution and is not a feature of the Illinois death penalty statute, this court will consider claims that a sentence of death in a particular case is disproportionate to the sentence imposed on a codefendant. See, e.g., People v. Erickson, 117 Ill. 2d 271, 302-03 (1987). Opposing this result, the defendant argues that preventing the trial judge from considering the merits of his sentencing-disparity motion would place him in a worse position with regard to this issue than he would occupy if he had not obtained post-conviction relief. The defendant observes that if he had not been awarded a new sentencing hearing, he could raise the sentencing-disparity issue as a post-conviction claim, as his codefendant Caballero has done. See People v. Caballero, 179 Ill. 2d 205 (1997). To refuse to consider the same issue at this juncture, the defendant believes, means that he would have been better off, at least with respect to this issue, by not winning a new sentencing hearing. We do not agree. Unlike Caballero, the defendant is not now facing a death penalty. If the sentencer at the new hearing decides to impose the death penalty against the defendant, the defendant may then pursue the sentencing-disparity claim that he wants to present now. The defendant also contends that allowing a trial judge to consider the merits of a sentencing-disparity claim prior to a capital sentencing hearing is the more efficient procedure and can only save time and resources. We believe, however, that the suggested procedure could also lead to needless duplication in many cases. Allowing a judge to consider a claim like the defendant’s prior to any capital sentencing hearing would require the parties to engage in two similar proceedings, at least in those cases in which the motion proved to be unsuccessful: first, a full-blown evidentiary hearing, complete with testimony about the defendant’s culpability and rehabilitative prospects, and second, a capital sentencing hearing, at which the same evidence about the defendant would be introduced. Rather than save time and resources, the defendant’s suggested procedure would, in many cases, cause the parties to present their evidence twice. Nor do we believe that this court’s decision in a codefendant’s case, People v. Caballero, 179 Ill. 2d 205 (1997), compels a different result here. The defendant argues that Caballero authorizes the circuit courts to entertain motions that seek to bar imposition of the death penalty on the ground that a sentence of death would be disproportionate to a noncapital sentence imposed on a codefendant. We do not agree. Caballero determined only that it is within the competence of a circuit court to consider whether the death sentence imposed on a post-conviction petitioner is disproportionate to the noncapital sentence received by a codefendant for the same offense. The court in that case rejected the State’s argument that a sentencing-disparity issue may be decided only by a reviewing court. Caballero did not determine, however, that such issues may properly be decided by the circuit court prior to the holding of a capital sentencing hearing, which is the context in which the question arises here. The court in Caballero found distinguishable this court’s earlier decisions in People v. Page, 156 Ill. 2d 258 (1993), and People v. Edgeston, 157 Ill. 2d 201 (1993), which had held that evidence of a codefendant’s sentence is irrelevant and inadmissible at a capital sentencing hearing. Caballero explained: “Neither Page nor Edgeston dealt with the sentence disparity issue in the context of a petition for post-conviction relief, nor did they hold that a circuit court could not consider such an issue raised under the [Post-Conviction Hearing] Act. Disparity of sentence is cognizable under the Act in noncapital cases (see People v. Wren, 223 Ill. App. 3d 722, 729 (1992)), and where circuit courts routinely handle post-conviction petitions in capital cases, we see no reason to preclude examination of this issue. Thus, we agree with defendant that the circuit court erroneously believed the issue was ‘a matter for appellate review’ only.” Caballero, 179 Ill. 2d at 215. We do not believe that Caballero altered the longstanding rule prohibiting introduction, at a capital sentencing hearing, of evidence of a codefendant’s sentence. Emerson, decided after Caballero, reaffirmed the earlier case law and demonstrates that the rule expressed in those opinions is still valid. Finally, we note that we do not decide here whether or not a sentence of death in this case would be disproportionate to any of the sentences imposed on the defendant’s codefendants. We determine only that the trial judge should not foreclose a sentence of death against the defendant at this time. As the defendant has not yet been resentenced for these offenses, it would be premature to compare a sentence of death in his case with the sentences received by LaBoy. The defendant’s original capital sentencing hearing was conducted in 1980. The defendant has not yet been resentenced, so we cannot be fully aware of what additional evidence might now be presented in aggravation and mitigation. In support of the motion to bar a capital sentence in this case, the defendant argues that he has been a model prisoner and that his adjustment to prison fife demonstrates his excellent prospects for rehabilitation. These are fact-based questions, however, and we believe that it would be premature to attempt to address them at this point in the proceedings, notwithstanding the defendant’s offer of evidence on these matters. For the reasons stated, the judgment of the circuit court of Cook County is reversed, and the cause is remanded to that court for further proceedings. Reversed and remanded.

=== CASE 9739619 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:33.413795+00 ===

CHIEF JUSTICE HARRISON, dissenting: This appeal is unlawful and should be dismissed. Contrary to the majority’s suggestion, the State could not have obtained review of the circuit court’s order by means of a supervisory order. Under article VI, section 16, of the Illinois Constitution (Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, § 16), this court’s supervisory authority must be exercised “in accordance with [the court’s] rules.” This is a criminal case, and our rules specifically provide that the only method of review in a criminal case is by appeal. 134 Ill. 2d R. 602. Whether the State may appeal a nonfinal order entered by the circuit court in a criminal case is determined exclusively by Rule 604(a)(1) (145 Ill. 2d R. 604(a)(1)). People v. Truitt, 175 Ill. 2d 148, 151 (1997). Under Rule 604(a)(1), the circumstances under which the State may prosecute an appeal are narrowly circumscribed. The rule clearly provides: “In criminal cases the State may appeal only from an order or judgment the substantial effect of .which results in dismissing a charge for any of the grounds enumerated in section 114 — 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963; arresting judgment because of a defective indictment, information or complaint; quashing an arrest or search warrant; or suppressing evidence.” (Emphasis added.) 145 Ill. 2d R. 604(a)(1). There is no dispute that the order at issue in this case, which merely precludes the State from seeking a particular sentence, does not fall within any of these categories. Where, as here, an appeal by the State does not fall within any of the provisions of our Rule 604(a)(1), the State has no right to appeal the order to this or any court of review. The State’s appeal must therefore be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction. Truitt, 175 Ill. 2d at 153. The authorities cited in the majority’s opinion (194 Ill. 2d at 459) do not alter this conclusion. Unlike the present case, People ex rel. Ward v. Moran, 54 Ill. 2d 552 (1973), did not involve an appeal by the State from the circuit court’s judgment. It involved a challenge to a judgment entered by the appellate court following an appeal by the defendant. People ex rel. Daley v. Suria, 112 Ill. 2d 26, 37-38 (1986), stated that our court may exercise its supervisory authority to intervene in a case where the circuit court has exceeded its authority and impermissibly exercised powers belonging to the executive branch, but those circumstances are not present here. Doherty v. Caisley, 104 Ill. 2d 72, 79 (1984), was not a criminal case. At issue there was whether the circuit court of one county exceeded its authority when it appointed the public defender of another county to represent two inmates confined in a state penal institution in civil actions the inmates had brought. Although People ex rel. Baricevic v. Wharton, 136 Ill. 2d 423 (1990), did arise from criminal proceedings, it was not a direct appeal by the State. It was an original action brought in our court to challenge the way in which a circuit court judge had been interpreting and applying the substitution of judge provisions in section 114 — 5(c) of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 38, par. 114 — 5(c)). The propriety of our jurisdiction to rule on that matter was not raised by the parties or addressed by this court. Even if we had jurisdiction to consider the State’s appeal, which we do not, I still could not join in the result reached by the majority. There are no circumstances in which the State should be allowed to seek the death penalty. For the reasons set forth in my partial concurrence and partial dissent in People v. Bull, 185 Ill. 2d 179 (1998), the Illinois death penalty law violates the eighth and fourteenth amendments to the United States Constitution (U.S. Const., amends. VIII, XIV) and article I, section 2, of the Illinois Constitution (Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, § 2). It is therefore void and unenforceable.

=== CASE 2220502 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:45.531908+00 ===

742 N.E.2d 15 (2000)
D.S.I., Stewart J. "Jason" Mart and Aquatic Renovation Systems, Inc., Appellants,
v.
NATARE CORPORATION, Appellee.
No. 49A02-0001-CV-50.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
December 29, 2000.
Rehearing Denied February 13, 2001.
*17 Michael L. Einterz, Indianapolis, Indiana, Attorney for Appellants.
David E. Wright, Jeffrey L. Carmichael, Leagre Chandler & Millard, LLP, Indianapolis, Indiana, Attorneys for Appellee. *16
*18 OPINION
FRIEDLANDER, Judge.
Stewart J. Mart, Duraplastic Systems, Inc. (D.S.I.), and Aquatic Renovation Systems, Inc. (A.R.S.) (hereinafter collectively referred to as "D.S.I." unless otherwise indicated) appeal from an award of attorney fees in favor of Natare Corporation. The appellants present the following consolidated, restated issues for review:
1. Was Natare a "prevailing party" within the meaning of Ind.Code Ann. § 34-52-1-1 (West 1999), such that Natare was eligible for an award of attorney fees under that statute?
2. Did the trial court err in determining that D.S.I.'s action was frivolous, baseless, unreasonable, or brought in bad faith?
3. Did the trial court err in piercing the corporate veil and making Mart personally liable for paying the assessment of attorney fees?
4. Did the trial court err in awarding Natare $75,000 in attorney fees?
5. Is Natare entitled to appellate attorney fees?
We affirm.
The underlying facts revolve around a series of disputes that began more than ten years ago between Mart and Michael Walsh, the owner of Natare. A review of the history of the course of litigation is useful in understanding the controversy at hand.
During the 1980s, Walsh and J. Kenneth McNeeley were each 50% owners of Recreonics Corporation, which was engaged in the business of selling swimming pools and aquatics-related equipment. There were two major facets of the corporation a mail-order catalogue sales division and a commercial-construction and swimming-pool-liner division. Mart was an employee of Recreonics sometime in the 1980s, but his association with that corporation had been severed by 1989. In 1989, Recreonics filed a lawsuit against Mart alleging that he had made false and disparaging statements about Recreonics, its products, and its business practices. As a result of this action, Recreonics sought and received a preliminary injunction against Mart in October 1991. Generally, Mart was enjoined from undertaking tortious and defamatory conduct against Recreonics.
In April 1991, Recreonics informed its creditors that it was unable to pay approximately $1,400,000 of its obligations, and it proposed to pay its creditors pro rata from existing cash flow. Also about this time, Walsh and McNeeley began to experience serious disputes between themselves about the manner in which the company should be directed. As a result, McNeeley and Walsh entered into an Agreement and Plan of Reorganization, whereby Recreonics was effectively split into two entities. McNeeley retained the mail-order and catalog-sales divisions, as well as the name "Recreonics Corporation." Walsh received the commercial and liner divisions, which would operate as a new entity named "Natare Corporation."
On April 22, 1992, shortly after the reorganization was implemented, McNeeley and Recreonics filed suit against Walsh and Natare, alleging that Walsh and Natare had improperly used the name "Recreonics" in Natare's business, in contravention of the terms of the reorganization agreement. As a result of this lawsuit, Natare was enjoined from using the Recreonics name in Natare's business.
By April 1993, McNeeley and Recreonics had filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 7 of the United States Bankruptcy Code. Merrill Moores was appointed to act as Trustee over Recreonics's bankruptcy estate. Moores decided not to pursue the action against Walsh and Natare because of the anticipated expense involved. On November 29, 1994, the bankruptcy court approved Moores's recommendation that Recreonics Corporation be sold to Frank Jones, Jr. and the newly formed corporation, Recreonics, Inc. In addition to the other resources of Recreonics Corporation, *19 Recreonics Inc. also purchased its rights in the lawsuit against Walsh and Natare.
Meanwhile, Mart had formed D.S.I. and A.R.S., corporations engaged in the same general business as Recreonics Inc. and Natare. In October 1996, D.S.I. sent a letter to numerous creditors of Recreonics Corporation requesting assignment to D.S.I. of the claims any of those creditors might have against Recreonics Corporation. Roughly twenty-three creditors assigned their claims to D.S.I. Armed with these assignments of rights, on December 10, 1996, D.S.I. filed a complaint for damages against Natare alleging that Natare "removed and transferred assets of Recreonics Corporation that rendered Recreonics insolvent or greatly reduced its ability to continue and maintain its business or to pay its creditors." Record at 1-2. A Return of Summons Served was tendered to the Marion Superior Court, Room 6, indicating that the complaint had been served on December 12 by a Deputy "Ron Elliot." Record at 5. Natare did not file its answer within the requisite twenty-three days and, on January 7, 1997, D.S.I. filed a motion for default judgment, which was granted on January 9, 1997. D.S.I. immediately commenced garnishment proceedings against Natare, which culminated in the freezing of Natare's bank accounts.
On January 22, 1997, Natare was informed by its bank that its accounts had been frozen. It is undisputed that this information was in fact the means whereby Natare first became aware of the lawsuit filed by D.S.I. and the January 9 default judgment. On January 23, Natare appeared in court and filed a motion asking the court to set aside the default judgment on the ground that it had never been served with the summons. It was subsequently learned that the return of service reflecting that the complaint was served upon Natare had been forged.[1] The court granted the motion on the same day and dissolved the garnishment order. In a pleading dated January 23, 1997, D.S.I.'s attorney petitioned the court to reconsider its ruling granting the motion to set aside the default judgment.
In a release dated January 23, 1997, and distributed on that day and the following day by mail, fax, and hand delivery, D.S.I. sent a series of "press releases" to several businesses and trade publications in the swimming pool industry. The release notified the recipients of the January 9 default judgment D.S.I. had obtained against Natare. The document stated as follows:
DSI Corporation of Indianapolis, Indiana was recently awarded a judgment of $337,818.00 against Natare Corp., also in Indianapolis, in the Marion County Superior Court # 6. The judgment was for funds due the creditors of the now bankrupt Recreonics Corp., which DSI had alleged were owed by Natare as a result of Natare's holding itself out as the continuing legal entity once known as Recreonics Corp., and for treble damages for civil fraud committed by Natare against the creditors of Recreonics Corp.
Stewart J. Mart, the President of DSI commented, "We are very pleased with the judgment and want all the creditors of the old Recreonics Corp. to know that their concerns about the pre-bankruptcy assets transfered [sic] to Natare and partially resulting in Recreonics Corp.'s eventual bankruptcy were indeed well founded. The owner of Natare has lived by the sword of litigation for so many years that this result is particularly fitting."
DSI has garnished Natare's checking accounts and will be garnishing the receivables of Natare Corp [sic] up to the judgment amount.
For further information contact DSI at:
*20 Natare Litigation Manager
DSI
P.O. Box 55074
Indianapolis, IN 46205
Record at 61. On January 25, D.S.I. sent the following letter to Natare's customers and other entities in the swimming pool business:
By now you are undoubtedly aware of the judgment entered in Marion County Superior Court # 6 against Natare Corp. in the amount of over $337,000. If this judgment and it's [sic] possible ramifications upon your current and potential business gives you pause as you contemplate your professional dealings with Natare Corp. in 1997 and beyond, know that there is a competitive and responsible supplier that stands ready to meet your PVC material needs.
All of us at RenoSys want to make certain that you are aware of our keen desire to expand and further develop our installing contractor relationships. As most of you are aware, RenoSys Corp [sic] offers a full range of PVC oriented product systems for the pool industry including the RenoSys PVC Pool Shell, RecDeck and CushionDeck Flooring and Decking products, Dura-Grate PVC Grating products and Dura-Tech PVC and stainless gutter systems....
Record at Exhibit 3, page 93.[2] The remainder of the letter is comprised of further descriptions of the products and services offered by D.S.I. Both the press release and the January 25 letters were prepared by Mart.
Mart claimed that he did not learn that the default judgment had been set aside until January 29. On February 4, D.S.I. sent out another press release. The following excerpt reflects the general tone of D.S.I.'s February 4 press release:
On January 23, 1997, we wrote you to advise you that DSI had recently obtained a $337,818.00 judgment against Natare Corporation. That fact was true when we reported it to you, and it remains true. In the meantime, though, Natare has been able to forestall DSI's collection on its claims against Natare by convincing the court that it did not receive a copy of the lawsuit, and that the judgment should be set aside pending a trial of the case.
* * * * * *
If it gives him pleasure, Walsh is free to vehemently vent his indignation from the highest diving platform in the land. His venting will not change either the nature or substance of his past conduct or the fact that the bright lights of a courtroom will determine the final outcome in this matter and not Mr. Walsh's distortions, volume or opinion. DSI, on behalf of the more than 23 creditors of Recreonics Corp [sic], intends to fully pursue this matter to it's [sic] final inevitable conclusion.
When all is said and done, and after DSI's case goes to trial or Natare files bankruptcy, we'll likely be reporting to you again that DSI, for the benefit of Recreonics's creditors, has obtained a judgment against Natare.
Record at 1110-11 (emphasis in original).
On January 31, 1997, Natare filed a motion to dismiss pursuant to Indiana Trial Rule 12(B)(6). On February 14, 1997, Natare filed a motion to dismiss for lack of subject matter jurisdiction. On February 19, 1997, D.S.I. filed an amended complaint. On February 24, 1997, Natare filed a counterclaim and third-party complaint, naming Mart and A.R.S. as defendants. On February 26, 1997, Natare filed an application with the trial court seeking a preliminary injunction. The court granted the petition and issued an order enjoining D.S.I., A.R.S., and Mart from communicating with any other persons or entities on *21 the subjects of (1) Walsh and Natare, (2) Walsh and Natare's business and business practices, and (3) any litigation, including Recreonics's bankruptcy action, involving Walsh and Natare. On March 6, 1997, the court dismissed D.S.I.'s complaint for lack of subject matter jurisdiction, ruling that the bankruptcy court had exclusive jurisdiction over the action.
On March 6, 1997, D.S.I. filed a motion for change of judge. On March 20, 1997, D.S.I. filed a second amended complaint that was substantially similar to the previous complaint.[3] On March 31, 1997, Judge Johnson assumed jurisdiction over the case, replacing Judge Cutter. On July 9, 1997, Judge Johnson vacated all entries made by Judge Cutter between March 6 and July 9, including the entry of a preliminary injunction against D.S.I., A.R.S., and Mart.
On March 24, 1998, the parties entered into a settlement agreement. Two days later, the parties filed a joint request for an order approving the settlement agreement, as well as a stipulation of partial dismissal. According to the stipulation of partial dismissal, the parties stipulated to
the partial dismissal, with prejudice, of all claims and counterclaims they have against each other in the above-entitled cause of action, for the reason that this matter has been partially settled between the parties to this action; except that the claims of Natare Corporation pursuant to Ind.Code 34-1-32-1, shall not be dismissed.
Record at 592 (emphasis in original). The court approved the settlement agreement and entered an order of partial dismissal. The effect of the order was to dismiss all claims between the parties except for Walsh and Natare's claim for attorney fees under Ind.Code Ann. § 34-1-32-1, the predecessor to Indiana's current attorney fees statute, which is Ind.Code Ann. § 34-52-1-1 (West 1999). On March 2, 1998, the court entered a permanent injunction against Mart, D.S.I., and A.R.S., pursuant to the settlement agreement. The order enjoined Mart, D.S.I., and A.R.S. from:
A. disseminating information to former, existing or prospective customers of Natare Corporation designed to disparage Natare Corporation or its products;
B. making any statements which relate in any way to third parties the results of status of Cause No. 49D03-8901-CT-0073, Cause No. 49D06-9612-CP[-]1695 (now 49D02-9704-CP-0459) or the Chapter 7 proceeding, In Re Recreonics Corporation, U.S. Bankruptcy Court, Southern District of Indiana, Indianapolis Division, Cause No. 93-0158-RLB-7;
C. making any contact with or disseminating any information to suppliers of Natare Corporation for the purpose of impugning or disparaging Natare's reputation or goodwill;
D. making any statement to prospective customers, distributors, or competitors of Natare which purports to disparage or impugn the business practices of Michael T. Walsh.
Record at 1067-68.
On December 28, 1999, the court granted Natare and Walsh's request for attorney fees under IC § 34-52-1-1, upon the court's finding that the allegations in the appellants' complaint were frivolous, unreasonable, and groundless within the meaning of Indiana Code § 34-52-1-1. D.S.I., A.R.S., and Mart appeal the award of attorney fees.
*22 1.
D.S.I. contends that Natare Corporation is not eligible for attorney fees under IC § 34-52-1-1.
When reviewing an award of attorney fees under IC § 34-52-1-1, we apply a multi-step review. Emergency Physicians of Indianapolis v. Pettit, 718 N.E.2d 753 (Ind.1999) (reversing the decision of the court of appeals in this case with respect to a different issue, but affirming and incorporating by reference this aspect of the opinion of the court of appeals, see Emergency Physicians of Indianapolis v. Pettit, 714 N.E.2d 1111 (Ind.Ct.App.1999)). We first review the trial court's findings of fact under the clearly erroneous standard. Next, we review de novo the trial court's legal conclusions. Finally, we review the decision to award attorney fees and the amount thereof under an abuse of discretion standard. Id.
The trial court awarded attorney fees to Natare pursuant to IC § 34-52-1-1(b)(1), which provides: "In any civil action, the court may award attorney's fees as part of the cost to the prevailing party, if the court finds that either party: brought the action or defense on a claim or defense that is frivolous, unreasonable, or groundless[.]" This statute specifies that, as a threshold requirement, attorney fees may only be recovered by a "prevailing party."
The court's conclusion that Natare is a prevailing party and thus entitled to attorney fees is based upon Finding of Fact No. 21, which states: "While this cause was disposed by a Settlement Agreement, Natare obtained an enforceable injunction against DSI and others for future actions. Natare had sought that injunction from the first day counsel for Natare appeared in the case." Record at 918. We need not review this finding for clear error because D.S.I. does not dispute its accuracy. Therefore, we proceed to the second part of our analysis, which consists of a de novo review of the legal conclusion that a party who obtains an injunction under such circumstances is a "prevailing party" within the meaning of IC § 34-52-1-1(b).
We find no Indiana case that addresses the application of IC § 34-52-1-1 in this particular circumstance, nor do the parties bring one to our attention. We start, then, by examining the law our courts have generally applied when determining the meaning of "prevailing party" in the context of attorney fees. We note at the outset that because the attorney fees statute is in derogation of the American Rule observed under the common law, we strictly construe its language.[4]O'Neill v. Goar, 622 N.E.2d 562 (Ind.Ct.App.1993).
This court has repeatedly stated that "prevailing party" in the context of the attorney fees statute denotes a party who successfully prosecutes his claim or asserts his defense. See Salcedo v. Toepp, 696 N.E.2d 426, (Ind.Ct.App.1998). This provision has been interpreted several times, two of which we find instructive in the instant case. In the first of those cases, Indiana State Bd. of Public Welfare v. Tioga Pines Living Center, Inc., 622 N.E.2d 935 (Ind.1993), cert. denied, 510 U.S. 1195, 114 S. Ct. 1302, 127 L. Ed. 2d 654 (1994), approximately 785 Medicaid-certified, skilled nursing facilities and intermediate care facilities in Indiana filed an action against the Indiana State Board of Public Welfare. The class sought a declaration that Indiana's Medicaid reimbursement rules violated the federal Boren Amendment, 42 U.S.C. § 1396a(a)(13)(A), and its state counterpart, Ind.Code Ann. § 12-1-7-17.6(b), repealed by P.L.2-1992, § 897 (current version codified at Ind. Code Ann. § 12-15-14-2 (West Supp. 2000)). The plaintiffs were awarded judgment and attorney fees by the trial court. The defendants ultimately prevailed on the *23 merits in a decision rendered by our supreme court.
On the question of attorney fees, the supreme court noted that the trial court had awarded attorney fees under 42 U.S.C. § 1988, which provides that a court may award reasonable attorney fees to the "prevailing party" in an action to enforce a provision of 42 U.S.C. § 1983. The court stated, "plaintiffs may be considered prevailing parties without obtaining a favorable final judgment following a full trial on the merits. Plaintiffs may prevail, for example, by consent decree or settlement which grants them the relief sought in bringing suit." Indiana State Bd. of Pub. Welfare v. Tioga Pines Living Ctr., Inc., 622 N.E.2d at 946. It appears, then, that attorney fees would be available in a § 1988 action where the matter was resolved through a settlement agreement, so long as the requesting party "prevailed," or received what they sought in the underlying litigation.
The second case was a voting rights case that arose in the Federal District Court for the Southern District of Indiana. In Dickinson v. Indiana State Election Board, 817 F. Supp. 737 (S.D.Ind.1992), a group of voters filed a lawsuit in which they alleged that the alignment of Indiana House Districts 49 and 51 violated Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act, 42 U.S.C. § 1973. The Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals rendered a decision in which it determined that the district court must decide if there had been a violation of section 2, and remanded it to the lower court for that purpose. Before the district court made that decision, however, the Indiana General Assembly passed a redistricting plan that cured the defects of which the plaintiffs' lawsuit had complained. Thereafter, the parties entered into a stipulation stating that (1) the plaintiffs' suit was a "significant catalytic factor" in the decision to reapportion voting districts, Dickinson v. Indiana State Election Bd., 817 F.Supp. at 746, and (2) plaintiffs could seek attorney fees under § 1988 in the event that the parties could not agree on same.
The district court noted that the threshold issue in deciding whether to award attorney fees under § 1988 was whether the plaintiffs were a "prevailing party." The court framed the standard as follows: "A prevailing party is one who succeeded `on any significant issue in the litigation which achieve[d] some of the benefit the part[y] sought in bringing suit,' ... and achieved some change in the parties' relationship as a result of the suit." Dickinson v. Indiana State Election Bd., 817 F.Supp. at 745 (quoting Hensley v. Eckerhart, 461 U.S. 424, 433, 103 S. Ct. 1933, 76 L. Ed. 2d 40 (1983)). Applying the above standard, the court concluded that the plaintiffs "easily" qualified as prevailing parties. Id. at 746. The court explained its conclusion in terms relevant to the instant case:
The stipulation resolved the dispute, altered the plaintiffs' legal relationship with the defendants, and demonstrated that the action had been a "significant catalytic factor" (and a causative link) in the General Assembly's decision to reapportion. It does not matter that the stipulation resulted from settlement, contained no outright admission of wrongdoing, or gave the plaintiffs less than all they requested.
Id. (citations and accompanying parenthetical information omitted).
We are aware that both Tioga Pines Living Center, Inc. and Dickinson addressed the meaning of "prevailing party" in the context of § 1988, not IC § 34-52-1-1. Nevertheless, the two provisions focus upon the same subject matter, albeit in different contextsthe former authorizes attorney fees in actions brought under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, while the latter is Indiana's general attorney fees statute. We perceive no meaningful distinction between the two contextual frameworks for purposes of determining the meaning of the term common to both, i.e., "prevailing party". In short, we conclude that "prevailing *24 party" means the same in either setting, and therefore Tioga Pines Living Center, Inc. and Dickinson are useful in determining the meaning of "prevailing party" as that term is used in IC § 34-52-1-1. Moreover, as we will explain, the term's meaning as set out in Tioga Pines Living Center, Inc. and Dickinson is consistent with its meaning in IC § 34-52-1-1, as it has developed thus far under Indiana law.
D.S.I. contends that State Wide Aluminum, Inc. v. Postle Distributors Inc., 626 N.E.2d 511 (Ind.Ct.App.1993), trans. denied, and State ex rel. Prosser v. Indiana Waste Systems, Inc., 603 N.E.2d 181 (Ind. Ct.App.1992), compel the result that Natare is not a "prevailing party" within the meaning of IC § 34-52-1-1. In State Wide Aluminum, Inc., this court noted that any ambiguity in subsection (b) concerning the meaning of "prevailing party" is resolved by subsection (a) of IC § 34-52-1-1. That subsection provides, "In all civil actions, the party recovering judgment shall recover costs...." Therefore, as we clarified in State ex rel. Prosser v. Indiana Waste Systems, Inc., 603 N.E.2d 181, a prevailing party is one that recovers a judgment. In both State Wide Aluminum, Inc. and Prosser, this court determined that the party seeking attorney fees was not a "prevailing party" within the meaning of IC § 34-52-1-1. In State Wide Aluminum, the requesting party claimed that it had received a judgment when its opponent failed to pursue a motion to appoint a receiver. In Prosser, the requesting party claimed that it received a judgment when it successfully opposed the opponent's motion for recusal of the judge. This court determined in both cases that the party requesting attorney fees lacked the same criterion; it had not obtained a judgment. In so holding, we determined that a ruling on a motion is not a "judgment" within the meaning of IC § 34-52-1-1(a).
We do not perceive a conflict between the holdings in Tioga Pines Living Center, Inc. and Dickinson, on one hand, and State Wide Aluminum and Prosser on the other. In fact, we are satisfied that these holdings and principles are not only compatible, but also complementary. Consistent with Tioga Pines Living Center, Inc. and Dickinson, a party is a "prevailing party" within the meaning of IC § 34-52-1-1, if that party successfully prosecutes its claim or asserts its defense. According to State Wide Aluminum and Prosser, the requisite successful litigation must culminate in a judgment. According to Tioga Pines Living Center, Inc. and Dickinson, the judgment alluded to in State Wide Aluminum and Prosser may take the form of an agreed entry or stipulation, so long as it resolved the dispute generally in the favor of the one requesting attorney fees and altered the litigants' legal relationship in a way favorable to the requesting party. In conducting the latter inquiry, we are to focus upon the requisite judgment in the specific context of the substance, issues, and nature of that particular litigation.
Applying these principles, Recreonics originally filed an unrelated lawsuit against Mart individually to enjoin him from making disparaging and defamatory remarks about Recreonics. In 1996, Mart's company, D.S.I., actively solicited from bankruptcy creditors of Recreonics the assignment of their claims against Recreonics. After it obtained such rights from more than twenty-three creditors, D.S.I. filed a complaint against Natare seeking to recover assets that D.S.I. asserted had been misappropriated from Recreonics by Natare prior to the time that Recreonics filed for bankruptcy. Thereafter, D.S.I. engaged in a letter-writing campaign, the primary effect of which was to impugn Natare's legal and financial status, viability, and business practices among Natare's customers. Natare counterclaimed and filed for a preliminary injunction against Mart, D.S.I., and A.R.S., which the trial court granted, and then later vacated. The litigation between the parties culminated in a February 24, 1998 settlement agreement. Pursuant to the *25 agreement, D.S.I. agreed to withdraw the lawsuit against Natare, and also agreed to the entry of a permanent injunction along the lines of the preliminary injunction that had been vacated earlier.
Viewed in the context of the entire litigation, pursuant to the result of the terms of the settlement agreement, Natare ultimately succeeded in defending against D.S.I.'s original lawsuit, and succeeded in obtaining a permanent injunction that prevented Mart from engaging in the behavior that had been the subject of the 1991 and 1997 preliminary injunctions. In other words, the litigation culminated successfully for Natare in a judicial order that altered the litigants' legal relationship in a way favorable to Natare.
We are satisfied that, under synthesized analyses of Tioga Pines Living Center, Inc., Dickinson, State Wide Aluminum, and Prosser, Natare was a "prevailing party" within the meaning of IC § 34-52-1-1, and therefore satisfied that criterion of eligibility for attorney fees.
2.
D.S.I. contends that the trial court erred in determining that D.S.I.'s lawsuit was groundless, frivolous, unreasonable, or brought in bad faith. We review de novo a trial court's legal conclusion that a party litigated in bad faith or pursued a frivolous, groundless or unreasonable claim or defense. Brant v. Hester, 569 N.E.2d 748 (Ind.Ct.App.1991).
As set out previously, IC § 34-52-1-1 (b) provides that, as a prerequisite to a recovery of attorney fees, the prevailing party must show that its opponent (1) brought the action or defense on a claim or defense that is frivolous, unreasonable, or groundless; (2) continued to litigate the action or defense after the party's claim or defense clearly became frivolous, unreasonable, or groundless; or (3) litigated the action in bad faith. In setting out its findings and conclusions in the instant case, the trial court did not specify which of the three grounds set out in subsection (b) supported the award of attorney fees. However, because the statute lists the grounds in the disjunctive, a litigant is required to demonstrate the existence of only one in order to justify an award of attorney fees. Accordingly, based upon our conclusion that the evidence supports the conclusion that D.S.I.'s lawsuit was frivolous, our analysis will focus upon that question.
A claim is "frivolous," for purposes of the attorney fee statute, if it is made primarily to harass or maliciously injure another, if counsel is unable to make a good faith and rational argument on the merits of the claim, or if counsel is unable to support the action by a good faith and rational argument for extension, modification, or reversal of existing law. Fisher v. Estate of Haley, 695 N.E.2d 1022 (Ind.Ct. App.1998). Again, because the elements are listed in the disjunctive, proof of one will suffice to support a conclusion that a claim was frivolous.
We need not repeat in detail facts that have been thoroughly discussed previously in this opinion. A brief review of the relevant facts reveals that Mart was enjoined by Recreonics, of which Walsh was a part owner at the time, from undertaking tortious and defamatory conduct against Recreonics. Thereafter, Walsh split from Recreonics and his former partner, McNeeley, and formed Natare. McNeeley and Recreonics thereafter filed suit against Walsh and Natare, claiming that Walsh had misappropriated the Recreonics name. Shortly thereafter, Recreonics filed for bankruptcy, and the trustee decided not to pursue the litigation against Natare. The court eventually approved the trustees' recommendation that all of the assets of Recreonics, including its lawsuit against Natare, should be sold to Jones. Mart thereafter actively solicited Recreonics's creditors, asking them to assign to D.S.I. any rights they might have against Recreonics. Having attained such an assignment from at least twenty-three creditors, *26 D.S.I. filed the instant action against Natare.
It is undisputed that Mart, D.S.I., and A.R.S. are in business of providing aquatics equipment and supplies, and not collections. In fact, the collection effort against Natare was the only foray into that arena taken by Mart or either of his companies. In the course of litigation that followed, Mart drafted all of the communications that were disseminated to third parties concerning the litigation, yet he deliberately concealed his role in the proceedings from others whom he contacted. Instead, all communications purportedly emanated from D.S.I. The communications were directed to Natare's customers, and not to the parties who purportedly had a stake in the outcome of the lawsuit, i.e., the creditors that had assigned their rights against Recreonics to Mart and D.S.I. The tone of the communications, which admittedly were drafted by Mart, was harsh and highly critical of both Walsh and Natare, as well as their business practices.
After D.S.I. obtained a questionable, and ultimately invalid, default judgment against Natare, Mart immediately drafted a "press release" and sent it to Natare's customers, informing them of the judgment and advising them that D.S.I. stood ready to meet their aquatic needs. Mart sent out a second release advising of the judgment two days later, which was two days after D.S.I.'s attorney appeared in court to challenge the setting aside of default judgment against Natare. It was not until twelve days after the trial court set aside the default judgment that Mart sent a letter to Natare's customers informing them of that fact. Moreover, that letter was highly critical of Walsh personally and predicted sure defeat for Walsh and Natare in defending against D.S.I.'s lawsuit. Meanwhile, Mart made no effort to contact the true parties-in-interest, i.e., the assignors of rights upon which the lawsuit was based, of the default judgment and the setting aside thereof.
These facts support the conclusion that D.S.I.'s actions in pursuing this lawsuit were undertaken primarily for the purpose of harassing or maliciously injuring Walsh and Natare. As such, the lawsuit was "frivolous" within the meaning of IC § 34-52-1-1(b)(1) and (2). Therefore, the trial court did not err in awarding attorney fees on that basis.
3.
The court concluded that Mart was personally liable to pay the attorney fees assessment. The finding of fact related to that ruling states:
The Court further finds that the activities of Mart, DSI, ARS, and their counsel Messrs. Einterz and Deckard, were coordinated and organized for a common purpose to benefit Mart and his companies at the expense of Natare. DSI and ARS share office space and other business facilities. Mart was unable to recall which company paid for the distribution of DSI's press release and thus was unable to demonstrate that he had segregated the two companies' business operations. In performing these activities, Mart shared business information of DSI and ARS and used such information for the exclusive benefit of ARS, even when it appeared to be against the business interests of DSI to do so. Additionally, the Court finds that Mart, as the president and sole shareholder of both DSI and ARS, was acting as the representative and agent of both DSI and ARS. Accordingly, the Court concludes that the respective corporate existences of DSI and ARS should be disregarded for the purposes of assessing attorney fees under Indiana Code § 34-52-1-1.
Record at 918. Mart contends that the trial court erred in making him personally liable for paying the attorney fees award.
Although we are generally reluctant to disregard a corporate entity, we will do so to prevent fraud or unfairness to third parties. The burden is on the party seeking to pierce the corporate veil to *27 establish "that the corporation was so ignored, controlled or manipulated that it was merely the instrumentality of another, and that the misuse of the corporate form would constitute a fraud or promote injustice." Commissioner, Indiana Dep't of Envtl. Mgmt. v. RLG, Inc., 735 N.E.2d 290, 294 (Ind.Ct.App.2000) (quoting Gurnik v. Lee, 587 N.E.2d 706, 710 (Ind.Ct. App.1992)). In determining whether a party has met this burden, our inquiry is fact sensitive. In so doing, we will examine several factors, including the following:
(1) [U]ndercapitalization; (2) absence of corporate records; (3) fraudulent representations by corporate shareholders or directors; (4) use of the corporation to promote fraud, injustice or illegal activities; (5) payment by the corporation of individual obligations; (6) commingling of assets and affairs; (7) failure to observe required corporate formalities; or (8) other shareholder acts or conduct ignoring, controlling, or manipulating the corporate form.
Hart v. Steel Prod., Inc., 666 N.E.2d 1270, 1277 (Ind.Ct.App.1996), trans. denied. All factors need not be present in order to support a decision to pierce the corporate veil. See Aronson v. Price, 644 N.E.2d 864 (Ind.1994).
The facts set out previously in this opinion support the trial court's decision to pierce the corporate veil with respect to Mart. Mart was the president and sole stockholder of both D.S.I. and A.R.S. In connection with the litigation against Natare, Mart clearly was the one who decided what actions to undertake. Moreover, except for the fact that his attorneys represented him in all legal matters before the court, Mart was solely responsible for implementing those decisions. In so doing, Mart prepared and disseminated deliberately inaccurate and highly defamatory "information" about the litigation to third parties. We have previously affirmed the trial court's conclusion that the lawsuit was frivolous and Mart pursued the litigation primarily in order to harass or maliciously injure Walsh and Natare. We conclude that, in view of these facts, injustice would result if Mart escaped responsibility for his actions by shielding himself from personal liability and placing the responsibility for those actions on his corporations. The trial court did not err in making Mart personally liable for the assessment of attorney fees.
4.
D.S.I. contends that the trial court erred in awarding Natare $75,000 in attorney fees.
The amount of an attorney fees award is left to the sound discretion of the trial court, and we will reverse such an award only upon a showing of abuse of discretion. Castlewood Prop. Owners Ass'n v. Trepton, 720 N.E.2d 10 (Ind.Ct. App.1999). An abuse of discretion occurs only when the trial court's decision is clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and circumstances before the court. Id. Finally, there must be evidence supporting the trial court's award. Id.
In support of its claim for attorney fees, Natare submitted detailed billing records reflecting services rendered by its counsel, and the cost thereof. Natare also presented expert testimony from attorney Wayne Turner, who did not represent Natare at any time in the instant litigation. Turner examined the nature of the litigation and the fees charged by Natare's counsel, and expressed his opinion that Natare's legal fees were reasonable. This evidence was sufficient to support the trial court's conclusion with respect to the amount of the attorney fees award.
The trial court did not abuse its discretion in order the appellants to pay $75,000 in attorney fees to Natare.[5]
*28 5.
Natare asks this court to order the appellants to pay Natare's attorney fees.
Under certain circumstances, this court has the discretion, pursuant to Indiana Appellate Rule 15(G), to award damages in addition to those awarded by the trial court. Specifically, Rule 15(G) provides: "If the court on appeal affirms the judgment, damages may be assessed in favor of the appellee not exceeding ten percent (10%) upon the judgment, in money judgments, and in other cases in the discretion of the court; and the court shall remand such cause for execution." Accordingly, a discretionary award of damages may be proper when an appeal is permeated with meritlessness, bad faith, frivolity, harassment, vexatiousness, or purpose of delay. Garage Doors of Indianapolis, Inc. v. Morton, 682 N.E.2d 1296 (Ind.Ct.App.1997), trans. denied. We must use extreme restraint when exercising our discretionary power to award damages on appeal, however, because of the potential chilling effect upon the exercise of the right to appeal. Thus, we will not impose such sanctions to punish lack of merit unless the appellant's contentions and argument are utterly devoid of all plausibility. Moreover, we have the authority to award attorney fees pursuant to IC § 34-52-1-1 when a party continues to litigate a claim after it becomes frivolous, unreasonable or groundless. See Garage Doors of Indianapolis, Inc. v. Morton, 682 N.E.2d 1296.
For purposes of appellate attorney fees, we are mindful that the issues presented in this appeal, although related, are distinct from those that were litigated in the underlying action. We have found that D.S.I.'s actions in pursuing the underlying action were initiated and pursued with bad motives. The attorney fees question, however, represents a separate and distinct phase of the litigation. We cannot say that the appellants' contentions on the issues presented in this appeal rise to the level of implausibility that would warrant an award of attorney fees under Appellate Rule 15(G). See Greasel v. Troy, 690 N.E.2d 298 (Ind.Ct.App.1997).
Judgment affirmed and request for appellate attorney fees denied.
DARDEN, J., and BARNES, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Deputy Ron Elliott submitted an affidavit stating that he did not serve the complaint upon Natare. Moreover, he noted that whoever signed the return had misspelled his name.
[2]  Exhibit 3 of the Record of Proceedings consists of two separately bound volumes that contain 325 pages that are numbered 1 through 325. The page numbering in Exhibit 3 is separate from the sequential numbering in the other six volumes of the record.
[3]  The second amended complaint differed from the first complaint only with respect to two additional allegations set forth in the former. Those allegation were that (1) D.S.I.'s action was limited to claims for which the bankruptcy court did not then retain jurisdiction, and (2) the Indiana court had jurisdiction over the matter under Articles 7 & 8 of the Indiana Constitution and Ind.Code Ann. § 32-2-7 because it alleged fraud and fraudulent transfer.
[4]  Under the American Rule, parties in most instances pay their own attorney fees absent a statute, rule, or agreement to the contrary. Depeyster v. Town of Santa Claus, 729 N.E.2d 183 (Ind.Ct.App.2000).
[5]  In so holding, we reject two other contentions advanced by the appellants in arguing that the award was erroneous. First, D.S.I. contends that the award must be reversed because the trial court did not explicitly state that the amount was reasonable. Under the circumstances, the trial court clearly implied that the award was reasonable. Cf. Emergency Physicians of Indianapolis v. Pettit, 714 N.E.2d 1111 (the appellate court may view an order of attorney fees based upon frivolous, unreasonable, and groundless defenses as an implicit conclusion that the defenses in question were improper in those respects). Second, the appellants assert that the award of attorney fees was improper because Natare failed to link the fees reflected on the billing records with particular actions undertaken by counsel to defend against the actions that the trial court found were frivolous and unreasonable. To the contrary, the billing records adequately reflect that Natare's legal costs were incurred as a result of legal actions undertaken by D.S.I., A.R.S. and Mart that were ultimately determined to be frivolous because they were motivated by bad faith.

=== CASE 2220511 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:45.836447+00 ===

742 N.E.2d 906 (2001)
318 Ill.App.3d 839
252 Ill. Dec. 368
Scott STYKEL, Curt Lamm, John Heilman, and Tave Kraft, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
The CITY OF FREEPORT, the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, Reginald D. McGee, Brian Borger, Denita Morris, David Shockey, and Mark Wagner, Defendants-Appellees.
No. 2-99-1446.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Second District.
January 22, 2001.
*908 David N. Rechenberg, Michael K. Havrilesko, Havrilesko & Rechenberg, P.C., Rockford, for John Heilman, Tave Kraft, Curt Lamm, Scott Stykel.
Ann M. Dittmar, McGreevy, Johnson & Williams, P.C., Rockford, for Board of Fire & Police Commissioners, Brian Borger, City of Freeport, Reginald D. McGee, Denita Morris, David Shockey and Mark Wagner.
Justice GEIGER delivered the opinion of the court:
This case arose after the plaintiffs, Scott Stykel, Curt Lamm, John Heilman, and Tave Kraft, took an examination for employment as a firefighter with the City of Freeport (City) that was administered by the Illinois Board of Fire and Police Commissioners (Board). The plaintiffs received a score of zero on the examination, rendering them ineligible for employment. Along with their causes of action under the Administrative Review Law (Review Law) (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq. (West 1998)), the plaintiffs filed counts against the defendants, the City of Freeport, the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, Reginald D. McGee, Brian Borger, Denita Morris, David Shockey, and Mark Wagner, for declaratory judgment, breach of implied oral contract, and for violations of their civil rights pursuant to section 1983 of the federal Civil Rights Act (42 U.S.C. § 1983 (1994)). Relying on Dorner v. Civil Service Comm'n, 85 Ill.App.3d 957, 41 Ill. Dec. 252, 407 N.E.2d 750 (1980), the trial court granted the defendants' motion to dismiss the counts that alleged causes for declaratory judgment, breach of implied oral contract, and civil rights violations. On appeal, the parties initially briefed the issue of whether the trial court erred in ruling that these causes of action could not be joined with an action under the Review Law. We then requested that the parties brief the additional issue of whether a cause of action under the Review Law preempts causes for declaratory judgment, breach of contract, and civil rights violations when the Review Law applies to the actions of an administrative agency. For the reasons that follow, we hold that the Review Law preempts causes of action for breach of contract and declaratory judgment, but not for civil rights violations.
The plaintiffs were applicants for firefighter positions with the City. They had received a score of zero on the written examination, which effectively rendered them ineligible for employment. The plaintiffs forwarded a request to the Board for a hearing, which was denied.
On December 20, 1991, the plaintiffs filed their complaint for administrative review, claiming that they were wrongfully denied certification as eligible for employment and a hearing. Following motions to dismiss and an attempt to remove to federal court, the plaintiffs ultimately filed their second amended complaint on March 1, 1999. Their second amended complaint contains 16 counts. Counts I through IV consist of causes for administrative review on behalf of each of the four plaintiffs against each defendant (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq. (West 1998)); counts V through VIII, requests for declaratory judgments; counts IX through XII, causes under section *909 1983 (42 U.S.C. § 1983 (1994)); and counts XIII through XVI, causes for breach of implied oral contract.
The defendants filed a motion to dismiss all counts of the complaint pursuant to sections 2-619(a)(1) (735 ILCS 5/2-619(a)(1) (West 1998)) and 2-615 (735 ILCS 5/2-615 (West 1998)) of the Code of Civil Procedure (the Code). Regarding the counts for administrative review, the defendants argued that the trial court lacked jurisdiction because the causes of action predicated on the failure to hire were not subject to the Review Law. Regarding counts V through XVI, consisting of all counts not predicated upon the Review Law, the defendants argued that those counts could not be joined with complaints under the Review Law. They also argued that those counts were not timely filed and that the plaintiffs failed to state a cause of action pursuant to section 1983.
The plaintiffs argued in their response that the Review Law applies to decisions not to hire and, therefore, the trial court had jurisdiction to consider the counts predicated upon the Review Law. Regarding the counts not predicated upon the Review Law, the plaintiffs argued that joinder with the administrative review counts was permissible under the liberal pleading rules. The plaintiffs further argued that they adequately stated a cause of action under section 1983 and that they were not barred by any statute of limitations.
On October 28, 1999, the trial court entered a written order on the motion to dismiss. The trial court found that the plaintiffs had properly pleaded a cause of action for administrative review against all defendants. However, citing Dorner, the trial court found that the remaining causes of action could not be joined with a cause for administrative review. Therefore, the trial court denied the motion to dismiss as to counts I through IV of the second amended complaint and granted the motion as to counts V through XVI. Thereafter, the trial court granted the plaintiffs' motion for a special finding under Supreme Court Rule 304(a) (155 Ill.2d R. 304(a)), and the plaintiffs filed a timely notice of appeal.
We note that the defendants raised in their brief arguments pertaining to counts I through IV of the complaint. The defendants argue that the Review Law does not apply because applicants for employment are not entitled to a hearing and because no administrative record is required by statute. Despite the fact that the defendants failed to file a notice of appeal from the trial court's October 28, 1999, order, they request that we dismiss the second amended complaint "in its entirety." These arguments are improper, as we lack jurisdiction to review the portion of the trial court's order denying the motion to dismiss as to counts I through IV.
I. JOINDER
The plaintiffs' first argument on appeal is that the trial court erred, as a matter of law, in dismissing counts V through XVI of their second amended complaint. Specifically, the plaintiffs argue that joinder of additional causes of action with a complaint for administrative review is permissible. The defendants respond that, under Dorner, joinder of additional causes with an administrative review complaint is inappropriate and that the plaintiffs have not timely filed any additional causes of action.
Absent any issue of fact, the appellate court reviews de novo the trial court's decision to grant an involuntary dismissal. Vrombaut v. Norcross Safety Products, L.L.C., 298 Ill.App.3d 560, 561-62, 232 Ill. Dec. 708, 699 N.E.2d 155 (1998). Because there are no facts at issue, we review the trial court's ruling de novo.
The scope of the Review Law is limited to judicial review of "a final decision of any administrative agency." 735 ILCS 5/3-102 (West 1998). Moreover, the Review Law is the sole and exclusive method to obtain judicial review of a final administrative decision. Midland Hotel *910 Corp. v. Director of Employment Security, 282 Ill.App.3d 312, 316, 217 Ill. Dec. 897, 668 N.E.2d 82 (1996).
As with other statutory schemes, the Review Law does not contain any provisions that directly address the propriety of joinder of additional causes of action. Joinder of causes of action is generally governed by section 2-614(a) of the Code, which provides that plaintiffs may join any causes of action against any defendant. 735 ILCS 5/2-614(a) (West 1998). Section 2-614 is to be liberally construed. See Hagen v. Stone, 277 Ill.App.3d 388, 392, 213 Ill. Dec. 932, 660 N.E.2d 189 (1995). The objective of joinder is to promote the economy of actions and trial convenience. Boyd v. Travelers Insurance Co., 166 Ill. 2d 188, 199, 209 Ill. Dec. 727, 652 N.E.2d 267 (1995).
Just as there is no statute on point, there is no case law addressing, in general, the propriety of joinder with administrative review actions. However, the court in Dorner discussed the viability of pleading for relief not enumerated in the Review Law when asserting a complaint for administrative review.
In Dorner, the plaintiff, a correctional academy trainer, filed suit for review of the decision of the Civil Service Commission not to offer him a voluntary reduction in his employment status after he was laid off from his position in the highest level classification of trainers. The trial court reversed the decision of the Civil Service Commission and ordered the Department of Corrections to offer the plaintiff the next available trainer position. The trial court, however, denied the plaintiff's prayer for back pay. The plaintiff appealed from that portion of the trial court's order denying back pay.
The reviewing court held that the power of the court was limited under the Review Law to either affirm or reverse the decision of the administrative agency or to remand the cause for additional evidence. Dorner, 85 Ill.App.3d at 963, 41 Ill. Dec. 252, 407 N.E.2d 750. The court further held that the trial court lacked jurisdiction to order the Department of Corrections either to offer the plaintiff the next available position, to compel reinstatement, or to order back pay. Dorner, 85 Ill.App.3d at 963, 41 Ill. Dec. 252, 407 N.E.2d 750. The court therefore remanded the matter to the Civil Service Commission for further proceedings consistent with the court's finding that the plaintiff was entitled to a certain lower classification position that had become available following the plaintiff's layoff.
The question in Dorner was the scope of the trial court's power to award relief within the context of a cause of action under the Review Law. The plaintiff in Dorner had not filed additional causes of action invoking the trial court's original jurisdiction. Simply put, joinder was not at issue. Accordingly, Dorner does not stand for the proposition that a plaintiff may not join additional causes of action with a complaint for administrative review. Accordingly, we believe that the trial court erred in ruling that Dorner operated to prohibit the plaintiffs from joining additional causes of action with a cause under the Review Law. Rather, the liberal pleading requirements and the goal of judicial economy suggest that the plaintiffs should be permitted to join with the administrative review counts any additional counts that are cognizable when the Review Law applies to the actions of an administrative agency.
II. VIABILITY OF ADDITIONAL CAUSES OF ACTION
The issue now becomes whether causes of action for declaratory judgment, breach of implied oral contract, and civil rights violations are cognizable when the Review Law applies to an action by an administrative agency. The plaintiffs argue that they may maintain causes of action for declaratory judgment and for civil rights, but admit that they may not maintain a cause for breach of implied oral contract when *911 the Review Law applies. The defendants argue that the Review Law constitutes the plaintiffs' sole and exclusive remedy.
The plaintiffs argue that the holding in Mueller v. Board of Fire & Police Commissioners, 267 Ill.App.3d 726, 205 Ill. Dec. 304, 643 N.E.2d 255 (1994), governs the instant case. In Mueller, the plaintiff filed a complaint for declaratory judgment and administrative review to contest the defendants' decision to remove his name from the list of eligible applicants for a firefighter position. The trial court dismissed the plaintiff's complaint for failure to state a cause of action. On appeal, the plaintiff argued that the decision was reviewable under either the Review Law, a complaint for declaratory judgment, or a common-law writ of certiorari. The court held that the complaint did not state sufficient facts for a declaratory judgment action. The court also noted that it need not consider the availability of a common-law certiorari because the Review Law applied to decisions made by a board of fire and police commissioners to deny employment. Mueller, 267 Ill.App.3d at 729, 205 Ill. Dec. 304, 643 N.E.2d 255.
In so holding, the court further noted that the Review Law provided the exclusive method of review of all final decisions of such boards. Mueller, 267 Ill.App.3d at 731, 205 Ill. Dec. 304, 643 N.E.2d 255. The court explained that the Review Law had been enacted to eliminate conflicting and inadequate common-law and statutory remedies for the judicial review of administrative decisions and to substitute a single uniform and comprehensive remedy. Mueller, 267 Ill.App.3d at 733, 205 Ill. Dec. 304, 643 N.E.2d 255. Although not expressly stated, the Mueller court appeared to suggest that a request for relief under the Review Law preempts relief pursuant to either a common-law action or a declaratory judgment action. The court reversed the trial court's order and remanded the cause.
Clearly, Mueller does not support the plaintiffs' contention that they may assert common-law causes of action in addition to the actions under the Review Law. Our own research reveals that, while certain constitutional causes may be asserted in conjunction with an administrative review cause, other statutory and common-law causes of action may not.
A. DECLARATORY JUDGMENT
Counts V through VIII request declaratory judgments declaring the plaintiffs' rights to be appointed as firefighters as well as awards of compensatory damages for loss of wages and benefits. Relying on Howard v. Lawton, 22 Ill. 2d 331, 175 N.E.2d 556 (1961), the plaintiffs argue in their additional brief that a declaratory judgment action may be maintained in conjunction with an administrative review action. The defendants maintain that the Review Law provides the sole and exclusive remedy.
We note that the parties have failed to cite the relevant provision of the Review Law:
"In all such [administrative review] cases, any other statutory, equitable or common law mode of review of decisions of administrative agencies heretofore available shall not hereafter be employed." 735 ILCS 5/3-102 (West 1998).
Prior to the enactment of the Review Law in 1945, there were diversity and uncertainty in the methods by which judicial review of the decisions of administrative agencies might be secured. Moline Tool Co. v. Department of Revenue, 410 Ill. 35, 37, 101 N.E.2d 71 (1951). The Review Law was designed to provide a single uniform method by which the decisions of most administrative agencies could be judicially reviewed. Moline, 410 Ill. at 37, 101 N.E.2d 71. Section 3-102 prohibits the use of preexisting methods of securing judicial review, and where the Review Law embraces administrative agencies subject to its terms, it becomes the sole means of securing judicial review of decisions of administrative agencies and eliminates the *912 heretofore conflicting and inadequate common-law and statutory remedies. See People ex rel. Goldfarb v. White, 54 Ill. App. 2d 483, 487, 203 N.E.2d 599 (1964).
The purpose of the Review Law has been strictly construed in several recent cases. In Dubin v. Personnel Board, 128 Ill. 2d 490, 132 Ill. Dec. 437, 539 N.E.2d 1243 (1989), the plaintiff filed a petition requesting that the trial court stay a discharge order issued by the defendant. The trial court allowed the petition, stayed the discharge order, and remanded the matter to the defendant. Our supreme court held that the trial court lacked subject matter jurisdiction. Dubin, 128 Ill.2d at 497, 132 Ill. Dec. 437, 539 N.E.2d 1243. The court further held that, once a final decision has been rendered by an administrative agency and the circuit court may grant the relief the party seeks within the context of reviewing that decision, a circuit court has no authority to entertain independent actions regarding the actions of an administrative agency. Dubin, 128 Ill.2d at 499, 132 Ill. Dec. 437, 539 N.E.2d 1243; see also County of Knox ex rel. Masterson v. Highlands, L.L.C., 188 Ill. 2d 546, 552-53, 243 Ill. Dec. 224, 723 N.E.2d 256 (1999); Midland, 282 Ill.App.3d at 317, 217 Ill. Dec. 897, 668 N.E.2d 82.
The plaintiffs are correct that the pleading requirement of section 2-701 of the Civil Practice Law (735 ILCS 5/2-701 (West 1998)) is liberally construed. Section 2-701 provides that a "[d]eclaration of rights * * * may be obtained by means of a pleading seeking that relief alone, or as incident to or part of a complaint * * * seeking other relief." 735 ILCS 5/2-701 (West 1998). Nonetheless, in Marozas v. Board of Fire & Police Commissioners, 222 Ill.App.3d 781, 791, 165 Ill. Dec. 223, 584 N.E.2d 402 (1991), the court expressly precluded the plaintiff from maintaining a declaratory judgment action because the Review Law applied.
In Marozas, the plaintiff, a former police officer, had been suspended by the board. He filed a cause for administrative review and further requested a declaratory judgment to void the administrative proceedings and to order his reinstatement. The court affirmed the trial court's dismissal of the count requesting a declaratory judgment, holding that the purpose of the Review Law was to review the actions of the board, rendering the request for declaratory judgment improper. Marozas, 222 Ill. App.3d at 791, 165 Ill. Dec. 223, 584 N.E.2d 402.
The plaintiffs further argue that they may maintain a declaratory judgment action pursuant to Board of Trustees of the Addison Fire Protection District No. 1 v. Stamp, 241 Ill.App.3d 873, 181 Ill. Dec. 800, 608 N.E.2d 1274 (1993). We find Stamp distinguishable. In Stamp, the board of trustees of a fire protection district brought a declaratory judgment action against the Director of the Department of Insurance to determine whether it could give pension credits to a firefighter for the time he served as a volunteer firefighter. The trial court entered a declaratory judgment construing the Pension Code (Ill.Rev. Stat.1991, ch. 108½, par. 1-101 et seq.) to allow the credits.
On appeal, the defendant argued that the decision of the board to credit the volunteer time did not constitute an administrative decision but, rather, a policy decision that he had the right to review. The reviewing court disagreed, holding that the administrative process that the plaintiff initiated was "tantamount to an administrative decision." Stamp, 241 Ill.App.3d at 882, 181 Ill. Dec. 800, 608 N.E.2d 1274. The court affirmed the trial court's entry of a declaratory judgment.
The present case is wholly unlike Stamp. In Stamp, the plaintiff was faced with a duty to decide the pension claims of a firefighter. The plaintiff made a determination to apply the credits, but it alleged that, upon attempting to implement its decision, its efforts were thwarted at the behest of the defendant. The Review Law was not implicated under this set of circumstances. *913 The plaintiff was not asking that the court determine whether an administrative action was against the manifest weight of the evidence or contrary to the law; it was seeking a judicial interpretation of the Pension Code so that it could enjoin the defendant from interfering with the implementation of its ruling. Because the unique issues in Stamp are not present in the case at hand, we decline to construe Stamp as holding that a declaratory judgment action is available to a firefighter applicant who seeks review of a board's decision not to hire.
The plaintiffs also rely on Howard v. Lawton, 22 Ill. 2d 331, 175 N.E.2d 556 (1961). Lawton is inapposite to the present case. In Lawton, the plaintiffs filed a cause for administrative review of a decision by the zoning board of appeals of the City of Chicago. The plaintiffs challenged the constitutionality of a certain zoning ordinance, which was upheld by the trial court. On appeal, the defendants challenged the court's jurisdiction, arguing that constitutional issues could not be raised in a complaint for administrative review. The court rejected this argument, noting that to hold otherwise would require the plaintiffs to first bring an action to review the administrative decision and then to bring a subsequent action to test the constitutionality of that decision. Lawton, 22 Ill.2d at 333, 175 N.E.2d 556.
As with Stamp, Lawton is not applicable because the plaintiffs in the present case are not raising a constitutional challenge to a regulation or ordinance. Therefore, these cases provide no authority for the proposition that a plaintiff bringing an administrative review action for failure to hire may request a declaratory judgment that he is entitled to be hired. We believe that the issue of the viability of the plaintiffs' declaratory judgment counts is controlled by Dubin, Masterson, Midland, and Marozas. For all of the foregoing reasons, we are persuaded that the plaintiffs in the present case cannot maintain declaratory judgment actions, and we affirm the trial court's ruling dismissing counts V through VIII of the complaint.
B. BREACH OF IMPLIED ORAL CONTRACT
Counts XIII through XVI allege that the defendants breached their promises to the plaintiffs that they would follow certain rules and regulations when hiring firefighters and that they would permit the plaintiffs the opportunity to obtain additional information concerning test results. The plaintiffs admit in their additional brief that the Review Law precludes a breach of contract claim when the Review Law applies to the actions of an administrative agency. However, the plaintiffs argue that the City was not a party in the administrative agency proceeding and that the breach of contract claim as to the City is not preempted by the Review Law. The plaintiffs further note that the defendants have denied that the Review Law applies, and therefore, the plaintiffs request that the matter be remanded for a determination of whether the Review Law applies to the City.
For the reasons set forth in our discussion in IIA above, we agree with the plaintiffs that the Review Law preempts a cause of action for breach of implied oral contract. We disagree that the breach of contract cause should proceed against the City. As noted above, in its October 28, 1999, order, the trial court expressly found that the plaintiffs pleaded a cause of action for administrative review against all defendants and denied the defendants' motion to dismiss as to the administrative review counts. The propriety of that portion of the trial court's order is not before us. Therefore, in this case, the Review Law applies to the City's alleged actions and preempts a cause of action for breach of an implied oral contract.
We also deny the plaintiffs' request that we remand for a determination of whether the Review Law applies to the case at all. The trial court has already made a specific finding regarding the cause for administrative *914 review, and the plaintiffs have offered no reason for us to require that the trial court revisit the issue. Therefore, we affirm that portion of the trial court's order dismissing counts XIII through XVI of the plaintiffs' complaint for breach of an implied oral contract.
C. CIVIL RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
The plaintiffs argue in their additional brief that, under the supremacy clause of the United States Constitution (U.S. Const., art. VI, cl. 2), a section 1983 action is not preempted by an action under the Review Law. The defendants do not analyze this issue in their response, contending that "if [the plaintiffs] sincerely believe that the [Review Law] does not preempt their alleged federal claims, [the plaintiffs] should have filed a section 1983 action separately from their [administrative review] claim." In their additional brief, the defendants continue to complain that the 1983 cause of action is beyond the statute of limitations period.
The United States Supreme Court has clearly indicated that the rights under section 1983 and the rights arising under state common law, although similar, are nonetheless distinct remedies. See Monroe v. Pape, 365 U.S. 167, 180, 81 S. Ct. 473, 480, 5 L. Ed. 2d 492, 501 (1961). Accordingly, although the same set of facts may give rise to violations of both section 1983 and state law, the rights protected are not necessarily identical nor are the criteria for each cause of action necessarily the same. Martin v. Duffie, 463 F.2d 464, 467 (10th Cir.1972).
Our research has disclosed Illinois cases not cited by the parties that unequivocally demonstrate that causes of action for constitutional violations committed by an administrative agency are not preempted by the Review Law when the Review Law applies to the actions of an administrative agency. In Board of Education of Rich Township High School District No. 227 v. Brown, 311 Ill.App.3d 478, 244 Ill. Dec. 68, 724 N.E.2d 956 (1999), residents of a school district filed for judicial review of a decision to grant the defendants' petition to detach the school district that was rendered by the board of trustees of the affected townships. The plaintiffs filed a complaint for administrative review, along with three additional causes of action, including two counts under section 1983 and a constitutional attack on the governing statute. Brown, 311 Ill.App.3d at 489, 244 Ill. Dec. 68, 724 N.E.2d 956. The trial court affirmed the decision of the trustees granting the detachment, but remanded the matter to the trustees to "entertain constitutional questions." Brown, 311 Ill. App.3d at 482, 244 Ill. Dec. 68, 724 N.E.2d 956.
After the trustees entertained the constitutional questions, they denied the detachment, effectively overruling the trial court's order. The trial court then entered an order explaining that its prior remand was intended to allow the trustees to develop a record of constitutional claims and arguments, but not to permit reconsideration of the detachment issue on constitutional grounds. The trial court reversed the trustees' decision and granted the detachment. Brown, 311 Ill.App.3d at 483, 244 Ill. Dec. 68, 724 N.E.2d 956.
The plaintiffs appealed the trial court's decision to grant the detachment. The reviewing court examined the propriety of the trial court's remand of the constitutional issues to the trustees. The court noted that constitutional challenges to an administrative action may be raised in a complaint for administrative review. Brown, 311 Ill.App.3d at 489, 244 Ill. Dec. 68, 724 N.E.2d 956. A constitutional claim is an original action independent of the administrative review proceeding and is therefore plenary in scope. Brown, 311 Ill.App.3d at 489, 244 Ill. Dec. 68, 724 N.E.2d 956. Moreover, a constitutional challenge is not a review proceeding even when it questions an administrative decision that has an adjudicative component. Brown, 311 Ill.App.3d at 489, 244 Ill. Dec. 68, 724 N.E.2d 956.
*915 The reviewing court explained that an agency lacks the authority to question the validity or constitutionality of a statute. Brown, 311 Ill.App.3d at 490, 244 Ill. Dec. 68, 724 N.E.2d 956. Such matters must be raised before the trial court, which is vested with original jurisdiction over constitutional issues raised in a complaint for administrative review. Brown, 311 Ill.App.3d at 491, 244 Ill. Dec. 68, 724 N.E.2d 956. Because the constitutional issues were not properly before the trustees, the reviewing court held that the trial court had erred in remanding the matter to the agency, and remanded the matter for further hearings. See also Mattis v. State Universities Retirement System, 296 Ill.App.3d 675, 231 Ill. Dec. 49, 695 N.E.2d 566 (1998) (trial court's dismissal of civil rights counts upon affirming decision of administrative agency was improper).
Similar to Brown and Mattis, the plaintiffs in the present case have raised constitutional issues regarding the administrative actions, which constitute claims wholly separate and apart from administrative review. The issues of whether the plaintiffs' civil rights were violated could not have been before the Board and, therefore, cannot be the subject of administrative review. Moreover, to hold otherwise would frustrate the very purpose behind the enactment of section 1983. Indeed, it is clear from Brown and Mattis that Illinois courts reviewing administrative decisions recognize that federal constitutional issues are not preempted by the Review Law. See also Piquard v. City of East Peoria, 887 F. Supp. 1106, 1118 (C.D.Ill.1995) (plaintiff police officer alleging disability discrimination may maintain cause of action under the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (see 42 U.S.C. § 1201 et seq. (1994)) in addition to cause under the Review Law). Therefore, we vacate the trial court's ruling that counts IX through XII of the complaint be dismissed, and we remand the matter for further hearings on the statute of limitations issue that was raised in the defendants' motion to dismiss.
III. CONCLUSION
We are persuaded that causes of action for civil rights violations by an administrative agency and other constitutional challenges are not preempted by the Review Law and may be joined with an action for administrative review. We also believe that other common-law actions predicated upon nonconstitutional theories are preempted by the Review Law when the Review Law applies to the actions of an administrative agency. For this reason, we reverse the trial court's ruling dismissing counts IX through XII, the section 1983 causes of action. However, we affirm the trial court's order dismissing counts V through VIII and XIII through XVI, the breach of contract and declaratory judgment counts.
For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of Stephenson County is affirmed in part and reversed in part, and the cause is remanded.
Affirmed in part and reversed in part; cause remanded.
BOWMAN and HUTCHINSON, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9739621 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:38.85462+00 ===

WILDER, J.
Defendants appeal as of right and plaintiff cross-appeals as of right a judgment awarding plaintiff $33,332 following a jury trial. This action arises out of an employment agreement between plaintiff and defendant Bentley & Associates, Inc. (Bentley). On appeal, defendants argue that the trial court erred in denying their motion for a directed verdict, because plaintiffs right of first refusal to buy Bentley’s stock did not accrue. On cross-appeal, plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in denying her motion for a directed verdict regarding a noncompetition clause and that Bentley is barred from enforcement of the noncompetition clause because the jury found that Bentley was the first to breach the employment agreement (by firing plaintiff without cause). We hold that (1) the trial court erred in denying defendants’ motion for a directed verdict on the right-of-first-refusal clause, (2) the trial court did not *501err in denying plaintiffs motion for a directed verdict on the noncompetition clause, and (3) Bentley is not barred from enforcement of the noncompetition clause by reason of its first breach. Therefore, we (1) reverse the judgment as it relates to plaintiffs right-of-first-refusal claim, (2) affirm the judgment in all other respects, and (3) remand for (a) entry of a directed verdict for defendants on plaintiffs right-of-first-refusal claim and (b) modification of the judgment to accord with this opinion.
i
(A)
The relevant facts are undisputed. Plaintiff began working for Bentley in 1980. In 1987, plaintiff and Bentley entered into an employment contract (an agreement prohibiting the firing of plaintiff without just cause), with plaintiff being employed as general manager. The contract contained both a noncompetition clause imposed on plaintiff and a right of first refusal in plaintiffs favor, whereby plaintiff would be given an opportunity to purchase Bentley stock if Bentley sold it.
John R. Waugh is the president of Bentley. Jeffrey Waugh is the vice president. John F. Waugh and Elnor Waugh are the parents of John R. and Jeffrey.
In 2001, Bentley had 4,000 shares outstanding. John F. Waugh and Elnor Waugh gave 320 shares to John R. and Jeffrey. Bentley redeemed the remaining 3,680 shares.
In October 2002, Bentley terminated plaintiffs employment. Plaintiff then accepted a position with a competitor.
*502(B)
Defendants brought an action for breach of the noncompetition clause. Plaintiff subsequently brought this action for breach of the just-cause and first-refusal provisions, and the trial court consolidated the actions for trial.
At trial, both sides moved for partial directed verdicts, with plaintiff arguing that the noncompetition provision was unenforceable and defendants arguing that the right of first refusal had not been activated. The trial court denied both motions.
The jury found (1) that plaintiff had breached the noncompetition clause and (2) that Bentley had breached (a) the right-of-first-refusal provision, (b) the just-cause provision, and (c) its obligation to pay plaintiff bonuses. The jury awarded Bentley $60,000 for plaintiffs breach of the noncompetition clause and awarded plaintiff $60,000 for Bentley’s breach of the first-refusal provision, $27,332 for Bentley’s breach of the just-cause provision, and $6,000 for Bentley’s breach of its obligation to pay bonuses. The trial court entered a net judgment of $33,332 in plaintiffs favor.
ii
(A)
Defendants contend that the trial court erred in denying their motion for a partial directed verdict because plaintiffs right of first refusal did not accrue. We agree.
We review de novo a ruling on a motion for a directed verdict. Smith v Jones, 246 Mich App 270, 273; 632 NW2d 509 (2001). The motion is properly granted if, viewing the evidence in a light most favorable to the *503nonmoving party, reasonable minds cannot differ. Id. The proper interpretation of a contract is a question of law, which we also review de novo. Wilkie v Auto-Owners Ins Co, 469 Mich 41, 47; 664 NW2d 776 (2003); Randolph v Reisig, 272 Mich App 331, 333; 727 NW2d 388 (2006).
(B)
That contracts are enforced according to their terms is a corollary of the parties’ liberty to contract. Rory v Continental Ins Co, 473 Mich 457, 468; 703 NW2d 23 (2005). This Court examines contractual language and gives the words their plain and ordinary meanings. Wilkie, supra at 47.1 “[A]n unambiguous contractual provision is reflective of the parties’ intent as a matter of law,” and “[i]f the language of the contract is unambiguous, we construe and enforce the contract as written.” Quality Products & Concepts Co v Nagel Precision, Inc, 469 Mich 362, 375; 666 NW2d 251 (2003).2 Courts may not impose an ambiguity on clear contract language. Grosse Pointe Park v Michigan Muni Liability & Prop Pool, 473 Mich 188, 198; 702 NW2d 106 (2005). A contract is ambiguous when two provisions “irreconcilably conflict with each other,” Klapp v United Ins Group Agency, Inc, 468 Mich 459, 467; 663 NW2d 447 (2003), or “when [a term] is equally susceptible to more than a single meaning,” Lansing Mayor v Pub Service Comm, 470 Mich 154, 166; 680 NW2d 840 (2004). *504Whether a contract is ambiguous is a question of law. Wilkie, supra at 47. Only when contractual language is ambiguous does its meaning become a question of fact. Port Huron Ed Ass’n v Port Huron Area School Dist, 452 Mich 309, 323; 550 NW2d 228 (1996).3 Agreements granting rights of first refusal are enforceable. See Randolph, supra at 336-337.
The parties’ employment contract granted plaintiff a right of first refusal only upon the sale of stock or the business: “In the event the Company shall elect to sell the business or the common capital stock of the Company, the Company grants to Employee a right of first refusal on like terms and conditions as any reasonable third party offer to purchase.” (Emphasis added.) We hold that this term is unambiguous, because it is not susceptible to more than one interpretation and does not conflict with any other term. It affords plaintiff a right of first refusal upon the happening of Bentley’s “election] to sell the business or. . . stock” and its receipt of a reasonable offer to purchase.
The question before us is whether Bentley “elect[ed] to sell... stock. . . ,”4 Dictionary definitions may be used to ascertain the plain and ordinary meaning of terms undefined in an agreement. Cole v Auto Owners Ins, 272 Mich App 50, 53; 723 NW2d 922 (2006). “Sell” means “to transfer (goods or property) or render (services) in exchange for money” or “to . . . offer for sale . ...” Random House Webster’s College Dictionary (1997). “Purchase” means “to acquire by the payment of money or its equivalent; buy.” Id. Under the unam*505biguous language of the contract, plaintiff therefore enjoyed a right of first refusal in the event Bentley elected “to transfer” for money or “offer for sale” its common stock and received a reasonable offer to purchase.
Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to plaintiff, Smith, supra at 273, reasonable minds cannot differ concerning the conclusion that the conditions required for the right of first refusal never occurred. Instead of “electing] to sell” its stock, Bentley actually redeemed outstanding stock. A redemption differs from a sale. SeeMCL 450.1344 (“[A] corporation may acquire its own shares ....”); Black’s Law Dictionary (8th ed) (defining “redemption” as “[t]he act or an instance of reclaiming or regaining possession by paying a specific price,” including “[t]he reacquisition of a security by the issuer”).5 Thus, because Bentley did not “elect to sell the business or [its] stock,” plaintiffs first-refusal right did not accrue. Accordingly, a directed verdict was proper on plaintiffs claim because plaintiff made no prima facie showing of liability on this claim. Elezovic v Ford Motor Co, 472 Mich 408, 429 n 29; 697 NW2d 851 (2005). The trial court erred in denying defendants’ motion for a partial directed verdict.
HI
(A)
On cross-appeal, plaintiff argues that (1) the trial court erred in denying her motion for a partial directed verdict regarding the noncompetition clause, because the clause was unenforceable as a matter of law, and (2) *506Bentley was barred from enforcement of the clause when the jury found that Bentley had breached the employment agreement first. We disagree.
The reasonableness of a noncompetition provision is a question of law when the relevant facts are undisputed. See St Clair Med, PC v Borgiel, 270 Mich App 260, 267-269; 715 NW2d 914 (2006). Questions of law are reviewed de novo. Bandit Industries, Inc v Hobbs Int’l, Inc (After Remand), 463 Mich 504, 511; 620 NW2d 531 (2001).
(B)
(1)
MCL 445.774a(l) governs the enforceability of agreements not to compete made between employers and employees:
An employer may obtain from an employee an agreement or covenant which protects an employer’s reasonable competitive business interests and expressly prohibits an employee from engaging in employment or a line of business after termination of employment if the agreement or covenant is reasonable as to its duration, geographical area, and the type of employment or line of business. To the extent any such agreement or covenant is found to be unreasonable in any respect, a court may limit the agreement to render it reasonable in light of the circumstances in which it was made and specifically enforce the agreement as limited. [Emphasis added.]
“Agreements not to compete are permissible under Michigan law as long as they are reasonable.” Thermatool Corp v Borzym, 227 Mich App 366, 372; 575 NW2d 334 (1998). In other words:
[A] restrictive covenant must protect an employer’s reasonable competitive business interests, but its protec*507tion in terms of duration, geographical scope, and the type of employment or line of business must be reasonable. Additionally, a restrictive covenant must be reasonable as between the parties, and it must not be specially injurious to the public.
Because the prohibition on all competition is in restraint of trade, an employer’s business interest justifying a restrictive covenant must be greater than merely preventing competition. To be reasonable in relation to an employer’s competitive business interest, a restrictive covenant must protect against the employee’s gaining some unfair advantage in competition with the employer, but not prohibit the employee from using general knowledge or skill. [Si Clair Medical, PC, supra at 266 (citation omitted).]
The noncompetition clause in this case provided:
Employee will not for a period of one (1) year after termination of employment with the Company, regardless of the reason for termination of employment, participate either personally or financially in any enterprise in competition with the Company. If the physical location of an enterprise is not within one hundred (100) miles of any business location of the Company, that enterprise will not be viewed as in competition with the Company.
As a general matter, courts presume the legality, validity, and enforceability of contracts. Cruz v State Farm Mut Automobile Ins Co, 466 Mich 588, 599; 648 NW2d 591 (2002). But noncompetition agreements are disfavored as restraints on commerce and are only enforceable to the extent they are reasonable. Stoia v Miskinis, 298 Mich 105, 118; 298 NW 469 (1941); Bristol Window & Door, Inc v Hoogenstyn, 250 Mich App 478, 495; 650 NW2d 670 (2002) (concluding that, in enacting MCL 445.774a, the Legislature intended to revive the common-law standards for the enforceability of noncompetition agreements); see also MCL 445.774a(l). A court must assess the reasonableness of *508the noncompetition clause if a party has challenged its enforceability. See MCL 445.774a(l); Woodward v Cadillac Overall Supply Co, 396 Mich 379, 389-391; 240 NW2d 710 (1976). The burden of demonstrating the validity of the agreement is on the party seeking enforcement. Id. at 391.
The trial court denied plaintiffs motion for a partial directed verdict, which argued that the noncompetition provision was unreasonable as a matter of law. The effect of the trial court’s ruling was to leave the issue of reasonableness to the trier of fact. Plaintiff, however, elected not to present to the jury her argument concerning the agreement’s unreasonableness, even though the trial court had rejected the argument that it was unreasonable as a matter of law. The jury enforced the clause.
The facts relevant to the reasonableness of the non-competition clause are undisputed. It is undisputed that Bentley is a graphic communications and advertising firm. It is undisputed that plaintiff had worked for Bentley since 1980, and thus at the time of her firing had worked for Bentley for 22 years. It is undisputed that the noncompetition clause only applied for one year and applied to competitors within 100 miles. Because the relevant facts were undisputed, the trial court erred in not deciding the reasonableness of the noncompetition clause as a matter of law. St Clair Medical, PC, supra at 267-269.
We hold that the noncompetition clause was reasonable as a matter of law, given its limited temporal scope, its modest geographic scope, and the undisputed length of plaintiffs employment with Bentley. However, even though the trial court erroneously failed to decide this issue as a matter of law, the jury enforced the clause, and we will not reverse if the right result is reached, *509albeit for the wrong reason. FACE Trading, Inc v Dep’t of Consumer & Industry Services, 270 Mich App 653, 678; 717 NW2d 377 (2006). In short, the trial court did not err in denying plaintiffs motion for a partial directed verdict on the reasonableness and the enforceability of the noncompetition clause.
(2)
Plaintiff next argues that Bentley was barred from enforcing the noncompetition clause because, under the jury’s verdict, Bentley was the first to materially breach the employment contract. Plaintiff cites Michaels v Amway Corp, 206 Mich App 644, 650; 522 NW2d 703 (1994) (“ ‘[0]ne who first breaches a contract cannot maintain an action against the other contracting party for his subsequent breach ....’ ”) (citation omitted). We disagree.
(a)
First, plaintiffs argument is unpreserved. Plaintiff presented this argument (that because Bentley breached first, it cannot enforce the noncompetition clause) to neither the jury (before its verdict) nor the trial court (after the verdict).6 We therefore reject plaintiffs unpreserved claim. Booth Newspapers, Inc v Univ of Michigan Bd of Regents, 444 Mich 211, 234; 507 *510NW2d 422 (1993) (“Issues raised for the first time on appeal are not ordinarily subject to review.”); Smith v Foerster-Bolser Constr, Inc, 269 Mich App 424, 427; 711 NW2d 421 (2006).
(b)
Alternatively, the plain language of the noncompetition clause vitiates the first-breach doctrine: “Employee will not for a period of one (1) year after termination of employment with the Company, regardless of the reason for termination of employment, participate ... in any enterprise in competition with the Company.” (Emphasis added.) We hold that this provision is not ambiguous, because it is not susceptible to more than one interpretation and does not conflict with any other provision. Klapp, supra at 467; Lansing Mayor, supra at 166. Plaintiff was barred from competing with Bentley, regardless of the reason for the termination of plaintiff’s employment. In other words, even though plaintiffs employment was terminated without cause, plaintiff was still barred from working for a competitor for one year. Thus, under this clause’s plain terms, plaintiff cannot argue that because her employment was terminated without cause, Bentley was barred from enforcing the non-competition clause. Such an interpretation contravenes the plain terms of the clause and therefore must be rejected. Wilkie, supra at 47. Bentley is entitled to the benefit of its unambiguous bargain. Rory, supra at 468.
We respect the parties’ freedom of contract. Id. Here, the parties opted out of the first-breach doctrine by using the language “regardless of the reason for termination of employment.” The parties are free to avoid, by *511contract, what might otherwise be an applicable rule of law.7 See id. at 468-472.
*512iv
We hold that the trial court erred in denying defendants’ motion for a partial directed verdict on the right-of-first-refusal clause, because the undisputed facts indicate that the right of first refusal did not accrue. The trial court did not err in denying plaintiffs motion for a partial directed verdict, because the non-competition clause was enforceable as a matter of law. We also reject plaintiffs argument that Bentley was barred from enforcing the noncompetition clause (given *513the jury’s finding that Bentley first breached the contract when it fired plaintiff without cause), because plaintiffs argument is unpreserved and is inconsistent with the plain terms of the noncompetition clause. Therefore, we (1) reverse the judgment as it relates to plaintiffs right-of-first-refusal claim, (2) affirm the judgment in all other respects, and (3) remand for (a) entry of a directed verdict on plaintiffs right-of-first-refusal claim and (b) modification of the judgment to accord with this opinion, i.e., entry of a net judgment of $26,668 in Bentley’s favor.
Reversed in part, affirmed in part, and remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. We do not retain jurisdiction.
SMOLENSKI, EJ., concurred.
In other words, if “contract language is neither ambiguous nor contrary to ... statute, the will of the parties, as reflected in their agreement, is to be carried out, and thus the contract is enforced as written.” Mud v State Farm Mut Automobile Ins Co, 267 Mich App 431, 435; 705 NW2d 151 (2005), rev’d on other grounds 478 Mich 178 (2007).
In other words, if a contract is unambiguous, its meaning is for the court to decide. Davis v LaFontaine Motors, Inc, 271 Mich App 68, 73; 719 NW2d 890 (2006).
The rule of contra proferentum (construction of an agreement against its drafter) is used only when there is a true ambiguity and the parties’ intent cannot be discerned through all conventional means, including extrinsic evidence. Klapp, supra at 470-471.
There is no contention that Bentley “electfed] to sell the business[.]”
Though defendants John E and Elnor Waugh (or trusts they controlled) clearly “elect[ed] to sell” their stock to Bentley, plaintiff had no contract with the Waughs under which she enjoyed first-refusal rights.
For example, plaintiff could have structured (or advocated the structuring of) the verdict form so that the first question was whether Bentley fired plaintiff without cause, and, if the answer from the jury was yes, the jury would not have gone on to consider Bentley’s claims. Alternatively, plaintiff could have brought a motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, to argue that the verdict was inconsistent or legally unenforceable, because the jury, by its verdict, found that Bentley was the first to breach but still allowed Bentley to recover for plaintiffs subsequent breach. Plaintiff brought no such motion.
We question the continued viability of the first-breach doctrine under our Supreme Court’s contracts jurisprudence, which emphasizes the limited role of courts in contract disputes: courts enforce unambiguous contract terms. Quality Products & Concepts Co, supra at 375.
For instance, courts generally may not attempt to evaluate whether a contract is one of “adhesion.” See Rory, supra at 477. “An ‘adhesion contract’ is simply that: a contract. It must be enforced according to its plain terms unless one of the traditional contract defenses applies.” Id. Rory explained:
Therefore, we hold that it is of no legal relevance that a contract is or is not described as “adhesive.” In either case, the contract is to be enforced according to its plain language. Regardless of whether a contract is adhesive, a court may not revise or void the unambiguous language of the agreement to achieve a result that it views as fairer or more reasonable.” [Id. at 489 (emphasis added).]
Rory concluded: “Consistent with our prior jurisprudence, unambiguous contracts .. . are to be enforced as written unless a contractual provision violates law or public policy.” Id. at 491.
Other decisions emphasize the limited role of courts in contract disputes. Wilkie held that the doctrine of reasonable expectations is inconsistent with the court’s limited role of enforcing unambiguous contracts:
This approach, where judges divine the parties’ reasonable expectations and then rewrite the contract accordingly, is contrary to the bedrock principle of American contract law that parties are free to contract as they see fit, and the courts are to enforce the agreement as written absent some highly unusual circumstance, such as a contract in violation of law or public policy. This Court has recently discussed, and reinforced, its fidelity to this understanding of contract law in Terrien v Zwit, 467 Mich 56, 71; 648 NW2d 602 (2002). The notion, that free men and women may reach agreements regarding their affairs without government interference and that courts will enforce those agreements, is ancient and irrefutable. [Wilkie, supra at 51-52 (footnotes omitted; emphasis added).]
*512Thus, the role of courts is to enforce unambiguous contracts as written. Wilkie also stated:
The rights and duties of parties to a contract are derived from the terms of the agreement. Evans v Norris, 6 Mich 369, 372 (1859). As this Court has previously stated, “The general rule [of contracts] is that competent persons shall have the utmost liberty of contracting and that their agreements voluntarily and fairly made shall be held valid and enforced in the courts.” Terrien, supra at 71, quoting Twin City Pipe Line Co v Harding Glass Co, 283 US 353, 356; 51 S Ct 476; 75 L Ed 1112 (1931). Under this legal principle, the parties are generally free to agree to whatever they like, and, in most circumstances, it is beyond the authority of the courts to interfere with the parties’ agreement. St Clair Intermediate School Dist v Intermediate Ed Ass’n, 458 Mich 540, 570-572; 581 NW2d 707 (1998). Respect for the freedom to contract entails that we enforce only those obligations actually assented to by the parties. Evans, supra at 372. [Id. at 62-63.]
Thus, the courts’ limited role in contract disputes is only to enforce all those, but only those, obligations actually assented to by the parties. Id.
Here, the parties’ contract clearly provides that plaintiff may not work for a competitor for one year after the termination of her employment, “regardless of the reason for termination . ...” To hold that Bentley is barred from enforcing this unambiguous contractual term, because it was the first to breach, would deny Bentley the benefit of its unambiguous bargain and contradict clear Supreme Court precedent providing that the courts must enforce unambiguous contractual terms. Rory, supra at 491; Wilkie, supra at 51-52, 62-63.

=== CASE 9739623 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:40.28472+00 ===

OPINION
BAILEY, Judge.
Case Summary
Mario McCann (“McCann”) was charged and convicted of Attempted Murder,1 Burglary,2 and Attempted Rape.3 McCann was tried by jury and sentenced to a total executed sentence of one hundred years. McCann appeals his convictions and sentence. We affirm in part, and reverse and remand in part.
Issues
McCann raises four issues on appeal, which we restate as follows:
I. Whether the photo array shown to the identifying witnesses was unduly suggestive and whether their subsequent in-court identifications were improper;
II. Whether the State committed prosecutorial misconduct in its closing argument;
III. Whether the trial court properly instructed the jury on Attempted Rape; and,
IV. Whether McCann’s sentence was manifestly unreasonable.
Facts and Procedural History
The facts most favorable to the judgment are as follows. On the evening of August 2, 1997, McCann approached and talked to A.L. (“A.L.”) and Anthony Dozier (“Dozier”) at their home at 38th Street and College Avenue in Indianapolis. After McCann left, A.L. went upstairs and fell asleep in her bed with the television on. When A.L. awoke McCann was in her bedroom. McCann tried to pull her covers off and told her he had a gun that he would use if she was not quiet. Additionally, McCann touched A.L.’s breasts and stated “shut up, it [won’t] take very long, and then [I’ll] leave [you] alone.” A.L. viewed McCann’s face for approximately ten minutes. A.L.’s boyfriend, Dozier, then entered the bedroom, saw McCann, and began to struggle with McCann. During this struggle, McCann shot Dozier in the chest. McCann then left through the bedroom window. Dozier viewed McCann’s face for approximately five minutes. An upstairs neighbor called the police.
Detective Lawrence Cahill (“Detective Cahill”), of the Indianapolis Police Department, responded to.the police radio call, and conducted the investigation of the crime. A.L. described McCann as a young black male approximately five feet ten inches in height, and other residents of the apartment and neighbors indicated to Detective Cahill that the suspect’s first name was Mario. From a police database, Detective Cahill printed out photographs comprised of black males named Mario. Then, after eliminating pictures from suspects that were in the database more than *1002once and removing names, Detective Cahill presented a thirty-two-picture array to A.L. and Dozier. Two of the pictures within this array were of McCann. Both Dozier and A.L. identified McCann as the person who attempted to rape A.L. and shot Dozier. Thereafter, McCann was arrested and charged for Attempted Murder, Burglary, and Attempted Rape.
Prior to trial, McCann moved to suppress A.L.’s and Dozier’s in-court identifications of him. McCann argued that the out of court identification procedures were unduly suggestive. The trial court denied this motion. During trial, McCann renewed his objections to A.L.’s and Dozier’s in-court identifications. These objections were denied.
McCann was found guilty on all three charged offenses. The trial court cited four aggravating circumstances and no mitigating circumstances. The trial court sentenced McCann to fifty years for each offense, with the Attempted Murder conviction and Burglary conviction to run consecutively and the Attempted Rape conviction to run concurrently. McCann was sentenced to a total executed sentence of one hundred years.
Discussion and Decision
I. Photo Array and Inr-Court Identification
A. Rule of Law
Due process of law under the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution requires suppression of testimony concerning a pretrial identification when the procedure employed is im-permissibly suggestive. Harris v. State, 716 N.E.2d 406, 410 (Ind.1999). A photographic array is impermissibly suggestive if it raises a substantial likelihood of mis-identification given the totality of the circumstances. Id. Factors to be considered in evaluating the likelihood of a misidentifi-cation include (1) the opportunity of the witness to view the criminal at the time of the crime, (2) the witness’s degree of attention, (3) the accuracy of the witness’s prior description of the criminal, and (4) the level of certainty demonstrated by the witness. Id. A photographic array is sufficient if the defendant “does not stand out so strikingly in his characteristics that he virtually is alone with respect to identifying features.” Id. (quoting Pierce v. State, 267 Ind. 240, 246, 369 N.E.2d 617, 620 (1977)). Where the pretrial procedures are not impermissibly suggestive, both the evidence of the pretrial and in-court identifications are held to be properly admitted. Id.
B. Analysis
Here, prior to trial, A.L. described the perpetrator as a young black male approximately five feet ten inches in height with a short haircut. Dozier offered a similar description, adding that the perpetrator was dark complected. A.L. and Dozier also indicated that they had previously seen the perpetrator when he approached them on the front porch of their apartment. A.L. further testified that she viewed the perpetrator’s face for approximately ten minutes on the night of the incident, and Dozier stated that he viewed the perpetrator’s face for approximately five minutes while the two struggled. Thus, both witnesses had a good opportunity to view the perpetrator, and reason to be attentive.
After Detective Cahill compiled thirty-two pictures of young black males with the first name of Mario, he showed this array of photos to both A.L. and Dozier on separate occasions and outside of each other’s presence. While this photographic array included young black males with varying physical attributes, including different hair lengths and complexions, McCann did not “stand out so strikingly” so as to render the process impermissibly suggestive. Pierce, 369 N.E.2d at 620. Similarly, the inclusion of two pictures of McCann, apparently by mistake, was not unduly suggestive. See Hollonquest v. State, 272 Ind. 380, 398 N.E.2d 655 (1979) (holding that *1003where a witness was shown a thirty-picture array which contained two pictures of the defendant, and he selected both pictures, this did not suggest to a significant degree that the police consider the individual portrayed to be a prime suspect and that this was not impermissibly suggestive). A.L. and Dozier selected the two pictures of McCann as the perpetrator, and after viewing the entire photographic array reiterated their certainty that the two pictures were of the perpetrator of the crime. Given the totality of the circumstances, we find the record demonstrates that this photographic array was not im-permissibly suggestive. Thus, the trial court properly admitted this evidence of the photographic identifications. As such, we need not separately analyze the bases for A.L.’s and Dozier’s in-court identifications. See Harris, 716 N.E.2d at 410.
II. Prosecutorial Misconduct — Closing Argument
A. Rule of Law
Before this Court will consider a claim of prosecutorial misconduct, the defendant must have made a timely objection to the alleged misconduct at trial to secure that issue for review, as failure to so object waives the issue. Stevens v. State, 691 N.E.2d 412, 420 (Ind.1997) cert. denied. This rule applies to allegedly improper remarks made during closing argument. Charlton v. State, 702 N.E.2d 1045, 1051 (Ind.1998) reh’g denied. However, a party may escape waiver of an issue, for failure to object, if the claimed error is fundamental in nature. Id. “Fundamental error is a substantial blatant violation of basic principles rendering the trial unfair to the defendant and, thereby, depriving the defendant of fundamental due process.” Id.
B. Analysis
In the instant case, McCann complains that the prosecutor engaged in misconduct in closing argument in several respects: “[b]y asserting her personal belief that her witness was being truthful[;] by misstating the role of defense counsel[;] and[,] by urging the jury to convict based on the Appellant’s supposed personality.” (Appellant’s brief at 14.) Specifically, McCann references the following excerpts from the prosecutor’s closing argument: (1) after summarizing the testimony of the victims, the prosecutor stated “they didn’t ask for this. All they’re asking is that you believe what they tell you.” (Appellant’s brief at 16; R. 558); (2) after summarizing Detective Cahill’s testimony, the prosecutor stated “Detective Cahill, he’s a good detective ... He does not refer to photos to individuals looking at them as mugshots ... He doesn’t taint photo arrays in that way ... [he] doesn’t want to present cases to the prosecutor that are on hedgy bets.” (Appellant’s brief at 16; R. 574-75); (3) commenting on the role of defense counsel, the prosecutor stated in part “there’s a lot of smoke here ... [defense counsel’s] job is to take you away from what you hear and point you to little details ... ”; and, (4) commenting on McCann’s character, the prosecutor stated “[McCann] didn’t care whether [the victims] were dead or alive, because all that mattered to him was Mario McCann ... Because the only thing in this world that matters to Mario McCann is Mario.” (Appellant’s brief at 17; R. 579.) McCann did not object to any of these allegedly improper closing comments. Ordinarily, such a failure would cause these issues to be waived. See Charlton, 702 N.E.2d at 1051. Consequently, McCann argues that the prosecutor’s statements amounted to fundamental error.
While considered as a whole the prosecutor’s closing statements may have pushed the bounds of zealous advocacy, we find nothing about the statements to be so egregious as to rise to fundamental error. A “claim of fundamental error is not viable absent a showing of grave peril and the possible effect on the jury’s decision.” Wrinkles v. State, 690 N.E.2d 1156, 1171 (Ind.1997) cert. denied. The error must be so prejudicial to the rights of a defendant *1004as to- make a fair trial impossible. Id. Here, any prejudicial impact caused by the prosecutor’s statements taken individually or as a whole was minimal against the backdrop of A.L.’s and Dozier’s identification testimony. McCann was not denied a fair trial.
III. Attempted Rape — Instructions
A. Standard of Review
The well-settled standard by which we review challenges to jury instructions affords great deference to the trial court. State v. Snyder, 732 N.E.2d 1240, 1244 (Ind.Ct.App.2000). Accordingly, the trial court’s ruling will not be reversed unless the instructional error is such that, taken as a whole, the charge to the jury misstates the law or otherwise misleads the jury. Id.
B. Analysis
Here, during final instructions, and over McCann’s objection, the trial court read the following Attempted Rape instruction:
A person attempts to commit a crime when he knowingly engages in conduct that constitutes a substantial step toward the commission of the crime.
The crime of Rape is defined by statute as follows:
A person who knowingly has sexual intercourse with a member of the opposite sex when the other person is compelled by force or imminent threat of force commits rape. The offense is a Class A felony if it is committed while armed with a deadly weapon.
The elements of this offense are that the Defendant must:
1. Knowingly
2. Have sexual intercourse
3. With a member of the opposite sex
4. By compelling the other person with force or the imminent threat of force
5.While armed with a deadly weapon.
The term “sexual intercourse” as used herein means an act that includes any penetration of the female sex organ by the male sex organ.
(R. 128.) Following the analysis of our supreme court in Richeson v. State, 704 N.E.2d 1008, 1010 (Ind.1998), we proceed by comparing the trial court’s instruction with the applicable statutes for Attempt and Rape.
Indiana’s attempt statute provides in part that “[a] person attempts to commit a crime when, acting with the culpability required for the commission of that crime, he engages in conduct that constitutes a substantial step toward the commission of the crime.” Ind.Code § 35-41-5 — 1(a) (emphasizing the same language as in Richeson). The culpability required for Rapé is “knowingly or intentionally.” Ind. Code § 35-42-4-1. This language of the Attempt statute and the applicable culpability for Rape, “knowingly or intentionally,” mirror that considered by our supreme court in Richeson. In Richeson, the defendant faced a charge of Attempted Battery and the trial court instructed the jury that the requisite mens rea the State needed to establish was “knowingly or intentionally.” Richeson, 704 N.E.2d at 1008. Our supreme court addressed the adequacy of the Attempted Battery instruction against the backdrop of Spradlin v. State, in which our supreme court held that an attempted murder instruction “must inform the jury that the State must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant, with intent to kill the victim, engaged in conduct which was a substantial step toward such killing.” 569 N.E.2d 948, 950 (Ind.1991) (emphasis added). In Richeson, our supreme court held as follows:
We conclude that the special precautions we took in Spradlin are not warranted for lesser offenses. We hold, therefore, that the attempt statute permits an instruction that the jury may *1005convict upon proof that the defendant took a substantial step toward a knowing battery.
Richeson, 704 N.E.2d at 1011. Accordingly, the supreme court affirmed the defendant’s conviction for Attempted Burglary. The Attempted Rape instruction given in this case dictates the same result, as it neither misstated the law nor misled the jury-
TV. Sentencing
Finally, McCann asserts that the sentence he received as a result of his convictions was manifestly unreasonable “because the trial court erroneously considered aggravating factors; the trial court failed to find mitigating circumstances of an abusive childhood and undue hardships to dependents; and the trial court did not balance the aggravating and mitigating circumstances in its sentencing.” Appellant’s brief at 22.
A. Standard of Review and Rule of Law
Sentencing decisions rest within the sound discretion of the trial court, and we will review sentencing only for an abuse of that discretion. Archer v. State, 689 N.E.2d 678, 683 (Ind.1997). When enhancing a sentence, a trial court is required to state its specific reasons for doing so. Georgopolus v. State, 735 N.E.2d 1138, 1143 (Ind.2000). Accordingly, the trial court’s sentencing statement must: (1) identify significant aggravating and mitigating circumstances; (2) state the specific reason why each circumstance is aggravating or mitigating; and (3) demonstrate that the trial court balanced the aggravating and mitigating circumstances and determined that the aggravators outweighed the mitigators. Id. In order to impose consecutive sentences, a trial court must find at least one aggravating circumstance. Sanquenetti v. State, 727 N.E.2d 437, 442 (Ind.2000). Aggravating circumstances may include, but are not limited to, any of several statutorily enumerated factors. Ind.Code § 35-38-1-7.1. “The trial judge is responsible for determining the appropriate weight of aggravating and mitigating factors in sentencing.” Hurt v. State, 657 N.E.2d 112, 115 (Ind.1995).
Article 7, Section 6 of the Indiana Constitution charges this Court with the responsibility to review and revise sentences “to the extent provided by rule.” Indiana Appellate Rule 17(B) in turn provides as follows:
The reviewing court will not revise a sentence authorized by statute except where such sentence is manifestly unreasonable in light of the nature of the offense and the character of the offender.
A sentence is manifestly unreasonable when it is clearly, plainly and obviously so. Evans v. State, 725 N.E.2d 850, 851 (Ind. 2000). Moreover, inasmuch as the sentencing process is inherently subjective, this Court does not substitute its own judgment for that of the trial court. Hurt, 657 N.E.2d at 114.
B. Analysis
Here, McCann was sentenced to the maximum of fifty years for each of his three class A convictions. See Ind. Code § 35-50-2-4. The Attempted Murder conviction and Burglary conviction were ordered to run consecutively, and the Attempted Rape conviction to run concurrently. Thus, McCann was sentenced to a total executed sentence of one hundred years. The trial court supported the enhanced and consecutive sentences by identifying the following aggravators in its sentencing statement:
One, the defendant has a prior history of criminal conduct. The Court considers just those matters contained in the pre-sentence report which reduce to a conviction or true finding as a juvenile. Also, that prior attempts to rehabilitate the defendant have been unsuccessful ... Third, that the injuries to the victim, Mr. Dozier, have resulted in some permanent impairment to him. Fourth, ... *1006the facts of this case are particularly aggravating. The case involves a home invasion of a residence for the purpose of committing the crime of rape. That the defendant attempted this matter while she was pregnant. And that these offenses or series of acts involves multiple victims!.]
(R. 609.) We review the aforementioned sentencing statement by analyzing the trial court’s reasoning for each alleged aggra-vator.
1.Criminal History
Ind.Code § 35 — 38—1—7.1(b)(2) provides that a person’s history of criminal or delinquent activity may be used to support the finding of an aggravating circumstance to enhance a sentence. Because some statements of aggravating circumstances are merely conclusory they must be substantiated by specific facts. For example, if a defendant has a history of criminal activity, the incidents comprising such activity should be recited.
Jones v. State, 675 N.E.2d 1084, 1087 (Ind. 1996) (citing Hammons v. State, 493 N.E.2d 1250, 1254 (Ind.1986)). Here, the trial court’s reference to McCann’s prior convictions and true adjudications as a juvenile, as contained in the pre-sentence report, adequately supports the trial court’s use of McCann’s criminal history as an aggravating circumstance. See Allen v. State, 722 N.E.2d 1246, 1252 (Ind.Ct.App. 2000) (quoting Tunstill v. State, 568 N.E.2d 539, 544 (Ind.1991)) (holding that “[t]he historical fact that a defendant has committed a crime, such that it may then be properly found to constitute the aggra-vator of a criminal history, may be established upon evidence that the defendant has been convicted of another crime,....”).
2.Rehabilitation
The trial court also sought to invoke the correctional and rehabilitative treatment aggravating circumstance. See Ind.Code § 35-38-l-7.1(b)(3). However, the trial court simply stated, “that prior attempts to rehabilitate the defendant have been unsuccessful.” (R. 609.) We have consistently held that “for this aggravating circumstance to justify in part an enhanced sentence, it must be understood to mean that the defendant is in need of correctional and rehabilitative treatment that can best be provided by a period of incarceration in a penal facility in excess of the presumptive sentence term.” Culver v. State, 727 N.E.2d 1062, 1072 (Ind.2000) reh’g denied (quoting Mayberry v. State, 670 N.E.2d 1262, 1271 (Ind.1996)). Here, the trial court did not articulate how such rehabilitation could be achieved through imposition of an enhanced sentence rather than the presumptive sentence. Thus, the trial court improperly applied this aggravating circumstance.
3.Permanent Injury to Attempted Murder Victim
Thirdly, the trial court referenced the permanent nature of Mr. Dozier’s injuries. We have previously recognized that the viciousness or seriousness of an injury is a proper aggravating circumstance. See Benton v. State, 691 N.E.2d 459, 465 (Ind. Ct.App.1998). Accordingly, the trial court’s consideration of the extent of Mr. Dozier’s injuries was proper.
4.Circumstances of Crime
Elements of a crime cannot be used to enhance a sentence, however particularized circumstances of a criminal act may constitute separate aggravating circumstances. Morgan v. State, 675 N.E.2d 1067, 1073 (Ind.1996) (emphasis added). Here, the trial court gives a summary of the facts of the crimes and notes that A.L. was pregnant at the time McCann attempted to rape her. The trial court’s summary merely tracks several of the elements of the crimes charged, and as such may not be used to enhance McCann’s sentence. Moreover, we are unaware of Indiana precedent that would cause A.L.’s *1007state of pregnancy, as a fact apparently unknown to McCann, to be a proper aggravating circumstance. Cf. Whitehead v. State, 511 N.E.2d 284, 297 (Ind.1987) cert. denied (considering a trial court’s finding that there was “no excuse or provocation which would justify Appellant’s attack on a woman five months pregnant” in its determination that a sentence was not manifestly unreasonable.) From the Record, we are unable to discern the stage of A.L.’s pregnancy at the time of McCann’s offenses, and therefore we are unable to infer McCann’s knowledge of such pregnancy, an inference seemingly made, and accepted as a proper aggravator, by our supreme court in Whitehead.
5. Mitigating Factors
Lastly, McCann alleges that the trial court failed to consider as mitigating factors both his abusive childhood and the hardship that will result to his child from incarceration. As to the former, McCann concedes that “no evidence was given directly as to how these experiences affected [his] later actions,” and as such the trial court was within its discretion not to consider this factor as mitigating. Appellant’s brief at 26; see Blanche v. State, 690 N.E.2d 709, 715 (Ind.1998) (holding that evidence of a troubled childhood does not require a trial court to find it a mitigating circumstance). As to the latter, we fail to see the harm that would result to McCann’s child from his continued incarceration, and the trial court was within its discretion not to consider this fact as mitigating. See Smith v. State, 670 N.E.2d 7, 8 (Ind.1996) (quoting Wilkins v. State, 500 N.E.2d 747, 749 (Ind.1986)) (holding that a trial court does not err when a mitigation claim is “highly disputable in nature, weight, or significance.”)
C. Conclusion
Here, the trial court relied upon four aggravators to arrive at its sentence for McCann. On review, we find two of these aggravators to be invalid. While it has been held that a single valid aggravator is sufficient to support an enhanced sentence, Page v. State, 689 N.E.2d 707, 712 (Ind.1997), we have not clearly discussed how long the enhanced sentence should be where the original sentence was based upon multiple aggravators and subsequent review reveals some of them to be invalid. Consequently, where, as here, it is unclear what weight the trial court assigned to each designated aggravator, and there are now fewer valid aggravating circumstances to consider, “we are not persuaded that the original sentence would have been the same had the trial court not relied on [such] impermissible factors.... ” See Bluck v. State, 716 N.E.2d 507, 515 (Ind.Ct.App.1999). To proceed by affirming the sentence, simply because we have said a single valid aggravator is sufficient to support an enhanced sentence, even though two of the four aggravators in this case have been determined to be invalid, is to impose our judgment for that of the trial court, which we have said we will not do. See Hurt, 657 N.E.2d at 114. Moreover, to affirm McCann’s sentence based upon fewer aggravators than originally found by the trial court would be to place greater weight on the remaining two ag-gravators, which would effectively result in an upward revision of his sentence. We cannot revise, in either direction, a sentence under Indiana Appellate Rule 17(B) unless we determine that the original sentence imposed was manifestly unreasonable. Accordingly, we remand this case to the trial court so that that the two remaining valid aggravators may be weighed and an appropriate sentence reached. See Miller v. State, 709 N.E.2d 48, 50 (Ind.Ct. App.1999) (holding that where this Court could not determine the weight that the trial court assigned to invalid aggravators the case should be remanded for re-sentencing). In so doing, we seek to strike an appropriate balance between the responsibilities of this Court and those reserved *1008for the discretion of the trial court.4
Affirmed in part, and reversed and remanded in part.
SULLIVAN, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part with separate opinion.
VAIDIK, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part with separate opinion.
. Ind.Code §§ 35-41-5-1,35-42-1-1.
. Ind.Code § 35-43-2-1.
.Ind.Code §§ 35-41-5-1,35-42-4-1.
. Because we remand for re-sentencing, we do not reach the issue of whether McCann’s sentence is manifestly unreasonable.

=== CASE 9739624 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:40.289699+00 ===

SULLIVAN, Judge,
concurring in part and dissenting in part.
I fully concur with respect to Parts I, and II of the majority opinion. Except to the extent that my dissent would impact upon resentencing, I also concur as to Part IV. I respectfully dissent, however, as to Part III.
The majority relies upon Richeson v. State (1998) Ind., 704 N.E.2d 1008, in holding that the jury need not be instructed in an attempted rape case that the defendant have the intent to accomplish the crime of rape. To be sure, Richeson does state that “we expressly limit Spradlin to attempted murder.” Id. at 1010. This is not to say, however, that the holding of Riche-son is applicable to all attempt crimes except attempted murder. As a matter of fact, even in the factual setting of Riche-son, an attempted battery case which could not have resulted in a conviction of any greater than a Class B felony, the court noted that the requisite mens rea, i.e., knowingly or intentionally, must be applied “to the attempted result, the battery itself’ rather than to the substantial step. Id. at 1010 n. 4. In other words, in the context of the case before us, Richeson requires that the jury be informed that the defendant must have intended to achieve a knowing or intentional rape.
A different and more significant factor convinces me that Richeson did not hold that all attempt offenses other than attempted murder are excepted from a Spradlin type analysis. To be sure, Richeson embraced within its holding attempt prosecutions which involve “either stringent penalties, or ambiguity, but not both.” Richeson, supra, 704 N.E.2d at 1011 (footnotes omitted). Presumably then, prosecutions which involve both an ambiguity in an instruction concerning the application of a requisite intent, and a felony carrying a “stringent penalty” are subject to a Spradlin type analysis.
The Richeson court went to great pains to note that the attempted murder conviction involved in Spradlin subjected the defendant to a “penalty that is two and one-half to fifty times higher than the penalty for attempted battery.” Id. at 1011 (Emphasis in original). It is imperative to note that the attempted rape conviction here involved is a Class A felony and in this regard, is identical to the attempted murder conviction of Spradlin.
Therefore, while bound by the statement in Richeson that Spradlin is limited to attempted murder cases, Richeson does not preclude this court from applying an analogous principle, perhaps drawn from the wisdom of Spradlin, to cases substantially similar in consequence.5 I would apply a principle analogous to that of Spradlin to cases which by instructions to the jury are likely to be confusing with respect to mens rea and intent and which involve a penalty for a Class A felony. This *1009is such a case and for that reason I would reverse the attempted rape conviction and remand for a new trial upon that charge.
. In discussing varying case definitions of “specific intent," Richeson cites to Wells v. State (1991) Ind.App., 568 N.E.2d 558 for the proposition that "[i]n the attempted rape context, specific intent has meant that the defendant must have taken a substantial step toward the commission of a knowing or intentional rape, but not a reckless one.” Richeson, supra, 704 N.E.2d at 1009 n. 1. This citation should not give rise to an inference that an attempted rape defendant, facing sentencing for a Class A felony, need not have intended to achieve a knowing or intentional rape. Wells was decided before the decision in Spradlin was issued, and it merely applied generally then understood concepts of "knowingly or intentionally” with respect to jury instructions.

=== CASE 9739625 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:40.293103+00 ===

VAIDIK, Judge,
concurring in part, and dissenting in part.
I agree with the majority opinion in all respects, except sentencing. I agree that the trial court properly considered the aggravating circumstances of the defendant’s prior criminal history and the permanent injury that the defendant caused to the attempted murder victim. I also agree that the trial court was within its discretion when it failed to find as mitigating factors both the defendant’s abusive childhood and the hardship that would result to his child from his incarceration.
However, I do not agree with the majority that an attempted rape victim’s pregnancy may not be used as an aggravating circumstance when the record is unclear as to whether or not the defendant knew of her condition. Additionally, I disagree with the majority’s conclusion that this case should be remanded to the trial court for re-sentencing.
First, the trial court was within its discretion to find as an aggravating circumstance that the victim of the attempted rape was pregnant at the time of the commission of the offense. A defendant takes a victim as he finds her. For example, Ind.Code § 35 — 38—1—7.1(b)(6) states that a court may consider as an aggravating circumstance that “[t]he victim of the crime was mentally or physically infirm.” Likewise, the age of a victim may also be considered as an aggravating circumstance. Ind.Code § 35 — 38—1—7.1(b)(5). Nothing in the statute requires that the defendant know of the infirmity or age of the victim before these factors may be used as aggravating circumstances. Furthermore, when properly explained, victim impact may be an appropriate aggravating circumstance. Smith v. State, 695 N.E.2d 909, 911 (Ind.1998). It is reasonable to presume that the impact of an attempted rape would be greater on a pregnant victim. Thus, in this case, it was within the trial court’s discretion to consider the pregnancy of the victim as an aggravating circumstance.
The majority states “we are unaware of Indiana precedent that would cause [the victim’s] state of pregnancy, as a fact apparently unknown to McCann, to be a proper aggravating circumstance.” Op. at 1006-07. Similarly, I am unaware of Indiana precedent that would preclude the victim’s pregnancy to be considered as a proper aggravating circumstance. The majority maintains .that in Whitehead v. State, 511 N.E.2d 284 (Ind.1987), cert. denied, our supreme court inferred that a victim’s pregnancy must be known to a defendant before it is appropriate to use her pregnancy as an aggravating circumstance. I cannot agree. Rather, the supreme court merely provided that it was appropriate for a trial court to find “no excuse or provocation which would justify [the defendant’s] attack on a woman five months pregnant.” Whitehead, 511 N.E.2d at 296. I do not read the same inference into the supreme court’s statement as the majority apparently does.
Second, I disagree with the majority when it remands this case to the trial court for re-sentencing. Even if the victim’s pregnancy is not a proper aggravating circumstance, the majority concedes that there were two valid aggravators. A single aggravator is sufficient to support a sentence. Casey v. State, 676 N.E.2d 1069, 1073 (Ind.Ct.App.1997). Moreover, when a trial court improperly applies an aggravator, but other valid aggravating circumstances exist a sentence enhancement may still be upheld. See Blanche v. State, 690 N.E.2d 709, 715 (Ind.1998). Here, given the three proper aggravators, the lack of any mitigating factors, and the heinous nature of this crime, I would affirm the trial court’s sentence.

=== CASE 2220518 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:46.254438+00 ===

742 N.E.2d 562 (2001)
Christina L. WILLIAMS, Petitioner,
v.
INDIANA DEPARTMENT OF STATE REVENUE, Respondent.
No. 49T10-0006-TA-79.
Tax Court of Indiana.
February 8, 2001.
Christina L. Williams, Okemos, MI, Petitioner Appearing pro se.
Steve Carter, Attorney General of Indiana, Indianapolis, Karen L. Hsu, Deputy Attorney General, Indianapolis, IN, Attorneys for Respondent.
FISHER, J.
Christina L. Williams challenges the Indiana Department of State Revenue's (Department) final determination that she is not entitled to a refund of Indiana gross retail (sales) tax that she paid when she purchased an automobile in Indiana. The sole issue for this Court's consideration is whether pursuant to IND.CODE ANN. Section 6-2.5-3-5 Williams is entitled to a refund of the gross retail tax that she paid on the automobile that she purchased in Indiana. For the reasons stated below, the Court finds for the Department.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
On November 27, 1998, Williams, an Indiana resident, purchased an automobile *563 in Indiana. At the time of purchase, she paid $539.85 in Indiana gross retail tax. Williams thereafter lost the original title to the automobile and requested a duplicate from the dealer, Enterprise Rent-A-Car. In March of 1999, Williams moved to Michigan. In May of 1999, she received a duplicate title for the automobile, titled and registered the automobile in Michigan, and paid $719.82 in Michigan use tax. Williams never titled or registered her automobile with the Indiana Bureau of Motor Vehicles (BMV).
After titling her automobile in Michigan, Williams filed a claim for refund with the Department claiming that she "twice had to pay sales and use tax on the vehicle: once in Indiana, and again in Michigan." (Pet'r Br. at 3.) On March 31, 2000, the Department denied Williams' claim. On June 28, 2000, Williams filed a petition to set aside the Department's final determination with this Court. On August 30, 2000, the Department filed a motion to dismiss stating that Williams' complaint failed to state a claim upon which relief could be granted because Williams failed to provide legal authority or argument to support her claim.[1] This Court held a hearing on the motion on November 16, 2000. On that same day, Williams filed a brief in support of granting summary judgment in her favor.[2]
ANALYSIS AND OPINION
Standard of Review
This Court reviews the Department's final determinations de novo and is not bound by either the evidence presented or the issues raised at the administrative level. IND.CODE ANN. § 6-8.1-9-1(d) (West 2000); Hunt Corp. v. Department of State Revenue, 709 N.E.2d 766, 768 (Ind. Tax Ct.1999). Summary judgment is only appropriate where no genuine issues of material fact exist and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Ind. Trial Rule 56(C); Snyder v. Indiana Dep't of State Revenue, 723 N.E.2d 487, 488 (Ind.Tax Ct.2000), review denied. Cross motions for summary judgment do not alter this standard. Hyatt Corp. v. Department of State Revenue, 695 N.E.2d 1051, 1053 (Ind.Tax Ct.1998), review denied.
Discussion
The sole issue for this Court's consideration is whether pursuant to I.C. § 6-2.5-3-5 Williams is entitled to a refund of the gross retail tax that she paid on the automobile that she purchased in Indiana. Although Williams has provided this Court with exhibits as evidence, the Department has only provided its brief in support of its motion. Neither party disputes the material facts. Because there is no material issue of fact, this Court will determine whether the Department is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.
The gross retail tax at issue in this case is set forth in IND.CODE ANN. § 6-2.5-2-1 as follows:
(a) An excise tax, known as the state gross retail tax, is imposed on retail transactions made in Indiana.
(b) The person who acquires property in a retail transaction is liable for the tax *564 on the transaction and, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall pay the tax to the retail merchant as a separate added amount to the consideration in the transaction. The retail merchant shall collect the tax as agent for the state.
The credit that Williams seeks is set forth in I.C. § 6-2.5-3-5 which provides as follows:
(a) A person is entitled to a credit against the use tax imposed on the use, storage, or consumption of a particular item of tangible personal property equal to the amount, if any, of sales tax, purchase tax, or use tax paid to another state, territory, or possession of the United States for the acquisition of that property.
(b) The credit provided under subsection (a) does not apply to the use tax imposed on the use, storage, or consumption of vehicles, watercraft, or aircraft that are required to be titled, registered, or licensed by Indiana.
(emphasis added).
First, this Court will address whether Williams' claim is within the ambit of I.C. § 6-2.-3-5(a). The words of statutes are given their plain, ordinary, and usual meaning unless the legislative intent reveals a contrary purpose. Maurer v. Indiana Dep't of State Revenue, 607 N.E.2d 985, 987 (Ind.Tax Ct.1993). Here, Williams paid the gross retail tax on the purchase of her automobile in Indiana. The plain language of I.C. § 6-2.5-3-5(a) provides that the credit is available against the use tax. See I.C. 6-2.5-3-2 (defining the use tax). The gross retail tax is not mentioned in this statute. In fact, the gross retail tax is set forth in chapter 2 while the use tax is set forth in chapter 3. Therefore, this Court concludes that I.C. § 6-2.5-3-5(a) is not applicable to Williams as that statute provides only for credit against the payment of use tax. See Maurer, 607 N.E.2d at 987.
Even assuming arguendo that I.C. § 6-2.5-3-5(a) did apply to Williams, she does not meet the requirements of I.C. § 6-2.5-3-5(b). The credit in I.C. § 6-2.5-3-5(a) is not applicable when a vehicle is required to be titled, registered or licensed by Indiana. I.C. § 6-2.5-3-5(b). Indiana law states that "any person who purchases or otherwise acquires a new or used motor vehicle ... must apply for a certificate of title in the purchaser's or transferee's name." IND.ADMIN.CODE tit. 140, r. 6-1-2 (1996). See also Indiana Bureau of Motor Vehicles Title Requirements §§ 1.1, 1.3, 1.4, 1.16, at http: www. state.in.us /bmv/titles/titlereq. html (last visited Feb. 8, 2001) (providing that Indiana residents must title their newly acquired vehicles no later than thirty-one days from the date of purchase); IND.CODE ANN. §§ 9-17-2-1 and 9-18-2-1 (requiring that within sixty days new residents must register and title all vehicles owned by the resident that are subject to the motor vehicle excise tax and that will be operated in Indiana). Clearly, Williams was required by Indiana law to title her automobile in Indiana because she was an Indiana resident when she purchased the automobile. Regardless of her reasons for not doing so,[3] she did not title the automobile in Indiana as required by law. As noted above, I.C. § 6-2.5-3-5(b) provides that vehicles that are required to be titled in Indiana are not entitled to a credit pursuant to I.C. § 6-2.5-3-5(a). Consequently, Williams is not entitled to a credit pursuant to I.C. § 6-2.5-3-5(a) against the tax that she paid on the purchase of her automobile in Indiana.
CONCLUSION
Pursuant to I.C. § 6-2.5-2-1, Williams was liable for the gross retail tax that she *565 paid on the purchase of her vehicle. Williams has not provided this Court with nor can the Court find any authority demonstrating that she is not liable for the gross retail tax. Therefore, the Department is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Consequently, this Court AFFIRMS the final determination by the Department that Williams is not entitled to a refund of the Indiana gross retail tax that she paid. For the foregoing reasons, the Court GRANTS the Department's motion for summary judgment and DENIES Williams' cross motion for summary judgment.
NOTES
[1]  The Department filed a motion to dismiss pursuant to Ind. Trial Rule 12(B)(6). Along with Williams' petition to set aside the Department's final determination and her brief responding to the Department's motion, Williams filed exhibits. If on a motion to "dismiss for failure of the pleading to state a claim upon which relief can be granted, matters outside the pleading are presented to and not excluded by the court, the motion shall be treated as one for summary judgment and disposed of as provided in Rule 56." Ind.Trial Rule 12(B) (emphasis added). Because this Court has not excluded the exhibits, the motion at issue here will be treated as a motion for summary judgment. See id.
[2]  The Court will treat Williams's motion as a cross-motion for summary judgment. See Hunt Corp. v. Department of State Revenue, 709 N.E.2d 766, 767-68 n. 5 (Ind.Tax Ct.1999) (stating that under Trial Rule 56(B) a court may grant summary judgment to the non-moving party).
[3]  Williams asserts that she did not title the automobile in Indiana because she was unable to go to the BMV to title it due to her demanding work schedule and because the BMV would not allow her husband to title it. In addition, she asserts that she lost the original title and was unable to procure a duplicate title through the dealer where she purchased the automobile until after she had moved to Michigan in May of 1999.

=== CASE 2220530 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:47.808301+00 ===

741 N.W.2d 782 (2007)
NORTHWEST INVESTMENT CORP., Appellant,
v.
Emmett Lee WALLACE, William R. Harvey and Helen I. Harvey, Appellees.
No. 05-0340.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
July 13, 2007.
Rehearing Denied November 19, 2007.
*783 John F. Lorentzen of Nyemaster, Goode, West, Hansell & O'Brien, P.C., Des Moines, for appellant.
Terry M. Giebelstein of Lane & Waterman, LLP, Davenport, for appellee Emmett Lee Wallace.
Steven H. Jacobs of Betty, Neuman & McMahon, LLP, Davenport, for appellees Harveys.
STREIT, Justice.
"This is a story about control."[1] Minority shareholders who were required to redeem *784 their shares after a reverse stock split refused to accept the corporation's offer to buy back their shares. They complained the offer did not include the additional amount a buyer would theoretically pay to own a controlling interest in the corporation. The district court held the proper valuation of the minority shareholders' stock included a control premium. On appeal, we must determine (1) whether Iowa's statute requiring a corporation in a reverse stock split to pay the shareholders "fair value" for their shares permits the addition of a control premium; and if so (2) whether there is substantial evidence to support the addition of a control premium in this case. We find Iowa's statutory definition of "fair value" implicitly requires the shares to be valued on a marketable, control basis. Because the minority shareholders presented credible evidence the corporation could obtain a significant control premium in the event of a sale, we affirm.
I. Facts and Prior Proceedings.
Dr. Emmett Lee Wallace, William R. Harvey, and Helen I. Harvey (collectively the "minority shareholders") once owned stock in River Cities Investment Co. Wallace owned approximately 7.1% of the outstanding shares (35,196) and the Harveys owned approximately 1.5% (7,291). The balance of the outstanding shares was owned by Northwest Investment Corp.
River Cities' principal asset was the indirect ownership of stock in Northwest Bank and Trust Company ("bank"). River Cities owned 100% of the Northwest Bank Holding Company, which in turn owned 84% of the bank. In addition, Northwest Bank Holding Company owned other assets, including a $2,400,000 note receivable and $455,000 in deferred tax debits.
In September 2003, at a special meeting, River Cities' shareholders adopted by resolution the first amendment to the Amended and Restated Articles of Incorporation of River Cities. The amendment provided the aggregate number of shares the corporation may issue is limited to 200 shares of common stock.[2] This action reduced the aggregate number of outstanding shares which had previously been 496,507. As a result of this amendment, the minority shareholders became owners of fractional shares of new stock. The amendment provided no fractional shares would be issued; any fractional shares created would be acquired for cash. The amendment effectively forced the minority shareholders to sell their shares back to River Cities.
River Cities' board of directors determined the fair value of the old stock was $33.23 per share immediately before the reverse stock split. This figure was based on an appraisal prepared by Wayne Brown of Clifton Gunderson LLP.
Shortly after the special meeting, River Cities merged into Northwest Investment (the majority shareholder). Northwest Investment then timely paid the minority shareholders $33.23 per share of old stock plus interest from the date of the resolution adopting the first amendment. It also gave the minority shareholders notice of their appraisal rights as required by Iowa Code section 490.1324 (2003).
The minority shareholders made a timely demand for further payment under Iowa Code section 490.1326. They demanded $64 per share for their old stock. This demand was based on an appraisal prepared by Richard F. Maroney, Jr. of Austin Associates, LLC. The shareholders timely tendered the certificates representing their shares of the old stock for transfer to Northwest Investment.
*785 Northwest Investment received the minority shareholders' demand for additional payment but disagreed with the minority shareholders' valuation. Consequently, Northwest Investment brought this action in February 2004. See Iowa Code § 490.1330 (if the corporation refuses shareholder's demand for additional payment, then it must commence a proceeding within sixty days after receiving payment demand and petition the court to determine fair value).
After initiating this action, Northwest Investment's board of directors requested a second appraisal from Clifton Gunderson. Ronald E. Nielsen of Clifton Gunderson completed his appraisal report in August 2004. He concluded the fair value of the old stock immediately prior to the reverse stock split was $48 per share.
Based on Nielsen's appraisal, Northwest Investment paid the minority shareholders an additional $14.77 per share, which is the difference between $33.23 and $48. Northwest Investment also paid interest to the minority shareholders, which is required by law. Northwest Investment made these payments to the minority shareholders without prejudice to their right to appraisal in this action. The minority shareholders refused to accept $48 per share as full payment for their old stock in River Cities.
The case was tried to the district court. The district court found Maroney's testimony more credible and adopted his opinion that the fair value of the old stock was $64. The district court denied both parties' requests for attorney fees.
Northwest Investment appealed. On appeal, Northwest Investment argues (1) the district court erred by adopting Maroney's appraisal because he included a premium for control in his valuation and (2) the district court erred by not awarding Northwest Investment attorney fees and expert witness expenses.
II. Scope of Review.
Actions to determine the value of stock pursuant to section 490.1330 are at law. Sieg Co. v. Kelly (Sieg II), 568 N.W.2d 794, 797 (Iowa 1997) (citing Sieg Co. v. Kelly (Sieg I), 512 N.W.2d 275, 278 (Iowa 1994)). Our review is for errors of law. Id. (citing Sieg I, 512 N.W.2d at 278). The district court's findings of fact are binding on us if supported by substantial evidence. Id. (citing Iowa R.App. P. 14(f)(1) (now Rule 6.14(6)(a))).
III Merits.
A. Control Premium. The principal differences between the appraisers' conclusions of value stem from their use of control premiums and Maroney's use of guideline transactions involving sale-of-control data. Northwest argues Maroney's inclusion of a control premium is unwarranted because Northwest Bank is a well-run, efficient bank. According to Northwest, a control premium is justified only if there is "substantial evidence of the inefficient use of assets of the company being appraised." Northwest also claims Maroney's "control premium" is really an impermissible award of "synergistic value." Before addressing the evidence of this case, we must first determine whether the addition of a control premium is permissible under Iowa Code section 490.1301(4).
1. Fair value. Iowa Code chapter 490 gives a shareholder "appraisal rights" and the right to obtain "fair value" for his or her shares upon the occurrence of enumerated corporate action, including a reverse stock split. Iowa Code § 490.1302(1)(d). The corporation must commence an action to determine the fair value of the minority shareholder's stock if the shareholder and *786 corporation cannot agree on a price. Id. § 490.1330.
Under Iowa Code section 490.1301(4), "fair value" means:
the value of the corporation's shares determined according to the following:
a. Immediately before the effectuation of the corporate action to which the shareholder objects.
b. Using customary and current valuation concepts and techniques generally employed for similar businesses in the context of the transaction requiring appraisal.
c. Without discounting for lack of marketability or minority status. . . .
With respect to shares of a corporation that is a bank holding company as defined in section 524.1801, the factors identified in section 524.1406, subsection 3, paragraph "a", shall also be considered in determining fair value.[3]
We have repeatedly stated there is no predominant, perfect formula for arriving at fair value. Sieg II, 568 N.W.2d at 798; Sec. State Bank v. Ziegeldorf, 554 N.W.2d 884, 888 (Iowa 1996); Sieg I, 512 N.W.2d at 278; see also Model Bus. Corp. Act § 13.01 cmt. 2, at 13-9 (2005) (stating subsection (b) "adopts the accepted view that different transactions and different contexts may warrant different valuation methodologies"). We have recognized three popular approaches to appraising stock: market value, investment value, and net asset value. Sieg I, 512 N.W.2d at 278 (citing Richardson v. Palmer Broad. Co., 353 N.W.2d 374, 378 (Iowa 1984)). "The usefulness of any particular approach depends on the facts and circumstances of each case." Sieg II, 568 N.W.2d at 798 (citing Ziegeldorf, 554 N.W.2d at 889). Each method is "designed to independently produce the full measure of the fair value of the stock rather than a component of fair value." Richardson, 353 N.W.2d at 378-79. Moreover, "[m]odern valuation methods will normally result in a range of values, not a particular single value." Model Bus. Corp. Act § 13.01 cmt. 2, at 13-9. "The court should consider any relevant factor not inconsistent with the statutory definition of `fair value.'" Sieg II, 568 N.W.2d at 798. Factors to be considered include:
the rate of dividends paid, the security afforded that dividends will be regularly paid, the possibility that dividends will be increased or diminished, the size of the accumulated surplus applicable to the payment of dividends, the record of the corporation, its prospects for the future, the selling price of stocks of like character, the value of its assets, book values, market conditions, the reputation of the corporation, and all relevant factors that may influence the valuation.
Sieg I, 512 N.W.2d at 279 (citing Robbins v. Beatty, 246 Iowa 80, 91, 67 N.W.2d 12, 18 (1954)).
The Iowa legislature adopted the current definition of fair value in 2002. 2002 Iowa Acts ch. 1154, § 78. The definition is derived from the 1999 amendment to section 13.01(4) of the Model Business Corporation Act ("MBCA").[4] The 1999 amendment to section 13.01(4) expressly prohibits "discounting for lack of marketability or minority status." Prior to the change, the MBCA's definition was silent on whether such discounts were appropriate. *787 Consequently, courts interpreting statutes based on the MBCA's previous definition were split on the issue of discounts. Compare Atl. States Constr., Inc. v. Beavers, 169 Ga.App. 584, 314 S.E.2d 245, 250-51 (1984) (holding minority discount is permissible); Columbia Mgmt. Co. v. Wyss, 94 Or.App. 195, 765 P.2d 207, 213 (1988) (holding marketability discount is proper but a minority discount is inappropriate), with Hansen v. 75 Ranch Co., 288 Mont. 310, 957 P.2d 32, 41 (1998) (holding minority discount is not appropriate); Hogle v. Zinetics Med., Inc., 63 P.3d 80, 90-91 (Utah 2002) (holding discounts based on lack of marketability and lack of control are impermissible).
In comments accompanying the 1999 amendment, the MBCA states
valuation discounts for lack of marketability or minority status are inappropriate in most appraisal actions, both because most transactions that trigger appraisal rights affect the corporation as a whole and because such discounts give the majority the opportunity to take advantage of minority shareholders who have been forced against their will to accept the appraisal-triggering transaction.
Model Bus. Corp. Act § 13.01 cmt. 2, at 13-10.
Although six other states[5] have adopted the MBCA's current definition of fair value with respect to appraisal rights, no appellate court in these jurisdictions has been asked to determine whether "fair value" may include a control premium. For guidance we turn to the official comments following MBCA section 13.01. See Richardson, 353 N.W.2d at 376-77 (referring to an earlier official comment to the MBCA).
Subsection (c) prohibits discounting for lack of marketability or minority status. The official comment explains subsection (c) is "designed to adopt a more modern view that appraisal should generally award a shareholder his or her proportional interest in the corporation after valuing the corporation as a whole, rather than the value of the shareholder's shares when valued alone." Model Bus. Corp. Act § 13.01 cmt. 2, at 13-10 (emphasis added); see Cavalier Oil Corp. v. Harnett, 564 A.2d 1137, 1144 (Del.1989) (stating the corporation must be valued as an entity before determining the shareholder's proportionate interest). If an appraiser is valuing the corporation as a whole, then a control premium is certainly proper. A control premium is the additional consideration an investor would pay over the value for a minority interest in order to own a controlling interest in the common stock of a company. Shannon P. Pratt, Valuing a Business: The Analysis and Appraisal of Closely Held Companies 349 (4th ed.2000) (quoting Control Premium Study, 4th quarter 1999 (Los Angeles: Applied Financial Information, LP, 1990), p. ii). "A controlling interest is considered to have greater value than a minority interest because of the purchaser's ability to effect changes in the overall business structure and to influence business policies." Id.
Our legislature made a policy decision when it adopted the current definition of "fair value." By not allowing a discount for lack of marketability or minority status, the legislature implicitly required shares to be valued on a marketable, *788 control interest basis. We therefore hold a control premium may be considered in determining fair value if supported by the evidence. See Rapid-Am. Corp. v. Harris, 603 A.2d 796, 804 (Del.1992) (holding the trial court improperly refused to add a control premium to publicly traded equity value of corporation's shares for each of the corporation's operating subsidiaries in determining valuation in an appraisal action); Borruso v. Commc'ns Telesystems Int'l, 753 A.2d 451, 457-58 (Del. Ch.1999) (adding thirty percent premium because comparable company analysis reflects inherent minority discount); In re 75,629 Shares of Common Stock of Trapp Family Lodge, Inc., 169 Vt. 82, 725 A.2d 927, 935 (1999) (thirty percent premium for control added to adjust for trading price of minority shares); Casey v. Brennan, 344 N.J.Super. 83, 780 A.2d 553, 571 (2001) (concluding "that in a valuation proceeding a control premium should be considered in order to reflect market realities"). We now turn to the dueling appraisals in this case.
2. Nielsen's appraisal. Nielsen was Northwest Investment's appraiser. He is a Certified Public Accountant and partner at Clifton Gunderson. He is also an Accredited Senior Appraiser. Nielsen primarily relied on an income approach in determining the value of the bank. An income approach assumes the value of the company is derived from the generation of income. In taking this approach, Nielsen employed a capitalization-of-earnings method. Capitalization of earnings involves an estimation of the company's ongoing net earnings and a determination of the risks associated with generating those earnings (capitalization rate).
Additionally, Nielsen used a market-based approach to valuing the bank. A market-based approach values a company with factors derived from comparable companies that are publicly traded. The particular method Nielsen employed was the guideline company method for price-to-book value. This method derives an estimated price-to-book multiple from the stock price of publicly traded guideline companies as compared to their book values. Nielsen applied the multiple to his opinion of the adjusted book value of the bank. To this figure, he added a 15% control premium. Nielsen reasoned the premium was necessary because the stock prices used in this method reflect a minority interest price.[6]
To determine the final value of River Cities, Nielsen combined the two approaches. He gave 90% weight to the income method figure and 10% weight to the market-based method figure. Nielsen then "rolled up" his combined value into Northwest Bank Holding Company and ultimately River Cities, based on its 84% ownership of the bank. To this figure, Nielsen added the value of the other assets owned by Northwest Bank Holding Company.[7] Nielsen then rolled up this net value into River Cities based on River Cities' direct ownership of 100% of Northwest Bank Holding Company. Finally, he divided his conclusion, which valued River Cities as a whole, by the number of outstanding shares in River Cities and arrived at a value of $48 per share for the old stock.
*789 3. Maroney's appraisal. Maroney, who was hired by the minority shareholders, is a principal of Austin Associates, a bank consulting firm. He has a Master's degree in Business Administration. Maroney used a combination of valuation methods in his appraisal of River Cities. Maroney used a discounted cash flow ("DCF") method, which is a type of income approach valuation. The DCF method uses the same basic components of the capitalization-of-earnings method. In addition, it includes a projection of future value from net earnings and a residual value at the end of the projected period, which must be discounted to present value.
Maroney also utilized a market-based approach. He considered two types of guideline transactions: transactions of publicly traded stock and transactions involving the sale of financial companies to other companies or groups (i.e. sale of control). He created a price-to-tangible book value ratio and a price-to-earnings multiple for each guideline type to determine River Cities' value.
Through these methods Maroney arrived at a total of five different values for River Cities (one for the DCF method, two using guideline transactions of publicly traded stock, and two using guideline transactions for sale of control of financial institutions). For each of these values, Maroney divided by the number of outstanding shares of old stock (496,507).
Next, Maroney added a 40% control premium to three of the five values  the DCF value and the two values based on guideline transactions of publicly traded stock. At trial, Maroney defined control premium as the "amount another organization or another group of people would pay to get control  controlling interest in a financial institution or any company." He explained the addition of a control premium is necessary to convert a "marketable, minority interest" value to a "marketable controlling interest" value. According to Maroney, the two values based on guideline transactions for sale of control of financial institutions do not require the addition of a control premium because control is already embedded in the values. To determine the appropriate control premium, Maroney reviewed bank and thrift sale transactions since 2001 (169 transactions). Maroney determined the percentage of the sale price representing control premium by comparing the announced sale price to the pre-announced stock price of the selling institution. The median control premium for all bank sales since 2001, using stock prices one month prior to the sale, was 41.2%. The median result for all thrift sales was 36.4%. Control premiums using the stock price three months prior to the sale were 52.1% for banks and 44.3% for thrifts. Maroney found the bank results more applicable to River Cities due to Northwest Bank's strong commercial lending. Accordingly, he selected 40% to use for a control premium in valuing River Cities.
Maroney's five values for a single share of old River Cities stock were:
Discounted Cash Flow with Control Premium $57.73
Guideline Transactions:
Publicly Traded Stocks with Control Premium
Price-to-Tangible Book Value Ratio $61.03
Price-to-Earnings Multiple $72.99
Sale of Control
Price-to-Tangible Book Value Ratio $61.36
Price-to-Earnings Multiple $69.52
To reach a final fair value determination, Maroney considered a simple average of the results ($64.53), the average of the three methods after averaging the two results *790 in each of the guideline approaches ($63.39), the average of the three results after excluding the high and low ($63.97) and the median value ($61.36). Maroney ultimately determined the fair value of River Cities' stock was $64 per share.
The district court found Maroney's appraisal more credible than Nielsen's. The court noted Nielsen's appraisal was significantly lower than recent appraisals done by Clifton Gunderson (Nielsen's employer) for the bank's employee stock option plan and the bank's own reverse stock split. The court found these multiple inconsistent appraisals of substantially the same assets difficult, if not impossible, to reconcile. Second, the court found no rational basis for the percentage weighting given by Nielsen to the valuation methods he used. Finally, the court disagreed with Nielsen's position that a well-run, high performing business, such as the bank, should either have no or very little control premium added to determine fair value. The district court adopted Maroney's opinion that $64 was the fair value of the minority shareholders' old stock. We must decide whether Maroney's addition of a control premium was appropriate in this case.
4. Applied methods of valuation. On appeal, Northwest alleges Maroney made several errors in his fair value determination. Northwest contends well-run companies typically do not command a control premium. At trial, Nielsen testified a buyer is willing to pay a larger premium to gain control of a poorly-run company due to the ability to eliminate inefficiencies and increase profits. Maroney, on the other hand, testified a well-run company is just as likely to obtain a significant control premium. He stated:
I think the fact that a company is highly profitable most likely means that they are going to have more interest from more buyers and more competition for the company and I don't find that to affect control premium at all.
The district court found Maroney more credible on this point, and we see no reason to disturb the court's finding.
Next, Northwest contends Maroney should have placed greater emphasis on the income approach and less emphasis on the market-based approach. According to Northwest, "[w]hen financial data of the company being appraised is reliable, the principal method for determining fair value is the income approach." Northwest argues "market-based valuation methods, which inherently reflect synergies, should be given little or no weight."
However, Maroney testified he considered each of the five methods he used in this case to be valid and appropriate. He noted he preferred using a variety of methods because there is a degree of uncertainty with respect to the income approach, which is based on projections. Like the district court, we see no reason to overemphasize the income approach. The market approach to valuation provided helpful, additional evidence regarding the value of the bank and by extension River Cities. See Shannon Pratt, The Lawyer's Business Valuation Handbook 105 (2000) (noting that while in theory the income approach is the dominant approach in business valuation, Revenue Ruling 59-60 and many investment bankers also put heavy emphasis on the market approach).
Northwest also argues it was error for Maroney to add a control premium to his income approach.[8] In support of this contention, *791 Northwest provides the following quote from a Delaware case:
The discounted cash flow method purports to represent the present value of [the corporation]'s cash flow. The calculation arguably may have left out a premium that normally accrues when shareholders sell a company. However, "the appraisal process is not intended to reconstruct a pro forma sale but to assume that the shareholder was willing to maintain his investment position, however slight, had the merger not occurred." Plaintiff is not entitled to the proportionate sales value of [the corporation]. Plaintiff is entitled to the proportionate value of [the corporation] as a continuing shareholder. The discounted cash flow analysis, as employed in this case, fully reflects this value without need for an adjustment.
In re Radiology Assocs., Inc. Litig., 611 A.2d 485, 494 (Del.Ch.1991) (citations omitted). While this position may be the law in Delaware, we choose to follow the position of jurisdictions who determine fair value based on "what a willing buyer realistically would pay for the enterprise as a whole on the statutory valuation date." BNE Mass. Corp. v. Sims, 32 Mass.App. Ct. 190, 588 N.E.2d 14, 19 (1992); see In re Valuation of Common Stock of McLoon Oil Co., 565 A.2d 997, 1004 (Me.1989) (stating the district court must determine "the best price a single buyer could reasonably be expected to pay for the firm as an entity" and then "prorate[] that value for the whole firm equally among all shares of its common stock"); Trapp Family Lodge, Inc., 725 A.2d at 931 (same); see also Barry M. Wertheimer, The Shareholders' Appraisal Remedy and How Courts Determine Fair Value, 47 Duke L.J. 613, 654-55 (Feb.1998) (advocating third party sales value, i.e. the price at which the corporation as an entity could be sold to a third party in an arm's length transaction, should be a factor to consider in determining "fair value"); 2 American Law Inst., Principles of Corporate Governance: Analysis and Recommendations § 7.22(c) (1994) ("[T]he court generally should give substantial weight to the highest realistic price that a willing, able, and fully informed buyer would pay for the corporation as an entity."). To hold otherwise "would inevitably encourage corporate squeeze-outs." McLoon Oil Co., 565 A.2d at 1005. Thus, we find nothing wrong with Maroney adding a control premium to his DCF valuation nor do we quarrel with his use of guideline transactions involving the sale of control. As Maroney's research indicates, buyers are willing to pay a large premium when purchasing an entire financial institution as opposed to a minority interest. The minority shareholders are entitled to the proportionate share of the control premium River Cities likely would obtain if the corporation were for sale.
5. Synergy. Northwest Investment also complains Maroney's control premium is inflated with synergistic value because the market data, upon which the premium is based, included corporate mergers. Synergistic value arises "when two assets are more valuable in combination than in isolation or, put otherwise, when two assets are more valuable when controlled by the same firm than when controlled by different firms." John C. Coates IV, "Fair Value" as an Avoidable Rule of Corporate Law: Minority Discounts in Conflict Transactions, 147 U. Pa. L.Rev. 1251, 1275 (1999); see Union Ill.1995 Inv. Ltd. P'ship v. Union Fin. Group, Ltd., 847 A.2d 340, 356 (Del.Ch. 2004) (defining synergistic value as "the amount of any value that the selling company's shareholders would receive because a buyer intends to operate the subject company, not as a stand-alone going concern, but as part of a larger enterprise, *792 from which synergistic gains can be extracted"). Examples of synergies are "(1) reducing combined overhead by the consolidation of operations [and] (2) raising prices by reducing competition." Pratt, Valuing a Business, at 346. Northwest Investment argues including synergy is impermissible because the fair value of the minority shareholders' stock should be derived from the value of the bank as a stand-alone enterprise rather than the value of the bank if it were to merge with a larger enterprise.
Our statutory definition of "fair value" means "the value of the corporation's shares . . . immediately before the effectuation of the corporate action to which the shareholder objects." Iowa Code § 490.1301(4)(a). We have previously said:
[T]he future opportunities for the company are certainly a consideration in setting the value of the company's stock. . . . Thus, the relevant consideration is what prospects could reasonably have been anticipated as of the date of valuation, not what opportunities are actually realized subsequent to the corporate action.
Sieg II, 568 N.W.2d at 798.
The minority shareholders did not present any evidence that a merger is a reasonable prospect in the bank's future or that valuation should be based on anything other than as a stand-alone going concern. See Ziegeldorf, 554 N.W.2d at 891. Nevertheless, there is nothing wrong with Maroney basing his opinion, in part, on the aggregations of actual sales data involving mergers and acquisitions. This evidence reflects the market place. While Maroney conceded synergistic value was likely embedded in his data, comparable sales transactions "are still the best empirical evidence generally available to quantify control premium." Pratt, Valuing a Business, at 354. Moreover, at least one study suggests merger acquisitions do not command higher premiums in comparison to acquisitions where the corporation will continue to be operated as a stand alone company. Patrick A. Gaughan, Mergers, Acquisitions, and Corporate Restructurings 528 (3d ed.2002) (citing George R. Roach, "Control Premium and Strategic Mergers," Business Valuation Review (June 1998), pp. 42-49) (explaining the Roach study of control premiums paid between 1992 and 1997 "failed to find any difference in the control premium for those deals in which the merging companies have the same or different Standard Industrial Classification (SIC codes)"); Pratt, Valuing a Business, at 351 (same); see Coates, 147 U. Pa. L.Rev. at 1331 (noting commentators "have widely varying intuitions about the significance of merger synergies"). Pratt, a leading authority in business valuation, simply cautions analysts to be cognizant of the possible inclusion of synergistic value in the underlying data when selecting and applying a control premium percentage. Pratt, Valuing a Business, at 360. Unfortunately, a more principled approach to eliminating synergy is not available because synergy is difficult, if not impossible, to quantify. See Agranoff v. Miller, 791 A.2d 880, 899 (Del.Ch.2001) (acknowledging the difficulty in eliminating synergy from control sales data and admitting the court's "rough approach . . . simply involves shaving some percentage off the top of the available information about control premiums paid").
The record shows Maroney, based on median figures, determined corporations similar to the bank have received control premiums in the range of 36% and 52%. He used 40% in his appraisal of River Cities. As a practical matter, Maroney's conservative approach to value indicates he *793 attempted to remove any marketplace distortions. Although we cannot be certain what effect, if any, synergistic value had on Maroney's calculations, it is more appropriate to accept Maroney's control premium in order to eliminate the minority discount which is proscribed by statute than to make no adjustment at all. Borruso, 753 A.2d at 459 n. 12; Casey, 780 A.2d at 571-72. Therefore, we affirm the district court's decision to accept Maroney's opinion of River Cities' fair value.
B. Attorney Fees & Witness Expenses. Northwest Investment also argues the district court erred by not ordering the minority shareholders to pay the corporation's attorney fees and expert witness expenses. Iowa Code section 490.1331(2)(b) states:
The court in an appraisal proceeding may . . . assess the fees and expenses of counsel and experts for the respective parties . . . [a]gainst either the corporation or a shareholder demanding appraisal, in favor of any other party, if the court finds that the party against whom the fees and expenses are assessed acted arbitrarily, vexatiously, or not in good faith with respect to the rights provided by the chapter.
We review the denial of a request for attorney fees and expenses under Iowa Code section 490.1331 for abuse of discretion. Sieg II, 568 N.W.2d at 807.
Northwest Investment concedes it must prove there was no factual or legal basis for the minority shareholders' demand for $64 a share in order to be even eligible for fees. Northwest Investment has obviously failed to meet this burden. We affirm the district court's denial of attorney fees and expert witness expenses.
IV. Conclusion.
We hold the fair value of stock in an appraisal action may include a control premium if the evidence supports the increase in value. The district court properly added a control premium to its valuation of River Cities because transactions involving the sale of financial institutions typically include a large control premium. We therefore affirm the district court's determination that the minority shareholders' shares were worth $64 each immediately before the reverse stock split. Northwest Investment was not entitled to an award for attorney fees and expert witness fees because the minority shareholders did not act arbitrarily or in bad faith.
AFFIRMED.
NOTES
[1]  Janet Jackson, Control, on Control (A & M Records 1986).
[2]  This is commonly referred to as a reverse stock split.
[3]  The parties agree River Cities was not a bank holding company within the meaning of Iowa Code § 524.1801. Therefore, the last sentence of the definition is not relevant.
[4]  The last unnumbered paragraph of Iowa Code section 490.1301(4), which defines fair value, is not derived from the MBCA. It originated in a 2000 amendment to the Iowa Code. See 2000 Iowa Acts ch. 1211, § 2.
[5]  The six other states are Connecticut, Idaho, Maine, Mississippi, Virginia, and West Virginia. See Conn. Gen.Stat. § 33-855(4); Idaho Code Ann. § 30-1-1301(4); Me.Rev.Stat. Ann. tit. 13-C, § 1301(4); Miss.Code Ann. § 79-4-13.01(4); Va.Code Ann. § 13.7-729; W. Va.Code § 31D-13-1301(4). Florida has adopted a variation of the new MBCA definition. See Fla. Stat. § 607.1301(4).
[6]  On appeal, Northwest Investment argues it was improper for Nielsen to add a control premium to his market based valuation. According to Northwest Investment, the control premium only represents 60¢ of Nielsen's $48 valuation conclusion.
[7]  Nielsen utilized the net asset method to determine the value of these other assets. This method sums the value of the assets and subtracts the liabilities associated with those assets.
[8]  Northwest does not explain why its first appraiser, Wayne Brown, added a 35% control premium to his income approach valuation.

=== CASE 9739626 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:44.191351+00 ===

ANDERSON, EJ.
¶ 1. Esteban Martinez appeals from an order denying his postconviction motion for discharge from sentence pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 974.06 (2005-06)1. He argues Wis. Stat. § 973.15(5) entitles him to sentence credit on his Wisconsin convictions for his time spent serving his sentence on his United States convictions. We do not agree and affirm the circuit court.
¶ 2. Facts. The facts are not in dispute. On August 4, 1993, Martinez was sentenced in Sheboygan County Circuit Court in Case Nos. 1992CF307 and 1993CF240 to a sentence totaling fourteen years for possession with intent to deliver with enhancer, contrary to Wis. Stat. §§ 161.41(lm)(h)2. and 161.49(2)(a) (1993-94), for a "no tax stamp" violation, contrary to Wis. Stat. § 139.95(2), and for bail jumping, contrary to Wis. Stat. § 946.49(l)(b). On January 31, 2001, Martinez was sentenced in United States District Court for the *755Eastern District of Wisconsin in Case No. 99-CR-203-1 to concurrent terms on three counts of drug-related crimes.2 His federal sentence totaled eighty-four months and was consecutive to the state sentence. In February 2001, the federal government filed a detainer with Dodge Correctional Institution based on the federal convictions. On June 4,2001, Martinez was paroled on his state sentences directly to the federal government.3
¶ 3. After approximately four years and eight months of federal incarceration, Martinez was released by federal authorities on February 13, 2006, to state authorities to serve the remainder of his state-ordered parole.
¶ 4. Three months later, on May 14, 2006, Martinez was picked up and incarcerated for violating his parole.4
¶ 5. In October 2006, Martinez filed a motion for discharge from sentence pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 974.06.5 He argued that under Wis, Stat. § 973.15(5) *756he must be given credit toward his state sentence for the time served under federal jurisdiction. After a hearing on October 10, 2006, the circuit court denied Martinez's motion. Martinez appeals.
¶ 6. Relevant Statutes.
WISCONSIN Stat. § 973.15 Sentence, terms, escapes.
(5) A convicted offender who is made available to another jurisdiction under ch. 976 or in any other lawful manner shall be credited with service of his or her Wisconsin sentence or commitment under the terms of s. 973.155 for the duration of custody in the other jurisdiction.
Wisconsin Stat. § 973.155 Sentence credit.
(1) (a) A convicted offender shall be given credit toward the service of his or her sentence for all days spent in custody in connection with the course of conduct for which sentence was imposed. As used in this subsection, "actual days spent in custody" includes, without limitation by enumeration, confinement related to an offense for which the offender is ultimately sentenced, or for any other sentence arising out of the same course of conduct, which occurs:
1. While the offender is awaiting trial;
2. While the offender is being tried; and
3. While the offender is awaiting imposition of sentence after trial.
(b) The categories in par. (a) and sub. (lm) include custody of the convicted offender which is in whole or in *757part the result of a probation, extended supervision or parole hold under s. 302.113(8m), 302.114(8m), 304.06(3), or 973.10(2) placed upon the person for the same course of conduct as that resulting in the new conviction.
(lm) A convicted offender shall be given credit toward the service of his or her sentence for all days spent in custody as part of a substance abuse treatment program that meets the requirements of s. 16.964(12)(c), as determined by the office of justice assistance under s. 16.964(12)(i) for any offense arising out of the course of conduct that led to the person's placement in that program.
(2) After the imposition of sentence, the court shall make and enter a specific finding of the number of days for which sentence credit is to be granted, which finding shall be included in the judgment of conviction. In the case of revocation of probation, extended supervision or parole, the department, if the hearing is waived, or the division of hearings and appeals in the department of administration, in the case of a hearing, shall make such a finding, which shall be included in the revocation order.
(3) The credit provided in sub. (1) or (lm) shall be computed as if the convicted offender had served such time in the institution to which he or she has been sentenced.
(4) The credit provided in sub. (1) shall include earned good time for those inmates subject to s. 302.43, 303.07 (3) or 303.19 (3) serving sentences of one year or less and confined in a county jail, house of correction or county reforestation camp.
(5) If this section has not been applied at sentencing to any person who is in custody or to any person who is on probation, extended supervision or parole, *758the person may petition the department to be given credit under this section. Upon proper verification of the facts alleged in the petition, this section shall be applied retroactively to the person. If the department is unable to determine whether credit should be given, or otherwise refuses to award retroactive credit, the person may petition the sentencing court for relief. This subsection applies to any person, regardless of the date he or she was sentenced.
(6) A defendant aggrieved by a determination by a court under this section may appeal in accordance with s. 809.30.
¶ 7. Standard of Review. The question before us involves the application of Wis. Stat. §§ 973.15(5) and 973.155. The application of a statute to undisputed facts presents a question of law which we review de novo. State v. Beiersdorf, 208 Wis. 2d 492, 496, 561 N.W.2d 749 (Ct. App. 1997).
¶ 8. Discussion. Martinez argues that the circuit court erroneously exercised its discretion by applying Wis. Stat. § 973.155 rather than Wis. Stat. § 973.15(5). For the reasons discussed below, we disagree and hold that § 973.15(5) does not apply to the facts of Martinez's case and that the circuit court was correct in applying § 973.155 and adhering to the reasoning of State v. Rohl, 160 Wis. 2d 325, 466 N.W.2d 208 (Ct. App. 1991).
¶ 9. Martinez contends that he is entitled to sentence credit against his Wisconsin sentences for the time he spent in the custody of the United States from June 4, 2001, until February 13, 2006. He relies on State v. Brown, 2006 WI App 41, 289 Wis. 2d 823, 711 N.W.2d 708, for his contention that Wis. Stat. § 973.15(5) is the controlling statute and dictates that he is entitled to sentence credit.
*759¶ 10. Brown was charged with drug crimes in March 1990. Brown, 289 Wis. 2d 823, ¶ 2. In March 1992, Brown was sentenced and, after completing his incarceration time, he was placed on probation. Id. In July 1995, Brown's probation was revoked for numerous violations and he was ordered to serve his sentence at Dodge Correctional Institution. Id., ¶ 3. Although Brown was ordered to be sent to the correctional institution to serve his state sentence, he apparently never arrived there, as he was turned over to federal authorities because of the existence of federal drug dealing charges against him, charges he was convicted of in November 1995. Id. Brown was then incarcerated by the U.S. authorities and remained in the federal prison system until he completed his federal sentence. Id. He was then transferred to state authorities for incarceration sometime in 2004. Id.
¶ 11. Brown filed a series of motions in the circuit court seeking to obtain credit on his state sentence for the time he served in federal custody. Relying on Wis. Stat. § 973.155, the circuit court did not grant Brown's request. Brown, 289 Wis. 2d 823, ¶ 5. On appeal, this court reversed the order of the circuit court. Id., ¶ 11. We relied on Wis. Stat. § 973.15(5) and held that Brown was entitled to have his state sentence credited for the time he was serving the federal sentences and to immediate release. Brown, 289 Wis. 2d 823, ¶ 11.
¶ 12. Martinez contends that, like Brown, he is entitled to have his state sentence credited for the time he served in federal custody. He further contends that if he is entitled to that credit, he should have been discharged from the Wisconsin sentences in April 2005. So discharged, he would no. longer have been a state parolee and, thus, could not have violated the rules of *760parole in May 2006 since his state-sentenced parole time would have expired while he was in federal custody.
¶ 13. We do not agree with Martinez's reliance on Brown, which we deem distinguishable from the facts of his case. Unlike Brown, Martinez's parole had not been revoked when he was released to the federal authorities on a federal detainer. Whether Martinez would be subject to state incarceration again was purely speculative because that is the nature of parole: follow the rules and you will not go back to prison; break the rules and you will. Whether he would be put into state custody again was not known at the time he served his federal sentence. In contrast to Martinez, at the time Brown was released to the federal authorities his probation had already been revoked and he had been ordered to serve a four-year sentence of incarceration. See id.
¶ 14. We agree with the circuit court's determination that Martinez's situation is more like that of the defendant in Rohl. See Rohl, 160 Wis. 2d 325. Rohl was a Wisconsin parolee in August 1986 when the Department of Corrections (DOC) granted him permission to go to California, where he would continue to be supervised pursuant to an interstate compact. Id. at 328. In November 1986, before the transfer of his parole had been accomplished, Rohl was arrested and jailed in California on four charges of receipt of stolen property. Id. Based upon the California charges, the Wisconsin DOC issued a parole violation warrant against Rohl. Id. Rohl was convicted in California in September 1987 and was sentenced in January 1988 to four years' imprisonment. Id. Rohl requested and was granted credit against his four-year California prison sentence for the *761number of days he had already spent in California's prison since his November 1986 arrest. Id.
¶ 15. After his release from the California prison system in April 1989, Rohl was returned to Wisconsin on the parole violation warrant and his parole was revoked. Id. In August 1989, a Department of Health and Social Services hearing examiner determined that Rohl should forfeit three years of accumulated good time on the Wisconsin sentences. Id. The examiner also ruled that Rohl could not receive credit against these three additional years for the presentence confinement related to the California sentence. Id.
¶ 16. Rohl subsequently filed a motion for sentence credit. Id. Rohl sought credit for all time spent in custody in California. Id The circuit court denied Rohl's request. See Rohl, 160 Wis. 2d at 329. We affirmed the circuit court concluding that under Wis. Stat. § 973.155, Rohl's credit request could not be granted because it would constitute impermissible double credit against two nonconcurrent sentences. Rohl, 160 Wis. 2d at 327-29. We reasoned that Rohl's sentence of confinement was conditionally completed when he was paroled. Id. at 332. We found it highly relevant that "[t]he prospect of Rohl serving any further Wisconsin prison sentence at the time of the California sentence was speculative." Id. We reasoned that the "critical flaw" in Rohl's logic was that he wanted us to label the California court sentence as one running concurrent with a sentence which he "might have to resume serving in the future." Id. We expressed our doubt that a trial court has the authority to presume the resumption of a sentence suspended due to parole where the parole has not been revoked. Id. At the time the California court sentenced Rohl, there simply was no other custodial *762sentence to which the California sentence could be, or could be presumed to be, concurrent. Id.
¶ 17. Here, as in Rohl, the critical flaw in Martinez's reasoning is that he wants us to label the federal sentence as one running concurrent with a sentence Martinez might have to resume serving in the future. See id. Martinez's Wisconsin sentence of confinement was conditionally completed when he was paroled by Wisconsin authorities. See id. Martinez wants us to interpret Wis. Stat. § 973.15(5) as entitling him to sentence credit for a sentence which was purely speculative at the time he served his federal sentence. To adopt this interpretation would be absurd. See State v. Williams, 198 Wis. 2d 516, 532, 544 N.W.2d 406 (1996) ("A statute should be construed so as to avoid absurd results."). Because the application of credit under § 973.15(5) is mandatory (i.e., "shall be credited"), Martinez's interpretation would dictate that the trial court must presume the resumption of a sentence suspended due to parole where the parole has not been revoked. See Rohl, 160 Wis. 2d. at 332. We rejected this result in Rohl-, we reject it here.
¶ 18. Like Rohl, at the time Martinez was serving his federal sentence, he did not have a custodial sentence to which the federal sentence could be, or could be presumed to be, concurrent. See id. The prospect of Martinez serving any further Wisconsin prison sentence at the time of the United States sentence was speculative. See id. Wisconsin Stat. § 973.15(5) does not apply to Martinez's situation. We affirm the circuit court's conclusion that under Wis. Stat. § 973.155 and the teaching of Rohl, Martinez's credit request cannot be granted because it would constitute impermissible double credit against two nonconcurrent sentences.
*763By the Court. — Order affirmed.
All references to the Wisconsin Statutes are to the 2005-06 version unless otherwise noted.
We take judicial notice of documents contained in the respondent's appendix which are related to Martinez's federal convictions and the detainer filed involving them.
The face sheet read that Martinez was on "parole" and listed his address as only "FEDERAL DETAINER."
Martinez was incarcerated on May 14, 2006, based on a revocation hearing request issued by the Department of Corrections (DOC). Martinez represents that the DOC revocation petition was subsequently granted after a hearing held on October 12, 2006, and not appealed, resulting in Martinez earning credit against the sentence in question from that date forward. This information is not in dispute and, though not found in the record, is in Martinez's brief to this court.
He also filed a motion to vacate Count 2 in Case No. 1992CF307 because it was decided under a law later determined *756to be unconstitutional. The State did not contest the motion to vacate and the trial court dismissed Count 2, vacated the judgment as to this charge and thereby amended the original judgment of conviction accordingly.

=== CASE 9739627 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:44.195723+00 ===

NETTESHEIM, J.
¶ 19. (concurring). I agree with the majority opinion that Martinez is not entitled to credit against his Wisconsin sentence for the time he served on his federal sentence. I also agree with the majority that this case is governed by State v. Rohl, 160 Wis. 2d 325, 466 N.W.2d 208 (Ct. App. 1991), not State v. Brown, 2006 WI App 41, 289 Wis. 2d 823, 711 N.W.2d 708. However, I disagree with the majority's attempt to distinguish this case from Brown. Instead, I would hold that Brown was incorrectly decided and, as a result, Rohl is the controlling law on the question.
¶ 20. The majority says that this is not a Brown case because, although Brown's Wisconsin probation had been revoked, he was turned over to the federal authorities to serve his federal sentence before commencing his Wisconsin sentence, whereas Martinez was already serving his Wisconsin sentence and then paroled directly to the federal authorities. Majority, ¶ 13. Because it was "purely speculative" whether Martinez would ever be called upon to serve the remainder of his sentence, the majority concludes that this is not a Brown case. Majority, ¶ 13.
¶ 21. I appreciate the majority's distinction between the two cases, but I fail to grasp why this has any bearing on the question of sentence credit. The inescapable fact is that both Brown and Martinez were subject to Wisconsin prison sentences (contingent or actual) when they were turned over to the federal authorities to serve their federal sentences. Brown clearly holds that Wis. Stat. § 973.15(5) is the more specific statute and controls over Wis. Stat. § 973.155, resulting in an award of sentence credit. Brown, 289 Wis. 2d 823, ¶ 11.
*764¶ 22. I would hold that Brown was incorrectly decided. The debate in Brown as to which statute was more specific was a false issue because Wis. Stat. § 973.15(5) expressly references Wis. Stat. § 973.155. Section 973.15(5) says, in relevant part, that when a convicted offender is made available to another jurisdiction, the offender "shall be credited with service of his or her Wisconsin sentence .. . under the terms of s. 973.155 . ..." (Emphasis added.) And § 973.155(l)(a), in turn, says that such credit is limited to "all days spent in custody in connection with the course of conduct for which sentence was imposed." Thus, the two statutes stand comfortably alongside each other. Section 973.15(5) allows for sentence credit when the offender is turned over to another jurisdiction to serve a sentence there, but § 973.155(l)(a) limits that credit when the latter sentence is linked to the course of conduct that produced the Wisconsin sentence. The Brown court should have applied the clear language of the two complementary statutes instead of erecting a barrier between the two and deciding which one prevailed.
¶ 23. Brown also falters on another front by failing to discuss Rohl, an earlier case relevant to the issue in Brown. As the majority correctly holds, this case is akin to Rohl because a grant of sentence credit to Martinez would constitute impermissible double credit against two nonconcurrent sentences. Majority, ¶ 18. See also State v. Boettcher, 144 Wis. 2d 86, 93-96, 423 N.W.2d 533 (1988), and Rohl, 160 Wis. 2d at 327. Brown was wrongly decided because it conferred dual credit contrary to Wis. Stat. § 973.155(l)(a) and Rohl. Where two court of appeals decisions conflict, the first decision governs. State v. Swiams, 2004 WI App 217, ¶ 23, 277 Wis. 2d 400, 690 N.W.2d 452. Moreover, the award of *765dual credit in Brown conflicts with Boettcher, a prior supreme court decision that clearly controls.
¶ 24. On this different basis, I concur with the majority's holding denying Martinez's request for sentence credit.