=== CASE 9736778 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:06:15.690553+00 ===

Wachenfeld, J.
(dissenting). In In re Woodworth, 15 Fed. Supp. 291; affirmed, 85 F. 2d 50 (C. C. A. 2, 1936), the court held:
“On principle, it cannot be doubted that when an attorney makes an agreement to prosecute a case for a fee contingent on success, and is disbarred before the fee is earned, he may not collect compensation from his client for the work done. The agreed fee he cannot have, because he has not performed his engagement and the contingency on which the compensation was to rest has not happened. Reasonable compensation in lieu of the fee he cannot have, because his inability to complete his contract has been brought about by his own wrongful ■conduct.”
I subscribe to this reasoning and conclusion and am therefore to affirm.
Adopting this rule would not complicate or bring economic ■considerations into disciplinary proceedings nor would it defeat their purpose. It would, in my opinion, be an added incentive to professional conduct, which is foreign to disciplinary complaints.
*530Admittedly, the plaintiff was disbarred because of his own wrongful act, and whether it was with reference to this particular case or not, the result, in my opinion, is the same.
The penalty falls and he can no longer represent his client because of his wrongful conduct. The result of that misconduct should be uniform, not varying with the degree of culpability or its relationship to any particular case.
“I-Iis inability to complete his contract has been brought about by his own wrongful conduct.”
I would affirm the judgment.
For reversal — Chief Justice Vandeebilt, and Justices Case, Heiiek, Olephant, Bueling and Ackekson — 6.
For affirmance — Justice Wachenfeld — 1.

=== CASE 2207251 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:18.374607+00 ===

208 Cal. App. 2d 702 (1962)
25 Cal. Rptr. 530
REGIE NATIONALE DES USINES RENAULT, BILLANCOURT (SEINE), FRANCE, Petitioner,
v.
THE SUPERIOR COURT OF SACRAMENTO COUNTY, Respondent; WILLIAM C. FORD, Real Party in Interest.
Docket No. 10575.
Court of Appeals of California, Third District.
October 19, 1962.
Bronson, Bronson & McKinnon and Ernest M. Thayer for Petitioner.
McCarty & Crow and Richard E. Crow for Respondent and Real Party in Interest.
THE COURT.
By mandate, petitioner seeks an order of this court compelling the Superior Court in and for the County of Sacramento to set aside and vacate its order denying petitioner's motion to quash service of summons and complaint *703 on petitioner. This court issued its order to show cause and the matter was set for oral argument.
After full consideration of the petition, the points and authorities, and the arguments of respective counsel, we are satisfied that the memorandum opinion filed by the Honorable Leonard M. Friedman denying a like motion correctly states the law and we therefore adopt the same as the opinion of this court.
[1] "The court has concluded that defendant Regie Nationale des Usines Renault, Billancourt (Seine), France (hereinafter referred to elliptically as `Regie') has had adequate contacts with California and California residents so that the maintenance of the suit against it does not offend our notions of fair play and substantial justice (International Shoe Co. v. Washington, 326 U.S. 310 [66 S. Ct. 154, 90 L. Ed. 95, 161 A.L.R. 1057]). It is, in other words, `doing business' in California and is amenable to substituted service of process on the Secretary of State in the manner provided by Section 6501-6502 of the Corporations Code.
"Defendant Regie is a business entity owned by the French government. As an automobile manufacturer, it inaugurates a flow of its products to the California market. It sells its products to defendant Renault, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary incorporated in the State of New York. Renault, in turn, sells to various American distributors, who in turn sell to retail dealers. There is a chain of sales leading from defendant Regie to California consumers. The product is such that negligence in manufacture and inspection might well cause injury to California citizens, as is alleged by the plaintiff and by the cross-complainant here.
"Regie might choose to arrange its marketing process through a hierarchy of its own agents and employees. Then, by establishing agents in California to sell its products, it would undoubtedly be amenable to suit in this state. For reasons of its own it chooses to market its products through a wholly-owned American subsidiary and a network of independently-owned distributorships and dealerships. These choices on its part effect little, if any, alteration in the jurisdictional situation. The `contacts' exist one way or the other and for precisely the same purposes. The differences are differences only in form and description.
"Apparently, where the tort occurs within the state, extensive sales and promotional contacts with California consumers *704 through nonexclusive, independent sales representatives may constitute `doing business' (Cosper v. Smith & Wesson Arms Co., 53 Cal. 2d 77 [346 P.2d 409]). Here there are additional circumstances which, in composite, impel subjection to jurisdiction. These are: (a) the interest of this State in providing a forum for its residents; (b) the relative availability of evidence; (c) the relative burden of defense and prosecution in California rather than at some other place; (d) the case of access to some alternative forum; (e) the extent to which the cause of action arises out of Regie's local activities. Fisher Governor Co. v. Superior Court, 53 Cal. 2d 222, 225-226 [1 Cal. Rptr. 1, 347 P.2d 1].
"As regards `fair play' it is obvious that if California rejects jurisdiction, Regie may successfully bar plaintiff and cross-complainant from access to the courts of all states of the union, including New York. Cannon Manufacturing Co. v. Cudahy Packing Co., 267 U.S. 333 [45 S. Ct. 250, 69 L. Ed. 634]; see also Fisher Governor Co. v. Superior Court, supra. Regie's argument would, in effect, confine the claimants to the courts of the Republic of France. Fairness to Regie does not entail this disadvantage to the claimants.
"Renault, Inc., whether regarded as an individual corporate entity or as alter ego of Regie, is simply a medium through which the latter establishes its business contacts with the California public. As to the mechanics of process serving, Regie has received process via the California Secretary of State without reference to the `presence' of Renault as its purported agent in California. Thus there is no point in deciding whether to respect the separate status of Renault or to regard it as merely the alter ego of Regie."
The order to show cause is discharged and the petition is denied.
Petitioner's application for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied December 12, 1962.

=== CASE 2207254 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:18.400331+00 ===

208 Cal. App. 2d 246 (1962)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
SOLLY TERENO, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 8014.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. One.
Oct. 5, 1962.
Matthews & Stanley for Defendant and Appellant.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and Norman H. Sokolow, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
LILLIE, J.
Having found defendant guilty of four counts of bookmaking in violation of section 337a, subdivisions 1 and 3, Penal Code, the trial judge on February 10, 1961, sentenced *247 him to a term of 180 days in the county jail; he suspended sentence and granted defendant probation for a period of three years on certain specified terms and conditions, among them, that defendant "not gamble or engage in any bookmaking activities or have paraphe[r]nalia thereof in his possession, and not be present in places where gambling or bookmaking is conducted," and that he "obey all laws, orders, rules and regulations of the probation department and of the court." Shortly thereafter defendant was again arrested and charged with four counts of bookmaking; he was found guilty of a violation of section 337a, subdivision 3, Penal Code, as alleged in count 3 of the information (no. 242588). On August 22, 1961, the court denied probation and sentenced defendant to 90 days in the county jail. At the same time, and in the instant case, the court found defendant to be in violation of the probation order of February 10, 1961, and ordered the same modified to provide that he serve the next 90 days in the county jail, probation to continue under the same terms and conditions upon his release. The court ordered the jail terms in case no. 242588 and in the instant case to run concurrently. From the judgment defendant appeals.
[1] It appearing that defendant engaged in bookmaking activities on March 23, 1961, for which he was charged and convicted (judgment affirmed by this court on August 29, 1962, People v. Tereno, 207 Cal. App. 2d 246 [24 Cal. Rptr. 501], in violation of section 337a, subdivision 3, Penal Code, and the probation order of February 10, 1961, the lower court properly found defendant to be in violation of the order, and modified the same. The judgment is affirmed.
[2] While defendant has also appealed from an order denying a motion for new trial, the record in both cases is silent concerning such a motion and no order relative to denial of a new trial appears therein. Thus, appeal from the purported order is dismissed.
Wood, P. J., concurred.

=== CASE 2207256 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:18.413158+00 ===

367 Pa. 159 (1951)
Commonwealth
v.
Chambers, Appellant.
Supreme Court of Pennsylvania.
Argued November 20, 1950.
March 21, 1951.
Before DREW, C.J., STEARNE, JONES, BELL, LADNER and CHIDSEY, JJ.
*160 Albert S. Oliensis, with him Maxwell L. Ominsky, for appellant.
Colbert C. McClain, Assistant District Attorney, with him John H. Maurer, District Attorney, for appellee.
OPINION BY MR. JUSTICE BELL, March 21, 1951:
This is the second time the defendant was convicted of first degree murder and at each trial the jury in their verdict imposed the death penalty. The defendant in this appeal raises two narrow but very important questions: (1) "Must a suspect in a capital case, prior to police questioning, be furnished counsel or at least advised of his right to counsel and to remain silent upon questioning"; and (2) Did the trial judge commit reversible error in his charge to the jury concerning a man named Phillips? The first question has been ruled adversely to the appellant in a companion case, Commonwealth v. Bryant, 367 Pa. 135, 79 A.2d 193; and we shall therefore proceed to a determination of the second question involved.
Joseph Saturno, 65 years old, was found dead in his apartment, 616 Pemberton Street, Philadelphia, about 6:25 p.m. on November 8, 1948. The deceased had been terribly beaten and mutilated, with about 20 wounds in the head; and his apartment was a shambles, with blood over everything. Detectives arrived at the scene of the crime shortly thereafter and as a result of a tip went to defendant's home at 633 Kenilworth Street, less than a block from the deceased's apartment. Defendant was shot by the detectives while he was attempting to escape and was then taken to a hospital. Detectives Lear and O'Donnell were permitted to testify, over objections of counsel, that they questioned defendant at the hospital and that defendant admitted being *161 the lookout while his co-defendant, Bryant, and another man, Phillips, beat the decedent to death.
Phillips was then brought to the hospital and identified by defendant. Next morning defendant was taken to Detective Division Headquarters and once more questioned. His statements were then reduced to writing, although not signed by him, and his written statement detailing this exceptionally brutal murder, was read in evidence by Detective Steinberg, over the objections of defendant's counsel. Phillips was again implicated in the crime by defendant.
Later the same day defendant signed a confession similar to the ones he had made on the two previous occasions above mentioned. At this time he was warned that any statement he made would probably be used against him at the trial of his case. Once again defendant connected Phillips with the killing.
Both Chambers and Bryant confessed that they had come to Saturno's apartment to rob him and gave details of the brutal beating administered to Saturno and how they ransacked his apartment in their search for money, but each blamed the actual beating of Saturno on the other. Bryant's confession was not used or read in defendant's trial. Defendant makes no contention that his confessions were involuntary or coerced or that he did not have a fair trial (except as to the two matters which he specifically raised in his aforesaid statement of the questions involved).
In each of defendant's confessions he implicated, as above mentioned, a man named "Phillips" as having, with Bryant, beaten the deceased to death. Phillips denied this when he was arrested by the police in his bedroom about 2 a.m. the morning after the murder and also when Chambers accused him of it at the hospital and again at the Coroner's Inquest, as well as at defendant's trial.
*162 Phillips testified at defendant's trial that defendant knocked him unconscious in a crap game on the afternoon of November 8th and that defendant's mother washed the wound; that Phillips then went to the Pennsylvania Hospital at about 4:15 p.m.; that he left the hospital around 5 o'clock and went to the house of Robert Magil, 638 Bainbridge Street, which is less than a block from Saturno's apartment; that he then went home, had supper and because his head hurt him, went right to bed; and that defendant lied when he said that Phillips had anything to do with the murder.
Detective O'Donnell testified that defendant (Chambers) definitely told him that Phillips got the patch on his head in his fight with Pop Saturno. Detectives O'Donnell and McColgan each testified that he had investigated these conflicting statements and found out from the hospital records and elsewhere that Phillips received the injury prior to 4:30 on the day of the murder; that they had also investigated Phillips' statement that he had nothing to do with the murder and that they had no proof that he participated in or had any connection with the murder of Saturno. The court then said: "Q. Let's dispose of Phillips. Did you check to see where Phillips was from the time he was discharged from the hospital until the time he was arrested? Did you make an investigation of that matter? A. Yes, we did. He told us the same story he told on the stand here. Q. Where did you ascertain where Phillips was, home in bed? A. We had nothing to prove that he was anywhere else. . . . The Court: He told you all the discussions up to that time, which would determine the status of Phillips. Now, Phillips is out. Q. All right. What happened after Phillips is eliminated?"[*]
*163 It is also a fact, for what it is worth, that Phillips was exonerated by the Coroner.
Defendant contends that the veracity of his story about Phillips was of very great importance to him because if the jury believed defendant was only a lookout and that the brutal beating had been committed by Bryant and Phillips and not by him, the sentence might have been life imprisonment instead of death. With this contention we agree. In the light of this we shall examine the court's charge to which the defendant objects.
The court charged: "The first thing this man did was implicate an innocent man who has successfully established an alibi and who has been vindicated in the community. He had nothing to do with it. The Commonwealth is not in possession of the slightest evidence that he was even near where the crime was committed at the time it was committed. I mention that to you because in determining what are the true facts in this case you have before you statements of this defendant, one of the two witnesses to what took place, and if he lied about Phillips you have a right to ask yourselves whether he lied about Bryant. Was he an innocent bystander or was he a participant in this brutality? Was he the man who beat and beat and beat the poor dead man until he passed out of this life, or was he the man who stood in between the doorway of the two rooms? . . . So, what is the truth? That is what you must ascertain. The law says that all of those who participate in a robbery and other crimes that are enumerated in the Act of Assembly are equally guilty. . . . If A and B are together and A fires the shot, B is just as guilty if he participates in one of these enumerated felonies as though he fired the shot himself. . . . If you believe this defendant is guilty of murder in the first degree, then decide whether it should be life imprisonment or death in the electric chair."
*164 It is the exclusive province of the jury, not the court, to decide all the facts, the inferences therefrom, the credibility of the witnesses and the weight and effect to be given to all of the testimony. While the main purpose of a judge is to state and explain the law and briefly review the evidence, it is always the privilege and sometimes the duty of a trial judge to express his own opinion, including his opinion of the weight and effect of the evidence or its points of strength and weakness or even the guilt or innocence of the defendant and the verdict which, in his judgment, the jury should render, provided (1) there is reasonable ground for any statement he may make; and (2) he clearly leaves to the jury the right to decide all the facts and every question involved in the case, regardless of any opinion of the court thereon: Commonwealth v. Cunningham, 232 Pa. 609, 611, 81 A. 711; Commonwealth v. Foster, 364 Pa. 288, 293, 72 A.2d 279; Commonwealth v. Simmons, 361 Pa. 391, 407, 65 A.2d 353; Commonwealth v. Watts, 358 Pa. 92, 97, 56 A.2d 81; Commonwealth v. Jones, 341 Pa. 541, 551, 19 A.2d 389; Commonwealth v. Nafus, 303 Pa. 418, 420-1, 154 A. 485.
The question in the instant case is whether the judge in his charge to the jury, by treating controversial questions as established facts, took away from the jury their right to pass upon and decide the evidence and issues presented to them, particularly with reference to Phillips? We are of the opinion that the trial judge unintentionally usurped the power of the jury and for this reason, the appeal must be sustained.
Our conclusion is further supported by Commonwealth v. Light, 195 Pa. 220, 45 A. 933. The defendant in that case was indicted for larceny. We there said: "This part of the charge is however open to the objection that it states as an established fact in the case a matter which was the subject of the most serious controversy at the trial, and upon which the guilt or innocence *165 of the defendant in the minds of the jury would depend to a great extent. Whether the defendant Light assisted in taking the turkeys to the buggy was the most important question in the case in determining his guilt. If he assisted in this act, his conduct at the time, shown by the same testimony, together with his denial, and his fabrication of an entirely different account of the matter left little room for doubt. If, as he testified, the turkeys were placed in the buggy by Sholl during his absence and without his knowledge, the case against him was much weakened. The statement that if `. . . at any time between the time they took these turkeys to the buggy,' etc., was an assumption by the court of a fact which had not been established by testimony. This was certainly injurious to the defendant. To what extent it prejudiced his case it is impossible to say. It is enough that it may have done so."
The statement of the court during the trial that "Phillips is out. . . . What happened after Phillips is eliminated?"; together with the court's charge exonerating Phillips and stating that he was an innocent man  who had successfully established an alibi and been vindicated in the community and was not even near (he was within half a block one hour before the murder, according to his own testimony) the scene of the crime at the time of its commission  assumed as established and true facts, facts which had not been proved and were, at best, important controversial questions which only the jury and not the judge could decide.
Judgment reversed and a new trial granted.
NOTES
[*]  Italics throughout, ours.

=== CASE 2207257 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:18.415886+00 ===

183 Mich. App. 191 (1989)
454 N.W.2d 121
PEOPLE
v.
POOL
Docket No. 109488.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided November 15, 1989.
Before: MAHER, P.J., and MARILYN KELLY and H.E. DEMING,[*] JJ.
PER CURIAM.
Defendant pled guilty to a reduced charge of larceny from a person, MCL 750.357; MSA 28.589. In exchange for the plea, the prosecutor dismissed the original unarmed robbery charge, MCL 750.530; MSA 28.798. The parties agreed to a sentence of three to ten years in prison.
The trial judge sentenced defendant to a prison term of 1 1/2 to 10 years. He noted that defendant's record was not that bad and that he had a good relationship with his family. The prosecutor did not object to the sentence. Neither party raised the subject of the sentence agreement.
About a month later, the prosecutor moved to vacate the sentence. He argued that it was a violation of the sentence agreement. The judge acknowledged that he had made a mistake. He vacated the original sentence and resentenced defendant to three to ten years. He denied defendant's subsequent motion to vacate the second sentence.
On appeal defendant argues that the trial court did not have authority to resentence him. We agree.
A trial court's authority to resentence a defendant is limited. It depends on whether the previously imposed sentence is invalid. People v Whalen, 412 Mich. 166, 169; 312 NW2d 638 (1981). We are unable to find any authority which holds that a sentence which does not follow the sentence *193 agreement is invalid. Even where there is a sentence agreement, the trial court is not bound by it and must still exercise discretion when imposing sentence. People v Killebrew, 416 Mich. 189; 330 NW2d 834 (1982). Since defendant's original sentence was valid, the trial court did not have authority to resentence him.
Accordingly, we vacate defendant's sentence and remand for reinstatement of his original sentence of 1 1/2 to 10 years in prison.
NOTES
[*]  Former circuit judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.

=== CASE 2207265 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:18.486798+00 ===

208 Cal. App. 2d 239 (1962)
LUIS PEREA RIVAS, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
ARNULFO AYALA, Defendant and Respondent.
Civ. No. 6851.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Dist.
Oct. 4, 1962.
Marshall Miles for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Harold King for Defendant and Respondent.
SHEPARD, J.
This is an appeal by plaintiff from a judgment for defendant in a personal injury action.
Facts
Sometime between 12 midnight and 2 a.m. of May 3, 1960, at the Apache Caf San Bernardino, California, an altercation occurred between plaintiff, Luis Perea Rivas, age 34, weight 215, a cook's helper, and defendant Arnulfo Ayala, age 70, weight 165, a retired Santa Fe railroad worker. While the broad outlines of what happened are not in dispute, the exact details of how the altercation started in the cafe and who the aggressor was after they left the cafe are in sharp conflict. Because where such conflict exists this court is bound by the evidence which supports the findings and judgment of the trial court, we shall so relate it. (Brewer v. Simpson, 53 Cal. 2d 567, 583 [1-2] [2 Cal. Rptr. 609, 349 P.2d 289].)
About one year previously, Luis had been a tenant in a house belonging to Ayala and Luis had been evicted. Shortly thereafter, Luis and his uncle "Chevo" Rivas met Ayala returning home late at night in an intoxicated condition. The two Rivas attacked Ayala, knocked him to the ground and severely beat him. Some time before midnight of the night here in question, Ayala came to the cafe, sat on a stool at the bar about 5 feet from the door and next to Mary Bareta (a niece of Luis), ordering a Seven-Up for himself and a beer for Mary. Some time after midnight Luis came in and took *241 a seat at the bar several stools away and next to a Bobby Silva. A short time later Luis came close to Ayala, started a discussion involving "Chevo," and challenged Ayala to fight. Ayala refused. Luis kept repeating his challenge. The bartender ordered Luis to leave Ayala alone and finally ordered Luis to get out of the bar. Luis refused. Finally, Ayala left with Luis. As he walked out he saw a knife in Luis' hand.
Outside, Luis and Ayala walked a few paces around the corner. Luis swung his knife at Ayala. Ayala had a small pocket-knife with a 2 or 2 1/2-inch blade which he evidently opened as they were walking. When Luis struck, Ayala struck back two or three times and cut Luis on the face and abdomen. All this took place in a few seconds or a minute. Luis walked away bleeding. Ayala did not follow him. Luis was taken to the hospital by others, for medical attention. Ayala had never before been in a knife fight.
Peculiarly, there were at least four other persons in the bar well known to both parties. But the only witness called by either party was a taxi driver who saw the parties walk out together, saw waving arms for a few seconds but could not see who struck what blow, if any, saw blood running from Luis and called the police. He contributed nothing to the question of who the aggressor was. Judgment was rendered for defendant. Plaintiff appeals.
Self-Defense
Plaintiff first contends that as a matter of law defendant's actions cannot be justified as self-defense, citing as authority People v. Hinshaw, 194 Cal. 1 [227 P. 156]; Fraguglia v. Sala, 17 Cal. App. 2d 738 [62 P.2d 783]. [1] The quotation given by plaintiff from the Hinshaw case provides its own answer: " '... that self-defense is not available as a plea to a defendant who has sought to a quarrel with the design to force a deadly issue and thus, through his fraud, contrivance, or fault, to create a real or apparent necessity for making a felonious assault.' "
The court found orally that plaintiff was the aggressor and also found in its written findings "That at the time and place of the occurrence in question the defendant herein acted in proper and reasonable self defense and used no more force than was reasonably necessary to repel the assault committed upon him by the plaintiff."
[2] The evidence factually supports both the oral statement of the trial court and its written finding. The Fraguglia *242 case involved a fight between two rubbish truck workers. The judgment there was reversed because there was no evidence that defendant was the aggressor in the sense of the rule as set forth in the Hinshaw case.
Furthermore, the trial court may well have believed that defendant finally concluded that plaintiff would attack him in any event and that he would be at a disadvantage in the close quarters of the bar. Some of defendant's answers are inconsistent with this conclusion, but when the whole testimony is read together, with the defendant's lack of fluency and English understanding in mind, it becomes a possible conclusion. Plaintiff's continued insistence on fighting, his refusal to heed the orders of the bartender to leave defendant alone and get out, the fact that an open blade in plaintiff's hand was seen by defendant as they started out of the cafe, the fact that defendant had been previously attacked and inexcusably beaten by plaintiff and "Chevo," the fact that defendant obviously misunderstood the import of several questions, the answers that he was not "afraid" but felt it necessary to protect himself from a knife attack, plus the fact that defendant repeatedly asked plaintiff to leave defendant alone and to go away, all put together lend credence and support to such a belief. If such was the belief of the trial judge, it would render involuntary the willingness of defendant to remove the scene of the impending fight from the close quarters of the bar. In any event the evidence provided ample support for the court's finding. We find the case of Ballew v. Davis, 76 Cal. App. 2d 418 [173 P.2d 317], more nearly in point. There, a photographer was found by the court to have been threatening to strike defendant because defendant was obstructing the photographer's view. Defendant therein was held to be acting in self defense when he anticipated the photographer's blow.
Mutual Consent to Combat
[3] Plaintiff now contends, for the first time, that this was voluntary mutual combat and that self-defense may not be used as a defense in a damage action in case of voluntary mutual combat. But we need not examine this theory. It was not the theory upon which the case was pleaded or tried and was never suggested to the trial judge for his consideration at any time. [4] Theories never suggested to the trial judge, and which neither he nor the opposing party had any opportunity to consider at the trial level, are not *243 properly presented for the first time on appeal. (Cal. Rules of Court, rule 14  [fn. *]; Richard v. Richard, 123 Cal. App. 2d 900, 903 [7] [267 P.2d 867]; Estate of Bialy, 185 Cal. App. 2d 634, 638 [3] [8 Cal. Rptr. 663]; Estate of Sayegh, 118 Cal. App. 2d 327, 332 [4] [257 P.2d 995].)
The judgment is affirmed.
Griffin, P. J., and Coughlin, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Formerly Rules on Appeal, rule 14.

=== CASE 2207267 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:18.504838+00 ===

325 Mass. 475 (1950)
91 N.E.2d 345
PETER F. GALJAARD
vs.
ALVAN N. DAY & another.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Middlesex.
February 9, 1950.
March 8, 1950.
Present: QUA, C.J., LUMMUS, RONAN, SPALDING, & COUNIHAN, JJ.
R.S. Marsh, (W.H. Macdonald with him,) for the plaintiff.
W. Powers, Jr., for the defendants.
LUMMUS, J.
The plaintiff was a tenant at will of the defendants in a tenement on premises in Lexington owned by the defendants and "occupied" by the plaintiff and the defendants. On October 21, 1948, the defendants obtained judgment against him for possession in an action of summary process, but the issuance of execution was stayed from time to time until sometime in March, 1949. St. 1948, c. 2. St. 1949, c. 87. The plaintiff remained in possession of the tenement. On December 25, 1948, he fell on ice on a common walk on the premises. The ice resulted *476 from the act of the defendant Alvan N. Day in emptying on the walk water which then froze. The defendants were seasonably aware of the condition of the walk.
The judge found that at the time of the fall the plaintiff was merely a tenant at sufferance to whom the defendants owed merely the duty of refraining from doing him wilful or wanton injury. He found for the defendants. The Appellate Division dismissed a report, and the plaintiff appealed to this court.
At common law a person in the position of the plaintiff was merely a tenant at sufferance. Dennett v. Nesson, 244 Mass. 299. Margosian v. Markarian, 288 Mass. 197. Mescall v. Somerset Savings Bank, 305 Mass. 575, 577. "A tenant at sufferance is a bare licensee to whom the landlord owes merely the duty not wantonly nor wilfully to injure him." Margosian v. Markarian, 288 Mass. 197, 199. Carney v. Conveyancers Title Ins. & Mortgage Co. 309 Mass. 197, 200.
We think that the rights of the plaintiff were made no greater by the recent statutes providing for stays of execution in cases of summary process. Such statutes do not extend the tenancy at will. On the contrary, they declare that the "tenancy has been terminated." G.L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 239, § 9. St. 1946, c. 43. St. 1947, c. 78. St. 1948, c. 2. St. 1949, c. 87. In Dennett v. Nesson, 244 Mass. 299, where after judgment of possession a stay of execution was granted under St. 1920, c. 577, it was held that the tenancy at will had ended, that no new tenancy at will arose, and that there existed only a tenancy at sufferance. In the present case wanton or reckless conduct is neither alleged nor proved. We find no error in dealing with the plaintiff's requests for rulings.
Order dismissing report affirmed.

=== CASE 2207272 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:18.5427+00 ===

79 A.2d 167 (1951)
BARTLETT
v.
CHISHOLM et al.
Supreme Judicial Court of Maine.
March 14, 1951.
James A. Connellan, Portland, for plaintiff.
Benjamin L. Berman, and Berman & Berman, all of Lewiston, for defendants.
Before MURCHIE, C. J., and THAXTER, FELLOWS, MERRILL, NULTY, and WILLIAMSON, JJ.
WILLIAMSON, Justice.
On exceptions by defendant, Richard A. Chisholm, to the acceptance of a referee's report. Plaintiff's action to recover a real estate broker's commission was referred under rule of court with the right to except as to matters of law. The referee found for the plaintiff. The first objection sharply raises a jurisdictional question. The objection reads: "1st. The Referee erred in ruling that the declaration could be regarded as having been amended, and further in ruling that the Plaintiff's action was not barred because there was no allegation in Plaintiff's pleadings that at the time of the transaction involved he was a duly licensed and qualified real estate broker under the Laws of Maine."
The issue is whether the referee could properly find for the plaintiff in the absence of an allegation in the declaration that the plaintiff was a duly licensed real estate broker at the time the alleged cause of action arose under the provisions of R.S., Ch. 75, Sec. 7, relating to the Maine Real Estate Commission, which reads so far as we are here concerned as follows: "No person, partnership, or corporation engaged in the business or acting in the capacity of a real estate broker or a real *168 estate salesman within this state shall bring or maintain any action in the courts of this state for the collection of compensation for any services performed as a real estate broker or real estate salesman without alleging and proving that such person, partnership, or corporation was a duly licensed real estate broker or real estate salesman at the time the alleged cause of action arose."
There is no dispute about the facts on the point at issue. The bill of exceptions seen and agreed to by the plaintiff reads as follows: "Plaintiff's writ and declaration failed to allege that Plaintiff was a duly licensed and qualified real estate broker under the Laws of Maine. The case was tried without any objection being raised to such defect or such insufficiency. The Referee found and ruled that since amendments could have been allowed, he will regard the writ and declaration as though they had been properly amended."
The position of the referee appears from his report: "The action is brought in assumpsit on an account annexed and the general money counts, and issue is joined on a plea of the general issue without brief statement. The case was tried without objection being raised as to any defects in or the sufficiency of the writ and declaration. If objection had been made, any apparent defects in pleading were amendable. Jones v. Briggs, 125 Me. 265 [132 A. 817]; Mansfield v. Goodhue, [Me.], 53 A.2d 264. Amendments could have been allowed as provided in R.S., Chap. 100, Sec. 95. See Benson v. [Inhabitants of Town of] Newfield, 136 Me. 23, 33 [1 A.2d 227]."
On direct examination the plaintiff testified:
"Q. And are you a licensed real estate broker? A. Yes."
On cross examination the critical fact of a license at the time the alleged cause of action arose in March 1949 was brought out from the plaintiff as follows:
"Q. How long have you been a real estate broker? A. Well, now, of that I am not absolutely positive but I think it is four years I have had a broker's license and either one or two years as a salesman of real estate."
The argument of the defendant that "there was no understanding that plaintiff was a licensed broker" or in other words that the case was not tried on the theory that the plaintiff had the required license is without merit. Proof of the fact was made without objection and the fact served no useful purpose except to establish a statutory requirement. It is the allegation, not the proof, which is defective.
This is the third case to come before us in which a real estate broker has failed to make the allegation required by statute. Gerstian v. Tibbetts, 142 Me. 215, 49 A.2d 227, arose upon exceptions to a nonsuit granted upon the merits. The Court overruled the exceptions both on the merits and for lack of the allegation. The Court said, 142 Me., at page 220, 49 A.2d at page 229: "If the fact that the plaintiff had a license is considered proved, it is not alleged. The very jurisdiction of the Court depends on both allegation and proof."
In Mansfield v. Goodhue, 142 Me. 380, 53 A.2d 264, upon the sustaining of a demurrer, the defect in the allegation was cured by amendment. A second demurrer by the defendant on the ground that the defect was not amendable was overruled. Our Court in sustaining the decision said on page 382 of 142 Me., on page 265 of 53 A.2d: "Assuming that such allegation does involve the right of the court to consider the case, yet there is no reason why the failure to allege such fact may not be cured by amendment. It may be true that a court without jurisdiction has no authority to allow an amendment. Yet if a court has jurisdiction of the subject matter, it may in such a case as this allow an amendment to perfect the jurisdiction on the record."
The Gerstian and Mansfield cases stand for the principle that the allegation required by statute must appear of record. There has been no curative amendment in the case at bar. The pleadings are fatally defective, and hence the exceptions must be sustained.
It is urged that the pleadings are to be regarded as though properly amended. No *169 objection was raised to the defect in or sufficiency of the pleadings at the trial before the referee. An amendment could have been, and no doubt would have been allowed, had the procedures required by R.S., Ch. 100, Sec. 95, relating to amendments in referred cases, been followed. See Ford v. Inhabitants of Town of Whitehead, 137 Me. 125, 15 A.2d 857, decided shortly before the statute was first enacted in 1941.
Our attention is directed to Jones v. Briggs, 125 Me. 265, 132 A. 817, and Benson v. Inhabitants of Town of Newfield, 136 Me. 23 at page 33, 1 A.2d 227 which illustrate the cure of mere defects in pleadings by verdict and the treatment of pleadings on an "as if amended" basis when variance appears between allegation and proof. See also Clapp v. Cumberland County Power & Light Co., 121 Me. 356 at page 359, 117 A. 307; Cyr v. Landry, 114 Me. 188 at page 196, 95 A. 883; Wyman v. American Shoe Finding Co., 106 Me. 263, 76 A. 483.
Such cases, however, do not touch upon the situation when jurisdiction is at stake. The Court did not consider the "as if amended" rule applicable in the Gerstian case, supra, although no objection to the pleadings appears to have been raised by counsel at any stage of the case. In the Jones case, supra, the Court said on page 266 of 125 Me., on page 818 of 132 A.: "An action at law is not to be dismissed for mere defects in pleading that are amendable or may be cured by verdict, if it appears that the court has jurisdiction and the plaintiff has stated a good cause of action."
In our view the allegation required by the statute must be made of record in fact. The statute does not read that on proof of the license in a case fairly tried and without surprise the allegation may be considered as if in fact made upon the record. Such a construction would fail to give effect to the meaning and the intent of the statute.
We may regret that the decision of the referee cannot be considered on the merits, but must be set aside for lack of a few appropriate words in the pleadings. The law here applicable, however, is found in the Act of Legislature which defined and limited the plaintiff's right to bring and maintain his action. Neither the parties nor the Court can waive its provisions. It is not necessary that we pass upon the remaining objections.
The entry will be:
Exceptions sustained.

=== CASE 2207273 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:18.546279+00 ===

183 Mich. App. 348 (1990)
454 N.W.2d 209
PEOPLE
v.
TOOHEY
Docket No. 111717.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided April 16, 1990.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, William F. Delhey, Prosecuting Attorney, and David A. King, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
Frank K. Rhodes, III, for defendant.
Before: HOOD, P.J., and MAHER and CYNAR, JJ.
MAHER, J.
Following a bench trial, defendant was convicted of possession of more than 50 grams *350 but less than 225 grams of a mixture containing a controlled substance (cocaine), with intent to deliver, MCL 333.7401(2)(a)(iii); MSA 14.15(7401)(2)(a) (iii), and operating a vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor (OUIL), MCL 257.625(1); MSA 9.2325(1). Defendant received ninety days imprisonment for the OUIL conviction and the statutory minimum ten years imprisonment for the cocaine-related conviction. In this appeal as of right defendant asserts the trial court erroneously denied his motion to suppress evidence of cocaine seized during an inventory search of his vehicle. We affirm defendant's conviction for OUIL, but reverse the cocaine-related conviction.
I
The primary issue in this case concerns the admissibility of evidence obtained during an inventory search of defendant's automobile. After defendant was arrested for OUIL, the police impounded his vehicle and conducted a routine inventory search of its contents. During the search, the police discovered a package of cocaine beneath the driver's seat, plus seven more bags of cocaine contained in a golf bag in the trunk. The total amount of cocaine discovered was more than 50 grams but less than 225 grams.
A suppression hearing was held on March 25, 1988. The testimony at the hearing established that on July 8, 1987, between 1:00 and 1:30 A.M., defendant and a friend, John Albert, left an Ann Arbor bar in defendant's vehicle, with defendant driving. Thomas Tanner, an Ann Arbor police officer, testified that he stopped defendant after observing the vehicle cross the center line of Packard Road. After noticing the police car, defendant pulled off onto a residential street where he legally *351 parked his car along the curb. Tanner then performed some field sobriety tests on defendant, after which he made his decision to arrest defendant for OUIL. Albert then asked Officer Tanner if he could take custody of the car. Although Tanner did not perform any sobriety tests on Albert, Tanner would not release the car to Albert because defendant indicated Albert had also been drinking and because Tanner noticed that Albert appeared unsteady, smelled of alcohol and had slurred speech. Albert was given the option of either walking away or having a cab called. Albert then went back and conferred with defendant in the police car. After Albert told defendant that the police officer would not let him take the car, defendant asked Albert to arrange for defendant's wife or attorney to pick up the car. When Albert spoke to Officer Tanner about this request the officer told him the car was being impounded, and it was now their car. Albert eventually left on foot. Shortly thereafter, the police conducted their inventory search of the car and the cocaine was discovered.
The sole reason given at the suppression hearing for the impoundment of defendant's vehicle was that impoundment was authorized under Ann Arbor Ordinances, 10:139, which provided:
1. A police officer may immediately remove and impound a vehicle in any of the following situations.
* * *
i. The driver of a vehicle is taken into custody by the Police Department and such vehicle would thereby be left unattended.
Once impounded, standard departmental policy required a police officer to thoroughly search the vehicle to determine what, if any, articles of value were present.
*352 Following the suppression hearing, the trial court found that the search of defendant's vehicle was valid and therefore ruled the cocaine was admissible. On May 31, 1988, the day scheduled for trial, defendant waived his right to a jury trial and it was agreed that the record of the suppression hearing plus certain other stipulated facts would serve as the basis for the trial record. Thereafter, the court again upheld the validity of the inventory search and found defendant guilty of possession of cocaine with intent to deliver and OUIL.
II
Defendant argues on appeal that the trial court erred in failing to suppress the cocaine because the impoundment of his vehicle violated his Fourth Amendment rights as an unreasonable search and seizure. A trial court's ruling at a suppression hearing is reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard. The court's decision will be affirmed unless, upon a review of the record, this Court is left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake was made. People v Burrell, 417 Mich. 439, 448; 339 NW2d 403 (1983). Upon our review of the record, we agree the trial court clearly erred in denying defendant's motion to suppress the cocaine.
The Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution, made applicable to the states by way of the Fourteenth Amendment, Mapp v Ohio, 367 U.S. 643; 81 S. Ct. 1684; 6 L. Ed. 2d 1081 (1961), guarantees "[t]he right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures." US Const, Am IV. A search and seizure without a warrant is unreasonable per se and violates the *353 Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution unless shown to be within one of the exceptions to the rule. People v Reed, 393 Mich. 342, 362; 224 NW2d 867 (1975). The burden is always on the state to show an exception exists. Id.; Coolidge v New Hampshire, 403 U.S. 443; 91 S. Ct. 2022; 29 L. Ed. 2d 564 (1971).
The leading case concerning the validity of inventory searches of impounded automobiles is South Dakota v Opperman, 428 U.S. 364; 96 S. Ct. 3092; 49 L. Ed. 2d 1000 (1976). In that case, the United States Supreme Court upheld an inventory search of a lawfully impounded vehicle. The search in that case was prompted by the presence, in plain view, of a number of valuables inside the car. The Court looked at all the facts and circumstances in the case and, after noting that "police intrusions into automobiles impounded or otherwise in lawful police custody" have been consistently sustained "where the process is aimed at securing or protecting the car and its contents," id. at 373, determined that an inventory search performed as a caretaking function pursuant to standard police procedure did not constitute an unreasonable search and seizure under the Fourth Amendment. Id. at 375-376 (emphasis added).
In Opperman, the vehicle had been impounded for violation of a parking ordinance and the validity of the initial impoundment was not at issue. However, Opperman did recognize the authority of the police to remove and impound vehicles in the interest of public safety and as part of a "community caretaking function." Id. at 368. Such authority, however, is not absolute. According to Opperman, the validity of a police intrusion must be examined by analyzing the reasonableness of the seizure under all the circumstances and each case must be decided on its own facts. Id. at 372-373.
*354 Opperman recognized various situations in which the impoundment and removal of a vehicle will generally be upheld. Such situations include instances where removal is required to permit the uninterrupted flow of traffic or to preserve evidence, instances where the vehicle is disabled or damaged, and instances where a parking ordinance is violated, thereby jeopardizing both public safety and efficient movement of vehicular traffic. Id. at 368-369. The Opperman Court recognized that, once a vehicle is impounded, an inventory search pursuant to standard police procedure will generally be upheld where its purpose is to (1) protect the owner's property while the vehicle remains in police custody, (2) protect the police against claims or disputes over lost or stolen property, and (3) protect the police from potential danger. Id. at 369.
Although defendant raises several issues concerning both the initial impoundment and the subsequent inventory search, we agree the dispositive issue in this case involves the legitimacy of the initial impoundment. In People v Krezen, 427 Mich. 681, 685-686; 397 NW2d 803 (1986), our Supreme Court applied the Opperman rationale in deciding just such a case. In that case, the defendant was arrested at an airport after picking up a package containing cocaine. After the arrest, the authorities impounded defendant's automobile, which was lawfully parked in an air freight parking lot. A brown vial containing cocaine residue and other paraphernalia were discovered in defendant's purse, which was lying visibly on the front seat of the car. In a plurality opinion, the Court upheld the admission of the cocaine found in the purse.
Writing for the majority, Justice BOYLE (with Justices RILEY and BRICKLEY concurring) followed *355 Opperman, supra, and indicated that the reasonableness of the impoundment was to be determined from the particular facts of the case. Id. at 686. In her majority opinion, Justice BOYLE noted that the possibility of theft or vandalism has been recognized as a valid reason for impounding a car upon the arrest of the driver, id. at 688, and ultimately upheld the impoundment as being a reasonable caretaking function instituted according to standard departmental policy. Id. at 686-689.
In a dissenting opinion, however, Justice LEVIN (with Justices CAVANAGH and ARCHER concurring) did not believe that an impoundment was justified merely to avoid the possibility of theft. He agreed with this Court's statement that the possibility of claims against the police for loss or damages does not compare in importance with the preservation of basic constitutional guarantees.[1]Id. at 703-705.
In the swing vote, Justice WILLIAMS likewise indicated he was not persuaded that the impoundment was reasonable. However, he agreed the police could not have reasonably left the purse in plain view and rationalized that, because returning the purse to defendant would have inevitably led to the discovery of the cocaine, its admission should be upheld. Id. at 697-698.
In applying the principles of Opperman and Krezen, we begin our analysis of the case at hand with the initial recognition that the burden was on the police to establish the reasonableness of the impoundment when considering the circumstances of the case. Having carefully reviewed the record, we do not believe this burden was met.
The evidence in this case established that the vehicle was lawfully parked along the curb of a *356 residential street. There was no evidence that the vehicle constituted a safety hazard or otherwise impeded the flow of traffic. Furthermore, there was no indication that it was necessary to impound the vehicle to protect the police from potential danger or that the impoundment was otherwise necessary as an incident to defendant's arrest. Finally, there was no evidence that any items of value were visibly present in the car.
The trial court, after indicating it had reviewed Krezen, stated the following as its basis for denying defendant's motion to suppress:
We have had so many suits in this county against police officers and other persons where people claim they lost things in the vehicle, the officer stole something from the vehicle or things are missing. So this Court finds that the officer did act reasonably when he decided that he wasn't going to leave the vehicle in the street and he was going to impound it and he felt that he should inventory what was in it so that somebody couldn't claim that he had stolen something.
I am not suggesting that the Defendant would have claimed this. But the officer doesn't know that, the officer has to act with what he has.
It is clear that the trial court relied on the reasoning of Krezen and determined that concern over potential liability for missing or stolen items was sufficient justification for the impoundment. However, the basis for the trial court's conclusion is not supported by the record. The police officer did not give as a reason for impoundment concern for either the safety of the vehicle or its contents, nor was there any evidence presented establishing the possibility of theft or vandalism as a reasonable concern. Instead, the only reason given for the impoundment was that it was authorized by local *357 ordinance in a situation where a driver is taken into custody and the vehicle would thereby be left unattended.
Although Krezen recognized the lawful impoundment of a vehicle as a reasonable caretaking function, we do not believe that Krezen stands for the proposition that an impoundment will be upheld as a reasonable caretaking function in the absence of evidence creating a reasonable concern for the actual safety of the vehicle or its contents. Indeed, an examination of Krezen clearly reveals that the decisive factor in that case was the presence of defendant's purse in plain view on the front seat of the car. In her majority opinion, Justice Boyle was very careful to indicate that the decision upholding the reasonableness of the impoundment was controlled by the particular facts of the case. Krezen, supra at 686 and 697. She expressly indicated that a departmental policy requiring impoundment upon arrest, regardless of the surrounding factual circumstances, may well involve situations where an impoundment would be violative of the Fourth Amendment as an unreasonable seizure. Id. at 685-686. Justice Levin agreed with this proposition in his dissent, stating, "[courts] generally have concluded that to justify impoundment something more must be shown than simply that the vehicle would otherwise be left unattended." Id. at 708. The "something more" that existed in Krezen was the presence of a purse in plain view on the front seat of the car.
In our view, the impoundment of defendant's vehicle would have been found unreasonable under Krezen. We reach this conclusion based on the fact that while Krezen contained specific facts establishing a reasonable concern for the safety of the vehicle's contents, there were no such facts in this case. Further, in spite of Krezen's more compelling *358 facts for upholding the validity of the impoundment, only three of the seven justices were able to find the seizure to be reasonable.
Because the only reason given for the impoundment in this case was the existence of the local ordinance, and because there were no other facts presented that would otherwise justify the impoundment of the vehicle as being reasonable under the circumstances, we find that the police did not sustain their burden in establishing the reasonableness of the seizure. Further, we believe that, by relying upon the possibility of theft or vandalism as its basis for finding the impoundment to be proper, the trial court clearly erred when this concern was neither expressed at the hearing nor supported by the record.
Inasmuch as the cocaine would not have been discovered absent the impoundment, its admission should have been suppressed. Moreover, because defendant could not have been convicted for possession of cocaine with intent to deliver had evidence of the cocaine not been admitted, this conviction is reversed and the charge shall be dismissed. With respect to defendant's conviction for OUIL, however, the improper admission of the cocaine was harmless error. Therefore, the OUIL conviction is affirmed.
III
Finally, defendant raises various sentencing issues.
Defendant initially claims the trial court erred by failing to give retroactive effect to the recent amendments to MCL 333.7401; MSA 14.15(7401). These amendments reduce the statutory minimum sentence for defendant's cocaine conviction to five years and also allow the sentencing court to depart *359 from the minimum sentence requirement where there exist substantial and compelling reasons to do so. However, in light of our reversal of defendant's conviction under this statute, this issue has been rendered moot. In any event, we agree with the prior decisions of this Court holding that the amendments to the statute are not retroactive. People v Becoats, 181 Mich. App. 722; 449 NW2d 687 (1989); People v Jackson, 179 Mich. App. 344; 445 NW2d 513 (1989).
Lastly, we find no merit to defendant's argument that he was deprived of his right of allocution at sentencing. The court twice offered him an opportunity to speak and he declined each time. Additionally, the record does not support defendant's contention that his opportunity to allocute was rendered meaningless because the court had already determined the sentence it was going to impose during an in-chambers conference. See People v McNeal, 150 Mich. App. 85; 389 NW2d 708 (1985). Therefore, defendant's sentence for the OUIL conviction is affirmed.
Affirmed in part and reversed in part.
NOTES
[1]  See People v Krezen, 143 Mich. App. 34, 40; 371 NW2d 882 (1985).

=== CASE 9736779 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:06:27.557448+00 ===

OPINION
NORTON, Judge.
Appellant Theresa Ann McColley Schmitz (“McColley”) seeks review of the trial court’s denial of her motion for a new trial in a paternity action. After a jury returned a verdict in favor of respondent Mark Stransky a/k/a Mark Rand (“Stran-sky”), McColley moved for a new trial alleging as error three evidentiary rulings.
Respondent Stransky filed a notice of review seeking review of orders which require him to reimburse the county for attorney fees expended on his behalf and which refuse to appoint counsel to represent him on this appeal. Stransky now argues that Minn.Stat. § 257.69 is unconstitutional because it violates equal protection by conferring privileges upon custodial parents during paternity actions and that the statute violates the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Minnesota Human Rights Act by favoring custodial parents, who are predominately female. Stransky argues that the trial court erred both in requiring him to reimburse Rice County for attorney fees incurred after he was employed and in failing to appoint paid counsel to represent him on this appeal.
Because Stransky challenges the constitutionality of statutes, the State of Minnesota intervenes to defend those statutes. We reverse.
FACTS
McColley alleges that she and Stransky began a sexual relationship in approximately March of 1981. She lived with Stransky in his home during August and September of 1981, and then moved out. Stransky and McColley saw less of one another after she moved out. In early November of 1981, McColley’s physician performed a pregnancy test whieh was returned negative. In early December 1981, a second test came back positive. A later ultrasound examination placed the date of conception at approximately October 15th. Expert testimony later placed conception between October 20 and November 1, 1981. The full-term child was born July 7, 1982. This paternity action was commenced in May of 1984.
McColley had undergone blood testing in an unrelated paternity action in June of 1982 and she and her new child gave samples for this action in 1984. Blood testing performed on Stransky resulted in a 98.082% likelihood of paternity. McColley had intercourse with two other men during *458the probable period of conception, once on October 29, 1981 and once on October 31, 1981. She claims that her sexual relationship with Stransky was continuing at a rate of once or twice a week until October 22, 1981, which she says is the last time that she and Stransky had intercourse. Stran-sky denies that he ever had a sexual relationship with McColley. Blood tests performed on the other two men exclude both as potential fathers. McColley insists that these three men were the only men with whom she had sexual intercourse during the likely conception time.
At the trial, the main issue for the jury was whether to believe McColley and the blood test or Stransky. McColley sought to introduce Exhibit 9, the child’s baby book, in which she had recorded visits and gifts to the child from Stransky’s mother and sister. She also sought to introduce Exhibit 10, a photograph of the new baby sleeping under a crocheted afghan presented by Stransky’s mother. The trial court excluded Exhibits 9 and 10 on the grounds that they were not relevant. McColley challenges the exclusion.
In support of her allegation that she had been involved in a sexual relationship with Stransky, McColley testified that she had seen a tattoo on his abdomen below the belt line. Stransky made an offer of proof, to pull down his pants, before the jury. The jury was then removed and Stransky, his attorney, McColley’s attorney and the judge retired to chambers. Upon their return, the parties stipulated that Stransky did not presently have a tattoo in that location. McColley challenges the offer of proof as an admission of demonstrative evidence which does not tend to support conditions existing at the time relevant to the proceeding.
McColley sought to impeach Stransky’s testimony through evidence of two convictions, one for aggravated robbery and theft in 1979 and another for burglary in 1982. Stransky was incarcerated after each conviction. The trial court excluded this evidence as prejudicial and stale; McColley challenges that ruling.
This action was brought by the Rice County Attorney’s office on McColley’s behalf. Stransky was unemployed when the action commenced. Because he was indigent, a court-appointed and paid attorney represented him. Stransky later became employed and the trial court determined that from September 1, 1986 he was responsible to reimburse the county for the attorney fees it incurred on his behalf. Stransky was also ordered to pay temporary child support in the amount of $115 per month, pending resolution. Those funds were held in escrow by the County. When the jury returned a verdict in favor of Stransky, the court ordered the es-crowed support refunded, minus the amount owed to reimburse attorney fees and costs. Stransky argues that it is unconstitutional for McColley to receive free legal representation while he is required to pay for his advocate.
ISSUES
1. Did the trial court err in refusing to admit Exhibits 9 and 10?
2. Did the trial court err in permitting the offer of proof to be made before the jury?
3. Did the trial court err in refusing to permit evidence of prior convictions for the purpose of impeachment?
4. Does Minn.Stat. § 257.69 unconstitutionally deny noncustodial parents equal protection of laws?
5. Does Minn.Stat. § 257.69 violate Minn.Stat. § 363.03, subd. 4 and the Civil Rights Act of 1964?
6. Did the trial court err in requiring Stransky to reimburse the county his attorney fees?
7. Did the trial court err in not appointing counsel to represent Stransky on appeal?
ANALYSIS
I.
McColley challenges the trial court’s refusal to admit Exhibits 9 and 10. The trial court’s ruling on evidentiary mat*459ters must be sustained in the absence of a clear abuse of discretion. State v. Brouillette, 286 N.W.2d 702, 707 (Minn.1979). The trial court excluded Exhibits 9 and 10 on the grounds that gifts from Stransky’s mother would not be probative of whether Stransky is the father of the child. The trial court went on to state that even if the evidence were probative, it was too prejudicial and would be excluded under Minn.R. Evid. 403.
The trial court reasoned that the evidence was irrelevant because it could tend to prove only what Stransky’s mother believed or wished and could not tend to prove whether her son was in fact the father. The trial court was well within its discretion in excluding this evidence.
II.
Stransky made an offer of proof that he did not have a tattoo which McColley had described and alleged he had. Her allegation was apparently intended to corroborate her assertion that she had been intimate with Stransky. The offer was made in response to McColley’s assertion. McColley argues that the trial court erred in denying her motion for a new trial which was based upon the offer of proof having been made in front of the jury.
Offers of proof are to be made outside the hearing of the jury. Minn.R. Evid. 103(c). However, McColley testified that she had seen a particular tattoo on Stransky in 1981. Stransky testified that he did not have such a tattoo, that he had never had such a tattoo and that he had never had a tattoo removed. The record discloses that as soon as Stransky’s attorney offered to have Stransky remove his pants, McColley’s attorney objected. The jury was removed; the parties retired to chambers, Stransky was examined, and the parties returned to stipulate before the jury that Stransky did not presently have a tattoo. McColley objects to the offer of proof (that Stransky would pull down his pants in court) on the basis that it is inadmissible to show whether he had a tattoo in 1981. Because McColley first alleged the tattoo had existed, and then stipulated that no tattoo presently existed, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in making this evidentiary ruling.
III.
McColley sought to impeach Stran-sky’s testimony by introducing evidence of Stransky’s prior criminal convictions. As he did in the trial court, Stransky attempts to minimize the importance of credibility in this case by instead criticizing the validity of the blood tests which show he is very probably the father. Although no transcript of the video deposition was provided, the expert through whom those tests were introduced, Dr. Polesky, gave uncontradict-ed testimony indicating that the blood tests were not damaged or invalid in any way. Stransky’s allegations that the blood was damaged in transit, or that McColley’s sample was corrupted with genetic material from her unborn child flatly contradict the whole of the expert testimony in the record.
Dr. Polesky explained that the blood samples are placed in test tubes containing preservatives and are inspected before testing. He testified that no damage to these particular samples was observed. He also testified that a child younger than six months may carry some of its mother’s genetic markers; not that a pregnant mother’s blood contains markers from her unborn child. In mischaracterizing the evidence, Stransky seeks to avoid that the crux of this case is in the question of his credibility. Because the blood tests were not invalid, the central issue in this case is not simply paternity; the focal point becomes the credibility of the witness who denies it.
McColley sought to introduce evidence of two prior crimes: Stransky pleaded guilty to simple robbery on April 25, 1979 and to burglary on October 13, 1982. The trial court granted Stransky’s motion in limine, relying on Minn.R.Evid. 609 and State v. Jones, 271 N.W.2d 534 (Minn.1978). The trial court held that the probative value of the evidence did not outweigh its prejudicial effect and that the convictions were stale. With regard to staleness, *460the applicable rule provides in pertinent part:
(b) Time Limit. Evidence of a conviction under this rule is not admissible if a period of more than ten years has elapsed since the date of the conviction or of the release of the witness from the confinement imposed for that conviction, whichever is the later date, unless the court determines, in the interests of justice, that the probative value of the conviction supported by specific facts and circumstances substantially outweighs its prejudicial effect. * * *
Minn.R.Evid. 609 (emphasis added).
The summons and complaint in this action were served in May of 1984, and trial began on April 18, 1989. Stransky’s first conviction was obtained on April 25, 1979 and Stransky was sentenced to one year in jail. The evidence does not disclose the actual release date. The second conviction on October 13, 1982 resulted in a sentence of eighteen months, with credit for time served. Again, the record does not reveal his actual release date. Because the rule counts time from the date of conviction or the date of release, whichever is the later date, the trial court erred in counting instead from the date of the convictions, which was the earlier date. The convictions both, therefore, are admissible under Minn.R.Evid. 609(b).
The error is compounded by the trial court’s analysis of the Jones factors. They are:
(1) the impeachment value of the prior crime, (2) the date of the conviction and the defendant’s subsequent history, (3) the similarity of the past crime with the charged crime (the greater the similarity, the greater the reason for not permitting use of the prior crime to impeach), (4) the importance of defendant’s testimony, and (5) the centrality of the credibility issue.
State v. Jones, 271 N.W.2d at 538. In Jones, a criminal case, the supreme court noted that the rules of evidence were not in effect at the time of Jones’ trial. In the civil case here, the rules of evidence apply and require admission of the impeachment evidence. The applicable rule provides in pertinent part:
(a) General Rule. For the purpose of attacking the credibility of a witness, evidence that he has been convicted of a crime shall be admitted if * * * the crime (1) was punishable by * * * imprisonment in excess of one year * * * and the court determines that the probative value * * * outweighs its prejudicial effect, or (2) involved dishonesty or false statement, regardless of the punishment.
Minn.R.Evid. 609 (emphasis added). This rule contains a bright line test which requires admission if the crimes involved dishonesty, without regard to the weighing test of prejudice against probative value contained in part (a)(1).
Although the trial court erred in applying the Jones factors to weigh prejudice against probity, it found correctly that the convictions were for crimes of dishonesty. See State v. Stanifer, 382 N.W.2d 213, 218 (Minn.Ct.App.1986) (robbery is a crime of dishonesty under rule 609(a)). The trial court erred in determining that although Stransky’s crimes involved dishonesty, the prejudicial effect outweighed the probative value of admitting this evidence. Because the rule requires admission of prior crimes evidence if the crime involves dishonesty, the trial court abused its discretion. The convictions are admissible to impeach Stransky’s credibility without regard to any prejudicial effect. Minn.R.Evid. 609(a)(2). The crimes were not stale. Minn.R.Evid. 609(b). Therefore, the trial court’s remaining analysis is unnecessary and erroneous.
Stransky now argues that a recent proposed amendment to Minn.R.Evid. 609 demonstrates that his convictions should be inadmissible against him. He is mistaken. Prior crimes evidence permits the jury to see the “whole person.” State v. Heidelberger, 353 N.W.2d 582, 589 (Minn.Ct.App.1984), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. Sept. 12, 1984) (citing Brouillette, 286 N.W.2d at 707). Because the testimony of the two key witnesses was diametrically opposed, their credibility was critical when the jury was asked to choose. McColley was enti-*461tied to have the jury informed about the background of the person whose testimony it was asked to believe. The exclusion of this evidence on the crucial question of Stransky’s credibility is an error neither insignificant nor harmless. For this reason, we disagree with the dissent.
IV.
Stransky questions the constitutionality of Minn.Stat. § 257.69 (1988), which permits governmental legal representation of a custodial parent in paternity proceedings. He contends this statute irrationally favors custodial parents and denies equal protection to others.
Statutes benefit from a presumption of constitutionality. Minn.Stat. § 645.17(3) (1988). Stransky must demonstrate compelling evidence in order to rebut this presumption. Equal protection requires that persons similarly situated be treated alike. City of Cleburn v. Cleburn Living Center, 473 U.S. 432, 439, 105 S.Ct. 3249, 3253, 87 L.Ed.2d 313 (1985). Different treatment passes constitutional muster where the distinction in question is rationally based upon a legitimate governmental purpose. See Dandridge v. Williams, 397 U.S. 471, 485, 90 S.Ct. 1153, 1161, 25 L.Ed.2d 491 (1970). The criteria against which the statute in question must be measured are whether 1) the classification uniformly applies to those who are similarly situated, 2) the distinctions are genuine and provide a reasonable basis to justify different legislation, and 3) the classification is relevant to the purpose of the law. Schwartz v. Talmo, 295 Minn. 356, 362, 205 N.W.2d 318, 322 (1973), appeal dismissed 414 U.S. 803, 94 S.Ct. 130, 38 L.Ed.2d 39 (1974).
The purpose of a paternity proceeding under Minn.Stat. §§ 257.51-.74 is to establish parentage and provide support for the child. Because the custodial parent has already acknowledged parenthood and is providing support, the distinction between custodial parents and others is genuine and provides a reasonable basis to justify different treatment. This distinction between acknowledged parents who are providing support and alleged parents who are not providing support is relevant to the purpose of the law. Stransky argues that all parties to a paternity action are similarly situated and should be entitled to free legal services in the interest of determining parentage and support issues. We do not agree that an alleged father who denies paternity is similarly situated to a custodial parent who is providing support. Stran-sky’s argument that the government is obligated to provide him a legal representative because it has provided one to McCol-ley is meritless. Stransky has failed to demonstrate that the statute unconstitutionally violates his equal protection of laws.
V.
Stransky also alleges that Minn. Stat. § 257.69 violates the Minnesota Human Rights Act, specifically Minn.Stat. § 363.03, subd. 4, and the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Stransky’s argument appears directed at the fact that many of the custodial parents who may receive benefits are women.
Minn.Stat. § 257.69 benefits custodial parents, regardless of gender. Stransky is ineligible for court-appointed and paid legal representation not because he is male, but because he is not a custodial parent.
VI.
Stransky alleges the trial court erred in ordering him to reimburse Rice County for attorney fees incurred by it since September 1, 1986. When this action began in 1984, Stransky had been recently released from prison and was unemployed. Minn.Stat. § 257.69, the constitutionality of which we have just upheld against Stran-sky’s challenge, governs appointment of counsel in paternity actions. The statute states in pertinent part: “The court shall appoint counsel for a party who is unable to pay timely for counsel” in paternity actions. Minn.Stat. § 257.69, subd. (1) (1988). A public defender was appointed at county expense and Stransky was ordered to inform the county when he became employed *462and again had income. In 1986 the court learned that Stransky had become employed and it ordered him to pay attorney fees from September 1, 1986 forward.
Stransky argues that the statute does not require complete reimbursement of attorney fees. He asserts that the trial court should have entered specific findings regarding his ability to pay and that if he is not capable of repaying in a reasonable period, such as a year, the fees should be forgiven. The statute states in relevant part that “the court shall require a party to pay part of the fees of court-appointed counsel according to the party’s ability to pay * * Minn.Stat. § 257.69, subd. 2 (emphasis added). There is absolutely no authority for the proposition that if Stran-sky delays payment, he then should not be required to reimburse the county. Rather, after Stransky became employed, the court found that he was no longer entitled to court-appointed counsel. The trial court did not err in its application of this statute to Stransky.
VII.
Stransky also argues that the trial court erred in failing to appoint counsel to represent him on this appeal. Stransky argues that the court applied the wrong standard in refusing him court-appointed appellate counsel. As noted above, the trial court found that Stransky was “indigent within the meaning of Minn.Stat. § 257.69, subd. 1.” The statute does not contain the word ‘indigent.’ The correct language, as discussed above, is “unable to pay timely.” However, the case upon which Stransky relies, Hepfel v. Bashaw, 279 N.W.2d 342 (Minn.1979), was decided before the present statute was enacted. Similarly, Stransky relies upon the model Uniform Parentage Act, although the Minnesota Legislature adopted a revised version in 1980.
Hepfel and the UPA are unnecessary to resolution of this problem. Minn.Stat. § 257.69 does not refer specifically to appellate counsel. This statute orders court-appointed counsel for those ‘unable to pay timely’ which was Stransky’s situation when the action began. When Stransky became employed, the trial court ordered him to take responsibility for his legal fees. The trial court did not err in refusing to appoint counsel for Stransky in this appeal.
DECISION
The trial court abused its discretion in refusing to permit prior crimes evidence for impeachment of Stransky’s testimony. McColley is entitled to a new trial. The constitutionality of the statute in question is affirmed. Stransky is not entitled to court-appointed counsel and must reimburse the county for the expenses it has incurred on his behalf.
Reversed.

=== CASE 2207258 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:18.425405+00 ===

208 Cal. App. 2d 313 (1962)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
VINCENT LUJAN ORTIZ, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 8315.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Four.
Oct. 9, 1962.
Vincent Lujan Ortiz, in pro. per., for Defendant and Appellant.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and Jack K. Weber, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent. *314
JEFFERSON, J.
In an information filed by the District Attorney of Los Angeles County, defendant and his wife (not appealing here) were jointly charged with a violation of section 11500 of the Health and Safety Code, possession of heroin. Three prior felony convictions were alleged as to defendant which were initially denied but later, out of the presence of the jury, admitted to be true. Defendant entered a plea of not guilty. After a jury trial defendant was found guilty as charged. Motion for a new trial and probation were denied, and defendant was sentenced to state prison for the term prescribed by law.
Defendant applied to this court for appointment of counsel to assist him on appeal. This court, having made an independent investigation of the record and having determined that it would be neither advantageous to defendant nor helpful to this court to have counsel appointed, denied the application, whereupon defendant prosecutes this appeal in propria persona. This is an appeal from the judgment and order denying motion for new trial.
Harry E. Dorrell, a police officer assigned to the narcotics division, testified that he had known defendant for about a year before the arrest. During that time he had received information from various sources that defendant and his wife were selling and using narcotics. A day or two before the arrest he had recived information that they had 22 ounces of heroin in their possession. Defendant and his wife were staying at a motel in the City of Los Angeles. Officer Dorrell, accompanied by a fellow officer, went to the motel and showed photographs of defendant and his wife to the motel manager who admitted that the same persons were occupying a room in the motel. Defendant and his wife were not in at the time, and the manager permitted the officers to use a vacant room next door to the unit occupied by defendant.
The officers were in the motel room looking out the window when they first observed defendant and his wife in the motel parking lot. As they were walking to their motel unit, defendant and his wife were stopped by the officers who identified themselves. Defendant's wife was asked if she was still using narcotics, and she replied that she was. Defendant was also asked if he was still using narcotics, and he answered that he was. The officers observed what appeared to be fresh hypodermic needle marks on defendant's arm, and on the hands and wrists of his wife. The officers asked defendant to show him where he was taking narcotics. Defendant began to take *315 off his coat, and one of the officers said "Never mind, I will take your word for it." At the request of the officers, defendant's wife voluntarily gave the room key to the officers who then asked if there were any narcotics inside the room. Defendant replied, "No, you can go ahead and search it."
The officers asked if they could search defendant, and defendant said "Go ahead." Defendant stated he gave permission for the search because he was "pretty certain he didn't have anything on him against the law." He stated he didn't think there was any more "stuff" (which in narcotics jargon means heroin). They searched defendant's person and found a cigarette package with five rubber containers in it, each containing a quarter ounce of a whitish powder resembling heroin. The officers asked defendant what he was going to do with it and defendant said he was going to "burn somebody." Defendant stated he had picked it up just before he entered the room. The officers made a search of the spot which he pointed out and found two more rubber containers, each holding the whitish powder resembling heroin.
Defendant testified in his own behalf. He stated that he stopped before they went in the motel room to ask his wife for the key. She told him the house key was in the package of cigarettes in the plants outside the motel unit. She asked him to get it because she didn't want to get her shoes dirty. He picked up the package which, a few minutes later, the officers took away from him. Defendant denied to the officers that he was using narcotics.
[1] At the preliminary hearing defendant's counsel stipulated to the qualifications of the prosecution's witness as an expert chemist and to the fact that if called he would testify that the substance contained in the cigarette package was heroin. Defendant was present when his counsel entered into this stipulation, and he remained completely silent in this regard. At the trial before the jury, a forensic chemist, employed by the police department as a criminologist, testified that in his opinion the powder was heroin.
Defendant contends "the main and sole issue on appeal is whether the preliminary hearing magistrate exceeded his jurisdiction to commit him to stand trial pursuant to the California Constitution, Article I, section 8, subdivision 3, in that he was not confronted with the forensic chemist at the time of his preliminary hearing in that his attorney stipulated to the chemist's testimony at the preliminary hearing."
Substantially the same factual situation and contention was *316 presented in People v. Prado, 190 Cal. App. 2d 374, 376 [12 Cal. Rptr. 141], which quoted from People v. Wilson, 78 Cal. App. 2d 108, 119-120 [177 P.2d 567], in support of its decision: "Defendant was present and heard her attorney enter into the stipulations. She at no time objected thereto nor sought to be relieved therefrom, nor did her attorney make any such request in her behalf. No contention is advanced that the stipulations were not in accordance with the facts... defendant was not prejudiced thereby."
Defendant argues in his brief that by his attorney's stipulation he was denied the right to be confronted by the witnesses at his hearing. If defendant felt that his counsel should not have made the stipulation, he should have complained at that time and given the court an opportunity to correct the situation. In the absence of such complaint the acts of defendant's counsel are imputed to him. "The right of the accused to confront witnesses at his trial, whether reserved in the Constitution or in statutes, may be waived. [Citations.]" (People v. Wallin, 34 Cal. 2d 777, 781 [215 P.2d 1].)
[2] Defendant also argues in his brief that he and his wife were committed to stand trial for an offense not proven to exist. "[H]e does so despite the fact no motion was made under section 995, Penal Code, nor did he raise the question at the trial. Section 995 provides that an information may be set aside if the defendant has been committed without probable cause; in section 996, Penal Code, it is provided as follows: 'If the motion to set aside the indictment or information is not made, the defendant is precluded from afterwards taking the objections mentioned in the last section.' " (People v. Stone, 195 Cal. App. 2d 282, 289-290 [15 Cal. Rptr. 737].)
Judgment of conviction is affirmed. Purported appeal from order denying motion for a new trial is dismissed.
Burke, P. J., and Ford, J.,  [fn. *] concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

=== CASE 9736782 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:06:31.380698+00 ===

LEVINE, Justice,
specially concurring.
I write specially to express my view that Rule 511, North Dakota Rules of Evidence, in conjunction with Rule 510, North Dakota Rules of Evidence, is sufficient to resolve the issue of the admissibility of Exhibit “N”, the letter inadvertently disclosed by counsel for the Bank. Because the Bank, as holder of the privilege, did not have the opportunity to claim the privilege, it did not waive the privilege. Rule 511, NDREv; 2 J. Weinstein and M. Berger, Weinstein’s Evidence, Standard 512[02], at 512-4 (1989); see also Explanatory Note to Rule 511, NDREv, quoted in the majority opinion, supra, at page 719.
In my view, case law from federal and state courts is not helpful, illuminating or determinative because of differing statutes, rules or “standards” governing waiver in those jurisdictions. In North Dakota, a lawyer cannot waive the privilege without consent of her client. Id. Under our rules of evidence, the client alone is keeper of the privilege. North Dakota has opted for the sanctity of client control of the privilege and its waiver in contrast with the differing positions of the several authorities cited by the majority. As the explanatory note to Rule 511 of the North Dakota Rules of Evidence explains, confidential attorney/client communications remain privileged, even when that confidentiality is breached, if the breach is committed by someone other than the client without the client’s having an opportunity to claim the privilege.
I agree, therefore, that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in excluding Exhibit “N”. I also agree that the judgment of foreclosure should be affirmed.
VANDE WALLE, J., concurs.

=== CASE 2207298 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:18.749746+00 ===

96 N.H. 491 (1951)
CLOVER CUTTING DIE CO. INC.
v.
SAM SMITH SHOE CORP.
No. 4003.
Supreme Court of New Hampshire.
March 6, 1951.
*492 J. Morton Rosenblum (by brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
Hughes & Burns (Mr. Donald R. Bryant orally), for the defendant.
BLANDIN, J.
The plaintiff claims first, there was no evidence of an implied warranty of fitness, second, if such warranty existed that the defendant did not sustain its burden of proving a breach and lastly that the amount of the verdict is unwarranted. We believe these contentions cannot be sustained and that the verdict must be upheld. The record shows there was only one purpose for which these dies were to be used, that such purpose was obvious and known to the trade and the parties. The defendant in ordering the dies specified only their size and shape. The method of manufacture, the material and the delicate task of tooling an edge which would cut the leather or lining without sticking in the block were left entirely to the plaintiff. The facts differ materially from those in Gregg v. Company, 69 N. H. 247, relied upon by the plaintiff where as the Court said (page 249) "The plaintiffs directed the size and method of constructing the belt. They relied upon their own judgment, not upon that of the manufacturers." The defendant was not a die maker but only a buyer of this highly specialized product from the plaintiff upon whose skill and judgment it had to rely. Under all the circumstances we believe the Court's holding that an implied warranty of fitness existed was sound. R. L., c. 200, s. 15, par. I.
*493 It also appears on all the evidence that the defendant has sustained its burden of showing a breach of the implied warranty. The record shows that the same type of die bought from other manufacturers, used by the same person on similar material and under like circumstances cut satisfactorily. The testimony suggests that if dies are either too sharp or too dull they are unfit for cutting. There was evidence that the plaintiff on several occasions took the dies back to its factory to sharpen or otherwise fix them. We believe upon all the facts the Court could properly find a breach of the implied warranty of fitness.
The plaintiff's final contention is that the amount of the verdict cannot be reconciled with the proof. There was conflicting evidence regarding the shipments and types of dies in question and the Court was at liberty to accept or reject all or any portion of the parties' claims regarding these items. Giguere v. Railroad, 86 N. H. 294, 298. The questions of interest and delivery charges were also involved. There were no requests for findings and it is not necessary for the defendant to be able to point out the exact method by which the Court reached its verdict since it cannot be said that it is not in accordance with the evidence. See Young v. Dow, 93 N. H. 210, 212. It follows the plaintiff's exception must be overruled and the order is
Judgment on the verdict.
JOHNSTON, C. J., was absent: the others concurred.

=== CASE 9736783 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:06:32.565738+00 ===

O’Sullivan, J.
On June 29, 1949, Windham Motor Sales, Inc., sold a Lincoln automobile to Emile W. Jacques under a contract of conditional sale. The seller subsequently assigned its interest in the contract to the plaintiff. On September 23, 1949, the defendant, a deputy sheriff, attached the automobile in an action instituted by a creditor of Jacques. During October, the plaintiff brought this action of replevin. The complaint included an allegation that Jacques was in default in failing to pay an instalment of the purchase price due on September 29. From a judgment that the plaintiff recover possession of the automobile, the defendant has appealed. The sole ques*543tion for determination is whether the contract of conditional sale was legally executed. The defendant contends that, as against the vendee’s creditors, it is invalid on two grounds, first, the conditions of the sale are not fully stated, and, secondly, the acknowledgment is defective. Our discussion will be limited to the first ground.
Section 6692 of the General Statutes requires that, except as otherwise provided, “all contracts for the sale of personal property, conditioned that title thereto shall remain in the vendor after delivery, shall be in writing, describing the property and all conditions of such sale.” Section 6694 provides that all conditional sales of personal property not made in conformity with § 6692 shall be held to be absolute sales except as between the parties to the transaction and their personal representatives, and that the property involved shall be liable to be taken by attachment and execution for the debts of the vendee.
The purpose of these statutes, as has been repeatedly pointed out, is to protect those who, in dealing with another, may be led, by that other’s possession and apparent ownership of personalty, to believe him to be its actual owner. C. I. T. Corporation v. Cohen, 117 Conn. 159, 163, 167 A. 102; Commercial Credit Corporation v. Carlson, 114 Conn. 514, 516, 159 A. 352. The statutes were not aimed at invalidating, nor do they invalidate, as between the parties, a conditional sale contract, however defective its execution may be. Refrigeration Discount Corporation v. Chronis, 117 Conn. 457, 460, 168 A. 783. They were passed solely for the benefit of the creditors of, and the bona fide purchasers from, the conditional vendee. In re Wilcox & Howe Co., 70 Conn. 220, 230, 39 A. 163. This legislative purpose has been consistently recognized by our previous decisions. We have interpreted the *544statutes strictly as against the parties to the conditional sale contract and with liberality towards those for whose protection they were enacted. Lee Bros. Furniture Co. v. Cram, 63 Conn. 433, 437, 28 A. 540; National Cash Register Co. v. Lesko, 77 Conn. 276, 280, 58 A. 967; Standard Acceptance Corporation v. Con-nor, 127 Conn. 199, 203, 15 A. 2d 314.
The terms of the contract involved in this action, in so far as they relate to the payment of the purchase price, read: “. . . for a Cash Price of $3680.00, plus Finance Charge of $440.16 making a Total Time Price of $4,120.16, which the buyer agrees to pay to the seller or seller’s assignee in manner following: ... a total down payment of $1282.00 on or before delivery leaving a Deferred Balance of $2838.16, payable ... in 24 equal monthly installments of One Hundred eighteen dollars & 26 cts. ($118.26) each . . . the first installment to be paid on July 29th, 1949 and the remaining installments to be paid on or before the--day of each and every month thereafter until this contract is paid in full.” The claimed defect in this recital of the conditions of the sale is that the day of the month upon which the instalments are due was left blank.
It is the plaintiff’s contention that the terms of payment are sufficiently definite to meet the requirements of the statute. Its claim appears to be this: the date of the contract is June 29; the first instalment is made payable on July 29, and those remaining, on the “-- day of each and every month thereafter until this contract is paid in full”; hence, an instalment is due on the 29th day of each succeeding month. The weakness of' this argument is obvious. In the first place, whether “month” refers to a period of one month immediately following the “29th” or to the calendar month which next follows that date is not stated. Furthermore, if we assume that the actual agreement of *545the parties was that all instalments subsequent to the first were to fall due as claimed by the plaintiff, then that was a condition of the sale and, as such, was required by the statute to be expressed in writing.
It is quite simple to say that the parties obviously intended, from the language they used, that monthly payments, subsequent to July, were to be paid on or before the 29th of each month. This is the equivalent of filling in an unstated term of the contract. For aught that appears therein, save what may be deduced by inference to the contrary, the actual, unrecorded agreement may have provided for payments on the 1st or 15th or 30th day of the month. The problem, however, is not one of interpretation, permitting the court to resort to its right to draw reasonable inferences in determining the meaning of a contract. If it were, it is not inconceivable that the missing information could be supplied by inferring that, because the dates when the contract was executed and the first instalment was made payable were the 29th of consecutive months, the parties must have intended the 29th of each of the "following months as the date on which the payment was to be made. That, however, is not the point. The only question is whether all of the conditions of the sale were reduced to writing.
The statute is not ambiguous. It provides unequivocally that all, not some, of the conditions shall be expressed in writing. Try as it may, the plaintiff cannot escape from the stubborn fact that the contract does not incorporate the complete terms to which the parties agreed. Unless we propose to depart from the strict policy which has characterized our former decisions, we must conclude, as we do, that the contract of conditional sale in this case was an absolute sale as to the vendee’s creditor. C. I. T. Corpora*546tion v. Meyers, 129 Conn. 514, 517, 29 A. 2d 758; Premium Commercial Corporation v. Kasprzycki, 129 Conn. 446, 450, 29 A. 2d 610.
There is error, the judgment is set aside and the case is remanded with direction to render judgment for the defendant for possession of the automobile.
In this opinion Baldwin, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9736784 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:06:32.569474+00 ===

Brown, C. J.
(concurring). I concur in the conclusion that there was error. I am in full agreement with what is stated in the preceding opinion as to the purpose of the statute and as to the court’s duty to enforce strict compliance with it for the protection of bona fide purchasers and creditors. The vendor’s gross carelessness and disregard for the requirements of the statute in this case are manifest, not only from its failure to state in the instrument the dates when the monthly payments were to be made but also in the inadequacy of the acknowledgment.
Among other of the applicable provisions of § 6692 is one that all conditional sales contracts “shall be acknowledged before some competent authority.” When a corporation is the vendor in such a contract, it “is essential that it appear from the certificate, when read in connection with the instrument acknowledged, that the acknowledgment is made on behalf of the corporation and therefore is its acknowledgment, and not merely that of the individual who executed the instrument.” Commercial Credit Corporation v. Carlson, 114 Conn. 514, 518, 159 A. 352. In other words, under our statute a certificate is insufficient unless it (1) identifies the subscriber, (2) specifies the writing subscribed, (3) states the capacity in which he executed it, and (4) certifies his acknowledgment thereof. At the end of this contract, just below what appears to be the buyer’s signature, this appears: “Seller *547Signs Windham Motor Sales, Inc., B. Hochberg, Pres. Columbia Ave., Willimantic, Conn.” The certificate of acknowledgment states: “Personally appeared Windham Motor Sales, Inc. (Seller) and Emile W. Jacques (Purchaser) signers and sealers of the foregoing instrument and acknowledge the same ... to be their free act and deed (and the free act and deed of corporation when either party is corporation), before me.
When the purported signature of the vendor, and the certificate, are read together, if it is assumed that the first three of the above requisites essential to a valid certificate were satisfied, it is clear that the fourth was not. Even though the vendor s signature is construed to be that of the corporation, by Hochberg as its president, there is nothing to show that he, rather than some other person without even ostensible authority to act on its behalf, acknowledged the instrument. Since a corporation can act only through its agents, the certification that Windham Motor Sales, Inc., “personally appeared,” adds nothing and means nothing. It follows that the certificate is insufficient and judgment must be directed for the defendant.

=== CASE 9736785 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:06:32.572988+00 ===

Inglis, J.
(dissenting). The purpose of the requirement of the statutes that, to be valid as against third parties, a conditional sale contract must state “all conditions” of the sale is to inform such third parties as to what interest the vendee has in the property sold. This purpose is fully accomplished if by a reasonable reading of the contract one is fairly apprised of its terms. Premium Commercial Corporation v. Kasprzycki, 129 Conn. 446, 450, 29 A. 2d 610; National Cash Register Co. v. Lesko, 77 Conn. 276, 280, 58 A. 967; see Mozwish v. Sirus, 113 Conn. 141, 144, 154 A. 166; Beach v. Osborne, 74 Conn. 405, 408, 50 A. 1019, 1118.
*548The only possible question concerning the statement of the terms of the sale in the contract involved in this case is whether the times of payments of the instalments of the purchase price are set forth with adequate certainty. The contract on its face is dated June 29, 1949. After stating the amount of each of the instalments and that there should be “24 equal monthly installments,” it reads: “the first installment to be paid on July 29th, 1949 and the remaining installments to be paid on or before the--day of each and every month thereafter until this contract is paid in full.” When these provisions are read in their entirety, it appears that the omission of the precise date of the month upon which the instalments were to become due does not materially detract from the certainty of the statement. The agreement was that the instalments would have become due “on or before” such a day, if one had been stated. It is quite apparent, therefore, that the actual agreement between the parties did not contemplate that any payment must be made on any specific day. It might be made at any time within a specified month. The contract did make it plain that the first instalment was due on July 29, that another instalment was due sometime within the month which followed that date, and that a further instalment was due within each successive month thereafter. The contract also made it plain that in no event could payments continue after the expiration of twenty-four months. To apprehend this much from a reading of the contract, it is not necessary to draw any inferences, still less to do any guesswork. It is the plain intendment of what the contract states. A reading of the contract fairly apprises one of what the agreement was with reference to the time for payment of instalments. It, therefore, satisfies the purpose and the requirement of the statute.
*549In only two cases has this court held that the statement of the due dates of instalments in conditional sale contracts was inadequate to meet the requirements of the statute. In C. I. T. Corporation v. Meyers, 129 Conn. 514, 517, 29 A. 2d 758, although the contract called for eighteen instalment payments, it completely failed to state when those payments should commence or end or whether they should be made in successive months. In Standard Acceptance Corporation v. Con-nor, 127 Conn. 199, 203, 15 A. 2d 314, although the contract was dated December 2, 1938, it stated that the instalment payments were to commence on January 10, 1938, an obvious error. The reasoning of the court which led to the conclusion that the requirement of the statute had not been satisfied was that, even if the error in the date were overlooked, the contract was left with no date stated for the commencement or ending of the instalment payments. Obviously, neither of these cases on their facts is analogous to the present case, nor does the reasoning of the opinion in either of them argue that the statement of terms contained in the contract now before us is inadequate. The present contract states plainly that an instalment is to be paid in each successive month commencing July 29, 1949.
The certificate of acknowledgment which was annexed to the conditional sale contract is set forth in the concurring opinion of Brown, C. J. In considering the question whether that certificate is adequate, it must be borne in mind that ordinarily the omission from the certificate of the name of the acknowledger is not fatal if his identity is fairly imported by referring to him in the certificate as the signer and sealer or the subscriber of the document acknowledged. Sanford v. Bulkley, 30 Conn. 344, 347; 1 C. J. S. 855, § 92 (a) (2); 1 Am. Jur. 364; notes, 29 A. L. R. 919, 1001, *55072 A. L. R. 1290, 1300. The same is true even though the certificate relates to acknowledgments by two or more persons. Bowles v. Lowery, 181 Ala. 603, 610, 62 So. 107; Brown v. Corbin, 121 Ind. 455, 458, 23 N. E. 276; Stephens v. Perkins, 209 Ky. 651, 655, 273 S. W. 545; Clewer v. Shields, 40 Pa. Super. 400, 403.
It obviously is impossible for a corporation to appear personally and acknowledge a document. Accordingly, the words “Windham Motor Sales, Inc. (Seller),” as they appear in the certificate in question, are to be treated as surplusage and ignored. If that is done, the certificate reads: “Personally appeared . . . and Emile W. Jacques (Purchaser) signers and sealers of the foregoing instrument. . . .” That is, the certificate does not specify by name one of the acknowledgers. It is apparent from the certificate, however, that at least two persons appeared and acknowledged the document, because it states that they were “signers and sealers” and that the instrument was acknowledged as “their” free act and deed. The quoted words are in the plural. The certificate is that those who appeared were the signers and sealers of the foregoing instrument. That can be interpreted in no way other than that it was “B. Hochberg, Pres.,” and “Emile W. Jacques.” It also means that B. Hochberg appeared in his capacity as president of Windham Motor Sales, Inc. The certificate further makes it clear that B. Hochberg as president acknowledged the instrument both as his free act and deed and as the free act and deed of the corporation. It, therefore, adequately complies with the requirements of a proper certificate of acknowledgment.
The case is distinguishable on the facts from Hayden v. Westcott, 11 Conn. 129; Commercial Credit Corporation v. Carlson, 114 Conn. 514, 159 A. 352; C. I. T. Corporation v. Hungerford, 123 Conn. 438, 196 A. 151; *551and C. I. T. Corporation v. Meyers, 129 Conn. 514, 29 A. 2d 758. In the Hayden case the certificate did not reveal even by way of inference who had appeared. In the Carlson case the certificate failed to state that the person who was making the acknowledgment on behalf of the corporation was an officer of the corporation or was acting in any official capacity. In each of the other two cases the certificate was so garbled as to be meaningless.
In this opinion Jennings, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2207309 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:18.847506+00 ===

454 N.W.2d 422 (1990)
Gregory James MOEN, Respondent,
v.
Salma MIKHAIL, M.D., George E. Reisdorf, M.D., et al., petitioners, Appellants.
No. C3-89-540.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
April 20, 1990.
Rehearing Denied May 10, 1990.
Robert R. Dunlap, Susan Scheffer, Dunlap, Finseth, Berudt & Sandberg, P.A., Rochester, for George Reisdorf, et al.
Kenneth R. White, Farrish, Johnson & Maschka, Mankato, for Salma Mikhail.
Evan H. Larson, Peter D. Plunkett, Warren F. Plunkett & Assoc., Austin, for respondent.
Considered and decided by the court en banc without oral argument.
SIMONETT, Justice.
We granted the petitions of defendants Salma Mikhail and George E. Reisdorf to review a split decision of the court of appeals, the majority of which concluded that the trial court is vested with discretion to extend the time limitations contained in Minn.Stat. § 145.682 (1988) upon a showing of excusable neglect and that it abused that discretion in determining that plaintiff made no showing of excusable neglect. Moen v. Mikhail, 447 N.W.2d 462 (Minn. App.1989). We reverse.
Here, the trial court improperly first concluded that it was without any discretion to extend the time limitations of section 145.682 in a medical malpractice action. See Stern v. Dill, 442 N.W.2d 322, 324 (Minn.1989). However, our review of the record leads to our conclusion that Moen provided no reasonable excuse for his failure to provide the requisite affidavits in a timely fashion and that, therefore, he would not have been entitled to the requested extension. Summary judgment was properly awarded to the defendants.
Reversed.

=== CASE 2207319 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:18.924753+00 ===

208 Cal.App.2d 429 (1962)
MAX KEROFF, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
BEN SNYDER, Defendant and Appellant.
Civ. No. 6735.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Dist.
Oct. 11, 1962.
Adams & Tom and Richard E. Adams for Defendant and Appellant.
Gostin & Katz and Louis S. Katz for Plaintiff and Respondent.
COUGHLIN, J.
These appeals arise out of an action to declare a partnership dissolved; to effect an accounting therein; and to partition real property. The dissolution had been accomplished by a written agreement executed prior to commencement of the action; the partition issues were settled thereafter; and the accounting was the sole remaining matter requiring court action. Although several defendants were joined in the action, the partnership and accounting phases thereof involve only the defendant, Ben Snyder, the appellant herein.
On February 15, 1961, the court entered a judgment, based on findings of fact and conclusions of law made by a referee appointed by it pursuant to stipulation of the parties, which declared the partnership dissolved and stated an accounting between them. The plaintiff, who is the respondent herein, moved for a new trial, based on several grounds, including insufficiency of the evidence. This motion was heard on April 11, 1961. At the time of this hearing, the parties, their counsel, and the court, the honorable Dean Sherry presiding, preliminarily engaged in an off-the-record discussion. Thereafter, as appears from the augmented record before us, the court granted a new trial because of the insufficiency of the evidence; counsel for defendant were permitted to withdraw as attorneys in the case; at his request he undertook to represent himself; and thereupon the trial judge, undoubtedly having in mind the preliminary unreported discussion heretofore noted, referred to a stipulation and engaged in a further discussion with the parties and the plaintiff's attorney as follows:
"The Court: It is now stipulated that the plaintiff has given his attorney full authority to make a settlement agreement here; and that when that agreement is made for the settlement of this case, there will be no further motion for a new trial, there will be no appeal from the decision of the Court."
"Is that your understanding, Mr. Katz? [Attorney for plaintiff.]"
"Mr. Katz: That is my understanding, Your Honor. *431"
"The Court: And Mr. Keroff [plaintiff], is that your understanding?"
Mr. Keroff: It is.
"The Court: And you Mr. Keroff,--you are giving your attorney, Mr. Katz, full authority to make such settlement, is that right?"
"Mr. Keroff: Yes, sir."
"The Court: And you understand that that is the arrangement,___"
"Mr. Snyder [defendant]: Yes, sir."
"The Court: ___Mr. Snyder?"
"Mr. Snyder: Yes, sir."
"The Court: That when the Court has entered a judgment in this case after discussion with you and Mr. Katz, that my decision on all matters that are presented to the Court at this hearing and the judgment itself will be final?"
"Mr. Snyder: I so understand."
"The Court: And there will be no motion for a new trial and there will be no appeal from that decision?"
"Mr. Snyder: I accept."
"The Court: Yes. All right."
"Now, gentlemen, I will suggest the matters that we can discuss."
This exchange was followed by a discussion which was not reported. From the amended minute order purporting to reflect the proceedings on the day in question, it appears that this unreported discussion terminated in a decision by the court to render judgment, and a direction to counsel for the plaintiff to prepare the same for signature. On April 17, 1961, a written judgment was signed and filed, the terms of which vary substantially from the judgment originally entered.
Forthwith, the defendant reemployed his counsel, and through them moved the court, the honorable George A. Lazar presiding, to vacate and set aside the second judgment; to reinstate the original judgment; and, in the alternative, to grant a new trial. This motion was denied. Thereupon the defendant appealed from the second judgment and from the order denying the aforesaid motion. No appeal was taken from the order granting a new trial as to the first judgment, and that order has become final.
[1] Heretofore the plaintiff moved this court to dismiss this appeal upon the ground that the defendant had waived his right to appeal. This motion was denied. The waiver *432 relied upon is that expressed in the course of the discussion following the court's setting aside the original judgment and granting a new trial. A fair and reasonable interpretation of that discussion convinces us that it concerned a judgment upon a "settlement agreement." No such agreement preceded the second judgment. Consequently, there was no waiver of an appeal from the latter.
The record does not indicate what transpired in the course of the unreported discussion between the court, the parties, and counsel for the plaintiff, which preceded the decision to render judgment as reflected in the minutes. The judgment appealed from recites that the parties "stipulated and agreed to have the case tried by the court at this time, without jury and without a court reporter and after submission of all of the issues to the court and informal discussion thereon, it was further stipulated that the court would render a final judgment herein as to all issues raised in the pleadings relating to the partnership accounting and the First Cause of Action herein." This recital is contrary to the facts as established by the record heretofore considered. The stipulation in question referred to a judgment to be agreed upon by the parties. [2a] In any event, the proceedings are fatally defective because no findings of fact were made by the court. [3] It is an elementary rule that written "findings are required on all material issues raised by the pleadings and evidence, unless they are waived, and if the court renders judgment without making findings on all material issues, the case must be reversed." (James v. Haley, 212 Cal. 142, 147 [297 P. 920]; in accord: Edgar v. Hitch, 46 Cal.2d 309, 312 [294 P.2d 3]; Krum v. Malloy, 22 Cal.2d 132, 136 [137 P.2d 18]; Morrow v. Morrow, 201 Cal.App.2d 235, 238 [20 Cal.Rptr. 338]; Perry v. Jacobsen, 184 Cal.App.2d 43, 49 [7 Cal.Rptr. 177]; Estate of Ingram, 99 Cal.App. 660, 662 [279 P. 208]; Frascona v. Los Angeles Ry. Corp., 48 Cal.App. 135, 137-138 [191 P. 968].) [2b] Section 632 of the Code of Civil Procedure, which imposes the requirement of written findings, provides that they may be waived "by consent in writing filed with the clerk or judge, or by oral consent in open court, entered in the minutes." The recitals in the instant judgment do not indicate a waiver of findings; no written consent to such a waiver is on file; and no oral consent thereto expressed in open court is recorded in the minutes. In this regard it may be noted that in a declaration filed in resistance to the plaintiff's motion to dismiss the appeal, the defendant *433 stated that he requested the court to make findings of fact and conclusions of law, but the judge told him these were not necessary. This statement was not denied. The failure to make findings was error, and the judgment must be reversed.
The order denying the defendant's motion for a new trial is not appealable and, therefore, the attempted appeal therefrom should be dismissed. (Rodriguez v. Barnett, 52 Cal.2d 154, 156 [338 P.2d 907].) [4] The order denying the defendant's motion to set aside the second judgment and reinstate the first properly was denied as there is no such proceeding sanctioned by law. (Ransom v. Los Angeles City High School Dist., 129 Cal.App.2d 500, 507 [277 P.2d 455]; Levy v. Brill, 107 Cal.App.2d 204, 205 [236 P.2d 603]; Biggs v. Biggs, 103 Cal.App.2d 741, 742 [230 P.2d 32].)
The judgment appealed from is reversed; the order denying the motion to set aside the second judgment and reinstate the first is affirmed; and the attempted appeal from the order denying the motion for a new trial is dismissed. Appellant to recover costs on appeal.
Griffin, P. J., and Shepard, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2207322 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:18.956562+00 ===

208 Cal.App.2d 740 (1962)
MORRISON DRILLING CO., INC., Petitioner,
v.
THE SUPERIOR COURT OF ORANGE COUNTY, Respondent; THOMAS F. BAILEY et al., Real Parties in Interest.
Civ. No. 7103.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Dist.
Oct. 22, 1962.
Hancock & Garland and David M. Garland for Petitioner.
No appearance for Respondent.
Kindel & Anderson and Paul F. Marx for Real Parties in Interest.
GRIFFIN, P. J.
[1a] This is a petition for a writ of certiorari to review an order of the respondent superior court staying all proceedings in the trial of an action until plaintiff therein (petitioner here) has brought into the action a party alleged to be indispensable.
Petitioner brought the action in the superior court against certain members of a joint venture to recover for the value of services alleged to have been rendered on behalf of the joint venture. The defendants who had been served in the action demurred on the ground that petitioner had failed to join Batzer Oil Corporation, a Wyoming corporation, as a defendant and that Batzer Oil Corporation was one of the members of the joint venture, a joint obligor, and an indispensable party. By leave of court, petitioner filed an amended complaint naming Batzer Oil Corporation as a party defendant. However, petitioner was unsuccessful in his attempts to serve Batzer Oil Corporation within the State of California and petitioner's motion to serve Batzer Oil Corporation as a foreign corporation doing business in the state, by service on the secretary of state, was denied because no showing was made that Batzer Oil Corporation had conducted any business *742 within the State of California. Thereafter, the petitioner brought this petition for a writ of certiorari.
The complaint alleges that petitioner is a Wyoming corporation and that about August 17, 1959, the respondents here and Batzer Oil Corporation entered into a written joint venture agreement whereby they agreed to drill an oil and gas well in Converse County, Wyoming. It is alleged that Batzer Oil Corporation, acting as the agent of the respondents, entered into an oral contract with petitioner in Wyoming whereby petitioner was to supply and did supply services and materials in connection with the drilling of an oil and gas well in Converse County, Wyoming. Petitioner alleges that the reasonable value of the services and materials supplied by it is $11,351.64 and that it has been paid no part of this amount. It is alleged that the respondents and each of them are indebted to petitioner in the amount of $11,351.64.
Appended to the original complaint is a contract between respondents and Batzer Oil Corporation. In this contract, it is agreed that Batzer Oil Corporation owns certain interests in oil leases in Converse County, Wyoming, that the parties agree to drill a test well on the leased land and that Batzer Oil Corporation shall be the agent of the parties in charge of the actual drilling of the well. It is provided that each of the parties, including Batzer Oil Corporation, shall have either a one-eighth or a one- fourth interest in the proceeds of the joint venture and in its obligations. It does not clearly appear whether this contract was entered into within the State of California. At the head of the contract, or letter purporting to be the contract, is noted "4252 Beverly Boulevard, Los Angeles 4, California, August 17, 1959." It is directed to William L. Rush at 3950 Beverly Boulevard, Los Angeles, California and is purportedly signed by all parties on August 18, 1959, including Batzer Oil Corporation by F. G. Batzer, vice president. The complaint does not allege the place where the agreement was executed.
[2] Both petitioner and respondents agree that the statutory and case authority in this state provides that the parties to a joint venture are jointly liable in an action brought by a third person to enforce an obligation of the joint venture. (Corp. Code,  15015.) In Harrison v. McCormick, 69 Cal. 616, 620 [11 P. 456], it was said:
"The rule is well settled that several persons contracting together with the same party for one and the same act, shall *743 be regarded as jointly, and not individually or separately liable, in the absence of any words to show that a distinct as well as entire liability was intended to fasten upon the promisors." This rule is reiterated in Iwanaga v. Hagopian, 39 Cal.App. 584 [179 P. 523]; Mirabile v. Smith, 119 Cal.App.2d 685, 688-689 [260 P.2d 179]; and Hobgood v. Glass, 161 Cal.App.2d 208 [326 P.2d 546].
[3] It is also clear that joint obligors are indispensable parties to an action brought to enforce a joint liability. (Williams v. Reed, 48 Cal.2d 57 [307 P.2d 353].) In 1 Chadbourn, Cal. Pleading, at page 517, it is said: "... joint obligors or obligees on a contract must be joined as plaintiffs or defendants."
See also 2 Witkin, California Procedure, at page 1054, where it is said: "... joint obligors or debtors jointly liable under a contract must be joined as defendants. [Citation.] Partners and joint venturers are likewise united in interest so as to require joinder in actions, whether on contract or tort."
[1b] Code of Civil Procedure, section 414, provides: "When the action is against two or more defendants jointly or severally liable on a contract, and the summons is served on one or more, but not on all of them, the plaintiff may proceed against the defendants served in the same manner as if they were the only defendants."
See also Tally v. Ganahl, 151 Cal. 418, 424 [90 P. 1049], where the plaintiff was allowed to proceed against one joint obligor alone where the other was absent from the state and not within the jurisdiction of the court. In Rawitzer v. Wyatt, 40 F. 609, the court held that Code of Civil Procedure, section 414, permits a plaintiff who has joined all joint obligors to proceed against less than all of them where service of process cannot be obtained on all of the joint obligors.
This view of the effect of Code of Civil Procedure, section 414, was reiterated in Iwanaga v. Hagopian, supra, 39 Cal.App. 584, and Hobgood v. Glass, supra, 161 Cal.App.2d 208. In the latter case, the court said:
"In Iwanaga v. Hagopian, 39 Cal.App. 584, 585 [179 P. 523], the court refers to the common law rule that a partnership obligation is joint, and not joint and several, and to the corollary rule that a judgment against less than all the partners upon such a liability extinguishes the original claim against all for the reason that the joint obligation is deemed *744 merged in the judgment. The decision then proceeds to point out that in California the common law rules have been abrogated by statue:"
" 'In some states the rigor of this common-law rule has been relaxed by statutes, which declare the obligations of copartners to be several as well as joint. But in this state the common-law rule has been expressly enacted by section 2442 of the Civil Code, which declares the liability of copartners to be joint, and we have no provision permitting several judgments to be recovered in several actions upon a joint obligation. The extent to which the common-law rule on this subject has been changed by the provisions of section 414 and section 989 of the Code of Civil Procedure is by permitting (section 414) an action brought against the joint debtors, but in which the summons has not been served on all, to proceed to judgment against those served; and (section 989) after judgment so obtained, to bring in any of the defendants not served by an order to show cause why they should not be bound by the judgment.' " See also Wharton v. Harlan, 68 Cal. 422, 427 [9 P. 727].
The order of the lower court was therefore erroneous. It should not be inferred from this holding that the petitioner should have judgment on the issues framed by the pleadings. We have only discussed the issues presented by this petition. Our description of the liability of the defendants as "joint" is not intended to foreclose the trial court from deciding that this obligation is other than joint. Nor should our use of the term "joint venture" preclude the trial court from deciding the exact nature of the parties' relationship after the issues are framed by the pleadings and the evidence is presented. (See Corporations Code,  25100, subd. (m).)
[4] The petition here seeks a writ of certiorari. A writ of mandamus is more appropriate where a court erroneously refuses to assume jurisdiction. (3 Witkin, California Procedure,  50, p. 2531.) Although the petition seeks the wrong relief, there is no reason why this court should not grant the appropriate writ where the complete record is before us. (Board of Trustees v. State Board of Equalization, 1 Cal.2d 784 [37 P.2d 84, 96 A.L.R. 775]; 3 Witkin, California Procedure, pp. 2567-2569.)
Let a writ of mandate issue directing respondent court to vacate all orders abating or staying proceedings in action *745 No. 97691 in said court, and directing it to assume jurisdiction, and to proceed to trial of the action.
Shepard, J., and Coughlin, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2207323 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:18.959469+00 ===

79 A.2d 620 (1951)
ABBOTT et al.
v.
ZONING BOARD OF REVIEW OF THE CITY OF WARWICK.
M. P. No. 948.
Supreme Court of Rhode Island.
March 16, 1951.
*621 Charles H. Drummey, Edmund J. Carberry, Jr., Providence, for petitioners.
Hailes L. Palmer, City Sol., Providence, for respondent.
CAPOTOSTO. Justice.
This is a petition for certiorari to review the action of the respondent board in granting the application of Leo T. Martineau for an exception under the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city of Warwick to permit the use of land in a residential zoning district as a "Drive-In Theater." The writ was issued and pursuant thereto the respondent certified to this court the records pertaining to the decision, including a summary of the representations made to the board for and against the application.
It appears that about one month prior to the date of application. November 30, 1949. Leo T. Martineau, a resident of Providence, hereinafter sometimes called the applicant, purchased 12.75 acres of vacant land in a residential B zone in the city of Warwick. A drive-in or open-air theater is not a permitted use in that zone. In the newspaper notice of the hearing thereon before the board the land was described as lot 472, plat 350 "at intersection of Warwick Ave. & Oakland Beach Ave. * * *" both of which are main highways. We note here that in said notice the plat was not definitely identified, although it later appeared that such reference was to an assessor's plat. It is conceded *622 by the board that the land was not located at the above-mentioned intersection although it was in that immediate vicinity. A statement of the actual site and of the tributary streets and roads involved is unnecessary for our purposes.
A hearing on the application was held on December 14, 1949. The applicant at that time told the board that he intended to sell the land to Gerald Deitch and Joseph Petrella, who were to build and operate the theater. Counsel for the prospective buyers then presented a plan of the theater, explained the details of the venture which he said would call for an expenditure of approximately $125,000, and urged the granting of the application. Such action was approved in a written statement signed by six persons owning land within 200 feet of the alleged location and by three others in person, while one property owner who lived some distance from the site voiced his opposition.
At the close of the hearing the board granted the application giving the following reasons for their decision: "1. The City of Warwick needs the additional revenue that it would derive from the taxes. 2. Young couples, who have one or two children, can attend the theater without the additional expense of hiring baby sitters. 3. Chief of Police stated that his department can control the traffic without it being a hazard. 4. The citizens and taxpayers of the City of Warwick are entitled to recreation of this sort." The decision further provided: "1. That the stipulations in the letter from the Chief of Police dated Dec. 13, 1949 be carried out" and "2. That fire protection, either a fireman or fire-box, be provided for." As a matter of fact the stipulations, so called, were merely suggestions by the chief of police of necessary changes for the maintenance of order and the control of increased traffic, including the resurfacing of two certain streets.
Shortly after such decision by the board other property owners and residents of the neighborhood whose interests would be affected by the erection and operation of the theater retained counsel. They thereupon immediately filed a petition, bearing some fifty signatures, asking for a rehearing by the board, alleging in substance that the petitioners were not present at the hearing "to protest the application" because some did not see the advertisement in the newspaper "while others who were cognizant of the application were misled by the advertisement * * *." Among the grounds of objection stated in this petition were increased fire and traffic hazards, devaluation of property, disturbance at late hours, and the creation of unsanitary conditions. Furthermore on January 11, 1950 two clergymen, one of whom spoke for himself and for an association of ministers, also wrote to the board for a review of the matter. However, after stating in an undated written decision that the application had been duly advertised and fully considered, the board denied the petition for a rehearing on the ground that its rules of procedure did not permit the granting of "any rehearing" within one year from the date of decision.
The petitioners here claim that in the circumstances the decision of the board is illegal, arbitrary and unreasonable. Respondent first contends that the petitioners are not really aggrieved parties entitled to have a review of the decision in question by certiorari, as after proper notice they had failed to present their objections to the board. It further urges that two of the petitioners, who owned property within 200 feet of the alleged site, "apparently have had a change of mind and have withdrawn their names as petitioners"; that another owner of a lot within that area, who was illiterate and had signed the petition by mark, should have supported her action in the matter by affidavit showing "that the petition was read to her or that she understood its contents"; and that the other petitioner owned property well beyond the aforementioned area. We observe at this point that we find no record of a "change of mind" by the two petitioners as above alleged, nor is there any provision by statute or otherwise requiring that a signature by mark, especially if it is duly witnessed as it was in the present petition, be supported by affidavit as respondent argues. In the absence of proof to the contrary, we will not presume *623 that the petitioner so signing was improperly induced to sign the petition.
We understand respondent's contention in effect to be that only an owner of property within 200 feet of land for which a variance or exception is sought can be an aggrieved party within the terms of the enabling act or ordinance. This same question was considered by us in Flynn v. Zoning Board of Review, R.I., 73 A.2d 808, and we there held that generally speaking a landowner whose property naturally would be affected adversely by a decision granting an exception or variance was considered to be an aggrieved party having a right to a review of the board's decision in this court by certiorari. As the reasons and pertinent authorities for such holding are set forth in that case we need not repeat them here. In the instant case all the petitioners not only own property in the same established residential zone, but the nature and extent of the proposed change is also such that it would naturally and reasonably tend to affect the value and use of the property in that neighborhood generally. The contention under consideration is therefore without merit.
Respondent, quoting certain language from Taft v. Zoning Board of Review, R.I., 71 A.2d 886, next contends that the petitioners are not entitled to question the hereinbefore-mentioned misdescription of the land in question as they waived that right by failing to make such objection to the board. Since it is admitted that the location of the premises is substantially incorrect, it cannot be said that persons in interest, whether within or outside the 200-foot limits of the alleged site, might not reasonably have been misled to inaction at the hearing before the board. As to the quotation from the Taft case, it is only necessary to observe no useful purpose is served by relying on language in a case which is so clearly different in its facts from the one at bar.
This is not the ordinary case for relief from the provisions of a zoning ordinance. The large amount of land involved, its location in a residential zone near the confluence of heavily traveled highways, and the character of the proposed use of that land present an unusual situation for careful consideration by the proper authority. The board urges, among other things of a similar nature, that the decision should be sustained because (1) that section of the city of Warwick has "not developed into a residential area as zoned" in 1945; (2) "The area is improperly zoned"; (3) "It is clear that this land wasn't suitable for residential B. and the board in granting the application is encouraging the most appropriate use of the land"; and (4) "It is common knowledge that `Y' intersections are excellent locations for business."
In the absence of any legislative power in the board to establish zones, the reasons just mentioned are without persuasive force. That power is vested exclusively in the city council by the enabling act, general laws 1938, chapter 342. The board was created to administer the zoning ordinance but not to formulate or revise it. The discretionary power of the board to grant an exception in special cases was intended to provide reasonable latitude in the application of the terms of the ordinance in order to relieve against the arbitrary effects that might follow from a literal enforcement thereof. Flynn v. Zoning Board of Review, supra. The case of East Providence Mills, Inc. v. Zoning Board of Review, 51 R.I. 428, 155 A. 531, upon which respondent relies, is inapplicable in the circumstances of the instant case. Our discussion of that case in the Flynn case need not be repeated here.
It is to be kept in mind that in the case at bar we are dealing with an exception and not with a variance. See Harrison v. Zoning Board of Review, 74 R.I. 135, 59 A.2d 361, for a statement of the difference between the two grounds of relief. The ordinance now before us authorizes the board in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards to make special exceptions to the terms of this ordinance in certain specified cases or "where the exception is reasonably necessary for the convenience and welfare of *624 the public." Since the application was not for a permitted and specified use in a residential B district, the decision of the board must necessarily rest on the quoted part of the ordinance.
Recognizing that the power of the board to grant an exception is broad and might be abused, in Costantino v. Zoning Board of Review, 74 R.I. 316, at page 324, 60 A.2d 478, the court stated that such power should be sparingly used, meaning thereby that a decision granting an exception would be reversed as an abuse of discretion in the exercise of the legal power delegated to the board unless such decision was based upon some substantial ground, as in East Providence Mills, Inc. v. Zoning Board of Review, supra. The nature and extent of the proposed use in the instant case present an extreme departure from the permitted uses in the district.
After due consideration we are of the opinion that the board was not warranted in granting an exception that would permit the applicant to introduce a new business of such size and character in a residential zone. The grounds set forth by the board in its decision relate almost entirely to the policy in zoning heretofore adopted by the city of Warwick, which policy, as hereinbefore stated, is for the city council and not for the board to determine. Therefore, excluding all questions of that nature, there is nothing in the present record which in our judgment shows that the granted exception was reasonably necessary for the convenience and welfare of the public.
The petition for certiorari is granted, the decision of the respondent board is reversed, and the records in the case which have been certified to this court are ordered sent back to the respondent board.

=== CASE 9736786 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:06:40.002119+00 ===

Mr. Justice Scanlan delivered the opinion of the court. H. S. Merrell, Trustee in Bankruptcy of the estate of Joseph William Council by appointment of the District Court of the United States for the Eastern District of North Carolina, Wilson Division, in bankruptcy cause No. 590, appeals from a judgment order entered in the Circuit court of Cook county. On November 3, 1947, National Bank of Commerce of Norfolk, Norfolk, Virginia, (hereafter referred to as the Bank), filed its complaint in the Circuit court of Cook county alleging that J. W. Council was indebted to it by virtue of a certain note dated August 18, 1947, in the principal sum of $7,388.24, which sum was past due. At the same time the Bank filed an affidavit for attachment and an attachment writ issued to attach any funds due Council. Weber Costello Company, a corporation, was summoned as garnishee, and subsequently it stated, in answer to interrogatories, that: “1. It holds indebtedness in the sum of $4811.28, representing commissions due J. W. Council on account of orders obtained by him and shipped to respective customers ; 2. Indebtedness in the sum of $200.25 representing commissions due J. W. Council on account of orders obtained by him and having been shipped and payment having been made therefor after the date of service; 3. Said J. W. Council obtained certain orders for garnishee’s products, shipped to various customers, but payment not made in amount of $192.40. J. W. Council obtained orders which had not been accepted. Goods not shipped and commissions when accepted and shipped total $1372.50.” On December 12, 1947, which was within four months of the issuance of the attachment writ, Council filed his petition in bankruptcy in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of North Carolina, Wilson Division, and he was adjudicated a bankrupt on December 13, 1947. When the Weber Costello Company filed its answer to the interrogatories, it also filed a countercomplaint, which admits that it owed Council, at the time of the service of the attachment writ, $4,811.28, that Council has demanded all commissions due him, and prays that Council and the Bank may settle their demands between themselves and that the court shall determine to whom the money should be paid. On March 22, 1948, it was ordered that Weber Costello Company pay to the Clerk of the Circuit court $5,178.68, which sum was to be subject to the order of the court. The judgment order entered by the trial court orders the Clerk of the court to pay to the Bank “out of the monies deposited by the counter-plaintiff” $3,026.86 and costs, and “that the Trustee in Bankruptcy is entitled to receive all funds in the possession of Weber Costello Company in excess of the sum of $3,026.86 to be administered by the Court of his appointment.” The Trustee appeals from that judgment order. The countercomplaint was filed two days after Council had been adjudged a bankrupt in the North Carolina court. On December 26,1947, the-Bank filed its answer to the countercomplaint, in which it set up that on June 4, 1946, Council had executed an assignment wherein he assigned to the Bank commissions due him from Weber Costello Company to secure his indebtedness to the Bank; that the assignment was in the amount of $3,026.86; that notice was given to Weber Costello Company of the assignment; that that Company acknowledged receipt of the assignment and agreed to pay to the Bank all commissions due Council on shipped orders totaling up to $3,026.86 beginning June 4,1946. On February 7, 1948, the District Court of the United States for the Eastern District of North Carolina, Wilson Division, in bankruptcy, entered an order reciting that Council was adjudicated a bankrupt in that court on December 13,1947; that H. S. Merrell was appointed Trustee on February 4, 1948, and authorizing him “to take the necessary steps to avoid the attachment lien . . . in the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois.” In the instant case, the answer filed by the Trustee, on March 2,1948, to the countercomplaint filed by Weber Costello Company alleges, inter alia, “the fact to be that said Joseph William Council was adjudicated a bankrupt on the 13th day of December, 1947, and that this defendant was duly appointed and qualified as Trustee in said bankruptcy of J. W. Council and has taken constructive possession of all of the assets of the said J. W. Council, and that the said sums due as aforesaid should be paid this defendant to be administered in the said bankruptcy proceedings now pending in the District Court of the United States for the Eastern District of North Carolina, Wilson Division, in Cause No. 590. . . . That the said cross-complaint was not filed in this cause until the 15th day of December 1947. That the said Joseph William Council was adjudicated a bankrupt on December 13, 1947, and all assets, including the debt due him by Weber Costello Company, passed into the possession of the Trustee in Bankruptcy and jurisdiction to determine the validity or the amount of all liens against the property of the said Joseph William Council vested exclusively in the Bankruptcy Court in the District Court of the United States for the Eastern District of North Carolina, Wilson Division, in Cause No. 590. That neither this trustee nor the said Bankruptcy Court have given permission to file this counterclaim or to adjudicate this claim outside of the said Bankruptcy Court. That this Court does not have jurisdiction of the person of Joseph William Council for the reason that he was served herein by publication; that it does not have jurisdiction of the subject matter of this cause for the reason that jurisdiction thereof has passed to the Bankruptcy Court. Therefore, this defendant asks that this cause be dismissed with plaintiff’s costs.” In the determination of this appeal we have been aided by the following statements made by the Bank in its brief: “It is an established general rule in bankruptcy law that after an adjudication in bankruptcy, the Bankruptcy court has exclusive jurisdiction to determine all questions involving the bankrupt’s property including the right to determine the extent and character of liens against the bankrupt’s property. It has also been said that the filing of a bankruptcy petition is a caveat to all the world and in effect an attachment and injunction. But — these rules and doctrines are subject to certain qualifications and limitations and must be taken with reference to the facts in each particular case. C ( 1 ‘ Congress recognized the need for additional process and procedure and provided that the Bankruptcy court shall have the right to ancillary proceedings through its trustee. After adjudication the trustee appointed in one district, may go into another and institute any action necessary to protect or recover the property of the bankrupt estate there. It is established law that any district court in bankruptcy, in the exercise of ancillary jurisdiction in aid of another Bankruptcy court, may grant injunctions, stay proceedings, etc. In other words, bankruptcy proceedings do not ipso facto, merely by virtue of their filing and maintenance, terminate an action already pending in a foreign State court, to which the bankrupt is a party or deprive the court of jurisdiction in such case. “The Bankruptcy Statute also empowers the Bankruptcy court to permit its trustee to intervene in foreign State court proceedings to protect the bankrupt’s estate and under such circumstances the trustee becomes bound by the decision in the State court case. For such purposes it matters not whether the State court case was filed before or after the trustee was appointed. í Í “The Trustee in Bankruptcy had the right to file ancillary proceedings in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois — without coming into the State court case, or, had the right upon entering into the State court case, to seek removal to our local Federal District Court. He did neither although he had ample opportunity so to do as appears from the various proceedings that took place in the State court. “Instead, the Trustee in pursuance of permission granted by the court of his appointment in North Carolina, appeared voluntarily in the State court and upon leave of court filed his appearance and answer. The Trustee’s answer to the counterclaim placed in issue the validity of the Assignment of Commissions held by the Bank, claiming that said assignment had been paid in full and that the Trustee was entitled to recover the entire amount of money held by Weber Costello Co.; further, that because of the bankruptcy of said Council, all assets including the moneys held by Weber Costello Co., allegedly passed into the constructive possession of the Trustee and that the Federal District Court of North Carolina had exclusive jurisdiction. “Consequently the State court rightfully heard the case on its merits and adjudicated the claims of the parties.” (Italics ours.) The Bank further states in its brief: “There isn’t any dispute about the fact that the Attachment Writ was voidable upon the election of the Trustee in Bankruptcy .... No evidence was offered by the Bank on the attachment issue,” and it was stipulated that the writ of attachment be quashed, and the trial court quashed the writ upon motion of the Trustee. The Bank contends that “a Trustee in Bankruptcy who intervenes in a foreign State court proceeding upon leave of the court of his appointment and participates in the merits of the case, is bound by the judgment of the State court”; that “the trial court in this case had a clear right to proceed as no proper legal action had been taken to oust it from its jurisdiction,” and that “the Bankruptcy court at North Carolina authorized the Trustee to intervene in the Circuit Court of Cook County; he did intervene, stayed in the case, litigated the validity of the assignment and now complains because the trial court held against his contentions. ’ ’ The Trustee states: “The law is perfectly clear, as appellee [the Bank] points out in the first paragraph of its argument, that bankruptcy courts, after adjudication, have exclusive jurisdiction to determine questions involving the bankrupt’s property. Appellee suggests that if a bankruptcy court is to make its authority felt outside of its territorial jurisdiction it must have the cause in question transferred to the Federal Court having jurisdiction or resort to ancillary proceedings in the local bankruptcy court. Either of these means would be effective, but there is a third alternative. That is to go into the state court, plead the adjudication, and ash the state court to direct that the funds be paid to its trustee to be returned to the jurisdiction of bankruptcy court. “. . . There is no question of the right of the trustee to possession of the bankrupt’s property wherever it is. However, if it is outside the territorial jurisdiction of the court appointing the trustee, then the trustee must go into a local court to enforce his rights. That does not abridge the rights of the trustee given him by the bankruptcy statutes, but merely makes him take a further step to enforce them. In the case on appeal the trial court refused to recognize these rights and undertook to adjudicate a portion of the bankrupt’s estate.” It is true, as the Bank contends, that the Trustee, in his answer, saw fit to question the validity of the Bank’s claim against the estate of the bankrupt, nevertheless, the answer of the Trustee challenged the jurisdiction of the Circuit court of the subject matter for the reason that the jurisdiction of the subject matter had passed to the Bankruptcy court. On March 4, 1948, the trial court overruled the motion of the Trustee to dismiss the countercomplaint for want of jurisdiction upon the ground that the court attained jurisdiction of the funds by virtue of the attachment and that although the trial court voided the attachment the court still had jurisdiction of the funds and the Bankruptcy court could not oust the trial court from that jurisdiction. The trial court after overruling the motion of the Trustee to dismiss the countercomplaint set the case for hearing. In the final order the trial court sustained the Trustee’s motion to quash the attachment writ because it was issued within four months of the adjudication in bankruptcy, at which time the principal debtor was insolvent. It is conceded by the Bank that the attachment writ was voidable upon the election of the Trustee and that the trial court was justified in quashing the writ of attachment upon the motion of the Trustee. It is further conceded by the Bank that it “made no proof on the attachment issue but the case was heard solely on the counterclaim and the rights of the parties to the funds in the hands of Weber Costello Co.” In the attachment proceedings the Bank based its claim on certain notes of the bankrupt aggregating $7,388.24, but in its answer to the countercomplaint, filed nearly two weeks after the adjudication in bankruptcy, it abandoned the claim made in the attachment proceedings and based its claim upon the alleged assignments made to it by Council of moneys due him from Weber Costello Company.  That the bankruptcy court has exclusive jurisdiction to control the administration of a bankrupt’s estate is settled law. In U. S. Fidelity Co. v. Bray, 225 U. S. 205, the court states (pp. 217, 218) : “We think it is a necessary conclusion from these and other provisions of the act [Bankruptcy Act] that the jurisdiction of the bankruptcy courts in all ‘proceedings in bankruptcy’ is intended to be exclusive of all other courts, and that such proceedings include, among others, all matters of administration, such as the allowance, rejection and reconsideration of claims, the reduction of the estates to money and its distribution, the determination of the preferences and priorities to be accorded to claims presented for allowance and payment in regular course, and the supervision and control of the trustees and others who are employed to assist them. C Í “Of the fact that the suit was begun in the Circuit Court with the express leave of the court of bankruptcy it suffices to say that the latter toas not at liberty to surrender its exclusive control over matters of administration or to confide them to another tribunal.” (Italics ours.) In Isaacs v. Hobbs Tie & T. Co., 282 U. S. 734, 739, the court cites with approval the rule stated in the Bray case. Other cases to the same effect need not be cited, as the Bank admits the rule. The Isaacs case further holds that a trustee in bankruptcy can recover the bankrupt’s property or enforce his rights wherever they are, and can turn to local courts for help in enforcing these rights; that “upon adjudication, title to the bankrupt’s property vests in the trustee with actual or constructive possession, and is placed in the custody of the bankruptcy court. Mueller v. Nugent, 184 U. S. 1, 14. The title and right to possession of all property owned and possessed by the bankrupt vests in the trustee as of the date of the filing of the petition in bankruptcy, no matter whether situated within or without the district in which the court sits.” (p. 737) In the Isaacs case it appeared that one Cunningham was adjudged bankrupt in the Northern District of Texas and Isaacs was made trustee of the bankrupt’s estate. Thereafter the holder of a note secured by a mortgage on certain land instituted foreclosure proceedings in a State court of Arkansas. Then the bank-rapt and the trustee specially appeared and petitioned for removal of the cause to the United States District Court for the Western District of Arkansas. To quote from the decision (p. 739): “. . . The appellant-trustee might have instituted ancillary proceedings in the District Court for the Western District of Arkansas and there obtained an injunction to restrain the appellee from foreclosing its mortgage. There is no reason, however, why he should not have followed the course here pursued, of pleading the adjudication in Texas in abatement of the foreclosure proceeding. The state court in which the foreclosure action was begun was without jurisdiction to pursue it. Upon removal into the federal court upon the ground of diversity of citizenship, the latter court had no higher or different right to interfere with the bankruptcy administration than had the state court. The answer of the trustee stated a valid defense and it was error to enter judgment against him on the pleadings. “Appellee asserts that inasmuch as the appellant removed the cause into the federal court he waived any lack of jurisdiction in that court and estopped himself to set up exclusive jurisdiction of the bankruptcy court. There is no merit in this contention. The jurisdiction in bankruptcy is made exclusive in the interest of the due administration of the estate and the preservation of the rights of both secured and unsecured creditors. This fact places it beyond the power of the court’s officers to oust it by surrender of property which has come into its possession. Whitney v. Wenman, 198 U. S. 539; In re Schermerhorn, 145 Fed. 341. Indeed, a court of bankruptcy itself is powerless to surrender its control of the administration of the estate. U. S. Fidelity & G. Co. v. Bray, 225 U. S. 205. The action of the trustee in removing the cause, could not, therefore, divest the Texas District Court of its jurisdiction.” (Italics ours.) As a trustee in bankruptcy could not surrender the control of the administration of the bankrupt’s estate even to a Federal court, he certainly could not surrender that control to the Circuit court of Cook county. If this were not so an intolerable situation as to estates of bankrupts would prevail.  The Federal District Court of North Carolina had jurisdiction to direct its Trustee to appear in the State court in Illinois to plead the adjudication in "bankruptcy and to ask the State court to return to the 'Trustee moneys in its possession that admittedly belonged to the estate of the bankrupt. When the attachment writ was quashed the funds of the bankrupt were in the actual possession of the Circuit court, but the title to the funds, the constructive possession of the funds, were vested in the Trustee and the Trustee had the clear right to actual possession of the funds. In our judgment the trial court should have turned over the funds to the Trustee. Instead of doing so the trial court proceeded to pass upon the merits of the Bank’s claim, that sought to reach funds belonging to the estate of the bankrupt, and after deciding that the claim was a just one the trial court retained a part of the estate of the bankrupt sufficient to pay the claim of the Bank against the bankrupt’s estate and then entered an order that the balance of the funds in its possession be returned to the Trustee, “to be administered by the Court of his appointment.” In our view of the law the position taken by the trial court, that it attained jurisdiction of the funds by virtue of the attachment and that although the trial court voided the attachment it still had jurisdiction of the funds and the Bankruptcy court could not oust it from that jurisdiction, cannot be defended. Indeed, the Bank, in its brief, does not rely upon the court’s position. It concedes that the Bankruptcy court had exclusive jurisdiction to determine all questions involving the bankrupt’s property, including the right to determine the extent and character of hens against the bankrupt’s property, and it seeks to support the judgment entered upon the ground that “the Bankruptcy court at Forth Carolina authorized the Trustee to intervene in the Circuit Court of Cook County; he did intervene, stayed in the case, litigated the validity of the assignment and now complains because the trial court held against his contentions.” The position of the Bank is, in effect, that the North Carolina Bankruptcy court waived or surrendered its exclusive jurisdiction to determine all questions involving the bankrupt’s estate in the instant case. We have shown, however, that the Bankruptcy court cannot surrender its exclusive control over matters of administration or confide them to another tribunal. That wholesome rule is based upon the Bankruptcy Act. Counsel for the Bank have cited a number of cases in support of their contention that the Trustee participated in the proceedings before the Circuit court and is, therefore, bound by the judgment of that court, but, in our judgment, the cases cited differ from the instant one upon the facts. If the Bank has a valid claim against the bankrupt estate of Council it has a right to present it to the Bankruptcy court in North Carolina. The judgment order of the Circuit court of Cook county is reversed, and the cause is remanded with directions to the trial court to order the Clerk of the Circuit court to pay to the Trustee in Bankruptcy all funds in his hands that were deposited there by the Weber Costello Company by order of the court. Judgment order reversed, and cause remanded with directions. Friend, P. J., and Sullivan, J., concur. (See next page)

=== CASE 9736787 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:06:40.010443+00 ===

Additional Opinion Upon Petition For Rehearing. As appears from our opinion, the principal contention urged by the Bank in its brief in support of the judgment was that “a Trustee in Bankruptcy who intervenes in a foreign State court proceeding upon leave of the court of his appointment and participates in the merits of the case, is bound by the judgment of the State court,” but as it is clear from certain cases cited in our opinion that the Bankruptcy Court was given by the Act exclusive jurisdiction to deal with the property of the bankrupt estate and that that court cannot surrender or waive that jurisdiction, the Bank abandoned, apparently, the waiver contention. In the petition for a rehearing it contends: “The bank’s claim under the counterclaim was not against the bankrupt or his bankruptcy estate. It was a direct and primary claim against a third party — Weber Costello Company, who expressly undertook and agreed to pay a specified sum of money to the bank in consideration of which the bank advanced its funds to Mr. Council. The assignment was not conditional, but passed the title to the funds thereunder directly to the bank, and such funds were not a part of the bankruptcy proceedings filed eighteen months after the assignment was given. Therefore the Bankruptcy Court did not and could not have constructive possession over property that wasn’t owned by the bankrupt. ” “Upon adjudication, title to the bankrupt’s property vests in the trustee with actual or constructive possession, and is placed in the custody of the bankruptcy court. Mueller v. Nugent, 184 U. S. 1, 14. The title and right to possession of all property owned and possessed by the bankrupt vests in the trustee as of the date of the filing of the petition in bankruptcy, no matter whether situated within or without the district in which the court sits. Robertson v. Howard, 229 U. S. 254, 259-260; Wells v. Sharp, 208 Fed. 393; Galbraith v. Robson-Hilliard Grocery Co., 216 Fed. 842. It follows that the bankruptcy court has exclusive jurisdiction to deal with the property of the bankrupt estate. It may order a sale of real estate lying outside the district. Robertson v. Howard, supra; In re Wilka, 131 Fed. 1004. When this . jurisdiction has attached the court’s possession cannot be affected by actions brought in other cou,rts. White v. Schloerb, 178 U. S. 542; Murphy v. Hofman Co., 211 U. S. 562; Dayton v. Stanard, 241 U. S. 588. . . . Thus, while valid liens existing at the time of the commencement of a bankruptcy proceeding are preserved, it is solely within the power of a court of bankruptcy to ascertain their validity and amount and to decree the method of their liquidation. Ex parte City Bank of New Orleans, 3 How. 292; Houston v. City Bank of New Orleans, 6 How. 486; Ray v. Norseworthy, 23 Wall. 128; In re Wilka, supra; Nisbet v. Federal Title & T. Co., 229 Fed. 644.” (Isaacs v. Hobbs Tie & T. Co., 282 U. S. 734, 737, 738. Italics ours.)  The Bank, in its brief upon the appeal, when it was relying upon the point of waiver, stated: “It is an established general rule in bankruptcy law that after an adjudication in bankruptcy, the Bankruptcy court has exclusive jurisdiction to determine all questions involving the bankrupt’s property including the right to determine the extent and character of liens against the bankrupt’s property. It has also been said that the filing of a bankruptcy petition is a caveat to all the world and in effect an attachment and injunction. ’ ’ In passing upon the Bank’s present position we deem it advisable to restate certain salient facts: On November 3, 1947, the Bank filed a complaint in the Circuit court of Cook county against J. W. Council, the complaint alleging that Council was indebted to the Bank by virtue of a certain note dated August 18, 1947, in the principal sum of $7,388.24, which was past due. On the same day, upon an affidavit for attachment, a writ issued to attach any estate or effects of Council, and service of the writ was had 'on Weber Costello Company as garnishee. The affidavit stated that Weber Costello Company “has effects or estate of said defendant [J. W. Council] in its possession, custody or charge. ’ ’ The answer of the garnishee stated: “1. It holds indebtedness in the sum of $4811.28, representing commissions due J. W. Council on account of orders obtained by him and shipped to respective customers; “2. Indebtedness in the sum of $200.25 representing commissions due J. W. Council on account of orders obtained by him and having been shipped and payment having been made therefor after the date of service; “3. Said J. W. Council obtained certain orders for garnishee’s products, shipped to various customers, but payment not made in amount of $192.40. J. W. Council obtained orders which had not been accepted. Goods not shipped and commissions when accepted and shipped total $1372.50.” It is clear from the record that “effects or estate” of J. W. Council reached by the attachment writ were deposited by Weber Costello Company with the clerk of the Circuit court by order of that court. In the “counterclaim” of Weber Costello Company filed December 15, 1947, it alleged that on the date of the service of the writ it was indebted to J. W. Council in the sum of $4,811.28, representing commissions due, and that since the service of the writ it has become indebted to Council in further amounts, and it prayed that it “may be ordered to bring the said sums of money into this court, subject to the further order of the court.” In an order entered March 22,1948, Weber Costello Company was ordered to pay to the clerk of the court the sums it owed J. W. Council. In the “answer” of the Bank to the “counterclaim of Weber Costello Company it admitted that said Company was indebted to J. W. Council as set forth in its “counterclaim. ’ ’ On December 12,1947, which date was within four months of the service of the attachment writ, Council filed his petition in bankruptcy and was adjudicated a bankrupt on December 13,1947. On December 26, 1947, thirteen days after the adjudication in bankruptcy, the Bank filed an “answer” to the “counterclaim,” and as it was then certain that the attachment writ would be quashed upon motion of the Trustee, the Bank in its “answer” abandoned its claim against Council and asserted a claim against Weber Costello Company based upon assignments of commissions executed by Council and accepted by that Company, which agreed to pay the Bank the amounts of the assignments, and the new suit asserted that the assignment is in full force, that Weber Costello Company is indebted to the Bank in the sum of $3,026.86, and the Bank prays for judgment against Weber Costello Company and “that Court order all of assignment paid in the amount of $3026.86.” The Bank contends, and the Trustee asserts, that the “answer” of the Bank was the commencement of an entirely new suit. It follows, of course, that the Circuit court of Cook county could not even claim that it acquired jurisdiction of the subject matter of the new suit until the “answer” of the Bank was filed. It was stipulated that the attachment writ in the case of the Bank against Council was voidable and the trial court was obliged to quash if upon the motion of the Trustee. In the final judgment order the trial court entered a judgment in favor of the Bank and ordered the clerk of the court to pay to the Bank $3,026.86 and costs out of the funds that had been deposited with the clerk by Weber Costello Company by the following order of the court: “. . . that Weber Costello Company pay to the Clerk of the Circuit Court, $5178.68 [the amount Weber Costello Company stated in its 'counterclaim’ that it was indebted to Council] subject to the order of this court.” The amount so deposited was the amount reached by the attachment writ. The trial court recognized that the funds that he ordered Weber Costello Company to deposit with the clerk were funds belonging to the bankrupt, and in the judgment order also ordered ‘ ‘ that the Trustee in Bankruptcy is entitled to receive all funds in the possession of Weber Costello Company in excess of the sum of $3026.86 to he administered hy the Court of his appointment.” Indeed, the trial court in deciding the case recognized that the funds in the possession of the clerk of the court were assets or effects of the bankrupt and stated that although he quashed the attachment writ the court still had possession of the funds and the Bankruptcy Court could not oust the trial court of that jurisdiction. Until the attachment writ was quashed all parties recognized that the funds deposited with the clerk of the court were assets or effects of J. W. Council. It must be noted that the judgment order in the instant case was entered March 23, 1948, three months and ten days after the adjudication in bankruptcy. The answer of the Trustee in Bankruptcy, filed March 2, 1948, alleged that jurisdiction to determine the validity of all liens against the property of Council was exclusively in the Bankruptcy Court in North Carolina. Despite the arguments of the able attorneys for the Bank it clearly appears from the record that the trial court passed upon the validity of the alleged lien of the Bank against the funds deposited with the clerk of the court, held that it was a valid lien, and ordered the claim of the Bank paid out of the said funds. It is our considered judgment that under the record in this case and the law only the Bankruptcy Court could pass upon the validity or invalidity of the alleged lien first asser ted by the Bank in its “answer” to the “counterclaim. ’ ’ We find no good reason why the petition for a rehearing should be allowed, and it is accordingly denied. Petition for rehearing denied.

=== CASE 2207325 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:18.983374+00 ===

208 Cal.App.2d 443 (1962)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
RICHARD M. GALVAN, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 1815.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Dist.
Oct. 11, 1962.
Peter J. Hughes, under appointment by the District Court of Appeal, for Defendant and Appellant.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and Richard S. Cohen, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
STONE, J.  [fn. *]
Defendant was charged by indictment with two counts of sale of narcotics, violation of Health and Safety Code section 11501, and, by a supplement to the indictment, with a prior conviction of a felony. Defendant admitted the prior conviction but pleaded not guilty to each count of the indictment. A jury found him guilty on each count. His motion for a new trial was denied; judgment was entered pursuant to the jury verdict; and he was sentenced to the state prison on each count, the sentences to run concurrently. Defendant has appealed from the judgment and from the denial of his motion for a new trial.
Fernando A. Maldonado was an agent for the Bureau of Narcotic Enforcement of the State of California, doing undercover work in the San Diego area between January and May, 1961. One Effrem Tucker was a "special employee" of the Bureau. Maldonado described a special employee as "a person employed and is paid, in this case was paid $10 per day for giving us information and introducing me to narcotic users and peddlers here in the San Diego area." On March 5 Maldonado, with Tucker as a passenger, parked a state automobile next to a curbing in the San Diego area. Prior to *446 that Tucker had "set-up" a rendezvous at this location with defendant, who was waiting. He approached on the passenger's side, Tucker informed him that he and Maldonado were looking for "stuff," referring to heroin; Maldonado passed Tucker $20 and Tucker handed it to defendant. In return defendant handed four papers to Tucker, who passed them on to Maldonado. The four papers contained heroin. Two days later Maldonado, with Tucker as his passenger, parked his car at the rear of defendant's car on a public street in San Diego. The meeting had been prearranged by Tucker. Defendant walked back to the car, approaching Tucker on the passenger's side. Again Maldonado gave Tucker $20. Tucker passed the money to defendant who, in turn, handed four white papers to Tucker and Tucker passed them to Maldonado. They contained heroin.
Maldonado testified that he masqueraded as a fisherman from San Pedro looking for a source of narcotics; that he enlisted Tucker's aid to make contact with a seller; that Tucker arranged for him to meet defendant. Although the narcotic sales occurred on March 5 and March 7, defendant was not arrested until May 12. The delay in defendant's arrest was occasioned by Maldonado's operations as an undercover agent. His relations with persons trafficking in narcotics required that Maldonado retain his anonymity until May 12.
The record is not clear whether defendant learned of Tucker's identity on May 12, at the time he was arrested, or on May 16, when he was arraigned and served with a transcript of the proceedings before the grand jury. In any event, on May 16 the transcript revealed to defendant that Tucker had acted as an informer. It also revealed that Tucker had been arrested for burglary prior to his participation in the narcotics sales on March 5 and 7; that Tucker pleaded guilty to the charge of burglary; that on March 24, by proceedings in the Superior Court of San Diego County, he was placed on five years' probation; that as a condition of probation Tucker was committed to the United States Public Health Service Hospital in Texas for treatment as a narcotics addict.
Defendant does not challenge the sufficiency of the evidence to prove that the sales were made. His appeal is centered upon his defense of entrapment, his contention being that Tucker furnished him the narcotics and induced him to sell them to Maldonado as a favor. Defendant testified that he simply acted as a "front" for Tucker. This he did after Tucker explained that Maldonado had purchased narcotics *447 from him in the past but that he would not buy from him now because Maldonado claimed the narcotics had been of poor quality. Tucker persuaded defendant to make the sales for him and allay Maldonado's doubts.
[1] It is not denied by the prosecution that defendant's arrest was delayed in order to preserve Maldonado's anonymity. This delay, argues defendant, permitted Tucker to leave California between the time the alleged crimes were committed and the time of defendant's arrest, so that defendant was deprived of a material witness at his trial. This, it is asserted, constitutes suppression of evidence by the prosecution, a denial of due process, and reversible error.
The record reflects that defendant at the time of his arraignment May 16, was aware of the identity and whereabouts of the informer, Tucker. However, the record discloses no effort on the part of defendant to locate Tucker prior to October 4, two days before the trial. Furthermore, defendant cannot in good conscience argue that he was allowed insufficient time to prepare for trial since the trial, which was originally set for July 31, was continued to October 6 at his request.
Defendant relies largely upon the reasoning of the court in People v. Kiihoa, 53 Cal.2d 748 [3 Cal.Rptr. 1, 349 P.2d 673]. The case at bar is distinguishable from the Kiihoa case in three important respects. First, the informer here was not sent out of the state by the police or the prosecution, as in Kiihoa. There was no design by enforcement officers or the prosecution to prevent the informer from appearing as a witness for the defendant. The superior court ordered the informer committed to a federal hospital for narcotics addicts in Texas as one of the conditions of his five- year term of probation.
Second, the delay in defendant's arrest was not for the purpose of preventing his learning the identity of the informer, but to preserve the anonymity of the undercover agent, Maldonado, who was working on other cases. To have arrested defendant and disclosed the identity of the agent would have destroyed the efficacy of preliminary work by the agent with other persons suspected of trafficking in narcotics.
The third distinction is that in Kiihoa when the defendant was arrested the police disclaimed any knowledge of the informer's whereabouts. The police, by design, made it impossible for Kiihoa to locate the informer to seek his assistance in preparing his defense. In the case before us the whereabouts of the informer and his identity were disclosed to *448 defendant. Furthermore the informer, although in a government hospital in the State of Texas, was under the supervision of the San Diego County Probation Office. There is nothing in the record indicating that the informer could not have been subpoenaed pursuant to Penal Code sections 1334 et seq.
The three critical circumstances just related not only distinguish the case at bar from People v. Kiihoa, supra, but they also bring the case within the ambit of People v. Sauceda, 199 Cal.App.2d 47, 56 [18 Cal.Rptr. 452]; People v. Wilburn, 195 Cal.App.2d 702, 705 [16 Cal.Rptr. 97]; People v. Castedy, 194 Cal.App.2d 763, 768 [15 Cal.Rptr. 413]; People v. McKoy, 193 Cal.App.2d 104, 110 [13 Cal.Rptr. 809]; People v. Givens, 191 Cal.App.2d 834, 840 [13 Cal.Rptr. 157]. The rationale of these cases is summarized in People v. Sauceda, supra, page 56, as follows:
"In all of these cases, as in People v. Kiihoa, supra, the suspect was not arrested until after the informant had left the jurisdiction. Yet the cases have uniformly held that in the void of specific testimony that the police encouraged the informer to disappear [as was the case in Kiihoa], the courts cannot infer improper motives or activities on the part of the officers, but must presume that the officers regularly and lawfully performed their duties (People v. Farrara, 46 Cal.2d 265 [294 P.2d 21]), as well as that the payment for and termination of an informer's employment is not in and of itself 'encouraging him to disappear.' (People v. Wilburn, supra.)"
If we understand defendant's argument, it is that intentional delay in making an arrest for the purpose of withholding the identity of an informer, cannot be justified upon the ground of public interest if the delay deprives a defendant of a substantial right. It is apparent that defendant's argument paraphrases the reasoning expressed by the Supreme Court in People v. McShann, 50 Cal.2d 802 [330 P.2d 33]; Priestly v. Superior Court, 50 Cal.2d 812 [330 P.2d 39]; and Mitchell v. Superior Court, 50 Cal.2d 827 [330 P.2d 48]. It cannot be denied that two fundamental judicial concepts, public interest and the right of an accused to defend himself, are here in conflict. However this case is not a suitable vehicle for pursuing the interesting question of when the right of an accused to defend himself outweighs public interest in delaying an arrest to protect an informer, because defendant has made no showing that by the exercise of a reasonable *449 amount of effort he could not have secured the presence of the informer as a witness. Defendant's own lack of due diligence contributed largely to the circumstance about which he now complains. The record reveals no excuse for the failure to attempt to locate and subpoena the informer pursuant to Penal Code sections 1334 et seq., nor does defendant's brief offer any explanation for this neglect. [2] Also it follows from defendant's failure to make a showing of due diligence that it was not error to deny his request for a continuance in order to locate the informer. (People v. McShann, 177 Cal.App.2d 195, 200 [2 Cal.Rptr. 71].)
[3] The foregoing discussion of defendant's first ground of appeal disposes of his second contention that the court erred in denying his offer of proof concerning his efforts to locate the informer. The trial court was justified in not permitting this evidence to go to the jury because the offer of proof showed, in addition to the facts hereinabove set forth, that the subpoenas secured two days before the trial were issued to agencies which had no control over the informer. Counsel for defendant had knowledge that the informer was under the supervision of the probation office, yet he had subpoenas issued in care of the State Bureau of Narcotics, and in care of San Diego Police Department Narcotics Detail. Each agency returned the subpoena, denying knowledge of Tucker's whereabouts. Thus defendant's offer of proof failed to support his charge that the prosecution was guilty of willful suppression of evidence.
[4] Likewise defendant's failure to make an adequate offer of proof that there was suppression of evidence negates his argument that the court erred by refusing to give his instruction on the subject. Defendant offered the following:
"Defendant's Requested Instruction No. 6 If the evidence demonstrates that a witness could give material and relevant testimony on the issues in question and that the ability to have such a witness available at trial was within the control of one of the parties but such witness was not called to testify, then you may infer that if such witness were called to testify, that he or she would give testimony adverse to the side failing to call such witness."
The court chose to give CALJIC No. 23, which reads:
"Neither the prosecution nor the defense is required to call as witnesses all persons who are shown to have been present at any of the events involved in the evidence, or who *450 may appear to have some knowledge of the matters in question in this trial; nor is the prosecution or defense required to produce as exhibits all objects or documents that have been referred to in the testimony, or the existence of which may have been suggested by the evidence."
We believe defendant's argument is untenable, first, because his instruction assumes that Tucker was within the control of the prosecution. The instruction recites "that the ability to have such a witness available at trial was within the control of one of the parties. ..." The evidence does not support this assumption. Second, defendant's argument presupposes that it was the duty of the prosecution to call the informer as a witness. [5] The prevailing rule is stated in People v. Kiihoa, supra, page 752, as follows:
"The prosecution is not required to call any particular witness, nor to put on all the evidence relating to a charge so long as all material evidence bearing thereon is fairly presented in such a manner as to accord to the defendant a fair trial. (People v. Tuthill, 31 Cal.2d 92, 98 [187 P.2d 16]; People v. Parry, 105 Cal.App.2d 319 [232 P.2d 899].)"
(See also People v. McShann, supra, 177 Cal.App.2d 195, 199; People v. Castedy, supra, 194 Cal.App.2d 763, 769.)
[6] And again in Kiihoa, page 752, the Supreme Court said:
"The denial by the prosecution of an opportunity for the defendant to seek out the informer and to defend by these means, where the testimony of the informer would be material to the issues, is unfair and oppressive to the defendant, and deprives him of due process of law. (See Roviaro v. United States, 353 U.S. 53, 63-64 [77 S.Ct. 623, 1 L.Ed.2d 639]; People v. McShann, supra, 50 Cal.2d 802, 809, 810.)" (Emphasis added.)
Defendant failed to take advantage of his opportunity to seek out the informer. As we have noted, defendant put off subpoenaing Tucker until two days before the trial, although he had both ample time to locate him and the means of compelling his attendance by following the procedure provided by Penal Code sections 1334 et seq. Furthermore, the tardy attempt to subpoena Tucker was misdirected and inadequate. Defendant cannot avoid the consequences of his failure to seek out the informer when he had the opportunity to do so, and likewise he cannot shift to the prosecution the burden of calling the informer as a witness for the defense.
[7] Defendant's final contention is that the court erred *451 in instructing the jury on his defense of entrapment because insufficient emphasis was placed on the role of persons other than law enforcement officers. The court gave CALJIC Instructions 851 and 854, as follows:
"The law does not tolerate a person, particularly a law enforcement officer, generating in the mind of a person who is innocent of any criminal purpose, the original intent to commit a crime thus entrapping such person into the commission of a crime which he would not have committed or even contemplated but for such inducement; and where a crime is committed as a consequence of such entrapment, no conviction may be had of the person so entrapped as his acts do not constitute a crime."
"If the intent to commit the crime did not originate with the defendant and he was not carrying out his own criminal purpose, but the crime was suggested by another person acting with the purpose of entrapping and causing the arrest of the defendant, then the defendant is not criminally liable for the acts so committed."
"It is important in considering the defense of entrapment to ascertain whether the acts charged as constituting the offense were the result of the intent of some other person to place the accused in a position where he might be charged with the offense, in which event the defendant may not be convicted or whether the defendant, acting in pursuance of his own intent, committed the acts, such other person merely affording him the opportunity of doing so, in which latter event the defense of entrapment would not relieve the defendant from responsibility."
In our opinion the foregoing instructions completely and adequately cover the defense of entrapment, including a situation where a person other than a law enforcement officer is involved. We find no merit in appellant's contention that the court erred in refusing to give his proffered instruction, which reads as follows:
"Defendant's Requested Instruction No. 7 In order to make the defense of entrapment available to a defendant, the person doing the entrapping need not be a law enforcement officer. If the offense was suggested by another person with the purpose of entrapping and causing the arrest of the defendant, then the defendant is not criminally liable for the acts committed, whether or not this other person was a law enforcement officer." *452
The substance of defendant's proposed instruction is fully covered by the two instructions which were given. A court is not bound to give a particular instruction submitted by a party simply because it is applicable to the case. Appropriate instructions may be selected by the court from those submitted by the parties, or the court may use its own instructions, provided the instructions given by the court embrace and fairly state all points of law on all the material elements of the case. (People v. Clark, 116 Cal.App.2d 219, 224 [253 P.2d 510]; People v. Latona, 2 Cal.2d 714, 727 [43 P.2d 260]; People v. Young, 70 Cal.App.2d 28 [160 P.2d 132]; 2 Witkin, California Procedure,  52(b), p. 1780.)
The judgment and the order denying motion for new trial are affirmed.
Griffin, P. J., and Coughlin, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

=== CASE 2207438 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:19.877146+00 ===

405 Ill. 460 (1950)
91 N.E.2d 401
MATHILDA JOHNSTON, individually and as executrix, Appellee,
v.
THE CITY OF EAST MOLINE, Appellant.
No. 31298.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed March 22, 1950.
*461 BEN A. STEWART, and ROY H. GLOCKHOFF, both of East Moline, for appellant.
EAGLE & EAGLE, of Rock Island, for appellee.
Judgments affirmed.
Mr. JUSTICE SIMPSON delivered the opinion of the court:
Leave to appeal having been granted, the appellant, the city of East Moline, is asking that we reverse two judgments against it, one in favor of Matilda Johnston, individually, and one in her favor as executrix of the estate of Dr. James P. Johnston, deceased. The judgments were obtained in the circuit court of Rock Island County and affirmed by the Appellate Court. Motions for directed verdict and for judgment notwithstanding the verdict were made by appellant in the lower court but were denied. There was another defendant below but a severance was granted and the case proceeded against appellant, alone.
The principal point urged for determination is whether or not the municipality, in the construction, maintenance *462 and operation of automatic electric traffic signals, was engaged in a governmental function or in a corporate or proprietary one. The appellant contends it is not liable because the acts and omissions complained of occurred in the exercise of its governmental functions, whereas the respondent takes the view that the city was engaged in corporate duties for which it must respond in damages for its negligent conduct. Appellant also contends that the negligence alleged was not the proximate cause of the injury.
February 23, 1945, a collision between two automobiles resulting in the injuries complained of occurred at the intersection of Seventh Street and Seventeenth Avenue in the city of East Moline. At this point the former street runs north and south while the other runs east and west. Since 1928 the traffic moving over this intersection in both directions has been controlled by electric automatic traffic signals which displayed at regular intervals red, amber and green lights. Traffic lights were located on each corner of the intersection.
February 18, 1945, a standard supporting the traffic lights on the northwest corner of the intersection was knocked down and broken, taking it entirely out of operation. The city hall was but a short distance away and officers of the city learned that the standard was rendered useless soon after the occurrence and a record thereof was made. The standard was not replaced until March 3, following, although the city ordered the repairs promptly. The other three sets of signals were permitted to operate during the time the northwest signal was gone, but no control was exercised over the traffic moving west on Seventeenth Avenue, being that which the absent signal would have controlled.
February 23, 1945, at about 10:00 P.M., Matilda Johnston and her husband, the deceased, were riding south on Seventh Street in East Moline. He was driving the automobile *463 and as they approached the intersection of Seventh Street with Seventeenth Avenue the traffic signal controlling their movement turned green and was still green as they entered the intersection traveling at about twenty miles per hour. The standard on the northwest corner, prior to its destruction, faced the east and controlled the traffic traveling west on Seventeenth Avenue. The standard on the southwest corner faces north and controls traffic going south on Seventh Street. A visor over each of the reflectors throws the light out into the street it faces but obscures the light to one traveling at right angles on the intersecting street.
Seventeenth Avenue is a main street through the city and carries a heavy volume of traffic, the westbound of which was without signal control at this intersection while the northwest standard was out of operation. From February 18 to the time of the accident in question a number of minor accidents occurred at this intersection and a number of collisions were narrowly avoided.
Immediately before the accident in question an automobile owned by Lester Thompson, driven by his son James L. Thompson, was proceeding west on Seventeenth Avenue. As it approached the intersection with Seventh Street there was no signal whatever controlling traffic in that direction. It entered the intersection at a speed of approximately twenty-five miles per hour, the driver not seeing the car of the deceased until it was too late to avoid a collision. The right front of the Thompson car came in contact with the left front of the Johnston car, throwing Johnston to the pavement. As he lay there unconscious another car, traveling west on Seventeenth Avenue, with no signals controlling its movement, ran through the intersection and across both of Johnston's legs. He died June 10, 1945, as a result of the injuries received in this collision.
It will be seen from the above that the deceased was, by the green light controlling his movement, invited into *464 and through the intersection without any effort being made by appellant to protect him from cross traffic. During the five and one-half days prior to the accident all like traffic moving over this intersection was subjected to the same hazard. It was indeed probable, under the conditions existing at this intersection during that period, that collisions would occur. The city was charged with knowledge of this fact but did nothing to cure the evil. As was said by the Appellate Court in its affirming opinion: "It was only a question of time under the conditions which the municipality permitted to exist at this intersection, until a serious accident happened."
We believe it was negligence for appellant to leave this intersection partly controlled and partly uncontrolled by traffic signals in the manner it did and that its negligence was the proximate cause of the injury. We said in Neering v. Illinois Central Railroad Co. 383 Ill. 366: "What constitutes proximate cause has been defined in numerous decisions, and there is practically no difference of opinion as to what the rule is. The injury must be the natural and probable result of the negligent act or omission and be of such a character as an ordinarily prudent person ought to have foreseen as likely to occur as a result of the negligence, although it is not essential that the person charged with negligence should have foreseen the precise injury which resulted from his act." The same rule is announced in Illinois Central Railroad Co. v. Oswald, 338 Ill. 270, and in Hartnett v. Boston Store, 265 Ill. 331.
An intervening and efficient cause is a new and independent force which breaks the causal connection between the original wrong and the injury and itself becomes the direct and immediate cause of the injury. (Pullman Palace Car Co. v. Laack, 143 Ill. 242; Illinois Central Railroad Co. v. Oswald, 338 Ill. 270.) The intervention of independent concurrent or intervening forces will not break causal connection if the intervention of such forces was, *465 itself, probable or foreseeable. Sycamore Preserve Works v. Chicago and Northwestern Railway Co. 366 Ill. 11; Wintersteen v. National Cooperage and Woodenware Co. 361 Ill. 95; Garibaldi & Cuneo v. O'Connor, 210 Ill. 284; Armour v. Golkowska, 202 Ill. 144.
Can the city evade responsibility for this injury on the theory that its acts and omissions were in the exercise of its governmental function? There is no controversy concerning the material facts as above enumerated. A municipality is not liable in damages for injuries to persons resulting from the negligence of its agents and servants while in the exercise of its governmental functions, (LePitre v. Chicago Park Dist. 374 Ill. 184; Gebhardt v. Village of LaGrange Park, 354 Ill. 234,) but it is equally well settled that a municipality is liable for the negligence of its servants in the exercise of its corporate duties as distinguished from governmental functions. Gravander v. City of Chicago, 399 Ill. 381; Roumbos v. City of Chicago, 332 Ill. 70; Hanrahan v. City of Chicago, 289 Ill. 400; City of Chicago v. Seben, 165 Ill. 371.
There was no statute requiring appellant to construct and maintain automatic signal devices at the intersection in question. (Cahill Illinois Rev. Stat. 1927, chap. 95a, secs. 26 and 33, pars. 27 and 34; Ill. Rev. Stat. 1943, chap. 95 1/2, sec. 30, par. 127.) Its action in this connection was voluntary. It had the power to provide for them if in its discretion they were necessary, but it was not required to do so. There is no claim that appellant was negligent in the exercise of its discretion to provide such system, or in the original construction of it. Whether in those matters it was in the exercise of a governmental function or a corporate duty is not, therefore, before us. The question of what the city did or permitted at the intersection, in the matter of controlling or not controlling traffic after the northwest standard was removed, is before us, and whether or not its acts and omissions in that regard *466 were in the exercise of a governmental function or a corporate duty must be decided.
As early as City of Chicago v. Powers, 42 Ill. 169, the principle was recognized that where a municipality undertakes to protect a street or bridge by lights it is liable for negligence if it does it in an insufficient manner. In City of Freeport v. Isbell, 83 Ill. 440, the same principle is enunciated and the Powers case is cited, the court saying with reference to it: "In the case referred to, the city had lighted a certain bridge where the accident occurred, as well as the street; but the injury arose from the fact that the light furnished by the city was insufficient to afford proper protection." In the Isbell case the city had omitted to light a portion of the street. It was held not liable but the court said: "In this case, if the city of Freeport, under the power conferred by the charter, had assumed to light the street where the accident occurred, but had exercised the power in a negligent manner, and had failed, in the exercise of the power, to furnish lights sufficient to afford proper security from danger, a different rule would prevail, and the rule announced in the case cited [Powers case] would govern."
A municipal corporation acts judicially or exercises discretion when it selects and adopts a plan in the making of public improvements, but as soon as it begins to carry out that plan it acts ministerially and is bound to see that the work is done in a reasonably safe and skillful manner. Johnston v. City of Chicago, 258 Ill. 494; City of Chicago v. Seben, 165 Ill. 371; 4 Dillon on Mun. Corp. (5th ed.) sec. 1741.
A rule determining when a municipality is exercising a public or governmental function as distinguished from a strictly corporate duty is difficult to formulate. It has been said more than once that all that can be done with safety is to determine each case as it arises. See Johnston v. City of Chicago, 258 Ill. 494, 497, wherein is cited *467 Lloyd v. New York, 5 N.Y. 369, and Cobb v. Dalton, 53 Ga. 426. In the Johnston case the city was held liable for negligence of a driver of an automobile hired by the library board which was part of the city government and who at the time of the accident was conveying books from one library building to another along the streets of Chicago. On page 497 of that opinion, the court, speaking through Mr. Justice Carter, said: "It is frequently stated that to determine whether there is municipal responsibility the inquiry must be whether the particular agents or servants for whose acts of negligence it is sought to hold the corporation are its agents and servants for the performance of a public duty imposed by law, or merely for the carrying out of private functions which are for its special benefit or advantage. [Citations.]" In the same case it was said that the mere fact that a particular work may incidentally benefit the public does not necessarily exempt the city from liability for torts committed by its employees.
It appears that appellant was specially benefited by the signal system, along with the public generally. The evidence shows that Seventeenth Avenue carried heavy traffic. The traffic on Seventh Street was also heavy and consisted mainly of travel between the business and residence districts of the city. It no doubt was difficult to enter or cross Seventeenth Avenue at the intersection. Being unable to cross readily, traffic would necessarily accumulate and congest in the city streets, whereas if it were intermittently protected in its movements across Seventeenth Avenue the congestion would not occur in so great volume. Congestion of automobile traffic in a street may lead to delay, inconvenience and damage to citizens.
We said in Roumbos v. City of Chicago, 332 Ill. 70, that it has always been the doctrine of this court that while the legal obligation of the city to construct gutters and sewers is one which is voluntarily assumed, yet, having assumed the obligation and constructed these improvements *468 for the benefit of the public, it then becomes the duty of the city to see that they are kept in repair. That same principle applies here. In the Roumbos case the city was held liable for the negligence of a street cleaner who set fire to a pile of rubbish and negligently left it burning without watching it and the flames blew across the sidewalk, igniting the clothing of a child causing her death. It was also stated in that case that the care of streets and sidewalks, lighting and maintenance, have always been held in this State to be the corporate functions of the municipality, and that the municipality has been held liable for the negligence of its employees in the performance of those functions which has resulted in injury to others. Appellant having elected to install, and having installed the signal system in question, it was a corporate duty not to permit its operation in a manner calculated to cause injury to others. In permitting the signal lights on the three corners of the intersection to operate while those at the northwest corner were completely out of service it failed to perform a corporate duty.
Appellant cites cases in many foreign jurisdictions where municipalities have avoided liability under similar facts because the acts complained of were held to have occurred in the exercise of a governmental function. Most of the cited cases are set forth in the opinion of the Appellate Court (338 Ill. App. 220,) and it will not be necessary for us to cite any of them here. A majority of the decisions of other States seem to uphold appellant's position. Justice and reason, however, impel us to the conclusion that after the signal system in question was constructed and in operation, the keeping of it in such condition that it would not inevitably be hazardous and invite citizens into danger was a corporate duty, for the failure of which liability was incurred.
In our opinion, both the circuit and the Appellate courts were right in their decisions and the judgments are affirmed.
Judgments affirmed.

=== CASE 2207442 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:19.899688+00 ===

79 A.2d 920 (1951)
JENNINGS
v.
JENNINGS.
M. P. No. 974.
Supreme Court of Rhode Island.
April 9, 1951.
Harlow & Boudreau, Providence, for petitioner.
John G. Murphy, James J. Corrigan, Providence, for respondent.
BAKER, Justice.
This is a petition by a husband for a writ of certiorari seeking to have this court review and quash an order, entered by the superior court on motion of the wife as petitioner in a divorce proceeding pending in that court, granting her an allowance for her support pendente lite, to be paid by him. We did not order the writ to issue but the instant hearing was in pursuance of our citation that he show cause why the writ should issue.
In the sworn petition it is alleged among other things that at the hearing in the superior court on the above motion it appeared from the testimony of the instant respondent, hereinafter referred to as the wife, that shortly before such hearing she received the sum of $3,250 in satisfaction of a certain claim against an estate; that she possessed securities of the then value of approximately $13,000; and that she owned and lived in a house containing several apartments from which she derived a substantial *921 rental. The petitioner herein, called the husband, also alleged in substance in his petition as grounds for the issuance of the writ that in entering the order in question the superior court acted in excess of its jurisdiction, abused its discretion, and was arbitrary and oppressive in its decision.
It appears that the wife's motion before the superior court was in the usual form and asked for an allowance for her support pendente lite and for counsel and witness fees. However, at the hearing in that court only the request for an allowance for her support was pressed. The matter of counsel and witness fees was expressly withdrawn and they were not ordered. Further, the husband does not contend that he is not financially able to pay his wife the weekly amount ordered by the court as such allowance. The principal point urged by him in support of the present petition is that the superior court acted in excess of its jurisdiction in entering the order in question. Since that contention raises chiefly a question of law it will not be necessary at this time to refer in detail to the facts of the case.
It is not disputed that proceedings in divorce are statutory in nature. This court has held that an order for alimony, meaning allowances for support pendente lite, is included within the provisions of what is now general laws 1938, chapter 416, § 14. Grattage v. Superior Court, 42 R.I. 546, 109 A. 86. The court in that and other cited cases reached such conclusion by adopting the uniform and broad construction of that section which the bench and bar had placed thereon in practice for a considerable number of years, rather than a strict and literal construction of the exact language appearing in such section. In accordance with the above holding the husband does not question the fact that the superior court had jurisdiction under § 14 in a proper case to enter an order granting an allowance for support pendente lite. However, he does maintain that in the present circumstances the superior court acted in excess of its jurisdiction in entering such an order since it appeared in evidence that his wife had a substantial amount of property of her own, as is set out in the petition now before us.
The material part of § 14 reads as follows: "The said court * * * may in its discretion make such allowance to the wife, out of the estate of the husband, for the purpose of enabling her to prosecute or defend against any such petition for divorce or separate maintenance, in case she has no property of her own available for such purpose, as it may think reasonable and proper * * *."
The husband urges that the words "in case she has no property of her own available for such purpose" in the above section should be construed as applying to the making of an order for support pendente lite for his wife. We are unable to agree with that contention. In our judgment the "purpose" therein mentioned refers to the making of an order in favor of the wife "for the purpose of enabling her to prosecute or defend against any such petition for divorce or separate maintenance." In other words, the existence in the wife of available property sets up a condition ordinarily preventing the granting of her motion for attorney's and witnesses' fees and such other expenses as may directly bear upon her ability to prosecute or defend against proceedings of the nature described. However, it does not necessarily prevent the granting of a motion for an allowance for her support pendente lite, which rests upon a fundamentally different basis.
Cases from other jurisdictions are not controlling in determining the issue before us, because in Grattage v. Superior Court, supra, we have a case in which the petitioner questioned the validity of an order in divorce proceedings making, among other things, an allowance pendente lite for the support of his wife. In that connection the court at page 551 of its opinion stated that in the divorce proceeding "the respondent was ordered to fulfill an obligation imposed upon him by law, namely, to provide for the support of his wife." It therefore appears that the court was not necessarily depending entirely on *922 the above-mentioned statute for its authority to order, pending the hearing, an allowance for support of the wife which was the husband's legal obligation apart from such statute.
Nor is the instant case governed by Sanford v. Sanford, 2 R.I. 64, cited to us by the husband. It appears that the pertinent statute respecting allowances was not similar to the one now in force; that the court in denying petitioner's motion treated it as one asking for an allowance to defray her expenses in carrying on her suit; and that the court's reference to the wife's dower interest was clearly dicta. In our opinion the husband in the instant case has not established, merely by showing that his wife had a substantial amount of property of her own, that in the circumstances the superior court acted in excess of its jurisdiction as a matter of law when it made the order of which he complains.
Generally an order for support pendente lite rests in the sound discretion of the court and will be determined according to the circumstances of each particular case. If the wife has income of her own that circumstance is a factor which the court ought to consider in deciding the amount, if any, which should be allowed her. However, the mere fact that the wife has property in her own right will not in itself prevent the entry of an order allowing her support pendente lite, and it is not necessary that she impair the capital of her own separate estate before asking for allowance for temporary support from her husband. 17 Am.Jur., Divorce and Separation, §§ 539, 545, pp. 435, 439.
In the instant case the wife explained how she spent the greater part of the money she had received from her claim against the estate hereinbefore mentioned. She testified regarding the taxes on her house, the cost of furnishing heat and other conveniences to her tenants, and the fact that some apartments had been vacant for a considerable time. There was also evidence that the husband had for a number of years, while the parties voluntarily had been living apart, paid her a weekly allowance which was the same amount allowed herein by the superior court. The wife testified that she needed this sum for her maintenance pendente lite. In view of the circumstances thus appearing in her evidence we cannot say that the superior court in making its decision on the motion in question abused its discretion or acted in an arbitrary manner. On the whole record we are of the opinion that the petitioner has failed to show cause why the writ of certiorari should issue.
The petition is denied and dismissed.

=== CASE 9736808 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:07:17.018865+00 ===

T. G. Kavanagh, J.
On April 9, 1985, a Mecosta Circuit Court jury convicted defendant of delivery of more than fifty grams but less than 225 grams of a mixture containing cocaine, MCL 333.7401(1) and (2)(a)(iii); MSA 14.15(7401X1) and (2)(a)(iii). Thereafter, defendant was sentenced to thirteen years, four months to twenty years of imprisonment. On March 25, 1987, a panel of this Court reversed defendant’s conviction and remanded the instant action for a new trial. People v Nixten, 160 *97Mich App 203; 408 NW2d 77 (1987). On remand, defendant pled guilty to delivery of less than fifty grams of a mixture containing cocaine, MCL 333.7401(1) and (2)(a)(iv); MSA 14.15(7401X1) and (2)(a)(iv), and was sentenced to eight to twenty years of imprisonment. Subsequently, defendant moved to withdraw his plea and for resentencing. The circuit court denied his withdrawal request, but granted his sentencing request. On July 29, 1988, defendant was resentenced to seven years, eleven months and twenty-eight days to twenty years of imprisonment. He appeals as of right. We remand for resentencing.
Defendant argues that the prosecution breached the plea agreement. A trial court is not bound by any sentencing agreement negotiated between a defendant and the prosecution. People v Killebrew, 416 Mich 189, 207; 330 NW2d 834 (1982). However, once a trial court accepts a plea which was induced by such an agreement, the terms of that agreement must be fulfilled. Santobello v New York, 404 US 257, 262; 92 S Ct 495; 30 L Ed 2d 427 (1971). Where the agreement is subsequently breached, a reviewing court has discretion to choose between vacating the plea or ordering specific performance, with defendant’s choice of remedy accorded considerable weight. People v Peters, 128 Mich App 292, 295; 340 NW2d 317 (1983).
In the instant case, defendant pled guilty in exchange for a reduction in the charged offense and a promise that "the People will recommend that the minimum sentence in this case not exceed eight years.” The prosecution did not honor its promise and make the aforementioned general sentencing recommendation at the July 29, 1988, resentencing proceeding. Instead, the prosecution recommended, and the sentencing court adopted, a specific minimum sentence of "7 years, 11 months, *9828 days.” This latter recommendation violates the agreement, if not in letter then certainly in spirit.
In In re Valle, 364 Mich 471, 477-478; 110 NW2d 673 (1961), our Supreme Court stated:
If the evidence establishes that the prosecutor or the judge has made a statement which fairly interpreted by the defendant (in our case of foreign extraction and with only an eighth-grade education, presumably in court for the first time) is a promise of leniency, and the assurance is unfulfilled, the plea may be withdrawn and the case proceed to trial.
We believe that, when the prosecution stated on the record at the plea hearing that defendant’s plea was induced in part by a promise that "the People will recommend that the minimum sentence in this case not exceed eight years,” defendant could have fairly interpreted this statement to mean that the prosecution would stand before the sentencing court and state: "The People recommend that the minimum sentence not exceed eight years.” Such a general sentencing recommendation permits the sentencing court to infer that it could impose any minimum sentence between one year and eight years, including a minimum sentence that fell within the applicable guidelines range, in this case within the range of thirty to forty-two months, and by doing so impose a sentence compatible with the prosecution’s recommendation. Put another way, a general recommendation of this nature leaves the sentencing court’s discretion to impose any minimum sentence less than eight years unfettered by any suggestion of a specific sentence made by the prosecution. Accordingly, we conclude that defendant could have reasonably interpreted the prosecution’s promise as one of leniency, leaving open the possibility of the *99imposition of a minimum sentence significantly less than eight years. Given that the prosecution recommended a specific sentence, and that the sentencing court adopted that sentence recommendation, we conclude that the prosecution’s action unnecessarily restricted the court’s discretion and left unfulfilled the prosecution’s assurance of leniency. The sentencing agreement was breached. However, because defendant is not asserting his innocence and is merely complaining that the prosecution did not keep its part of the bargain, we find that specific performance is the appropriate remedy. People v Kenneth Johnson, 122 Mich App 26, 29-30; 329 NW2d 520 (1982). We remand for resentencing before a different judge. People v Evans, 156 Mich App 68, 72; 401 NW2d 312 (1986).
Remanded. We do not retain jurisdiction.
Cavanagh, P.J., concurred.

=== CASE 2207733 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:22.846796+00 ===

431 Pa. Super. 194 (1994)
636 A.2d 196
Michael S. KRICHTEN and Doris M. Krichten, Appellants,
v.
Melanie A. WOLPERT, Appellee.
Superior Court of Pennsylvania.
Argued November 8, 1993.
Filed January 13, 1994.
*195 Thomas P. Lang, York, for appellants.
Donald B. Hoyt, York, for appellee.
Before WIEAND, OLSZEWSKI and POPOVICH, JJ.
*196 OLSZEWSKI, Judge:
Michael and Doris Krichten appeal from the judgment of the lower court denying their petition for delay damages. We affirm.
On January 19, 1989, appellee Melanie Wolpert lost control of her car and struck Michael Krichten who was working in a pipeline ditch adjacent to the road. Krichten was severely injured in the accident. On March 21, 1989, appellants filed a negligence action against Wolpert. On November 13, 1989, following an evaluation of the Krichtens' claims, Wolpert made a written offer of settlement equal to the policy limits of her automobile insurance coverage. Wolpert's insurance policy limits were $15,000 per person/$30,000 per accident. Appellants rejected the settlement offer and, on December 2, 1992, the case went to trial. After a two-day trial, the jury returned a verdict in favor of appellants in the amount of $250,000. On December 10, 1992, appellants filed a timely petition for delay damages under Pa.R.C.P. 238. This petition was supplemented by a subsequent petition filed on March 12, 1993. On May 20, 1993, the trial court denied appellants' petition.
The sole issue we need to consider is whether the trial court erred in denying appellants' petition for delay damages. In Berry v. Anderson, 348 Pa.Super. 618, 502 A.2d 717 (1986), this Court held that "a plaintiff shall not be awarded damages for delay pursuant to Pa.R.C.P. 238 after the date of the defendant's offer when the court determines that because of the defendant's indigency, the offer was the full amount available for payment of the plaintiff's claim and it was impossible for the defendant to have offered more." Id. at 627, 502 A.2d at 722. It is not disputed that within a year of the accident appellee made a written settlement offer of her policy limits. The trial court found that appellee was indigent and that she had no assets other than her insurance coverage. Consequently, the trial court ruled that, under Berry, delay damages could not be awarded against appellee even if her settlement offer was inadequate under Rule 238.
*197 Appellants argue that the trial court erred in finding that appellee is indigent under Rule 238. They contend that appellee possesses a viable bad faith cause of action against her insurance carrier, based upon its conduct in the handling of this case. Appellants argue that the claim should have been treated as an asset because it could be assigned to appellants, or appellee could pursue it to judgment and thereby create a pool of funds from the claim. We find this contention meritless.
A trial court's determination that a defendant is indigent under Rule 238 will not be reversed absent an abuse of discretion. Krysmalski by Krysmalski v. Tarasovich, 424 Pa.Super. 121, 622 A.2d 298 (1993). We find no abuse of discretion. Appellants were willing to stipulate to appellee's indigency with the exception that they considered the bad faith claim an asset. Consequently, the only issue is whether the trial court should have considered the alleged bad faith claim an asset. First, it is pure speculation that appellee may have a bad faith claim against her insurance carrier. Whether appellee has a viable bad faith claim against her insurance carrier is a matter for another day, since the carrier is not a party to this lawsuit. See Id. at 139, 622 A.2d at 308; see also Hall v. Brown, 363 Pa.Super. 415, 420, 526 A.2d 413, 416 (1987) ("A finding that delay damages are due is fundamentally different from a determination that an insurer acted in bad faith."). We refuse to assess delay damages against a defendant on the basis of mere speculation.
Moreover, we find that appellee acted within the spirit of Rule 238. There is no dispute that when appellee made her settlement offer, she offered all of her available assets. Even if appellee presently has a viable bad faith claim, it had not yet accrued at the time she made her offer. Clearly we cannot hold appellee responsible for not anticipating that a bad faith claim might accrue. Lastly, we note that our decision does not bar appellants from pursuing a bad faith claim, on an assignment from appellee, against appellee's insurance carrier.
Appellants also argue that Berry should not apply to cases in which defendant or, in the context of automobile *198 accidents, defendant's insurance carrier, has not negotiated in good faith. We find it unnecessary, however, to decide whether such an exception should be carved from Berry. Assuming arguendo that such an exception should exist, we find that it would not apply here. Appellants have not demonstrated that appellee's insurance carrier negotiated in bad faith. Appellants claim the insurance carrier negotiated in bad faith because the insurance carrier did not offer appellee's policy limits until eight months after the accident. We note, however, that under Rule 238 appellee had a grace period of one year in which to make her offer. Rule 238 provides a grace period to defendants so that they may have an opportunity to investigate and evaluate an action before the damages for delay begin to run, thereby increasing the chances of an appropriate settlement. Explanatory Note, Pa.R.C.P. 238, 42 Pa.C.S.A. We refuse to find that a defendant's decision to use this grace period constitutes bad faith, per se.[1]
Judgment affirmed.
POPOVICH, J., concurs in the result.
NOTES
[1]  We also note that appellants seek delay damages for the period of two and one-half years. Even if appellee's eight-month delay in making her offer was due to bad faith, we would still not award delay damages for two and one-half years. At most, appellants would only be entitled to delay damages for the eight months of delay.

=== CASE 2207736 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:22.899514+00 ===

271 Cal. App. 2d 292 (1969)
CITY OF LOS ANGELES, Petitioner,
v.
THE SUPERIOR COURT OF LOS ANGELES COUNTY, Respondent; DOROTHEA E. BOYDSTON, Real Party in Interest.
Civ. No. 34034.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Five.
Mar. 28, 1969.
Roger Arnebergh, City Attorney, and Stephen R. Powers, Deputy City Attorney, for Petitioner.
No appearance for Respondent.
Shapiro, Finn, O'Leno and Harry E. Risnick for Real Party in Interest.
ALARCON, J. pro tem.  [fn. *]
The petitioner has filed for a writ of mandate to require the Superior Court for Los Angeles to vacate its order denying the motion of the City of Los Angeles for a dismissal of the action pending in that court, entitled Dorothea E. Boydston v. The City of Los Angeles, a municipal corporation, superior court number NWC 3942. *294
The real party in interest, Dorothea Boydston, filed a complaint in the respondent superior court on February 11, 1964, to recover damages for personal injuries. The complaint alleges that the plaintiff was injured on February 12, 1963, by tripping and falling due to the negligence of the City of Los Angeles in failing to warn her of the existence of certain excavations, defects, and other disfigurations in the street, which was then under repair. The petitioner was served on February 14, 1964, and its answer was filed on February 25, 1964.
On November 22, 1968, the petitioner served and filed a motion pursuant to section 583 of the Code of Civil Procedure for a dismissal of the action for a failure to bring the case to trial within two years after the date of the commencement of the action.
Petitioner's motion was heard and denied by the respondent superior court on December 3, 1968. The real party in interest did not file or submit any points and authorities, nor any affidavit in opposition to the motion for a dismissal.
The petitioner contends that the respondent superior court abused its discretion in denying the motion to dismiss in that the record before the court showed that over four years and nine months had elapsed without a trial since the date the action was filed.
[1] Section 583 of the Code of Civil Procedure, insofar as it is pertinent to this matter, provides in part: "The court may in its discretion dismiss any action for want of prosecution on motion of the defendant and after due notice to the plaintiff, whenever the plaintiff has failed for two years after action is filed to bring said action to trial ..."
This statute requires the trial judge to exercise his discretion to grant or deny the defendant's motion to dismiss if the plaintiff has failed to have the trial of his action commence within two years of the filing of the complaint. However, the exercise of this discretion is not free from appellate review if it has been abused. The trial judge may not act arbitrarily or capriciously in exercising his discretion. His decision must be governed by a consideration of existing legal principles and by the drawing of appropriate analogies to existing case law. (Raggio v. Southern Pac. Co., 181 Cal. 472 [185 P. 171].) Such discretion must be exercised in such a manner as to further, not defeat, the ends of justice. (Knight v. Pacific Gas & Elec. Co., 178 Cal. App. 2d 923 [3 Cal. Rptr. 600].)
[2] It is the policy of the law that every person who has a *295 justiciable claim should have his day in court and a trial on the merits. (Black Bros. Co. v. Superior Court, 265 Cal. App. 2d 501 [71 Cal. Rptr. 344].) However, it is also the policy of the law that the defendant in a civil action is entitled to a speedy disposition of the claim against him so that he may prepare his defense when the evidence is still available and witnesses' memories are fresh. (General Motors Corp. v. Superior Court of Los Angeles County, 65 Cal. 2d 88 [52 Cal. Rptr. 460, 416 P.2d 492].)
[3] Section 583 requires that the plaintiff use due diligence to prosecute his action within two years of the filing of his complaint. (Geiger v. Aetna Ins. Co., 243 Cal. App. 2d 235 [52 Cal. Rptr. 212]. See also McKenzie v. Albaeck, 219 Cal. App. 2d 97 [32 Cal. Rptr. 762].) If the evidence shows that the plaintiff has failed to exercise due diligence or fails to make a showing of excusable delay, it is an abuse of discretion for the trial judge to deny a defendant's motion to dismiss for want of prosecution within two years. (Breckenridge v. Mason, 256 Cal. App. 2d 121 [64 Cal. Rptr. 201].)
In this matter, the real party in interest, Dorothea E. Boydston, did not present any proof to the respondent superior court that she had exercised due diligence in bringing her action to trial. She apparently chose to rely on the record before the court as sufficient proof that she had exercised due diligence. If the record demonstrates that due diligence was exercised by the plaintiff or that the delay in bringing the matter to trial was caused by the defendant, the filing of an affidavit pointing out what was already obvious from the record would be meaningless and of no assistance for the trial judge in exercising a proper discretion. [4] Section 583 does not require a defendant to support his motion by an affidavit. (Simonini v. Jay Dee Leather Products Co., 85 Cal. App. 2d 265 [193 P.2d 53].) This statute should not be construed to require that the plaintiff file an affidavit in opposition to a motion for a dismissal where the record clearly demonstrates that due diligence was exercised.
An analysis of the record before the respondent superior court reveals the following steps taken by the plaintiff in prosecuting this matter.
1. The complaint was filed on February 11, 1964. The alleged injuries were sustained on February 12, 1963. (The answer was filed on February 25, 1964.)
2. On March 13, 1964, the defendant filed interrogatories directed to the plaintiff and a demand for a jury trial. *296
3. On March 13, 1964, the plaintiff filed through counsel a "Certificate of Readiness For Case Pending in Branch District" and a "Memorandum For Setting Contested Action," wherein it was represented to the court that "I know of no further pleading to be filed and know of no reason why the cause should not be tried as soon as the calendar of the Court will permit."
4. On April 13, 1964, the respondent superior court on its own motion set this matter for pretrial conference for May 14, 1964.
5. On May 11, 1964, the plaintiff filed a stipulation continuing the pretrial conference to July 9, 1964.
6. On July 9, 1964, the pretrial conference was continued to August 27, 1964.
7. On August 27, 1964, the "Memorandum For Setting Contested Action" was vacated and the matter was placed off calendar.
8. On October 19, 1964, the plaintiff filed her answers to the interrogatories filed and served upon the plaintiff on March 13, 1964.
9. On January 18, 1966, the plaintiff filed interrogatories directed to the defendant. (The defendant filed and served its answers to these interrogatories on February 9, 1966.)
10. On July 11, 1967, the plaintiff filed additional interrogatories directed to the defendant. (The defendant filed its answer to these interrogatories on July 27, 1967.)
11. On September 26, 1967, a second "At Issue Memorandum and Certificate of Readiness" was filed by the plaintiff through her attorney, David A. Sanders. On November 15, 1967, a third "At Issue Memorandum and Certificate of Readiness" was filed by the plaintiff.
12. On December 7, 1967, the matter was set by the respondent superior court for pretrial conference on April 9, 1968.
13. On February 8, 1968, a notice of substitution of attorneys was filed, substituting the plaintiff in propria persona as her own attorney for David A. Sanders, who had represented her from the time the complaint was filed.
14. On March 14, 1968, the plaintiff filed notice that she had retained present counsel.
15. On April 9, 1968, the pretrial conference was continued to August 6, 1968. The minute order does not indicate which side requested the continuance; however, counsel for the defendant was ordered to serve notice. *297
16. On August 6, 1968, the pretrial conference was continued to October 2, 1968, at the request of the plaintiff.
17. On October 2, 1968, "Pretrial" was waived and the matter was set for trial on January 7, 1969.
A review of the record reveals that the plaintiff did not obtain a trial date on this matter until four years and nine months had elapsed since the filing of her complaint. The trial date set by the respondent superior court was approximately one month short of five years from the date of the filing of the complaint.
No reason appears from the record as to why the pretrial conference scheduled on the court's own motion for August 27, 1964, was placed off calendar. However, the fact that the plaintiff did not answer the defendant's interrogatories until October 19, 1964, is some indication that the plaintiff was far from ready for trial prior to that date. Had the case been set for trial on August 27, 1964, the defendant would have had no basis for a motion to dismiss pursuant to section 583 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The only affirmative steps taken by the plaintiff to bring her action to trial within two years of the filing of her complaint were the filing of the "Certificate of Readiness For Case Pending in Branch District," a "Memorandum For Setting Contested Action" on March 13, 1964, and the filing of interrogatories directed to the defendant on January 18, 1966.
The action of the court on vacating the "Memorandum For Setting Contested Action" on August 27, 1964, is unexplained in the record that was before the respondent superior court. If the plaintiff requested this order, then the delay was attributable to her, and indicates she was not ready or willing to have the case set for a fixed trial date within two years of the filing of her complaint. If the delay was caused by the defendant, or by the condition of the court's calendar, the plaintiff could have presented proof of this fact to the trial judge in reply to the motion for a dismissal.
The plaintiff did not again file a request for a trial date until September 26, 1967, over three and one half years after the complaint was filed. A further delay of one year occurred before the plaintiff appeared in court to request a trial date. No evidence was presented to the respondent superior court to explain these delays nor any proof that due diligence had been exercised by the plaintiff.
[5] On the face of the record before the trial judge, the *298 plaintiff failed to exercise due diligence in prosecuting her complaint against the defendant City of Los Angeles. Upon the showing by the defendant before the trial judge by way of affidavit and from the court's record that four years and nine months had elapsed since the commencement of her action, the burden was on the plaintiff to come forward to show that she had acted with diligence and that the delays were excusable. (Black Bros. Co. v. Superior Court, 265 Cal. App. 2d 501 [71 Cal. Rptr. 344]; Membrila v. Vonett Sales Co., 250 Cal. App. 2d 299 [58 Cal. Rptr. 544]; Bonelli v. Chandler, 165 Cal. App. 2d 267 [331 P.2d 705].)
Since there was no evidence presented to the trial judge to excuse the delay by way of affidavit or from the record, the respondent superior court had the power and duty to dismiss the action upon the motion of the defendant. (Breckenridge v. Mason, 256 Cal. App. 2d 121 [64 Cal. Rptr. 201].) The failure to grant the defendant's motion for a dismissal was an abuse of discretion.
Let a peremptory writ of mandate issue as prayed.
Kaus, P. J., and Aiso, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Assigned by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.

=== CASE 9736876 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:54.218562+00 ===

WILLIAM A. BABLITCH, J.
This is an original action challenging the constitutionality of sec. 757.48(l)(a), Stats., as amended by 1987 Wis. Act 355, which imposes a continuing legal education requirement on attorneys prior to their appointment as guardians ad litem. We conclude that sec. 757.48(1) (a), as amended, improperly intrudes on a regulation of the practice of law that is exclusively within the province of the judiciary. Accordingly, we hold the statute void as an unconstitutional violation of the separation of powers doctrine.
The facts are stipulated. On April 14, 1987, Assembly Amendment 1 to 1987 Assembly Bill 205 was offered in the legislature. The amendment included a provision that read: "In order to be appointed as a guardian ad litem under s. 767.045, an attorney shall have completed three hours of approved continuing legal education relating to the functions and duties of a guardian ad litem under ch. 767." After further amendments in the assembly and senate, the bill was passed by the legislature, signed by the governor, and published as 1987 Wis. Act 355 on May 2, 1988. The bill as enacted appears as sec. 757.48(1)(a), Stats.
Petitioners sought a declaratory ruling on the constitutionality of the enactment, and a petition for leave to commence an original action with a brief in support of the petition were filed with this court on April 21, 1989. On April 26, 1989, the court issued an administrative directive instructing the circuit judges of Wisconsin to refrain from implementing the continuing legal education requirements of sec. 757.48(l)(a), Stats. On the same date, the court ordered a response to the petition, which was filed on May 9,1989. The respondents stated *99that they did not oppose the request that the court exercise original jurisdiction. By order of May 10, 1989, this court granted the petition for leave to commence the action.
The petitioners request a judgment declaring sec. 757.48(1)(a), Stats., as amended by 1987 Wisconsin Act 355, unconstitutional under the separation of powers doctrine. The petitioners further contend that the amendment to sec. 757.48(1) (a) is devoid of any standard for implementation and is therefore unconstitutionally vague. Both parties agree this is a proper case for declaratory relief. State ex rel. Lynch v. Conta, 71 Wis. 2d 662, 239 N.W.2d 313 (1976).
We conclude that while the legislature may prescribe minimum standards for the eligibility of persons desiring to practice law, it is the province of the judiciary ultimately to decide the fitness of those who practice before it and to regulate their activities following their admission to practice. A concomitant of this authority is the power to decide whether special training for a particular area is appropriate. Because the amendment to sec. 757.48(l)(a), Stats., interferes with this authority, we hold it void under the separation of powers doctrine.
In State v. Holmes, 106 Wis. 2d 31, 42, 315 N.W.2d 703 (1982), we discussed the separation of powers doctrine at great length. We stated:
The Wisconsin constitution creates three separate coordinate branches of government, no branch subordinate to the other, no branch to arrogate to itself control over the other except as is provided by the constitution, and no branch to exercise the power committed by the constitution to another. Id. at 42.
We recognized that although the three governmental branches are coordinate and separate, each deriving *100its power from the constitution, the constitution does not explicitly define legislative, executive, or judicial power. Id. Thus, it is neither possible nor practicable " 'to classify accurately all the various governmental powers and to say that this power belongs exclusively to one department and that power belongs exclusively to another.' " Id. at 42-43 (quoting Integration of Bar Case, 244 Wis. 8, 45, 11 N.W.2d 604 (1943)).
The separation of powers doctrine therefore does not require an absolute division of power without overlap. Rather, the doctrine envisions a government of separated branches sharing certain powers. Holmes, 106 Wis. 2d at 43. Where the legislative and judicial powers overlap, the legislature's power to act in the area of shared authority is not unchecked. The legislature is prohibited from unreasonably burdening or substantially interfering with the judicial branch. State v. Unnamed Defendant, 150 Wis. 2d 352, 360, 441 N.W.2d 696 (1989).
However, the separation of powers doctrine does not render every power conferred upon one branch of government a power which may be shared by another branch. There are zones of authority constitutionally established for each branch of government upon which any other branch of government is prohibited from intruding. As to these areas of authority, the unreasonable burden or substantial interference test does not apply: any exercise of authority by another branch of government is unconstitutional. In Matter of Complaint Against Grady, 118 Wis. 2d 762, 776, 348 N.W.2d 559 (1984).1
*101The respondents correctly assert that the judiciary and the legislature share authority to prescribe qualifications for admission to the practice of law. The judiciary is concerned with the qualifications of attorneys in the exercise of its inherent power to regulate the bar. See Holmes, 106 Wis. 2d at 45, and cases cited at n.ll. The legislature is concerned with the qualifications of attorneys pursuant to its power to promote the general welfare. As we stated in In re Cannon, 206 Wis. 374, 396, 240 N.W. 441 (1932):
We think the separation of sovereign power by which the constitution assigns the legislative power to the legislature and the judicial power to the courts, with the purpose of making each department supreme and independent in its respective field, accords to the legislature the power of exacting of those who shall be admitted to the practice of the law such qualifications as the legislature shall deem sufficient to protect the public from the evils and mis-chiefs resulting from incompetent and characterless attorneys, which qualifications so prescribed must be respected by the courts. The courts cannot and should not license any as attorneys at law who do not *102possess the qualifications deemed by the legislature necessary for the protection of the public interest.
This language establishes that the legislature may prescribe minimum qualifications for persons desiring to be admitted to practice law in the state as an incident to its general power to protect the public. Once admitted, however, it does not follow that the legislature shares with the judiciary the authority to establish minimum qualifications in specific areas of law.
To the contrary, we made it clear in the subsequent case of State ex rel. Reynolds v. Dinger, 14 Wis. 2d 193, 206, 109 N.W.2d 685 (1961), that no rule or practice, however venerable, would preempt the exclusive authority of the judicial branch to define and regulate the activities of those who have been admitted. We stated:
[T]he regulation of the practice of the law is a judicial power and is vested exclusively in the supreme court; that the practitioner in or out of court, licensed lawyer or layman, is subject to such regulation; that whenever the court's view of the public interest requires it, the court has the power to make appropriate regulations concerning the practice of law in the interest of the administration of justice, and to modify or declare void any such rule, law, or regulation by whomever promulgated, which appears to the court to interfere with the court's control of such practice for such ends.
Furthermore, the competence of an attorney to represent a client in a particular area is at present governed by SCR 20:1.1, which requires competent representation through application of the legal knowledge, skill, thoroughness, and preparation necessary for the *103representation. To the extent an attorney fails to meet the level of competence necessary for effective representation, the attorney is subjected to an action for legal malpractice, and to disciplinary action undertaken pursuant to the judiciary's inherent authority to discipline members of the bar. See Rubin v. State, 194 Wis. 207, 214-15, 216 N.W. 513 (1927).
The issue of an attorney's competence to practice in a particular area is therefore currently left to the attorney's professional judgment bounded solely by the judiciary's inherent power to regulate the bar. This court has never in the past authorized the legislature to adopt rules or enact legislation attempting to establish a threshold level of competency to practice in a particular area. In fact, this court has specifically prohibited attorneys from holding themselves out as having special expertise in a particular field of law. See SCR 20:7.4.
We therefore conclude that once an attorney has been determined to have met the legislative and judicial threshold requirements and is admitted to practice law, he or she is subject to the judiciary's inherent and exclusive authority to regulate the practice of law. A necessary attribute of the court's regulatory authority is the power to determine the quantum of competence necessary to perform legal tasks and the authority to discipline those practitioners who fail to represent their clients competently. See In re Cannon, 206 Wis. at 397-98. Because the amendment to sec. 757.48(1)(a), Stats., intrudes upon that area of exclusive authority, it unconstitutionally violates the separation of powers doctrine.
In urging a contrary result, the respondents draw an analogy to the rules governing appointment of private practitioners to serve as public defenders. The respon*104dents argue that before an attorney can be certified, they are required to complete seven hours of continuing legal education each calendar year in courses approved by the state public defender. See Wis. Admin. Code, Sec. SPD 1.04(9). Furthermore, the public defender board was created by the legislature under sec. 15.78, Stats., and the board members are appointed by the governor with the advice and consent of the senate, pursuant to sec. 15.07(1). Therefore, the respondents insist that if sec. 757.48(l)(a) is a violation of the separation of powers doctrine, then so too must be the public defender requirements for appointment to represent indigent clients.
We are unpersuaded. Section SPD 1.04(9) does not constitute an example of the legislature intruding on the discretion of the circuit courts in deciding whom to appoint. The rule relates to attorneys who are eligible to represent indigent clients on behalf of the state public defender. The rule does not purport to prohibit circuit courts from appointing attorneys other than those certified by the state public defender who the court may see fit to serve as the legal representative of an indigent criminal defendant. There is nothing in the implementing legislation to suggest that any attorney licensed to practice could not, if he or she were willing, be appointed to represent an indigent defendant even though the practitioner did not meet the requirement of sec. SPD 1.04(9). Unlike the public defender regulations, the amendment under challenge here intervenes in a court's decision concerning whom to appoint as a guardian ad litem and imposes a standard that displaces the adjudicative function.
Nor does the decision in Witter v. Cook County Com'rs et. al., 100 N.E. 148 (Ill. 1912), support the *105respondent's position. That case involved a statute creating the position of probation officer in the juvenile court. The situation is more closely analogous to the Wisconsin public defender rule requiring private attorneys to take certain continuing legal education as a precondition to eligibility for employment. Thus, Witter is not authority for the proposition that the legislature may intervene in a court's decision concerning whom to appoint as guardian ad litem.
Finally, the respondents suggest that even if the amendment to sec. 757.48(l)(a), Stats., falls within the court's exclusive authority, the statute is valid as an aid to the court's power, much as the practice of real estate brokers to use legal forms was allowed to continue in Reynolds v. Dinger, 14 Wis. 2d at 206. However, unlike the matter before the court in Reynolds, this is not a situation where the court is called upon to review a practice that has been engaged in by laypersons, tacitly permitted over a substantial period of time, and determined to function "reasonably well." Id. at 206. The amendment to sec. 757.48(1) (a) imposes practical impediments to the court's discharge of its substantive decisionmak-ing authority, and usurps the uniquely judicial function of determining the qualifications of those seeking to represent a minor litigant's interest. Accordingly, sec. 757.48(1)(a), as amended by 1987 Wis. Act 355, is unconstitutional.
In reaching this conclusion, we do not question the legislature's laudable purpose in establishing a level of competence for persons appointed to serve as guardians ad litem, thereby also promoting efficiency in the adjudication of minors' rights. However, these qualifications can only be established by the judicial branch pursuant *106to its authority conferred by Art. VII of the Wisconsin Constitution.
Accordingly, we conclude that it is the province of the judiciary to decide whether special training for a particular area of the law is appropriate. The amendment to sec. 757.48(l)(a), Stats., interferes with this court's power in that regard, and therefore violates the separation of powers. Because of our conclusion in this regard, we need not reach the issue whether sec. 757.48(1) (a) is impermissibly vague.
By the Court. — Rights Declared.
For examples of recognized areas of authority exclusive to the judicial and therefore free from intrusion by another branch *101of government, see, e.g., In re Janitor of Supreme Court, 35 Wis. 410 (1874) (an attempt to remove and replace a court employee); In re Court Room, 148 Wis. 109 (1912) (an attempt to dictate the physical facilities in which a court was to exercise its judicial functions); Thoe v. Chicago, M. & St. P.R. Co., 181 Wis. 456 (1923) (an attempt to legislate what constitutes the legal sufficiency of evidence); Rules of Court Case, 204 Wis. 501 (1931) (an attempt to regulate trials in the conduct of court business); see also, cases cited in G. Currie & W. Resh, The Separation of Powers Control of Courts and Lawyers, 47 Wis. Bar Bull. 7, 11 (Dec. 1974).

=== CASE 9736877 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:08:54.2239+00 ===

SHIRLEY S. ABRAHAMSON, J.
(dissenting). Once again this court claims exclusive judicial authority and declares a statute unconstitutional.1 This court's expanding concept of its own exclusive judicial authority creates the danger of unchecked power in this court. The legislature, bench, bar and public should be concerned.2
The issue presented by the case is whether the legislature may impose educational requirements on certain *107guardians ad litem. Section 757.48(l)(a), Stats. 1987-88, requires that circuit courts appoint as guardians ad litem for children in actions affecting the family only those attorneys who "have completed three hours of approved continuing legal education related to the functions and duties of a guardian ad litem under ch. 767."3
The majority opinion chooses to characterize sec. 757.48(1)(a) as regulating the practice of law and concludes that any statute regulating the practice of law is unconstitutional.
I share the majority's doubts about the wisdom of sec. 757.48(1)(a).4 Nevertheless I conclude that sec. 757.48(1)(a) is constitutional. A statute is presumed constitutional; the opponents of legislation bear the burden of proving unconstitutionality beyond a reasonable *108doubt. In Matter of E.B. v. State, 111 Wis. 2d 175, 180, 330 N.W.2d 584 (1983). No such showing has been made in this case.
When determining whether a statute is unconstitutional as a usurpation of judicial powers, I believe the court should, following our earlier cases, consider four questions. First, is the subject matter of the statute within the legislature's constitutional charge to promote the general welfare? Second, is the subject matter within the court's constitutional grant of judicial power? Third, is the subject matter properly characterized as falling within the area of powers shared between the legislature and the courts or does the subject matter fall within the court's exclusive authority? Fourth, what is the effect of the statute on the administration of justice?
Although I believe this court may be better qualified than the legislature to deal with the issue of educational requirements for guardians ad litem, this court need not claim exclusive authority or declare the" statute unconstitutional to take advantage of its expertise.
HH
The Wisconsin legislature has plenary power to enact legislation for the general welfare. Except for the argument on separation of powers, the parties do not cite any state or federal law that would prevent the legislature from regulating the educational qualifications of guardians ad litem who represent children in an action affecting the family.
I conclude that the legislature clearly acted under its constitutional plenary legislative .powers to protect the general welfare.
*109HH HH
No one disputes this court's power to regulate the educational requirements of attorneys who are appointed guardians ad litem to represent children in an action affecting the family. The constitutional grant of judicial power extends beyond the power to decide a particular case. It encompasses those powers necessary for the court to efficiently perform its adjudicatory role. These powers are known as incidental, implied or inherent powers. State v. Holmes, 106 Wis. 2d 31, 44, 315 N.W.2d 703 (1981); In re Cannon, 206 Wis. 374, 393-95, 240 N.W. 441 (1932); State v. Cannon, 199 Wis. 401, 402, 226 N.W. 385 (1929); State v. Cannon, 196 Wis. 534, 536-537, 221 N.W. 603 (1928). In the past, the court has exercised its incidental, implied or inherent judicial powers to regulate the court's budget, regulate pleading, practice and procedure, appoint counsel at the public's expense, create a judicial code of ethics, and discipline judges. See Rules of Court, 204 Wis. 501, 236 N.W. 717 (1931); Holmes, supra, 106 Wis. 2d at 45 n.11 and the cases cited therein; In Matter of E.B., supra 111 Wis. 2d at 181-82.
HH hH
The majority opinion characterizes sec. 757.48(1) (a) as regulating the practice of law, an area it labels as exclusively within the judiciary's power under the separation of powers doctrine. As I explain later, see Part IV below, the cases do not support the conclusion the majority reaches.
The majority opinion ignores the broader purposes and other possible characterizations of the legislation.
I would characterize sec. 757.48(l)(a) as protecting children in court, protecting families, regulating guardi*110ans ad litem, governing pleading, practice and procedure, and incidentally affecting lawyers. The judiciary does not have the power, exclusive of the legislature, to act in any of the forementioned areas. I therefore conclude that sec. 757.48(1) (a) falls within the powers shared by the legislature and the judiciary.
This court has declared in numerous decisions that the doctrine of separation of powers is not an absolute rule but a working principle of government. The doctrine is applied to maintain the balance of power among the three branches of government, to preserve their respective independence and integrity, and to prevent the concentration of unchecked power in the hands of any one branch. In Matter of E.B., supra 111 Wis. 2d 181; In Matter of Complaint Against Grady, 118 Wis. 2d 762, 790 n.4, 348 N.W.2d 559 (1984) (Abrahamson, J., concurring).
Relying on the separation of powers doctrine, this court has guarded the judiciary's independence and has been unwilling to sanction any legislative attempt to interfere with the essence of judicial power — a court's ability to decide the merits of a dispute under law, independently, impartially and free from coercion from another branch of government. At the same time the court has been reluctant to draw absolute boundaries between legislative and judicial powers because of the amorphous nature of the separation of powers doctrine. Davis v. The President and Trustees of the Village of Menasha, 21 Wis. 497 [*491], 501 [*495] (1867). In Matter of E.B., supra 111 Wis. 2d at 181.
The primary sources for interpreting the separation of powers doctrine sire the practices before and at the time of the adoption of the constitution and the earliest interpretation of the provision as manifested in the first laws adopted by the legislature. Rules of the Court, 204 *111Wis. 501, 505, 236 N.W. 717 (1931); State v. Beno, 116 Wis. 2d 122, 136-37, 341 N.W.2d 668 (1984); State v. Unnamed Defendant, 150 Wis. 2d 352, 361, 441 N.W.2d 696 (1989) (overruling State ex rel. Unnamed Petitioners v. Connors, 136 Wis. 2d 118, 401 N.W.2d 782 (1987)).
History supports my conclusion that sec. 757.48(1) (a) is properly characterized as falling within the area of shared powers. Wisconsin legislative enactments on the subject of children in court and guardians ad litem predate statehood. In 1837, the territorial legislature required courts to appoint guardians ad litem for minors who were parties to litigation. Laws of 1839, p. 160. In 1849 the newly formed state legislature enacted a similar statute. Laws of 1848, ch. 88, sec. 35. In 1887, the legislature required that guardians ad litem be attorneys. See 1887 R.S. ch. 295, sec. 1. See Hohmann and Dwyer, Guardians ad Litem in Wisconsin, 48 Marq. L. Rev. 445 (1965).
The legislature's longstanding and continuing involvement in defining when a court should appoint a guardian ad litem and the qualifications and responsibilities of the guardian ad litem justifies concluding that the regulation of guardians ad litem falls within the area of powers shared by the legislature and the courts, not within the exclusive domain of this court.
If a law falls within an area of shared authority, as I believe sec. 757.48(1) (a) does, the law is constitutional unless it unduly burdens or substantially interferes with the judicial branch. State v. Holmes, 106 Wis. 2d 31, 42, 68, 315 N.W.2d 703 (1981). Petitioners argue, but never demonstrate with the requisite degree of certainty, that sec. 757.48(1) (a) would place an undue burden on or substantially interfere with the circuit court or this *112court.5 The majority opinion fails to consider whether any significant impairment exists.
The legislative requirement that guardians ad litem who represent children in any action affecting the family take three hours of approved continuing legal education credit fits with the court's rules requiring every lawyer to take a prescribed number of credit hours of continuing legal education. SCR ch. 31. The legislative requirement parallels this court's own order requiring lawyers to "attend as part of the continuing legal education requirement of SCR 31.02 three hours of approved continuing legal education credits on the subject of the new Rules of Professional Conduct for Attorneys." Supreme Court Order, In the Matter of the Amendment of Supreme Court Rules: SCR Chapter 20: Code of Professional Responsibility, June 10, 1987, p. 5.6
The shared powers approach respects the expertise and institutional ability of both the legislature and the courts. If the court believes sec. 757.48(1) (a) is unsound or can be improved, the court should not declare the statute unconstitutional but should hold a public hearing and amend or suspend the statute pursuant to its rule-making powers under sec. 751.12, Stats. 1987-88.7
*113IV.
The majority contends that the court possesses the exclusive authority to regulate the practice of law to the complete exclusion of the legislature. Our case law provides no support for holding that this court shall, in the absence of legislative interference with the judicial branch, exclusively regulate the practice of law. The court stated in Integration of Bar Case, 244 Wis. 8, 50, 11 N.W.2d 604, 12 N.W.2d 689 (1943), "it is quite obvious from a study of the history of the bar and the consideration of judicial decisions that the line of demarcation between the legislative field and the judicial field in mat*114ters relating to the bar is not a straight line or even a fixed one."
I can find no unified theory in our cases explaining the court's and legislature's spheres of authority in matters relating to admission to the bar, practice of law or disbarment. The court has followed a pragmatic approach to statutes relating to these subjects, seeking to accommodate the legislature's concerns for the general welfare, to defer to reasonable legislative enactments, and to avoid conflict with the legislature. See, e.g., Application of Lavinia Goodell, 39 Wis. 232 (1875), 48 Wis. 693, 81 N.W. 551 (1879); State v. Cannon, 196 Wis. 534, 221 N.W. 603 (1928); In re Cannon, 206 Wis. 374, 240 N.W. 441 (1932); State ex rel. Junior Assn of Milwaukee Bar v. Rice, 236 Wis. 38, 53, 294 N.W. 550 (1940); State ex rel. Reynolds v. Dinger, 14 Wis. 2d 193, 109 N.W.2d 685 (1960).
The majority opinion contends that In re Cannon, 206 Wis. at 396, and State ex rel. Reynolds v. Dinger, 14 Wis. 2d at 206, prohibit the legislature from regulating the practice of law. I disagree.
Cannon's reach is significantly more limited than the majority opinion suggests. The Cannon court merely held that the legislature may not enact a statute admitting a single individual as a member of the bar, namely Raymond Cannon, whom the court had suspended from practice of law. The court reasoned that the legislature may establish minimum criteria for bar admission so long as the criteria apply generally to all attorneys and do not interfere with the court's power to enact further requirements for admission or to discipline individual attorneys. Cannon does not suggest the legislative interest ends with lawyers' admission to the bar.
Similarly, the majority opinion's reliance on Dinger is misplaced. In Dinger, the court considered whether *115the real estate brokers could complete title transfers and real estate documents for their clients or whether these activities constitute the unauthorized practice of law. The court stated in dictum that it has the exclusive power to regulate the practice of law. It also stated, however, that its power did not displace the role of the legislature or an administrative agency to adopt laws and regulations that might affect the legal profession or that aids the court in its constitutional powers affecting the legal profession. Dinger, supra 14 Wis. 2d at 203, 206. The Dinger court held that the court retains the final power to modify any rule, law, or regulation which interferes with the court's function in the administration of justice.
Even if the court were to determine that the sec. 757.48(1) (a) falls within the exclusive power of the court under the separation of powers doctrine, the statute is not necessarily unconstitutional. When the court has claimed an area as exclusive to the judiciary, the court has turned to principles of comity, recognizing the legislature's power and duty to declare itself on questions relating to the general welfare. This rationale for the judicial policy of comity is set forth in State v. Holmes, 106 Wis. 2d at 46 (quoting Integration of the Bar Case, 244 Wis. at 52):
While the legislature has no constitutional power to compel the court to act or, if it acts, to act in a particular way in the discharge of the judicial function, it may nevertheless with propriety, and in the exercise of its power and the discharge of its duty, declare itself upon questions relating to the general welfare .... The court, as has been exemplified during the entire history of the state will respect such declaration and, as already indicated, adopt them so *116far as they do not embarrass the court or impair its constitutional functions.
Accordingly, this court has consistently held that even if a law falls within the court's exclusive authority, the court will uphold the law if this court accepts it as an aid to the court's power; it is invalid if this court determines that the law thwarts the administration of justice. State ex rel. Reynolds v. Dinger, 14 Wis. 2d 193, 109 N.W.2d 685 (1961).
The majority opinion makes no effort to demonstrate that sec. 757.48(1) (a) thwarts the court's authority or the administration of justice. There is nothing in the record to show that sec.,757.48(l)(a) thwarts the administration of justice or impedes or interferes with the administration of justice. I therefore conclude that the statute is constitutional.
V.
I do not join the majority opinion because it improperly and unwisely closes the people's access to the legislature by characterizing the statute as falling within this court's exclusive powers. Neither the majority opinion nor the cases it cites defines the phrase practice of law. For the difficulty of defining what constitutes the practice of law, see Dinger, supra. The court arbitrarily claims the power to place vast areas of the law beyond the power of the legislative and executive branches by characterizing a statute as regulating the "practice of law."
As a result of this opinion, the only recourse for those seeking to improve the quality of performance of guardians ad litem who represent children in an action affecting the family is to petition this court to adopt rules. I do not believe the court's rule-making process *117should supplant the right of the people to act through their elected representatives.
The court's rule-making procedures are, unfortunately, confusing and shrouded in secrecy. Some rules fall within sec. 751.12, Stats. 1987-88. Others fall within the Supreme Court Rules. Still others fall within the court's Internal Operating Procedures. The procedure for petitioning the court for the different types of rules is not clear. The court holds hearings on some rules, not on others. Hearings are open to the public. The decision-making process on all rules and internal operating procedures is presently closed. In the past the court usually has not explained its adoption of a rule or refused to adopt a proposed rule. See, e.g., In re Felony Sentencing Guidelines, 120 Wis. 2d 198, 216-18, 353 N.W.2d 793 (1984) (Abrahamson, J., dissenting). The public's need for access to this court's decision-making process concerning rules and administrative matters becomes all the more important as the court declares its powers to be exclusive of the legislature.
At times this court must assume exclusive power to ensure the orderly administration of justice. In my opinion, this case is not one of those times. The majority opinion departs from time-honored principles of shared powers between two equal and coordinate branches of government and the spirit of comity. Justice Crownhart's words in 1929 chastising the court for assuming powers are applicable in this case: "The court is the sole judge of its powers, without guide or compass. I would think that this court would not wish [to exercise] arbitrary power, for arbitrary power begets arbitrary use *118or abuse of power." State v. Cannon, 196 Wis. 534 (1929) (Crownhart, J., dissenting).
For the reasons set forth, I dissent.
See also In re Grady, 118 Wis. 2d 762, 790, 348 N.W.2d 559 (1984).
For a discussion of the dangers of courts' increasingly declaring their exclusive prerogative of regulating lawyers, see Wolfram, Lawyer Turf and Lawyer Regulation — The Role of the Inherent-Powers Doctrine, 12 U. Ark. Little Rock L.J. 1 (1989-90). Professor Wolfram (Charles Frank Reavis, Sr., Professor of Law, Cornell Law School) views the judicial exclusivity aspect of the separation of powers doctrine as "a powerful barrier shielding the legal profession from any of its critics who wish to urge legislative reform of the profession.”
For a discussion of the relations of the Illinois Supreme Court and Illinois Legislature on the court's claim of exclusive power, see Chicago Tribune, May 4, 1990, sec. 1, p. 7.
Section 757.48(l)(a), 1987-88, provides:
Guardian ad litem must be an attorney. (1) (a) Except as provided in s. 879.23 (4), in all matters in which a guardian ad litem is appointed by the court, the guardian ad litem shall be an attorney admitted to practice in this state. In order to be appointed as a guardian ad litem under s. 767.045, an attorney shall have completed 3 hours of approved continuing legal education relating to the functions and duties of a guardian ad litem under ch. 767.
The Judicial Council filed a petition for rule-making with this court on June 19, 1989, to amend various provisions governing guardians ad litem for minor children. While the Judicial Council did not propose an educational requirement for the guardians ad litem, other persons filed proposals and requested the court to adopt educational requirements for guardians appointed in chapter 48 proceedings. Public Hearing on October 10, 1989. In closed discussion of the proposed rules, the court refused to adopt educational requirements, but gave no reason for its action. Order in the Matter of Rules Pertaining to Guardians ad Litem: Secs. 48.02(9), 48.23(1), (3) and (4), 48.235, 48.41(30), 767.045, 809.85, 813.122(3), 880.33(2)(c) and 880.331, Stats., dated October 26,1989.
If a circuit court could not find an attorney with the appropriate CLE accreditation, the requirement would obviously give way to the circuit court's inherent power to appoint counsel for the proper administration of justice. Contempt in State v. Lehman, 137 Wis. 2d 65, 403 N.W.2d 438 (1987).
Petitioners have also argued that the statute is impermissi-bly vague. I find this contention without merit on the basis of our own 1987 order requiring continuing legal education credits on the new attorneys' professional conduct code.
Section 751.12, Stats. 1987-88, provides:
751.12 Rules of pleading and practice. The state supreme court shall, by rules promulgated by it from time to time, regulate *113pleading, practice and procedure in judicial proceedings in all courts, for the purpose of simplifying the same and of promoting the speedy determination of litigation upon its merits. The rules shall not abridge, enlarge or modify the substantive rights of any litigant. The effective dates for all rules adopted by the court shall be January 1 or July 1. A rule shall not become effective until 60 days after its adoption. All such rules shall be printed by the state printer and paid for out of the state treasury, and the court shall direct the rules to be distributed as it deems proper. All statutes relating to pleading, practice and procedure may be modified or suspended by rules promulgated under this section. No rule modifying or suspending such statutes may be adopted until the court has held a public hearing with reference to the rule. Notice of public hearings shall be given by publication of a class 3 notice, under ch. 986, the expense of the publication to be paid out of the state treasury. Notice shall also be given in an official publication of the state bar of Wisconsin, the notice to be published not more than 60 days nor less than 30 days before the date of hearing. The state bar of Wisconsin shall not charge the state treasury for publication of this notice. Proposed rules, including changes, if any, in existing rules, shall be set forth in full in the notice. This section shall not abridge the right of the legislature to enact, modify or repeal statutes or rules relating to pleading, practice or procedure. The judicial council shall act in an advisory capacity to assist the court in performing its duties under this section.

=== CASE 2207326 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:18.987689+00 ===

340 Ill. App. 10 (1950)
91 N.E.2d 106
Fay M. Lane, Administrator of Estate of Harry L. Lane, Deceased, Appellant,
v.
George Bobis, Appellee.
Gen. No. 9,680.
Illinois Appellate Court.
Opinion filed March 3, 1950.
Released for publication March 29, 1950.
*11 DYER & RICHMOND, of Hoopeston, for appellant; C.F. DYER and KENNETH L. RICHMOND, both of Hoopeston, of counsel.
ACTON, ACTON, BALDWIN & BOOKWALTER, of Danville, for appellee; W.M. ACTON and D.S. BALDWIN, both of Danville, of counsel.
MR. PRESIDING JUSTICE WHEAT delivered the opinion of the court.
Plaintiff appellant, Fay M. Lane, administratrix of the estate of Harry L. Lane, deceased, brought this action against defendant appellee, George Bobis, for the wrongful death of her husband, charging that decedent was a guest of Bobis in an automobile wrongfully operated by the latter in a wilful and wanton manner. At the close of plaintiff's case, the court directed a verdict in favor of defendant and entered judgment thereon. This appeal follows.
*12 The facts appear to be that on November 6, 1947, at about 1:30 p.m., Bobis was driving his car near Hoopeston, Illinois. He was accompanied by Lane who sat beside him. Each man owned a hunting dog and the two dogs had been placed in the rear seat of the car, for the purpose of taking them out for field training. At a time when they were driving on a gravel road about twelve to fourteen feet wide, the two dogs in the rear seat caused a disturbance. Lane turned around and attempted to separate the dogs. Bobis, who was then driving about twenty-five to twenty-seven miles per hour, also turned his body to join in the attempt. He held the steering wheel in his left hand, took his foot off of the accelerator, and reached toward the rear of the car with his right hand, at the same time calling to his dog to behave. He lost control of the car which ran off of the road and crashed into a tree, causing injuries to Lane which resulted in his death.
[1] It is first argued that Bobis was guilty of wilful and wanton misconduct in allowing two strange dogs to be placed together in the car, knowing the tendency of such dogs to create a disturbance. If this be true, Lane was guilty of equal wilful and wanton misconduct, which is a complete defense to an action charging the same wrong. (Prater v. Buell, 336 Ill. App. 533.)
[2, 3] Regardless of this, it is well settled that when the uncontroverted facts in a case, together with all reasonable inferences which may lawfully be drawn therefrom, and viewed in the aspect most favorable to the plaintiff, fail to make a question of fact for the jury, the court should properly direct a verdict for the defendant. Such is the case here, as it cannot be said that the conduct of defendant constituted wilful and wanton misconduct, and the court properly directed a verdict for the defendant. The judgment of the circuit court is affirmed.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9736788 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:06:41.311309+00 ===

Inglis, J.
The principal question involved in this case is whether the plaintiffs may recover for damage done to their building by vibrations of the earth set in motion by the blasting operations of the defendants, in the absence of negligence on the part of the latter.
The finding is not subject to correction. The plaintiff John M. Carbulon was the owner of property consisting of land and a large brick building known as the Wauregan Hotel, located in the business district of Norwich. On August 1, 1947, the Whitman Hotel Corporation, hereinafter referred to as the plaintiff, took possession of the hotel under a lease for twenty years which required it to keep the hotel building in repair. In May, 1947, the defendant Elliott and Watrous, Inc., entered into a contract with the United States war department, corps of engineers, to widen *564and deepen the channel of the Shetucket River in Norwich for. a distance of 750 feet so as to create a more adequate raceway. The purpose of the project was to prevent the flooding of the downtown district of Norwich in the. neighborhood of the Wauregan Hotel. The work was done for Elliott and Watrous, Inc., by the other defendant, the Elliott and Watrous Engineering Company, operating under a subcontract. Pursuant to and in accordance with the specifications of the contract, and in a method usual to such an operation, the defendants, between June 1, 1947, and February 28, 1949, discharged many hundreds of blasts of a dynamite known in the trade as 60 per cent high velocity gelatin in close proximity to a number of compactly located business buildings. The Wauregan Hotel was 230 feet from the river at its nearest point, and operations were carried on in the river on both sides of that point.
At various times between August 1, 1947, and February 29, 1948, many water and heating pipes in the hotel were broken, causing water damage, plaster was cracked in numerous places, and a terrazzo floor was split. The intensity of the vibrations of the earth resulting from the explosions was sufficient to cause this damage, and on several occasions the development of cracks in the pipes and in the plaster was noted nearly synchronously with the sound of the blasting. The parts of the structure which were damaged had been in good condition, and the expenditures made or contemplated by the plaintiff were for the purpose of restoring the building to the condition of usefulness it was in prior to the commencement of the blasting operations.
The trial court concluded that it was the vibration set up, by the defendants’ blasting operations which damaged the plaintiff’s building; that the defendants *565were liable for that damage, even though they were guilty of no negligence in the conduct of their operations; and that the plaintiff was entitled to recover the cost of the repairs. It also concluded that the plaintiff Carbulon was not entitled to nominal damages.
It is almost universally held that one who by exploding dynamite causes damage to another’s property through flying debris is absolutely liable for that damage irrespective of whether he was negligent either in the selection of the time or place for the blasting or in the method of blasting which he followed. This rule rests on the principle that the explosion of dynamite is an intrinsically dangerous operation and that, therefore, one who engages in it acts at his peril. 2 Cooley, Torts (4th Ed.) § 260; 22 Am. Jur. 179, § 53; Restatement, 3 Torts § 519, § 520, comment e. The rule is adhered to in Connecticut. It has been stated as follows: A person who uses an intrinsically dangerous means to accomplish a lawful end, in such a way as will necessarily or obviously expose the person of another to the danger of probable injury, is liable if such injury results, even though he uses all proper care. Worth v. Dunn, 98 Conn. 51, 59, 118 A. 467. Although we, in that case, were speaking of liability for injury to person, the principle stated governs liability for injury to property as well.
In spite of the fact that we have stated that liability attaches “even though he uses all proper care,” the defendants contend that considerations of negligence are imported into the rule by the phrase “in such a way as will necessarily or obviously expose the person of another to the danger of probable injury.” They say, in substance, that this means that no liability attaches unless it would appear to a reasonably prudent person that injury would result from the explosion, and therefore the real basis of the cause of action is failure to *566use reasonable care. The phrase has no such intendment. As pointed out above, the basis of liability in this class of case is that one acts at his peril if he engages in an intrinsically dangerous operation. The purpose of the phrase relied upon by the defendants is to define an intrinsically dangerous operation. If dynamite is exploded under such circumstances that it will not expose the person or property of another to the danger of probable injury, then the explosion is not an intrinsically dangerous operation. If the circumstances are such that the explosion does necessarily or obviously expose the person or property of another to the danger of probable injury, then it is an intrinsically dangerous operation. The phrase, therefore, does not make the failure to use reasonable care a condition of liability. It does not make the test of liability the question whether a reasonably prudent person would consider that under the attendant circumstances the explosion would either necessarily or obviously expose another to the danger of probable injury and would refrain from setting off the blast. What it does relate to is the fact of exposure to the danger of probable injury. It means that, to make out a case of intrinsically dangerous operation upon which absolute liability may be predicated, it is essential that it appear that the dynamite was discharged under such circumstances that it, in fact, necessarily or obviously exposed the person or property of another to the danger of probable injury. Welz v. Manzillo, 113 Conn. 674, 682, 155 A. 841. It is said in Harper, Law of Torts, page 408, in support of the author’s statement that the basis of the cause of action is not negligence: “Blasting is frequently not only desirable but absolutely essential under circumstances that entail serious potentialities of harm. Under such circumstances it is not negligence. Nevertheless, there is liability to *567make good such losses as come within the scope of the rule, that is such harms, the danger of which is the reason for predicating liability upon this type of conduct. ... In all of these situations danger may be foreseen by reasonable men, as possible if not probable, but the risks to others are not by the ordinary prudent man, regarded as unreasonable. It is precisely these conditions which give rise to the doctrine of strict liability. Defendant is not regarded as engaging in blameworthy conduct. He is creating hazards to others, to be sure, but they are ordinary, and reasonable risks incident to desirable social and economic activity. But common notions of fairness require that the defendant make good any harm that results even though his conduct is free from fault.” The cause of action for damages resulting from the intrinsically dangerous operation of blasting does not necessarily sound in negligence.
In cases in which the damage resulting from the explosion of dynamite has been caused, not by flying debris, but by concussion of the atmosphere or vibration of the earth, there is a clearcut division of the authorities. Some jurisdictions hold that there is no liability for such damage unless there has been negligence on the part of the blaster. This is the so-called New York rule, and it is followed not only in that state but also in Alabama, Arizona, Kansas, Kentucky, Maine, Massachusetts, New Jersey and Texas. Booth v. Rome, W. & O. T. R. Co., 140 N. Y. 267, 278, 35 N. E. 592; Holland House Co. v. Baird, 169 N. Y. 136, 141, 62 N. E. 149; Bessemer Coal, Iron & Land Co. v. Doak, 152 Ala. 166, 177, 44 So. 627; Drumm v. Simer, 68 Ariz. 319, 321, 205 P. 2d 592; Cherryvale v. Studyvin, 76 Kan. 285, 287, 91 P. 60; Williams v. Codell Construction Co., 253 Ky. 166, 169, 69 S. W. 2d 20; Reynolds v. W. H. Hinman Co., (Me.) 75 A. 2d 802, 811; *568MacGinnis v. Marlborough-Hudson Gas Co., 220 Mass. 575, 578, 108 N. E. 364; Simon v. Henry, 62 N. J. L. 486, 488, 41 A. 692; Standard Paving Co. v. McClinton, (Tex. Civ. App.) 146 S. W. 2d 466, 468.
In the greater number of jurisdictions, however, as is indicated by the following citations, no distinction is made between damage resulting from the throwing of debris on the one hand and damage resulting from concussion or vibration on the other. The dynamiter is held absolutely liable for the latter as well as the former. Exner v. Sherman Power Construction Co., 54 F. 2d 510, 513; Colton v. Onderdonk, 69 Cal. 155, 159, 10 P. 395; FitzSimons & Connell Co. v. Braun, 199 Ill. 390, 397, 65 N. E. 249; Watson v. Mississippi River Power Co., 174 Iowa 23, 27, 156 N. W. 188; Cahill v. Eastman, 18 Minn. 324, 332; Stocker v. Richmond Heights, 235 Mo. App. 277, 283, 132 S. W. 2d 1116; Wendt v. Yant Construction Co., 125 Neb. 277, 279, 249 N. W. 599; Louden v. Cincinnati, 90 Ohio St. 144, 149, 106 N. E. 970; Muskogee v. Hancock, 58 Okla. 1, 6, 158 P. 622; Hickey v. McCabe & Bihler, 30 R. I. 346, 355, 75 A. 404; Feinberg v. Wisconsin Granite Co., 54 S. D. 643, 645, 224 N. W. 184; Schade Brewing Co. v. Chicago, M. & P. S. R. Co., 79 Wash. 651, 658, 140 P. 897; Brown v. L. S. Lunder Construction Co., 240 Wis. 122, 128, 2 N. W. 2d 859.
The reasoning supporting the minority rule is presented in the most plausible manner in the leading case of Booth v. Rome, W. & O. T. R. Co., 140 N. Y. 267, 278, 35 N. E. 592. The line of argument is. twofold. In the first place, it is that a rule which would make a landowner absolutely responsible, irrespective of his negligence, for all damage which he caused to his neighbor’s land by vibration from blasting on his own property would be against public policy because it would operate as a deterrent to the improvement and *569development of property in thickly settled communities. To this reasoning it might well be replied that public policy does not demand that private citizens go unrecompensed for damage to their property caused by vibration for the sake of encouraging other persons to build structures on other land. If it did, it would also preclude the right to recover for damage done by rocks hurled on their land from their neighbors’ explosions of dynamite. As pointed out above, nearly all jurisdictions accord the right to recover for damages caused in the latter manner. Considerations of public policy do not require immunity from liability for damages caused by concussion or vibration any more than from liability for damages caused by flying debris.
The second line of argument implicit in the Booth case is this: No cause of action may be recognized by the courts unless it is one for which some form of action was recognized at common law. Damage sustained by any person which could not be recovered in some one of those forms of action is damnum absque injuria. The only two possible forms of action available for the recovery of damages because of injury to real property by blasting on another’s land were trespass and trespass on the case. Damages for injury caused by concussion or vibration set in motion by the explosion of dynamite could not be recovered in an action of trespass because such vibrations are not a physical invasion of the real property. Recovery for such damage may be had in an action on the case only in the event that it has been the result of a nuisance or caused by negligence. Therefore, it is reasoned, damages for injury caused by vibrations are recoverable in cases not involving a nuisance only upon proof that the one who in exploding dynamite set the vibrations in motion was negligent.
*570With this reasoning we are unable to agree.1 The old technical rules of common-law pleading with their finespun distinctions between forms of action no longer obtain. They should not control the substantive law of today. If it is necessary to talk about trespass as distinguished from trespass on the case, it would seem that the jarring of a man’s real property by vibration or the concussion in the atmosphere above it is, in actuality, a physical invasion of that property. Trespass to real property is the doing of direct injury to that property with force. 52 Am. Jur. 836, § 2. When one’s building is damaged by vibration or concussion from a blast, the injury is done directly by the physical movement of the earth or the air which has been started by the blast. For any practical purpose such movement is just as much a physical invasion as the throwing of debris through the atmosphere and the injury done by it is just as direct. As is said in Exner v. Sherman Power Construction Co., 54 F. 2d 510, 514, “Yet in every practical sense there can be no difference between a blasting which projects rocks in such a way as to injure persons or property and a blasting which, by creating a sudden vacuum, shatters buildings or knocks down people.” The Iowa court puts it well in Watson v. Mississippi River Power Co., 174 Iowa 23, 31, 156 N. W. 188: “Physical invasion of the property of another does not necessarily imply an actual breaking or entering of the plaintiff’s close by the wrongdoer in person, or casting upon his premises any particular kind of missile or other particular thing or substance. The employment of force of any kind which, when so put in operation, extends its energy *571into the premises of another to their material injury, and renders them uninhabitable, is as much a physical invasion as if the wrongdoer had entered thereon in person and by overpowering strength had cast the owner into the street.”
Connecticut is committed to the rule that, when one engages in the inherently dangerous operation of blasting with dynamite under such circumstances that the person or property of another is necessarily or obviously exposed to the danger of probable injury, he does so at his peril. He is absolutely liable for damages which result from that blasting whether he was negligent in his conduct of the operation or not. Worth v. Dunn, 98 Conn. 51, 59, 118 A. 467; Welz v. Manzillo, 113 Conn. 674, 682, 155 A. 841. To exempt such a one from liability for damage caused by vibrations or concussion resulting from his blasting would be to put a limitation upon the scope of the rule which would not be justified by any considerations of logic or practicality.
The defendants make the additional contention that public policy should prevent the application of the rule of absolute liability to this case because the blasting was being done pursuant to a contract with the United States government and, therefore, it was being done for the public welfare. The record is uncertain as to whether this claim was made in the trial court, but there is enough indication that it was to warrant our consideration of it. The argument is not in any sense based upon the principle that a sovereign is immune from suit, as, of course, it could not be, because the United States is not a party to this litigation. Nor is it based on the doctrine of governmental immunity. The contention really is that the social value of the use of dynamite in a public work outweighs the risk of damage resulting therefrom through concussion and *572vibration and that for that reason the rule of absolute liability ought to be relaxed.
It is true that in Booth v. Rome, W. & O. T. R. Co., 140 N. Y. 267, 278, 35 N. E. 592, the leading case adhering to the minority rule, it is indicated that if the blasting had been done pursuant to a contract with the state that would be an added reason to deny absolute liability. This was upon the authority of Benner v. Atlantic Dredging Co., 134 N. Y. 156, 161, 31 N. E. 328. No case has come to our attention which, in a jurisdiction adhering to the rule of absolute liability, holds that the application of the rule should be affected by the fact that the blasting was done in aid of a public work. Looked at from the viewpoint of a property owner, damage to his property is just as real when it results from blasting in connection with a public work as when it results from dynamiting in pursuance of a purely private enterprise. If the property owner is to be compensated in the one case, he should be compensated in the other. The advantages to society of a public work are not so great as to require that private citizens suffer damage without compensation. Moreover, even the defendants are not contending that there should be no liability for damage resulting from the throwing of debris in dynamiting pursuant to a contract with the government. They ask that the rule of absolute liability be relaxed only as regards damage resulting through concussion or vibration. As was pointed out above, there is no real difference between the two, and reason would be strained if we held that the rule of absolute liability for blasting in connection with a public work applied in one case and not in the other. We conclude that the trial court was right in deciding that the defendants were hable in this case for such *573damage as was caused by their blasting operations, irrespective of negligence on their part.
The trial court concluded that the plaintiff was entitled to recover as damage the actual cost to it of the repairs made or intended which were reasonably necessary to restore the building to its former condition. The defendants assign error in this conclusion. The ultimate measure of damages in a case such as this is the diminution in the value of the plaintiff’s property caused by the defendant’s tort. It is, however, well established that such diminution in value may be determined by the cost of repairing the damage, provided, of course, that that cost does not exceed the former value of the property and provided also that the repairs do not enhance the value of the property over what it was before it was damaged. “And when the property injured may be repaired, if the repairs will substantially restore the property to its former condition, the cost of such repairs will ordinarily furnish proper proof of the loss.” Hawkins v. Garford Trucking Co., 96 Conn. 337, 341, 114 A. 94; see Ferrigno v. Odell, 113 Conn. 420, 427, 155 A. 639. Recognizing this to be the law, the defendants, nevertheless, contend that to allow the plaintiff to recover the full cost of repairs puts it in a better position than it was in before the damage was done, because it is supplied with new pipes and fresh decoration of its rooms in the place of pipes and decorations which had depreciated prior to the damage. The answer to that is that the trial court found that the expenditure for repairs would “restore the building of the plaintiff to its condition of usefulness prior to the commencement of the blasting operations.” This means that the repairs would do no more than put the building into the condition it was in before the blasting. Then too, as we said in Ball v. Pardy Construction Co., 108 Conn. 549, 551, *574143 A. 855, “From the very nature of the situation,the amount of loss cannot be proved with exactitude and all that can be required is that the evidence, with such certainty as the nature of the particular case may permit, lay a foundation which will enable the trier to make a fair and reasonable estimate.” The trial court measured the damages correctly.
The defendants also assign error to the conclusion of fact made by the trial court that their blasting operations were the proximate cause of the damage sustained by the plaintiff. Without discussing the subordinate facts found, suffice it to say that they justify the conclusion.
The rulings on evidence excepted to by the defendants and pressed by them on appeal were correct. One group of such rulings was the admission in evidence of several letters written by the attorney for the plaintiffs to the defendants calling attention to the fact that their blasting was damaging the plaintiffs’ property. One of the claims made by the plaintiffs on the trial was that the defendants were negligent in conducting the blasting operations. Negligence had been denied by the defendants. The letters were relevant to that claim because they put the defendants on notice that it was claimed that they should exercise greater care. The letters were not self-serving declarations or hearsay, as contended by the defendants, because they were admissible to prove, not the truth of the statements contained therein, but the fact of the defendants’ knowledge of the claimed effect of their operations, since that knowledge should influence their future conduct. Another group of rulings admitted testimony of damage done by the defendants’ blasting to property at a greater distance from the point of the explosions than the plaintiffs’ property. This evidence was relevant to the claim of the plaintiffs that the force *575of the explosions was sufficient to cause the damage of which they complained and, therefore, had a bearing on proving the causal connection between the blasting and the damage to them.
The plaintiffs on their appeal press two assignments of error. The first of these is that the court erred in failing to find that the defendants were negligent. In view of our conclusion that negligence was not an essential element of the plaintiffs’ case, this question is academic and need not be discussed. The other assignment is that the court erred in refusing to award nominal damages to the plaintiff Carbulon. This plaintiff suffered no actual damage and, therefore, no substantial injustice was done in denying him any recovery. If we assume, without deciding, that he was entitled to nominal damages, the refusal of the trial court under the circumstances to award them to him does not justify a reversal. Sacramone v. DeMatteo, 136 Conn. 66, 70, 68 A. 2d 167; Went v. Schmidt, 117 Conn. 257, 259, 167 A. 721.
There is no error on either appeal.
In this opinion Jennings and Shea, Js., concurred.
For a full discussion and criticism of the New York rule, see Gregory, Trespass to Negligence to Absolute Liability, 37 Va. L. Rev. 359, 370, 374.

=== CASE 9736789 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:06:41.316317+00 ===

Baldwin, J.
(concurring). I concur in the result but I do not agree to the meaning given in the majority opinion for the words “in such a way as will necessarily or obviously expose the person of another to probable injury,” which appear in Worth v. Dunn, 98 Conn. 51, 59, 118 A. 467. The majority opinion states that these words do no more than define an intrinsically dangerous operation and that to incur liability one must use an intrinsically dangerous instrumentality in such a way that it necessarily or obviously exposes persons or property to probable injury. That connotes a degree of fault on the part of the defendant which is, at least, negligence and, probably, *576even more than negligence. It carries with it an inference of wilful or deliberate misconduct. The majority opinion subscribes to the rule of absolute liability imposed when dynamite is exploded and hurls debris which injures persons or damages property, and we apply that rule to injury or damage caused by vibration and concussion. Absolute liability is liability without fault. If the words quoted mean what the majority claims for them, they add a needless and confusing qualification or condition. If the same rule is to apply for injury or damage caused by concussion and vibration as applies for damage caused by a direct hit, then these words in the Worth v. Dunn case mean no more than that the dynamite was used under circumstances and conditions which demonstrate to the trier that it could and did in fact cause the damage for which complaint is made.

=== CASE 9736790 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:06:41.320067+00 ===

O’Sullivan, J.
(concurring). I concur in the result on the basis of the dogmatic proposition, with which the opinion begins its legal discussion, that “one who by exploding dynamite causes damage to another’s property through flying debris is absolutely liable for that damage irrespective of whether he was negligent. . . .” This principle makes an insurer of the blaster, and rightly so. Exner v. Sherman Power Construction Co., 54 F. 2d 510, 512. Dynamite is an intrinsically dangerous substance. Worth v. Dunn, 98 Conn. 51, 60, 118 A. 467; Norwalk Gaslight Co. v. Norwalk, 63 Conn. 495, 527, 28 A. 32. The possibility of its doing damage is great. The blaster should be subjected to absolute liability for injury to any property caused by the potentially destructive energy of a force which he has intentionally released. If I understand the opinion correctly, it makes liability absolute only when dynamite is used “in such a way as will necessarily or obvi*577ously expose the {property] of another to the danger of probable injury.” This means, inferentially, that under circumstances which do not fall within the quoted phrase liability is conditioned on negligence. This emasculates the principle that the blaster acts at his peril. It reaches a result with which I am not in accord.

=== CASE 2207329 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:19.01085+00 ===

208 Cal. App. 2d 1 (1962)
GLADYS STERLING, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
CITY OF OAKLAND et al., Defendants and Respondents.
Civ. No. 19732.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. Three.
Sept. 28, 1962.
Haet, Dominguez, Speiser & Williams, Goldstein, Brann & Stern and Franklyn K. Brann for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Hilton J. Melby, City Attorney, and Frederick M. Cunningham, Deputy City Attorney, for Defendants and Respondents.
DEVINE, J.
Plaintiff, appellant, brought this action seeking an injunction to prevent defendants, the City of Oakland and its chief of police, from keeping on file her photograph and fingerprints, and seeking declaratory relief to determine if defendants are entitled to maintain a record of her arrest and to keep the said photograph and fingerprints, following dismissal of misdemeanor charges which had been made against her. The pleading in respect of the injunction contains allegations that "by reason of said police record plaintiff is more liable to arrest by police officers on the grounds that she has a prior arrest record and said factor is considered by police officers in making arrests of individuals; that in the event plaintiff is ever arrested again or charged and convicted of a crime, the fact that the Oakland police records show she has been arrested previously will be used by the court in determining what sentence to impose." There is no allegation that the fingerprints and photograph would *3 be disseminated generally, or at all, and there is no allegation that the photograph would be exhibited in any way to the public, or that it would be available for public inspection. Demurrer was overruled, but at trial the court sustained objection to testimony offered by plaintiff, on the ground that the complaint does not state a cause of action, and rendered judgment in favor of defendants on that ground. Plaintiff appeals from the judgment.
The facts stated in this paragraph are those alleged in the complaint. On September 21, 1957, Mrs. Sterling was a passenger in a Yellow Cab driven by defendant Oran Sheppard. Upon arriving at her home she offered to pay her $1.90 fare with a $20 bill. The driver refused this tender, saying that plaintiff should know better than to pay with a $20 bill. Sheppard then stated that he would drive somewhere in order to get change, but that he would charge the additional fare. Plaintiff refused to do so, but Sheppard still proceeded to drive to a cafe at Seventh and Pine Streets in Oakland (about three blocks from plaintiff's residence) and refused to allow plaintiff to leave the cab until the additional fare was paid. When plaintiff refused to pay, Sheppard called the Yellow Cab Company office and the police officers were summoned. A citizen's arrest was made by Sheppard.
While being held by the police officers, plaintiff had to submit to fingerprinting and photographing, and a record was made of the arrest. Plaintiff seeks to have the prints and photograph returned or destroyed. On October 24, 1957, the charges against plaintiff (violation of section 5- 14.181 of the Oakland Municipal Code [refusal to pay taxicab fare]) were dismissed because of the failure of Oran Sheppard to appear in court to testify.
The cab company was a party defendant to this action, in counts charging false imprisonment and malicious prosecution, and a jury returned verdicts on both counts for compensatory and punitive damages, although the awards were small in amount. Plaintiff also sued nine police officers; verdict was in their favor. There is no appeal from the judgment for plaintiff against Yellow Cab Company nor from judgment in favor of defendants, the police officers.
Appellant contends that the police had no right to take her fingerprints and photograph upon charge of the misdemeanor, and that, even if they had such right, they must, on demand, return or destroy them after her dismissal.
There is but little reference to fingerprints and photographs *4 of offenders or suspected offenders against the law, in this state, except in the statutes relating to records of convicted felons, certain offenders against children, fugitives from justice, and possessors of various kinds of contraband, in Penal Code sections 11100-11112. Regarding other persons arrested or accused, there is no specific statute. In 1959, subdivision 21 was added to section 7 of the Penal Code, and it reads: "To 'book' signifies the recordation of an arrest in official police records, and the taking by the police of fingerprints and photographs of the person arrested, or any of these acts following an arrest." In the same year, section 851.5 of the Penal Code was enacted, giving any person arrested the right to make a telephone call immediately after he is booked, under certain circumstances (this was amended to two calls, and the circumstances were somewhat changed by amendment in 1961), with the implication that recordation, photographing and fingerprinting, or any one or more of these acts, would have been done by the arresting or custodial officers.
[1] In general, fingerprinting and photographing of accused persons, even before conviction, has been held valid in the absence of statute, upon the grounds of a means of identifying the accused and of assisting in the recapture in event he escapes or flees before trial. (Downs v. Swann, 111 Md. 53 [73 A. 653, 134 Am. St. Rep. 586, 23 L.R.A. N.S. 739]; State ex rel. Bruns v. Clausmeier, 154 Ind. 599 [57 N.E. 541, 77 Am. St. Rep. 511, 50 L.R.A. 73]; Bartletta v. McFeeley, 107 N.J. Eq. 141 [152 A. 17]; People v. Sallow, 100 Misc. 447 [165 N.Y.S. 915]; United States v. Cross, 20 D.C. (9 Mackey) 365.)
[2a] More important, however, to the decision in the case than the subject of the right to take fingerprints and photographs at all, is the question whether fingerprints and photographs, once taken, must be delivered to the accused, on demand, when the accused is dismissed. We are of the opinion that plaintiff's complaint does not state a cause of action, and that the judgment should be affirmed. We base our decision chiefly upon the omission of the Legislature of this state to prescribe any duty to return photographs or fingerprints, and upon certain statutory relief which does exist in this state; but we find some support for the judgment in the decisions of other states.
Addressing ourselves first to the decisions in other states, we find that there are but few; on the whole, however, they tend to support the judgment herein. The cases cited by appellant are given herein, with brief statements of the reasons *5 why we do not deem them persuasive in the case before us: (1) Two Louisiana cases decided in 1905 and 1906, Itzkovitch v. Whitaker, 115 La. 479 [39 So. 499, 112 Am. St. Rep. 272, 1 L.R.A. N.S. 1147], and Schulman v. Whitaker, 117 La. 704 [42 So. 227, 8 Ann.Cas. 1174, 7 L.R.A. N.S. 274], in which placing of pictures in a "rogues' gallery" before trial was held enjoinable. These cases were decided over 50 years ago, and had to do with "rogues' galeries" as they then existed. (2) State ex rel. Reed v. Harris (1941) 348 Mo. 426 [153 S.W.2d 834], in which it was held that a cause might be stated (although it was not yet stated) against circularization of fingerprints and photographs of an alleged traffic violator. The case had to do with circularization, not merely retention. (3) Miller v. Gillespie (1917) 196 Mich. 423 [163 N.W. 22, L.R.A. 1917E 774], in which the court held that the arrest report need not be returned on acquittal, and there was dictum taken from the Louisiana cases, supra, on placing of photographs in a rogues' gallery. The holding of the case, as distinguished from the dictum, had nothing to do with the matter before us. (4) State ex rel. Mavity v. Tyndall (1946) 224 Ind. 364 [66 N.E.2d 755], appeal dismissed 333 U.S. 834 [68 S. Ct. 609, 92 L. Ed. 1118], rehearing denied 333 U.S. 858 [68 S. Ct. 732, 92 L. Ed. 1138], in which it was held that plaintiff stated a cause of action by alleging that although gaming charges against him had been dismissed, his photograph, with a number across the body, was to be displayed in a rogues' gallery for public exhibition. There is no such allegation in our case. (5) United States v. Kelly (1932) 55 F.2d 67 [83 A.L.R. 122], in which the court recognized the right of taking fingerprints without statute, and stated that the court was informed it was the practice of the Federal Bureau of Investigation to return them in event of acquittal. This, too, probably was dictum and, besides, the information related to a practice existing in 1932.
On the other hand, it was held in the Mavity case, supra, at page 762 [66 N.E.2d], that if photographs are filed away from public gaze, and not published or exhibited in a public place called a "rogues' gallery," they are in the same category as filed fingerprints, and the complainant was not entitled to their return; and in State ex rel. Mavity v. Tyndall (1947) 225 Ind. 360 [74 N.E.2d 914], appeal dismissed 333 U.S. 834 [68 S. Ct. 609, 92 L. Ed. 1118], rehearing denied 333 U.S. 858 [68 S. Ct. 732, 92 L. Ed. 1138], wherein allegations relating to the rogues' gallery had been omitted from the complaint, judgment *6 sustaining demurrer was affirmed. In Kolb v. O'Connor, 14 Ill.App.2d 81 [142 N.E.2d 818], the court pointed out, at page 823 [142 N.E.2d], that the rogues' gallery as it had existed in Louisiana seems to have been a place where the pictures were publicly exhibited, and reversed a judgment which had decreed return of the photographs where the evidence showed that the practice was merely to keep photographs in the police files.
[3] There is no statute in this state on the subject of return or destruction of photographs or fingerprints of persons who have been accused of crime, either misdemeanor or felony, and who have been acquitted on trial or dismissed without trial. A bill to require return of photographs and fingerprints, on demand, to anyone who has been arrested, after determination of the criminal action or proceeding in his favor, was introduced in the Assembly in 1961, and was referred to the Committee on Criminal Procedure. There it was amended to limit the requirement of return to cases of citizen's arrest, and provision was made for a fee of not more than $25 for administration costs, payable by the returnee. The amended bill (Assembly Bill 1211) was reported out of committee, but that was the last of its history.
Thus, plaintiff can rely on no statute, and the failure of the Legislature to enact the proposed bill, in one form or another, is some evidence that the Legislature does not consider it necessary or proper or expedient to enact such legislation.
We deem the subject matter to reside principally within the legislative domain. In giving, in this paragraph, some of the reasons which lead us to this conclusion, we do not mean to intimate that a statute should or should not be enacted, but to indicate that the subject belongs primarily to the lawmakers. [4] The magnitude of the task of returning fingerprints and photographs on demand, and of making certain that they are returned to the correct person, is a matter for legislative consideration. As to fingerprints, there may be considered the facts that fingerprinting has been so common that it seems that by 1956 over 70,000,000 persons' fingerprints had been recorded in the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and that fingerprinting in itself, apart from arrest, is no longer considered an indignity (see Everett, New Procedures of Scientific Investigation and the Protection of the Accused's Rights (1959) Duke L.Rev. 45); and that, although the taking of the fingerprints of a person arrested who is wholly innocent may have been of more or less mortification, the filed *7 prints are decipherable only by experts. (See De Angelis, The Right of Persons Who Have Been Discharged or Acquitted of Criminal Charges to Compel the Return of Fingerprints, Photographs, and Other Police Records, 27 Temple L.Q. 441, 449.) Photographs, of course, are in a somewhat different category, but here, too, the filing may be so handled as to prevent disclosure. Whether they are generally in danger of falling into the view of others than the custodians, or are well guarded, is a matter which the Legislature, if it desires, can determine. [5] Although particular cases may be presented in which privacy would be so threatened, by indiscriminate or injudicious display of a photograph by custodians of records, and particularly of photographs, as to justify action by a court of equity, there is nothing in the pleading in this case which is of that nature.
If the Legislature should come to the conclusion, in general, that there should be delivery of the items, there would still be the matter of possible classification according to the types of offense charged, what demand would be necessary, and other details requiring the particularity of a statute.
A final consideration is that the Legislature has enacted statutes for the protection of acquitted or dismissed persons. In 1961, the Legislature added section 11116 to the Penal Code, which provides in part that: "Whenever a criminal complaint or accusation is filed in any superior, municipal or justice court, the clerk, or, if there be no clerk, the judge of that court shall furnish a report of the disposition of such case to the sheriff, police department or other law enforcement agency primarily responsible for the investigation of the crime alleged, in a form and manner prescribed or approved by the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation." Thus, a record of the fact that the complaint against plaintiff was dismissed has been made. Indeed, the photograph and fingerprints on file with the police department will be a permanent means by which plaintiff can establish her identity as the person who was dismissed. Although she may personally desire to have the records returned to her, it may well be that the Legislature has decided, not only for the public interest, but for her own as well, that the record made in compliance with section 11116 is reinforced by the retention in the police files of the identifying picture and prints.
[2b] We do not believe any weight must be given to the theory that the police would be more likely to arrest plaintiff in the future for the rather trivial offense with which she was *8 charged because of this incident, when the case terminated so favorably to her; and we cannot place any weight at all on the proposition that a judge might be inclined to impose a heavier sentence for any other offense which plaintiff might commit.
As evidence of her vindication, plaintiff can point not only to evidence of her exoneration in the record, made pursuant to section 11116, but also to the verdicts of the jury and to the judgment which she was awarded.
Judgment affirmed.
Draper, P. J., and Salsman, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9736791 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:06:45.267629+00 ===

*540HENDERSON, Justice.
PROCEDURAL HISTORY/ISSUES
Ken Herren (Herren) brought an action against Doug Gantvoort (Gantvoort) on December 26, 1987, alleging that Gantvoort was negligent in the operation of his pickup on November 22, 1985, when he slid into Herren on State Highway 22 and that such negligence was the direct and proximate cause of Herren’s neck and back injuries.
This case was tried to a jury on January 11, 12, and 13, 1989. Herren made a motion for a directed verdict on the issue of Gantvoort’s liability following Herren’s case-in-chief. The motion was denied. Thus, evidence continued to unfold during Gantvoort’s side of the case. Herren also made a motion for a directed verdict following Gantvoort’s case-in-chief which motion was also denied.
Herren requested a jury instruction on Gantvoort’s duty “to see what was there to be seen,” which instruction was denied by the trial court. The issues were submitted to the jury, which returned a verdict for Gantvoort finding him not negligent.
On January 30, 1989, following a hearing on the matter, the trial court denied Her-ren’s motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict and Herren’s motion in the alternative for a new trial. A final judgment was entered on behalf of Gantvoort by the trial court on February 7,1989. On appeal, Herren argues:
(1) that the trial court erred in denying his motion for a directed verdict;
(2) that the trial court erred in denying his motion for a judgment notwithstanding the jury verdict and in the alternative for a new trial;
(3) that the trial court erred in not admitting his proposed jury instruction, that Gantvoort had a duty to see what was there to be seen;
(4) that the trial court erred in entering a final judgment on behalf of Gantv-oort where the verdict was not supported by the evidence or the settled law of South Dakota.
—Holding—
We affirm the trial court’s decision.
FACTS
Ken Herren was injured in an accident on an icy road (South Dakota Highway 22, one and one-half miles west of the Minnesota border) on November 22, 1985, after Gantvoort’s pickup collided with Herren’s semi-trailer.
Gantvoort was driving his pickup when he came upon two hills. As he topped the second hill he spotted Herren’s semi-truck in his lane ahead of him traveling in the same direction. His pickup truck collided with Herren’s vehicle causing the pickup to drift into the right shoulder of the road. The only damage to the semi-truck was a broken tail light lens while the pickup truck had damage to the front sheet metal of the vehicle. Therefore, damages to the vehicles were quite minor.
After the collision, Herren stopped his truck about a quarter mile down the road after realizing that his truck had been hit. Herren testified he did not know what happened or even that he had been hit until he saw Gantvoort’s vehicle in the ditch through his right-hand rear window.
An eyewitness, Dennis Toft, said he observed the vehicles and the accident. He was traveling east on the road when he came even with Herren’s semi-truck and saw Gantvoort come over the second hill. Toft estimated that Herren’s truck was traveling 15-20 miles per hour slower than Gantvoort’s pickup.
DECISION
I. The trial court did not err in denying Herren’s motion for a directed verdict.
Herren first argues that the trial court should have granted his motion for a directed verdict. We disagree. A motion for directed verdict under SDCL 15-6-50(a) questions the legal sufficiency of the evidence to sustain a verdict against a moving party. Carlson v. First Nat’l Bk., 429 N.W.2d 463, 466 (S.D.1988). Upon such a motion, the trial court must determine whether there is any substantial evidence to sustain the action. Sabag v. Continen*541tal South Dakota, 374 N.W.2d 349, 355 (S.D.1985). A trial court must accept the evidence which is most favorable to the non-moving party and indulge all legitimate inferences in his favor that can be fairly drawn therefrom. Carlson, supra,. If sufficient evidence -exists so that reasonable minds could differ, a directed verdict is not appropriate. Id. The trial court’s decision and rulings on such motions are presumed correct and this Court will not seek reasons to reverse. Lytle v. Morgan, 270 N.W.2d 359, 360 (S.D.1978). We conclude that at the time these motions were made, sufficient evidence existed to reasonably conclude Gantvoort was not negligent. His alleged negligence was a question for the jury.
At trial, Gantvoort testified that the roads were extremely icy and slippery so he slowed his pickup to 40 miles per hour. Gantvoort further testified he did not see Herren’s semi-truck until he came over the second hill when the truck was approximately 400 feet away, that he tried to apply his brakes first, then swerved for the right ditch, but struck the right rear corner of Herren’s semi-truck.
The only witness to the accident was Dennis Toft, who stated that he was driving east on the highway and saw Gantvoort come over the second hill. A jury could reasonably infer that Toft saw Gantvoort’s pickup coming over the hill for the first time as he (Toft) pulled even with Herren’s vehicle. From this testimony, the jury could reasonably conclude Gantvoort also could not see the Herren vehicle because the second hill blocked his view and he was therefore faced with a sudden emergency, not of his own making.
Viewing the evidence most favorably to Gantvoort, we conclude that reasonable minds could differ as to whether Gantvoort was negligent. Therefore, the trial court did not err in refusing to grant Herren’s motion for directed verdict.
II. The trial court properly denied Her-ren’s motion for a judgment notwithstanding the jury verdict or in the alternative for a new trial.
In reviewing a trial court’s ruling on a motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, this Court must view evidence in a light most favorable to the jury verdict, giving the prevailing party the benefit of every inference and resolving in its favor every controverted fact. Carlson, supra at 467. The same grounds may be asserted as a basis for directed verdict and judgment notwithstanding the verdict. Carlson, supra.
In this case, the jury returned a verdict in favor of Gantvoort. We must determine, without weighing the evidence, whether there is sufficient evidence which would support the jury’s verdict in favor of Gantvoort (finding him not negligent). Herren asserts the same grounds for judgment notwithstanding the verdict as he did for his motion for a directed verdict. Her-ren also contends a judgment notwithstanding the verdict or a new trial should be granted because the jury’s decision against him was based upon passion and prejudice.
The jury is the sole judge of all questions of fact and credibility of the witnesses and the weight to be given the testimony of each of them. Sharkey v. Washington Nat. Ins. Co., 373 N.W.2d 421 (S.D.1985). Under direct examination by Herren’s counsel and on cross-examination, Herren admitted to various falsehoods he expressed concerning the present case. The jury is entitled to consider evidence of this kind in connection with all the other facts in evidence in deciding the weight to be given to the testimony of that witness. Gross v. Gross, 355 N.W.2d 4 (S.D.1984). Since Herren’s testimony was replete with inconsistencies, the jury may properly disregard his testimony. Hence, we hold that the trial court did not err in denying Her-ren’s motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict.
Herren has also alleged that a new trial should be granted on the grounds that the jury verdict was contrary to the weight of the evidence and the settled law of the State of South Dakota. It has been stated that the trial court has broad discretionary power in granting or denying a motion for a new trial, and generally that order will *542not be disturbed absent a clear showing of abuse of discretion. Helper v. Triple U Enterprises Inc., 388 N.W.2d 525, 530 (S.D.1986). We conclude the evidence is sufficient to support the verdict and the judgment and we do not believe the jury’s verdict was a product of “passion and prejudice.” Therefore, we find no abuse of discretion in the trial court’s denial of Her-ren’s motion for a new trial.
III. The trial court did not err when it refused to admit Herren’s proposed jury instruction, that Gantvoort had a duty to see what there was there to be seen.
We next address the trial court’s denial of Herren’s proposed jury instruction, “that defendant had a duty to see what was there to be seen.” Jury instructions are adequate, if when considered as a whole, they correctly state the law and inform the jury. State v. White Mountain, 332 N.W.2d 726 (S.D.1983); State v. Traversie, 387 N.W.2d 2 (S.D.1986). Her-ren’s proposed Instruction Number 2 stated:
It is the law of the state of South Dakota that the operator of a motor vehicle has a duty to see what is plainly in front of him.
If the operator of a motor vehicle fails to see an automobile which was plainly to be seen in front of that vehicle, said operator is bound to the same extent so as he had actually seen the automobile.
If you find the plaintiff’s truck was in plain view in front of defendant, but defendant failed to see it, defendant has the same duty as if he had actually saw plaintiff’s vehicle.
We note that the trial court gave three instructions as follows:
Instruction No. 10
It is the duty of every driver of a vehicle using a public highway to exercise ordinary care at all times to avoid placing himself or others in danger and to exercise ordinary care at all times to avoid a collision.
While a driver may assume that others will exercise due care and obey the law, he may not for that reason omit any of the care which the law demands of him; and any person driving on a public highway is bound to anticipate the presence on the highway of other person, vehicles and objects;
Instruction No. 11
The statute SDCL 32-25-3 provides that it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle on a highway located in this state at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing or at speeds in excess of those fixed by this chapter or provided by the transportation commission.
This statute sets the standard of care of the ordinarily careful and prudent person. If you find the Defendant violated it, such violation is negligence.
Instruction No. 12
The statute SDCL 32-26-40 provides that the driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and conditions of the highway.
This statute sets the standard of care of the ordinarly careful and prudent person. If you find the Defendant violated it, such violation is negligence.
As the instructions given to the jury correctly stated the law on the duty that a driver must maintain while operating a motor vehicle, we must conclude that such instructions were adequate. Additionally, we believe that the legal principles set forth in Herren’s proposed instruction were generally embodied in the various instructions given by the trial court. It is not error for the trial court to refuse to give jury instructions which are already embodied in other given instructions. State v. Cook, 319 N.W.2d 809, 814 (S.D.1982). Finally, we believe that Herren has failed to show the trial court’s denial of his proposed instructions prejudiced him in any manner since it is unlikely that the jury would have returned a different verdict if his instructions had been given. See Cook, 319 N.W.2d at 814. We therefore hold that the *543trial court did not err in refusing Herren’s proposed instruction.
IV. The trial court did not err in entering a final judgment on behalf of Gantvoort where the verdict was supported by the evidence and the settled law of South Dakota.
Finally, Herren argues that entry of final judgment on behalf of Gantvoort was erroneous where Herren demonstrated at trial that Gantvoort had violated one or more statutory duties that he owed Herren. As stated earlier, we believe that reasonable minds could differ as to whether or not Gantvoort violated one or more statutory duties that he owed Herren. When viewing the evidence most favorably to Gantv-oort, Herren did not demonstrate that Gantvoort neglected his duty to him. Budahl v. Gordon and Davis Associates, 323 N.W.2d 853 (S.D.1982).
Broad discretion is given to the trial court when determining whether or not to grant a new trial. Having reviewed the evidence, we cannot conclude the trial court abused its discretion because sufficient evidence existed to support the jury’s verdict.
MORGAN and MILLER, JJ., concur.
WUEST, C.J., concurs in result.
SABERS, J., dissents.

=== CASE 9736834 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:07:55.828276+00 ===

MONTEMURO, Justice,
dissenting.
I dissent from the Majority’s conclusion that the trial court erred in denying appellants’ suppression motions, and would affirm the judgments of sentence in this case. My disagreement is based on my belief, consonant with that of Justice Papadakos’ dissent, that the Majority’s holding invalidates the drug courier profile approved by the United States Supreme Court, thus impeding drug interdiction efforts involving use of the profile by limiting its application to very specific fact patterns. Moreover, I believe this has been accomplished by dismissal of the facts as they were justifiably found by the trial court.
*514The thrust of the Majority’s holding is that the characteristics contained in the drug courier profile here were substituted by the investigating officers for personal observation of behavior which would have aroused reasonable suspicion so as to warrant a Terry stop. However, this requires dismissal of the trial court’s contrary finding, that the testimony of the investigating officer, albeit circuitous, consisted entirely of observations made by him of the appearance and conduct of the appellants on the day of their arrest. The Majority’s rejection of empirical experience as if it were mechanistic fantasy seems to me to contravene our scope of review, and to impugn the integrity of the trial court, who emphatically determined the facts to be otherwise than the Majority has done. In concluding as it does, the Majority has ignored the admonition of our Supreme Court in United States v. Sokolow, 490 U.S. 1, 109 S.Ct. 1581, 104 L.Ed.2d 1 (1989), that “[a] court sitting to determine the existence of reasonable suspicion must require the agent to articulate the factors leading to that conclusion, but the fact that these factors may be set forth in a ‘profile’ does not somehow detract from their evidentiary significance as seen by a trained agent.” Id. at 10, 109 S.Ct. at 1587.
The reversal of the trial court’s finding here, however, is merely a necessary precondition for the larger conclusion that while the drug courier profile is “not per se unreasonable” (Majority Opinion at 625), it is nevertheless constitutionally unacceptable because it is used independently of personal observation, the instant case bearing witness to its unacceptability. Thus, the objection is used to prove itself.
I disagree with the Majority’s conclusions, both because I believe the profiles to be useful tools in the interdiction process when not, as here, limited to replication of the facts in Sokolow, and because I believe there is no conflict between the profile and personal observation.
Accordingly, I would affirm the judgments of sentence.
PAPADAKOS, J., joins in this dissenting opinion.

=== CASE 2207585 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:21.141287+00 ===

271 Cal.App.2d 555 (1969)
CITY OF OAKLAND, Petitioner,
v.
WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION APPEALS BOARD, MARYON BERNARDINI et al., Respondents.
Civ. No. 25873.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. One.
Apr. 8, 1969.
Edward A. Goggin, City Attorney, and George M. Cahalan, Assistant City Attorney, for Petitioner.
Everett A. Corton, Richard E. Ryan, Caroll, Davis, Burdick & McDonough and Philip Paul Bowe for Respondents. *556
ELKINGTON, J.
This proceeding, in review of a Workmen's Compensation Appeals Board award, is one of a series of cases relating to the "double recovery" provision found in section 249(2) of the Charter of the City of Oakland. (See Act 5557, Deering's General Laws, Uncodified; City of Oakland v. Workmen's Comp. App. Bd. (Reimers) 259 Cal.App.2d 163 [66 Cal.Rptr. 283]; Barnett v. Brizee, 258 Cal.App.2d 97 [65 Cal.Rptr. 493].)
Section 249(2) is designed to prevent that city's liability to the same person, for the industrial death of, or injury to, a policeman or fireman, under the workmen's compensation provisions of the Labor Code and under the city's retirement system. It has repeatedly been held that a municipality may protect itself in this manner from such double liability. (See City of Los Angeles v. Industrial Acc. Com. (Morse) 63 Cal.2d 263 [46 Cal.Rptr. 110, 404 P.2d 814]; City of Los Angeles v. Industrial Acc. Com. (Fraide) 63 Cal.2d 242 [46 Cal.Rptr. 97, 404 P.2d 801]; Stafford v. Los Angeles etc. Retirement Board, 42 Cal.2d 795 [270 P.2d 12]; Lyons v. Hoover, 41 Cal.2d 145 [258 P.2d 4]; Healy v. Industrial Acc. Com., 41 Cal.2d 118 [258 P.2d 1]; City & County of San Francisco v. Workmen's Comp. App. Bd. (Shaughnessy-Swall-Morey) 269 Cal.App.2d 382, 390 [74 Cal.Rptr. 810]; City & County of San Francisco v. Workmen's Comp. App. Bd. (Engler) 267 Cal.App.2d 771 [73 Cal.Rptr. 429]; City of Oakland v. Workmen's Comp. App. Bd. (Reimers) supra, 259 Cal.App.2d 163; Barnett v. Brizee, supra, 258 Cal.App.2d 97.)
The Charter of the City of Oakland (including  249(2)) was enacted under the authority of article XI, section 8 of the California Constitution. Evidence Code section 451 provides that judicial notice shall be taken of the "public statutory law of this state ... and ... any charter described in Section ... 8 of Article XI of the California Constitution." The appeals board accordingly was required to, and did, take such judicial notice. Evidence Code section 459 requires that this reviewing court shall take judicial notice of "each matter that the trial court was required to notice under Section 451."
Dante Bernardini, a fireman employed by the City of Oakland, died June 10, 1967, as a result of a duty-incurred injury. Totally dependent on him for support were his wife Maryon and their daughter Denise. On October 6, 1967, Mrs. Bernardini, on behalf of herself and Denise, filed with the *557 Workmen's Compensation Appeals Board a claim for the statutory death benefit of $20,500. Thereafter Mrs. Bernardini filed notice with the appeals board stating, "I have authorized my attorney ... to repudiate and withdraw any claim I as an individual may have to workmen's compensation benefits." The appeals board then made the entire maximum allowable death award in favor of Denise "against City of Oakland ... payable at the rate of $70.00 a week ... and continuing until the total amount of $20,500.00 shall have been paid."
[1] The City of Oakland contends that the appeals board acted in excess of its jurisdiction and abused its discretion in awarding the entire maximum death benefit to Denise instead of dividing it equally between the two dependents.
Under the City of Oakland Charter Mrs. Bernardini is entitled to, and we may infer, receiving, a monthly retirement allowance. This retirement allowance and the above mentioned compensation award are based on Mr. Bernardini's injury and death. Charter section 249(2) as pertinent here provides: "It is the intention of this section that allowance granted to or on account of members of the [Retirement] System for injury, illness or death incurred in the performance of duty shall not be cumulative with [workmen's compensation] benefits under the Labor Code of California awarded as the result of the same injury, illness or death. If any member of the System or dependent receives compensation under the Labor Code for disability or death arising out of and in the course of the performance of duty, any payment on account thereof shall be applied as a credit and set off against any payment on account of ... retirement allowance or other benefit granted to or on account of such member under the provisions of this Article. ..."
The contention of the city, and the waiver by Mrs. Bernardini of her compensation claim, become meaningful when we note the practice of the appeals board, in cases such as this, where for any reason a dependent widow cannot, or does not, receive workmen's compensation death benefits, to award the entire maximum allowable benefits to the dependent child or children. (See City & County of San Francisco v. Workmen's Comp. App. Bd. (Shaughnessy-Swall-Morey) 269 Cal.App.2d 382 [74 Cal.Rptr. 810].) The insistence of the City of Oakland that Mrs. Bernardini be awarded one-half of the statutory death benefit results from a desire to offset her retirement *558 allowance against her portion of the workmen's compensation award. It is equally clear that Mrs. Bernardini's "repudiation and withdrawal" of her claim stems from a wish to ensure payment of the entire award, without the deduction provided for by charter section 249(2).
At the appeals board hearings the City of Oakland did not expressly state the reasons for its opposition to the award. The appeals board therefore states that since such a contention was not made below, the city has not shown that it was prejudiced by the award. As we have noted, ante, the appeals board was required to judicially notice the City of Oakland's Charter provisions relating to Mrs. Bernardini's monthly allowance, and the city's right to credit on such allowances against any compensation award to her. And it is clear, since Mrs. Bernardini's counsel had previously represented the compensation claimants in City of Oakland v. Workmen's Comp. App. Bd. (Reimers) supra, 259 Cal.App.2d 163, and Barnett v. Brizee, supra, 258 Cal.App.2d 97, q.v., that all parties were in fact, fully cognizant of the reasons for the city's opposition.
The parties concede that no showing was made to the appeals board that the needs of Denise were any greater than those of her mother. Both Mrs. Bernardini and Denise were dependents of the deceased fireman. They alleged in the appeals board's proceedings that they were "totally dependent on him for support." And Labor Code section 3501 provides that they were "conclusively presumed to be wholly dependent" on him for support.  [fn. 1]
Section 4703 provides, as applicable here: "Subject to the provisions of section 4704, this section shall determine the right to a death benefit. ... If there is more than one person wholly dependent for support upon a deceased employee, the death benefit shall be divided equally among them." (Italics added.) It is thus apparent (except as provided by section 4704 which will be discussed later) that the appeals board was required by law to divide the award equally between Denise and her mother.
Section 4900 provides that "No claim for compensation ... is assignable before payment, ..." Accordingly, Mrs. Bernardini's "repudiation and withdrawal" of her claim may not be accepted for its intended purpose, a thinly veiled *559 assignment of her compensation benefits to Denise.  [fn. 2] It stands only as a renunciation or waiver of such benefits. It follows that the death benefit otherwise awardable to Mrs. Bernardini (except for the possible operation of section 4704) is now payable to no one.
Section 4704 provides, as relevant: "The commission may set apart or reassign the death benefit to any one or more of the dependents in accordance with their respective needs and in a just and equitable manner, and may order payment to a dependent subsequent in right, or not otherwise entitled thereto, upon good cause being shown therefor. ..."
It is the clear intent of the statute that wholly dependent survivors shall share equally unless the appeals board in its discretion shall determine that their respective needs differ. Upon such a determination the apportionment must be made "in a just and equitable manner." Speaking of the parent statute to section 4704 (with substantially the same language), the court in Pacific Gas & Elec. Co. v. Industrial Acc. Com., 124 Cal.App. 303, 307 [12 P.2d 647], stated, "[W]e think it is beyond debate that it designated prima facie who should receive benefits, but that it also vested in the Commission a discretion to change or vary from the statutory rule as the circumstances might demand." Referring to the same earlier statute the court in Perry v. Industrial Acc. Com., 176 Cal. 706, 710 [169 P. 353], stated: "The question [of] what disposition in any particular case is in proportion to the respective needs of the dependents and just and equitable is, of course, one of fact, the determination of which is committed to the commission, and in its determination the commission is necessarily invested with a large discretion."
The wide discretion exercised by the appeals board is nevertheless a "judicial discretion" to be exercised according to the fixed principles applying to courts generally. (See Martin v. Alcoholic Beverage etc. Appeals Board, 55 Cal.2d 867, 875 *560 [13 Cal.Rptr. 513, 362 P.2d 337].) Martin, iterating principles earlier announced by the court, stated (p. 875): " 'The mere fact that a court may have jurisdiction to make an order does not equip it to exercise judicial discretion. Its acts must not only be confined within the field of discretion but must also be of a character within the bounds of the limiting adjective "judicial." To exercise that power all the material facts in evidence must be both known and considered, together also with the legal principles essential to an informed, intelligent, and just decision. ...' " (Italics changed.)
By virtue of section 4703, such facts as were in evidence before the appeals board, indicate equal entitlement of Mrs. Bernardini and her daughter to the death benefit award. Section 4704 allows setting aside or reassignment of such death benefits, to any one or more of the dependents in accordance with their respective needs and in a just and equitable manner. It does not appear that the appeals board's decisions were reached in the informed, intelligent and just manner, after consideration of all material facts, as required by Martin v. Alcoholic Beverage etc. Appeals Board, supra. Nor can it be said that the setting aside or reassignment was made to the dependents in accordance with their respective needs or in a just and equitable manner as required by section 4704. Instead, Mrs. Bernardini's waiver and the ensuing grant of the entire maximum benefit to Denise appears to have been made for the purpose of denying to the City of Oakland its right to credit Mrs. Bernardini's pension payments against her proper and legal share of the appeals board's award.  [fn. 3]
Our task here, if reasonably possible, is to protect the right of the city to credit Mrs. Bernardini's monthly allowances against her legal share of the compensation award (or what accomplishes the same result--to give effect to her waiver) without at the same time doing violence to the appeals board's power to set apart or reassign under section 4704 a previously made award.
Section 4702 provides that "The death benefit in all cases shall be paid in installments in the same manner and amounts as temporary disability indemnity, payments to be made at least twice each calendar month, unless the appeals board *561 otherwise orders." Sections 4650-4653 relate to the manner and amounts of temporary disability indemnity payments. Generally they provide that the amount of such payments is 65 percent of the average weekly earnings of the employee ( 4653), that payments shall be made for the period commencing on the eighth day after the injury becomes permanent ( 4650), and not less frequently than twice in each calendar month ( 4651).
In City & County of San Francisco v. Workmen's Comp. App. Bd. (Shaughnessy-Swall-Morey) supra, 269 Cal.App.2d 382, 389, we held that where the statute of limitations ( 5406) has run against the widow who otherwise would be entitled to an equal share of an award, the appeals board may not later set apart or reassign that part of an award which, but for the statute of limitations, would already have been paid to the widow. The rationale of that case is reasonably applicable to the problem before us.  [fn. 4]
We conclude that on the evidence before the appeals board Mrs. Bernardini was entitled under section 4703 to receive one-half of the compensation benefits unless and until the board for cause set apart or reassigned such portion under section 4704. Her waiver constituted a renunciation of her share; it did not operate as an assignment thereof to Denise. It operated only on such payments of the award, which, but for her waiver, the widow would otherwise have received pursuant to sections 4702 and 4650-4653. It did not affect the appeals board's power for cause to set apart or reassign under Labor Code section 4704; such power, however, when and if exercised would relate only to that portion of the widow's award which would then have been unpaid (under Lab. Code,  4702, 4650-4653) had she executed no waiver.
The award of the appeals board is annulled; the board will take further proceedings not inconsistent with the views herein expressed.
Molinari, P. J., and Sims, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. Unless otherwise stated all statutory references hereinafter mentioned are to the Labor Code.
[fn. 2]  2. That such was the purpose is further demonstrated in Mrs. Bernardini's brief before the appeals board. There it was stated that if her waiver be rejected "all that will be accomplished in this and in future cases is the absurd result that minor children through the widow as a guardian will wait until the statutory limitations period has expired against the widow and then file." Reference was then made to cases where the appeals board had awarded the entire death benefit to dependent minor children when the statute of limitations ( 5406) had run against the widow--a practice later disapproved in City & County of San Francisco v. Workmen's Comp. App. Bd. (Shaughnessy-Swall-Morey) supra, 269 Cal.App.2d 382.
[fn. 3]  3. We note that in City of Los Angeles v. Industrial Acc. Com. (Morse) supra, 63 Cal.2d 263, a device calculated by the appeals board and the petitioner therein to defeat the right of the City of Los Angeles to credit allowances to a policeman's widow against a workmen's compensation award, was nullified by the court.
[fn. 4]  4. Barnett v. Brizee, supra, 258 Cal.App.2d 97, is cited as authority approving the maximum death benefit award to a fireman's dependent child where the statute of limitations had run against a dependent widow. In that case there was no issue before, or discussion by, the court as to the propriety of such an award--hence it is not authority on the question before us.

=== CASE 2207603 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:21.399827+00 ===

454 N.W.2d 614 (1990)
In the Matter of DeWayne COLBERT.
No. C6-89-1830.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
May 4, 1990.
William Lubov, Law Firm of William Lubov, Minneapolis, for DeWayne Colbert.
Thomas L. Johnson, Hennepin County Atty., Elizabeth Cutter, Asst. Hennepin County Atty., Minneapolis.
Considered and decided by the court en banc without oral argument.
KELLEY, Justice.
This is an appeal from an MID (mentally ill and dangerous) commitment proceeding. At the commitment hearing the district court determined that the subject of the commitment, DeWayne Colbert, while still mentally ill, no longer was dangerous. The court of appeals in an unpublished decision reversed, holding that the trial court clearly erred in its determination. We disagree and accordingly reverse the decision of the court of appeals and reinstate the decision of the district court.
Colbert suffers from paranoid schizophrenia and has a history of chemical dependence and substance abuse. He has been hospitalized before and has a history of both responding to treatment on anti-psychosis medication and of deteriorating when he quits taking the medication.
Before the current commitment Colbert was living in an apartment building in Minneapolis. His paranoia, aggravated by his drug use, led him to engage in conduct indicating that he was mentally ill as well as dangerous to others.
At the original commitment hearing, Dr. Calvin W. Vraa, Ph.D., the court-appointed examiner, testified that Colbert had responded to medication and that commitment to the Minnesota Security Hospital in St. Peter was not appropriate. He testified that placement in the Anoka Metro Regional Treatment Center was a possibility but that placement in a Rule 36 facility would be acceptable if Colbert's medication was monitored and if he was in a structured day program. Bruce Quarry, a senior psychiatric social worker at Hennepin County Medical Center, where Colbert was confined pending the commitment hearing, also testified that commitment to St. Peter was not necessary and that the Anoka facility would be an appropriate placement. He testified that Colbert was not ready for *615 a Rule 36 facility but was making progress toward it. The district court determined that Colbert was both mentally ill and dangerous and committed him to the Minnesota Security Hospital.
As we said, we are dealing with the issue of the continuation of that commitment. Two experts testified at the continuation hearing, which was held before a different judge. One expert, Douglas Fox, a licensed psychologist at the Minnesota Security Hospital, testified that Colbert was not dangerous while using the drugs being given to him but that if he were released there would be a substantial likelihood of danger to the safety of others because he would discontinue taking his medicine. Fox recommended that the MID commitment be continued.
Dr. Sharon Satterfield, a psychiatrist appointed by the court as a second examiner (Dr. Vraa being the first), generally agreed with Fox, but her way of stating her conclusions was different. She testified that the psychosis had been alleviated almost entirely by the medicine and the Colbert currently did not present any substantial likelihood of engaging in acts capable of inflicting serious physical harm on another person. She testified that he "might not be" what is termed "med-complaint" if he were not in a facility that actually offered him the medicine. She put it slightly differently moments later when she said "I do not trust" that he would choose to take medicine on his own. She said she was satisfied that Anoka Metro Regional Treatment Center could adequately provide for Colbert's treatment needs and that staying at the state security hospital in St. Peter was not required.
Colbert also testified, saying that he now realized the importance of taking his medicine and of not using marijuana. He stated he would continue to take his medicine once he was released.
The district court dismissed the allegation of mentally ill and dangerous, and found that Colbert was just mentally ill because he "is not dangerous while taking medications." The district court sent Colbert to the locked unit at the Anoka Metro Regional Treatment Center, with permission to the doctors to transfer him to an unlocked unit when they determined it was appropriate.
The court of appeals reversed, holding that the district court's determination that Colbert was not dangerous was clearly erroneous. We hold that the court of appeals erred in concluding as it did.
The issue for the district court was whether Colbert continued to be "mentally ill and dangerous" within the meaning of Minn.Stat. § 253B.02, subd. 17 (1988), which provides:
A "person mentally ill and dangerous to the public" is a person (a) who is mentally ill; and (b) who as a result of that mental illness presents a clear danger to the safety of others as demonstrated by the facts that (i) the person has engaged in an overt act causing or attempting to cause serious physical harm to another and (ii) there is a substantial likelihood that the person will engage in acts capable of inflicting serious physical harm on another.
Hennepin County had the burden of proving that Colbert continued to be mentally ill and dangerous by clear and convincing evidence. The court of appeals, holding that the trial court clearly erred, in effect ruled that the trial court had no choice on this record but to conclude that Colbert was still dangerous.
Undoubtedly, other cases can be found upholding a continued MID commitment on a record like this one; an example of such a case is In re Malm, 375 N.W.2d 888 (Minn.App.1985). The effect of the court of appeals' decision is to extend those decisions and turn them into an inflexible rule, that whenever there is a record like this one the trial court clearly errs if it does not continue the MID commitment. We believe that the evidence was such that, although the trial court arguably was free to continue the commitment, the trial court was not compelled to do so. In other words, we hold the trial court was justified in determining that Colbert, although still mentally ill, was no *616 longer dangerous. Reversed and decision of district court reinstated.

=== CASE 9736793 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:06:45.275093+00 ===

SABERS, Justice
(dissenting).
THE TRIAL COURT COMMITTED REVERSIBLE ERROR IN REFUSING TO INSTRUCT THE JURY THAT DEFENDANT GANTVOORT HAD A DUTY TO SEE WHAT WAS THERE TO BE SEEN.
Under the evidence in this case, the jury could conclude that Gantvoort could have seen Herren’s vehicle some 1,200 feet before he did. Since Gantvoort claims he did not apply his brakes until he was within 140 feet of Herren’s vehicle — too late to stop because of the icy road — it was crucial for the jury to be properly instructed that Gantvoort had a duty to see what was there to be seen (and was bound by same whether he saw anything or not). Anderson v. Adamson, 79 S.D. 429, 112 N.W.2d 612 (1962); Flanagan v. Slattery, 74 S.D. 92, 49 N.W.2d 27 (1951).
Under the circumstances of this case, it was clearly prejudicial to refuse to give said instruction. Contrary to the statement in the majority opinion, Herren’s proposed instruction was not “embodied in other given instructions” and it is likely that the jury would have returned a different verdict if Herren’s proposed instruction had been given because the emphasis on Gantvoort’s conduct would have been substantially different. The undeniable fact is that Gantvoort struck Herren’s vehicle even though he could have seen it some 1,500 feet earlier. The jury should have been instructed that Gantvoort was responsible as though he had seen the vehicle earlier.

=== CASE 9736794 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:06:46.698561+00 ===

Opinion by
Gunther, J.,
. The issue here presented is whether the court below erred in permitting the withdrawal of signatures to a petition seeking annexation of a. tract of land, in Scott. .Township, to. Mount Lebanon Township, .both first:, class:.. townships in--Allegheny- County. • The - an*519nexation petition was opposed by Scott Township and the School District of Scott Township, appellees. The court below permitted the withdrawal of 28 original signers and then dismissed the annexation petition on the ground that the statutory provisions1 requiring signatures of 80% of the qualified electors and signatures of the owners of 80% of the assessed valuation of the real estate in the tract to be annexed had not been complied with. Erwin Lerten has taken this appeal on behalf of the annexation petitioners.
Erwin Lerten and 326 others, on August 2, 1949, filed their petition in the Court of Quarter Sessions of Allegheny County averring, inter alia, that they constituted (1) the owners of more than 80% of the assessed valuation of the property desired to be detached and annexed, and (2) that they constituted more than 80% of the qualified electors resident in the territory. The petitioners prayed that a tract of land consisting of approximately 324 acres located in Scott Township be annexed to Mount Lebanon Township pursuant to the provisions of the Act of June 19, 1939, P.L. 430, Section 1 et seq. 53 PS Section 19092-312.1 et seq. Attached to the petition was a plan or survey of the territory desired to be detached and annexed, together Avith a certified copy of the approval of the proposed annexation by Mount Lebanon ToAvnship Board of Commissioners. On August 2, 1949, the court entered an order that the annexation petition be served upon the secretary of the Township Commissioners of Scott Township. Scott ToAvnship filed an ansAver denying the material averments of the annexation petition and averred, by way of new matter, that the annexation petition was not filed in good faith, and that the underlying purpose of the annexation petition was to force *520the Paul tract into Mount Lebanon Township, thereby effectively prohibiting the Pauls from constructing certain apartment-type dwellings which were permissible under contemplated amendments to the zoning ordinance and regulations of Scott Township.2 The School District of Scott Township was, upon petition, permitted to intervene.
The matter came on for hearing on September 26, 1949. The petitioners seeking annexation presented testimony establishing the averments of their petition. At the close of petitioner’s case in chief, counsel for Scott Township offered to present a petition signed by 28 persons seeking to withdraw their names from the annexation petition averring that since they had signed “. . . they have discovered that the person or persons circulating said (annexation) Petition had *521made certain misrepresentations to them, and they have therefore reconsidered their action and are now desirous of withdrawing their names as petitioners. . . .”. The court below refused to permit the 28 signers to recant merely upon averments of the withdrawal petition, but to enable the court to determine whether a proper and sufficient reason for withdrawal existed, permitted testimony of any person who wished to withdraw. The court below, after a full and extensive hearing, concluded that 38 signatories3 had established valid and sufficient reasons for withdrawal and dismissed the petition. Exceptions were filed by Erwin Lerten on behalf of the annexation petitioners. This appeal is from dismissal by the court en banc of the material exceptions.
It is stated that if these 28 persons, plus one witness who had not signed the withdrawal petition but who appeared and testified and sought the withdrawal of his and his wife’s signatures (or 30 in all) are permitted to withdraw, the annexation must fail for the reason that the annexation petition would not only lack the names of the owners of the required 80% of the assessed valuation of the real estate in the territory desired to be annexed, but would also lack the requisite 80% of the qualified electors residing within the tract.
*522Appellant contends that (1) jurisdiction of the court attached upon filing of the annexation petition and the court below lacked power thereafter to permit signatories to withdraw their names therefrom; (2) assuming power to permit withdrawal, it could be exercised only upon proof which would sustain a finding of fraud and deceit sufficient to avoid a contract; and (3) the evidence is insufficient to sustain a finding of fraud or deceit.
Prior to the decision of the Supreme Court in Mercersburg Independent School District, 237 Pa. 368, 85 A. 467, there are decisions lending weight to appellant’s position that after the filing of the petition, recanting signers should not be permitted to withdraw. See Borough of Quakertown, 3 Grant 203 (1855); Mann v. Cassidy, 1 Brewster’s Rep. 11, 43 (1857); Tullytown Borough, 1 Dist. 292 (1891); Warren Borough’s Annexation, 168 Pa. 441, 32 A. 38 (1895); Incorporation of Flemington Borough, 168 Pa. 628, 32 A. 86 (1895); Incorporation of the Borough of Old Forge, 12 Pa. Superior Ct. 359 (1900); Cf. Newton v. Emporium Borough, 225 Pa. 17, 73 A. 984 (1909). In Borough of Quakertown, supra, the Court said: “The court were right in disregarding the recantation of some of the petitioners, for after the jurisdiction had attached, they could not oust it by any act of theirs.” Again in Incorporation of the Borough of Old Forge, supra, the Court said (p. 362): “The court in determining whether the original petition had been signed by the required number of freeholders, counted as signers these parties who had signed but changed their minds when the proceeding was almost finished. Petitioners cannot thus play fast and loose with the court, joining with others to make up the number necessary to confer jurisdiction, and then threaten to deprive the court of jurisdiction, by withdrawing, if all col*523lateral questions are not decided, as they suggest.” The cases cited above, together with the cases cited in the footnote4, indicate that the question here involved has been rather extensively considered by the appellate and lower courts. A considerable variation in result and a conflict in judicial reasoning as to the right to withdraw appears. In Mercersburg Independent School District, supra, the Court reviewed -the cases cited, and although the Court recognized that those cases appeared to sustain appellant’s contention that those seeking to withdraw could not by any act of their own oust jurisdiction of the court once jurisdiction had attached, it said (p. 372) : “Certainly, it was not intended to say that petitioners under no circumstances, even with leave of court, could withdraw. Such a rule would not only be a harsh one, but it would not be in keeping with the spirit and purpose of our system of jurisprudence. In such cases much must be left to the sound discretion of the court. The jurisdiction of a court in a sense attaches as soon as the petition is filed, or presented, but, prior to a hearing, and before anything has been done involving the rights of the parties, reasonable discretion should be exercised in favor of petitioners who in good faith and for proper reasons desire to withdraw.” The Court also said, at page 371, that: “After a careful examination of all our Pennsylvania cases, above and below, the following general rules may be regarded as well established: ... 2. A petitioner does not have the right per se to withdraw his name after jurisdiction, has attached, *524and in such cases never has the right to withdraw without leave of court. 3. If a petitioner has been induced to sign by misrepresentations, he may withdraw his name even after jurisdiction has attached, but this must be done with leave of court, or other body or tribunal having jurisdiction of the proceeding. 4. In those cases, in which jurisdiction has attached, the fact that several petitioners desire to withdraw their names, should be taken into consideration by the court; and, if, a sufficient number desire to withdraw, the court would not only be warranted in dismissing the petition, but in many instances should do so, on the ground, that under such circumstances the power of the court should not be asserted against the real wishes of signers whose names are necessary to give jurisdiction when they in good faith desire to withdraw from the proceeding. In other words, there should be no hard and fast rule making it impossible for petitioners to withdraw from a proceeding, or to discontinue a case, because jurisdiction in the first instance had attached.”
It is true that the Supreme Court in the Mercers-burg case, supra, disposed of that appeal on other grounds, yet we adopt the enlightening dicta, there pronounced as setting forth a reasonable and equitable rule to dispose of the question here presented. The rationale of the dicta in the Mercersburg case pronounces what to us seems to be the more equitable rule and one more in harmony with our system of jurisprudence.
The fact that jurisdiction of the court had attached by the filing of the annexation petition was not of itself sufficient to deprive signatories the right to.withdraw. They, of course, could not have withdrawn without leave of court. At this stage of the proceeding, it was the duty of the court below to inquire into the facts to ascertain whether the -reasons .submitted were sufficient to warrant their withdrawal; whether *525the recanting signers were acting in good faith, and whether they were proceeding timely. There was lodged in the trial court the power to exercise a sound and judicial discretion to determine whether the evidence upon which withdrawal was sought was sufficient in quality and probative value to justify withdrawal. It is conceded by all parties that the petitioners were given full opportunity to establish proper reasons to warrant their withdrawal.
. The precise inquiry then becomes whether there has been a manifest abuse of discretion by the court below. This is a statutory proceeding; the statute is silent on the right of appeal and we, therefore, may review the case in the broadest sense of certiorari. Braddock Township Appeal, 148 Pa. Superior Ct. 52, 55, 24 A. 2d 705; Grime v. Department of Public Instruction, 324 Pa. 371, 375, 188 A. 337. A distinction exists between certiorari in its broadest sense and appeal. While we may review the evidence, the scope of review in the former is limited to whether an error of law has been committed. Unless there has been a serious abuse of discretion, matters resting solely in the judgment of the court below cannot be interfered with. In re Elkland Leather Workers’ Association, 330 Pa. 78, 80, 198 A. 13, 15. “An abuse of discretion is not merely an error of judgment, but if in reaching a conclusion the law is overridden or misapplied, or the judgment exercised is manifestly Unreasonable, or the result of partiality, prejudice, bias or ill-will, as shown by the evidence or the record, discretion is abused”: Mielcuszny v. Rosol, 317 Pa. 91, 93, 94, 176 A. 236. When the court, by the exercise of its discretion, has reached a conclusion “the party complaining of it on appeal has a heavy burden; it.is not sufficient to persuade the appellate court that it might have reached a different conclusion if, in the first place, charged with the duty imposed on the court below; *526it is necessary to go further and show an abuse of the discretionary power”: Garrett’s Estate, 335 Pa. 287, 292, 293, 6 A. 2d 858; Irwin Borough Annexation Case (No. 1), 165 Pa. Superior Ct. 119, 133, 67 A. 2d 757.
We now turn to a summary of the testimony of the signers seeking withdrawal. Of these 28 signers seeking withdrawal, 13 actually appeared and testified.5 Nine witnesses of the 13 appeared and testified on behalf of themselves and their spouses.6 The court below did not err in permitting one spouse to testify on behalf of the other absent spouse, especially where, as here, the joint property of both was involved. Cf. Act of May 23, 1887, P.L. 158, Section 5, cl. (c), as amended by the Act of May 10, 1927, P.L. 861, Section 1, 28 PS Section 317; Henry, Trial Evidence, (3rd Ed.) Section 451. At this point, therefore, 22 persons sought to withdraw by appearing and testifying or appearing through their respective spouses. W. H. Dengler did not sign the withdrawal petition, but he did appear, testified and asked that his and his wife’s signatures be withdrawn. At this point, 24 names were sought to be stricken from the list. Twelve additional witnesses appeared and testified concerning a variety of alleged misrepresentations but the record is unmistakably clear that not one of these twelve witnesses requested the withdrawal of their signatures.
John YaSenka was called as a witness on behalf of the opponents to the annexation. He testified that he *527was secretary of the Scott Township Civic League; that he, together with a Mr. Ostrowski, . . went out with a petition to get these people to withdraw their names and inform them of the true facts of the case”. The substance of YaSenka’s testimony, pertinent here, is that William A. Haller and his wife, and William W. Morris and his wife wanted Mr. YaSenka to appear in court and have their names withdrawn. Strenuous objection was made to this testimony, and properly so. It was manifestly unreasonable for the court below to strike the names of these four signers from the annexation petition on such obviously hearsay testimony. For the same reason, it was error for the court below to strike the signature of the son of John Miller. In this, there was a manifest abuse of discretion. In a matter which was so bitterly contested, and where the public weal was so clearly involved, signers desiring to withdraw were duty-bound to appear and to submit testimony upon which the court below could determine whether they were acting in good faith and for proper reasons sufficient to warrant their withdrawal.
It is unnecessary to recite the evidence in detail. Suffice it to say that misrepresentations were made concerning the population, financial stability of Scott Township and Scott Township School District, together with promises that signers would receive better police and fire protection and lower taxes. We have examined with extreme care the testimony of all parties seeking to withdraw and conclude that the court below iu the exercise of a sound discretion properly permitted the withdrawal of the 24 signatures listed above on the basis of a finding , of misrepresentations, a misapprehension of the facts;- that they were misinformed and misguided. -The findings of the court, below in this respect will not be disturbed for the lack. of. a showing.of a,serious, abljse of..discretion.-.,;. -.;
*528Appellant’s final contention that the proofs justifying withdrawal should amount to a finding of actual fraud or deceit sufficient in quality to avoid the consequences of a contract is without merit. Appellant’s suggested burden of proof is too harsh. The rule which permits a withdrawal upon timely application when made in good faith and for proper reasons is much more likely to get at the real and mature judgment of the voters, and moreover is calculated to discourage a hasty presentation of a petition without a full disclosure of the real merits of the question. Cir-culators of a petition can usually avoid sufficient withdrawals to defeat the petition by taking care that the matter is fully understood by those to whom it is presented for signature. What was said in the Mer-cersburg case, supra, is more consonant with the theory of the cases that “. . . reasonable discretion should be exercised in favor of petitioners who in good faith and for proper reasons desire to withdraw. ... In other words, there should be no hard and fast rule making it impossible for petitioners to withdraw from a proceeding, or discontinue a case”. Tacit approval that the burden of proof imposed upon recanting signers is that as pronounced in the Mercersburg case, supra, is found In Re: Petition of Wilhelm, 104 Pa. Superior Ct. 479, 482, 483, 159 A. 49. Several lower court decisions indicate that the burden of proof contended for by appellant is too onerous. Cf. East Newport Borough, 35 C. C. 617; In Re: Independent School District, 2 Chester 132; Election Expense Accounts, 22 Dist. 952. The power of the court should not be asserted against the real 'wishes of signers whose names are necessary to give jurisdiction when they in good faith desire .to withdraw from the. proceeding. That this. is. the extent of the burden, in Other jurisdictions' is deducible from. the. cases. Cf. Hawkins v. Carroll, *529190 S.C. 11, 1 S.E. (2) 898; Sutherland v. McKinney, 146 Ind. 611, 45 N.E. 1048; State ex rel Morgan v. Nemaha, 10 Neb. 32, 4 N.W. 373; Hill v. McClintock, 175 Ark 1059, 1 S.W. (2) 564. .
Order reversed. The record is remitted with instructions that the court below, on the basis of thé views expressed in this opinion, recalculate the percentage of assessed valuation of real estate owned by the annexation petitioners and the percentage of qualified electors seeking annexation to determine if the requirements of Section 2 of the Act of June 19, 1939,: P.L. 430, have been complied with and thereafter to enter an order accordingly. Each party to pay his or its costs of this appeal.
Act of June 19, 1939, P. L. 480, Section 1 et. seq., 53 PS Section 19092-312.1 et seq.
On August 16, 1949, Erwin Lerten filed Ms petition seeking (1) to restrain tlie commissioners of Scott Township from publishing and otherwise making effective certain amendments to the zoning ordinance, and (2) an order restraining R. W. Paul and his wife from building or causing to be built on the Paul premises any type of mulitiple family dwelling or apartment houses. The injunction petition averred, inter alia, that the Scott Township commissioners had amended the zoning ordinance to permit the construction of multiple family dwelling units and apartment houses; that the Pauls were preparing to build apartment houses upon a 45 acre tract to the detriment of the petitioners seeking annexation to Mount Lebanon Township. It appears that the Paul tract of 45 acres which constitutes a portion of the tract presently sought to be annexed to Mount Lebanon Township had previously been situate in Mount Lebanon Township, but had been annexed to Scott Township on June 30, 1949. The reason for the annexation of the Paul tract to Scott Township was undoubtedly the fact that the zoning ordinance of Mount Lebanon forbade the erection and construction of multiple family dwelling units and apartment houses as contemplated by the Pauls. A restraining order was entered pending final disposition of this annexation proceeding.
The court below inadvertently said that 38 signers sought to withdraw. The record clearly establishes that only 28 signed the petition to withdraw their names. They Are: Mary M. Schroeder; Rose Wagner; Priscilla Schmdit; Henry Schmidt; Helen Hilton; Roy Hilton; Wm. A. Haller; Vivetta Haller; John P. Loboda; Betty L. Loboda; Charles R. Ward; Geo. T. Hoffman; Jean L. Hoffman; John H. Terhorst; Mrs. Madalyne Terhorst; J. Giest; Mrs. Virginia S. Giest; Harry P. Schultz; June C. Schultz; William W. Morris; Thelma H. Morris; John Miller; Helen G. Miller; W. Phillips Palmer; George S. Clarke: Mrs. George S. Clarke; J. Manheimer; Mrs. Jack Manheimer.
Application of Hunsberger, 2 Montg. 132 (withdrawal. refused); Annexation of South Allentown. 2 Leh. L. J. 387 (withdrawal refused); Petition for the Incorporation of Mountville Borough, 22 Lanc. L. Rev. 113 (withdrawal refused); Wernersville Borough, 5 Berks L. J. 364 (withdrawal refused); Road in Rapho Township, 22 pane. L. Rev. 29.
They are: Bose Wagner; Henry Schmidt; Helen Hilton; Charles B. Ward; Geo. T. Hoffman; Mrs. Madalyne Terhorst; J. Geist; Mrs. Virginia S. Geist; June C. Schultz; John Miller; W. Phillips Palmer; Georgé S. Clarke; J. Manheimer.
The' spouses who did not appear are as follows: Mrs.' W. Phillips Palmer; Mrs. George S. Clarke; Mrs. Helen G. Miller; Mrs. Jack Manheimer; Mr. Harry P. Schultz; Mrs. Priscilla Schmidt; Mr. Boy Hilton; Mr. John H. Terhorst; Mrs. Jean L. ' Hoffman.

=== CASE 9736795 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:06:46.703573+00 ===

Dissenting Opinion by
Rhodes, P. J.:
I feel obliged to file a dissent to the majority opinion, as I would affirm the order of the court below.
The first question raised on the appeal in this proceeding is whether the court below had authority to permit petitioners in the proceeding to withdraw after the petition for annexation had been filed. Appellant admits that, if the withdrawals permitted by the court below are proper, as a matter of law, the petition must fail for lack of “the requisite 80% of the qualified electors and 80% of the assessed valuation.” Appellee joins in this admission. It is argued that the court below had no discretion to permit withdrawals for the reasons given at this stage of the proceeding. Appellant admits that if the withdrawals permitted by the court below are sustained, even though this number be taken as twenty-nine and not thirty-eight, the.petition must fail.
.....Twenty-eight..persons . had. signed the petition to with'draw which set forth that they had signed. tEe an-. *530nexation petition due to misrepresentations made to them. At the hearings on the annexation petition testimony was introduced in support of and supplementary to the averments in the petition to withdraw. Among the witnesses were thirteen who had signed the withdrawal petition. A number testified that they spoke for their respective spouses who had likewise signed the withdrawal petition. Some appeared for themselves and others who had signed the petition to withdraw. In another instance a party who had not signed the .withdrawal petition appeared and testified that he and his wife desired their signatures to be withdrawn from the annexation petition. Many additional witnesses appeared and testified although they may not specifically have requested that their names should be withdrawn from the annexation petition. The oral testimony was confirmatory of the petition to withdraw which contained twenty-eight signatures.. At least twenty-niné persons properly sought to withdraw, and the court permitted at least that many to withdraw.
The trial judge who heard the witnesses concluded that the withdrawing petitioners signed the annexation petition under a misapprehension of fact as to the reasons for that petition. The trial judge also dismissed the annexation petition on the ground that the amended petition and plan had not been approved by the annexing Township of Mount Lebanon. Exceptions were filed to the dismissal of the petition for annexation; on argument the court in banc affirmed the dismissal of the annexation petition, holding that it Was within the discretion Of the trial judge to permit the petitioners to' withdraw their names.
Certain undisputed facts fully supported by the evidence áre Set forth by the' opinion of "the court in banc as follows:
“(a). That a group of Mt. Lebanon property owners,. calling themselves Mt. Lebanon Property 'Owners *531Association, instituted this proceeding for the sole purpose of preventing the erection of apartment buildings on a tract of land in Scott Township;
“(b) That the committee formed to solicit signatures to the petition did not, in most instances, show a map or boundary line of the territory to be annexed to the residents or owners of property in the.area;
“(c) That many of the persons whose signatures were obtained did not know that the map or plan, bisected Scott Township into two separate tracts;
“(d) That the Mt. Lebanon Property Owners Association had underwritten the entire cost of this proceeding, and .that signers of the petition ■ did not ■ pay any money for fees, costs or other expenses of this proceeding;
“(e) That the Chairman of the Committee for annexation filed an amended petition and plan, and in the affidavit stated that he was authorized to do so by the signers to the petition; no such authority was requested or given according to the testimony of some of the signers to the petition who testified under subpoena;
“(f) That the plan was drawn without any rational boundary lines and did not follow streets, roads, streams, or other natural boundaries;
“(g) That the plan submitted consisted largely of property on the higher elevations which would throw a tremendous burden upon Scott Township by forcing Scott Township to take care of all the drainage from the district without getting any revenue therefrom;
“(h) That misrepresentations were made concerning the population, financial stability and adequate schooling for Scott Township;
“(i) The Committee made no attempt to inform some of the signers that the voters of Scott Township *532had authorized a bond issue of $225,000 to build a new school in the area; .
“(j) The amended plan which was offered in evidence was not presented to the Commissioners of Mt. Lebanon Township.” . .
Appellant’s position is that, as a matter of law, the court below had no authority or discretionary power to permit any of the petitioners to withdraw after the court had assumed jurisdiction of the annexation petition, especially in the absence of any finding that either fraud or misrepresentation had been practised upon those petitioners who sought to withdraw. Appellant contends that there is no evidence which would justify the court’s .permission for withdrawal. The right of petitioners to withdraw depends upon the circumstances ; no hard and fast rule can be laid down, and in such cases much must be left to the sound discretion of the court. Mercersburg Independent School District, 237 Pa. 368, 371-373, 85 A. 467.
The evidence in this proceeding supports the court’s finding that petitioners seeking withdrawal signed the annexation petition in some instances under specific misrepresentations; and while, as the court below states, the evidence may not, in all instances, have been sufficient to establish actual fraud or active misrepresentation, it does appear from the evidence that withdrawing petitioners acted at least under a misapprehension of the facts, and in many instances without a full and complete disclosure of all the relevant facts which would ordinarily motivate their action in signing such an annexation petition.
It devolves upon the court of quarter sessions to see that such an annexation proceeding is conducted properly, and that the requirements of the statute are fulfilled. If some petitioners are shown to have been induced to sign without full disclosure of material facts *533or under a misapprehension as to important facts, these matters go to the very foundation and legality of the petition, and may establish that the procedural requirements of the Act (June 19, 1939, P. L. 430) have not been met. In acting within its discretionary powers and permitting withdrawal of petitioners for cause shown, the court is in no. way exceeding its statutory authority. In the present case the court acted within its discretionary power in permitting petitioners to withdraw, and its decision cannot be reversed on the ground of abuse of that discretion.
The annexation petition was also properly dismissed by the court beiow for lack of another statutory requirement — approval of the amended plan by the annexing Township of Mount Lebanon. Act of June 19,1939, P.L. 430, § 3, 53 PS § 19092-312.3. Cf. Whitehall Borough Incorporation Case, 161 Pa. Superior Ct. 397, 403, 55 A. 2d 70. When counsel for petitioners offered in evidence the petition and amended petition,, counsel for Scott Township School Board, intervening appellee, objected on the ground that the amended plan had never been approved by the Commissioners of Mount Lebanon Township. It is admitted that such approval by Mount Lebanon Township was never obtained. The requirements of the statute are mandatory. In re Annexation of a Portion of Abington Twp. to Boro. of Jenkintown, 101 Pa. Superior Ct. 227, 230. Petitioners for annexation had the burden of showing compliance with the requirements of the statute. Braddock Township Appeal, 148 Pa. Superior Ct. 52, 59, 24 A. 2d 705.
The order of the court below dismissing appellant’s exceptions and affirming the dismissal of the annexation petition should be affirmed.
Judge Reno joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 9736796 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:06:48.416024+00 ===

DAY, J.
This is a review of a decision of the court of appeals, State v. DeSmidt, 151 Wis. 2d 324, 444 N.W.2d 420 (Ct. App. 1989), which affirmed the order of the circuit court for Brown county, the Honorable John P. Hoffmann, Judge, suppressing all evidence, except Medicaid provider handbooks, seized in a warrant-authorized search of Dr. DeSmidt's dental offices. The first question is whether the search of Dr. DeSmidt's dental offices and seizure of his dental and business records violated either Art. I, Sec. 11 of the Wisconsin Constitution or the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution. If the search and seizure was constitutionally infirm, the second question is whether this court should adopt the "good faith" exception to the exclusionary rule established by the United States Supreme Court in United States v. Leon, 468 U.S. 897 (1984). We conclude the search and seizure was constitu*125tional and reverse. We therefore do not reach the Leon issue.
An investigation of Dr. DeSmidt's dental practice in Green Bay arose in late August of 1985 after a former employee of Dr. DeSmidt's, Ms. Harriet Berger, contacted the Wisconsin Department of Justice alleging that Dr. DeSmidt was submitting fraudulent Medicaid and insurance claim forms. The matter was investigated by Mr. John P. Isely, an investigator with the Medicaid Fraud Control Unit of the Wisconsin Department of Justice. Investigator Isely interviewed Ms. Berger on several occasions. On September 24, 1985, Investigator Isely filed a Complaint for Search Warrant, drafted by an Assistant Attorney General, and a supporting affidavit detailing the interviews with Ms. Berger and her allegations. The affidavit, which is appended in full to the court of appeals' decision, provided in pertinent part that Ms. Berger had been employed by Dr. DeSmidt from early June of 1985 through mid-August of that same year. Ms. Berger's duties included preparing third party claim forms, and she had access to all of Dr. DeSmidt's business records and files. Ms. Berger alleged that Dr. DeSmidt was engaged in a series of illegal activities. Ms. Berger alleged and gave specific examples of claim forms that had been filed seeking Medicaid assistance for. services performed on one date when patient records and other documents disclosed that in fact the services had been performed on another date when the patient was ineligible to receive Medicaid assistance. Ms. Berger alleged that similar practices were being utilized in filing claim forms with private insurance companies and gave specific examples of such cases. Ms. Berger also stated that Dr. DeSmidt adjusted some bills to private insurance companies so as to receive his full customary fee for a particular service even though the policy pro*126vided coverage for only a percentage of the fee. Ms. Berger also alleged that Dr. DeSmidt routinely submitted Medicaid claim forms for periapical x-rays when in fact bite wing x-rays had been performed. Bite wing x-rays are only covered by Medicaid assistance if authorization is received prior to treatment. Ms. Berger stated she believed that Dr. DeSmidt's associate, Dr. McClain, was being trained to conduct her business in a similar illegal fashion. Ms. Berger alleged that Dr. McClain had stated to her that Medicaid eligibility dates presented no problem inasmuch as the service could be backdated on the claim forms to fall within the eligibility period. Ms. Berger stated that an examination of the business records of Dr. DeSmidt and Dr. McClain would disclose other instances in which claim forms containing false information were filed for Medicaid assistance or with private insurance companies. Ms. Berger stated that when she confronted Dr. DeSmidt with the fact that he was engaging in activities which were illegal, he merely smiled and said that it was his office. Shortly after this confrontation, Dr. DeSmidt terminated Ms. Berger's employment.
A search warrant was issued on September 25,1985, by the circuit court for Brown county, the Honorable Alexander R. Grant, Judge. The warrant authorized the search for and seizure of the following items:
Patient charts and dental records, recording, among other things, services actually performed, dates of service; x-ray negatives in envelopes attached to the individual patient dental records; business records including but not limited to, appointment book or books, copies of patient statements, receipt book or books, fee schedule, ledgers, daily business summaries, remittance forms; Medicaid provider handbooks.
*127On September 25,1985, Investigator Isely and three other Wisconsin Department of Justice agents entered Dr. DeSmidt's dental offices in Green Bay to execute the search warrant. Dr. DeSmidt was served with a copy of the search warrant, but not a copy of the affidavit. The search lasted approximately two hours and ten minutes. Investigator Isely directed the agents to seize all business records and all patient files dated from 1979. While the other agents were conducting the search, Investigator Isely questioned Dr. DeSmidt in his office. The questioning ceased after approximately one hour when Dr. DeSmidt asked to speak to an attorney. The agents seized twenty-two boxes of materials, including all "active patient" files, financial records, accounting ledgers, business and personal bank statements, appointment books, day sheets recording the daily work performed, and payroll and expense check stubs. Dr. DeSmidt was allowed to retain blank business checks and to photocopy the charts of those patients expected in the next day as well as several days of the appointment book. Investigator Isely and the agents transported the materials to their offices in Madison.
In an amended complaint filed on July 3, 1986, the State charged Dr. DeSmidt with nine counts of medical assistance fraud, in violation of sec. 49.49(l)(a), Stats. (1983-84), and four counts of insurance fraud, in violation of sec. 943.395, Stats. (1983-84). A preliminary examination was held and on January 23, 1987, the circuit court bound Dr. DeSmidt over for trial. On February 23, 1987, the State filed an information against Dr. DeSmidt charging eleven counts of medical assistance fraud, in violation of sec. 49.49(1)(a).
On March 31,1987, Dr. DeSmidt moved to suppress all evidence seized during the search of his offices, alleging the search and seizure violated Art. I, Sec. 11 of the *128Wisconsin Constitution and the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution because the warrant was issued without probable cause, the warrant was not sufficiently particular in describing the items to be seized, and the execution of the search was overbroad. On March 1, 1988, the circuit court issued a memorandum decision holding that the warrant was not sufficiently particular, except for the description of Medicaid provider handbooks. The circuit court also found that there was not probable cause to support seizing all of Dr. DeSmidt's records. On May 31, 1988, the circuit court entered an order suppressing all evidence obtained in the search, with the exception of the Medicaid provider handbooks.
The State appealed the circuit court's order pursuant to sec. 974.05(l)(d)2, Stats. (1983-84). A majority of the court of appeals concluded that the warrant described the items to be seized, which amounted to all of Dr. DeSmidt's dental and business records, with sufficient particularity. DeSmidt, 151 Wis. 2d at 330. The majority held, however, that there was not probable cause to support seizing all of Dr. DeSmidt's records. Id. at 333. The dissent in the court of appeals, noting that the affidavit made reference to Ms. Berger's allegations that filing false claim forms was a "common practice" and "done routinely” at Dr. DeSmidt's offices, disagreed that probable cause to support seizing all of Dr. DeSmidt's records was lacking. Id. at 341-42 (Myse, J., dissenting). The dissent reasoned:
[Ms. Berger's] allegations clearly indicate that a pattern of fraudulent practice existed in the office at the time Berger started her employment. [Because she was not aware of the exact date this practice commenced], it was necessary for the state to obtain sufficient records to demonstrate the difference between *129the amounts billed depending on the method of payment and the way claims were processed in order to prove the alleged fraudulent practice. Because no accurate starting date of this practice was available to the state, they were unable to limit the seizure of records to a specific time period.
Id. at 342.
The State petitioned this court for review, which was granted. We conclude that bécause there was probable cause to believe Dr. DeSmidt's dental practice was "permeated with fraud," the search for and seizure of all of Dr. DeSmidt's dental and business records was reasonable and therefore constitutional, and accordingly we reverse.
As this court has previously recognized, Art. I, Sec. 11 of the Wisconsin Constitution and the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution are substantially the same. See State v. Anderson, 138 Wis. 2d 451, 461, 406 N.W.2d 398 (1987); State v. Fry, 131 Wis. 2d 153, 172, 388 N.W.2d 565 (1986), cert. denied, 479 U.S. 989 (1986). Art. I, Sec. 11 provides:
Searches and seizures . . . The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects against unreasonable searches and seizures shall not be violated; and no warrant shall issue but upon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched and the persons or things to be seized.
The fourth amendment provides:
The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, sup*130ported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.
Where the state and federal constitutional provisions at issue are virtually identical, this court has traditionally interpreted the state provision consistent with the protections afforded its federal counterpart. State v. Tompkins, 144 Wis. 2d 116, 133, 423 N.W.2d 823 (1988). This has been particularly true with respect to the provisions at issue here. This court has held on numerous occasions that the standards and principles surrounding the fourth amendment are generally applicable to the construction of Art. I, Sec. 11. See, e.g., Tompkins, 144 Wis. 2d at 131-38; Anderson, 138 Wis. 2d at 461; Fry, 131 Wis. 2d at 172-74; State v. Boggess, 115 Wis. 2d 443, 448 n.8, 340 N.W.2d 516 (1983); State v. Beal, 40 Wis. 2d 607, 612, 162 N.W.2d 640 (1968); State v. Paszek, 50 Wis. 2d 619, 624, 184 N.W.2d 836 (1971).
The basic purpose of the prohibition against unreasonable searches and seizures is to safeguard the privacy and security of individuals against arbitrary invasions by government officials. Boggess, 115 Wis. 2d at 448-49. The central inquiry under the fourth amendment is the reasonableness of the governmental intrusion in light of all of the circumstances. State v. Wilks, 121 Wis. 2d 93, 100, 358 N.W.2d 273 (1984), cert. denied, 471 U.S. 1067 (1985). Because the particularity and probable cause requirements of the fourth amendment are the only protections a person has against a general search of his or her papers, somewhat closer scrutiny has been given to review of warrants authorizing the search for and seizure of documents, especially where the rights of third parties may be involved. See Andresen v. Maryland, 427 U.S. *131463, 482 n.11 (1976); United States v. Washington, 797 F.2d 1461, 1468 (9th Cir. 1986); Klitzman, Klitzman & Gallagher v. Krut, 744 F.2d 955, 960 (3rd Cir. 1984); United States v. Abrams, 615 F.2d 541, 547 (1st Cir. 1980).
On review in this court, Dr. DeSmidt no longer contends that the warrant was insufficiently particular in describing the items to be seized and therefore granted too much discretion to the agents executing the warrant. The parties agree that the warrant particularly authorized the search for and seizure of all of Dr. DeSmidt's dental and business records. Dr. DeSmidt contends only that there was insufficient probable cause to support the seizing of all of his dental and business records and that the execution of the warrant was unreasonable.
A search warrant may only issue on the basis of a finding of probable cause by a "neutral and detached magistrate." United States v. United States District Court, 407 U.S. 297, 318 (1972); Ritacca v. Kenosha County Court, 91 Wis. 2d 72, 77, 280 N.W.2d 751 (1979). Whether probable cause exists is determined by analyzing the "totality of the circumstances." Illinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 213, 238 (1983).
The task of the issuing magistrate is simply to make a practical, common-sense decision whether, given all the circumstances set forth in the affidavit before him, including the 'veracity' and 'basis of knowledge' of persons supplying hearsay information, there is a fair probability that contraband or evidence of a crime will be found in a particular place.
Id. This court has stated that the warrant-issuing judge must be apprised of "sufficient facts to excite an honest belief in a reasonable mind that the objects sought are *132linked with the commission of a crime, and that the objects sought will be found in the place to be searched." State v. Starke, 81 Wis. 2d 399, 408, 260 N.W.2d 739 (1978). "The quantum of evidence necessary to support a finding of probable cause for a search warrant is less than that required for a conviction or for bindover following a preliminary examination." Ritacca, 91 Wis. 2d at 77; see also Starke, 81 Wis. 2d at 411. "Probable cause [is] not susceptible of 'stringently mechanical definitions.' What is required is more than a possibility, but not a probability, that the conclusion is more likely than not. This court has always stressed the reasonableness factor." Tompkins, 144 Wis. 2d at 125. A finding of probable cause under federal standards will generally result in a finding of probable cause under state standards. Beal, 40 Wis. 2d at 612.
In reviewing whether probable cause existed for the issuance of a search warrant, we are confined to the record that was before the warrant-issuing judge. State v. Princess Cinema of Milwaukee, 96 Wis. 2d 646, 649, 292 N.W.2d 807 (1980). The person challenging the warrant bears the burden of demonstrating that the evidence before the warrant-issuing judge was clearly insufficient. Ritacca, 91 Wis. 2d at 78. Review of the warrant-issuing judge's finding of probable cause is not de novo. Gates, 462 U.S. at 236. Rather, great deference should be given to the warrant-issuing judge's determination. Id.; Leon, 468 U.S. at 914.
'A grudging or negative attitude by reviewing courts toward warrants' ... is inconsistent both with the desire to encourage use of the warrant process by police officers and with the recognition that once a warrant has been obtained, intrusion upon interests protected by the Fourth Amendment is less severe *133than otherwise may be the case ... A deferential standard of review is appropriate to further the Fourth Amendment's strong preference for searches conducted pursuant to a warrant.
Massachusetts v. Upton, 466 U.S. 727, 733 (1984) (quoting United States v. Ventresca, 380 U.S. 102, 108 (1965)). "[T]he duty of a reviewing court is simply to ensure that the magistrate had a 'substantial basis for . . . concluding]' that the probable cause existed." Gates, 462 U.S. at 238-39 (quoting Jones v. United States, 362 U.S. 257, 271 (I960)); see also Anderson, 138 Wis. 2d at 469. "Although in a particular case it may not be easy to determine when an affidavit demonstrates the existence of probable cause, the resolution of doubtful or marginal cases in this area should be largely determined by the preference to be accorded warrants." Ventresca, 380 U.S. at 109.
At issue in this case is whether the breadth of the warrant, the search for and seizure of all of Dr. DeSmidt's dental and business records, was supported by probable cause. "The search and seizure of large quantities of material is justified if the material is within the scope of probable cause underlying the warrant." United States v. Hayes, 794 F.2d 1348, 1355 (9th Cir. 1986), cert. denied, 479 U.S. 1086 (1987); see also United States v. American Investors of Pittsburgh, Inc., 879 F.2d 1087, 1106 (3rd Cir. 1989), cert. denied. 110 S. Ct. 368 (1959). The United States Supreme Court has recognized that, in cases involving a complex scheme to defraud, a criminal investigation may require piecing together, like a jigsaw puzzle, a number of bits of evidence which if taken alone might show comparatively little. Andresen, 427 U.S. at 481 n.10. Where there is probable cause to believe that there exists a pervasive *134scheme to defraud, all the records of a business may be seized. United States v. Brien, 617 F.2d 299, 309 (1st Cir. 1980), cert. denied, 446 U.S. 919 (1980). "The complexity of an illegal scheme may not be used as a shield to avoid detection when the State has demonstrated probable cause to believe that a crime has been committed and probable cause to believe that evidence of this crime is in the suspect’s possession." Andresen, 427 U.S. at 481 n.10.
We conclude that here there was a substantial basis for the warrant-issuing judge's determination that seizure of all of Dr. DeSmidt's records was supported by probable cause. The record at the time the warrant was issued consisted solely of Investigator Isely's affidavit in support of the warrant application. The affidavit was based upon the allegations of Ms. Berger. "The assertions in an affidavit seeking a search warrant may be based on hearsay provided the affiant indicates that the informant is credible and reliable." Bast v. State, 87 Wis. 2d 689, 694, 275 N.W.2d 682 (1979). Ms. Berger's credibility or reliability is not challenged by Dr. DeSmidt, and in any event, Investigator Isely's affidavit clearly supports a finding that Ms. Berger was a credible and reliable informant. The affidavit set forth that Ms. Berger was a past employee of Dr. DeSmidt, and that in that capacity she had access to Dr. DeSmidt's dental and business records and her duties directly involved preparing third party claim forms. The affidavit further set forth that through an examination of government records, Investigator Isely confirmed much of the information Ms. Berger provided concerning specific claims. Investigator Isely also stated in the affidavit his belief that Ms. Berger was correct in asserting that false claims had been filed. In determining whether probable cause *135exists, the conclusions of an agent based on his experience with investigations may be considered. United States v. Crozier, 111 F.2d 1376, 1380 (9th Cir. 1985).
We note at the outset that there is no doubt the affidavit on its face established probable cause to search for and seize at least those dental and business records of Dr. DeSmidt relating to the specific instances of fraud alleged by Ms. Berger. Dr. DeSmidt argues that the scope of the warrant should have been limited to those specific instances. We disagree. To limit the warrant to the search for and seizure of solely the specific instances of fraud alleged by Ms. Berger would unreasonably restrict and frustrate the State's investigation. Cf. Starke, 81 Wis. 2d at 416. "[A] magistrate is entitled to go beyond the averred facts and draw upon common sense in making reasonable inferences from those facts." United States v. Hershenow, 680 F.2d 847, 852 (1st Cir. 1982); see also Bast, 87 Wis. 2d at 693. "The Fourth Amendment does not deny law enforcement officers the support of the usual inferences . . . reasonable men draw from the evidence,... it requires [only] that such inferences be drawn by a neutral and detached magistrate." Starke, 81 Wis. 2d at 409. The logical inference from the information provided by Ms. Berger was that the specific instances of fraud she referred to were only the "tip of the iceberg." United States v. Offices Known as 50 State Distrib., 708 F.2d 1371, 1374-75 (9th Cir. 1983), cert. denied, 465 U.S. 1021 (1984). Investigator Isely's affidavit contained allegations by Ms. Berger that Dr. DeSmidt was "engaged in a series of illegal activities;" that Dr. DeSmidt "routinely" and as a "common practice" billed bite wing x-rays as periapical x-rays; that Dr. DeSmidt's fraudulent practices were not limited to Medicaid claims, but also included filing false claim *136forms with private insurance companies; that in addition to the particular fraudulent claims she identified, other false claims had been filed. Ms. Berger further alleged that Dr. DeSmidt was "training" his associate to conduct her practice in a similar, illegal fashion. We conclude that the affidavit supported the inference of a probability of fraud throughout Dr. DeSmidt's dental practice. Compare United States v. Henson, 848 F.2d 1374, 1383 (6th Cir. 1988), cert. denied, 109 S. Ct. 784 (1989); United States v. Diaz, 841 F.2d 1, 5 (1st Cir. 1988); In re Impounded Case (Law Firm), 840 F.2d 196, 201 (3rd Cir. 1988); United States v. Sawyer, 799 F.2d 1494, 1508 (11th Cir. 1986), cert. denied, 479 U.S. 1069 (1987); Hayes, 794 F.2d at 1356; Hershenow, 680 F.2d at 852-53; United States v. Hoskins, 639 F. Supp. 512, 516-17 (W.D.N.Y. 1986), aff'd., 875 F.2d 308 (2nd Cir. 1989); Hearn v. Internal Revenue Agents, 597 F. Supp. 966, 970 (N.D. Texas 1984); State v. Hughes, 433 So. 2d 88, 93 (La. 1983).
Dr. DeSmidt argues that seizure of all of a business' records is only permissible where the defendant's entire business is "illegitimate." While we recognize the majority of the reported decisions in which the seizure of all of the defendant's records has been allowed have involved illegitimate businesses, we disagree that the character of the business is the determining factor in assessing the reasonableness of the seizure. The magnitude of a search, in and of itself, is insufficient to establish a constitutional violation. United States v. Santarelli, 778 F.2d 609, 615 (11th Cir. 1985). Where a warrant authorizes the seizure of records relevant to a particular crime and all of a business' records fall into that category, all of the records may lawfully be seized and removed from the premises irrespective of the nature of the business. See *137id. at 616; Williams v. Kunze, 806 F.2d 594, 598 (5th Cir. 1986); Sawyer, 799 F.2d at 1508.
Dr. DeSmidt further argues that the warrant was unreasonable because it was not limited in time to dental and business records relating only to the duration of Ms. Berger's employment. The observations of a ten or eleven week employee cannot, Dr. DeSmidt asserts, lead to a reasonable belief that Dr. DeSmidt's fifteen year practice was "permeated with fraud." It was upon this basis that the majority in the court of appeals, relying upon dicta in Abrams, concluded that the warrant lacked probable cause.
In Abrams, three former employees of the defendants informed the Department of Health, Education and Welfare that the defendants, who were physicians, had filed false Medicare claim forms. The former employees alleged that claim forms had been submitted to Medicare billing for laboratory tests never actually performed. An investigation ensued and a warrant was obtained to search the defendants' offices. The warrant broadly authorized the search for and seizure of "certain business and billing and medical records of patients of [the defendants] which show actual medical services performed and fraudulent services claimed to have been performed in a scheme to defraud the United States and to submit false medicare and medicaid claims for payment ..." Id., 615 F.2d at 542. The district court suppressed the evidence seized in the search and the court of appeals affirmed on the ground the warrant failed to meet the constitutional requirement of particularity. Id. at 543. The court of appeals rejected the government's argument that the warrant authorized the seizure of all of the defendants' records, concluding that the supporting affidavit failed to support an inference of pervasive *138fraud and should have included a time limitation. Id. at 544 n.7, 545. The court of appeals then went on to make the following "observation":
[I]f an affidavit contains an averment by an employee that fraudulent practices were regularly pursued during his or her employment, and the term of such employment is set forth, the warrant could authorize the seizure of all records of Medicare and Medicaid services billed and purportedly performed during the period.
Id. at 545 (emphasis added). The concurrence disagreed:
I think my brothers are a bit narrow in their view of the relevant time frame. The fact that a former employee indicates that certain fraudulent practices are being regularly followed during the period of his or her employ might, I think, depending on the circumstances, supply probable cause to believe that the fraud continued for a reasonable time in the future. I think the same sort of analysis could also be applied in regards to the seizure of records dating prior to the time of the employee's tenure.
Id. at 550 n.3 (Campbell, J., concurring). We conclude the concurring opinion states the proper approach. See United States v. Zanche, 541 F. Supp. 207, 210 (W.D.N.Y. 1982), and cases cited therein. In a case of this nature, whether the search and seizure should be limited to records relating to a specified time period is certainly always a paramount consideration. But whether a search and seizure is unreasonable and therefore unconstitutional due to the lack of a time limitation is dependent upon the particular facts of each case. See Sawyer, 799 F.2d at 1509; VonderAhe v. Howland, 508 F.2d 364, 369 (9th Cir. 1975); Callaway, 106 Wis. 2d at 511-12. Under the facts of this case, we conclude the *139lack of a time limitation was not unreasonable. Compare Hughes, 433 So. 2d 88. Unlike Abrams, the affidavit here contained specific allegations that the filing of fraudulent claim forms was a "common practice" performed "routinely" at Dr. DeSmidt's offices, and that this fraudulent practice was not limited to Medicaid claim forms but also private insurance company claim forms. In addition, the affidavit here contained an allegation that Dr. DeSmidt was "training" his associate to submit false claim forms, another allegation not present in Abrams, which greatly supports the inference that Dr. DeSmidt's entire dental practice was "permeated with fraud." While this is a close case, given our deferential standard of review and the United States Supreme Court's explicit directive that the resolution of doubtful or marginal cases should largely be determined by the preference to be accorded to warrants, we conclude there was a substantial basis supporting the warrant-issuing judge's finding of probable cause. Compare Hayes, 794 F.2d at 1356. Analogous to our holding here, the court in Hayes held that fifty-eight known cases of the defendant illegally prescribing Schedule II drugs in violation of the Controlled Substances Act could fairly be considered as representative of more pervasive violations. Id.
Dr. DeSmidt next contends that the execution of the warrant was so unreasonable that suppression of the evidence seized in the search is justified. Because it concluded the warrant lacked probable cause, the court of appeals did not reach this issue.
A search reasonable at its inception may later become unreasonable in scope. See United States v. Heldt, 668 F.2d 1238, 1256 (D.C. Cir. 1981), cert. denied, 102 S. Ct. 1971 (1982); Wilks, 121 Wis. 2d at 200. "Claims that otherwise reasonable searches have been *140conducted in an unconstitutionally unreasonable manner must be judged under the facts and circumstances of each case." United States v. Penn, 647 F.2d 876, 883 (9th Cir. 1980), cert. denied, 449 U.S. 903 (1980). In determining the reasonableness of the execution of a warrant, a reviewing court must consider whether the scope of the search and seizure was reasonably related to the circumstances which justified the intrusion in the first place. Wilks, 121 Wis. 2d at 100. "[T]he need to strictly limit the scope of the search is particularly acute where . . . the warrant authorizes the seizure of documents." Washington, 797 F.2d at 1468.
Dr. DeSmidt first argues the execution of the warrant was unreasonable because the State examined numerous files he alleges were not suspected of containing fraudulent documents. We fail to see the basis for Dr. DeSmidt's argument in view of his abandoning the contention that the warrant did not satisfy the particularity requirement. In any event, because we conclude the affidavit established probable cause to believe Dr. DeSmidt's dental practice was "permeated with fraud" and that therefore the search and seizure of all his dental and business records was justified, Dr. DeSmidt's argument must fail. Where probable cause supports the search for and seizure of all of the records of a business, a warrant authorizing the seizure of all such records and describing them in generic terms is sufficient to meet the particularity requirement. See Kunze, 806 F.2d at 598; Brien, 617 F.2d at 309; Hershenow, 680 F.2d at 852. Abrams, upon which Dr. DeSmidt relies, is distinguishable because there the search for and seizure of all of the defendants' records was not supported by probable cause. See Abrams, 615 F.2d at 548-49.
*141Dr. DeSmidt, relying upon Klitzman, Klitzman & Gallagher and VonderAhe, lastly argues that the execution of the warrant was unreasonable due to the effect of the seizure, particularly in terms of its length, upon Dr. DeSmidt's professional livelihood and his patients' welfare. Subsequent to the seizure, Dr. DeSmidt made a formal request to the State to return his dental and business records or at least copies of them. The State agreed to return parts of the patient files on an "as needed" basis. Dr. DeSmidt alleges the State failed to comply with that agreement, however, and often either did not send the needed portions of the records or failed to respond at all. After the State filed the complaint, Dr. DeSmidt filed a motion seeking return of the documents. See sec. 968.20, Stats. (1983-84). On August 1,1986, the circuit court for Brown county, the Honorable William J. Duffy, Judge, issued a written order directing the State to return to Dr. DeSmidt all original records the State did not intend to use as evidence at trial and to return copies of all records the State needed. Dr. DeSmidt alleges that when the State returned the records on August 4, 1986, many of the records were incomplete and many were unaccounted for. Dr. DeSmidt subsequently moved to have the State directly comply with the August 1,1986, order, but Dr. DeSmidt alleges that although the State returned some additional records, there were still portions of records and entire records missing.
We disagree that the State's alleged misconduct in returning Dr. DeSmidt's dental and business records requires suppression of the evidence. Just as the exercise of discretion by officers executing a warrant cannot rehabilitate an otherwise defective warrant, see United States District Court, 407 U.S. at 317, in this case the *142subsequent alleged misconduct of the State cannot "reach back" to invalidate the lawful search and seizure here. The return of property properly seized can be obtained by court order pursuant to sec. 968.20, Stats. If the court issues such an order and there is non-compliance, an action for contempt may lie. See secs. 785.01(l)(b) and (d), Stats. 1983-84. Moreover, if the State was negligent in its handling of Dr. DeSmidt's property, he may seek a civil remedy. Nor do we find any merit in Dr. DeSmidt's complaint that the State failed to notify any of Dr. DeSmidt's patients that their records were being examined. While we are mindful of and sensitive to the rights of third parties involved in cases such as this, we are aware of no authority, and Dr. DeSmidt cites none, that requires the State in circumstances such as this to notify the third parties involved that their records are being examined. The rights of third parties are essentially derivative from those of the person being searched, and are protected by the constitutional prohibition against unreasonable searches and seizures. Unlike the circumstances here, in neither case relied upon by Dr. DeSmidt was there probable cause to believe the defendant's entire business was "permeated with fraud." See Klitzman, Klitzman & Gallagher, 744 F.2d at 960; VonderAhe, 508 F.2d at 369-70.
By the Court. — The decision of the court of appeals is reversed and cause remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.

=== CASE 9736797 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:06:48.422094+00 ===

SHIRLEY S. ABRAHAMSON, J.
(dissenting). For the warrant to seize "all" the patients records over an unlimited time period to be valid, the affidavit must provide a substantial basis for the inference that Dr. DeSmidt's entire dental practice was "permeated with fraud" or that seizure of all records was necessary to *143show the defendant's illegal activities. Both the circuit court and the court of appeals determined that the affidavit was not adequate.
I agree with the court of appeals: "The presence of criminal practices during the summer of 1985 does not give rise to the reasonable inference that DeSmidt was engaged in a lifetime of wrongful conduct . . .. The informant in this case made no claim to know the contents of files outside her employment period [of ten or eleven weeks] .... Even if the fraud is reasonably inferred to precede [the informant's] employment, there is nothing in the affidavit to suggest it went on for many years." State v. DeSmidt, 151 Wis. 2d 324, 332-33, 444 N.W.2d 420 (Ct. App. 1989). I therefore dissent.
While courts have upheld search warrants permitting the search and seizure of "all" business records, they have done so in very limited circumstances, namely when there is substantial evidence that (1) the entire business can be characterized as illegal, e.g., "boiler room" stock sales operations, mail or wire fraud operations, extortion plots, and massive fraudulent schemes; or (2) the business is legitimate but illegal activities are pervasive. When the business is legitimate and the affidavit does not show pervasive fraud, the warrant to search and seize all records is invalid. In these instances the warrant should be limited to the documents relevant to the segregable fraud. See, e.g., In re the Application of Lafayette Academy, 610 F.2d 1 (1st Cir. 1979).
None of the cases the majority opinion cites supports its holding that in the face of a legitimate business and no factual documentation of extensive fraud, a magistrate (judge) may authorize the seizure of all business and patient records.*
*144In this case the affidavit does not suggest that DeSmidt operated his dental practice solely for criminal *145purposes. Nor does the affidavit allege observation of wholesale fraud. In the absence of any reported complaints against DeSmidt by patients, other employees or any informants and in the absence intensive police or other agency investigations corroborating pervasive illegal activities, the majority opinion parses words and phrases in the affidavit, to find evidence of endemic fraud. Allegations using conclusory words like "routine" or "commonplace" are no substitute for the evidence or documentation necessary to establish probable cause.
The majority opinion's attempts to distinguish United States v. Abrams, 615 F.2d 541 (1st Cir. 1980) are unconvincing. In Abrams, the court considered an affidavit presenting information obtained from three former employees alleging approximately 50 incidents of false claims for Medicare payments. The Abrams court struck down the warrant, concluding that there was no support in the affidavit providing probable cause to believe all of the patients' billings were inflated. See Ringel, Searches and Seizures, Arrests and Confessions sec. 5.6(c), pp. 5-39 through 5-45.
The majority opinion relies on a footnote to Judge Campbell's concurring opinion in Abrams, but the language quoted is taken out of context. Judge Campbell joined his colleagues on the Abrams court in concluding that the warrant to search all the doctor's records over an unlimited time period was unconstitutional. Judge Campbell would not have limited the time period as narrowly as the majority opinion's dicta suggested. Judge Campbell wrote in Abrams:
*146.... I am not satisfied that the general statement [in the affidavit] measures up to the particularity expressly required by the Fourth Amendment. At least, this is so where the search and seizure is directed at medical files, and not at files of a substantially or wholly illegal enterprise, involving privacy interests of a lessor character. The government, moreover, should have been able to do better. Surely its records reflected the names of patients for whom Dr. Abrams had obtained Medicare-Medicaid reimbursement, and in what amounts. Could it not have named these patients in the warrant and directed the seizure of evidence of the services performed with respect to these individuals?, At [the] very least, the relevant time frame should have been indicated.3
When viewed in context, Judge Campbell's statements do not support the majority opinion in this case; they support the position that the warrant in this case is unconstitutional. The affidavit in this case fails to adequately identify any rational nexus between the time of the informant's employment at DeSmidt's office and prior acts of medicaid or insurance fraud. As in Abrams, the search warrant failed to support the inference of a *147probability of fraud for the entire time Dr. DeSmidt practiced dentistry.
I conclude that a warrant authorizing the search and seizure of "all" patient and business files without limitations on the nature of the records or the period of time amounts in this case to the government's wholesale rummaging through documents prohibited by the fourth amendment.
The majority opinion relies primarily on three cases to support its rule of law that when all business records are relevant to a *144particular crime, all the records of a business (whether it be a legitimate business or not) may be seized. None is analogous to the instant case.
United States v. Santarelli, 778 F.2d 609, 615 (11th Cir. 1985), involved a loansharking business, that included the use of fire-arms and violence to enforce repayment of loans. The affidavit was based on information from one of the borrowers detailing a series of loans he had taken with the defendant, from other FBI agents, and from a taped telephone conversation between the borrower and the defendant. The court upheld the search warrant because the affidavit showed probable cause to believe that the documents were part of an illicit extortionate credit operation.
In Williams v. Kunze, 806 F.2d 594, 598 (5th Cir. 1986), the Criminal Investigation Division of the Internal Revenue Service was conducting an investigation of several allegedly fraudulent tax shelter schemes organized and operated from the Caymen Islands by United States Tax Planning Services, Limited, and a licensee. After an extensive investigation of the licensee, including several visits by undercover agents posing as clients, an IRS investigator sought a search warrant. The application was supported by the IRS investigator's affidavit and the affidavit of a Special Agent, who had previously conducted a nationwide investigation of USTPS. The court upheld the search because the affidavits showed there was probable cause to believe the entire business was merely a scheme to defraud or that all the records of the business are likely to constitute evidence of tax evasion.
In United States v. Sawyer, 799 F.2d 1494 (11th Cir. 1986), cert. denied, 479 U.S. 1069 (1987), the court considered a "boiler room" sales operation. Affidavits submitted by the investigators described in detail twenty five customer transactions and repeated instances of misrepresentation or concealment of material facts and other fraudulent conduct in which the defendants engaged. The affidavits also identified a number of sales persons who engaged in deceptive sales techniques and enumerated many unauthorized transfers of customer funds to generated commis*145sions. The court upheld the warrants, concluding that the affidavits showed widespread efforts to defraud customers through a variety of misleading disclosures and representations.
My brothers suggest that 'if an affidavit contains an averment by an employee that fraudulent practice were regularly pursued during his or her employment, and the term of such employment is set forth, the warrant could authorize the seizure of all records of Medicare and Medicaid services billed and purportedly performed during that period.' (Emphasis added.) I think my brothers are a bit narrow in their view of the relevant time frame. The fact that a former employee indicates that certain fraudulent practices are being regularly followed during the period of his or her employ might, I think, depending upon the circumstances, supply probable cause to believe that the fraud continued for a reasonable time in the future. I think the same sort of analysis could also be applied in regards to the seizure of records dating prior to the time of the employee's tenure.

=== CASE 2207356 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:19.241839+00 ===

366 Pa. 557 (1951)
Dorsey Estate.
Supreme Court of Pennsylvania.
Argued January 4, 1951.
March 19, 1951.
Before DREW, C.J., STERN, STEARNE, JONES and BELL, JJ.
*558 Joseph F. McVeigh, with him Cornelius C. O'Brien, for appellant.
Francis J. Gafford, Deputy Attorney General, with him Charles J. Margiotti, Attorney General, and Irving N. Kieff, for appellee.
OPINION BY MR. JUSTICE HORACE STERN, March 19, 1951:
Where the share of an employe in a Savings and Profit Sharing Pension Fund composed of contributions from the wages or salaries of employes and contributions from the profits of the employer was paid at the time of his death to a beneficiary he had designated, was the portion of it which represented the employer's contributions subject to transfer inheritance tax under the Act of June 20, 1919, P.L. 521, as amended? That is the question presented on this appeal.
The pension fund here involved is a trust established by Sears, Roebuck & Company for its employes. Decedent, Harry J. Dorsey, an employe, became a member of it in 1924 and subsequently named his sister, Eleanor A. Dorsey, as the person who was to receive the proceeds payable therefrom in the event of his death. Under the rules and regulations governing its administration and operation an employe is required to deposit 5% of his compensation up to a maximum per annum of $250; the Company contributes *559 annually a certain graded percentage of its consolidated net income. The fund is administered by trustees with whom all the contributions are deposited. The Company's contributions are credited to the accounts of the depositors in accordance with age and length of service, the largest proportionate share being allotted to those in the so-called "Group D", which consists of employes over 50 years of age and having 15 or more years' continuous service. At the time of his death in 1945 decedent was in "Group D". The total credits to his account in the fund at the time of his death included 932 shares of stock of the Company of a value of $35,183, all of which shares had been contributed by the Company, and the sum of $3,939.29 representing contributions made by decedent from his salary. Transfer inheritance tax was paid on the latter amount at the rate of 10%. The Register of Wills assessed also a 10% tax on the value of the shares of stock, or $3,518.30, from which assessment Eleanor A. Dorsey appealed. The court below decided that the tax was properly imposed, and from that decision she now appeals to this Court.
Section 1(c) of the Act provides that the tax shall be imposed upon the transfer of any property made by a resident by deed, grant or gift intended to take effect in possession or enjoyment at or after the death of the grantor or donor. Section 1 (d) provides that where property is transferred pursuant to a power of appointment it shall be taxed as of the estate of the donor, notwithstanding any blending of such property with the property of the donee. It is the contention of appellant that in designating her as beneficiary decedent was merely exercising a power of appointment over that portion of the share of the fund credited to him which represented contributions by the Company. Such a contention would be valid only if the Company's *560 contributions continued to be owned by the Company and not by decedent, because obviously a power of appointment can exist only with reference to another's property and not one's own. But it seems quite clear that decedent's share of the fund belonged to him in its entirety during his lifetime and without any distinction as to the part thereof contributed out of his salary and the part contributed by the Company. The rules and regulations governing the fund state its purposes to be, inter alia, to permit the employes to share in the Company's profits and to provide a plan through which each employe may accumulate his own savings and his portion of the Company's contributions as a means of providing an income for himself on retirement. These declarations fairly indicate that the Company regarded its contributions as the property of the depositors during the period of their accumulation in the fund. It was evidently so understood by decedent himself, for in his will he stated: "I am presently the owner of certain shares of the Profit Sharing Plan of Sears, Roebuck & Co., a corporation, as well as a certain cash balance held by said Sears, Roebuck & Co. in connection with the operation of said Profit Sharing Plan." The rules and regulations provide that, so far as practicable and advisable, the fund should be invested in the capital stock of the Company, to the end that the depositors may, in the largest measure possible, share in the earnings of the Company. There stood to the credit of each depositor's account in the fund a share made up not only of his own contributions but also those of the Company; in other words, the Company's contributions were apportioned as a credit to each depositor. A depositor, after completing five years of service, was entitled, upon ceasing to be a member of the fund, to withdraw all moneys and securities credited to his account at that time, and *561 upon the death of a depositor, regardless of length of service, his estate or his designated beneficiary was entitled to receive all moneys and securities then credited to his account. Payment of the moneys and securities could be made by the trustees wholly or partially in kind or in cash or by the purchase and delivery of a single premium annuity contract. A "Group D" depositor was entitled to withdraw from the fund even without leaving his employment and prior to attaining the age of retirement, and he could also withdraw upon the termination of his employment after attaining the age of retirement, and in either event he was entitled to receive all the moneys and securities then standing to the credit of his account in the fund, to be paid in instalments over a five years' period or, at the option of the trustees, in the form of a single premium annuity contract, the latter being presumably for the purpose, in appropriate cases, of protecting him against his own recklessness or improvidence in the expenditure of the property so withdrawn by him. The fact that the trustees thus had some discretionary power to determine the mode of payment at the time of the employe's withdrawal or in the event of his death in nowise limited his absolute right to withdraw his share of the property in the fund or to dispose of it at his death, but governed only the form in which he or his designated beneficiary or his estate would receive it. Once the Company's contributions became part of the fund they could never thereafter revert to the Company; it is not necessary to consider whether they are to be regarded, realistically, as additional compensation for the services rendered by the employe or as constituting a pure gift on the part of the Company, since, in view of the depositor's right to withdraw in his lifetime the total amount of the fund credited to him or to make full disposal of it at the time of his *562 death, he had, in any event, substantial ownership of his entire share of the fund and accordingly, in transferring it to the beneficiary designated by him he was transferring not only his own property to the extent that it represented contributions from his salary, but also his own property to the extent that it represented his proportionate share of the Company's contributions, and therefore he was not in anywise acting merely as the donee of a power of appointment. For the same reason the designation of the beneficiary under the facts of the present case is not analogous to the designation of a beneficiary in a life insurance policy. The funds payable by an insurance company to the beneficiary of a life insurance policy never formed part of the estate of the decedent and therefore did not "pass from" that estate but directly from the assets of the insurance company (cf. Housekeeper's Estate, 10 D. & C. 494, 497) whereas, here, as previously pointed out, the property involved did form part of decedent's estate in his lifetime and passed to the beneficiary, not from the employer-Company but from decedent's estate.
Appellant urges that, even in the face of such a conclusion, the inheritance tax here in controversy should not be imposed because the right of decedent to withdraw the fund in his lifetime was equivalent to a right of revocation, which, unexercised, did not render the property transferred subject to the tax, citing Dolan's Estate, 279 Pa. 582, 124 A. 176. The Commonwealth contends that the decision in Dolan's Estate has been in effect overruled by pronouncements in subsequent opinions of this Court.[*] Be that as it *563 may, however, the decision in Dolan's Estate is not here in point, since the Commonwealth is not basing its claim on the fact that there was here what amounted to a reserved right of revocation, but on the fact that the transfer to decedent's beneficiary was intended to take effect in possession or enjoyment only at and after his death. In Dolan's Estate, the donor, by deed of conveyance completely divested herself of all right, title, interest, possession and enjoyment of, in and to the property, subject only to her reserved right of revocation, whereas in the present instance decedent did not in his lifetime make any transfer to his named beneficiary of either title or enjoyment or possession, but merely designated her as the person to receive the title, enjoyment and possession at the time of his death; in other words, in Dolan's Estate the transfer of the property took place during the lifetime of the donor and not at her death; in the present case no transfer whatever occurred during the life of the donor but only at his death, thus bringing the transaction directly within the purport of the Act of 1919 and subjecting it to the tax therein provided.
Decree affirmed at cost of appellant.
NOTES
[*]  Commonwealth v. Linderman's Estate, 340 Pa. 289, 17 A.2d 397; Glosser Trust, 355 Pa. 210, 215, 49 A.2d 401, 404; Todd Trust, 358 Pa. 530, 534, 58 A.2d 135, 136, 137; Myers Estate, 359 Pa. 577, 581, 60 A.2d 50, 52.

=== CASE 9736798 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:06:50.281054+00 ===

MESCHKE, Justice.
We consider consolidated appeals by Robert W. Hogie, Jr., from a jury conviction for theft of property and from a following order which revoked his probation on a prior conviction. We hold that Ho-gie’s possession of the recently stolen automobile sufficiently corroborated testimony of two accomplices for the theft conviction. We affirm both the conviction and the revocation.
Hogie was criminally charged with theft of an automobile, a class C felony under NDCC 12.1-23-02(1) and 12.1-23-05(2)(d). During his jury trial, the State used the testimony of two accomplices who had been separately convicted of the same theft. The accomplices, Mark Buckeye and Jerald Rudolph, gave similar testimony which we summarize here.
Buckeye and Rudolph were drinking with Hogie during the evening of April 10, 1987. Earlier in the week, Hogie had obtained a set of keys to a yellow Camaro parked on the lot of Walt Sanders Chevrolet by breaking into a “lock box” attached to the Cama-ro’s window. In the early morning hours of April 11, the trio decided to steal this auto from Sanders. ■
After taking the Camaro, Hogie drove the threesome to the home of Buckeye’s parents in Edgeley, North Dakota, where they picked up cassette tapes, got money from Buckeye’s brother, and filled the car with gas at a filling station. On the same day, they left Edgeley to drive to Kansas where Buckeye planned to “settle a debt,” meaning that he expected to assault an individual. By alternating drivers during the journey, all three men drove the Cama-ro. They stopped briefly in Frederick, South Dakota, removed a set of South Dakota license plates from another auto, and placed them on the Camaro. After staying overnight at Grand Island, Nebraska, they traveled together to Osbourne County, Kansas, where Buckeye “settled his debt.”
Afterward, Hogie, Buckeye, and Rudolph stopped to eat lunch at a fast-food restaurant in Smith Center, Smith County, Kansas. Hogie entered the restaurant to order, leaving Buckeye and Rudolph in the Camaro. While Hogie was waiting for the food, a Smith County sheriff’s car pulled into the parking lot directly behind the Camaro. Shortly, Sheriff Floyd Bose arrested Buckeye for assault based on a teletype advisory to be on the lookout for a yellow Camaro carrying someone named Buckeye and several other passengers.
After arresting Buckeye, Sheriff Bose had Hogie and Rudolph follow him in the Camaro to his office. There, Sheriff Bose asked about ownership of the Camaro. None of the three claimed the vehicle. Sheriff Bose asked Hogie whether he had driven the Camaro. Hogie responded that all three men had driven it and that he had driven the vehicle to the restaurant. Sheriff Bose then asked Hogie to sign a consent-to-search form, which Hogie signed. When Sheriff Bose checked the vehicle identification number with the National Information Crime Network, he learned that both the vehicle and the plates were stolen. Later, Hogie was arrested and charged with theft.
*503After this testimony by the two accomplices, the State called Sheriff Bose as a corroborating witness. Sheriff Bose testified that Hogie admitted driving the Cáma-ro to the restaurant in Smith Center, that Hogie drove the car to the Sheriffs office, that he asked Hogie to sign a consent-to-search form, and that Hogie voluntarily signed the form. The signed consent to search was put in evidence.
After the State rested its case, Hogie moved for acquittal alleging that the State’s corroborating evidence was legally insufficient to submit the case to the jury. The trial court denied Hogie’s motion. The jury returned a guilty verdict. Hogie appealed the conviction.
After Hogie’s conviction, the State moved to revoke Hogie’s probation on a prior suspended sentence for burglary. At the revocation hearing, the State submitted a certified copy of the conviction for theft, certified copies of two other convictions in municipal court, and testimony that Hogie had not yet paid $417 in court-ordered restitution. The trial court revoked Hogie’s probation and imposed a sentence concurrent with Hogie’s sentence for theft. Ho-gie also appealed the revocation.
On appeal, Hogie claimed “that without the testimony of the two accomplices, Bu-dolph and Buckeye, there [was] not sufficient other evidence which ‘tends to connect the defendant with the commission, of the offense,’ theft of an automobile.” Ho-gie contended that the trial court erred in submitting the theft case to the jury because there was “a total lack of any other evidence that [Hogie] was involved in the theft.” Hogie argued further that the probation revocation must be reversed if the conviction for theft is set aside.
Since Sheriff Bose “provided evidence of his observations and Hogie’s own oral and written statements concerning his connection with the [stolen] vehicle,” the State argued that there was enough evidence to allow the jury to weigh the corroboration. The State contended that Hogie’s possession of the stolen car, as evidenced by his driving it, by his admissions about driving it, and by his consenting to the search of it, connected him to its recent theft.
Under North Dakota law, a defendant cannot be convicted of a crime upon the testimony of accomplices alone. NDCC 29-21-14 declares:
A conviction cannot be had upon the testimony of an accomplice unless he is corroborated by such other evidence as tends to connect the defendant with the commission of the offense, and the corroboration is not sufficient if it merely shows the commission of the offense, or the circumstances thereof.
The purpose of corroborative evidence is to demonstrate that an accomplice is a reliable witness and worthy of credit. State v. Haugen, 448 N.W.2d 191 (N.D.1989) [Haugen I]; State v. Smith, 238 N.W.2d 662 (N.D.1976); State v. Kent, 4 N.D. 577, 62 N.W. 631, 638 (1895). Evidence other than an accomplice’s testimony must tend to connect the defendant to the crime.
When an accomplice testifies, the trial court must first determine, as a matter of law, whether other evidence corroborates that testimony. When the trial court has determined that other evidence corroborates the accomplice’s testimony, the sufficiency of all of the evidence is for the jury to decide. State v. Haugen, 449 N.W.2d 784 (N.D.1989) [.Haugen II]; Haugen I; State v. Garcia, 425 N.W.2d 918 (N.D.1988). While the existence of corrob-. orating evidence is for the trial court, the credibility and weight of that evidence is for the jury. State v. Foster, 69 N.D. 428, 287 N.W. 517, 520 (1939). To be submitted to the jury, the corroborating evidence standing alone does not need to prove guilt.
As used in the statute requiring corroboration, “tends” indicates tendency, not certainty. Websters Third New International Dictionary 2354 (1971) says the ordinary meaning of “tend,” in this context, is “to have an inclination toward a particular belief, feeling, or attitude.” Thus, every fact given by an accomplice need not be corroborated. All that is needed is other evidence corroborating one or more material details or facts which tend to connect the defendant with the crime. *504Haugen I; State v. Neurohr, 376 N.W.2d 805 (N.D.1985); State v. Lind, 322 N.W.2d 826 (N.D.1982). The prosecution need not point to a single, isolated item which in itself is corroborative. Rather, the combined and cumulative evidence other than the testimony of an accomplice may tend to connect the defendant to the crime. Haugen II; State v. Anderson, 172 N.W.2d 597 (N.D.1969). Circumstantial as well as direct evidence can be corroborative.
It is not necessary that the corroborating evidence “be sufficient, in itself, to warrant a conviction or establish a prima facie case.” Anderson, 172 N.W.2d at 600. See also State v. Thompson, 359 N.W.2d 374 (N.D.1985); Lind; State v. Thorson, 264 N.W.2d 441 (N.D.1978). If some evidence tends to connect a defendant to the crime, it is for the jury to weigh that corroborating evidence with the accomplices' testimony to determine the guilt or innocence of the defendant.
We agree that Hogie’s possession of the stolen vehicle in Kansas with plates stolen in South Dakota tended to connect him to the recent theft in North Dakota. It is well established and widely recognized that a jury may infer a defendant’s guilt of theft from his unexplained possession of recently stolen property. The United States Supreme Court described this permissible inference as “a traditional common-law inference deeply rooted in our law” and quoted James Thayer, writing in his Preliminary Treatise on Evidence (1898), who explained that the inference was “the descendant of a presumption ‘running through a dozen centuries.’ ” Barnes v. United States, 412 U.S. 837, 843-844, 93 S.Ct. 2357, 2362, 37 L.Ed.2d 380 (1973). See 50 Am.Jur.2d Larceny § 160 (1970); Annotation, Modern Status: Instruction Allowing Presumption or Inference of Guilt From Possession of Recently Stolen Property as Violation of Defendant’s Privilege Against Self-Incrimination, 88 A.L.R.3d 1178 (1978); Annotation, What Constitutes “Recently” Stolen Property Within Rule Inferring Guilt From Unexplained Possession of Such Property, 89 A.L.R.3d 1202 (1979); Annotation, Presumptions and Inferences Arising in Prosecutions Under National Motor Vehicle Theft Act (Dyer Act) (18 USGS §§ 2312, 2313) From Unexplained Possession of Stolen Motor Vehicle, 15 A.L.R. Fed. 856 (1973). Unexplained possession of recently stolen property permits an incriminating implication.
Examples are plentiful. In Brown v. State, 165 Ga.App. 51, 299 S.E.2d 108 (1983), the defendant was convicted of theft of a motor vehicle after he was found in possession of it in another county 90 miles distant, six days after the vehicle was reported stolen. In State v. Clayton, 658 P.2d 621 (Utah 1983), the defendant was convicted of theft after he was located in California in possession of a vehicle stolen in Utah six days earlier. And, in People v. Sherman, 110 Ill.App.3d 854, 65 Ill.Dec. 581, 441 N.E.2d 896 (1982), the defendant was convicted of theft when he was arrested driving a vehicle stolen about two weeks earlier. These examples illustrate that Ho-gie’s possession was a circumstance which tended to connect him with the theft.
The presence of the accomplices in the stolen vehicle does not dispel the inference of complicity. The kind of possession which supports an inference of guilt may be joint. 50 Am.Jur.2d Larceny § 161 (1970); § 4 (“View That Possession May Be Joint”) and § 24 (“Theft of Motor Vehicle,” “Driven By Defendant”), Annotation, What Amounts To “Exclusive" Possession of Stolen Goods to Support Inference of Burglary or Other Felonious Taking, 51 A.L.R.3d 727 (1973). For example, see People v. Donald, 132 Ill.App.2d 598, 270 N.E.2d 85 (1971) which held the evidence was sufficient to convict of theft where defendant was found driving an automobile five days after its theft, despite lack of direct evidence that defendant had taken the auto. The Illinois Court said: “Neither is it of consequence that there was a second occupant of the car who may have been exercising joint control over the auto. Where possession is joint, it is presumed all in possession are guilty of theft.” (citations omitted). 270 N.E.2d at 86. Indeed, the otherwise unexplained presence *505of the two testifying accomplices as passengers with Hogie in the recently stolen vehicle when they were stopped can be viewed as an additional corroborating circumstance.
This court has frequently held that a defendant’s unexplained possession of recently stolen property is incriminating. In State v. Rosencrans, 9 N.D. 163, 82 N.W. 422 (1900), this court held that a defendant’s possession of two rakes and a hay mower nine days after their theft was sufficient evidence of guilt of grand larceny. “It is a well-settled principle that the recent personal possession of stolen property, not satisfactorily explained, is an evidential fact, from which complicity in the larceny of the property may be inferred.” 83 N.W. at 423. In State v. Lennick, 47 N.D. 393, 182 N.W. 458 (1921), this court held that defendant’s possession in Dunn County of three cows stolen from Mercer County 13 days earlier was sufficient evidence of larceny. “The jury also were warranted in finding that the defendant had the possession of stolen property, recently, after it was stolen. This gave rise to the presumption of fact that the recent possession of stolen property, not satisfactorily explained, is an evidentiary fact from which the crime of larceny may be imputed.” 182 N.W. at 459. In State v. Williams, 150 N.W.2d 844 (N.D.1967), this court approved an instruction to the jury to this effect for the crime of larceny of an automobile, when given with instructions placing the burden of proof upon the State to show all of the elements of larceny beyond a reasonable doubt. The instruction approved was:
To warrant an inference of guilt from the possession of stolen property, the possession must be personal, recent, unexplained, and must involve a conscious exercise of dominion over the property.
Id. at 847. See also City of Dickinson v. Gresz, 450 N.W.2d 216 (N.D.1989). Unexplained possession of recently stolen property is an incriminating circumstance.
This court has often recognized that incriminating possession of stolen property corroborated testimony of an accomplice. In State v. Smith, 51 N.D. 130, 199 N.W. 187 (1924), this court held that a larceny defendant’s possession of an automobile stolen four days earlier in another city over 75 miles away corroborated testimony of his accomplice sufficiently to affirm the conviction. In State v. Smith, 238 N.W.2d 662 (N.D.1976), we ruled that evidence, that at his arrest defendant possessed a diamond engagement ring taken in the burglary, was a circumstance which sufficiently corroborated an accomplice’s testimony. In Haugen I, we ruled that rolled and loose quarters, like those stolen in a burglary and found on the floorboard in front of the driver’s seat of a vehicle driven to a bank by defendant on the day following the burglary, tended to connect the defendant with the burglary. We concluded that this possession helped support testimony of the witness who accompanied defendant in the car and who testified against him. In Hau-gen II, a stolen battery cable on defendant’s ear was deemed corroborative of an accomplice’s testimony that the defendant aided in a burglary. Similarly, Hogie’s unexplained possession of the recently stolen Camaro corroborated testimony of his accomplices.
Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court properly submitted all of the evidence to the jury, including the testimony of the accomplices, the corroborating testimony of the sheriff, and the consent-to-search form signed by Hogie. There was sufficient evidence to support the jury’s verdict of guilty. We affirm Hogie’s conviction for theft.
Hogie’s sentence on revocation of probation was concurrent with his sentence for theft, which we have affirmed. The theft conviction alone was sufficient to justify the revocation. Therefore, it is unnecessary for us to consider Hogie’s other arguments about the sufficiency of the evidence for revocation of probation.
We affirm.
ERICKSTAD, C.J., and GIERKE, J„ concur.

=== CASE 9736799 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:06:50.285895+00 ===

*506VANDE WALLE, Justice,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent.
Recent decisions of this Court, some of which I have authored, may appear to minimize the purpose of the requirement in NDCC § 29-21-14 that the testimony of an accomplice be corroborated in order to convict. But, simply put, because accomplices are often given reduced sentences or other incentives to testify, the law looks with distrust on their testimony and will not allow a defendant to be convicted on that testimony unless it is corroborated. State v. Kent, 4 N.D. 577, 62 N.W. 631 (1895). The requirement is therefore more than a procedural device or a hoop through which the State must jump in order to obtain a conviction when the entire evidence against the defendant consists of the testimony of the accomplices. We have stated numerous times that all that is required is that the evidence corroborate the testimony of accomplices as to some material fact or facts and tends to connect the defendant with the commission of the offense; that it is not necessary that the corroborating evidence be sufficient, in itself, to warrant a conviction or establish a prima facie case; and that it is not necessary that the State corroborate every fact testified to by an accomplice. E.g., State v. Haugen, 448 N.W.2d 191 (N.D.1989); State v. Lind, 322 N.W.2d- 826 (N.D.1982). But there is a point at which the evidence that “tends to connect the defendant with the commission of the offense” becomes so tenuous that, even though it may be some evidence, it cannot, as a matter of law, rise to a level adequate to submit the issue of whether or not it is sufficient corroborative evidence to the jury. For the reasons stated below, I believe this is such a case.
The majority opinion cites numerous authorities for the proposition that possession of stolen property is sufficient to convict of theft and therefore most certainly must be sufficient corroborative evidence. Those authorities include annotations on subjects such as instructions allowing presumption or inference of guilt from possession of recently stolen property as a violation of a defendant’s privilege against self-incrimination and what constitutes recently stolen property for purpose of inferring guilt from unexplained possession of stolen motor vehicle which, as acknowledged in the majority opinion, involve issues other than that of corroborative evidence. In many instances in the authorities cited the defendant was in sole possession of the stolen property. Where that is the fact of the case, that fact alone may be sufficient corroborative evidence. I might reach that conclusion even in those instances in which the defendant is found in possession of the property with persons other than the accomplice-witnesses. Where, however, the defendant’s “possession” is shared with that of the alleged confessed or convicted accomplices it is too facile a rationale, for the defendant’s presence with the accomplices makes the defendant an easy victim upon which to place all or some of the blame for the crime.
I do not understand that the majority opinion relies upon guilt by association, i.e., that the fact the defendant is found in the company of the accomplices some days after the crime was committed and hundreds of miles away from the place of the crime is sufficient corroborative evidence. If that understanding is correct, then the defendant’s “possession” of the automobile as shared with those accomplices adds nothing of substance to the picture. For example, given the same time and distance as here, if the stolen property was a ring found in the pocket of an accomplice, would that constitute sufficient evidence of corroboration of the accomplice’s testimony that defendant had acted with that accomplice to steal the ring? 1 I assume not, because the defendant would not be in “possession” of the ring. Although the majority opinion concludes that all the persons in the automobile are “in possession” of the automobile, that conclusion is more a fiction of law than factual evidence of possession. “Many cases have recognized that *507it may be found that an inference of guilt of burglary based on defendant’s possession of stolen goods has not been raised where the stolen property was found in a place where others had an equal right and facility of access thereto.” Annotation, What Amounts To “Exclusive”Possession of Stolen Goods to Support Inference of Burglary or Other Felonious Taking, 51 A.L.R.3d § 5 727, 737 (1973).
More specifically, in dealing with a motor vehicle, there are many ways in which a person can come into possession of the vehicle, some of which involve innocence on the part of the possessor of the vehicle:
“The possession of an automobile which does not belong to the driver is not so strange, unusual, or unique that it points to guilty knowledge as more likely than innocent knowledge on the part of the driver. The borrowing or leasing of an automobile for temporary use is not an uncommon occurrence. If every person possessing an automobile which they did not own would be held accountable as having knowledge that the automobile was stolen, every person who borrowed a car would be in peril of a conviction for receiving stolen property.” Commonwealth v. Henderson, 451 Pa. 452, 457, 304 A.2d 154, 157 (1973).
That rationale is even more compelling where, as here, “possession” of the automobile is shared with accomplices who are the source of the only evidence that the defendant committed the theft of the automobile. Furthermore, as an annotation at 15 A.L.R.Fed. 856, 859 (1973) discusses, the inference of guilt flowing from possession of a recently stolen motor vehicle grows weaker as the time of the possession recedes from the time of theft. Thus, if the defendant had been found in the vehicle with the accomplices within a few hours of the theft and not days later and hundreds of miles away from the place of the crime, I might agree that there was sufficient inference to permit the matter to go to the jury.
In State v. Haugen, 449 N.W.2d 784 (N.D.1989), we recently observed that an inference is a fact logically drawn from the admitted evidence and that speculation is a mere theorization of facts from the evidence. We reversed two burglary convictions because the accomplice testimony was not sufficiently corroborated. We noted that that “corroborative evidence” presented by the State did not support the inferences it sought to make, but only amounted to mere speculation that the defendant was connected with the crime. In one instance we reversed the conviction because there was no independent testimony placing the defendant in the vicinity of the place of the crime before, during, or after the burglary or otherwise connecting the defendant with the burglary. Here, although the majority opinion does not so indicate, there was no independent evidence that Hogie was even a resident of North Dakota much less that he was in the vicinity of the place of the crime before, during, or after the burglary.
We reversed another burglary conviction, observing that:
“We have previously stated that evidence that defendant was in the company of accomplices or was present at or near the place of the crime shortly before or after the crime was committed may be corroboration that tends to connect defendant with commission of the crime. [Citations omitted.] We do not have such evidence in this case. All we have is speculation as to Haugen’s presence. Speculation is not evidence tending to connect defendant with the commission of the crime.” Haugen, supra, 449 N.W.2d at 789.
In conclusion, I do not believe that the State entered sufficient corroborative evidence to allow the court to submit the case to the jury. If § 29-21-14, NDCC, is to protect a defendant, more than coincidence and speculation are required. The State’s corroborative evidence was too remote in time and place to “tend to connect” Hogie to the theft in Jamestown. If the testimony of the accomplices is to be believed, it appears that the State had more persuasive corroborative evidence available to it which it did not offer into evidence. For example, the State could have entered into evidence the testimony of Dave Buckeye, Mark Buckeye’s brother, or the full-service gas *508station attendant. The testimony of these individuals could have placed Hogie in the automobile, and in the company of the accomplices, near the place of the theft immediately after it occurred. See State v. Garcia, 425 N.W.2d 918 (N.D.1988) [evidence that defendant was seen in the company of the accomplices near the scene of the crime before and after it occurred was sufficient corroborative evidence tending to connect defendant to the crime]; State v. Thorson, 264 N.W.2d 441 (N.D.1978) [testimony that defendant and accomplices were together near the scene of the crime was sufficient corroborative evidence].
Because I do not believe there was sufficient corroborative evidence tending to connect Hogie to the crime to submit the case to the jury, I would reverse Hogie’s judgment of conviction for theft.
The second case in this consolidated appeal stems from the district court’s order revoking Hogie’s earlier probation. It is clear from the order that the court considered Hogie’s judgment of conviction for theft, two minor-in-possession convictions and testimony that Hogie had not paid court-ordered restitution which, at the time of the revocation hearing, was not yet due. However, the order did not specify which of the aforementioned grounds the court utilized in revoking Hogie’s probation. Because I am unable to determine from the order whether the court based its decision to revoke the probation solely on the judgment of conviction for theft, solely on the minor-in-possession conviction, or on a combination of all the listed grounds, I would remand the order revoking probation to the district court for reconsideration and instruct the court to consider the grounds for revocation in light of the reversal of Ho-gie’s judgment of conviction for theft.
LEVINE, J., concurs.
. Compare State v. Smith, 238 N.W.2d 662 (N.D.1976), in which this Court concluded that a stolen diamond ring, found in the pocket of the defendant, was sufficient corroborative evidence to submit the case to the jury.

=== CASE 2207368 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:19.323066+00 ===

183 Mich. App. 208 (1989)
454 N.W.2d 125
HILL
v.
FORD MOTOR COMPANY
Docket No. 113577.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided December 7, 1989.
Snyder & Handler, P.C. (by David S. Snyder and Michael W. Bartnik), for plaintiff.
James C. Curtiss, for defendant.
*210 Before: MAHER, P.J., and MARILYN KELLY and H.E. DEMING,[*] JJ.
PER CURIAM.
The Michigan Supreme Court has vacated our prior order in this matter and remanded for reconsideration as on leave granted in light of Teper v Park West Galleries, Inc, 431 Mich. 202; 427 NW2d 535 (1988), reh den 431 Mich. 1207 (1988). See 431 Mich. 900 (1988). Upon reconsideration, we reverse the trial court's decision with respect to Count II of plaintiff's complaint but affirm as to Count III.
This case concerns whether plaintiff's state law claims for breach of contract and misrepresentation are preempted by § 514 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act, 29 USC 1144(a) (ERISA). Plaintiff, a long time salaried employee of defendant, took a voluntary early retirement effective June 1, 1982, twelve years prior to his scheduled retirement. As a salaried employee, plaintiff was an eligible participant and beneficiary in defendant's General Retirement Plan, an employee benefit plan under the ERISA. This plan entitled plaintiff to receive both basic retirement benefits and certain supplemental benefits.
Plaintiff alleged that, prior to deciding to accept early retirement, he reviewed various documents, bulletins and notices provided by defendant, attended early retirement seminars, and met with members of defendant's personnel staff in order to ascertain the various benefits to which he would be entitled. Plaintiff alleged he specifically inquired about entitlement to supplemental benefits under the plan, and was informed that outside earnings in excess of a given sum during a calendar year would cause a penalty deduction in the *211 supplemental benefits for the balance of that calendar year. In particular, plaintiff alleged he was informed that the penalty reductions applied only to excess earnings for the same calendar year and that calculations began anew at the beginning of each successive calendar year.
After accepting the early retirement offer, plaintiff obtained outside employment and reported his earnings as required under the plan. Thereafter, however, plaintiff alleged he was informed, contrary to his prior understanding, that his excess earnings for that calendar year would be applied cumulatively and operate to deprive him of supplemental benefits otherwise due in subsequent years until the excess earnings had been fully consumed.
After plaintiff was informed the supplemental benefits would not be paid in accordance with his understanding, he commenced the instant action with the filing of a three-count complaint. Count I of his complaint sought declaratory relief regarding his rights to supplemental benefits under the plan. Count II contained an action for breach of contract based upon the various publications provided by defendant describing the supplemental benefits available under the plan. Finally, Count III contained an action for misrepresentation wherein plaintiff alleged that he was induced into accepting early retirement in reliance upon various representations by defendant that proved to be false. Plaintiff alleged that, but for the representations, he would not have surrendered his then existing seniority, salary and fringe benefit package.
After the lower court denied defendant's motion for summary disposition as to all three counts, an application for leave to appeal to this Court was filed. We denied leave with respect to Count I, but reversed the lower court's decision with respect to *212 Counts II and III, finding that plaintiff's claims were preempted by 29 USC 1144. Plaintiff then sought leave to appeal our ruling to the Michigan Supreme Court which, in lieu of granting leave to appeal, vacated our decision and remanded back to us for reconsideration as on leave granted in light of Teper, supra.
Initially, we note that consideration of the lower court's ruling with respect to Count I of plaintiff's complaint is not properly before us inasmuch as we originally declined to grant leave on this claim and plaintiff's application for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court addressed Counts II and III only. Accordingly, we will not address this claim.
Additionally, we disagree with plaintiff's contention that the law of the case doctrine requires us to rule that his claims are not preempted. Plaintiff correctly points out that, where a case is taken on appeal to a higher appellate court, the law of the case announced in the higher appellate court supersedes that set forth in the intermediate appellate court, Johnson v White, 430 Mich. 47, 53; 420 NW2d 87 (1988).
However, plaintiff is incorrect in his assertion that the effect of the Supreme Court's order in this case was to reverse this Court's prior order. First, leave to appeal was never granted by the Supreme Court. Instead, it vacated our prior decision in lieu of granting leave. Thus, there was never any decision by the Supreme Court and no law of the case established there. Second, the order of the Supreme Court did not reverse our prior order as apparently contended by plaintiff, but merely vacated it with directions to reconsider plaintiff's claims in light of Teper. Accordingly, the law of the case doctrine does not apply in this case.
With respect to the remaining two claims, we are required to determine whether plaintiff's actions *213 for breach of contract and misrepresentation "relate to" defendant's retirement plan. Under the ERISA, state laws that "relate to" an employee benefit plan are expressly preempted. 29 USC 1144(a). In Teper, supra, p 221, our Supreme Court found that a state law is preempted if it "relates to" an employee benefit plan by
1) altering the level of benefits which would be paid out under a given plan from state to state, 2) altering the terms of the plan such as requirements for eligibility, or 3) subjecting the fiduciaries of a plan to claims other than those provided in the ERISA itself.
The Court stated that ERISA preemption "turns upon whether state law places any fiscal, administrative, or legal burdens upon the plan." Teper, 218. In addition, the Court indicated that preemption exists only where there is a real, if only indirect, relationship between the challenged state law and an employee benefit plan. Teper, 220. The Court ultimately found that an award of future pension benefits in a wrongful discharge action against the employer, rather than the plan or fiduciary of the plan, did not "relate to" the plan and was not preempted.
We will first address plaintiff's claim for misrepresentation. In our view, this claim does not "relate to" the plan, and therefore, is not preempted by ERISA. Plaintiff's misrepresentation claim is not based upon any misrepresentation within the plan itself, but is, instead, based upon alleged representations made by the employer prior to plaintiff's participation in the plan. Further, plaintiff is not suing for actual supplemental benefits allegedly due under the plan, but is seeking damages for alleged misrepresentations concerning the amount of benefits plaintiff would ultimately be entitled to *214 receive if he were to accept early retirement. In effect, plaintiff is claiming that, irrespective of the actual terms and conditions of the plan itself, he is entitled to additional damages, not under the plan, but pursuant to the various representations made by defendant. Additionally, plaintiff is not seeking to impose liability on either the plan or the fiduciary, but on the employer who allegedly made the false representations.
Accordingly, because plaintiff's misrepresentation claim is based upon representations independent of the plan itself, and does not seek actual benefits under the plan, the claim will not alter the level of benefits paid out under a plan from state to state, nor will it alter the terms of the plan. Further, because plaintiff's claim is against the employer, there is no danger that the fiduciary will be subjected to claims other than those provided in the ERISA. Finally, there is no fiscal, administrative or legal burden imposed on an employee benefit plan by requiring that the employer refrain from misrepresenting the availability of benefits.
Thus, in light of our Supreme Court's decision in Teper, supra, we are unable to conclude that plaintiff's misrepresentation claim "relates to" defendant's employee benefit plan. As a result, plaintiff's state law claim is not preempted by the ERISA. Accordingly, the trial court did not err in denying defendant's motion for summary disposition with respect to this claim.
We agree with defendant, however, that plaintiff's breach of contract claim "relates to" the plan and, thus, is preempted by the ERISA. The alleged breach of contract complained of in the complaint is the deprivation of "supplemental benefits due to plaintiff under the General Retirement Plan for *215 salaried employees." Thus, plaintiff is seeking actual benefits alleged to be due under the plan, rather than benefits otherwise due pursuant to an independent contract. In this situation, plaintiff is attempting to have his entitlement to supplemental benefits under the plan determined on the basis of a breach of contract action governed by state law. By attempting to determine entitlement to supplemental benefits on the basis of state law, plaintiff's claim would clearly have the effect of altering the level of benefits payable under a given plan from state to state. Teper, supra, p 214. Therefore, plaintiff's breach of contract claim "relates to" defendant's employee benefit plan and is preempted by the ERISA. Accordingly, defendant was entitled to summary disposition as to the breach of contract claim.
Affirmed in part, reversed in part and remanded.
NOTES
[*]  Former circuit judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.

=== CASE 9736800 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:06:55.239593+00 ===

Cavanagh, J.
i
This litigation arises out of a construction contract dispute between a property owner, plaintiff, and its general contractor’s surety, defendant. The plaintiff, Old Orchard by the Bay Associates, filed a complaint on February 10, 1978, in Oakland Circuit Court, alleging that defendant, Hamilton Mutual Insurance Company, was liable under a surety bond for latent defects relating to the construction of an apartment project which Old Orchard owns. The litigation was pending for three years, during which time the parties commenced discovery, and in 1980 the case was mediated.
By a stipulated order filed February 6, 1981, Old Orchard and Hamilton Mutual voluntarily submitted their entire dispute to statutory arbitration.1 The arbitration proceedings, including extensive *248evidentiary hearings, took place throughout 1985.2 On December 6, 1985, five years after the execution of the arbitration agreement, the Commercial Arbitration Tribunal entered an award of $300,000, plus statutory interest, in favor of plaintiff.3
The arbitrator’s interest award to Old Orchard was computed from the date of the filing of the circuit court complaint at the statutory judgment rate, MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013. Subsequently, defendant Hamilton Mutual filed several motions, including a claim that the arbitrators erred in awarding interest other than that allowable under the prejudgment interest statute, MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4, from the date of the arbitration award. The trial court confirmed the award in all respects on May 21, 1986, including confirmation of the award of interest at the statutory judgment rate.
Defendant Hamilton Mutual appealed on several issues. The Court of Appeals, in an unpublished opinion, affirmed on all issues, except as to the interest award. In a split decision, the Court of Appeals held that MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4 should *249have been applied, allowing for an award of five percent annual interest from the date of the 1985 arbitration award.4
We granted the plaintiff’s application for leave to appeal, while denying the defendant’s application for leave to appeal as cross-appellant.5 430 Mich 891 (1988). The defendant claims that the plaintiff is entitled to interest only from the date of the arbitration award at a five percent annual rate under MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4. We reject that argument and reverse the decision of the Court of Appeals on the interest issue and hold as follows: (1) where the parties to a contract dispute have no agreement to arbitrate, and (2) do not later stipulate to an interest entitlement or rate (assuming the original action is not dismissed),6 (3)(a) statutory interest is awardable on the judgment from the date of the filing of the complaint until the judgment is entered, and (b) such interest is also awardable thereafter until the judgment is paid, as provided in MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013.
ii
Before discussing the merits, the relevant statu*250tory provisions are set forth briefly. Two statutes potentially govern the award of interest to the prevailing party in any contractual dispute. MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4 authorizes the award of interest where the parties fail to agree on the matter of entitlement to interest in an action. It applies to specified types of disputes founded on a contract that are resolved less formally "by verdict, report of referees, award of arbitrators, or by assessment made by the clerk of the court or by any other mode of assessment according to law . . . .” Statutory interest under MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4 accrues from the date of the award until payment or judgment is rendered thereupon.7
MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013 authorizes the payment of interest on all money judgments awarded in "civil actions.”8 The award of such *251statutory judgment interest under MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013 is mandatory, although the parties may vary the applicable interest rate within certain parameters.9
hi
The statutory interest provision that applies in a given action is a purely legal question to be resolved by means of statutory interpretation, except where the parties stipulate to an interest schedule or otherwise agree on the matter of interest as part of their arbitration agreement.10 The parties in the instant dispute, however, never agreed upon the matter of interest.
Plaintiff Old Orchard alleges that it was error for the Court of Appeals to state as a broad rule that "interest on an arbitration award in an action founded on a contract is governed by MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4.”11 We agree. This conclusion is based on a close examination of both the language and history of the two interest statutes at issue, as well *252as the purposes that the Legislature sought to accomplish in enacting these provisions.
IV
As this Court stated in White v Ann Arbor, 406 Mich 554, 562; 281 NW2d 283 (1979), and Advisory Opinion re Constitutionality of 1972 PA 294, 389 Mich 441, 478; 208 NW2d 469 (1973), the interpretative task at hand requires the Court to infer legislative intent from the language used in the statute, as well as to consider the statutory language in the context of the special subject matter which it addressed. The meaning of the statute must be viewed "in light of the general purpose sought to be accomplished or the evil sought to be remedied by the constitution or statute.” White, supra at 562.
The rationale for awarding statutory interest under MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013 is primarily a compensatory one. The Revised Judicature Act interest statute serves the purpose of compensating the prevailing party for loss of the use of the funds awarded as a money judgment, as well as offsetting the costs of bringing a court action. In Denham v Bedford, 407 Mich 517, 534-536; 287 NW2d 168 (1980), this Court wrote:
The Michigan Legislature has dictated that interest should accrue from the date of filing the complaint. . . . [T]he legislative purpose was to compensate the prevailing party for the delay in payment of money damages and to cover the costs of litigation . . . .[12]
The second purpose of awarding judgment inter*253est is to provide an incentive for prompt settlement. See Gage v Ford Motor Co, 423 Mich 250, 257; 377 NW2d 709 (1985). The award of statutory prejudgment interest under MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013 in suits to collect on an insurance contract is a useful illustration; in this context, prejudgment interest serves a distinct deterrent function by both encouraging settlement at an earlier time and discouraging a defendant from, delaying litigation solely to make payment at a later time. See Matich v Modern Research Corp, 430 Mich 1, 12-15; 420 NW2d 67 (1988).
v
In this case, the plaintiff filed a complaint to resolve a contract dispute in the absence of any prior agreement to arbitrate or any agreement on the appropriate interest rate. Is this a "civil action” resulting in a judgment of recovery in the form of "money damages” and therefore governed by the prejudgment interest provisions of MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013? Or, is the plaintiff’s recovery more properly considered a "liquidation” or "ascertainment” of debt pursuant to the "award of an arbitrator” and therefore governed by MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4?
Since 1965 there have been two prejudgment interest statutes in Michigan, rather than just one. Until recently, the statutory scheme was more orderly.13 By exploring the history of the two interest statutes, one can see that they share both common purposes as well as common origins.
A summary of the evolution of the two interest statutes which must be interpreted is summarized *254in the margin.14 The right to judgment interest originated in an 1827 Michigan territorial statute which created an entitlement to interest from the time a judgment was entered. See 2 Laws of Territory of Michigan, p 491 (1874). In an even earlier statute (an act of 1809), a conventional rate of interest was authorized (at the specific rate of six percent) under any contract — with only a few specified exceptions. (The 1809 act was copied from a Vermont statute, see 4 Laws of Territory of Michigan, pp 61-62 [1884].) Both statutes then appeared together in chapter 6 of the Revised Statutes of 1838.15
*255The placement and language of these provisions indicate that they were intended to further a common purpose. Section 8 (now MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013) applied to all actions resolved by means of formal dispute resolution, and § 9 (now MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4) applied to contract-based claims where the amount owed was to be determined by report of referees, award of arbitrators, or by any other mode of assessment according to law. Yet, the purpose of both provisions was the same as is evident from their language and function. The two statutes were coordinated to accomplish the same goal of compensating parties for the loss of the use of funds wrongfully detained for the period when they were due but unpaid.
The subsequent history of the two provisions, prior to 1965, does not alter this conclusion. While these statutory provisions have since been assigned to separate chapters in the Compiled Laws,16 their language was, until 1965, essentially *256the same as when originally enacted. MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4, formerly §9 of the 1838 Revised Statutes, has remained substantively unchanged. (The only minor amendments made to this provision, in 1846, were editorial in nature. See RS 1846, ch 34, §7.) MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013 also did not undergo any major changes even as it was moved and edited.17
Since its amendment in 1965, MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013, however, entitles a prevailing party to prejudgment interest from the filing of the complaint to the entry of a judgment in any civil action. Moreover, the various provisions of MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013 are clearly designed to encourage settlement and to compensate the prevailing party for the value of money wrongfully obtained. See, generally, Rittenhouse v Erhart, 424 Mich 166, 190-193; 380 NW2d 440 (1985) (discussion of how MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013, in its present form, as of the 1980 amendments, clearly seeks to further both goals).
Both MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013 and MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4 were enacted by the same Legislature. Given the manner of their enactment and the similar functions that the two statutes have performed for more than a century, the amendment of MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013 in 1965 is *257highly problematic. The extension of that interest statute to prejudgment interest awards causes two formerly compatible statutes to be in irreconcilable conflict. Only by concluding that the §6013 interest provision has repealed MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4 by necessary implication, insofar as civil actions are concerned, can any sense be made of the two interest statutes.
While repeals by implication are not favored, it is a question of legislative intent whether or not there has been such a repeal of an earlier statute by a subsequently enacted one. See Attorney General ex rel Owen v Joyce, 233 Mich 619, 621; 207 NW 863 (1926); Yarger v City of Hastings, 375 Mich 413, 417; 134 NW2d 726 (1965). The latest legislative expression on the entitlement to prejudgment interest must control where two interest statutes specifically address the issue of entitlement and cannot be harmonized.
VI
Plaintiff maintains that the enactment of 1965 PA 240 repealed MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4 to the extent that it might apply to the award of arbitration under the unique circumstances in which arbitration was agreed to in this case. The 1965 amendment clearly broadened the entitlement to prejudgment interest under MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013.
The defendant argues that the two interest statutes do not overlap, but this position is untenable given the plain language of the two statutes. First, the argument assumes that MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4 provides the exclusive entitlement to interest even after a court enters a money judgment conñrming an arbitration award. Yet, this cannot be reconciled with the language of MCL 600.6013; MSA *25827A.6013 which requires that interest be awarded from the date of the filing of the complaint. Moreover, MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4 by its own terms, does not extend as far as the defendant contends; in fact, it authorizes the award of interest "only 'until judgment shall be . . . rendered’ upon the verdict, arbitration award, etc.”
The overlapping coverage of the two statutes creates a conflict regarding the entitlement to prejudgment interest that appears to be irreconcilable. The only way to harmoniously apply the two interest provisions would be to apply them both at the same time. Yet, such simultaneous application would yield a double recovery for the prevailing party from the date of the arbitration award to the date of judgment. This is surely inconsistent with any rational view of legislative intent.18 Since there appears to be no way to justify application of only one of the statutes over the other,19 we find that MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013 and MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4 are in conflict, as applied to the facts of this case.
The defendant contends that the plaintiff’s entitlement to prejudgment interest is governed exclusively by MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4. This argument ignores the express terms of MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013 which applies to a money judgment recovered in a civil action. Perhaps, defendant concludes that only MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4 applies *259here by reading that statute too narrowly. MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4 applies to arbitration awards, as well as to awards entered by verdict, report of referees, assessment made by the clerk of the court, or otherwise. Following the logic of defendant’s argument would result in awarding prejudgment interest on a jury verdict under MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4, exclusively, even though it precludes a judgment of money damages in a "civil action.” But this result would make MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013 inoperative where it plainly applies.
Thus, we are constrained by the rules of statutory construction to award prejudgment interest in the instant dispute on the basis of MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013 by resorting to rules of statutory interpretation. Normally, two statutes which share a common purpose or object are to be interpreted in pari materia. This is the appropriate rule to apply where two statutes are enacted by the same assembly with a common purpose. The rule requires that the two statutes be strictly construed so as to avoid interpreting one in a manner that defeats the main purpose of another on the same subject. Detroit v Michigan Bell Telephone Co, 374 Mich 543, 558, 561; 132 NW2d 660 (1965), cert den 382 US 107 (1965); Richardson v Jackson Co, 432 Mich 377, 384; 443 NW2d 105 (1989).
But where the two statutes cannot be reconciled, this rule of statutory construction does not apply. Specifically, the rule of in pari materia does not control here since it would likely result in upholding the policy embodied in MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4, the earlier statute, in a manner tending to contradict the plain language of the subsequent statute (i.e., MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013). See People ex rel Pellow v Byrne, 272 Mich 284, 288; 261 NW 326 (1935), quoting Voorhies v Recorder’s Court Judge, 220 Mich 155, 157-158; 189 NW 1006 (1922).
*260Any judicial attempt to read a restriction into MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013, however, is foreclosed. This Court cannot refuse to award prejudgment interest in a "civil action” (from the date of the filing of the complaint) in contravention of the plain language of MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013. Were we to hold that MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4 applies and that plaintiff is not entitled to prejudgment interest from the date of the complaint, it would violate the rule of Voorhies, since the force of the two statutes could not thereby be preserved. See, generally, Rathbun v Michigan, 284 Mich 521, 544-545; 280 NW 35 (1938).
Our conclusion that MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013 applies is supported by the rule that the Revised Judicature Act authorization for prejudgment interest is remedial in nature and so must be liberally construed. Denham, supra at 528-529, citing MCL 600.102; MSA 27A.102.
VII
Given the broad statutory definition of a "civil action” in Michigan, and given the parties stipulation to arbitrate made in the context of a properly filed lawsuit, we conclude that the judgment in favor of plaintiff was made pursuant to a "civil action.”
This Court has defined the term "civil action” broadly enough so that this suit satisfies the requirements of MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013.20 The trial court’s order confirming the arbitration award was preceded by a complaint and ended in a *261money judgment. Furthermore, this is not a case where the money judgment rendered was not made by a "court” or lacked the procedural attributes of a civil action.21 Rather, a trial court entered the judgment in dispute here.
We distinguish this case from those actions which are brought for the sole purpose of obtaining a judgment confirming the award. In asking the court to apply MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4, the defendant relies upon cases interpreting the two interest statutes that are inapplicable to the instant suit. See Morgan v Kamil, 144 Mich App 171; 375 NW2d 378 (1985), lv den 422 Mich 970 (1985); Western Casualty & Surety Co v Garden City, 151 Mich App 83; 390 NW2d 687 (1986). The salient fact in this case is that the parties chose to arbitrate only after the filing of the complaint. By contrast, in Morgan, supra, the parties had agreed to arbitrate prior to the filing of the complaint; moreover, the circuit court dismissed the case after entering an order compelling arbitration.22 Western Casualty & Surety Co, supra, involved a preexisting arbitration agreement also.
In these two cases, as well as in Osinski v *262DAIIE, 69 Mich App 426; 245 NW2d 76 (1976), the Courts held that MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4 specifies the entitlement to interest on judgments entered merely to confirm the arbitrator’s award. Also, the arbitration proceedings in those cases were held prior to the bringing of the circuit court action. Thus, by applying MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4, in those cases, the Court of Appeals reached correct results.23
MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013 does not apply to money judgments which are ordered as the result of contractually agreed upon means of dispute resolution which a court lacks the power to alter. This rationale justifies the failure to apply MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013 to the prejudgment phase of the litigation. But, even in the above cases, MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013 might have authorjzed prejudgment interest if the party required to *263pay it had successfully moved to vacate the award on the ground (1) that there was no enforceable agreement to arbitrate, or (2) that the arbitrator’s decision must be set aside. See DAIIE v Gavin, 416 Mich 407, 440-441; 331 NW2d 418 (1982). In Morgan, supra at 173, MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013 may have governed the award of prejudgment interest if the Court had not dismissed the complaint. In all the above cases, MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013 governs the award of postjudgment interest, according to its plain language.24
Defendant argues that "this case is not a civil action because an agreement to arbitrate, whether reached before or after the filing of a complaint, precludes a circuit court’s exercise of subject matter jurisdiction while the arbitration is pending.” The defendant relies incorrectly on the Morgan decision to support the view that the trial Court in this case lost subject matter jurisdiction over this lawsuit when the parties entered into their agreement to arbitrate.25
When the instant complaint was filed, the trial court clearly had jurisdiction to decide the con*264tract claim presented to it. By stating in their stipulation that the court would "retain[ ] jurisdiction” over the dispute, the parties clearly consented to allow the court to enter the judgment confirming the arbitrator’s award. Given this stipulation, the court properly retained jurisdiction and entered a judgment conforming to the decision of the arbitrator.26
The text and history of MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013 and MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4 simply do not support the conclusion that a party who prevails in an arbitration proceeding is less entitled to prejudgment interest when the award is made in the context of a civil action.
VIII
The policy of encouraging arbitration is in no way frustrated by the award of a higher rate of interest at an earlier point in the litigation under MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013. The parties have some flexibility in specifying the appropriate rate of prejudgment interest.
By drafting agreements that require the arbitration of any disputes as a condition precedent to bringing a court action, parties prevent an entitlement to prejudgment interest under MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013 from ever arising prior to the filing of an action to confirm the arbitrator’s award. Thus, the result of this case will neither encourage nor discourage parties, who intend to prevent litigation, from engaging in arbitration. The demands of MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013 must be satisfied, however, when a "civil action” has been filed and is not dismissed before a judgment is entered on the arbitration award._
*265IX
In sum, we hold that the 1965 amendment of MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013 repeals MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4 by necessary implication to the extent that the two interest statutes are in conflict. MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013 repeals that part of MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4 providing for prejudgment interest, in the interval between liquidation or ascertainment of the amount owed and either payment of or judgment on that amount in actions "founded on contracts” commenced by filing a complaint with a court, i.e., civil contract actions.
Thus, we reverse the decision of the Court of Appeals, and remand the case for entry of a judgment awarding prejudgment interest in conformity with this opinion.
Riley, C.J., and Brickley, Boyle, and Archer, JJ., concurred with Cavanagh, J.
The stipulation read in part as follows:
This matter is being submitted for resolution by arbitration in accordance with the Construction Industry Rules of the American Arbitration Association. . . . Any award entered into in the aforesaid arbitration may be entered as a judgment in this Court and this Court has retained jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing any such award. .
The terms of this stipulation conform the arbitration agreement to the requirements of statutory arbitration set forth in MCR 3.602(A), citing MCL 600.5001-600.5040; MSA 27A.5001-27A.5040. Such an agreement to arbitrate, generally, is revocable only by the mutual consent of the parties. MCL 600.5011; MSA 27A.5011. Upon the making of this agreement, the trial court had jurisdiction to enforce its terms and to render judgment on the award thereunder. MCL 600.5025; MSA 27A.5025.
Defendant Hamilton Mutual filed a motion on January 30, 1985, for summary judgment and to dismiss the arbitration. The motion was denied by the lower court without prejudice, pending completion of arbitration, on March 18, 1985.
Several additional facts, though not directly relevant, must be stated to give a complete picture of the nature of the instant lawsuit.
F & T Contractors, the principal, filed suit against plaintiff on November 11, 1976, alleging that $639,949.43 was still owed on the construction contract. Later, f & t’s net claim was reduced to $331,-800. After being sued by f & t, plaintiff sued defendant for $390,000 in the instant suit which was filed after f & t’s claim against plaintiff.
Finally, under a consent judgment entered into between f & t and plaintiff, plaintiff became obligated to pursue arbitration with the instant defendant, Hamilton Mutual. According to that consent agreement, plaintiff must pay to f & t sixty percent of the remainder of any monetary recovery which might be obtained through the arbitration proceeding, less expenses not to exceed $30,000, as a full settlement of f & t’s claims against plaintiff.
Judge Mackenzie dissented and would have affirmed the trial court on all issues, including the interest award.
The plaintiff framed its application in terms of two distinct issues:
Issue I: Is the Court of Appeals clearly erroneous in holding that a plaintiff, having filed suit, forfeits its right to prejudgment interest under MCL 600.6013 [MSA 27A.6013] by later entering into a voluntary stipulation with the defendant to submit their entire dispute to arbitration?
Issue II: Will the Court of Appeals’ ruling cause material injustice if permitted to stand where it contravenes the legislative policies to encourage arbitration and to ensure fair compensation for prevailing plaintiffs?
See n 22.
MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4 provides:
In all actions founded on contracts express or implied, whenever in the execution thereof any amount in money shall be liquidated or ascertained in favor of either party, by verdict, report of referees, award of arbitrators, or by assessment made by the clerk of the court or by any other mode of assessment according to law, it shall be lawful, unless such verdict, report, award, or assessment shall be set aside, to allow and receive interest upon such amount so ascertained or liquidated, until payment thereof, or until judgment shall be thereupon rendered; and in making up and recording such judgment, the interest on such amount shall be added thereto, and included in the judgment.
MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013 provides:
(1) Interest shall be allowed on a money judgment recovered in a civil action, as provided in this section ....
(2) For complaints filed before June 1, 1980, in an action involving other than a written instrument having a rate of interest exceeding 6% per year, the interest on the judgment shall be calculated from the date of filing the complaint to June 1, 1980, at the rate of 6% per year and on and after June 1, 1980, to the date of satisfaction of the judgment at the rate of 12% per year compounded annually.
For example, under MCL 600.6013(3); MSA 27A.6013(3), where a complaint is filed before June 1, 1980, judgment interest may vary between six and twelve percent annually until the date judgment is entered, depending on the parties’ agreement, if any. But, after the date of judgment, interest may not exceed seven percent (except for the period after judgment which elapses after May 31, 1980, in which case interest may not exceed thirteen percent annually).
See also MCL 600.6013(5); MSA 27A.6013(5), as amended by 1986 PA 178, § 1, effective October 1,1986.
Where there is a contractual agreement by the parties regarding the entitlement to interest, or the rate of interest to be awarded, in a dispute founded on a contract, the question of interest is one of the intent of the parties. Therefore, since arbitration is primarily a matter of contract, a stipulation entered by the parties, before or after the complaint is filed, specifying the applicable rate of prejudgment or postcomplaint interest, is normally binding.
Old Orchard by the Bay Associates v Hamilton Mutual Ins Co, unpublished opinion per curiam, decided January 11, 1988 (Docket No. 93161), slip op, p 8, citing Western Casualty & Surety Co v Garden City, 151 Mich App 83, 89; 390 NW2d 687 (1986).
See also id. at 532, citing Waldrop v Rodery, 34 Mich App 1, 4; 190 NW2d 691 (1971) (Levin, J.); Wood v DAIIE, 413 Mich 573, 589, n 17; 321 NW2d 653 (1982).
The historical evolution of these interest statutes, as described above, is discussed in Griffin, Prejudgment interest in contract actions, 67 Mich B J 250 (1988).
The plaintiff provides a very succinct summary of the history of the two statutes:
Chapter 6 contained nine sections, all addressing the topics of money and interest. Section 3, precursor of MCL 438.31 [MSA 19.15(1)], defined the legal rate of interest (7 percent annually or, if agreed otherwise in writing, up to 10 percent). Section 8, precursor to MCL 600.6013 [MSA 27A.6013], provided for interest on all money judgments or decrees.
Section 9, which has remained substantially unchanged and is now codified as MCL 438.7 [MSA 19.4], complemented section 8 by allowing interest "until judgment” as to debts based on contract. The interest under section 9 accrues from the date the amount of the debt becomes "liquidated or ascertained.” The statute recognizes any number of ways by which an amount can become liquidated or ascertained: "by verdict, report of referees, award of arbitrators, or by assessment made by the clerk of the court, or by any other mode of assessment according to law.” . . .
Sections 8 and 9 were never in conflict because the former section covered interest only after the judgment and the latter covered interest only until the judgment. This complementary relationship between the sections continued for more than a century, through several amendments to section 8 and various recodifications, until 1965 PA 240, sec. 1. By that enactment, the Legislature amended the accrual date in MCL 600.6013 [MSA 27A.6013] (the descendant of section 8) so that interest on a judgment would thereafter be "calculated from the date of filing the complaint.”
The two sections were published under the same heading — "Title VII, Chapter 6, Of Money of Account, and of the Interest of Money, and on Judgments, Verdicts, &c.” — and under the same subheading— *255"Interest on Judgments, Verdicts, &c.” The two statutes, as they appeared in 1838, read as follows:
Sec. 8 Interest may be allowed and received, upon all judgments at law, for the recovery of any sums of money, and upon all decrees in chancery, for the payment of any sums of money, whatever may be the form or cause of action or suit in which such judgment or decree shall be rendered or made; and such interest may be collected on execution. [The predecessor of MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013.]
Sec. 9 In all actions founded on contracts express or implied, wherever in the prosecution thereof any amount in money shall be liquidated or ascertained in favor of either party, by verdict, report of referees, award of arbitrators, or by assessment made by the clerk of the court, or by any other mode of assessment according to law, it shall be lawful, unless such verdict, report, award, or assessment shall be set aside, to allow and receive interest on such account, so ascertained or liquidated, until payment thereof, or until judgment shall thereupon be rendered, and in making up and recording such judgment, the interest on such amount shall be added thereto, and included in the judgment.
The 1838 statute was reenacted in 1846, a statute which com*256bined together the prior sections that provide for "Interest of Money” (wherein a conventional legal rate of interest is specified) and for judgment and prejudgment interest (the former §§ 8 and 9 of the 1838 statute). The phrase "at the rate of seven per centum per annum” was added to the end of §6, but otherwise it was reenacted as it appeared in 1838. See 1846 RS, ch 34, § 6.
Section 8 of the 1838 Revised Statutes (predecessor of MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013) was moved from its original location alongside the prejudgment interest provision. See 1915 PA 314, ch 22, § 20. The other change of some significance was the addition of language specifying that the judgment be "in a civil action.” This amendment came in 1961 when the Judicature Act of 1915 was recodified as the Revised Judicature Act, see 1961 PA 236, ch 60, §6013, where it remains today.
While such double recoveries of interest are permitted when a clear legislative purpose is served thereby, see Wood, n 12 supra, no such result can be justified under the statutes at issue here. A double award of prejudgment interest under both MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013 and MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4 would overcompensate the prevailing party in contradiction of the purposes of the statute and would produce an absurd result. Thus, we assume that the Legislature did not intend to apply both statutes and thereby authorize two sources of recovery of prejudgment interest.
The two interest statutes simply do not contain any textual clues as to how one would decide which of the two provisions should be given priority in what circumstances.
A "civil action” is defined as an "action is commenced by filing a complaint with a court.” MCR 2.101(B) (formerly GCR 1963, 101). See also MCL 600.1901; MSA 27A.1901 (codifying court rule); Buscaino v Rhodes, 385 Mich 474, 481; 189 NW2d 202 (1971) (a civil action is commenced by the filing of a complaint in the context of the statutes of limitations, as well as every other context).
See Solakis v Roberts, 395 Mich 13, 21; 233 NW2d 1 (1975) (Workers’ Compensation Appeal Board is not a court and is not possessed of judicial power), and Detroit v Detroit Police Officers Ass’n, 408 Mich 410, 499-502; 294 NW2d 68 (1980).
Indeed, the trial court may dismiss a complaint after entering an order compelling arbitration, where the arbitration proceedings are not yet final and the parties do not dispute the existence or terms of the agreement to arbitrate.
In that situation, moreover, even if the civil action is stayed (pursuant to MCR 3.602[C]), the presence of a prior arbitration agreement means that MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4, rather than MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013, governs the entitlement to prejudgment interest.
Under MCR 3.602(C), the court must issue a stay if an order for arbitration or an application for such an order has been made. The rule does not address whether the court having granted the stay (pending the outcome of arbitration) may or must dismiss the case for lack of jurisdiction.
We do not decide what is the applicable rate of interest since we are not required to settle the issue to decide this case. This Court in Solakis v Roberts, n 21 supra at 20, fixed the interest rate allowable under MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4 at five percent according to the terms of MCL 438.31; MSA 19,15(1), yet, held that MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4 determines a right to interest op workers’ compensation awards that is fixed by the five percent per annum rate specified in MCL 438.31; MSA 19.15(1).
The legislative history of MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4 casts doubt on this proposition and raises the possibility that the interest rate that this interest statute borrows shall be the one specified in ‘MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013. See, e.g., Griffin, n 13 supra at 254 ("The Legislature intended that the prejudgment interest of the Revised Statutes, now MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4, should have the same rate as the judgment interest of the Revised Statutes, now MCL 600.6013 [MSA 27A.6013]”). Indeed, the specific language and history of MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4 suggests that it was intended to establish a "legal rate” of interest, rather than the rate of interest for money wrongfully detained. Its primary purpose was to establish limits on transactions insofar as the conventional rate of interest is concerned and to facilitate the enforcement of the prohibition on usury.
We also do not decide whether the allowance of interest on verdicts and judgments in Michigan is "purely statutory,” see Motyka v Detroit, G H & M R Co, 260 Mich 396, 398; 244 NW 897 (1932), or allowable even where no express statute could be invoked, Wilson v Doehler-Jarvis Div of Nat’l Lead Co, 358 Mich 510, 514-519; 100 NW2d 226 (1960).
Thus, the Court in Western Casualty & Surety Co, supra at 89, was incorrect when it stated that "nothing authorizes interest on an arbitration award (with the exception of the arbitration interest statute [MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4] to be discussed) whether awarded by the court or the arbitration panel.” MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4 may not properly be referred to as the "arbitration interest statute” since it authorizes the award of interest in a variety of other contexts and it is not the exclusive source of statutory entitlement to interest on an arbitration award.
The Morgan Court stated: “Since plaintiff was a party to the arbitration agreement, the circuit court lacked subject matter jurisdiction over the lawsuit.” Id. at 176, citing Bowes v Int'l Pharmakon Lab, Inc, 111 Mich App 410; 314 NW2d 642 (1981).
For the contrary view, namely, that the court does not lack subject matter jurisdiction to decide an arbitrable dispute under MCL 600.5001(2), 600.5025; MSA 27A.5001(2), 27A.5025, see DAIIE v Maurizio, 129 Mich App 166; 341 NW2d 262 (1983), Hendrickson v Moghissi, 158 Mich App 290, 295-296; 404 NW2d 728 (1987), and Campbell v St John Hosp, 170 Mich App 551, 558-559; 428 NW2d 711 (1988).
See MCL 600.5025; MSA 27A.5025 (the legal and equitable power of a court to enforce the parties’ arbitration agreement and to render judgment on any award thereunder).

=== CASE 9736801 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:06:55.246933+00 ===

Levin, J.
(concurring). The question presented is whether the circuit court erred in entering a judgment confirming an arbitration award for an amount, $300,000, plus statutory interest computed from the date the complaint in this action was filed in the circuit court.
I would hold that the arbitrators did not exceed their authority when they included in the award interest, computed as provided in the statute, from the date the complaint was filed. I therefore agree with the majority that this Court should reverse the decision of the Court of Appeals, which held that the circuit court should not have confirmed an award that included prejudgment interest and should have allowed interest only from the date of entry of the award.
*266I
Hamilton Mutual Insurance Company was the surety of a bankrupt general contractor that had constructed a multifamily housing complex for Old Orchard by the Bay Associates. The surety bond provided protection for defects in materials and workmanship. Old Orchard claimed that there were defects in an amount exceeding the $390,000 amount of the bond. Three years after this action was commenced by Old Orchard, the parties stipulated that the matter was to be submitted for resolution by arbitration in accordance with the Construction Industry Rules of the American Arbitration Association of Michigan. An order was entered by the circuit court pursuant to the stipulation "remanding case to arbitration” and providing that any award "may be entered as a judgment in this Court and this Court has retained jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing any such award.”
The arbitrators filed an award1 providing that Hamilton should pay Old Orchard $300,000 plus statutory interest to be computed on the $300,000 pursuant to § 6013 of the Revised Judicature Act2 from the date the action was commenced in the circuit court. The award concluded with the statement that it was in "full settlement of all claims submitted to this arbitration.”
Old Orchard moved to confirm, and, after hearing objections, the circuit judge entered a judgment on the award of $300,000 plus interest of over $366,000 computed pursuant to § 6013.
The Court of Appeals reversed,3 holding that *267interest should have been awarded pursuant to a statute4 that provides for interest at five percent per annum only after entry of an award.
ii
The majority holds as a matter of law that where the parties have not agreed to arbitrate before a complaint is filed, but thereafter stipulate to arbitrate and the original action is not dismissed, prejudgment interest should be added pursuant to § 6013.
The majority states that prejudgment interest need not be added pursuant to § 6013 where the parties stipulate or otherwise "agree on the matter of interest,” but that where, as in the instant case, the parties do not agree on the matter of interest, the statute governs.5
While the parties did not specifically agree on whether interest pursuant to §6013 was to be added to the award, they agreed, in submitting the dispute to arbitration, to confer on the arbitrators the power to decide whether, as a matter of con*268tract rather than statutory interpretation, interest would be added to an award.
In holding that the failure of the parties specifically to agree on the matter of interest meant, as a question of interpretation of the contract, that they had "never agreed on the matter of interest,”6 the majority substitutes its interpretation for the interpretation of the arbitrators. In the instant case, the result is the same because the arbitrators added interest pursuant to § 6013. But, in another case, the majority’s approach would mean that interest must be added to an award although the arbitrators had not included or provided for interest as part of the award.
hi
In arbitration cases, questions of contract interpretation often concern arbitrability — whether a dispute is arbitrable or excluded from arbitration. In the arbitrability context, the United States Supreme Court ruled that arbitration "should not be denied unless it may be said with positive assurance that the arbitration clause is not susceptible of an interpretation that covers the asserted dispute.”7 This Court adopted the approach of the United States Supreme Court when it said that a court should not weigh competing claims of contract interpretation because to do so would give "to the court the task assigned to the arbitrator— namely, the interpretation and application of the contract.”8_
*269While the question of contract interpretation presented in the instant case does not concern arbitrability, but rather whether awarding interest was within the scope of the powers conferred on the arbitrators, the question whether it was within their powers to award or deny interest is nevertheless, because it concerns contract interpretation, confided to the arbitrators unless it can be said with "positive assurance” that the submission to arbitration is "not susceptible of an interpretation” that would permit the arbitrators to decide whether to award interest.
This Court cannot state with positive assurance that the submission to arbitration in this case is susceptible of only one interpretation on the ques*270tion whether interest may or must be awarded pursuant to §6013. This Court should not, therefore, impose its interpretation and declare that, because the parties did not specifically agree on the matter of interest, it would be beyond the power of the arbitrators to decline to award interest pursuant to §6013.9 The question whether interest should be awarded pursuant to § 6013 is one for the arbitrators, and not this Court, to decide.10
Almost five years later.
MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013.
Old Orchard by the Bay Associates v Hamilton Mutual Ins Co, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals, decided January 11,1988 (Docket No. 93161).
MCL 438.7; MSA 19.4. MCL 438.31; MSA 19.15(1).
The majority states:
The statutory interest provision that applies in a given action is a purely legal question to be resolved by means of statutory interpretation, except where the parties stipulate to an interest schedule or otherwise agree on the matter of interest as part of their arbitration agreement.10 The parties in the instant dispute, however, never agreed upon the matter of interest.
Where there is a contractual agreement by the parties regarding the entitlement to interest, or the rate of interest to be awarded, in a dispute founded on a contract, the question of interest is one of the intent of the parties. Therefore, since arbitration is primarily a matter of contract, a stipulation entered by the parties, before or after the complaint is filed, specifying the applicable rate of prejudgment or postcomplaint interest, is normally binding. [Ante, p 251.]
See n 5.
United Steelworkers of America v Warrior & Gulf Navigation Co, 363 US 574, 582-583; 80 S Ct 1347; 4 L Ed 2d 1409 (1960).
Kaleva-Norman-Dickson School Dist v Kaleva-Norman-Dickson Teachers’ Ass’n, 393 Mich 583, 594-595; 227 NW2d 500 (1975).
The Court continued:
*269In deciding whether a dispute involving an issue of contract interpretation is arbitrable, a court should guard against the temptation to make its own interpretation of the substantive provisions of the contract encompassing the merits of the dispute. If the parties have agreed that an arbitrator shall decide questions of contract interpretation, the merits of the dispute are for the arbitrator.
Where a court finds itself weighing the pros and cons of each party’s interpretation of substantive provisions of the contract, it is likely that the court has gone astray. The question for the court is not whether one interpretation or another is correct, but whether the parties have agreed that an arbitrator shall decide which of the competing interpretations is correct.
Similarly, see St Clair Prosecutor v AFSCME, 425 Mich 204; 388 NW2d 231 (1986); Port Huron Area School Dist v Port Huron Ed Ass’n, 426 Mich 143; 393 NW2d 811 (1986).
Arbitration is a matter of contract. In contracting for arbitration, parties generally agree to substitute an arbitrator for a judge and jury as factfinder and decision maker on all questions, factual and legal. Whether questions of law are "primarily or even ordinarily within the province of arbitration” is a question of contract and not of law. It is well within the province of parties to a commercial arbitration to allow the arbitrator to decide questions of law as well as of fact, and agreements to arbitrate have generally been construed as contracts for deciding questions of law as well as of fact. [DAIIE v Gavin, 416 Mich 407, 446-447; 331 NW2d 418 (1982) (Levin, J., concurring).]
To the extent that the reasoning in Waldrop v Rodery, 34 Mich App 1; 190 NW2d 691 (1971), is inconsistent with the reasoning in this opinion, I would no longer follow Waldrop.
See Tobacco Workers Int’l Union, Local 317 v Lorillard Corp, 448 F2d 949, 956 (CA 4, 1971), where the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit declared in a union’s action against an employer for specific performance of a collective bargaining clause providing for arbitration of employee grievances:
While a contract may contain provisions detailing what remedies should be applied to compensate for a particular breach, labor contracts, like other contracts, commonly do not. Part of what the parties bargain for when they include an arbitration provision in a labor agreement is the "informed judgment” that the arbitrator can bring to bear on a grievance, especially as to the formulation of remedies. . . . Therefore, we conclude that, although the agreement is silent as to remedies, the fashioning of an appropriate remedy is not an addition to the obligations imposed by the contract. In deciding that the agreement did not provide for retroactive pay in promotion cases, the District Court usurped the function of the arbitrator.