=== CASE 9738996 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:04.257027+00 ===

WUEST, Chief Justice.
Tyrane E. Phyle (defendant) was found guilty of first degree robbery, as defined by SDCL 22-30-6. He later pleaded guilty to being a habitual offender, in violation of SDCL 22-7-8. Defendant now appeals his conviction on the charge of first degree robbery claiming the evidence presented at trial was insufficient to either sustain a finding of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt or corroborate his accomplice’s testimony. He also alleges that the trial court erred in denying his motion for a mistrial after a witness testified a second time at the conclusion of the other state’s witnesses’ testimony. The trial court had previously ordered that this particular witness testify prior to receiving the testimony of the other witnesses. We affirm defendant’s conviction.
On the evening of April 23, 1988, a liquor store in Claire City, South Dakota, was robbed by a man wielding a .12 gauge shotgun. The liquor store was attended by an elderly lady named Gertrude Wolfe (Wolfe). The robbery occurred between 9:30 and 10:00. The robber absconded with approximately $200. Although Wolfe later stated the offender was approximately 5 feet 8 inches tall, she was unable to describe his facial characteristics because his face was masked by a blue bandanna with white polka dots. Wolfe also commented that the robber attempted to take the entire cash register drawer. When he encountered difficulty in doing so, he grabbed the cash therein and ran out the door.
*381Between 9:00 and 9:30 that same evening, Doug Gutzmer (Doug) and Danny Ringsaker (Danny) arrived in Claire City to visit Danny’s brother, Clark Ringsaker (Clark). While driving through the town, Doug and Danny noticed a small, yellow pickup parked on the wrong side of the street near the liquor store. They observed an individual seated in the pickup on the passenger side. Shortly thereafter, they again drove by the liquor store and again observed the person seated in the pickup. Both Doug and Danny later stated that they believed the individual was “acting skittish.” After their second observation, they drove to Clark’s home. The individual seated in the pickup was later identified as Larry Phyle (Larry), defendant’s brother.
Shortly after Doug and Danny arrived at Clark’s home, the local “fire phone” rang. Clark answered the phone and was informed that the liquor store had just been robbed. Acting on their suspicions that the person seated in the yellow pickup was somehow involved in the robbery, Doug, Danny and Clark immediately drove to the liquor store. When they arrived at the liquor store, the yellow pickup and the person seated therein were gone. Shortly thereafter, they received a tip from a passerby that a yellow pickup had been seen traveling west on a gravel road just outside of town. Acting on this tip, the three men eventually caught up with the yellow pickup. Following closely behind the pickup, Clark then dimmed and brightened his headlights a few times, but there was no response from the pickup. Clark then drove alongside the pickup and forced it off the road. Sensing danger, Doug, Danny and Clark then proceeded to a nearby farm and the pickup followed them.
Upon arriving at the farm, Doug entered the house and obtained a rifle. By that time, the pickup had driven onto the farm yard. As Larry exited the pickup, Doug pointed the rifle at him and told him to remain still. Larry inquired as to why he had been forced off the road. He was told by one of the three men that they had suspected him of robbing the liquor store. After examining the pickup and discovering a broken .12 gauge shotgun in the pickup box, Clark summoned the Roberts County Sheriff’s Department. Deputy Sheriff Roger Wright (Wright) subsequently arrived at the farm. Wright was informed by Doug and Danny that they had seen Larry in front of the liquor store shortly before it had been robbed. They, along with Clark, also indicated that there had been two people in the pickup during the chase, but only Larry was found therein when it arrived at the farm.
Larry subsequently was taken to the Roberts County Jail in Sisseton, South Dakota. There, he was questioned by Sheriff Neil Long (Long). Initially, Larry denied having any knowledge of or involvement in the liquor store robbery. However, he later stated that he had been the “wheel man” in the robbery and eventually implicated his brother, defendant. Larry pleaded guilty to aiding and abetting robbery in the first degree. Defendant subsequently was arrested in Oklahoma. After a jury trial, he was convicted of first degree robbery.
On appeal, defendant contends that the evidence presented at trial was insufficient to either sustain a finding of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt or to corroborate Larry’s testimony. His appeal arises from the trial court’s denial of his two motions for a judgment of acquittal. These motions were made at the close of the State’s case.
SDCL 23A-23-1 provides, in pertinent part:
A court on motion of a defendant or on its own motion shall order the entry of judgment of acquittal of one or more offenses charged in an indictment or information after the evidence on either side is closed, if the evidence is insufficient to sustain a conviction of the offense or offenses.
In State v. Jenner, 434 N.W.2d 76 (S.D.1988), we had the opportunity to discuss whether a trial court had erred in denying a defendant’s motion for judgment of acquittal. In addressing this issue, we stated:
*382Our standard of review on denial of this motion is whether the State made out a prima facie case from which the jury could reasonably find the defendant guilty. Sufficiency of trial evidence rests on whether the evidence, if believed by the jury, is sufficient to find guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. In making such determination, this court will accept evidence and the most favorable inferences that can be fairly drawn from that evidence which will support the guilty verdict. (Citations omitted).
Id. at 81 (quoting State v. Weddell, 410 N.W.2d 553, 555-56 (S.D.1987)).
We believe that in the absence of the testimony of the accomplice (Larry), the evidence was not sufficient to find guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. However, the testimonial evidence of the accomplice and all evidence corroborating such testimony, if believed by the jury, is sufficient evidence to meet this standard. In reaching this conclusion, we note the significance of corroborative evidence as in relates to accomplice testimony. SDCL 23A-22-8 provides:
A conviction cannot be had upon the testimony of an accomplice unless it is corroborated by other evidence which tends to connect the defendant with the commission of the offense. The corroboration is not sufficient if it merely shows the commission of the offense or the circumstances thereof.
In State v. Reutter, 374 N.W.2d 617 (S.D.1985), we expounded on this requirement of corroborative evidence, stating:
Accomplice testimony need not be corroborated by evidence sufficient to sustain a conviction. The mandate of [SDCL 23A-22-8] is satisfied where the corroborative evidence in some substantial degree tends to affirm the truth of the testimony of the accomplice and establish the guilt of the accused. There is no requirement that every material fact testified to by the accomplice be confirmed by corroborative evidence. The accused himself can provide the necessary corroboration. Finally, whether corroboration is sufficient is a question for the jury.
Id. at 626 (citations omitted). See also State v. Feyereisen, 345 N.W.2d 58 (S.D.1984). We also have recognized the well-settled principle that circumstantial evidence can satisfy the requirements of corroboration. Id. at 60.
Although the evidence corroborating the testimony of the accomplice in this case is largely circumstantial, we nevertheless believe that it is sufficient to satisfy the mandate of SDCL 23A-22-8. The record shows two people, namely, Doug and Danny, testified they saw Larry sitting in the yellow pickup in front of the liquor store prior to the robbery. Larry was sitting on the passenger side of the vehicle. In addition, Doug, Danny and Clark testified that they saw two people in the pickup while they were chasing it. Although Doug and Danny later admitted they could have mistaken a rear window decal for the second person, Clark did not waiver from his position. This evidence indicates that two people participated in robbing the Claire City liquor store. Furthermore, the victim of the robbery told investigators one day after the robbery that the robber was approximately 5 feet 8 inches tall. Also, the victim testified the robber was not wearing glasses at the time of the robbery. The record shows that Larry is 6 feet 1 inch tall and wears glasses, while the defendant is 5 feet 10 inches tall and does not wear glasses. The victim’s description of the robber more accurately describes the defendant than it does Larry.
Although it is clear that this evidence, taken alone, would not sustain defendant’s conviction, we believe it tends to affirm the truth of Larry’s testimony. The jury chose to believe that the sum of this evidence was sufficient to prove the defendant’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. For these reasons, we believe that the trial court properly denied defendant’s motions for judgment of acquittal.
The defendant’s second contention concerns the trial court’s decision to allow Wolfe to testify twice. Prior to the trial, the state moved the trial court to allow Wolfe to remain in the courtroom throughout the trial. Defendant resisted this mo*383tion, arguing that it would be prejudicial to him if a witness for the state was allowed to be present in the courtroom while the state’s other witnesses were testifying. Defendant was concerned that Wolfe might change her testimony after hearing that of the other witnesses. The trial court granted the state’s motion, thereby allowing Wolfe to be present in the courtroom throughout the trial. However, the trial court further ordered that Wolfe’s testimony be presented first so she would not have the benefit of hearing the other witnesses’ testimony.
After testifying, Wolfe remained in the courtroom during the testimony of the state’s other nine witnesses. At that point the state recalled Wolfe as the witness and she again testified. Defendant immediately moved the trial court for a mistrial, which was denied. He now submits that the trial court violated its own pre-trial order, and in doing so, allowed the state to unfairly improve its position with the jury. We disagree.
This situation is closely related to one in which a sequestration order is violated by a witness, but the trial court nevertheless permits the testimony of that sequestered witness. Under such circumstances, it is within the discretion of the trial court to allow testimony from such a witness. State v. Swillie, 218 Neb. 551, 357 N.W.2d 212, 215 (1984). A trial court abuses its discretion in permitting such testimony only where it is shown that said testimony was prejudicial to the defendant. Id. “Prejudice is established where the witnesses testimony has changed or been influenced by what he heard from other witnesses.” Id.
We believe that under the circumstances presented in this case, it was within the trial court’s discretion to allow Wolfe to testify a second time after she had heard the testimony of the other state’s witnesses. Furthermore, we believe the trial court did not abuse its discretion in permitting such testimony because it is clear that such testimony was not prejudicial to the defendant. The propriety of allowing Wolfe to testify a second time after hearing the testimony of the other state’s witnesses might concern us if the defendant had shown Wolfe’s testimony changed or was influenced by what she heard from the other witnesses. The record, however, indicates that Wolfe’s second appearance involved an identification demonstration with Larry as the subject. Her testimony did not conflict with that which she had given earlier and it was distinct from the other witnesses testimony. Accordingly, we cannot say that the defendant' was prejudiced by Wolfe’s testifying a second time or that the trial court abused its discretion in allowing this testimony.
We affirm defendant’s conviction.
MORGAN and MILLER, JJ., concur.
SABERS, J., specially concurs.
HENDERSON, J., concurs in result.

=== CASE 9738999 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:08.187013+00 ===

MILLER, Justice.
In this appeal we affirm convictions for burning to defraud an insurer and attempted theft by deception and hold that the trial court did not abuse its discretion by admitting evidence of appellant’s prior crimes, wrongs and bad acts.
FACTS
In April 1987, the Rapid City Fire Department received a smoke investigation call concerning a residence. Appellant Ronald John Klein was the owner and sole occupant of the house. Upon their arrival, firemen observed flames through the windows of the house. The firemen were forced to break down the front door which was secured from the inside by a chain lock. Once inside, the firemen found that the house contained few personal items. (Earlier that afternoon a neighbor had observed Klein packing many personal items into his van.) Klein, who had been at a movie, returned home to find the firemen extinguishing the blaze. Fire investigators later concluded that the home was damaged by two fires, both of which had been intentionally set.
At the time of the fire, Klein was a student who had limited sources of income (mostly loans) and was undergoing financial difficulties. He was in default on a contract for deed for the purchase of the home with the entire remaining balance due at the time the fire occurred. Klein had previously let his insurance coverage on the house lapse, but did obtain new coverage thereon one month before the fire.
After the fire, Klein submitted a proof of loss form to his insurer. The amounts listed for the value of lost property were significantly higher than the property values he had previously listed when he had applied for court-appointed legal assistance in June 1986. However, Klein had not made any substantial purchases between the time he made his initial application for legal assistance and the submission of his claim to the insurance company.
State filed an information charging Klein with burning to defraud an insurer in violation of SDCL 22-33-4 and attempted theft by deception, contrary to SDCL 22-30A-3.1 *18Both counts related to the house fire. Klein entered pleas of not guilty to both counts of the Information and entered a denial as to Part II Information, which alleged that he was a habitual offender because of his conviction in October 1986 of two counts of theft by deception. Klein was convicted by a jury on both counts of Part I. Several days later, he entered an admission to Part II. Soon thereafter, Klein filed a motion for new trial, which was ultimately denied. He was sentenced to 10 years in the state penitentiary for burning to defraud an insurer and to 7V2 years for attempted theft by deception, both sentences to run concurrently. Klein appeals. We affirm.
DECISION
WHETHER THE TRIAL COURT ABUSED ITS DISCRETION BY ADMITTING EVIDENCE OF KLEIN’S PRIOR CRIMES, WRONGS OR BAD ACTS.
Klein first claims that the trial court abused its discretion when it allowed the admission of Klein’s prior theft by deception convictions (two counts stemming from the same incident) and a sanitized copy of Klein’s court-appointed attorney application from an earlier criminal charge, both of which evidenced Klein’s financial problems.2 Klein was advised by the trial court that if he should take the stand in his own defense, his prior convictions for theft by deception and the charges contained in his earlier court-appointed counsel application would be admissible.
Our standard of review concerning the trial court’s admission of evidence of prior crimes, wrongs or acts is whether the trial court abused its discretion. State v. Champagne, 422 N.W.2d 840 (S.D.1988).
SDCL 19-12-5 provides:
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the character of a person in order to show that he acted in conformity therewith. It may, however, be admissible for other purposes, such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, or absence of mistake or accident.
SDCL 19-12-3 states:
Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence.
The test for determining whether evidence of other crimes or wrongs was properly admitted against a defendant involves a two-step inquiry. It first must be determined whether the proffered evidence is relevant to proving one of the stated exceptions of SDCL 19-12-5. State v. Bradley, 431 N.W.2d 317 (S.D.1988). See also State v. Titus, 426 N.W.2d 578 (S.D.1988), and Champagne, supra. If the evi*19dence is found to be relevant, it next must be determined whether its prejudicial effect substantially outweighs its probative value. Bradley, supra; Titus, supra; Champagne, supra; see also SDCL 19-12-3. Evidence is relevant and has probative value if it contains any fact which tends to connect an accused with the commission of a crime. See State v. Reutter, 374 N.W.2d 617 (S.D.1985). However, if the court determines that the evidence is relevant, but that its submission will unfairly prejudice the defendant’s case, such evidence cannot be admitted. Bradley, supra; Titus, supra; Reutter, supra. Under State v. Holland, 346 N.W.2d 302 (S.D.1984), this balancing process is within the sound discretion of the trial court. Further, this balancing process must be conducted on the record. See State v. Eagle Hawk, 411 N.W.2d 120 (S.D.1987).
A. Klein’s Prior Convictions
Our review of the evidence leads us to the conclusion that the trial court did not abuse its discretion by admitting Klein’s two prior felony convictions for theft by deception. We believe, as did the trial court below, that the convictions, especially the count charging him with theft by deception which involved a check scheme designed to assist Klein with his house payments, was relevant to show his motive and intent. We note that his convictions were to be admitted in a “sanitized” fashion so that the jury would not be able to consider their other, less relevant aspects.
The admission of Klein’s prior convictions fits squarely within the motive exception to SDCL 19-12-5. Klein was motivated by financial difficulties at the time of the fire, as he had been previously when he committed the 1986 check scheme in order to make his house payments. Even Klein himself went so far as to admit that he had previously committed theft by deception because of his financial difficulties. Thus, the admission of his prior convictions is clearly relevant on the issue of Klein’s motive. See State v. Swallow, 405 N.W.2d 29 (S.D.1987).
Evidence of Klein’s prior convictions also would be admissible under the intent exception to SDCL 19-12-5. As we stated in Champagne, supra, where specific intent is an element of an offense, proof of similar acts may be admitted so that the State may carry its burden even if the defense to the charge is a complete denial. It is beyond dispute that intent is an element of both burning with intent to defraud an insurer and theft by deception.3 We believe that evidence of prior similar crimes is admissible to show that Klein’s action was done with the specific intent necessary to convict under these two statutes. See also State v. Pedde, 334 N.W.2d 41, 43 (S.D.1983), wherein we stated that evidence of prior acts need not be that of an identical offense but only “of similar involvement reasonably related to the offending conduct.” Citing United States v. Gocke, 507 F.2d 820, 825 (8th Cir.1974), cert, denied 420 U.S. 979, 95 S.Ct. 1407, 43 L.Ed.2d 660 (1975).
Having determined that Klein’s pri- or convictions were relevant, we must next turn to the issue of whether their admission would be unfairly prejudicial. The evidence tends to show that Klein was in dire financial straits and that he had previously committed similar acts'because of his financial condition. We do not believe that the trial court erred in determining that the probative value of the evidence, as admitted, was not outweighed by its prejudicial effect. The trial court did not abuse its discretion in admitting such evidence. See Swallow, supra.
We further note that Klein’s counsel, during cross-examination of one of State’s expert witnesses, “opened the door” to the admission of Klein’s prior convictions when he asked the witness whether he was aware that Klein was a convicted felon. The trial court later noted that this question by Klein’s counsel was the functional equivalent of putting Klein himself on the stand and therefore evidence concerning Klein’s status as a convicted felon was admissible. Having opened the door *20to the admission of evidence of Klein’s prior convictions, Klein may not now challenge its admission on appeal. See United States v. Gipson, 862 F.2d 714 (8th Cir.1988). He cannot seek to advantage himself through the use of an error which he himself committed. See State v. Vogel, 315 N.W.2d 321 (S.D.1982).
B. Klein’s Prior Application for a Court-Appointed Attorney.
Klein next contends that the trial court abused its discretion when it admitted his 1986 application for court-appointed counsel.4 It appears from the record that the application was admitted as a statement of Klein’s assets. Klein contends that the application should not have been admitted because it could have inferred to the jury that he faced serious criminal charges in the past. Using the same two-prong test set forth earlier herein, we believe that the application was relevant evidence of Klein’s financial condition and that its probative value outweighed any prejudicial effect.
Moreover, in addition to our comment in footnote 2, supra, it appears that Klein has failed to preserve this issue for appeal due to his counsel’s stipulation to the admission of the sanitized application as a public record. See State v. Novaock, 414 N.W.2d 299 (S.D.1987).
We have examined the other issues raised by Klein (that the trial court erred in (1) refusing an in-court fire demonstration; (2) allowing cross-examination concerning a letter written by Klein regarding restitution in another case; and (3) denying his motion for judgment of acquittal) and find them to be without merit.
Affirmed.
WUEST, C.J., and MORGAN, J., concur.
HENDERSON and SABERS, JJ., concur in result.
. SDCL 22-33-4 provides:
Any person who with intent to injure or defraud an insurer set fire to or burns or causes to be burned any real or personal property of any kind, whether the property of himself or anoth-
er, which property is insured against fire, is guilty of a Class 4 felony.
SDCL 22-30A-3 provides:
*18Any person who obtains property of another by deception is guilty of theft. A person deceives if with intent to defraud he:
(1) Creates or reinforces a false impression, including false impressions as to law, value, intention or other state of mind; but deception as to a person’s intention to perform a promise shall not be inferred from the fact alone that he did not subsequently perform the promise;
(2) Prevents another from acquiring information which would affect his judgment of a transaction;
(3) Fails to correct a false impression which the deceiver previously created or reinforced, or which the deceiver knows to'be influencing another to whom he stands in a fiduciary or confidential relationship; or
(4) Fails to disclose a known lien, adverse claim or other legal impediment to the enjoy-
ment of property which he transfers or encumbers in consideration for property he obtains, whether such impediment is or is not valid, or is or is not a matter of official record.
The term "deceive" does not, however, include falsity as to matters having no pecuniary significance, or puffing by statements unlikely to deceive reasonable persons.
. This application was "sanitized” by attempting to delete therefrom information which might tend to infer it was related to previous criminal activity. It should also be noted that the application retained one reference to court-appointed counsel. This reference had been removed by State but was reinserted at the request of Klein’s counsel.
. See footnote 1, supra.
. See footnote 2, supra.

=== CASE 9739000 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:08.191599+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(concurring in result).
Although I agree with affirming the convictions, I write to call the reader’s attention to my special writing in State v. Champagne, 422 N.W.2d 840, 844 (S.D.1988) (Henderson, J., specially concurring). Champagne is cited in the majority opinion for several precedential holdings.
These “prior crimes, wrongs, or bad acts” cases, i.e., admitting prior crimes or wrongs or bad acts to prove the crime at hand, must be distinguished and decided on each set of facts.
Admitting evidence of prior crimes, wrongs or bad acts is a matter of judicial discretion. It is not a matter, in every case, of automatic inclusion or automatic exclusion. A court must reflect, rather than rely on judicial reflex, when admitting or excluding this type of evidence. Rulings by the trial judge will depend on his/her assessment of the evidence. Cardinal to our consideration are the following digested cases. Relevancy does not automatically result in admissibility. US. v. Goodwin, 492 F.2d 1141, 1155 (5th Cir.1974). The prior conduct, to be admissible, must be similar. State v. Pedde, 334 N.W.2d 41 (S.D.1983). There must be a balancing, by the trial court, of the prejudicial effect versus the probative value. State v. Thomas, 381 N.W.2d 232, 237 (S.D.1986). The proffered evidence must be close in time rather than remote. Pedde, supra; State v. Johnson, 316 N.W.2d 652 (S.D.1982). This Court will not tolerate persuasion by illegitimate means and taking advantage, unfairly, of a criminal defendant. State v. Dokken, 385 N.W.2d 493 (S.D.1986). “The standard of review in this Court is whether the trial court abused its discretion in admitting the evidence.” State v. Bose, 324 N.W.2d 894, 895 (S.D.1982).*
*21Here, two fires were started to avoid financial collapse: (1) Igniting by wrapping cloth around the base of an iron turned on the high position, and (2) ignition by leaving a candle burning in a crawlspace of an attic. Klein was facing foreclosure. He had little financial resource. He could not meet his financial obligations. “Prior bad acts”, in close proximity to the time when he committed the crimes alleged in the information had a very direct bearing on motive, namely, convictions of theft by deception.
Where men isolate retarded women (using an official position of authority), as in State v. Willis, 370 N.W.2d 193 (S.D.1985), to sexually take advantage of them or physically abuse women establishing a pattern leading to murder, as in State v. Bradley, 431 N.W.2d 317 (S.D.1988), I have written opinions, for the majority of this Court, admitting evidence of prior bad acts or wrongs. See also, State v. Perkins, 444 N.W.2d 34 (S.D.1989). (pedophilia). I have written specially to admit prior bad acts or wrongs to protect innocent children from men who scheme or plan to isolate and sexually abuse young children/members of their family or friends. Champagne, supra, Roden v. Solem (Roden II), 431 N.W.2d 665, 670-1 (S.D.1988) (Both pedophilia cases). In those cases, admission of such evidence was within the discretion of the trial court.
We also said in Rose, at 895-96: "In making such review we are bound by the rule that the question is not whether the judges of this court would have made an original like ruling, but rather whether we believe a judicial mind, in view of the law and the circumstances, could reasonably have reached that conclusion.” Rose, a unanimous decision, anteceded the present case by seven years. Rose was written by then Chief Justice Jon Fosheim with former *21Chief Justices Roger Wollman and Frances Dunn sitting on the Court, together with Justice Morgan, now our Senior Justice, and myself.

=== CASE 9739001 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:08.195214+00 ===

SABERS, Justice
(concurring in result).
I concur in the result only.
I believe that evidence of Klein’s two prior convictions for theft by deception in situations where he was “financially strapped” was admissible because the defense “opened the door” by asking a witness whether he was aware that Klein was a convicted felon.
The evidence was also admissible under the motive exception of SDCL 19-12-5 because the financial desperation of all three instances were highly relevant to motive, which was a material issue because Klein claimed to have financial resources.
However, the evidence was not admissible under the “intent” exception as claimed by the majority. The intent exception applies in situations where a person admits the act, but denies the intent, e.g., a person charged with sexual contact with a minor, admits the contact while bathing the child but denies the sexual intent. See- also State v. Titus, 426 N.W.2d 578 (S.D.1988), where Titus, who was charged with first-degree burglary, admitted entry, but denied intent as a result of alcohol-induced blackouts. In Titus, intent was a material issue for purpose of SDCL 19-12-5. Here, it was not. The reliance on State v. Champagne, 422 N.W.2d 840 (S.D.1988) is wrong, even if specific intent is an element of the offense. As stated in my dissent in Champagne, supra at 845, “We were wrong to [reject the dispute requirement in State v. Means, 363 N.W.2d 565 (S.D.1985) ] and we should reinstate [it].” Until we do, really fair trials may be “few and far between.” See my writing in State v. Perkins, 444 N.W.2d 34, 40-42 (S.D.1989), and the cases cited therein.

=== CASE 9739002 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:09.408129+00 ===

OPINION
HUSPENI, Judge.
Appellants contest the trial court’s October 24, 1987 determination that they did not comply with the Minn.Stat. § 145.682 (1986) requirement of expert review of medical malpractice claims. Based on the trial court’s determination, the various respondents were dismissed pursuant to court orders issued between October 24, 1987 and January 30, 1989. On February 7,1989, final judgment pursuant to Minn.R. Civ.P. 54.02 was entered. Appellants maintain that they complied with the statutory requirements. We agree and reverse.
*850PACTS
On September 7, 1984, Therese Soren-son’s son John was stillborn.
In September, 1986, appellants Kevin Sorenson, as trustee for the heirs and next of kin of the deceased John Sorenson, and Kevin’s wife Therese Sorenson commenced a medical malpractice action and included service of an affidavit indicating that the verification pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 145.682 (1986) was forthcoming. Under section 145.682 medical malpractice plaintiffs, within 180 days of initiating such an action, must indicate by affidavit or answers to interrogatories the identities of any expert witnesses plaintiffs expect to call, the essdntial facts and opinions about which the expert would testify, and a summary of the grounds for the expert’s opinion(s). By mid-November service was completed upon respondents St. Paul-Ramsey Hospital (Hospital), midwife Rebecca Brick (Birch), doctors Barbara Bezdicek, Gordon Ditmanson and Michael Koszalka, as well as nurses Beth Rykken and Marcia Pershing.
In an affidavit dated October 7, 1986, appellants’ counsel indicated that an expert had reviewed the medical records relevant to appellants’ claims. The affidavit also indicated that appellants’ counsel reasonably believed that the expert’s opinions regarding the negligence of one or more of the respondents would be admissible at trial. On October 10, 1986, the Hospital and Bezdicek served appellants with interrogatories. Subsequently, by a January 1987 letter, the Hospital, Bezdicek, Rykken and Pershing indicated that they did not believe that appellants’ October 7, 1986 affidavit was sufficient to meet the requirements of Minn.Stat. § 145.682. These respondents . requested either a supplemental affidavit or responses to the interrogatories, either of which could be used to meet the statutory requirements.
A supplemental affidavit, submitted by appellants’ counsel and dated February 6, 1987, stated in part:
(5)That [appellants’ expert] will base his opinions upon the facts contained in the medical records of Theres[e] Soren-son and John Sor.enson at St. Paul-Ramsey Hospital and the death certificate and autopsy of John Sorenson.
(6) At the present time your affiant believes that [appellants’ expert] will testify that the facts indicate that Theresfe] Sorenson presented herself at the hospital at approximately 12:25 p.m. on September 7, 1984, with a history of eight hours of persistent abdominal pain and was found to be contracting every one and one-half minutes with contractions lasting almost one minute. The nurse-midwife [ ] and [a doctor] both examined Theres[e] Sorenson. There [were] obvious symptoms of fetal distress and probable abruptial placenta that should have been identified by [the] nurse-midwife [ ] and [the doctor]. Each of them failed to properly evaluate Theres[e] Sorenson’s condition and failed to properly care [for] and treat Theresfe] Sorenson thereafter. Shortly thereafter, it should have been apparent that the contractions were abnormal and that the fetal heart rate was abnormal and that there should have been timely intervention by a physician but there was not. At some point in time between 12:25 p.m. and 1:40 p.m., [Therese Sorenson] was also examined by either [a second doctor] or [a third doctor] while there were still viable heart tones for John Sorenson, and they failed to properly diagnose an abruptial placenta and fetal distress and failed to take proper steps to deliver John Sorenson prior to his death.
(7) That the admission of Theres[e] Sorenson to the hospital was under the supervision of [the second doctor] and that he failed to identify the problems set forth above. That [the first doctor] was present and examined Theres[e] Soren-son at a time when the fetal heart tones were still in a range which would indicate that Theres[e] Sorenson’s fetus was viable and being supplied with blood and oxygen, but failed to diagnose the problems which were developing and failed to timely intervene.
(8) That [the second doctor] w'as in charge of supervision of [the] nurse-midwife and [the first doctor] and failed to *851properly supervise and direct them in the provision of care and identification of the complications that were presented to them by Theres[e] Sorenson.
(9) That [the third doctor] was the staff doctor in charge of the entire supervision of the care of Theres[e] Soren-son and failed to have her properly supervised and evaluated.
(10) That each of the above acts and failures to act by the doctors and nurse-midwife [was] contrary to the standard of care that should have been provided and that these breaches of [the] standard of care were the direct cause of injury to Theres[e] Sorenson and [of] the death of John Sorenson.
(11) That the grounds for the opinions of [appellants’ expert] are his background, training and experience as a medical doctor specialized in the area of obstetrics and gynecology, and subspe-cialized in the area of paranatology[,] [t]ogether with the medical records, death certificate and autopsy report referred to in the paragraph above.
Also on February 6,1987, Ditmanson and Koszalka served appellants with a motion to compel appellants to answer interrogatories. Appellants answered the interrogatories of Bezdicek and the Hospital on February 23,1987, with information substantially equivalent to that in the supplemental affidavit.1
Motions of respondents Ditmanson, Koszalka and Birch for “summary judgment” were granted by the trial court. The parties’ “summary judgment” briefs and affidavits addressed appellants’ expert review obligations under Minn.Stat. § 145.682. The memorandum accompanying the orders granting “summary judgment” stated that appellants failed to provide a “summary of the grounds for [the experts’] opinion[s]” and observed the statutory requirement “to dismiss [appellants’] case.”
Subsequently, the remaining respondents moved for dismissal “pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 145.682” and appellants moved for vacation of the “summary judgment” orders. Respondents Pershing and Rykken were dismissed without objection by appellants. When appellants did not appear for the hearing on their vacation motion, that motion was denied and the remaining respondents were dismissed.
Finally, the trial court dismissed certain fictitious defendants and again individually re-dismissed all claims against all defendants, stating that judgment was to be final under Minn.R.Civ.P. 54.02.
ISSUES
1. What is the standard of review?
2. Did the trial court err in concluding that appellants failed to meet the requirement for medical malpractice claims of expert review?
ANALYSIS
I.
While the parties and the trial court both referred to the October 24,1986 order as a “summary judgment,” an actual summary judgment was neither sought nor obtained. Instead, respondents argued that appellants failed to meet the statutory requirements of Minn.Stat. § 145.682, subds. 2 and 4 (1986), and that dismissal was mandated under Minn.Stat. § 145.682, subd. 6 (1986). The trial court agreed.
Respondents actually sought, argued for, and obtained a statutory dismissal based on appellants’ failure to meet the requirements of Minn.Stat. § 145.682. This fact is reflected by the trial court’s January 20, 1989 order stating that appellants’ claims
against [respondents] Dr. Ditmanson and Dr. Koszalka and [respondent] Rebecca Birch are dismissed with prejudice pursuant to the court’s order of October 24, 1987 * * *.
*852(Emphasis added.) See also Thorson v. Rice Co. Dist. One Hosp., 437 N.W.2d 410, 413-14 (Minn.1989). (Based on plaintiffs’ alleged failure to comply with section 145.-682, defendant sought “summary judgment” but the supreme court referred to the motion as one for “dismissal” under the statute.)2
The standard of review for information submitted under Minn.Stat. § 145.682 has not previously been addressed. However, for medical malpractice cases prior to the effective date of section 145.682:
The general rule in Minnesota is that a trial court’s dismissal of an action for procedural irregularities will be reversed on appeal only if it is shown that the trial court abused its discretion. Specifically, this is the standard applied to sanctions for a party’s failure to disclose information regarding, expert witnesses.
Dennie v. Metropolitan Medical Center, 387 N.W.2d 401, 404 (Minn.1986) (citations omitted); see also Bush v. Winter, 402 N.W.2d 229, 231 (Minn.Ct.App.1987). Section 145.682
regulat[es] malpractice actions against health care providers, provides] certification of expert review * * ⅜ [and] requires] disclosure of experts * * *.
See Minn.Stat. § 145.682 (1986); Preamble to 1986 Minn.Laws ch. 455. However, it neither implicitly nor explicitly alters the Dennie standard. Therefore, we conclude that an abuse of discretion standard is appropriate when reviewing the information required under Minn.Stat. § 145.682.3
II.
Appellants’ complaint alleges that “The care [respondents] provided to [Therese Sorenson] * * * was unreasonable and negligent.” The supreme court has declared that “[plaintiffs,] in order to prove negligence in a malpractice action, must offer expert medical testimony * * *,” Silver v. Redleaf, 292 Minn. 463, 465, 194 N.W.2d 271, 272 (1972) (emphasis added), except “where the facts to be determined are within the common knowledge of the jury * * *.” Bauer v. Friedland, 394 N.W.2d 549, 553 (Minn.Ct.App.1986). In this case, the trial court explicitly stated:
The circumstances of this case call for expert medical opinion since [appellants’] claim with regard to negligent treatment, involving the failure to diagnose placenta abruptio, involves an area outside the common understanding of the jurors.
We agree that appellants’ case requires a medical expert.
By statute
In an action alleging [medical] malpractice * * * which includes a cause of action as to which expert testimony is necessary to establish a prima facie case, the plaintiff must * * * serve upon defendant within 180 days after commencement of the suit an affidavit as provided by subdivision 4.
Minn.Stat. § 145.682, subd. 2 (1986). The affidavit required by Minn.Stat. § 145.682, subd. 4
must be by the plaintiff’s attorney and state the identity of each person whom plaintiff expects to call as an expert witness at trial to testify with respect to the issues of malpractice or causation, the substance of. the facts and opinions to which the expert is expected to testify, and a summary of the grounds for each opinion. Answers to interrogatories that state the information required by this subdivision satisfy the requirements of this subdivision if they are signed by the plaintiff’s attorney and served upon the defendant within 180 days after commencement of the suit against the defendant.
*853Minn.Stat. § 145.682, subd. 4. Failure to submit such an affidavit or combination of affidavits and/or interrogatory answers
results, upon motion, in mandatory dismissal with prejudice of each cause of action as to which expert testimony is necessary to establish a prima facie case.
Minn.Stat. § 145.682, subd. 6.
A careful reading of section 145.682 suggests that great precision is neither expected nor required when setting forth
the substance of the facts and opinions to which the expert is expected to testify and a summary of the grounds for each opinion.
Minn.Stat. § 145.682, subd. 4. Therefore, we conclude that if any combination of affidavits and interrogatories contains information which complies with the statutory requirements and is sufficiently precise to enable initiation of the discovery process, that combination is adequate under the statute. We believe the affidavit and interrogatory answers presented in this case meet this minimal standard.
Initially, we note that
The primary purpose of Minn.Stat. § 145.682 is to eliminate nuisance malpractice suits by establishing a process where affidavits of expert review are required to verify the lawsuit’s validity.
Parker v. O’Phelan, 414 N.W.2d 534, 537 (Minn.Ct.App.1987), affd by an equally divided court, 428 N.W.2d 361 (Minn.1988). This goal may be achieved even in the absence of extremely precise information, since the information need not conclusively demonstrate that a case will be resolved in plaintiffs favor, but only that the plaintiff has a case which, in the view of a medical expert, has a reasonable possibility of being so resolved. Such a demonstration is consistent with the genesis of section 145.-682 as tort reform legislation aimed at avoiding abuse of the discovery process and eliminating the threat of litigation to obtain a “nuisance settlement.” See Conference Committee Hearing, tape recording of March 14, 1986.
In view of the statute’s purpose, we conclude that adoption by this court of the higher standard of specificity implicitly urged by respondents would result in a burden for appellants not contemplated by the legislature. Adopting the higher standard would also equate the statute with expert discovery provisions under the rules of civil procedure. Under both the statute and the rules, plaintiffs calling experts are required to state
the substance of the facts and opinions to which the expert is expected to testify and a summary of the grounds for each opinion.
Compare Minn.R.Civ.P. 26.02(d)(1)(A) and Minn.Stat. § 145.682, subd. 4. To interpret both the statute and the rule as requiring the same precision and detail would render that aspect of either the statute or the rule moot and would be inconsistent with the policy of construing conflicting statutory provisions “if possible so that effect may be given to both [provisions].” Minn.Stat. § 645.26, subd. 1 (1988). While we recognize that Minn.R.Civ.P. 26.02 is not technically subject to the provisions guiding statutory interpretation, we are not convinced that the legislature enacted a statute specifically requiring the precision already specifically required under the rules applicable to the situation. Additionally, the statute rendering the rule moot would be inconsistent with the general superiority of the rules in matters of “pleading, practice and procedure in the district courts,” see Minn. R.Civ.P. 81.01(c); see also Minn.R.Civ.P. 1.
Further, we recognize that expert affidavits are required for cases having “cause[s] of action [for] which expert testimony is required to establish a prima facie case,” Minn.Stat. § 145.682, subd. 2, and that such cases involve complex and technical subject matter. Because of the complexity of such suits, the legislature by enactment of section 145.682 has required that plaintiffs obtain expert analysis and verification of the viability of their claim. While the expert testimony required for actual recovery at trial must, by its nature, come from a medical expert, the affidavit, by statute, “must be made by the plaintiff’s attorney,” who is presumably not a medical expert. Minn.Stat. § 145.682, subd. 4 (emphasis added). Thus, the legislature’s rec*854ognition of the technical complexity of medical cases and requirement of expert medical review, combined with the explicit requirement that the affidavit regarding such review be made not by the reviewing expert but by counsel, suggests that in reviewing the affidavit courts cannot require extreme detail or precision.4 To conclude otherwise will regularly produce the harsh result seen here where appellants’ case was dismissed because an attorney, presumably with little or no medical training, was deemed to have provided insufficient details of the grounds for a medical expert’s belief that negligence might have been present.
Additionally, our determination that the information provided by appellants meets the' reasonable minimal standards of section 145.682 is consistent with Minnesota’s policy preference that cases be decided on their merits. The supreme court has recently indicated that
a statute is procedural when it neither creates a new cause of action nor deprives [a] defendant of any defense on the merits.
Stern v. Dill, 442 N.W.2d 322, 324 (Minn.1989) (quoting Strauch v. Superior Court, 107 Cal.App.3d 45, 49, 165 Cal.Rptr. 552, 554 (1980)). Under this definition Minn. Stat. § 145.682 is procedural in nature. See Parker, 414 N.W.2d at 538 (also quoting Strauch and also concluding that Minn. Stat. § 145.682 is essentially procedural). Therefore, a dismissal for failure to meet the statute’s requirements would be on procedural grounds. The supreme court has made clear that:
An order of dismissal on procedural grounds runs counter to the primary objective of the law to dispose of cases on the merits.
Firoved v. General Motors Corp., 277 Minn. 278, 283, 152 N.W.2d 364, 368 (1967). See also Lampert Lumber Co. v. Joyce, 405 N.W.2d 423, 426 (Minn.1987) (“The law favors cases being decided on their true merits”). Thus, to employ a stringent standard for evaluation and to require submission of technically precise information would systematically produce procedural dismissals despite a strong policy to the contrary.
Furthermore, dismissal here, in addition to being procedural, is also required to be “with prejudice.” Minn.Stat. § 145.682, subd. 6. According to the supreme court:
Since a dismissal with prejudice operates as an adjudication on the merits, it is the most punitive sanction which can be imposed for noncompliance with the rules or order of the court or for failure to prosecute. It should therefore be granted only under exceptional circumstances.
Firoved at 283, 152 N.W.2d at 368 (footnote omitted, emphasis added).
Although it was issued before the effective date of Minn.Stat. § 145.682, we find Dennie v. Metropolitan Medical Center, 387 N.W.2d 401 (Minn.1986) instructive regarding what type of deficiency justifies dismissal with prejudice. In Dennie, the trial court suppressed testimony of both of plaintiff’s medical experts and dismissed the case with prejudice. Dennie, 387 N.W.2d at 404. Suppression was ordered because plaintiff’s attorney allegedly provided to defendant insufficient information regarding plaintiff’s experts. In affirming this court’s reversal of the trial court, the supreme court stated “only truly reprehensible conduct by an attorney will warrant dismissal of his or her client’s case.” Dennie, 387 N.W.2d at 407. By analogy, section 145.682 affidavits or interrogatories would have to be “reprehensibly” deficient to justify the “most punitive” of sanctions imposed by the trial court. We do not find appellants’ affidavit is so woefully deficient.5
*855Finally, we believe our determination that appellants’ affidavit is sufficient to meet statutory requirements corresponds to the legislative history of section 145.682. At a conference committee hearing, the bill’s senate sponsor described its structure:
[THE STATUTE] sets up a two stage certification process where first at the time that the suit is first filed an affidavit has to be filed with the court providing * * * some legal basis for the claim and stating that it has been reviewed by an expert and that they basically believe that the evidence is there to proceed.
Within 180 days [an affidavit of expert review] is filed and this gives more specific information including the names of the experts who would be called to trial and the specific information that they would be providing in this case so, if you don’t have any expert who is willing to take your side on the specific claim you’re making about medical malpractice, you can’t proceed with your lawsuit.
See Conference Committee Hearing, tape recording of March 14,1986 (emphasis added.) The senator’s comments, especially the emphasized text, strongly suggest that the statute is primarily designed to assure medical malpractice defendants that the plaintiffs have an expert who is willing to testify, see Parker, 414 N.W.2d at 537: (“The affidavit of expert review fulfilled the purpose of Minn.Stat. § 145.682 by showing that an expert believed the case had merit”). The statute is only secondarily designed to address the technical theories of malpractice and the bases for those theories. Notably absent from the senator’s description of the bill is any reference to stating the grounds for an expert’s opinions.
Even though the standard for meeting the requirements of Minn.Stat. § 145.682 is minimal, a trial court may still grant an actual summary judgment should it find after discovery, specifically the taking of expert depositions, that the case presents no genuine issue of material fact.
DECISION
The trial court’s dismissal with prejudice was a dismissal under the statute rather than a “summary judgment.”
Filing of an affidavit containing the information required by Minn.Stat. § 145.682 is necessary to initiate a medical malpractice action. Consistent with the purpose of the statute, with maintaining the integrity of the discovery rules, and with recognition of the presumptively non-expert nature of the attorney making the affidavit, the information contained in that affidavit cannot be required to be overly precise in nature. Such a conclusion is consistent with the policy of deciding cases on their merits, with recognizing the extreme harshness of the mandatory dismissal with prejudice for failure to meet that standard, and with the statute’s legislative history. The trial court abused its discretion in finding the information presented by appellants to be insufficient under the statute. Therefore, dismissing appellants’ action with prejudice was unwarranted.
Reversed.
. We note that the record indicates some confusion regarding whether certain respondents received appellants’ "supplemental affidavit.” However, the trial court file includes appellants’ interrogatory answers and the attached affidavit of service indicates that all respondents were served therewith.
. In Thorson, the nature of the trial court’s ruling was not at issue because it was the trial court’s grant of plaintiffs’ cross motion for an extension of the time allowed for compliance with section 145.682 which was on appeal. See Thorson at 414-15.
. In Chizmadia v. Smiley’s Point Clinic, 428 N.W.2d 459 (Minn.Ct.App.1988), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. Oct. 26, 1988) a trial court's ruling under Minn.Stat. § 145.682 was reviewed by this court as a summary judgment. However, Chizmadia predates Thorson, and does not address the question of "dismissal” versus "summary judgment” because no affidavit of expert review was filed in that case. Id. at 460.
. To require a different standard of precision when the information required to initiate a medical malpractice suit is provided by a combination of affidavits and interrogatories rather than by an affidavit alone would serve no purpose and make enforcement unwieldy and subject to potential abuse.
. We believe that the trial court, if unsure whether a plaintiffs affidavit meets the statutory requirements, should allow the parties to attempt to remedy any informational deficiency perceived by the court by requesting the parties to submit the additional information or clarification needed for the court to make an in*855formed decision, and should allow any necessary continuance for the non-submitting parties to properly assimilate such information and to incorporate it into their case preparation. Such a policy is consistent with the ultimate nature of the statute’s mandatory sanction for noncompliance, the recent decisions of the state’s appellate courts allowing an extension of time to file the required affidavit, see Parker v. O’Phelan, 414 N.W.2d 534 (Minn.Ct.App.1987), aff'd by an equally divided court, 428 N.W.2d 361 (Minn. 1988); Stem v. Dill, 430 N.W.2d 864 (Minn.Ct. App.1988), aff’d, 442 N.W.2d 322 (Minn.1989), and the supreme court’s endorsement of this court's reasoning in Dennie:
[T]he trial court would have served [the plaintiffs] interest in seeing his cause of action concluded by [a] trial on the merits, and [the defendant's] interest in remaining free from prejudice, by an in camera inspection of all documents, a ruling on all disputed questions, and a continuance, if necessary, to allow [the defendant] to fully meet [the experts'] testimony.
Dennie, 387 N.W.2d at 404. See also Dennie v. Metropolitan Medical Center, 369 N.W.2d 552, 557 (Minn.Ct.App.1985).

=== CASE 9739003 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:09.413042+00 ===

*856SCHUMACHER, Judge
(concurring in part, dissenting in part).
I join the majority’s analysis of the first issue. However, I write separately because I do not believe the trial court abused its discretion in concluding that appellants failed to provide information meeting the requirements of Minn.Stat. § 145.682, subd. 4 (1986).
Under Minn.Stat. § 145.682, subd. 4 plaintiffs in malpractice cases must provide
the substance of the facts and opinions to which the expert is expected to testify, and a summary of the grounds for each opinion.
The trial court found that appellants “failed to provide the requisite information with regard to the basis for [appellants’] expert opinion.” Only paragraphs 5 and 11 of the quoted affidavit attempt to provide a “summary of the grounds for each opinion” of appellants’ expert. However, they give neither respondents nor the court any information they did not have when the suit was filed.
Initially, paragraph 11 indicates that the grounds for appellants’ expert opinions are “[the expert’s] background, training and experience as a medical doctor * * *.” This information does not satisfy the statute because it gives no details for the basis of his opinions. To hold that the information required by Minn.Stat. § 145.682, subd. 4 need only be specific enough to justify initiation of the discovery process is clearly contrary to the plain language of the statute.
Paragraph 11 indicates that the grounds for appellants’ expert opinion include “the medical records, death certificate and autopsy report referred to in the paragraph above.” Ignoring the fact that paragraph 10 does not refer to any medical documents, this reference clearly does not satisfy the statute’s requirements. Additionally, such a reference cannot support the experts’ opinions in a manner consistent with the statute’s language requiring a “summary.”
The grounds for the expert opinion must be articulated with specificity so that medical merits of the case may be intelligently evaluated.
Once the trial court concluded that the information submitted by appellants was insufficient under the statute, it had no choice but to dismiss the case with prejudice. See Minn.Stat. § 145.682, subd. 6. While I agree with the majority that dismissal with prejudice is an extremely harsh sanction, the legislature has declared that to be the appropriate sanction for failure to meet the prescribed requirements. The majority has lowered the standard for review of information required under Minn. Stat. § 145.682. This is contrary to the plain meaning of the statute and contrary to what I perceive as the purpose of the statute, namely: to make sure there is a valid malpractice claim before engaging in expensive and time consuming discovery and to eliminate nuisance suits.
The requirements of the statute will be substantially curtailed by our approval of overbroad and vague affidavits..

=== CASE 9739004 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:10.291263+00 ===

TRAPP, J. At the conclusion of a bench trial defendant was found guilty of pandering and sentenced to a term of two to five years. He appeals. The offense was charged in the language: “. . . that for money he arranged a situation in which Toye Brown, a female, did practice prostitution.” Ill Rev Stats 1967, c 38, § 11-16 (a) (2). It is defendant’s theory that the evidence was not sufficient to support the conviction for this offense, arguing that if the evidence is sufficient to show any offense committed such would be under c 38, § 11-19, pimping, or possibly under c 38, § 11-15, soliciting for a prostitute.  Defendant argues that under the provisions of the Criminal Code of 1961, pandering arises by reason of the relationship existing, and acts done, between the panderer and the prostitute in terms of recruitment or arranging a situation in which the woman practices prostitution. We agree.  Apart from defendant’s testimony that he did not live at the address and that he was just visiting the “nice girls” without knowledge that they were practicing prostitution, the principal facts are that following receipt of complaints of venereal disease the police raided the premises. Officers Sandage and Coventry stopped in front of the premises where defendant was sitting on the front porch. Sandage asked defendant if there were any girls there. Defendant answered that there were and directed them to go to the back door. Defendant let the officers into the building at the back door and left the room. Two women were present and Sandage spoke to Toye Brown. The latter asked Sandage to step into a small adjacent room and asked him how much he wanted to spend. He indicated and handed her a ten dollar bill which had been treated with phosphorescent powder. As they started upstairs, she left him and went momentarily into an adjacent room which he described as a kitchen. They proceeded upstairs and she removed her gown. Sandage then announced that he was a police officer and placed her under arrest. Coventry remained downstairs with Pamela Johnson, and upon Sandage’s signal Coventry beckoned several waiting police officers into the building. The defendant and the two women were thereupon arrested and taken to police headquarters. The hands of Toye Brown and defendant were examined under ultraviolet light to bring out the phosphorescent glow evidencing that each had handled the treated ten dollar bill. This item was never found. Coventry testified that he saw Toye Brown hand something to the defendant. At this time defendant was in an adjacent room described as a kitchen. Coventry testified that following the arrest, defendant expressed outrage and said that there was no evidence and no case. Sullivan, the officer in charge of the raid, testified that defendant said that they were not going to get them this time as they were not going to get the ten dollar bill back, that they had gotten the ten dollar bill from him the last time but would not get it this time. There is, of course, no evidence that defendant compelled Toye Brown to become a prostitute. C 38, § 11-16 (a)(1). Is there evidence showing beyond a reasonable doubt that defendant arranged a situation in which a female may practice prostitution? The “Committee Comment” prepared for this section and found in Illinois Annotated Statutes, c 38, § 11-16, discusses the offense in the following terms: “Section 11-16 describes the activity here labelled ‘pandering,’ which involves the recruiting of persons into the practice of prostitution and with keeping practicing prostitutes in that line of endeavor. This functional classification then makes a distinction between the ‘recruiter-business manager’ and the runner or contact man (dealt with under the preceding section) and the individual who is the prostitute’s consort — the pimp.” It is subsequently said that the emphasis of the section is directed against one who puts the prostitute in business or keeps her there. No cases are cited as to quantum or quality of evidence required under this section. We have found none. It is shown beyond a reasonable doubt that Toye Brown and defendant handled the treated money placed into the business by Sandage. Particularly significant is that Toye Brown immediately upon receipt of the bill, arranged to deliver it to the defendant. The testimony of Sandage is that Toye Brown went into the one remaining room on the floor where defendant could be apart from the others. Coventry saw Toye Brown hand something to defendant while he was in that room. The trier of fact could reasonably infer that this was the business arrangement and that defendant was not simply a pimp, as he subsequently boasted that he had so disposed of the bill that the police would never find it. Such suggests a claim of right or interest and control in the cash flow of the business, rather than that the money paid belonged to Toye Brown. The evidence supports a conclusion that defendant filled the “business manager” aspect of pandering as now defined. The conclusion is further supported in the record by the testimony that in his moment of outrage upon arrest, defendant stated that the police had gotten ten dollars from him the last time, but that they would not get it this time. Such gives rise to inferences of a manner and scheme of doing business. Further evidence of defendant’s management role is found in the fact that despite his testimony that he did not reside upon the premises and did not know of prostitution there, he nevertheless undertook to act as spokesman in protest of the police search of the premises for additional evidence. The judgment of conviction is affirmed. Affirmed. SMITH, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739005 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:10.295656+00 ===

CRAVEN, P. J., dissenting: I am unable to agree with my colleagues that there is sufficient competent evidence to support a finding of guilty of the offense of pandering. An information was filed charging the defendant with pandering in that “for money he arranged a situation in which Toye Brown, a female, did practice prostitution, . ...” A bench trial resulted in a finding of guilty in the manner and form charged in the indictment and the defendant was sentenced to the penitentiary for a term of two to five years. Ill Rev Stats 1967, § 11-16 (a) of c 38, defines the offense of pandering in terms of one who “(1) Compels a female to become a prostitute; or (2) Arranges or offers to arrange a situation in which a female may practice prostitution.” There is no indication, nor is it urged, that the defendant compelled a female to become a prostitute. There is no essential dispute as to the evidence. Two police officers, not in uniform and in an unmarked car, drove to an address in Decatur, Illinois. The defendant was sitting on the porch and one of the officers went up to the defendant and asked him if there were any girls there. He replied in the affirmative, told the officer to go around to the back door and further advised him to tell his “buddy” to pull the car around to the back. This was done. The two officers went to the back door and were admitted to the premises by the defendant. The defendant then left for another part of the house without further conversation with the officers. Two women were in the room. One of the officers had a conversation with one of the women, agreed to a price of $10, and gave her a $10 bill which had previously been treated with a phosphorescent material. The officer went upstairs with the woman into a bedroom. She started to undress. He placed her under arrest and notified his partner who was still downstairs. At some point the girl to whom the officer had given the $10 had a conversation with the defendant and was seen handing him something not otherwise identified. The defendant and the two girls were taken to the police station. Ultraviolet-light examination indicated that the hands of the defendant had some of the phosphorescent material on them. The money itself was not recovered, and in fact the defendant stated that it would not be recovered. In the rewrite of the Criminal Code of 1961, criminal offenses dealing with prostitution were reclassified and section 11-16 is described in the Committee Comments as “the activity here labeled ‘pandering,’ which involves the recruiting of persons into the practice of prostitution and with keeping practicing prostitutes in that line of endeavor.” (SHA, c 38, sec 11-16, Committee Comments, p 668.) At another point in the Comments (p 669), it is stated: “. . . the emphasis of section 11-16 is shifted away from the technique by which the panderer accomplishes his objective, to the striving to accomplish the task, namely, putting a prostitute in business, or keeping her there. . . .” (Italicized in original.) The evidence here is not sufficient to establish that the defendant either compelled a female to become a prostitute or arranged or offered to arrange a situation in which a female may practice prostitution. This case is not one where the determination of guilt by the trier of fact, based upon conflicting evidence or the credibility of witnesses, is such that a reviewing court will not interfere with the finding. Where, as in this case, the evidence is insufficient to establish the offense charged, it is our duty to reverse the conviction. As stated in People v. Dougard, 16 Ill2d 603, 607-608 (158 NE2d 596, 598-599 (1959)): . . if there is not sufficient credible evidence, or if it is improbable or unsatisfactory, or not sufficient to remove all reasonable doubt of defendant’s guilt and create an abiding conviction that he is guilty, the conviction will be reversed. It is the duty of this court to resolve all facts and circumstances in evidence on the theory of innocence rather than guilt if that reasonably may be done, and where the entire record leaves us, as this one does, with grave and substantial doubt of the guilt of the defendant, we will not hesitate to reverse the judgment. People v. Sheppard, 402 Ill 347, 83 NE2d 587 (1949).” The brief of the appellee, in argument, describes the activity of the defendant in terms that would meet the statutory definition of the offense of pandering. For example: “Defendant should be commended for his astute management of these prostitutes. He . . . provided parking facilities . . . insured the availability of two ‘girls’ . . . supplied bedroom facilities . . . required the payment of money ... [in advance].” This language may well describe conduct sufficient to convict of pandering. A reading of the record, however, does not disclose any evidence that the defendant managed prostitutes, supplied bedroom facilities, required the payment of money in advance, or insured the availability of two girls, as is argued in the brief. I would reverse the conviction.

=== CASE 2218459 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:48.352137+00 ===

128 Ill. App. 2d 249 (1970)
261 N.E.2d 827
William T. Elizer, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Louisville & Nashville Railroad Company, a Corporation, Defendant-Appellant.
Gen. No. 69-22.
Illinois Appellate Court  Fifth District.
August 27, 1970.
*250 *251 Walker & Williams, of East St. Louis (Edward G. Maag, of counsel), for appellant.
McGlynn & McGlynn, of East St. Louis (James McGlynn, of counsel), for appellant.
GOLDENHERSH, J.
Defendant, Louisville & Nashville Railroad Company, appeals from the judgment of the Circuit Court of St. Clair County entered upon a jury verdict in the amount of $130,000.00.
Plaintiff's cause of action is brought under the Federal Employers' Liability Act (45 USCA 51 et seq.) and arises out of an occurrence on December 24, 1966 while he was employed as a switchman in Nashville, Tennessee.
Defendant's first contention is that the verdict is so grossly excessive as to require the granting of a new trial.
Plaintiff was injured when his right leg was immersed in scalding hot water to a point just above his knee. He was taken to a hospital where he was confined until February 1, 1967. He had first and second degree burns on his right leg from the ankle to the junction of the lower and middle third of his thigh. He developed areas of secondary infection. The burns were painful and he was given Demerol and later, Empirin or Darvon. During the period of hospitalization he was treated by defendant's district surgeon.
Following discharge from the hospital he was seen at the surgeon's office eight times. On March 3, 1967, the surgeon recommended plaintiff enter the hospital for skin grafting.
*252 Plaintiff rejected the services of defendant's surgeon and consulted a plastic surgeon. He was hospitalized and on March 13, 1967, extensive plastic surgery was performed on his leg. He was bedfast until April 10, 1967, and was discharged from the hospital on April 4. He was seen by the doctor on May 8, June 19, and on August 3, 1967, was released for work. He returned to the surgeon's office on September 7, and some areas of graft were still draining. He was hospitalized and on October 2, 1967, corrective surgery was performed. He was discharged on October 6th. He was seen by the doctor on November 30, 1967 and again on February 2, 1968. He was having difficulty with numbness and pain in the leg, particularly when he worked outside in cold weather.
On several occasions when seen by the plastic surgeon plaintiff complained of weakness in the ankle and difficulty in walking on uneven surfaces because of its weakness and tendency to turn. He was referred to an orthopedic surgeon for X-ray and examination.
The doctor stated that to a reasonable degree of medical certainty it was his opinion that the weakness of the ankle and its tendency to turn might be a permanent condition, that the injury could cause impairment of his ability to perform the duties of a switchman, was causing pain now as well as in the past, and may well cause pain and discomfort in the future, possibly requiring further medical attention and treatment.
At the time of the injury plaintiff was 24 years of age. He received a high school diploma upon successful completion of a General Education Test. His seniority as a switchman dates from November 12, 1963. His earnings in 1966 were in excess of $7,000. In 1967, he earned $2,200. As of the date of trial, May 22, 1968, his earnings in 1968 were less than $500.00.
[1-3] The assessment of damages is a jury function and our conclusion upon careful examination of the record is best described in the following statement found in Lau *253 v. West Towns Bus Co., 16 Ill. 2d 442, 158 NE2d 63, at page 453:
"We are not unmindful of our obligation to carefully scrutinize the record to determine whether the amount of the verdict is so large as to indicate passion and prejudice. This we have done, and we conclude from the evidence that although the verdict may well be in excess of the amount which the judges of this court would have allowed if they had heard the evidence and made the original determination, yet we do not believe that it is so excessive as to show passion or prejudice.
"We therefore conclude that the verdict and judgment below are correct and the judgment is affirmed."
Defendant contends it was deprived of a fair trial as the result of misconduct on the part of plaintiff's counsel. Defendant argues that in his direct examination of the plaintiff, plaintiff's counsel "set the stage" for the "character assassination" of defendant's district surgeon. We have examined the transcript and find that only one objection was made during the portion of the interrogation of which defendant complains and it was sustained.
Defendant argues that plaintiff's counsel, pursuing the course of "character assassination" made improper allusion in final argument to a conversation, not in evidence, between the defendant's surgeon and another doctor whom plaintiff had consulted. The record shows the trial court sustained defendant's objection. Defendant complains of other remarks of plaintiff's counsel, to some of which no objections were made.
[4-6] A detailed discussion of these remarks is of no precedential value nor is it necessary to discuss the authorities cited by the parties. The rule governing review of assignments of error based upon alleged improper argument to the jury is clearly stated in Belfield v. Coop, *254 8 Ill. 2d 293, 134 NE2d 249. The character and scope of argument to the jury is left very largely to the trial court, and every reasonable presumption must be indulged in that the trial court has performed his duty and properly exercised the discretion vested in him. North Chicago St. R. Co. v. Cotton, 140 Ill. 486, 29 N.E. 899. The attitude and demeanor of counsel and the general atmosphere of the trial are observed by the trial court, and cannot be reproduced in the record on appeal. The trial court is, therefore, in a better position than a reviewing court to determine the prejudicial effect, if any, of a remark made during argument, and unless clearly an abuse of discretion, its ruling should be upheld. Chicago v. Chicago Title & Trust Co., 331 Ill. 322, 163 N.E. 17.
[7] Citing cases which hold that a party who calls a witness vouches for, and may not impeach him, defendant argues that since its district surgeon's testimony was adduced by evidentiary deposition in plaintiff's case, plaintiff was barred from criticizing him in final argument which was designed to impeach him. This theory was not the basis of objection in the trial court, and although paragraph 4 of defendant's posttrial motion, by liberal construction, might be deemed to include it, it is raised in this court for the first time in defendant's reply brief, and under the circumstances will not be further considered.
[8] Defendant contends the court erred in giving plaintiff's instruction No. 16 because it submitted to the jury the question of damages for future medical care and treatment (IPI 30.06). The record reflects that Dr. Lissner, the plastic surgeon, testified to a reasonable degree of medical certainty that plaintiff might require further medical treatment. Defendant's medical witness testified there was atrophy in the injured leg which should be corrected through therapy and exercise. We have examined the cases upon which defendant relies (Panepinto v. Morrison Hotel, Inc., 71 Ill. App. 2d 319, 218 NE2d 880; Lauth *255 v. Chicago Union Traction Co., 244 Ill. 244, 91 N.E. 431; Meltzer v. Shklowsky, 321 Ill. App. 400, 53 NE2d 272) and find them distinguishable in that here, unlike those cases, there is medical testimony to a reasonable degree of medical certainty that future medical treatment might be necessary.
[9] Defendant's final contention is that the court erred in giving plaintiff's instruction No. 19 (IPI 34.04) because there is no evidence that plaintiff might suffer future loss of earnings. The testimony of plaintiff's surgeon and plaintiff's testimony of pain, and difficulty with his leg, supply an evidentiary basis for submission of this element of damage to the jury.
We find no reversible error in this record and the judgment of the Circuit Court of St. Clair County is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
MORAN and EBERSPACHER, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9739006 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:10.825129+00 ===

MILLER, Justice.
In this appeal, we hold that a convicted person has no protected liberty interest in parole and that he is not entitled to a due process hearing prior to rescission of an unexecuted parole.
FACTS
Petitioner and appellant Charles A. Winters appeals the circuit court’s denial of his amended petition for habeas corpus. Winters claims that the court erred when it *723held that he had no liberty interest in his release once his parole had been granted by the South Dakota Board of Pardons and Paroles (Board) and that the court erred in holding that he was not entitled to any due process prior to a summary rescission of his grant of parole by Board.
In September 1986, Winters was convicted of the crime of sexual contact with a child under sixteen years of age. He was sentenced to ten years in the South Dakota State Penitentiary with four years of his sentence suspended. Winters later applied for parole and his application was heard by Board in March 1988. On March 24, Winters was granted parole on the condition that he relocate to Kentucky. He was not immediately released, however, because his parole was subject to approval by Kentucky authorities, pursuant to the Compact on Interstate Parolee Supervision. See SDCL 24-16-1 to 24-16-5. One week after his parole was approved, but while still in custody, Winters was expelled from the sex offenders’ therapy group at the Human Services Center’s trustee unit due to his lack of interest and lack of participation. It was also reported that he had told a prison employee that he was not guilty of the crime of which he was convicted, that he planned to engage in sexual contact with a child once he was released and that he saw nothing wrong in planning to do so. He also told an institutional parole agent that, unlike other inmates, he did not have an urge to go drink, but rather had an urge to go to a “peep show.”
In April, prior to receiving approval from the Kentucky authorities, Winters was called back before Board to reassess the granting of his parole. At the meeting, Winters was not allowed to cross-examine or confront the witnesses against him nor was he allowed to call any witnesses on his behalf. He was not given the opportunity to present any documentary evidence and his request to retain counsel or have counsel appointed was denied.
Board specifically determined that Winters’ rehabilitation had been misrepresented and that his parole had been improvidently granted because he expressed a willingness and desire to reoffend upon his release and because he displayed an attitude inconsistent with the goals of parole. Board further found that society would not be protected if Winters was released. Board concluded as a matter of law that Winters had no greater right to an unexe-cuted grant of parole than he had to release on parole generally, and that it had the same discretion to rescind an unexecut-ed grant of parole as it would to deny a parole application. Finally, Board noted that an unexecuted grant of parole does not vest a prisoner with any protected liberty interest and that unlike a revocation of parole, parole rescission does not require a due process hearing. Board then found that Winters’ parole was unexecuted and determined that his parole should be rescinded.
Winters petitioned the circuit court for a writ of habeas corpus. The court issued the writ and a hearing was held. The circuit court denied Winters’ habeas corpus relief, holding that he did not have a liberty interest in parole and that the rescission of parole without a hearing did not violate his right to due process. Winters appeals. We affirm.
DECISION
I
WHETHER THE CIRCUIT COURT ERRED IN HOLDING THAT WINTERS HAD NO LIBERTY INTEREST IN HIS UNEXECUTED GRANT OF PAROLE.
Winters first claims that the circuit court erred when it determined that he did not have a liberty interest in his unexecut-ed grant of parole. SDCL 24-15-1.1 provides:
Parole is the discretionary conditional release of an inmate from actual penitentiary custody before the expiration of his term of imprisonment. The prisoner remains an inmate under the legal custody of the department of charities and corrections until the expiration of his term of imprisonment. A prisoner is not required to accept a conditional *724parole. A prisoner is never entitled to parole. However, parole may be granted if in the judgment of the board of pardons and paroles granting a parole would be the best interests of society and the prisoner.
Neither this section nor its application may be the basis for establishing a constitutionally protected liberty, property or due process interest in any prisoner. (Emphasis added.)
It is clear from the statute that a prisoner is paroled when he is actually released from penitentiary custody before the expiration of his term of imprisonment. That term does not apply to the waiting period between the grant and the execution of parole. It also would not apply here, where Winters’ release on parole was explicitly conditioned on his acceptance by parole authorities in Kentucky.
The United States Supreme Court has specifically held that a convicted person has no constitutional or inherent right to parole. Greenholtz v. Inmates of Nebraska Penal and Correctional Complex, 442 U.S. 1, 99 S.Ct. 2100, 60 L.Ed.2d 668 (1979).* In the case of Dace v. Mickelson, 816 F.2d 1277 (8th Cir.1987), the court in examining our parole statutes and analyzing the Greenholtz holding, specifically held that in South Dakota a convicted prisoner has no protected liberty interest in parole. We agree and adopt their holding and rationale.
II
WHETHER THE CIRCUIT COURT ERRED IN HOLDING THAT WINTERS WAS NOT ENTITLED TO A DUE PROCESS HEARING PRIOR TO THE RESCISSION OF HIS GRANT OF PAROLE.
Winters next contends that the circuit court erred when it determined that he was not entitled to a due process hearing prior to the rescission of his grant of parole. We disagree. The United States Supreme Court has clearly held that even though a prisoner has been notified that he is to be paroled, such expectation is not a protected liberty interest which requires a due process hearing prior to its rescission. Jago v. Van Curen, 454 U.S. 14, 102 S.Ct. 31, 70 L.Ed.2d 13 (1981).
In Jago, a penitentiary inmate was interviewed by the Ohio Adult Parole Authority (OAPA) to determine his fitness for parole under Ohio’s “shock parole” statute. An OAPA panel recommended that the inmate be paroled and the inmate was so notified. He attended and completed prison pre-re-lease classes and had even been measured for civilian clothes. Six days after the panel’s interview with the inmate, OAPA was notified that the inmate had not been truthful in his interview concerning the gravity of the offenses he had committed or in his parole plan. As a result, OAPA rescinded its earlier decision to grant the inmate parole and continued his case to a later OAPA meeting, at which time his parole was formally denied. At no time was the inmate granted the opportunity to explain the statements he had made in his initial parole interview or in his parole plan.
The inmate ultimately filed a petition for writ of habeas corpus claiming that the rescission without a hearing violated his due process rights under the United States Constitution. The district court denied the writ. After that decision was remanded by the United States Supreme Court, the district court determined that no due process hearing was necessary because early release in Ohio was a matter of grace, that its law was unambiguous, and that no pro-tectible interest in early release arises until actual release. The United States Supreme Court affirmed, holding that parole for Ohio prisoners lied wholly within OAPA’s discretion, and that Ohio’s parole statutes did not create a protected liberty interest for due process purposes.
*725Following the rationale set forth in Jago, and reviewing our unambiguous statutes, we likewise believe that early release under our law is a matter of grace and that SDCL 24-15-1.1 gives Board the right to rescind an unexecuted grant of parole without the necessity of a due process hearing.
Affirmed.
WUEST, C.J., and MORGAN, J., concur.
SABERS, J., specially concurs.
HENDERSON, J., dissents.
The Greenholtz court did, however, provide that a statute which instills an expectancy of release may create a liberty interest in parole. We note that certain legislation regarding parole, SDCL 24-15-1.1 and 24-15-8, specifically disclaims any intent to create a protected liberty, property or due process interest in any prisoner. These provisions respond to the Greenholtz caveat.

=== CASE 2220878 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:59.593224+00 ===

85 N.Y.2d 1024 (1995)
654 N.E.2d 1220
630 N.Y.S.2d 972
The People of the State of New York, Respondent,
v.
Anthony Graves, Appellant.
The People of the State of New York, Respondent,
v.
Darnell Williams, Appellant.
The People of the State of New York, Respondent,
v.
Kevin Kane, Also Known as Andre Kane, Appellant.
Court of Appeals of the State of New York.
Argued April 25, 1995.
Decided June 15, 1995.
Ira Mickenberg, New York City, for appellant in the first above-entitled action.
Robert M. Morgenthau, District Attorney of New York County, New York City (Donald J. Siewert and Alan Gadlin of counsel), for respondent in the first above-entitled action.
Edith Blumberg, New York City, for appellant in the second above-entitled action.
Robert M. Morgenthau, District Attorney of New York County, New York City (Alan Gadlin and Donald J. Siewert of counsel), for respondent in the second above-entitled action.
Hunton & Williams, New York City (Christopher M. Mason of counsel), and Philip L. Weinstein for appellant in the third above-entitled action.
Richard A. Brown, District Attorney of Queens County, Kew Gardens (John M. Castellano and Steven J. Chananie of counsel), for respondent in the third above-entitled action.
Chief Judge KAYE and Judges SIMONS, TITONE, BELLACOSA, SMITH, LEVINE and CIPARICK concur.
*1026MEMORANDUM.
In each case, the order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed.
Each of these appeals involves a prosecution arising out of a street-level "buy and bust." In all three, the trial courts permitted the People to adduce "expert" testimony by police officers regarding the distinctive roles and practices of some street dealers. The apparent purpose of this evidence in People v Graves and People v Williams was to explain to the jury why the defendants did not have "buy money" or drugs on their persons when they were arrested shortly after the alleged sales. In People v Kane, the purpose was to bolster the People's theory that the defendant had been a participant in the charged narcotics sale even though he had not handled either the drugs or the buy money.
To the extent that the trial objection of the defendant in People v Graves may be construed to rest on grounds of relevance, the objection was properly denied, since proof of the habits of some street drug dealers is at least marginally probative of what others in the same business might do. The argument now made by the defendant in People v Williams that the limited probative worth of this evidence is outweighed *1027 by its prejudicial effect was not made by him or any of the other defendants at trial. Similarly, none of the defendants made the argument now made on appeal by the defendant in People v Graves, i.e., that the practices of street dealers in ridding themselves of incriminating evidence are not a proper subject for "expert" testimony. Accordingly, regardless of their merits, none of those arguments can be considered on these appeals.
Similarly unreviewable is defendant Kane's present claim that his conviction should be reversed because of the prosecutor's failure to turn over a police expense report that arguably constituted Rosario material. When the report's existence was disclosed during the police officer's testimony, the court deferred further discussion about the prosecutor's obligation to produce it, instead permitting defense counsel to question the witness about the report's availability. Counsel did not mention the report again and no sanction either for its belated disclosure or for its nonproduction was sought. Accordingly, any claim for relief defendant might have as a result of the possible violation of his Rosario rights must be deemed abandoned (cf., People v Rogelio, 79 N.Y.2d 843).
Orders affirmed in a memorandum.

=== CASE 9739764 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:20:33.728693+00 ===

OPINION
HUSPENI, Judge.
Appellant Beltrami County challenges the juvenile court’s order for voluntary termination of father’s parental rights. We reverse.
FACTS
J.D.N. was born in May 1985 to Janice N. and Lawrence S. In June 1987, Janice married Paul N., and in August 1988 Paul adopted J.D.N. Paul and Janice separated in November 1990, and in September 1991 Paul petitioned to voluntarily terminate his parental rights to J.D.N. Faced with the loss of Paul’s potential financial contribution, appellant Beltrami County intervened, and a guardian ad litem was appointed for J.D.N.
A contested hearing was held in Beltrami County Juvenile Court. Four witnesses testified at the hearing. Paul testified that he adopted J.D.N. to strengthen his relationship with Janice, that he had not seen J.D.N. since the summer of 1991, and that his only other contact with J.D.N. was a Christmas card. Paul claimed that he could have seen J.D.N. since then, but chose not to in part because he did not want to cause J.D.N. confusion. Paul also testified that he had never made any voluntary payment of child support to J.D.N. and that money was involuntarily withheld from his paycheck. Paul admitted that he has made no attempt to pay child support arrearages although he is currently employed.
Janice testified that Paul was “emotionally mostly absent” as a parent. Janice stated that Paul saw J.D.N. only three times from the time of the separation, and that Paul has neither contacted J.D.N. nor provided him with clothing, food, or other support since then. Janice testified that if she were to die, she would like her brother to care for J.D.N. She also stated that J.D.N. feels resentful because of Paul’s abandonment.
Janice stated that she began receiving AFDC from Beltrami County shortly after she separated from Paul. She is currently *56a graduate student, and needs only to complete four credits and her thesis to receive a master’s degree.
A Beltrami County child support officer confirmed that'Paul is currently in arrears on his child support obligation, and testified as to the amount and frequency of Janice’s AFDC support.
Finally, J.D.N.’s guardian ad litem testified that Paul has been struggling with emotional problems and that she did not believe that Paul was acting as a “father figure” for J.D.N. She concluded that given Paul’s past history of support, it was in J.D.N.’s best interest to terminate Paul’s parental rights.
Based on this evidence, the court ordered that Paul’s parental rights be terminated. The court ordered that the termination be retroactive and forgave Paul’s support ar-rearages.
ISSUE
Did the juvenile court err in ordering that Paul’s parental rights be voluntarily terminated?
ANALYSIS
“As a matter of law, termination of parental rights is not a preferred action.” In re Welfare of M.G., 407 N.W.2d 118, 120 (Minn.App.1987), quoted in In re Welfare of R.T.B., 492 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Minn.App.1992).
Due to the gravity of the proceedings, * * * a reviewing court must exercise great caution. This court must “closely inquire into the sufficiency of the evidence to determine whether the evidence is clear and convincing.”
R.T.B., 492 N.W.2d at 3 (citation omitted) (quoting In re Welfare of Clausen, 289 N.W.2d 153, 156 (Minn.1980)).
Minn.Stat. § 260.221, subd. 1 (1990) provides two separate grounds upon which a juvenile court may terminate parental rights. First, a juvenile court may terminate parental rights “[w]ith the written consent of a parent who for good cause desires to terminate parental rights.” Id., subd. 1(a). Second, a juvenile court may involuntarily terminate a parent’s rights if it finds that one or more of a list of specifically enumerated circumstances exist.1 Id., subd. 1(b). The provisions of subdivision 1(a) and 1(b) are distinct and circumstances that justify involuntary termination of parental rights under subdivision 1(b) do not necessarily justify the voluntary termination of parental rights under subdivision 1(a). See In re Welfare of K.T., 327 N.W.2d 13, 17 (Minn.1982) (cases involving involuntary termination of parental rights do not apply to cases involving voluntary termination of parental rights).
The juvenile court specifically found “[tjhat [Paul] has not visited, talked to, or communicated with [J.D.N.] since the summer of 1991”; “[t]hat Paul[’s] * * * failure to pay child support as ordered is without good cause”; “that Paul * * * is unfit and unwilling to be a parent to [J.D.N.],” and that Paul has consistently failed to “appropriately care for the ongoing physical, mental and emotional needs of [J.D.N.].” The juvenile court’s findings as a whole clearly indicate that the court based its conclusion that good cause existed for the termination upon circumstances that would justify in*57voluntary termination. Our concern is whether these findings are sufficient to establish “good cause” for a voluntary termination of parental rights. We conclude they are not.
Under subdivision 1(a), a juvenile court may voluntarily terminate parental rights if it finds “good cause” for the termination. Minn.Stat. § 260.221, subd. 1(a). While the section does not define “good cause,” this term was construed by the Minnesota Supreme Court in In re Welfare of Alle, 804 Minn. 254, 257, 230 N.W.2d 574, 576 (1975). The petitioner in Alie sought to voluntarily terminate his parental rights to his adopted children. Id. at 256, 230 N.W.2d at 576. The trial court found that the children’s natural mother had planned to separate from the petitioner at the time of the adoption and had not entered the adoption in good faith. Id. Nevertheless, the supreme court held that there was not “good cause” for termination of petitioner’s parental rights. Id. at 257, 230 N.W.2d at 576. The court explained:
The statute is generally aimed at two ends: First, to enable the judicial system to legally remove a child from a destructive or unhealthy home environment without the consent of the natural parents, and, second, to facilitate adoption procedures by providing a means by which existing parental rights may be voluntarily terminated. The showing of “good cause” below is consistent with neither of these purposes.
Id. The court went on to note that:
[T]he children wish to be able to look to their legal father for financial support; it is surely not in their best interest to have that avenue of support terminated.
Id. at 258, 230 N.W.2d at 577.
The termination of Paul’s parental rights is not consistent with either of the policies discussed in Alie. Paul does not seek to terminate his parental rights in order to facilitate J.D.N.’s adoption. Nor will the termination of Paul’s parental rights remove J.D.N. from a destructive or unhealthy home environment, since Paul is the noncustodial parent of J.D.N.
This court has held that imminent adoption is not a prerequisite for voluntary termination of parental rights. In re Welfare of D.C.M., 443 N.W.2d 853, 854 (Minn.App.1989), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. Sept. 21, 1989). However, D.C.M. is clearly distinguishable from the case at bar and must be held to its unique facts. In D.C.M., both custodial parents sought to terminate their parental rights because “they felt that they were unable to cope with D.C.M.’s [emotional and behavioral] problems and the way his behavior affected their family.” Id.
In contrast to D. C.M., the parent seeking to terminate parental rights in this case is not a custodial parent. Janice’s desire to curtail Paul’s non-nurturing, and possibly disruptive influence upon J.D.N. can be accomplished through less drastic means. While parents ideally will strive to limit the effect of their marriage dissolution upon their individual relationship with their children, problems unfortunately do arise in establishing meaningful and nurturing visitation between children and a noncustodial parent. As a noncustodial parent, Paul has a right only to such visitation as is in J.D.N.’s best interests. See Minn.Stat. § 518.175 (1990). Janice has the opportunity to seek the assistance of the court to restrict or even deny visitation that is “likely to endanger the child’s physical or emotional health or impair the child’s emotional development.” Id.; see also Griffin v. Van Griffin, 267 N.W.2d 733, 735 (Minn.1978) (court may deny visitation upon “persuasive evidence” that it would not serve best interests of the child).
Relief under section 518.175, with or without accompanying counseling, would be just as effective in addressing concerns about Paul’s relationship with J.D.N. as termination of Paul’s parental rights would be. Such alternative relief would also preserve for J.D.N. vitally important rights that flow from the legal relationship with his father. These rights include the right to receive social security benefits, 42 U.S.C.A. §§ 416(e), (h)(2)(A) (West 1991); the right to inherit through intestate succession, Minn.Stat. §§ 524.2-103(1), 524.2-*58109(1) (1992) (provisions defining an adoptive child as a child of the parent and enumerating child’s share of intestate estate); and the right to recover in a wrongful death action, Minn.Stat. § 573.02, subd. 1 (1992) (recovery for next-of-kin). Of the most immediate importance, of course, is the right of the child to receive support from his father. Minn.Stat. § 518.551, subd. 5 (1992) (child support guidelines).
Rights that flow to the child from the parent and child relationship certainly include visitation with the noncustodial parent, but rights other than visitation are not dependent upon visitation. Minn.Stat. § 518.612 (1990); see England v. England, 337 N.W.2d 681, 684 (Minn.1983) (deprivation of custody or visitation is not a proper factor to consider in determining or enforcing support obligations). Just as non-willful failure to pay support should not be a ground for denial of visitation, neither should court-ordered restriction or denial of visitation in itself be a sufficient ground for even temporary suspension of child support, much less its permanent elimination.
In any proceeding under section 260.221, “the best interests of the child must be the paramount consideration.” Minn.Stat. § 260.221, subd. 4 (1990). Given the policy objectives of the termination of parental rights statutes recognized in Alle, we believe that the best interests of a child are not served by permitting a noncustodial parent to terminate parental rights voluntarily unless that termination is accomplished to facilitate adoption of the child. Adoption assures that the child will not lose valuable rights to support, social' security and intestate inheritance. As the natural parent is relieved of the corresponding obligations arising from these rights, an adoptive parent assumes them.
On the record before the juvenile court, Paul failed to establish by clear and convincing evidence that good cause exists for the voluntary termination of his parental rights. See R.T.B., 492 N.W.2d at 3. While termination of parental rights may appear to serve Paul’s best interests, that cannot be and never has been an appropriate consideration under the statute. His benefit in being relieved of any obligation to J.D.N. is accompanied by an immediate and substantial detrimental effect on J.D.N. J.D.N. will, at such time as current AFDC benefits cease, be forced to look solely to his custodial parent Janice to meet all of his needs. J.D.N.’s rights have been cast aside by the decision of the juvenile court and that decision cannot be affirmed on appeal.
DECISION
Petitioner has failed to demonstrate “good cause” for the voluntary termination of his parental rights. The juvenile court’s order terminating parental rights is reversed.
Reversed.
. A court may involuntarily terminate a parent’s rights if it finds that one or more of the following conditions exist:
(1) the parent has abandoned the child;
(2) the parent has "substantially, continuously, or repeatedly failed to comply with the duties imposed upon the parent”;
(3) the parent has been ordered to contribute to the support of the child and has failed to do so without good cause;
(4) the parent is "palpably unfit" and is unable to care appropriately for the "ongoing physical, mental, or emotional needs of the child”;
(5) the parent has failed to correct the conditions leading to a determination of neglect, dependency, or child in need of protection or services;
(6) the parent has been convicted of causing the death of another of the parent's children;
(7) the child's mother was not married to the child’s father when the child was conceived or born and either the parent has not filed notice of intent to retain parental rights or the notice has been successfully challenged;
(8) the child is neglected and in foster care. Minn.Stat. § 260.221, subd. 1(b) (1990).

=== CASE 2222261 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:34.155069+00 ===

535 N.E.2d 1235 (1989)
George SCHULTZ, Appellant (Plaintiff below),
v.
Thad B. HODUS, Phyllis T. Kinder, B & O Railroad, Appellees (Defendants below).
No. 64A03-8808-CV-252.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Third District.
March 21, 1989.
Rehearing Denied June 8, 1989.
Barry D. Rooth, Theodoros, Theodoros & Rooth, Merrillville, Douglas E. Johnston, Tourkow, Crell, Rosenblatt & Johnston, Fort Wayne, for appellant.
Samuel J. Bernardi, Gregory J. Tonner, Robert J. Dignam, Spangler, Jennings, Spangler & Dougherty, P.C., Valparaiso, for Phyllis T. Kinder.
Leonard M. Holajter, Friedrich, Bomberger, Tweedle & Blackmun, P.C., Highland, for Baltimore & Ohio RR.
STATON, Judge.
George Schultz appeals the trial court's granting of summary judgment in favor of the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad Company (Railroad) and Phyllis Kinder on his amended complaint for damages. This appeal raises two issues:
1. Whether a genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether the Railroad failed to provide him with a safe place to work.
2. Whether a genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether Kinder negligently operated her van.
Affirmed.
On December 28, 1983, Schultz was an employee of the Railroad. On that date, he and three other Railroad employees were to be driven from the rail yard in Garrett, Indiana, to Barr Yard in Chicago, Illinois, to bring a train back to the Garrett Yard. Kinder had an oral agreement with the Railroad under the terms of which the Railroad *1236 paid her by the mile to transport its employees in her van to and from various locations when necessary. The Railroad phoned Kinder on the morning of December 28 at approximately seven o'clock, requesting her to transport the crew from Garrett to Barr Yard, a trip of about 150 miles. Kinder arrived at the train station at 8:30 a.m. and left with the crew at about 8:45 a.m.
The roads were in good condition when Kinder, Schultz and the other Railroad employees began the trip. However, when Kinder reached Interstate 94, she discovered the Interstate was covered with ice so she reduced her speed to 15 mph. Kinder took I-94 into Illinois and exited on to Sibley Blvd., which she took into Dolton, Illinois. The driving conditions on Sibley Blvd. in Dolton were better than they were on I-94, but it was icy in places and wet due to melting snow and ice.
Sibley Blvd. was a four lane street running east and west with two lanes in each direction. Kinder was traveling at about 30 mph, with the flow of traffic, in the westbound curb lane when Thad B. Hodus, who was in the east bound curb lane, came across the lanes of traffic and struck Kinder's van. Schultz was injured as a result of the accident.
I.
Standard of Review
On an appeal from a summary judgment, we must determine whether the record reveals a genuine issue of material fact and whether the trial court correctly applied the law. Any doubt as to a fact, or an inference to be drawn, is resolved in favor of the non-moving party. Schrader v. Mississinewa Community School Corp. (1988), Ind. App., 521 N.E.2d 949, 952. Summary judgment will be affirmed if it is sustainable upon any theory supported by the record. Aetna Insurance Co. of Midwest v. Rodriquez (1987), Ind. App., 504 N.E.2d 1030, 1032, reversed on other grounds, (1988), Ind. 517 N.E.2d 386, reh. denied.
II.
FELA
Schultz first raises the issue whether a genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether the Railroad failed to provide him with a safe place to work. Pursuant to the Federal Employers Liability Act
[e]very common carrier by Railroad while engaging in commerce between any of the several States or Territories ... shall be liable in damages to any person suffering injury while he is employed by such carrier in such commerce ... for such injury ... resulting in whole or in part from the negligence of any of the officers, agents, or employees of such carrier, or by reason of any defect or insufficiency, due to its negligence, in its cars, engines, appliances, machinery, track, roadbed, works, boats, wharves, or other equipment.
45 U.S.C. § 51. This statute imposes on the Railroad a nondelegable duty to use reasonable care in furnishing employees with a safe place to work. Payne v. Baltimore & Ohio RR. (6th Cir.1962), 309 F.2d 546, 548-49. This duty extends even to premises not owned, controlled or maintained by the Railroad. Id.
Schultz argues that the Railroad breached its duty when it required him to travel on roads it knew were in hazardous condition. We do not agree with Schultz' premise that evidence exists that the Railroad knew the roads were so hazardous that it was unreasonable to require Schultz to travel on them.
To convince us that a genuine issue of fact exists for a jury, Schultz devotes a large portion of his brief to a discussion of the applicable standards under FELA cases. He correctly notes that the proper inquiry is "whether the proofs justify with reason the conclusion that employer negligence played any part, even the slightest, in producing the injury or death for which damages are sought." Rogers v. Missouri Pacific RR Co. (1957), 352 U.S. 500, 506, 77 S.Ct. 443, 448, 1 L.Ed.2d 493. It is also true that only "slight" or "minimal" evidence is needed to raise a jury question of negligence under FELA, Mendoza v. *1237 Southern Pacific Transportation Co. (9th Cir.1984), 733 F.2d 631, 632, and the jury has broad power to engage in inferences. Id. at 633.
It does not follow, however, as Schultz would have us conclude that the minimal negligence standard removes proximate cause as an essential element of a FELA negligence case,[1] or that every negligence case should go to the jury. To recover under FELA, the plaintiff must still prove that the employer was negligent. Richardson v. Missouri Pacific RR Co. (8th Cir.1982), 677 F.2d 663, 665. "In this respect, a plaintiff's prima facie case under the Act must include all the same elements as are found in a common law negligence action." Id., quoting Davis v. Burlington Northern, Inc. (8th Cir.1976), 541 F.2d 182, 185, cert. denied, 429 U.S. 1002, 97 S.Ct. 533, 50 L.Ed.2d 613 (1976). The plaintiff must prove that the Railroad could have reasonably foreseen that a particular condition could cause injury. Gallick v. Baltimore & Ohio RR (1963), 372 U.S. 108, 117, 83 S.Ct. 659, 665, 9 L.Ed.2d 618.
Furthermore, the focal point of judicial review is the resonableness of a particular inference or conclusion that may be drawn by the jury. Id., 372 U.S. at 115, 83 S.Ct. at 664. "It is only necessary that the jury's conclusion be one which is not outside the possibility of reason on the facts and circumstances shown." Mendoza, supra, at 633, quoting Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific RR Co. v. Melcher (8th Cir.1964), 333 F.2d 996, 999. These general principles do not, however, grant a plaintiff the unqualified right to have the jury pass on issues of negligence and proximate cause in all cases. New York, N.H. & H.R.R. v. Dox (1st Cir.1957), 249 F.2d 572, 573. Thus, if the facts and circumstances of the present case are such that a conclusion the Railroad is liable for negligence is outside the possibility of reason, we will affirm the trial court's grant of summary judgment.
Schultz contends that a jury could conclude the Railroad is liable for negligence based on depositions of witnesses and exhibits of newspaper stories describing the bad road conditions due to the weather across northern Indiana and the Chicago area. The accident occurred on Sibley Blvd. in Dolton, Illinois. Thus, the only evidence relevant to our inquiry is evidence of the condition of Sibley Blvd. Viewed most favorably to Schultz, the evidence shows that Sibley Blvd. had ice and snow on it in some places and it was wet because the snow and ice were melting. There were snow banks of about two feet high along the edge of the road because it had been plowed. The investigating police officer testified that while the weather conditions made travel less safe than normal, it was not so bad that no one should have been driving and that with due care a vehicle could be safely driven on the road. Furthermore, the newspaper articles describing the hazardous conditions did not appear in the papers until the evening of the day the accident occurred. Thus, it cannot be argued that they served as notice of the bad conditions. Under the facts and circumstances of this case, we conclude the Railroad did not breach its duty to provide a safe place to work by requiring Schultz to travel to Barr Yard. See Spinello v. New York, Chicago, and St. Louis RR Co. (1962), 173 Ohio St. 324, 181 N.E.2d 884.
III.
Negligence
Schultz next raises the issue whether a genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether Kinder negligently operated her van. Schultz alleges that Kinder was negligent for failing to maintain a proper lookout and failing to avoid the accident.[2] The *1238 facts are not in dispute as to how the accident occurred. Kinder was traveling in the westbound curb lane at about 30 mph. Hodus was traveling in the eastbound curb lane at about 35-38 mph. When the car in front of Hodus slowed down to make a right hand turn into a parking lot, Hodus hit his brakes and started to slide. To avoid hitting the car in front of him, Hodus pulled into the eastbound inside lane. However, a car was stopped a few feet ahead, preparing to make a left hand turn. Rather than attempting to stop, Hodus drove across the westbound lanes of traffic, hoping no cars were coming in that direction, and hit Kinder's van.
A motorist has a duty to maintain a proper lookout. Brock v. Walton (1983), Ind. App., 456 N.E.2d 1087, 1091. He also has a duty to use due care to avoid a collision and to maintain his automobile under reasonable control. Chaney v. Tingley (1977), 174 Ind. App. 191, 366 N.E.2d 707, 710, trans. denied. The duty to keep a lookout is imposed upon a motorist so that he may become aware of dangerous situations and conditions to enable him to take appropriate precautionary measures to avoid injury. Brock, supra, at 1092.
Schultz argues that there is an inference that Kinder was not maintaining a proper lookout because she did not see Hodus' car until the impact and that if she had seen it coming she could have avoided the collision. Whether Kinder maintained a proper lookout is only part of the question. The failure to do so must also be the proximate cause of the injury. Assuming that by keeping a proper lookout Kinder would have seen Hodus coming into her lane of traffic, the failure to keep a proper lookout would be the proximate cause only if Kinder would have had sufficient time and distance within which to avoid the collision. See id.
"Having the means and ability to avoid a collision means not only the mechanical appliances, such as steering apparatus with which to swerve, signalling equipment with which to warn, or braking appliances with which to slow down or stop, but also the existence of sufficient time and distance, considering the movements and speeds of the vehicles, to enable the party charged [with failure to keep a careful lookout] to take effective action in avoidance."
Id. at 1092-93, quoting Hawkins v. Whittenberg (1979), Mo. App., 587 S.W.2d 358, 361.
The eyewitness to the accident testified that only four to five seconds elapsed between the time Hodus first tried to stop and when he hit Kinder. Even less time would have been available for Kinder to react if she had seen Hodus at the time he crossed the center lane. Although Kinder testified she did not see Hodus until the impact, the eyewitness testified that she saw Kinder's van slow down and pull to the right immediately before the collision but the snow banks along the curb left Kinder with nowhere to go. The law does not require a motorist to do the impossible to avoid a collision. There is no evidence here from which a jury could infer Kinder was negligent in failing to avoid the collision.
AFFIRMED.
HOFFMAN and NEAL, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Schultz argues that proximate cause is not an essential element under FELA because the employer's negligence need not be a substantial cause of the injury. We point out that as an element of a negligence cause of action, the test for proximate cause is whether the injury is a natural and probable consequence which, in light of the circumstances, should reasonably have been foreseen or anticipated. Reynolds v. Strauss Veal, Inc. (1988), Ind. App., 519 N.E.2d 226, 229, trans. denied.
[2]  Schultz also raises the issue whether the trial court erred by granting summary judgment for the Railroad on the grounds that there is a genuine issue of fact whether Kinder was an agent of the Railroad, making her negligence imputable to the Railroad. Because we conclude as a matter of law that Kinder was not negligent, we need not consider this issue.

=== CASE 9739007 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:10.829136+00 ===

SABERS, Justice
(specially concurring).
Although I agree with the dissent’s position that courts, not legislatures, determine constitutionality, the legislature does determine “parole.” Under SDCL 24-15-1.1, parole is defined as “the discretionary conditional release of an inmate from actual penitentiary custody before the expiration of his term of imprisonment.” (emphasis added). The emphasized language makes it clear that parole does not occur until actual release from penitentiary custody. Defining parole as “release” is a proper legislative function. Pursuant to Article XIV, sections 1 and 2 of the South Dakota Constitution, the state penitentiary is governed by such rules as the legislature shall provide, and an inmate, when incarcerated, “is under the exclusive control and custody of the penitentiary.” State v. Huftile, 367 N.W.2d 193, 196 (S.D.1985). Therefore, Winters was not granted “parole,” but was still in the process of applying and the process could properly produce a negative determination without a hearing.

=== CASE 9739008 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:10.833369+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(dissenting).
We do not have before us an instance of a prisoner claiming he is entitled to parole. Having been granted parole, the prisoner is claiming that he is entitled to a hearing, because of its rescission.
SDCL 24-15-1.1 is a state law, cited by the majority. Said statute expresses that an application for parole cannot establish a constitutionally protected liberty, property or due process interest. Parole is grace bestowed upon a prisoner because of his good conduct. Statutes should not try to express what is and what is not constitutional. See, Vellinga v. Vellinga, 442 N.W.2d 472, 475-77 (S.D.1989) (Henderson, J., dissenting), for dissertation on constitutional powers of the respective branches and historical background thereof. Therefore, the last paragraph of the statute is in absolute violation of Art. II of the South Dakota Constitution which prescribes DIVISION OF THE POWERS OF GOVERNMENT; said last paragraph also violates Art. V, § 1 and § 5 of the South Dakota Constitution. Only the courts can say what is and what is not constitutional. The legislature cannot. Our state legislature has a penchant for assuming the role of the courts of this state and has sought, in the past, to nullify this Court’s powers. My most recent expression on this ideological phenomenon may be found in Finck v. City of Tea, 443 N.W.2d 632, 636-637 (S.D.1989) (Henderson, J., specially concurring).
But SDCL 24-15-1.1 is simply not applicable for another reason. Winters is not using the Great Writ of Liberty to obtain parole. He is screaming to the high heavens that he was granted parole and that it was then taken away from him without due process, to wit: No right to cross-examine witnesses; no right to call witnesses on his behalf; no right to present documentary evidence; and no right to be represented by counsel.1
Essentially, we face a broader issue than the majority would have us believe. We have before us this issue: As an incarcerated prisoner, has he been deprived of basic constitutional rights, having been granted parole and deprived of the aforementioned rights? I would hold that he has. Satter *726v. Solem, 422 N.W.2d 425 (S.D.1988); Goodroad v. Solem, 406 N.W.2d 141 (S.D.1987); State ex rel. Burns v. Erickson, 80 S.D. 639, 129 N.W.2d 712 (1964).
Due process for parolees, suspected of having violated the terms and conditions of parole, is conceivably guaranteed by SDCL 24-15-23.2 Having granted Winters a parole, his statutory and constitutional rights were triggered. Under my thesis, the majority errs when it attempts to apply a statute and law upon a wrong academic basis, i.e., Winters is now applying for parole. The point is: He was granted parole on March 24, 1988 to the state of Kentucky.
I have absolutely no quarrel with Green-holtz or Dace, cited in the majority opinion. We have a different set of facts before us. Moreover, by reading the dicta of the majority decision, I draw a conclusion that prisoners in our state penitentiary have virtually no protected liberty rights at all. And I would hazard that this is wrong, if not medieval. Prisoners they are, but they are not wholly stripped of their constitutional protections when imprisoned for a crime. They retain a variety of important rights that the courts must be alert to protect. Wolff v. McDonnell, 418 U.S. 539, 94 S.Ct. 2963, 41 L.Ed.2d 935 (1974).
Hypothetically, let us suppose that a guard or a penitentiary official has an antipathy so great against an inmate that total hearsay and prevarication estops parole implementation. Is it right that a prisoner granted parole would then have his parole rescinded or revoked before he left the institution based upon hostility and prevarication? Procedural due process is a friend of the masses and should be used to prevent administrative tyranny. These are my words but they compare favorably with the spiritual holding of In re Prewitt, 8 Cal.3d 470,105 Cal.Rptr. 318, 503 P.2d 1326 (1972).
I have always believed that the right to be heard is a fundamental right of every American citizen. To that belief, I must remain true. My conviction, in this factual scenario, is shared by three respectable authorities: Green v. McCall, 822 F.2d 284 (2nd Cir.1987); Christopher v. U.S. Board of Parole, 589 F.2d 924 (7th Cir.1978); and Robinson v. Benson, 570 F.2d 920 (10th Cir.1978). These cases essentially hold that inmates who have been granted parole, and who are waiting release, are entitled to due process before their parole can be rescinded. However, I must note that these three cases fall within the ambit of the federal habeas corpus regulations. These cases have not been overruled, modified or reversed. It strikes me that liberty is liberty; and that a deprivation of liberty via a parole rescission through constitutional transgression, and a deprivation of liberty in a parole revocation is, qualitatively, the same. I cannot, therefore, in good conscience, accept the holding and dicta of the majority opinion.
For dissertation on the inculcation of the Judeo-Christian ethic, as it relates to family life, see Matter ofS.L., 419 N.W.2d 689, 694-98 (S.D.1988) (Henderson, J., dissenting); for its historical influence on the formulation of the Declaration of Independence and the U.S. Constitution, see the same dissent, infra.
Deeply imbedded within the American law is the right to confront your accuser. Whence did this spring? I refer to Acts of the Apostles, twenty-fifth chapter, eleventh verse and also the sixteenth verse. Of course, I refer to Holy Scripture and the accusations against St. Paul, then Paul of Tarsus. Paul was brought before Festus, a Roman governor. Paul was accused of serious charges but steadfastly maintained that he should not be severely punished unless the charges were proven. Later, he was brought before King Agrippa (thirteenth verse of chapter twenty-five) whereupon due process was immortalized. Fes-tus laid Paul’s case before King Agrippa expressing, inter alia, in verse sixteen: “But I told them that Romans are not accustomed to give any man up before the *727accused has met his accusers face to face and has been given a chance to defend himself against the charges.”3 Later, we find in verse 27 wherein the Roman governor expressed: “For it seems to me unreasonable to send a prisoner without stating, the charges against him.”
In my quest for justice, in my hope to shelter those whose liberties are unfairly withheld, in my enduring faith in the great writ of liberty, I would reverse the habeas corpus court and remand this case so that this prisoner could face his accuser and have an opportunity reply to these “Star Chamber” charges. For, in the end, isn’t justice really about fairness?
. Institution Parole Agent Timothy Cortan filed a report with the Parole Board; he was permitted to testify, also, before the Board; Winters was never permitted to confront his accuser or to refute any of the allegations against him. The Board unilaterally "rescinded” (this word was used by the Board, see Settled Record p. 8-9) his parole on May 2, 1988; and "Order and Findings of Fact and Conclusions on Parole Rescission” was the written caption (ex-parte) sealing his legal fate. Exhibits 1 and 2, granting him parole, are appended hereby.
. It is also obviously guaranteed by South Dakota Constitution Art. VI, § 2, which provides, inter alia: “No person shall be deprived of life, liberty or property without due process of law." (emphasis supplied mine).
. Where was "due process", in the United States Constitution, born? From whence did it originally evolve?

=== CASE 9739009 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:11.901453+00 ===

Maher, J.
On February 17, 1988, defendant pled guilty in: the Detroit Recorder’s Court to probation violation, MCL 771.4; MSA 28.1134, for failing to report to his probation officer on a monthly basis as required by the order of probation imposed upon his conviction of malicious destruction of property worth over $100. After being sentenced to one to four years imprisonment, he filed this appeal as of right, claiming that his plea should be vacated and the charge dismissed because (i) the police did not act with due diligence in executing the bench warrant charging him with the violation and (ii) he received notice of the violation only one day before tendering his plea.
Before discussing the merits of defendant’s claims, it must be noted that he did not raise the objections below. I believe, though, that defendant’s claims implicate the very authority of the state to bring him to trial. People v New, 427 Mich 482, 491; 398 NW2d 358 (1986). Much like alleged violations of the "180-day rule” then, a guilty plea *510should not operate to waive the claims. See People v Sickles, 162 Mich App 344, 350-351; 412 NW2d 734 (1987), lv den 429 Mich 898 (1988); People v Wolak, 153 Mich App 60, 69; 395 NW2d 240 (1986). But see People v Rivera, 164 Mich App 670, 671-673; 417 NW2d 569 (1987).
As to defendant’s first claim, I would hold that the twenty-seven-week period between the issuance of the bench warrant (on July 27, 1987) and its execution (on February 16, 1988) was unreasonable on its face. See People v Gunner, 61 Mich App 569, 570; 233 NW2d 87 (1975), lv den 396 Mich 842 (1976); People v Diamond, 59 Mich App 581, 586-587; 229 NW2d 857 (1975), lv den 394 Mich 824 (1975). However, jurisdiction to try the case is not lost if the authorities acted with due diligence in attempting to execute the warrant. People v Miller, 77 Mich App 381, 384; 258 NW2d 235 (1977).
Unfortunately, there is insufficient information in the record, upon which to review this claim. We therefore remand the matter to the trial court for development of an adequate factual record and for a decision in the first instance on whether the authorities acted with due diligence in executing the warrant which charged defendant with the probation violation. If the trial court determines that the warrant was executed with due diligence, defendant’s conviction and sentence are to be affirmed. If the authorities did not act with due diligence, they shall be deemed to have waived the violation (Miller, supra) and defendant’s conviction and sentence are to be vacated and the instant charge dismissed. Jurisdiction will be retained to review the propriety of the trial court’s decision in this regard.
Defendant’s next argument (i.e., that the conviction must be vacated because he received only one *511day’s notice of the probation violation charge) is without merit. Not only was defendant represented by counsel, but the basis of the charged violation was factually very simple (thus requiring little time to determine the existence of any viable defense). People v Duncan, 154 Mich App 652; 397 NW2d 857 (1986). Having reviewed the transcript of defendant’s pled hearing, we are convinced that he tendered the plea knowingly, understandingly, and voluntarily. Thus, reversal is not required because of the short notice.
Remanded for an evidentiary hearing to determine whether the authorities acted with due diligence in attempting to execute the bench warrant on defendant. Jurisdiction is retained on that issue only.

=== CASE 9739010 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:11.905184+00 ===

Reilly, J.
(concurring in the result only). I concur with the results reached by Judge Maher on both issues. However, because of a split of opinion on this Court with respect to the first issue, I believe additional comments are appropriate.
Defendant’s guilty plea does not operate to waive his claim that the police did not act with due diligence in executing the bench warrant charging him with violation of probation because such a claim contests the authority of the state to prosecute. In People v New, 427 Mich 482; 398 NW2d 358 (1986), the Supreme Court set aside its dictum in People v Alvin Johnson, 396 Mich 424; 240 NW2d 729 (1976), cert den 429 US 951; 97 S Ct 370; 50 L Ed 2d 319 (1976), and dictated a new test to be applied to distinguish between those rights or defenses which are waived by a plea of ghilty and those which may be asserted despite a guilty plea.
Today, we hold that a defendant, after pleading *512guilty, may raise on appeal only those defenses and rights which would preclude the state from obtaining a valid conviction against the defendant. Such rights and defenses "reach beyond the factual determination of defendant’s guilt and implicate the very authority of the state to bring a defendant to trial . . . [People v] White, 411 Mich [366] 398 [308 NW2d 128 (1981)] .... In such cases, the state has no legitimate interest in securing a conviction. On the other hand, where the defense or right asserted by defendant relates solely to the capacity of the state to prove defendant’s factual guilt; it is subsumed by defendant’s guilty plea.
In summary, ... a criminal defendant may appeal from an unconditional guilty plea . . . only where the claim on appeal implicates the very authority of the state to bring the defendant to trial, that is, where the right of the government to prosecute the defendant is challenged. Such rights are never waived by a plea of guilty or nolo contendere. [427 Mich 491, 495-496.]
Such a challenge is made in this case because defendant claims that if due diligence was not exercised, the probation violation should have been waived and the court should have lost jurisdiction. People v Miller, 77 Mich App 381; 258 NW2d 235 (1977).
I recognize that there is a split on this Court as to the eifect of a guilty plea on a defendant’s claim on appeal that there was a denial of the right to a speedy trial because of the prosecutor’s lack of due diligence. Those cases deal with a claim similar to the one posed by the facts of this case. The panels which would hold that a guilty plea waives the right to a speedy trial have, without discussion, cited various federal cases in support of their position. See People v Rivera, 164 Mich App 670; *513417 NW2d 569 (1987); People v Parshay, 104 Mich App 411; 304 NW2d 593 (1981), lv den 411 Mich 1081 (1981).
I have reviewed the cited federal cases and the earlier cases upon which they rely. The rationale which supports the position that a "speedy trial” or "due diligence” right is always "waived” by a guilty plea was provided by Judge Learned Hand in United States v Parrino, 203 F2d 284 (CA 2, 1953). In that case the court ruled that a habeas corpus motion to vacate sentence was not the proper remedy when the defendant was claiming on appeal that his guilty plea should be set aside because of his statute of limitations defense. The court explained that prior to the enactment of FRCP 12(a), an accused person could assert the statute of limitations to avoid prosecution by either a "special plea” in response to an indictment or by presenting evidence "under the general issue.” However, Rule 12(a) abolished all defensive pleadings except "not guilty” and provided that defenses which previously had been raised by demurrer must be raised only by a motion to dismiss. In his opinion, Judge Hand reasoned that because the statute of limitations could not be raised by demurrer under the old practice, it could not, under Rule 12(a), be raised by a motion to dismiss. That being so, it must be raised by a plea of "not guilty.” Recognizing the procedural aspects of the situation, the court determined:
[I]f the plea stands, the defence of the Statute of Limitations is out of the case, and the only question open is whether Parrino shall be allowed to withdraw it. Id. at 287.
The court emphasized that it was not ruling on Parrino’s right to withdraw his plea under Rule 32(d), based upon a claim of manifest injustice.
*514None of the federal cases reviewed dealt with the underlying substantive issue relating to the authority of the state to prosecute the case or the fact that a plea of guilty does not directly address the right of the government to proceed. Nor did any of the cases reviewed suggest any basis for a determination by this Court that the test enunciated in People v New should not be applicable in this case. I therefore concur that People v New is the controlling law on this issue.
I also agree that this case must be remanded for an evidentiary hearing to determine whether due diligence was exercised and what prejudice to defendant, if any, occurred, using the guidelines recognized in People v Miller, supra. However, I reject Judge Maher’s statement that the twenty-seven-week delay was "unreasonable on its face.” Considering the nature of the charge made here, and recognizing the tremendous workload being handled by the various law enforcement agencies involved, I would not make any presumption as to the question of reasonableness, but would leave such determination to the factfinder.

=== CASE 9739011 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:11.908494+00 ===

Doctoroff, P.J.
(dissenting). I respectfully dissent. In People v Rivera, 164 Mich App 670; 417 NW2d 569 (1987), the panel rejected the claim that People v New, 427 Mich 482; 398 NW2d 358 (1986), resolved the issue of whether a plea of guilty or nolo contendere waives a speedy trial issue. Relying upon People v Parshay, 104 Mich App 411; 304 NW2d 593 (1981), lv den 411 Mich 1081 (1981), People v Williams, 145 Mich App 614; 378 NW2d 769 (1985), United States v Freed, 688 F2d 24 (CA 6, 1982), and United States v Lee, 500 F2d 586 (CA 8, 1974), cert den 419 US 1003; 95 S Ct 322; 42 L Ed 2d 279 (1974), we held that a speedy trial claim is nonjurisdictional and, thus, *515waived by a defendant’s plea of guilty or nolo contendere. Rivera, p 673. I would hold that, by his plea of guilty, defendant has waived his right to raise this issue in this Court.
Assuming, arguendo, that waiver was not an issue, I do not agree that this case should be remanded for an evidentiary hearing to determine whether due diligence was exercised. First, I agree with the concurrence by Judge Reilly that a twenty-seven-week delay should not be considered "unreasonable on its face.” Second, it is clear that defendant suffered no prejudice by the delay between the issuance of the bench warrant and its execution. People v Phillips, 109 Mich App 535, 540; 311 NW2d 301 (1981). Indeed, the delay inured to his benefit. Defendant was not incarcerated and he continued to carry on his life without incident or interruption during this period. On appeal, defendant admits that he was living at home and working in the area and makes no claim of prejudice.
Finally, according to information from the Michigan State Police, in May, 1989, there were over 24,000 outstanding felony warrants entered in lein. Of these, over 18,000 represented probation and parole violations. Many were for such crimes as homicide, kidnapping, criminal sexual conduct, and armed robbery. There were similar numbers of outstanding warrants in the lein system when defendant’s warrant was issued. The primary goal of the police is to identify and apprehend persons wanted for violent felonies. Priority is given to those persons who have a high probability of committing future violent acts.
In this case, a bench warrant was issued against defendant for failure to report to his probation officer on a monthly basis as required by the order of probation imposed upon his conviction of mali*516cious destruction of property worth over $100. Given the almost impossible task which the police have to attempt to locate the over 24,000 outstanding felony offenders and those persons who have committed serious parole and probation violations and considering the nature of defendant’s violation, I would require no more of the police than that which was done in this case. It would be the height of folly to require from the police the same amount of effort to locate persons who have committed minor probation violations as they expend in their search for outstanding felony offenders who are dangerous to the community.
I would affirm.

=== CASE 9739012 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:12.906183+00 ===

Givan, J.
Appellants were convicted of the crime of theft as defined in Burns Ind. Stat., 1969 Supp., § 10-3030 on a plea of not guilty submitted to the court without a jury.
The Appellant Williams was sentenced to the Indiana State Reformatory for a term of not less than one nor more than ten years, and the Appellant Bolton was sentenced to the Indiana State Prison for not less than one nor more than ten years.
The evidence in the case was as follows:
On or about November 9, 1966, a Bolens Husky Model 1050 Tractor with snow plow was reported missing from a garage occupied by Indiana Credit League located at 2719 Arlington Avenue in Indianapolis. A window in the garage had been broken and a chain that fastened the tractor to the concrete floor had also been broken. There was testimony that the owners did not give permission to either of the appellants to exercise control over the tractor. Shortly after the tractor was taken, a relative of the appellants informed one Arthur Sanders that appellants had a tractor for sale.
Sanders testified that “around the middle of November of 1966” he met the appellants at a house trailer in Lawrence. At that time he discussed the sale of the tractor with the appellants and with one other man who accompanied them. A price of $300 was agreed upon and three men, including both the appellants, accompanied Sanders to the place where the tractor was stored in the 2600 block on Arlington Avenue. *650Appellants and Sanders loaded the tractor in Sanders’ truck and $300 was accepted from Sanders in payment for the tractor.
Appellants’ first assignment of error is that the decision of the trial court was not sustained by the evidence in that the State failed to prove that the defendants ever had possession of the tractor. Appellants cite several authorities which hold that “mere presence” of the defendants in regards to the property in question does not constitute possession. We agree with this general proposition of law; however, in the case at bar the evidence demonstrates far more than “mere presence” of the defendants concerning the stolen property. They had entered into a discussion with Mr. Sanders concerning the price to be paid for the tractor, had gone with him to its place of storage, removed it from a building, placed it on his truck and accepted $300 from Mr. Sanders in payment for the tractor. We cannot accept the appellant’s position that they were merely present at a location where a stolen tractor was kept. We hold that the evidence was sufficient to sustain a finding by the trial court that the appellants were in exclusive possession of the tractor after it had been stolen. This Court has previously held that exclusive possession of property shortly after it has been stolen is a circumstance to be considered by the trier of fact that those in possession are guilty of having committed the theft. Durrett v State (1967), 249 Ind. 12, 230 N. E. 2d 595, 11 Ind. Dec. 593.
Appellants’ second assigned error is that the finding and decision of the trial court was not sustained by the evidence in “that mere possession of stolen goods will not give grounds in itself for conviction for theft, but must be coupled with other evidence showing that the defendants did in fact commit the theft.”
It is the contention of the appellants there was no evidence that they in fact committed the theft of the tractor and that their later possession of it was not close enough in time to *651warrant an inference that they had committed the theft. In support of this proposition the appellants cite Finch v. State (1967), 249 Ind. 122, 231 N. E. 2d 45, 12 Ind. Dec. 22, and Bruck v. State (1963), 244 Ind. 466, 193 N. E. 2d 491, 2 Ind. Dec. 291. However, there is a marked difference between the facts in each of the above cases and the facts in the case at bar.
In the Finch case the appellant had been convicted of burglary of a meat market, and when arrested some nine and one-half hours after the time of the burglary was in possession of meat and cigarettes. However, the Court pointed out that the State never established that the meat and cigarettes in the possession of the appellant were goods that were taken from the store, nor did the Court find that there was sufficient evidence to establish that the appellant had committed the breaking necessary to prove the burglary.
In Bruch the Court pointed out that there was no evidence of a break in to corroborate any taking nor did the State produce any evidence from the owners to exclude the possibility of a sale or other disposition of the merchandise. In the absence of this evidence the Court ruled that the non-production of evidence which was within the State to produce, caused the State to fail in raising any inference of guilt. For that reason the Court refused to apply the rule of exclusive possession in that case.
In the case at bar, however, as above set out the State proved a felonious taking of the tractor and produced affirmative evidence that the owners had not given permission to either of the appellants to exercise control over the tractor. The tractor was stolen on the 9th of November. Shortly thereafter, the exact time is not stated, one Sanders Postle, a relative of Appellant Bolton, contacted Mr. Sanders at his place of employment and told him the defendants had a tractor for sale, after which Mr. Sanders contacted the appellants and made the purchase above described. The entire transaction according to the evidence was completed by the *652middle of November. We hold that the State had made its prima facie case before the trial court when it presented evidence of exclusive possession in the appellants shortly after the theft of the tractor. The weight of this evidence was to be determined by the trier of fact and not by this Court. At the point in the trial when the State had made its prima facie case, if the appellants had evidence which would have explained their possession, it was their privilege to present the same. In the absence of such explanation, the trier of fact was entitled to believe the evidence presented by the State in making its prima facie case. (See Durrett, supra.)
The appellants also state that since there was more than one person present at the time the transaction was made selling the tractor to Mr. Sanders and that Sanders could not remember which man accepted the $300, the trier of fact had no evidence to establish which one of the persons present actually had guilty knowledge concerning the theft of the tractor. We see no application of this argument for at the time the sale was made to Sanders those present were obviously acting in concert one with the other. The law in Indiana is well established that an accessory to a crime may be prosecuted as a principal. Burns Ind. Stat., 1956 Repl., § 9-102. From the circumstances presented by the evidence the trial court had ample evidence before it from which to find that the appellants had equally participated in the theft and the sale of the tractor.
The trial court is, therefore, affirmed.
Hunter, C.J., and Arterburn, J., concur; Jackson, J., dissents with opinion in which DeBruler, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739013 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:12.913869+00 ===

Dissenting Opinion
Jackson, J.
I am unable to concur in the majority opinion and dissent thereto.
This is an appeal from the judgment of the Marion Criminal Court, Division 1, wherein the appellants were convicted of the *653crime of theft as defined by Acts 1963 (Spec. Session), ch. 10, § 3, p. 10, being Ind. Ann. Stat. § 10-3030 (1969 Supp.).
The affidavit charging the appellants with the offense reads, in pertinent part, as follows:
“BE IT REMEMBERED, That, on this day before me, NOBLE R. PEARCY Prosecuting Attorney of the Nineteenth Judicial Circuit, personally came JOHN E. FERGUSON who, being duly sworn, upon his oath says that FRED A. BOLTON, ADRON EUGENE BULLINGTON and MICHAEL A. WILLIAMS on or about the 8th day of NOVEMBER, A.D. 1966, at and in the County of Marion in the State of Indiana, committed the crime of theft in that they knowingly, unlawfully and feloniously obtained and exerted unauthorized control over property of INDIANA CREDIT UNION LEAGUE, INC., a corporation, to-wit: ONE (1) BOLENS HUSKY MODEL 1050 TRACTOR WITH SNOW PLOW ATTACHMENT, of the value of ONE THOUSAND FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS ($1,500.00), intending to deprive INDIANA CREDIT UNION LEAGUE, INC., a corporation, permanently of the use and benefit of said property, then and there being contrary to the form of the statute in such case made and provided, and against the peace and dignity of the State of Indiana.”
On January 17, 1968, the appellants waived arraignment and pleaded not guilty. On December 5, 1968, the appellants were tried to the court, and found guilty as charged. Thereafter the appellant Williams was sentenced to the Indiana State Reformatory for a term of not less than one (1), nor more than ten (10) years, and costs, appellant Bolton was sentenced to the Indiana State Prison for not less than one (1), nor more than ten (10) years, and costs.
On December 26, 1968, the appellants filed their motions for a new trial in which they alleged that the decision of the trial court was contrary to law, and not sustained by sufficient evidence. The trial court overruled these motions on January 3, 1969. On appeal the appellants’ sole assignment of error is that the trial court erred in overruling their motions for a new trial.
*654From the evidence adduced at trial, it appears that on or about November 8, 1966, a Bolens Husky Model 1050 tractor with snow plow was reported missing from a garage of the Indiana Credit League located at 2719 Arlington Avenue in Indianapolis. The tractor was recovered sometime in the middle of April, 1967, from a witness who testified that he purchased the tractor from the appellants.
According to the witness’ testimony, he learned from a person with whom he worked that some people had a tractor for sale. He went to the address given him by his co-employee and there met the appellants and one other person. He conversed with the three for a short time, and during the course of the conversation he agreed to purchase the tractor for $300.00. The witness could not identify either of the appellants as the person with whom he made the agreement. Instead, he stated that the four of them generally discussed the transaction. The witness then testified that the four of them drove to the 2600 block of Arlington Avenue to get the tractor which was being kept in a garage at that location. The appellant Bolton rode over in the witness’ truck, and the other two followed in a car. After the tractor was loaded into the truck the witness paid one of the three men the $300.00 previously agreed upon. However, the witness stated that he was unable to identify the person to whom he paid the money. Finally, the witness testified that the transaction took place sometime in the middle of November, 1966.
The statute under which the appellants were charged is § 10-3030, supra, which reads in pertinent part as follows:
“10-3030. Theft in general. — A person commits theft when he (1) knowingly:
(a) obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner; or }£ ifc jfc
(2) either:
(a) intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use and benefit of the property; or
*655(b) uses, conceals or abandons the property in such manner as knowingly to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit;or
(c) uses, conceals or abandons the property knowing such use, concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit.” (Emphasis added)
This appeal challenges the sufficiency of the evidence to sustain the verdict of the trial court. Where the issue of the sufficiency of the evidence is raised, we are bound by our rules of appellate review to consider only that evidence most favorable to the appellee together with all reasonable, logical and permissible inferences which may be drawn therefrom. Lambert v. State (1969), 252 Ind. 441, 249 N. E. 2d 502; McGill v. State (1969), 252 Ind. 293, 247 N. E. 2d 514. Moreover, where the evidence is in conflict we cannot weigh the evidence or determine the credibility of the witnesses. Lambert v. State, supra; McGill v. State, supra.
In the case at bar, the burden was on the State to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the appellants “knowingly” obtained or exerted unauthorized control over the property of another with the intent to permanently deprive the owner of the use and benefit of the property. The only evidence offered by the State to prove the charges against the appellants was that the appellants arranged for the sale of the allegedly stolen property at a date sometime after the property was reported missing. The evidence was therefore circumstantial requiring the trier of fact to infer from the arrangement of the sale that the appellants committed theft as defined by § 10-3030, supra.
In Easton v. State (1967), 248 Ind. 338, 228 N. E. 2d 6, cited with approval in Manlove v. State (1968), 250 Ind. 70, 232 N. E. 2d 874, and Crawford v. State (1968), 251 Ind. 437, 241 N. E. 2d 795, this Court said:
“Where the evidence of an issuable fact is wholly circumstantial in nature the evidence must be so conclusive and *656compelling in character that it excludes every reasonable hypothesis of the assumption of innocence of the defendant.” (Emphasis added) 228 N. E. 2d 6, 10-11
In Manlove v. State, supra, this Court said :
“Thus it is clear that where the evidence is wholly circumstantial and fails to exclude every reasonable hypothesis of innocence such evidence is not sufficiently persuasive to allow a reasonable man to find the accused guilty beyond a reasonable doubt and such a finding of guilty cannot stand.” (Emphasis added) 232 N. E. 2d 879.
In Crawford v. State, supra, this Court, quoting from Easton v. State, supra, and Baker v. State (1956), 236 Ind. 55, 138 N. E. 2d 641, said:
“If the evidence merely tends to establish a suspicion of guilt it is not sufficient to sustain a conviction.” 241 N. E. 2d 795, 797.
Therefore, since the evidence in the case at bar is wholly circumstantial, it is our duty to determine whether the evidence is sufficient to exclude every reasonable hypothesis of the assumption of innocence of the appellants, and whether it merely tends to establish a “suspicion of guilt” without more.
As was stated above, the only evidence offered by the State to establish the guilt of the appellants beyond a reasonable doubt was the testimony that the appellants arranged for the sale of the property at a date sometime after the property was reported missing. There were no additional facts or circumstances put in evidence by the State to prove the appellants guilty of the alleged crime.
While it is true that an inference of guilt may be drawn from the unexplained, exclusive possession of recently stolen property, Bruck v. State (1963), 244 Ind. 466, 193 N. E. 2d 491, we cannot say that the permissible inference which may. be drawn from the scanty evidence in the case at bar is sufficient, standing alone as it does, to prove the appellants or either of them guilty of theft beyond a reasonable doubt.
*657In Bruck v. State, supra, this Court said, “It should be noted that there must be- proof that the property was -‘stolen’ and the possession -must be ‘recent’.” In Bruck, which we' reversed on the basis of insufficiency of the evidence, the appellant was found in possession of property some ten days after the property was reported missing. Here, there was clearly a lapse of several days time since the tractor was reported missing on November 8, 1966, while the sale transaction involving the appellants did not take place until the “middle” of November, 1966. In the case at bar, therefore, possession was not “recent” in the same sense that it was in Gilley v. State (1949), 227 Ind. 701, 88 N. E. 2d 759, where the appellants were apprehended with the stolen property within a few minutes after it was stolen.
Moreover, there is no evidence to show that the allegedly stolen tractor in the case at bar was in the “exclusive possession” of the appellants. The State’s witness testified that the tractor was in a garage located some distance from the trailer where he met the appellants. There is absolutely no evidence as to who owns the garage. Moreover, there is no' evidence as to how the tractor found its way into the garage. There is absolutely no evidence to show that the appellants had ever been in or near the garage either before or after the transaction in question. There is therefore a total failure of proof as to whether the tractor was in the “exclusive, possession” of the appellants.
Finally, the statute defining the offense of theft, § 10-8030, supra, requires that the proscribed conduct be entered into “knowingly.” In the case at bar, there is absolutely no evidence that either one or both of the appellants knowingly obtained or exerted unauthorized control over the tractor. There is here no showing that possession was “exclusive”. in either or both of the defendants, or the third person who. was present at the trailer. Further, the State’s witness was unable to identify which of the three persons present at the trailer offered to sell the tractor, nor could he identify the person to *658whom he paid the money. Indeed, it is entirely reasonable to suppose that any one or more of the three innocently volunteered their help in loading the tractor onto the truck.
To say that the appellants in the case at bar were proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt would be to allow them to be convicted of a crime on the basis of their associations with other people. Here, the meager evidence may give rise to an inference of someone's guilt. However, the evidence fails to establish who that someone is. To allow a group of people to be convicted of a crime merely because an inference exists that one or more of the members of the group committed the crime is completely alien to our Anglo-Saxon criminal jurisprudence which requires that each defendant be proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
In the case at bar, we cannot say that the circumstantial evidence is “* * * so conclusive and compelling in character that it excludes every reasonable hypothesis of the assumption of innocence of the defendant.” Easton v. State, supra, at 228 N. E. 2d 6, 10-11. Indeed a very reasonable hypothesis which may be drawn from the evidence is that either one or both of the appellants were merely helping a friend load a tractor onto a truck. Thus, applying the rule of law set out in Manlove v. State, supra, the “* * * evidence is not sufficiently persuasive to allow a reasonable man to find the accused guilty beyond a reasonable doubt and such a finding of guilty cannot stand.” Id. at 879.
Finally, at most the evidence in the case at bar merely raises a suspicion of the appellants’ guilt. Since the evidence merely tends to establish a suspicion of guilt it is insufficient to sustain a conviction. Crawford v. State, supra; Easton v. State, supra; Baker v. State, supra.
The judgment of the trial court should be reversed with instructions to grant the appellants’ motion for a new trial.
DeBruler, J., concurs.
Note. — Reported in 261 N. E. 2d 841.

=== CASE 2218474 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:48.656075+00 ===

126 Ill. App. 2d 265 (1970)
261 N.E.2d 776
People of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Michael L. Malone, Defendant-Appellant.
Gen. No. 53,748.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District, Fourth Division.
June 10, 1970.
*266 John B. Cashion, of Chicago, for appellant.
Edward V. Hanrahan, State's Attorney of Cook County, of Chicago (Elmer C. Kissane and Laurence J. Bolon, Assistant State's Attorneys, of counsel), for appellee.
MR. JUSTICE ENGLISH delivered the opinion of the court.
*267 OFFENSE CHARGED
Robbery. Ill Rev Stats 1967, c 38, § 18-1.
JUDGMENT
After a jury trial in which defendant was found guilty, the court imposed a sentence of 2 to 4 years.
ISSUES RAISED ON APPEAL
1. Defendant was not proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
2. The trial court improperly refused to permit defense counsel to argue his interpretation of reasonable doubt.
3. The prosecutor's final argument was improper and denied defendant a fair trial.
4. The trial court, during the hearing in aggravation and mitigation, improperly considered defendant's prior convictions in Boy's Court.
EVIDENCE
William Brown, for the State:
Around midnight on March 2, 1968, he walked from his residence at 317 South Throop Street to a restaurant at Madison Street and Ogden Avenue. He ate a bowl of soup there and left at approximately 12:45 a.m. on March 3. He then vomited, since he was still weak from a recent illness and confinement with tuberculosis. As he was walking home in the vicinity of Laflin and Adams, a "fellow" (identified as defendant) came from behind him and asked for a cigarette. He was reaching for his cigarettes when defendant asked if he had any money. He replied, "Yes, about $8." Thereupon, defendant told him to get up against the wall, which he did. Facing the wall, he was searched by defendant, who kept his right hand in his pocket. Defendant took $7 from the witness' wallet, together with $1 in loose change and various medicines and papers from his pockets. The wallet, medicine and papers were then thrown to the ground.
*268 Defendant kept telling him to turn toward the wall and asked if he wanted to be shot. Defendant then turned and walked south on Laflin. The witness hailed a squad car parked nearby and two policemen got out. He told them what had happened and they grabbed defendant. He observed the officers as they searched defendant and found $8 on his person.
Steve Glynn, for the State:
He is a police officer, and on March 3, 1968, at approximately 1:00 a.m., was patrolling in a marked squad car with Officer Finstrom on Laflin between Monroe and Adams Streets. He observed two men standing against a wall just off the northeast corner of Laflin and Adams. "It appeared that one man (identified as defendant) was holding the other man against the wall." The witness then drove up behind the men at the curb and was getting out of the car when Mr. Brown shouted that defendant had robbed him. Defendant started to walk south on Laflin and threw a wallet into the air. Defendant was told to stop, but when he continued walking, the witness and his partner grabbed him by the arms. A search of defendant's person at the scene revealed $7 in bills and a dollar in change. Defendant was not carrying a weapon.
Dale Finstrom, for the State:
He is a police officer, and his testimony was substantially the same as that of Officer Glynn. However, he could not testify that defendant was "actually using any force as opposed to Mr. Brown."
Michael Malone, on his own behalf:
On the night in question, he was headed home, after leaving the 1340 Club on Madison Avenue, walking southward on Laflin toward the bus stop at Adams and Laflin. He noticed a police car parked on Laflin near the intersection of Monroe. He continued down the street and noticed a man leaning against the wall of a building at the northeast corner of Adams and Laflin. The man *269 was staggering, as if something was wrong, and mumbling, but defendant didn't understand what he was saying. He noticed a wallet, keys, papers and medicine "that was on the ground falling out." He asked if anything was wrong, but the man kept up the incoherent mumbling. The man began to fall, so defendant put his "hand around him and grabbed him to keep him from falling." When Brown was balanced, defendant started picking up the articles that were strewn on the ground.
The police then drove up and Brown told them he had been robbed. Defendant was frightened, and the objects fell from his hands. He did not walk away but went to the squad car when the police asked him to. He was frisked and taken to the station, where the police took $7 from him and gave it to Mr. Brown. He had $33 in his pants pocket when he was taken into custody. He denied threatening Mr. Brown or taking any of his money.
OPINION
[1-3] Defendant initially contends that he was not proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, as the evidence is wholly lacking in proof of the use of force. In order to prove robbery, the State must show a threat or use of such force as to overcome the power of the owner to retain his property. People v. Williams, 23 Ill. 2d 295, 485. The victim testified that defendant, a total stran-178 NE2d 372; People v. Hampton, 44 Ill. 2d 41, 253 NE2d ger, approached him from behind and ordered him to face a wall. Defendant kept his right hand in his pocket during the entire incident. These circumstances obviously produced in the victim a reasonable fear which induced him to part with his property against his will. See People v. Carpenter, 71 Ill. App. 2d 137, 217 NE2d 337. The testimony was sufficient to support defendant's conviction. While the officers' testimony furnished only partial corroboration of the victim's account, and it was *270 contradicted by the accused, a conviction will stand, nevertheless, if the testimony of a single witness is positive and credible, as it was in this case. People v. Davis, 103 Ill. App. 2d 418, 424, 244 NE2d 381.
[4] It is also urged that the trial court erred in refusing to permit defense counsel, during closing argument, to present to the jury his interpretation of "reasonable doubt." We believe that the court was correct. The IPI, Committee, on the basis of innumerable cases through the years, recommends that no instruction be given defining "reasonable doubt" because it is a term which needs no elaboration, and to attempt to define it is futile. IPI, Criminal, § 2.05. If the trial court is to be so limited, it becomes evident why the court, in turn, must have discretion to deny counsel an opportunity to offer his own comments on the meaning of "reasonable doubt."
[5] Defendant next contends that the prosecutor's final argument was prejudicial and denied him a fair trial. The prosecutor made reference to defense counsel's argument in which he had doubted that any person would commit a crime on a public street corner, as alleged in the instant case, where "anybody could see both of these men." The prosecutor then mentioned a prior occurrence in the courtroom, evidenced by a bullet-crack in the floor, where a spectator had shot at the judge. We believe that, under these circumstances, the prosecutor had been invited to reply, as he did, to the argument initiated by defense counsel. See People v. Hardaway, 108 Ill. App. 2d 325, 330, 247 NE2d 626; People v. Edwards, 98 Ill. App. 2d 128, 135, 240 NE2d 430. The nature of the prosecutor's comment was a fair response, and not such as would arouse passion or prejudice in the jury. Accordingly, we find that defendant was not thereby denied a fair trial.
[6] Defendant's final contention is that, at the post-trial hearing in aggravation and mitigation, the court *271 improperly considered defendant's prior convictions in Boy's Court in determining the sentence. This argument is without merit, as it confuses Boy's Court with Juvenile Court. Defendant places reliance on In re Gault, 387 U.S. 1, to support his theory that no evidence of prior convictions should be considered unless the proceedings resulting in the conviction and sentencing had been "clothed with the trappings of due process." Gault has no application in the instant case since it is concerned solely with the adjudicatory stage of a "juvenile proceeding." Boy's Court is simply a branch of the First Municipal District of the Circuit Court (Ill Rev Stats 1967, Const art VI, §§ 1 and 8), and its proceedings may result in routine misdemeanor convictions, whereas "juvenile proceedings" exist by authority of the Juvenile Court Act (Ill Rev Stats 1967, c 37, § 701-1, et seq.). We find no impropriety in the court's sentencing procedure in the instant case.
The judgment of the Circuit Court is affirmed.
Affirmed.
DRUCKER and LEIGHTON, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 3785153 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:35:01.292422+00 ===

We will pass upon the charges of error contained in the statement seriatim. *Page 509
The following map in miniature graphically portrays the course and termini of the route complained of:
[EDITORS' NOTE:  MAP IS ELECTRONICALLY NON-TRANSFERRABLE.]
The case of City of Cleveland v. Public Utilities Commission, is not applicable in any wise to the case before us, as the bus line therein involved was wholly within the city of Cleveland.
We fully agree that the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio is statutory only, and that the cases cited by plaintiffs in error support such contention beyond all cavil and this is not disputed by any one. It must likewise be conceded that the Motor Transportation Act is included in Sections 614-84 to 614-102a, General Code, inclusive, and it is patent that a construction of the last clause of Section 614-86, General Code, determines the question involved in this *Page 510
case. That clause of Section 614-86, General Code, upon which this case turns, reads as follows:
"* * * no motor transportation company operating under a certificate of convenience and necessity shall carry persons whose complete ride is wholly within the territorial limits of a municipal corporation, or within such limits and the territorial limits of municipal corporations immediatelycontiguous thereto, except with the consent of such municipal corporation or municipal corporations." (Italics ours.)
It will be noted from the map that the course of this route is northwest. Beginning in the municipal corporation of Bedford, it runs through the municipal corporations of Maple Heights and Garfield Heights, and thence through Cleveland to the Public Square.
Maple Heights, the next adjoining municipal corporation to Bedford on the northwest, is contiguous to Cleveland, as well as Bedford; Garfield Heights is contiguous to Cleveland and Maple Heights, but there is no contiguity between Cleveland and Bedford or between Garfield Heights and Bedford, and for that reason does not come within the exception provided for by the last clause of Section 614-86, General Code.
When the scope and meaning of the words "immediately contiguous" are determined in the light of legislative intent, this case is ended, unless Section 614-86, General Code, runs counter to the Constitution; and we are frank to say we find no unconstitutionality.
Words contained in a legislative enactment are given their plain, usual and ordinarily accepted meaning, unless and until it is made manifest that a different meaning was intended by the enacting body. This proposition is fundamental and needs no citatory authority.
It is well to remember that Section 614-86, General Code, was amended in 1925 (111 Ohio Laws, 19), for the purpose of taking from the Public Utilities Commission *Page 511
the power and authority to regulate motor transportation companies where the complete ride is wholly within the limits of a particular municipal corporation, or within such limits and the territorial limits of municipal corporationsimmediately contiguous thereto, except with the consent of such municipal corporation or municipal corporations.
In ascertaining the "plain, usual and ordinary" meaning of the words "immediately" and "contiguous," we will use the preferential meaning as given in Webster's International Dictionary, viz:
Immediately — "Without intermediary; in direct connection or relation."
Contiguous — "In actual contact; touching."
The "immediate" contiguity contemplated by Section 614-86, General Code, does not obtain in this case. We have carefully examined the cases cited and we fail to find in any of the cases any authority for the claim that a transportation route must extend into unincorporated territory before the Public Utilities Commission has jurisdiction over it; but we can understand how a transportation route running through a half dozen or more contiguous but not "immediately contiguous" municipal corporations could be completely emasculated at the whim of one municipal corporation, regardless of how the others felt about it.
We fail to see how the city of Maple Heights is the key municipal corporation in this set-up. True, Maple Heights is immediately contiguous to Bedford and Cleveland, the termini of the route, but Garfield Heights must not be overlooked, for it is not immediately contiguous to Bedford.
Neither can we find lodgment for the contention that the General Assembly sought to distinguish between suburban and interurban lines when it amended Section 614-84, General Code, in 1925 (111 Ohio Laws, 19).
The Public Utilities Commission had jurisdiction to *Page 512
make the order complained of herein unless the Constitution of Ohio places a limitation thereon in so far as the city of Cleveland is concerned, by virtue of Sections 3 and 7 of Article XVIII thereof.
It is most evident that the General Assembly since the creation of the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio has subordinated the right of the municipality to regulate transportation lines within its limits to the authority granted the Public Utilities Commission.
A careful reading of Sections 614-86 and 614-98, General Code, eradicates all doubt along this line.
We have examined Murphy v. City of Toledo, 108 Ohio St. 342,140 N.E. 626; Hodge Drive-It-Yourself Co. v. City ofCincinnati, 123 Ohio St. 284, 175 N.E. 196, and SylvaniaBusses, Inc., v. City of Toledo, 118 Ohio St. 187,160 N.E. 674, and fail to find wherein such rule is in any wise changed.
In the case of Cleveland Ry. Co. v. Village of North Olmsted,ante, 144, 198 N.E. 41, there was but one question, viz.: The right of the city of Cleveland to regulate an uncertificated bus line operated by the village of Olmstead within the corporate limits of the city of Cleveland.
The decision in the case of Village of Perrysburg v. Ridgway,a Taxpayer, 108 Ohio St. 245, 140 N.E. 595, was disregarded in the case of City of Nelsonville v. Ramsey, 113 Ohio St. 217,  148 N.E. 694, inasmuch as the decision in that case was rendered prior to the enactment of Section 614-86, General Code.
It is further contended by plaintiffs in error that the old service was adequate and that there was no necessity or convenience justifying a certificate for service to the Public Square in Cleveland.
As to these questions, both being questions of fact, this court has many times held that it will not substitute its judgment for that of the Public Utilities Commission and will not disturb its findings unless they *Page 513
are against the manifest weight of the evidence. There is testimony in the record to support the findings of the Public Utilities Commission on these questions, and they will not be disturbed.
Order affirmed.
WEYGANDT, C.J., WILLIAMS, JONES, MATTHIAS, DAY and ZIMMERMAN, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 3785154 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:35:01.343334+00 ===

The only question briefed or argued by either side is what effect is to be given Section 5548-2, General Code, and, if applicable, what is meant by the phrase, "additional levies for specific purposes," as used in such statute.
We proceed with the decision of this case by assuming, without deciding, that appellants had no administrative remedy. The petition contains the allegation:
"Plaintiffs say they have no adequate remedy through any administrative proceeding for the matters and things herein complained of." This has not been challenged in brief or argument.
The trial court's journal entry contains the following paragraph: *Page 70
"The court further finds that there is no issue of fact in this action but that it presents only the issue as to the proper construction of General Code Section 5548-2 and its application to the facts set up in the petition and answer."
In the course of the opinion of the Court of Appeals it is said:
"There is presented for determination by this court only one question: viz., Was the levy in question for a specific purpose, or for a general purpose (as held by the trial court)?"
Appellant board was created under Section 2976-1 et seq., General Code, and by Section 2976-6, General Code, constituted a body politic and corporate, capable of suing and being sued. Under Section 2976-10, General Code, such board has the "power to levy taxes upon all the taxable property within such district in an amount not in excess of one-tenth of one mill upon each dollar of the assessed value of the property in the district in any one year, subject, however, to the combined maximum levy for all purposes otherwise provided by law. After the budget commission of the county in which said district is located shall certify such levy, or such modification thereofas they deem advisable to the county auditor, it shall be by him placed upon the tax duplicate." (Italics ours.)
Under Section 2976-10i, General Code, "the board of park commissioners, by resolution, may submit to the electors of the district the question of levying taxes for the use of the district. Such resolution shall declare the necessity of levying such taxes, shall specify the purpose for which suchtaxes shall be used, the annual rate proposed, and the number of consecutive years such rate shall be levied." That section also contains the provision: "If a majority of the electors voting upon the question of such levy shall vote in favor thereof, such taxes shall be levied and shall be in addition to *Page 71
the taxes authorized by Section 2976-10 of the General Code, and all other taxes authorized by law; provided that the rate submitted to the electors at any one time shall not exceed one-tenth of one mill annually upon each dollar of valuation." (Italics ours.)
The act containing the foregoing section was filed in the office of the Secretary of State on the 16th day of January 1920 (108 Ohio Laws, pt. 2, 1099), and was held to be constitutional by two judges in the cases of State, ex rel.Bryant, v. Akron Metropolitan Park District and State, ex rel.Wadsworth, a Taxpayer, v. Zangerle, Aud., 120 Ohio St. 464,166 N.E. 407. See, also, McNab v. Bd. of Park Commrs.,108 Ohio St. 497, 141 N.E. 332.
Section 5548-2, General Code, was passed March 5, 1925, as Section 3 of an act entitled: "To amend Section 5548 of the General Code relative to the assessment of property for taxation, and adjusting the amount of levies previously voted by the people to conform thereto." (111 Ohio Laws, 420.) Such Section 3 provides:
"When the people of any taxing subdivision have voted additional levies for specific purposes in the year of reassessment or any year prior thereto, and said additional levies are effective in the year of reassessment or thereafter and are to be calculated on a total valuation of property higher than that of the year before reassessment, the rate of said additional levy shall be reduced in the same proportion in which the total valuation of property in said taxing subdivision is increased by the reassessment over the total valuation of the year preceding the reassessment."
Under Section 342-1, General Code (101 Ohio Laws, 144), when an act of general and permanent nature was passed by the General Assembly it became the duty of the Attorney General to give each section of such act a sectional number. The Attorney General *Page 72
did not give to Section 3 of the act any code section number. In the case of Southern Surety Co. v. Standard Slag Co.,117 Ohio St. 512, 159 N.E. 559, Judge Robinson said at pages 516 and 517: "Whether the Attorney General gave these numbers to the several sections of the act because he believed that the act applied only to buildings, or whether he gave the act these numbers as a mere matter of routine, is not significant, since the power conferred upon him by the legislature to number does not attempt to confer upon him any power to legislate, and could not if it did so attempt."
The editor of Page's Ohio General Code, not agreeing with the Attorney General, gave the section the number 5548-2 and placed this number in brackets. However, the General Assembly has twice recognized the editor's numbering of 5548-2 as official and the section as of a permanent and general nature. See 113 Ohio Laws, 260, Section 7595-1, General Code, and 114 Ohio Laws, 849, Section 7595-1, General Code (since further amended).
Appellants claim that Section 5548-2, General Code, was repealed by implication by the later enactment of Section 5625-1 et seq., General Code, being the Uniform Tax Levy Law, effective August 11, 1927 (112 Ohio Laws, 391).
We repeat here the language of Judge Zimmerman at page 451 in the case of State, ex rel. Draper, v. Wilder, Recorder,145 Ohio St. 447, 62 N.E.2d 156:
"The rule is too well established to require discussion that the repeal of statutes by implication is not favored in law; and the presumption is always against the intention to repeal an existing statute where express terms indicating that intention are not employed."
In 37 Ohio Jurisprudence, 395, Section 135, it is said:
"If an act is so repugnant to, or so contradictory of, *Page 73
or so irreconcilably in conflict with, a prior act that the two acts cannot be harmonized in order to effect the purpose of their enactment, the later act operates, without any repealing clause, as a repeal of the first to the extent of the irreconcilable inconsistency."
Section 5625-23, General Code, provides:
"The county auditor shall lay before the budget commission the annual tax budgets submitted to him under the provisions of this act, together with an estimate to be prepared by such auditor, of the amount of any state levy, the rate of any school tax levy as theretofore determined, and such other information as the budget commission may request or the state tax commission may prescribe. The budget commission shall examine such budget and ascertain the total amount proposed to be raised in the county for the purposes of each subdivision and other taxing units therein.
"The budget commission shall ascertain that the followinglevies are properly authorized and if so authorized, shallapprove them without modification:
"(a) All levies outside of the ten-mill limitation. * * *
"(e) The provisions of the foregoing paragraphs (a) * * * are mandatory and budget commissions shall be without discretion to reduce such minimum levies except as therein provided. * * *" (Italics ours.)
We agree with appellants that the Uniform Tax Levy Act is a general law. While the terms of Section 5548-2, General Code, are general the statute itself is a specific statute applying only to those cases where additional levies have been voted forspecific purposes.
At the time the levy in question was voted, Section 5548-2, General Code, contained a part of the conditions under which the levy here was authorized. Plainly at the time the vote was taken it was upon the condition that if the levy was for a specific purpose it *Page 74
was to be limited in amount by reducing the rate in the same proportion that reassessment had increased the valuations of the duplicate. In other words, a level rate for a specific purpose irrespective of the increase of the valuations on the duplicate by reassessment is not authorized and the county budget commission may not approve such a levy without modification.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that Section 5548-2, General Code, is not irreconcilable with any section of the Uniform Tax Levy Law and was not repealed by implication.
Appellants further contend that if it be held that Section 5548-2, General Code, is still effective, the levy in question was not for a specific purpose. Section 2976-10i, supra, provides that a park board may, by proper resolution, submit to the electors of the district the question of levying taxes for the use of the district. Such resolution must specify the purpose for which such taxes shall be used. As said by the Court of Appeals in its opinion herein: "Moreover, while the purpose specified in the resolution of necessity is somewhat garbled, in that it does not conform to the wording of the statute (Section 2976-1, General Code), it nevertheless does specify one of the purposes therein set forth, viz., 'for the conservation of the natural resources of the district.' It is thus made specific, and accords with one of the purposes which the statute provides shall be the reasons for the creation of park districts."
Section 5625-5, General Code, provides in part:
"The purpose and intent of the general levy for current expenses is to provide one general operating fund derived from taxation from which any expenditures for current expense of any kind may be made * * *."
The only way in which the ten-mill limitation may be exceeded to provide for current expenses is found in *Page 75
Section 5625-15, General Code (a part of the Uniform Tax Levy Law). Under this section the taxing authority of any subdivision by a vote of "two-thirds of all the members of said body, may declare by resolution that the amount of taxes which may be raised within the ten-mill limitation will be insufficient to provide an adequate amount for the necessary requirements of the subdivision, and that it is necessary to levy a tax in excess of such limitation for any of the following purposes:
"1. Current expenses of the subdivision."
Clearly, we do not have in this case a levy outside the ten-mill limitation for current expenses. We find no authorization for any general levy outside the ten-mill limitation.
The park board has no authority to levy a tax outside the ten-mill limitation for general purposes. It follows, therefore, that the levy is either for a specific purpose or is void.
We agree with the opinion of the Court of Appeals that the additional levy was voted for a specific purpose and is therefore valid.
Appellants claim that they do not come within the term "taxing subdivision" as used in Section 5548-2, General Code. They admit that the term "undoubtedly had a meaning when that statute was enacted in 1925. It does not seem that there could have been any doubt as to its meaning at that time. It probably has the same meaning as the term 'taxing district' used in Article XII, Section 2, of the Constitution, and refers to a territorial outline as to which given tax laws apply.
"The uncertainty of the meaning of the term arises from the fact that some years later, when the Uniform Tax Levy Law was enacted, it defines the term 'subdivision.' "
However, Section 5625-1, General Code, which defines *Page 76
the term "subdivision" specifically limits the definition to the term as used in the Uniform Tax Levy Law.
In considering the foregoing quotation from appellants' brief we also find in the same brief the claim that Sections 5548-2 and 5625-23, General Code, are not in pari materia. Granting this, we do not see how it helps appellants. At another point in their brief appellants say: "All of the foregoing is set out merely to bring to the court's attention that the subject of voted levies by metropolitan park boards is completely covered in the statutes without recourse to the Uniform Tax Levy Law." There is, therefore, no justification for departing from the ordinary meaning of the word "subdivision" as it is used in Section 5548-2, General Code. Webster's dictionary defines the word: "A part of a thing made by subdividing." As illustrative that the definition of "subdivision" as made in Section 5625-1, General Code, is confined to the term as found in the Uniform Tax Levy Law, we call attention to the case of State, ex rel.Matthews, a Taxpayer v. Zangerle, Aud. (15 Ohio Law Abs., 661). In that case the pleadings raised the question whether the provisions of Section 2976-10i, General Code, were repealed by implication when the Uniform Tax Levy Law was enacted. The Court of Appeals of the Eighth Appellate District held:
"With reference to the first contention of plaintiff, subdivision (a), a careful reading of Section 2976-10i, General Code, and of the provisions of Sections 5625-15, -17 and -18, General Code, impels us to the conclusion that in drafting the Uniform Tax Levy Law, the legislature meant exactly what it said in Section 5625-1, General Code, when it defined the terms used in said act. No mention is made of park districts in the provisions of paragraphs (a) and (c) of said Section 5625-1, General Code, which expressly designate *Page 77
the taxing units to which the terms 'subdivision' and 'taxing authority' shall apply. However, metropolitan park districts are mentioned in paragraph (i) of said section as 'taxing units.' It is therefore clear that it was not intended to include park districts within the meaning of the terms 'subdivision' or 'taxing authority,' and that there is therefore no conflict between the two enactments. Moreover, repeals by implication are not favored unless the statutes involved cannot be reconciled by any other interpretation."
A petition in error was dismissed by this court for the reason that no debatable constitutional question was involved (127 Ohio St. 452). At the same time a motion to certify the record was overruled and later an application for rehearing was filed and denied. While the overruling of a motion to certify is without significance as a precedent, nevertheless we mention it.
As we have heretofore pointed out, appellant board is constituted by law (Section 2976-6, General Code) "a body politic and corporate." The park board is not a private corporation. Being a body politic and a public corporation and being authorized to levy taxes within its district, it is a taxing subdivision within the meaning of Section 5548-2, General Code.
Summarizing:
(1) The Uniform Tax Levy Law (Section 5625-1 et seq., General Code) does not supersede or repeal Section 5548-2, General Code.
(2) The term "taxing subdivision as used in Section 5548-2, General Code, includes park districts created under Section 2976-1 et seq., General Code.
(3) Under Section 2976-10i, General Code, a board of park commissioners created pursuant to Section 2976-1 et seq., General Code, may levy additional taxes only for the specific purpose set forth in its resolution.
(4) Under Section 5625-23, General Code, it is the mandatory duty of the county budget commission to *Page 78
ascertain whether all levies outside the ten-mill limitation are properly authorized. Unless properly authorized, the county budget commission has no authority to approve them with or without modification.
(5) Where a tax levy is voted pursuant to Section 2976-10i, General Code, in the year of reassessment or any year prior thereto, and such additional taxes are effective in the year of reassessment or thereafter and are to be calculated on a total valuation of property higher than that of the year before reassessment, the rate of such additional levies shall be reduced by the county budget commission in the same proportion in which the total valuation of property in such taxing subdivision is increased by the reassessment over the total valuation of the year preceding the reassessment. (Sections 5548-2 and 5625-23, General Code.)
This court being of the opinion that the action of the county auditor and county budget commission holding that such voted levy was for a specific purpose within the meaning of Section 5548-2, General Code, and that by reason thereof the rate voted must be reduced to correspond to any increase in the appraised value of the taxable property, as alleged in substance in appellants' petition, was correct, the judgment of the Court of Appeals should be and hereby is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
WEYGANDT, C.J., ZIMMERMAN, BELL, WILLIAMS, MATTHIAS and HART, JJ., concur. *Page 79

=== CASE 9739016 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:18.329742+00 ===

*Hunter, C.J.
Appellant was charged by affidavit with the criminal offense of sodomy arising out of alleged homosexual *431activities between appellant and another person. Upon a plea of not guilty, trial was had before a jury and appellant was found guilty as charged. Following the jury verdict, a fine of one hundred dollars was imposed and appellant was committed to the custody of the Board of Trustees of the Indiana Reformatory for a period of not less than two (2) nor more than fourteen (14) years.
Appellant’s sole assignment of error is that the trial court erred in overruling his motion for new trial. In that motion, appellant alleges that he was deprived of a fair trial by reason of certain irregularities in the proceeding and that the verdict of the jury is contrary to law in that there was insufficient evidence to support the conviction.
The essence of appellant’s argument as it relates to the alleged irregularities occurring at trial is that the trial court erred in refusing to grant appellant’s motion for mistrial made on two occasions when the jury returned from its deliberations to inform the court that it was unable to reach a verdict. Briefly, the background facts are as follows: The jury received the case for deliberation at approximately 2:00 P.M. on September 20, 1967. At 8:50 P.M. the members of the jury returned and stated to the court that they were unable to reach a verdict. The appellant immediately moved for a mistrial. The court, however, after hearing argument of counsel overruled the motion and directed the jury to further consider the case. Later, at 11:10 P.M. the members of the jury again returned to open court and stated that they were still unable to agree on a verdict. A second motion was made by the appellant for mistrial but this was also overruled and the jury was again instructed to deliberate further. At 11:55 P.M. the jury returned with a verdict of guilty as charged.
There appears to be a dearth of authority in this state on the precise legal issue here presented. This court has on numerous occasions held that it is within the trial court’s discretion to determine whether the discharge of the jury and the de-*432daring of a mistrial are appropriate under the circumstances of the case. Note should be made, however, that these cases normally involve the propriety of the trial court’s allowing a case to go to the jury where certain statements have come into evidence which are prejudicial to the defendant. See e.g. Gunder v. State (1968), 250 Ind. 689, 238 N. E. 2d 655; Duke v. State (1968), 249 Ind. 466, 233 N. E. 2d 159; Greenwalt v. State (1965), 246 Ind. 608, 209 N. E. 2d 254.
Most cases dealing with the question of discharge of the jury for failure to reach a verdict have arisen in situations where there is a challenge to the propriety of the trial court’s dismissal of the jury and not the failure to do so. See State v. Larimore (1910), 173 Ind. 452, 90 N. E. 898; State v. Leach (1889), 120 Ind. 124, 22 N. E. 111; Fowler v. State (1882), 85 Ind. 538; Shaffer v. State (1866), 27 Ind. 131. In State v. Leach, supra, however, the following statement was made:
“The length of time that a jury should be kept together in a criminal case without a verdict is a matter very much within the discretion of the court.” 120 Ind. at 125.
The rule there declared remains the overwhelming weight of authority in this country, as evidenced by the numerous cases cited in the annotation found at 93 A. L. R. 2d 627. See also 53 Am. Jur., Trial § 962. There is nothing in the record, nor does the appellant make mention of any action or statement made by the trial judge which would indicate that the jury’s verdict had been in any way coerced. Nor in our opinion does the time period during which the jury deliberated on the case appear to be unduly long so as to raise a question of coercion notwithstanding the fact that the jury had twice been directed to continue its deliberations. Consequently, we hold that the trial judge, in a legitimate use of his discretionary powers, properly overruled appellant’s motions for mistrial.
Appellant next argues that the evidence, when considered *433in its entirety, is of such a dubious nature that appellant’s guilt has not been proven beyond a reasonable doubt. It is pointed out in the argument section of appellant’s brief that although there were several persons present on the evening that the alleged acts occurred, only one witness testified that he in fact saw the acts of sodomy take place; all other persons present who were called to the witness stand denied that the alleged acts occurred or indicated that they had not seen them.
As we have said on occasions too numerous to require citation, this court will not weigh the evidence nor determine the credibility of the witnesses, but will look only to that evidence most favorable to the appellee and all reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom to determine whether the conviction is supported by sufficient evidence. Applying the above guidelines, we feel compelled to affirm appellant’s conviction. One witness, William Jackson, testified unequivocally that he saw the acts of sodomy performed and described with particularity their occurrence. This testimony together with the contrary testimony of other witnesses presented a question of credibility for the jury which they resolved against appellant. It is clearly within their province to do so. The resulting verdict cannot be overturned in the absence of some legitimate basis for so doing.
Finally, appellant attempts to raise an issue relating the alleged incompetence of trial counsel. No mention is made in appellant’s motion for new trial of such incompetence, however, nor did appellant attempt to bring the issue before this court under the remedies then afforded by our Supreme Court Rules 2-40 and 2-40A. See Shack v. State (1967), 249 Ind. 67, 231 N. E. 2d 36. Appellant’s only remedy at this time on the question of incompetence of trial counsel therefore would be under the post conviction remedy rules.
For all the foregoing reasons the judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
*434Arterburn, DeBruler and Givan, JJ., concur. Jackson, J., dissents with opinion.
This appeal was transferred and re-assigned to this office on May 28, 1970.

=== CASE 9739017 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:18.333724+00 ===

Dissenting Opinion
Jackson, J.
I am unable to concur in the majority opinion and dissent thereto.
An examination of the record herein discloses a total lack of substantial evidence of probative value to sustain the verdict below.
The evidence relied on by the State is the uncorroborated testimony of a fourteen year old delinquent adduced by improper direct, leading and suggestive questions by the prosecuting attorney and denied by one of the State’s witnesses and by the defense witnesses.
The second reason that I am unable to concur in the majority opinion is occasioned by the failure of that opinion to recognize the abuse of discretion by the trial court in refusing to grant the several motions of the defendant to declare a mistrial on the report of the jury that they were unable to agree on a verdict.
The record discloses the trial of appellant resumed on September 20, 1967, at 9:30 a.m. The Jury retired to deliberate on the case at 2:00 o’clock p.m. on said date. At 8:50 p.m. on the same day the jury reported to the court that they were unable to agree upon a verdict. The appellant then moved the court for a mistrial, such motion was overruled and the jury retired for further deliberation.
At 11:10 p.m. on said date the jury again returned into open court and reported they were unable to agree upon a verdict and were again ordered to retire for further deliberation. Appellant again moved for a mistrial, which motion was again overruled.
Thereafter at 11:55 p.m. the jury again returned, this time with a verdict of guilty of sodomy as charged in the affidavit.
*435At that time the jury had been in the court room and the jury room for a total of fourteen hours and twenty-five minutes and, in the opinion of the writer, such verdict did not represent the true verdict of the jury and was a coerced verdict brought about by the abuse of discretion of the court in refusing to grant appellant’s motion for a mistrial.
The judgment of the trial court should be reversed and remanded with instructions to grant appellant’s motion for a new trial.
Note. — Reported in 261 N. E. 2d 68.

=== CASE 9739018 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:22.164577+00 ===

Shanahan, J.
After a bench trial in the county court for Lancaster County, Ernie W. Chambers was found guilty on the charge of operating a motor vehicle at the speed of 70 miles per hour in a 55-mile-per-hour zone and was fined $25, plus costs. Chambers appealed to the district court for Lancaster County, which affirmed the county court’s decision; hence, Chambers’ appeal to this court.
Trooper Robert Stivers of the Nebraska State Patrol, a pilot since 1975, was trained and certified by the State Patrol to use an aircraft for detection of vehicular speed. On September 11, 1986, Stivers was officially maintaining an aircraft patrol of Interstate 80 in Lancaster County, which had a speed limit of 55 miles per hour at the patrol site, when he observed a blue Honda automobile, later determined to be driven by Chambers, passing other cars on the Interstate. Stivers believed that the Honda was “running in excess of the speed limit.” By using an “Accusplit 735XP” battery-powered stopwatch, Stivers timed Chambers’ vehicle as the car traveled the State Patrol’s predetermined course of 5,400 feet 7 inches between two 3- by 4-foot white rectangles painted on the shoulder of the Interstate. According to Stivers’ stopwatch, Chambers’ car traveled the measured course in 50.61 seconds. In view of the fractional or decimal figure for the time indicated on the stopwatch and consistent with State Patrol policy, Stivers rounded off the time for Chambers’ vehicle at 51 seconds and consulted a “speed chart” to convert the determined time into miles per hour. Based on the chart used by Stivers, Chambers’ car was traveling 70 miles per hour. Stivers then radioed Sgt. Robert Cruise, who was in his cruiser on the Interstate, and told Cruise that Chambers’ Honda was traveling 70 miles per hour on the Interstate. From the aircraft, Stivers helped Cruise *237identify Chambers’ car and confirmed that Cruise had correctly identified and stopped the vehicle clocked at 70 miles per hour. Cruise testified that in his opinion formed during his observation of Chambers’ moving vehicle, Chambers was “traveling in excess of the 55 mile-per-hour speed limit” shortly before Cruise signaled Chambers to pull to the Interstate’s shoulder, where Cruise issued Chambers a citation for driving 70 miles per hour in a 55-mile-per-hour zone.
At trial, over Chambers’ objection (foundation), only Stivers testified that Chambers was driving at 70 miles per hour. Stivers also testified that the Accusplit stopwatch used to clock Chambers’ car was checked for accuracy by Fred Wilson Jewelers on August 18, 1986, and again on December 9, 1986. The State called Fred Wilson, a jeweler, who testified that he used a “Q.T. 10 Quartz Tester” to ascertain the accuracy of Stivers’ stopwatch used to time Chambers’ car. When asked on direct examination whether “other jewelers, to your knowledge, use a machine just like that [Q.T. 10 Quartz Tester] to check the accuracy of Quartz watches,” Wilson responded, “Similar, I’m not sure though.” Later, during direct examination of Wilson, when the State offered Wilson’s “Stop Watch Certifications” for Stivers’ watch, Chambers was allowed to interrogate Wilson, an interrogation which included:
[CHAMBERS:] And you also don’t know whether this machine that you use [the quartz tester] is the one that jewelers in the trade use for the purpose that you stated?
[WILSON:] There’s probably a dozen different companies that sell machines that do the same thing.
[CHAMBERS:] But you don’t know and you’ve already testified to that, but I wanted — in response to my question to you, you don’t know whether jewelers in the trade use this particular machine as the machine for testing these watches?
[WILSON:] No, I don’t.
[CHAMBERS:] Mr. Wilson, when was the last time that your machine was tested to determine whether or not it was accurate?
[WILSON:] As far as I know, it never has been.
*238Asserting an insufficient evidential foundation, Chambers then objected to introduction of the certification documents. The court overruled Chambers’ objection, received the certification documents, and, at the conclusion of evidence, found Chambers guilty of speeding, that is, operating a motor vehicle at 70 miles per hour in a 55-mile-per-hour zone.
Chambers assigns five errors, each of which questions the admissibility of evidence concerning the speed of Chambers’ vehicle, which was determined by reference to Stivers’ battery-powered stopwatch. Chambers’ argument boils down to a contention that the State’s evidence of his driving 70 miles per hour, determined by Stivers’ timed observation, was inadmissible because the State failed to produce a foundation establishing the accuracy of Stivers’ stopwatch.
“Admission or exclusion of evidence is a matter for the discretion of the trial court, whose ruling on an evidential question will be upheld unless such ruling constitutes an abuse of discretion.” State v. Olsan, 231 Neb. 214, 220, 436 N.W.2d 128, 133 (1989).
Much of Chambers’ brief revolves around the assertion that Stivers’ stopwatch is an “electronic speed measurement” device within the purview of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 39-664 (Reissue 1988), which provides in part:
(1) Determinations made regarding the speed of any motor vehicle based upon the visual observation of any law enforcement officer may be corroborated by the use of radio microwaves or other electronic device. The results of such radio microwave or other electronic speed measurement may be accepted as competent evidence of the speed of such motor vehicle in any court or legal proceeding when the speed of the vehicle is at issue. Before the state may offer in evidence the results of such radio microwave or other electronic speed measurement for the purpose of establishing the speed of any motor vehicle, the. state shall prove the following:
(a) The measuring device was in proper working order at the time of conducting the measurement;
(b) The measuring device was being operated in such a manner and under such conditions so as to allow a *239minimum possibility of distortion or outside interference;
(c) The person operating such device and interpreting such measurement was qualified by training and experience to properly test and operate the device; and
(d) The operator conducted external tests of accuracy upon the measuring device, within a reasonable time both prior to and subsequent to an arrest being made, and the measuring device was found to be in proper working order.
In Chambers’ previous appeal of a speeding conviction, State v. Chambers, 207 Neb. 611, 299 N.W.2d 780 (1980), we determined that § 39-664 was not applicable when the defendant’s speed was “determined by use of a mechanical stopwatch.” Chambers, supra at 614, 299 N.W.2d at 782.
We conclude that § 39-664 is equally inapplicable in the present case. Although the battery-operated stopwatch used by Stivers to time Chambers’ car is properly characterized as an “electronic” device, Chambers’ argument that the stopwatch is a “speed measurement” device ignores laws even more fundamental and universal than the laws of the State of Nebraska, namely, the laws of physics. Speed, or more correctly, velocity, is a function of distance and time. Time is one of the two elements in the formula v(elocity) = d(istance)/t(ime). A device which measures only one of the two elements utilized in the foregoing formula is not a “speed measurement device,” but is either a device to measure time (more commonly known as a clock or watch) or a device to measure distance. Therefore, we conclude that a battery-operated stopwatch is not an “electronic speed measurement” device within the purview of § 39-664.
Acknowledgment of the laws of physics does not end our inquiry in Chambers’ appeal. At trial, Chambers objected to introduction of Wilson’s “Stop Watch Certifications,” which purportedly verified the accuracy of Stivers’ stopwatch used to time Chambers’ car, and also objected to Stivers’ testimony regarding the time registered by the stopwatch for the resultant calculation of Chambers’ speed. We must, therefore, consider whether the State established a sufficient evidential foundation for admission of the stopwatch results as evidence that *240Chambers’ car was traveling 70 miles per hour.
In State v. Chambers, supra, we considered the use of a mechanical stopwatch in a speeding case, upheld the defendant’s conviction, and stated:
We believe the foundation evidence was sufficient to allow the State to establish the speed of the defendant’s vehicle by use of the stopwatch. The evidence was that Lt. Donald Grieser, the officer flying the airplane, had been trained and certified for clocking ground vehicles from aircraft. The stopwatch had been tested on July 19, 1978, and again on August 25, 1978, and found to be accurate within 1 second per 24 hours or 6/io,ooo of a second per minute. Fred A. Wilson, the jeweler who performed the tests on the stopwatch, testified that the stopwatch had been tested on a Vibrograph machine which was an accepted method for determining the accuracy of watches. The Vibrograph machine was tested occasionally with another Vibrograph machine and other watches whose timekeeping accuracy was verified by a digital watch or an electronic clock.
Id. at 612-13, 299 N.W.2d at 781.
To sustain a conviction based on information derived from an electronic or mechanical measuring device, there must be “[reasonable proof that the . . . machine was accurate and functioning properly.” State v. Kudlacek, 229 Neb. 297, 301, 426 N. W.2d 289, 292 (1988) (foundation relating to accuracy of radar unit and Intoxilyzer machine). See, also, State v. Snyder, 184 Neb. 465, 168 N.W.2d 530 (1969). In Snyder and Kudlacek, we rejected the argument that for admissibility of information from a primary instrument, the accuracy of the primary instrument, such as a measuring device, must be established by an appropriate testing device which itself has been tested for accuracy, lest such evidence of testing and the testing itself “might have to proceed ad infinitum” to verify the accuracy of all instruments used. State v. Snyder, supra at 466, 168 N.W.2d at 531. See, also, Peterson v. State, 163 Neb. 669, 80 N.W.2d 688 (1957) (an officer’s testimony that he drove his patrol car at 60 miles per hour, indicated by the car’s speedometer, through the testing range for the radar device used to prove the speed of
- *241the defendant’s vehicle was sufficient foundation for admissibility of the radar-determined speed without proof of the speedometer’s accuracy). Thus, although we have rejected a requirement that any testing device used to establish the accuracy of a primary measurement device must itself be independently tested, we have recognized such a procedure to thwart a foundational challenge to the primary device’s accuracy. See State v. Chambers, 207 Neb. 611, 299 N.W.2d 780 (1980) (mechanical stopwatch tested with a Vibrograph, which was in turn itself tested against another Vibrograph).
Without some proof of reliability in the device used to test for accuracy in a primary device, a test for accuracy of the primary device is a meaningless exercise. Undoubtedly, a meaningless test for accuracy in Stivers’ stopwatch does not supply the “reasonable proof of accuracy” required for the permissible introduction of evidence concerning information derived from the stopwatch. The test of the stopwatch in the present case somewhat resembles the situation in the apocryphal story of the cannon and the clock, recounted by our Chief Justice. The cannoneer was responsible for firing the cannon in the village square at 6 o’clock each day. When asked how he knew it was time to fire the cannon, the cannoneer answered that he simply looked at the clock in the tower of the village hall at the other end of the street which ran from the square to the hall. When the tower clock indicated 6 o’clock, he fired the cannon. However, when the clockkeeper was asked how he checked the tower clock’s accuracy, he said that every time the village cannon fired, he looked up to verify the time, which was always 6 o’clock. In any event, we hold that to present “reasonable proof” that a stopwatch was operating correctly as an accurate device to measure time, the watch must be tested against a device whose instrumental integrity or reliability has been established either through proof that the testing device’s accuracy has been verified through an independent test for accuracy or through proof that the testing device is the type recognized and normally used to verify accuracy in stopwatches.
In the present case, there is no evidence on either of the bases which we have mentioned for verified accuracy in a stopwatch. *242Wilson testified that his Q.T. 10 Quartz Tester had never, to his knowledge, been tested for accuracy. Also, exactly what is a Q.T. 10 Quartz Tester? There is no evidence explaining the nature, function, or operation of a Q.T. 10 Quartz Tester. Further, Wilson testified that he did not know whether other jewelers used the Q.T. 10 Quartz Tester to verify the accuracy of stopwatches. Consequently, in view of the record presented to us, there is no “reasonable proof” of accuracy in the stopwatch used to clock Chambers’ car. Evidence that Chambers’ car took 51 seconds to travel the predetermined distance on Interstate 80 and was, consequently, traveling at 70 miles per hour was improperly received by the trial court. Evidence based on Stivers’ stopwatch was used to prove the charge against Chambers and, therefore, constitutes reversible error. For that reason, we reverse the judgment of the district court, which affirmed the county court’s decision, and remand this matter to the district court with the direction that the district court order a new trial for Chambers in the county court.
The county court’s reversible error in admitting evidence of speed calculated through information from Stivers’ stopwatch is properly characterized as “trial error,” which does not bar retrial of Chambers after this reversal of his conviction. See, Burks v. United States, 437 U.S. 1, 98 S. Ct. 2141, 57 L. Ed. 2d 1 (1978) (retrial after reversal of a defendant’s conviction, when the reversal resulted from “trial error, ” that is, “a defendant has been convicted through a judicial process which is defective in some fundamental respect, e.g., incorrect receipt or rejection of evidence, incorrect instructions, or prosecutorial misconduct,” 437 U.S. at 15); Lockhart v. Nelson,_U.S___ 109 S. Ct. 285, 102 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1988) (double jeopardy clause of the fifth amendment to the U.S. Constitution does not bar retrial of a defendant if all the evidence, whether erroneously admitted or not, supports the action of the trial court or jury). See, also, State v. Pierce, 231 Neb. 966, 439 N.W.2d 435 (1989).
Reversed and remanded for a new trial.

=== CASE 9739020 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:22.759123+00 ===

Cynar, J.
Plaintiff appeals from the order of the circuit court which vacated an arbitration award in favor of plaintiff and awarded an amount equal to sixty-days pay. The arbitrator had awarded plaintiff $85,201 in damages against defendant for breach of plaintiff’s employment contract.
Plaintiff and defendant entered into a contract for plaintiff’s employment. The contract provides in part:
whereas, the Authority desires to secure the services of Jontig as its General Manager for a period of three (3) years, and Jontig is willing to enter into this Agreement for such period, and the parties hereto agree as follows:
article i
TERM OF EMPLOYMENT
The Authority hereby employs Jontig, and Jontig hereby accepts employment with the Authority as its General Manager for a period of three (3) years beginning on the 12th day of March, 1986, and continuing until the 11th day of March, 1989, or later if mutually agreed upon.
After a little over one year, defendant fired *501plaintiff pursuant to Article VI of the contract. Article VI of the contract reads as follows:
TERMINATION
A. Authority: The Authority and Jontig mutually recognize that as the Authority’s General Manager, Jontig serves at the pleasure of the Authority’s Board of Directors. However, the Authority and Jontig further recognize that if Jontig’s services are terminated by the Authority’s Board of Directors for any reason other than malfeasance or misfeasance, then Jontig will receive sixty (60) days severance pay.
Defendant gave plaintiff no reason for his discharge.
On July 1, 1987, plaintiff filed for arbitration pursuant to Article XIV of the contract. Arbitration was held in October, 1987.
At the arbitration proceedings, plaintiff argued that, because the contract was for a definite term, three years, it required good cause to terminate plaintiff. Plaintiff argued that the personnel policy that defendant promulgated required good cause before termination of employees and that a member of defendant’s board of directors told plaintiff that he would not be fired if he did his job. Defendant argued that the employment contract allowed for termination at will by defendant and that good cause to terminate was unnecessary.
After hearing the testimony and arguments, the arbitrator found that the provisions of the contract that established a definite term of employment and at will termination conflicted and created an ambiguity in the contract. The arbitrator then looked at the evidence surrounding the negotiation and drafting of the contract to interpret the contract.
The arbitrator determined that defendant vio*502lated the contract by firing plaintiff without good cause. The arbitrator awarded plaintiff $82,701 in damages, $2,500 in costs, and medical coverage for the remainder of the contract term.
Plaintiff moved to have the circuit court confirm the arbitration award and defendant moved to have the circuit court vacate the award. The trial court ruled that the arbitrator exceeded his powers and vacated the arbitration award because the award went beyond the material terms of the contract. The arbitration award was vacated except for that amount equal to sixty days of plaintiff’s pay.
Plaintiff Jontig argues that the circuit court erred by applying an inappropriate standard of review to the arbitrator’s decision. We disagree.
Under MCL 600.5001; MSA 27A.5001, most civil cases in Michigan can be submitted to arbitration. A circuit court’s review of an arbitration award is provided for under MCR 3.602. MCR 3.602(J) provides in part:
(1) On application of a party, the court shall vacate an award if:
(c) the arbitrator exceeded his or her powers; or
(d) the arbitrator refused to postpone the hearing on a showing of sufficient cause, refused to hear evidence material to the controversy, or otherwise conducted the hearing to prejudice substantially a party’s rights.
In DAIIE v Gavin, 416 Mich 407, 443; 331 NW2d 418 (1982), the Michigan Supreme Court adopted the standard for judicial review of a statutory arbitration award as follows:
Where it clearly appears on the face of the *503award or the reasons for the decision as stated, being substantially a part of the award, that the arbitrators through an error in law have been led to a wrong conclusion, and that, but for such error, a substantially different award must have been made, the award and decision will be set aside.
In Roseville Community School Dist v Roseville Federation of Teachers, 137 Mich App 118, 123; 357 NW2d 829 (1984), lv gtd 422 Mich 940 (1985), lv dis per stipulation 422 Mich 940 (1986), a panel of this Court ruled that the Gavin standard of review did not apply to cases involving collective bargaining agreements. The panel reasoned that the Gavin Court expressly ruled that the expanded standard of review applied to cases reviewing statutory arbitration awards. Roseville, supra, p 122. Under MCL 600.5001(3); MSA 27A.5001(3), only cases involving collective bargaining agreements are expressly excluded from statutory arbitration.
The trial court correctly applied the Gavin standard of review in this case. Gavin applies to cases involving statutory arbitration. MCL 600.5001(3); MSA 27A.5001(3) excludes only collective bargaining agreements from application of the rules of statutory arbitration. This case involves an agreement between an employer and an employee and not a collective bargaining agreement. Therefore, we find that the trial court applied the proper standard of review in this case.
Plaintiff Jontig further contends that the circuit court improperly reviewed the arbitrator’s interpretation of the provisions of the employment contract.
In reviewing an arbitration award, with regard to whether it should be affirmed or vacated, the circuit court may vacate if the arbitrator exceeds *504his powers in determining the award. The Supreme Court, in Gavin, supra, p 434, stated:
Arbitrators can fairly be said to exceed their power whenever they act beyond the material terms of the contract from which they primarily draw their authority, or in contravention of controlling principles of law.
The circuit court was of the opinion that the arbitrator ignored material terms of the contract and thereby exceeded his power. While observing the contract at first glance it may appear to be ambiguous. However, a review of the entire contract can only result in one logical interpretation. According to the preamble and Article I of the contract, the contract was to run for a period of three years. According to the termination provision, the transportation authority and Jontig mutually recognized that Jontig served at the pleasure of the transportation authority’s board of directors. On these facts, the contract would have been open to the arbitrator’s interpretation. However, the contract additionally provides that "the Authority and Jontig further recognize that if Jontig’s services are terminated by the Authority’s Board of Directors for any reason other than malfeasance or misfeasance, then Jontig will receive sixty (60) days severance pay.” Thus, the contract unambiguously provides for only sixty days severance pay and the arbitrator exceeded his power by awarding damages in excess of sixty days of pay upon Jontig’s termination.
The circuit court vacated the arbitration award except for that amount equal to sixty days of Jontig’s pay. The basis of the circuit court’s ruling was that the arbitration award went beyond the material terms of the contract. Based upon our *505review of the record, we find that the circuit court’s ruling was not erroneous.
Affirmed.
Gilus, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9739021 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:22.765187+00 ===

Michael J. Kelly, P.J.
(dissenting). I disagree with the majority’s conclusion that the circuit court properly vacated the arbitrator’s award on the basis that the arbitrator exceeded his powers.
When employment is set by contract for a definite term, it is generally assumed that the employee can only be discharged for good cause. Toussaint v Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Michigan, 408 Mich 579, 611; 292 NW2d 880 (1980), reh den 409 Mich 1101 (1980). An employer and employee may expressly agree that the employee may be discharged at any time for no reason, but this rule is generally applied to contracts for an indefinite period of employment. Id., p 612, n 24. Statements by an employer that the employee would remain employed so long as he did the job may be used to prove that the employment contract required just cause for discharge. Id., p 597. If the employer effects a personnel policy which states that employees will be discharged only for just cause, this practice may be used to prove that just cause was required to discharge the employee. Id., pp 597-598.
Here there was conflicting evidence regarding whether plaintiff’s employment contract permitted termination only for good cause or at will. Plaintiff’s contract specified that his employment was for a three-year term. Plaintiff testified that a board member informed him that he would remain employed so long as he did his job. Also, defendant had promulgated a personnel policy which indicated that employees must be given a reason for *506their discharge. This evidence indicated that plaintiff could only be discharged for good cause. However, the contract also stated that plaintiff could be terminated at the board’s pleasure, and provided for sixty days severance pay, which indicated an employment contract terminable at will.
Where there is conflicting evidence over whether a contract allows discharge only for cause, this creates an issue of fact for the trier of fact. Toussaint, pp 620-621; Schipani v Ford Motor Co, 102 Mich App 606, 612; 302 NW2d 307 (1981). Such a fact question exists despite express contract language providing for termination at will. Schipani, supra. The evidence producéd created a factual dispute to be resolved by the trier of fact. Fact finding is within an arbitrator’s powers. DAIIE v Gavin, 416 Mich 407, 444; 331 NW2d 418 (1982). The arbitrator did not exceed his powers by acting as fact, finder in this case.
I would reverse the circuit court and reinstate the arbitration award in favor of plaintiff.

=== CASE 3785155 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:35:01.478394+00 ===

This case does not present any question of the ultimate liability of the defendant for the negligent act of its agent while acting in the course of and within the scope of his employment, nor of the right of the person injured to maintain such action.
The sole question presented here is one of venue and must be answered by the interpretation and application of the provisions of Section 6308, General Code. It is as follows: *Page 639
"Actions for injury to a person or property, caused by the negligence of the owner or operator of a motor vehicle, may be brought, by the person injured, against such owner or operator in the county wherein such injury occurs. A summons in such action against any defendant or defendants shall be issued to the sheriff of any county within this state wherein such defendant or defendants reside and may be served as in other civil actions, notwithstanding any contrary provision of law for the service of summons in civil actions."
Was the defendant, The Jeffrey Manufacturing Company, theoperator of the motor vehicle owned by John Wilson and being driven by him at the time of the collision?
The appellant relies mainly upon the statutory definition of "operator" contained in Section 6290, General Code, which is as follows:
" 'Operator' includes any person who drives or operates a motor vehicle upon the public highways."
Appellant contrasts the language there used with that in a preceding subdivision of the same section wherein "owner" is defined, that definition being as follows:
" 'Owner' includes any person, firm or corporation other than a manufacturer or dealer having title to a motor vehicle * * *."
The phrase "firm or corporation" following the word "person" in one subdivision and not in the other is urged as determinative of the proposition that the term "operator," as used in Section 6308, General Code, and as defined in Section 6290, General Code, can have no application to a corporation.
It must be observed, however, that the Legislature had some purpose in the use of the word "operates" in this definition, for the phrase, "any person who drives," would have been sufficient if the meaning of "operator" were to be limited to one who in fact manipulates the mechanism of the motor vehicle. Such *Page 640
individual is referred to as a driver or chauffeur. If the meaning of the term "operator" were thus restricted, it would exclude persons, firms and corporations operating lines of cabs, buses or trucks which they do not own but who certainly are operators thereof and liable as such for the negligent acts of their employees in connection therewith.
It is contended by the appellee that the maxim, "Qui facitper alium facit per se," applies and is a complete answer to the question presented in this case, for Wilson was acting as agent for the defendant and in the operation of the automobile he was acting within the scope of his employment and therefore, inasmuch as he was then driving his automobile for and on behalf of the defendant, the defendant within the meaning and intent of the statute was the operator of the automobile.
The provisions of Section 6308, General Code, relate solely to venue. Being remedial in character, such provisions are to be liberally construed. Gorey v. Black, 100 Ohio St. 73,125 N.E. 126; Snavely v. Wilkinson, Exr., 138 Ohio St. 125,33 N.E.2d 999.
The defendant is a corporation. If by the word "operate" we mean the physical action of manipulating the steering wheel, accelerator and brake, the defendant could not be deemed an operator of a motor vehicle. In our opinion the provisions of the statute should not be subjected to such strict construction and application.
A corporation can be the operator of a motor vehicle only by and through its agent or employee. If the automobile being driven by Wilson, the defendant's employee, were owned by the defendant corporation, it properly could be considered the operator as well as the owner of the automobile. When the automobile was being driven by Wilson for and on behalf of the corporation, as is conceded, it was the operator thereof, even though Wilson was the owner. The corporation *Page 641
was doing precisely what Wilson, its employee and agent acting for it, was doing when he was driving the car. In short, the defendant was the operator of the motor vehicle by and through the instrumentality of its duly authorized and acting agent, he being at the time within the scope of his employment. The proposition is well established that what one does by another he does himself. The familiar maxim, "Qui facit per alium facitper se," is applicable here.
It follows that the judgment of the Court of Appeals is in all respects correct and is therefore affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
WEYGANDT, C.J., TURNER, WILLIAMS, HART and ZIMMERMAN, JJ., concur.
BETTMAN, J., not participating.

=== CASE 3785156 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:35:01.557687+00 ===

This plaintiff in error, Frank Liska, was indicted, tried, and convicted of murder in the first degree. The jury did not recommend mercy. The trial judge imposed the sentence of death. The Court of Appeals affirmed the *Page 284
judgment of the trial court. Liska prosecutes error in this court.
The deceased was the wife of Liska. The evidence clearly indicated that death resulted from personal violence, to wit, strangulation. The body, when found by firemen and policemen between 2 and 3 o'clock in the morning, was in a burning chicken house, owned by Liska, and located in the rear of the home owned and occupied by the Liska family.
Almost the entire argument of counsel for Liska in this court is devoted to errors arising by reason of the conduct of the trial judge in giving additional instructions to the jury after the jury had had the case under consideration for some time, and to errors arising by reason of admission of a written confession made by Liska shortly after the murder, and claimed by him, at the trial, to have been secured by duress. At least two forms of verdict were furnished to the jury for their use. Form No. 2 was a verdict of guilty of murder in the first degree, with recommendation of mercy. After considering the case for about 24 hours, the jury, at their own request, were brought into court, with the accused and counsel for both sides present, and then the foreman, referring to verdict No. 2, asked the trial judge this question: "We would like to have you inform us if there is any hope of pardon if that verdict is brought in."
The trial judge told the jury the pardon board could not recommend a pardon for one convicted of murder in the first degree, except on evidence showing innocence beyond a reasonable doubt, and then also said to the jury that the Governor could *Page 285
pardon, if so disposed, at any time. Counsel for Liska insists that "this was prejudicial error of the most glaring kind." We cannot agree with counsel on this. The recommendation of mercy rests wholly in the sound discretion of the jury. They may extend or withhold as they see fit. The trial court might have declined to answer the question asked by the jury, but he did answer, and then told the jury it was not an issue in the case, and that it was not a thing for the jury to speculate upon.
After the jury had considered the case for about 48 hours, they reported that as matters then stood it would be impossible for them to agree. The trial judge then admonished them, saying that it was their duty to counsel with each other and listen to reason, and not to act from stubbornness alone, or in any spirit of that kind, and directed that they continue their consideration of the case. Counsel for Liska claims the jury should then have been discharged. The trial judge was clearly within his right and duty in what he said and did at this time.Davis v. State, 63 Ohio St. 173, 57 N.E. 1099. We find no prejudicial error in any of these additional instructions by the trial judge.
The only other feature of the case that merits attention is the written confession. Counsel for Liska is an experienced, able, trial lawyer. His practice in criminal cases has been very extensive. When retained in this case, which was after the confession had been made, he was able to make a very accurate estimate of the merits and demerits of the case, and particularly with respect *Page 286
to the written confession. When it was offered by the state, which was after the police detectives had testified without objection to statements made to them by Liska prior to and at the time the confession was made, counsel for Liska made a formal objection, but did not press it upon the attention of the court. When the court offered counsel for Liska an opportunity to test by evidence the admissibility of the confession, in the absence of the jury, counsel said to the court that that would double the work, and that he preferred to have all the facts relative to the confession developed before the jury. Counsel then knew Liska intended to repudiate the confession on the ground of duress. He had every reason to believe that the three police detectives would deny all the claimed acts of duress, as they did. Evidently it was plain to counsel that the evidence when in on the question of duress would not warrant the trial judge in sustaining Liska's claim of duress and excluding the confession from the consideration of the jury. No trial judge would exclude the confession on the evidence manifest in this record. Liska's only chance, if it was even a chance, was to get all these facts about the confession to the jury in the hope that the jury, or at least some of the jurors, might believe his story as to how the confession was procured from him. His counsel had but little choice of routes to pursue, and we are not suggesting that he did not pursue the wisest course. At one point in the trial, counsel for the state said he was in doubt whether the written confession had in fact been formerly offered in *Page 287
evidence. Counsel for Liska insisted that it had been, and stated that, if the state had not offered it in evidence, he would have offered it himself. The situation was desperate in the extreme. The confession could not be kept out of the case. If in, and believed by the jury, as it evidently was believed, a finding of murder in the first degree was inevitable. The murder was wicked and horrible from every viewpoint. Any jury that believed Liska's story about the duress would have acquitted him. When the jury discredited his story about duress, they evidently discredited the balance of his testimony as well, in which he denied that he killed his wife. All errors assigned have been fully considered. We find no error in the record prejudicial to Liska. There is abundant evidence in the record to sustain the verdict and judgment in the trial court, and the judgments of the lower courts will be affirmed.
Judgments affirmed.
JONES, MATTHIAS, DAY, ALLEN and KINKADE, JJ., concur. *Page 288

=== CASE 9739025 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:25.235891+00 ===

MILLER, Justice
(concurring in result).
I disagree with the majority holding that the trial court did not abuse its discretion (1) in denying the expert testimony and (2) in the manner it/handled the deposition testimony. I would hold that the trial court abused its discretion in both areas, but that such error was not prejudicial.
Justice Henderson, speaking for this court in K & E Land and Cattle, Inc. v. Mayer, 330 N.W.2d 529, 533 (S.D.1983), defined “prejudicial error” as “that which in all probability must have produced some effect upon the final result and affected rights of the party assigning it.”
Considering all of the other compelling evidence, including the eyewitness testimony, I am convinced that the error committed by the trial court had no effect on the result and the jury would have reached the same verdict. See also Koupal & Anton, Inc. v. Wieczorek, 375 N.W.2d 639 (S.D. 1985); Shaull v. Hart, 327 N.W.2d 50 (S.D. 1982); State Highway Commission v. Beets, 88 S.D. 536, 224 N.W.2d 567 (1974); and Allen v. McLain, 75 S.D. 520, 69 N.W.2d 390 (1955).
I am authorized to state that MORGAN, J., joins in this concurrence in result.

=== CASE 9739026 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:29.863992+00 ===

OPINION
HUSPENI, Judge.
The parties entered into a stipulation defining the amount and term of maintenance payments owed to wife. Prior to the end of the term, wife’s motion for modification of the maintenance award was granted. Husband brought a motion to reconsider in light of Karon v. Karon, 435 N.W.2d 501 (Minn.1989). The trial court denied husband’s motion and he appeals therefrom. We affirm.
*606FACTS
Appellant Edward Keating and respondent Donna Keating were married on November 7, 1953, and the decree of dissolution was entered on July 2, 1981. The parties were 56 and 53 years old respectively in 1981 when they stipulated that respondent would receive maintenance as follows: $1,200.00 per month for 24 months; $1,000.00 per month for the next 24 months; and $500 per month for 48 months, with payments terminating in August 1989.
The critical provisions of the 1981 decree read as follows:
Upon fulfilling the obligation of spousal maintenance as set forth hereinabove, each of the parties waives any claim to additional spousal maintenance from the other, which waiver shall be complete and final as of the times referred to herein and in all other respects.
The decree further read:
That each party hereto has released the other of and from any and all claims, demands, actions, causes of action, or obligations of any and every nature whatsoever, past, present or future, growing out of or arising from the marital relationship between the parties, except such claims, demands, actions, causes of action, or obligations which are provided for herein or may arise hereunder.
On August 16, 1988, respondent brought a motion seeking to extend the duration of the maintenance payments and to increase the amount. The trial court granted respondent’s motion and ordered permanent monthly maintenance payments of $1,200.00, retroactive to May 11, 1988, the date of service of respondent’s motion upon appellant. An amended decree was filed December 6, 1988.
Appellant’s motion to reconsider the maintenance modification in light of the supreme court’s January 30, 1989 release of Karon v. Karon, 435 N.W.2d 501 (Minn.1989) was denied and he appeals from the amended decree.
ISSUES
1. Did the trial court have jurisdiction to alter appellant’s maintenance payments?
2. If the trial court had jurisdiction, was it permitted only to increase the amount of temporary maintenance payments and not to extend the payments by granting permanent maintenance?
3. Did the trial court err in awarding monthly maintenance of $1,200?
ANALYSIS
1. Respondent’s motion to modify the maintenance award was brought pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 518.64, subd. 1 (1988) which reads in pertinent part:
After an order for maintenance or support money, temporary or permanent, * * * the court may from time to time, * * * modify the order respecting the amount of maintenance or support money, and the payment of it, * * * and may make an order respecting these matters which it might have made in the original proceeding, except as herein otherwise provided.
Section 518.64 gives the trial court continuing jurisdiction over dissolution proceedings and enables it to modify prior orders. However, appellant claims that Minn.Stat. § 518.64 notwithstanding, the waiver language of the parties’ stipulation prevented the trial court from exercising continuing jurisdiction over the maintenance issue. We cannot agree and find appellant’s reliance upon Karon v. Karon, 435 N.W.2d 501 (Minn.1989) to be misplaced.
In Karon the parties stipulated that husband would make periodically decreasing maintenance payments for ten years. Within the Karons’ stipulated decree was the following language:
Except for the aforesaid maintenance, each party waives and is forever barred from receiving any spousal maintenance whatsoever from one another, and this court is divested from having any jurisdiction whatsoever to award temporary or permanent spousal maintenance to either of the parties.
Karon, 435 N.W.2d at 502.
In Karon, respondent’s motion to increase maintenance and to make it perma*607nent was brought within the temporary maintenance period. The motion was granted by the trial court. The supreme court reversed, holding that the terms of the original decree denied the trial court any further jurisdiction over the matter.
The Karon court defined the issue as: whether one of the. adult parties to a stipulation in a dissolution matter made in 1981, which was approved by the trial court and which settled all issues, including maintenance, and which further provided that the parties expressly waived any right to maintenance except as provided in the original agreement, may now re-open the issue of maintenance to seek an increase therein.
Karon at 503. The supreme court continued:
Phrased in other words, we must decide whether the district court properly divested itself of jurisdiction over the issue in 1981. We hold that it did.
Id. (emphasis added).
In the present case, appellant argues that, as in Karon, the parties’ waiver was sufficient to divest the trial court of jurisdiction.' He further contends that in 1981 the Minnesota Supreme Court had already precluded modification of a maintenance award after the maintenance term expired. See Eckert v. Eckert, 299 Minn. 120, 126-27, 216 N.W.2d 837, 841 (1974), and therefore the parties’ stipulation must have been intended to do more than merely waive the right to maintenance after August 1989. We cannot agree with either position set forth by appellant.
In Karon the stipulation contained both an immediate waiver of maintenance and specific language stating that the court was divested of jurisdiction. This court recently applied Karon and upheld a stipulated waiver of maintenance modification which had been incorporated into the dissolution decree. In Berens v. Berens, 443 N.W.2d 558, 563 (Minn.Ct.App.1989), the decree provided:
[Joanne ] expressly waives all rights to modification of the maintenance ordered herein including but not limited to her rights under Minnesota Statutes § 518.64 for modifications of orders and decrees.
(Emphasis added in Berens.) On appeal from the trial court’s denial of Joanne Ber-ens’ motion to modify maintenance, this court stated:
Under Karon, either a binding contractual waiver or express language of divestment, when entered by a trial court, leads to a final judgment preventing the court from hearing future modification motions. Karon, 435 N.W.2d at 503. Here, the trial court entered Joanne’s express waiver as part of its findings and decree. Thus it terminated her right to seek maintenance under Eckert. By adopting the terms of the stipulation and incorporating those terms in the decree, the court divested itself of jurisdiction to hear any claims for modification by Joanne. See Karon, 435 N.W.2d at 503.
Id. at 564.
The waiver in the present case is distinguishable from both Karon and Berens. The operative language in Karon contained both waiver of maintenance language and divestiture of jurisdiction language. The Berens waiver provided that “[Joanne] expressly waives all rights to modification of the maintenance ordered herein * * *.” Berens at 563.
The stipulated decree in the present case states that “[u]pon fulfilling the obligation of the spousal maintenance as set forth,” the parties waive additional maintenance, and that the “waiver shall be complete and final as of the times referred to herein and in all other respects.” There is neither express divestiture language as in Karon nor is there an immediate waiver of the right to modify maintenance as in Berens. By the terms of the decree, the waiver in this case is not effective until completion of the maintenance obligation. Any attempt to bring this waiver within the rationale of Karon or Berens would result in rendering Minn.Stat. § 518.64 a nullity in those disso-lutions where the waiver of modification is effective, not at the time of the decree, but at the termination of the payment of maintenance. We agree with the trial court’s observation that “[i]t is not appropriate to *608infer waiver in the absence of a clear intent to waive a statutorily conferred right.” Pursuant to the language of the decree in this case, either party may seek modification under Minn.Stat. § 518.64 prior to August 1989. See Eckert v. Eckert, 299 Minn. 120, 216 N.W.2d 887 (1974).
2. Appellant also argues that if the trial court does maintain any jurisdiction, it may only increase the amount of temporary maintenance, but may not award permanent maintenance and thereby extend payments beyond the stipulated term of years. Again, we disagree. Minn.Stat. § 518.64, subd. 1 permits the trial court to “make an order respecting these matters which it might have made in the original proceeding * * The trial court could have rejected the parties’ stipulation and ordered permanent maintenance in the original proceeding. Karon, 435 N.W.2d at 503. (The court may refuse or accept the terms of a stipulation.) Pursuant to and in compliance with the requirements of section 518.64, the trial court in the present case had the authority to order any maintenance it could have ordered originally, including permanent maintenance.
3. Finally, appellant argues that the trial court erred in finding that there had been a substantial change in circumstances rendering the terms of the 1981 decree unreasonable and unfair because all of the circumstances relied upon by the court either existed or were contemplated by the parties at the time of their stipulation. While modifying a maintenance award, the court shall consider all relevant factors set forth in section 518.64 and also those factors used in determining an award for maintenance listed in Minn.Stat. § 518.552, subd. 2 (1988). See Minn.Stat. § 518.64, subd. 2 (1988). The modification of a maintenance award will not be reversed absent an abuse of the trial court’s discretion. Bissell v. Bissell, 291 Minn. 348, 351, 191 N.W.2d 425, 427 (1971).
In the memorandum accompanying its order, the trial court made the following findings:
1) that husband’s income had increased 31.8% between 1981 and 1988, from $96,339 to $126,941; 2) that wife’s income had decreased due to a decline in interest income generated by investments made from wife’s property distribution after the dissolution and that wife’s $500 decrease in monthly expenses was due to a decrease in wife’s standard of living; 3) that wife sold the town house awarded her after the dissolution because she could not afford the mortgage payments and has since had to pay increasing rent; and 4) that the cost of living in Minneapolis-St. Paul had increased 28.8% from 1981 to 1988.
The court further determined that application of the factors set forth in section 518.552 supported a finding of changed circumstances rendering the 1981 decree unfair and unreasonable. The trial court’s findings are supported by the evidence and it did not abuse its wide discretion.
DECISION
The trial court did not divest itself of jurisdiction over the issue of maintenance and it did not abuse its discretion in awarding $1,200 per month permanent maintenance.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9739027 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:29.868035+00 ===

SCHUMACHER, Judge
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent. Admittedly, the stipulation incorporated into the decree in the present case neglected to use the magic words expressly divesting the court of jurisdiction as in Karon v. Karon, 435 N.W.2d 501, 502 (Minn.1989). However, the language waiving further maintenance in this case is clear and concise and leaves no room for doubt as to what the parties intended and agreed to, namely, to only provide respondent with maintenance for a period of ten years.
“The fundamental approach for construing contracts is to allow the intent of the parties to prevail.” Turner v. Alpha Phi Sorority House, 276 N.W.2d 63, 66 (Minn.1979) (citations omitted).
*609The parties entered into an agreement and should be bound by its terms. Parties in a dissolution,
especially when represented by counsel, must be expected to honor their contracts the same as anyone else. Any other holding would result in chaos in the family law field and declining respect for binding agreements as well.
Karon, 435 N.W.2d at 504. This court should enforce the agreement of the parties in this case.

=== CASE 9739028 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:30.122003+00 ===

Hoffman, P.J.
This appeal arises from the overruling of a motion for new trial. The trial resulted in a verdict and judgment in favor of defendant-appellee in a negligence action for personal injuries sustained by plaintiff-appellant while a guest passenger in an automobile.
The facts from the record before us may be summarized as follows:
Appellant was a guest passenger in a vehicle being driven by her son in an easterly direction on U. S. Highway No. 30 in the left-hand passing lane of a four-lane divided highway. Appellee’s employee, Nyle W. Jurczewsky, was operating a semi-tractor and trailer in the same direction on U. S. Highway No. 30, in the right-hand lane. The vehicle in which appellant was a passenger proceeded to pass a pick-up truck which was traveling behind appellee’s tractor-trailer. There was a dispute as to whether or not appellee’s tractor-trailer swerved into the left-hand lane thereby causing the collision between the vehicle in which appellant was riding — the guard rail — and the tire of appellee’s trailer.
Appellant and her son each sued appellee separately. On a motion by appellee, the two causes were consolidated and tried together — notwithstanding appellant’s motion to separate for trial. The jury returned a general verdict in favor of appellee in both actions. The trial court rendered judgment in accordance with the verdict.
Appellant’s sole assignment of error is the overruling of her motion for a new trial.
Appellant has briefed and argued that the trial court erred on three separate grounds: 1) That the trial court erred in granting appellee’s motion to consolidate causes for trial and in overruling, appellant’s motion to separate said causes for trial; 2) that the trial court erred in giving appellee’s Instruction No. 7; and 3) that the trial court *411erred in overruling appellant’s motion to strike the testimony of Cletus Stabler.
As to point number one, appellant contends that the issue of contributory negligence — which was a defense to her son’s cause of action — was allowed to spill over and cloud the issues in her cause of action.
Rule 1-4A, adopted October 15, 1957, effective January 1, 1958, is applicable to the instant case and is as follows:
“Consolidation — Separate trials. — (a) Consolidation. When actions (other than criminal) involving a common question of law or fact are pending before the court, it may order a joint hearing or trial of any or all the matters in issue in the actions; it may order all the actions consolidated; and it may make such orders concerning proceedings therein as may tend to avoid unnecessary costs or delay.
“(b) Separate trials. The court in furtherance of convenience or to avoid prejudice may order a separate trial of any claim, cross-claim, or counter-claim, or of any separate issue or of any number of claims, cross-claims, counterclaims, or issues.”
In support of her contention that the trial court erred in overruling her motion to separate causes, appellant cites Kizer v. Hazelett, 221 Ind. 575, 49 N. E. 2d 543 (1943). In Kizer plaintiff-appellee sued her son — she was a guest passenger in his vehicle — for wanton and wilful misconduct and the operator of the other vehicle for negligence, both in a single paragraph. Both defendants appealed a judgment for the plaintiff alleging that the trial court abused its discretion in overruling their motions to separate. Our Supreme Court reversed, holding that the trial court erred in overruling defendant’s several motions for separate trials.
The factual difference in Kizer is apparent. Plaintiff-passenger in that case filed two causes of action — not just one as in the instant case — each requiring a different burden of proof. Appellant in the instant case did not sue her son, the operator of the vehicle in which she was riding, but *412she and her son both sued appellee alleging that the actions of defendant-appellee’s truck driver were the sole and proximate cause of the accident. Kizer is not in point and not determinitive of the issue in the instant case.
Hoesel v. Cain; Kahler v. Cain, 222 Ind. 330, 53 N. E. 2d 165 (1944), followed very closely the Kizer case — both in time and similarity of facts. However, in Hoesel neither appellant filed a motion for separate trials. Notwithstanding their failure to file the proper motion, appellants, citing Kizer, urged the Supreme Court to reverse because of the confusion which resulted from the complicated issues. Although the Supreme Court reversed on improper instructions, they did discuss the issue of consolidation and stated that Kizer did not mean that “the several issues of wilful and negligent injury can never be fairly presented in one trial.” (Id. at 347, 53 N. E. 2d 171.)
The general rule for appellate review of consolidation under Rule 1-4 A (a), Rules of the Supreme Court of Indiana, was stated by Judge Cooper, speaking for this court in Brennan v. Reydell, 134 Ind. App. 298, at 301, 187 N. E. 2d 492, at 494, (1963) :
“ [G] enerally a consolidation of causes of action cannot be successfully demanded as a matter of right, but is to be granted or denied in the discretion of the trial court, and such ruling is not cause for reversal unless such discretion is manifestly abused.” (Citing cases.)
Recognizing that a showing of prejudice is a prerequisite to a finding by this court that the discretion of the trial court was abused, appellant, in her brief, attempts to show that she was prejudiced. Being somewhat overzealous, however, counsel for appellant attempted to show prejudice by affidavits1 which purport to prove that the jury believed both *413drivers were at fault and, therefore, appellant should have recovered — contributory negligence not being a defense to her action. While the court would not penalize the litigants because of the action of counsel,2 we believe that counsel for appellant was made aware, at the time of oral argument, of this court’s disapproval of such action.
It is the law in Indiana that affidavits of jurors will not be received to impeach their verdict. See: Sinclair v. Roush, 14 Ind. 450 (1860); Stanley v. Sutherland, et al., Administrators, 54 Ind. 339 (1876) ; Houseworth v. Bishop, 57 Ind. App. 62, 106 N. E. 380 (1914) ; 22 I.L.E., New Trial, § 129, p. 115.
Perhaps the best, and most recent, statement in Indiana concerning conduct such as counsel for appellant has displayed in the instant case appears in Wilson v. State, 253 Ind. 585, 255 N. E. 2d 817, at 821, 21 Ind. Dec. 1, at 6 (1970), wherein Judge Arterburn, speaking for our Supreme Court, said:
“A jury’s verdict may not be impeached by testimony of the jurors. Even the slightest consideration of such a practice under these circumstances would create an intolerable situation and no jury verdict would ever be lasting or conclusive.” (Citing cases.)
Aside from the affidavits, appellant’s assertion that she was prejudiced is based upon a reproduction of testimony found in the transcript. In effect, appellant urges us to view the evidence in a light most favorable to her. This is contrary to the well-established principle that on appeal the court will view the evidence in the light most favorable to appellee. Dent v. Dent, 241 Ind. 606, 613, 174 N. E. 2d 336 (1961) ; Shula v. Shula, 235 Ind. 210, 213, 132 N. E. 2d 612 (1956).
*414Appellant has failed to' show — and after a careful reading of the record before us we are unable to say — that appellant was prejudiced in that the jury was so confused that they returned a general verdict for appellee even though they believed appellee’s employee was negligent.
There was no abuse of the discretion lodged in the trial court by Rule 1-4A, supra, and thus no reversible error. It is worth noting, however, that Rule 1-4A, supra, was replaced, effective January 1, 1970, by Indiana Rules of Trial Procedure, Rule TR 42. Rule TR 42, however, would not change our decision on this issue in the instant case.
Appellant’s second specification of error centers on defendant’s tendered Instruction No. 7, which is as follows:
“If, after considering all of the evidence, you find that the accident might have been caused in several different ways other than as alleged by plaintiffs in their complaint and you cannot determine from the evidence what was the proximate cause of the accident, then there can be no recovery by either plaintiff and you may return a verdict for the defendant.”
Appellant urges that this instruction was error for three different reasons:
(A) It is a mandatory instruction which incorrectly states the law regarding an essential element of the appellant’s cause of action, proximate cause.
(B) It instructs the jury regarding matters outside of the issues presented by the pleadings and proof.
(C) It is, in effect, a “mere accident” instruction which was given in a case where the evidence clearly indicates that the accident was caused, at least in part, by the negligence of appellee’s driver.
Although counsel for appellant briefed and argued sub-point (B) above, she failed to raise the objection when she filed her written objections to instructions. It is the .law in Indiana that on appeal appellant may only raise points to which specific objections were made in *415the trial court. McCleary v. Mowery, 141 Ind. App. 672, 678, 231 N. E. 2d 165 (1968) (Transfer denied) ; Miller v. Deming Hotel Co., 139 Ind. App. 339, 342, 213 N. E. 2d 809 (1966) (Transfer denied) ; Drolet, Admtrx., etc. v. Pennsylvania R. Co., 130 Ind. App. 549, 558, 164 N. E. 2d 555 (1960) (Transfer denied).
Therefore, appellant waived any objection to Instruction No. 7 relating to- her argument that it instructed the jury regarding matters outside of the issues presented by the pleadings and proof. This is also true of the argument that the instruction ignores the possibility of concurring proximate cause. - .
Under subpoint (A) above, appellant argues that Instruction No. 7 was a mandatory instruction. With this contention we cannot agree. The definition of a mandatory instruction was reiterated by our Supreme Court in Perry v. Goss, 253 Ind. 603, 255 N. E. 2d 923, at 925, 20 Ind. Dec. 433, at 435 (1970), wherein Judge Arterburn, speaking for the court, stated:
“A mandatory instruction is one in which there is ah attempt to set out certain facts upon which the jury is directed to reach a certain result.” (Emphasis supplied.)
Instruction No. 7 does not set out certain facts; none of the parties are referred to by name; from this instruction it is impossible to tell how the accident occurred — in fact— one cannot even deduce that the accident referred to was an automobile accident. Instruction No. 7 does not meet the first element required — an enumeration of certain facts — and is, therefore, not mandatory.
Appellant’s subpoint (C) above charges that Instruction No. 7 is a “mere accident” instruction and, therefore,' it is reversible error. We agree that the giving of a “mere accident” instruction is reversible error. Miller v. Alvey, 246 Ind. 560, 566, 207 N. E. 2d 633 (1965); Jones v. Castor, 140 Ind. *416App. 342, 214 N. E. 2d 180, 65 A.L.R. 2d 12 (1967), (Transfer denied).
We also agree that the instruction need not contain the words “mere accident” or “pure accident.” As was stated by this court in Qualls v. J. C. Penney Company, 144 Ind. App. 276, 245 N. E. 2d 860, at 863, 17 Ind. Dec. 72 (1969), (Transfer denied) :
“As we interpret the above cited authorities, it is reversible error to give an instruction in which is incorporated the phrases ‘mere accident,’ ‘unavoidable accident’, ‘pure accident,’ or any form or phrase regardless of form which directly or indirectly conveys to the jury a mere accident situation.” (Emphasis supplied.)
That Instruction No. 7 does not contain the words “mere”, “pure”, or “unavoidable” is beyond dispute. Beyond this, however, we are of the opinion that the instruction does not convey, either directly or indirectly, to the jury a “mere accident” situation. In so finding we have not done as appellant suggests in subpoint (C), i.e., viewed the evidence in a light most favorable to appellant in order to conclude that “the accident was caused, at least in part, by the negligence of appellee’s driver.” As we have previously stated, the law in Indiana is exactly to the contrary.
Dent v. Dent, supra;
Shula v. Shula, supra.
Instruction No. 7, in our opinion, is directed at one element of plaintiff-appellant’s case — proximate cause. The trial court, by this instruction, told the jury that if plaintiff failed to carry her burden of persuasion and convince them that a proximate cause of the accident was as alleged by plaintiff, then the jury may return a verdict for defendant. This is a proper statement of the law, and it was not error for the trial court to so instruct the jury.
Appellant’s third specification of error is the trial court’s overruling of the motion to strike the testimony of Cletus *417Stabler. Mr. Stabler was the driver of the pick-up truck that was behind appellee’s tractor-trailer at the time of the accident. He was called as an “eyewitness” for appellee. Appellant asserts that he was a surprise witness, alleging that she did not learn of his identity or the fact that he would testify until the day before the trial commenced. Appellee alleges that counsel for appellant had notice that Mr. Stabler would testify during the week before trial. Without deciding, we will assume that counsel for appellant only learned of the witness the day before trial.
The statutory basis for this specification of error is found in Acts 1881 (Spec. Sess.), ch. 38, §420, p. 240, Ind. Stat. Anno., § 2-2401, Burns’ 1968 Eepl.,3 which, in pertinent part, is as follows:
“Causes For. — A new trial may be granted in the following cases:
* * *
“Third. Accident or surprise, which ordinary prudence could not have guarded against.”4 (Emphasis supplied.)
In support of her allegation of “surprise”, appellant contends that she was misled and hindered in the preparation of her case by certain answers to questions in the deposition of Mr. Nyle Jurczewsky, appellee’s employee and the driver of the truck. The questions and answers are as follows:
“Q. Do you know the name of the driver of the pickup truck?
“A. No, I do not.
“Q. Do you know the names of any other witnesses who may have seen the accident take place?
“A. No.”
The accident occurred on December 29, 1965, and the deposition was taken on February 4, 1969. We do not think it *418unusual that Mr. Jurczewsky did not remember.Mr. Stabler’s name. In fact, he testified at the trial that he had given the name of the witness, Cletus Stabler, which was written on a piece of paper, to his employer after the accident.
Appellant was, at all times, aware of a witness and the fact that the witness was in a pick-up truck. However, she apparently did not know his name until the day before trial. The surprise, if any, was the fact that the witness, Mr. Stabler, had given his name to appellete’s driver, Mr. Jurczewsky, at the scene of the accident. This fact was first brought out at the trial during the cross-examination of Mr. Stabler.
The record before us reveals that the only discovery undertaken by appellant-was the deposition of Mr. Jurczewsky, appellee’s truck driver. Further discovery proceedings permitted under' the statutes would have revealed the identity of the witness.
Surprise is a ground for new trial only when ordinary prudence could not have guarded against it. We cannot say that appellant has met the statutory test in the' instant case.
The trial court did not err in consolidating appellant’s cause for trial; the giving of defendant’s tendered Instruction No. 7; or in overruling appellant’s motions to strike the testimony of Mr. Cletus Stabler.
Judgment affirmed.
Pfaff and Sharp, JJ., concur.
White, J. concurs with opinion.
. Affidavit of one of the jurors, Mrs. Judith Marsh; and affidavit of counsel as to his conversation with one of the jurors, Mrs. Doris Uehlein.
. We should point out, however, that neither of the attorneys who briefed and argued this appeal is the attorney who signed or procured the affidavits.
. Acts 1881 (Spec. Sess.), ,ch. 38, §420, p. 240, Ind. Stat. Anno., § 2-2401, Burns’ 1968 Eepl., concerning new trials, was repealed by Acts 1969, ch. 191, § 3, effective January 1, 1970.
. The emphaized language is now in Indiana Rules of Trial Procedure, TR 59(A) (2), effective January 1,1970.

=== CASE 2218525 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:49.600123+00 ===

444 N.W.2d 325 (1989)
233 Neb. 222
Larry R. DEMERATH, Appellant,
v.
Delores A. DEMERATH, Appellee.
No. 87-723.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
August 18, 1989.
Larry R. Demerath, pro se.
James J. Frost of North & Black, P.C., Omaha, for appellee.
BOSLAUGH, CAPORALE, and GRANT, JJ., and SPRAGUE and MULLEN, District Judges.
PER CURIAM.
Larry R. Demerath appeals a judgment of the district court for Douglas County authorizing his former wife, Delores A. Demerath, to remove the children from the state.
"Generally, before the court will permit the removal of a minor child from the jurisdiction, the custodial parent must satisfy the court that there is a legitimate reason for leaving the state and that it is in the minor child's best interests to continue to live with that parent." Vanderzee v. Vanderzee, 221 Neb. 738, 739-40, 380 N.W.2d 310, 312 (1986); Maack v. Maack, 223 Neb. 342, 389 N.W.2d 318 (1986). The record shows that Delores has remarried and that she and her new husband wish to move to another state for business reasons.
"As a general rule, all other circumstances being equal, legitimate career changes of the custodial parent, whether they be job-related or matrimonial in nature, will support an application for changing the residence of a child placed in that parent's custody." ... If there is *326 a legitimate reason for the custodial parent's decision to leave the jurisdiction, the minor child will be allowed to accompany the custodial parent if the court finds it to be in the best interests of the child to continue to live with that parent.... Custody is not to be interpreted as a sentence to immobility.
(Citations omitted.) Hicks v. Hicks, 223 Neb. 189, 195, 388 N.W.2d 510, 515 (1986).
Based on our de novo review of the record, we conclude that allowing Delores to retain custody and remove the children is consistent with the best interests of the children. The trial court did not abuse its discretion in granting Delores' motion. In the absence of an abuse of discretion, a trial court's decision bearing upon the custody of minor children will not be disturbed on appeal. Maack v. Maack, supra.
The decision of the district court is affirmed.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 9739030 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:33.201987+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice.
PROCEDURAL HISTORY/ISSUES
Appellant Anthony Hahne (Anthony) is the ex-husband of Appellee Gloria Hahne (Gloria). He appeals from a judgment of the circuit court for Campbell County, after a show cause hearing, holding him in con*361tempt for (1) failing to make child support payments, and (2) failing to transfer ownership of a life insurance policy to Gloria as directed by the parties’ 1973 Minnesota decree of divorce and subsequent proceedings in that state. The circuit court ordered Anthony to pay $4,316.48 in child support arrearages and interest thereon, and to pay an amount equal to net cash value of the insurance policy, as of June 19, 1983. Anthony, via notice of appeal (Appeal No. 16043), asserts circuit court error in two respects:
(1) There were no child support arrear-ages to pay, per a Minnesota court order dated August 28, 1984; and
(2) Statutes of limitations barred Gloria’s claim regarding the life insurance policy-
Gloria, in turn, filed a notice of review (Appeal No. 16052) alleging that the circuit court erred in refusing to take jurisdiction of her claim for an award of alimony where the Minnesota court had, in 1984, awarded her none, but reserved jurisdiction over the question. We affirm the trial court on the alimony issue raised by Gloria, but reverse the trial court’s determinations regarding child support and the insurance policy.
FACTS
Hahnes were married in South Dakota on October 9, 1959. In 1968, they moved to Hibbing, Minnesota: They were divorced in Minnesota pursuant to a Decree of Divorce dated January 29,1973, issued by the District Court for Itasca County, Minnesota. Three children were born of the marriage, of which only the youngest, Brenda, is relevant to the present case. In addition to providing child support, the 1973 decree contained the following paragraph regarding a life insurance policy:
6. That the Defendant shall continue in force and effect the life insurance policy which he has, in the name of Perpetual Life Insurance Company, and shall designate as beneficiaries on said policy the three minor children of said marriage, and the defendant shall continue paying the premium on said policy and SAID POLICY SHALL BE ENDORSED SHOWING OWNERSHIP THEREIN IN THE PLAINTIFF, but the premiums due and payable thereon shall be paid by the defendant. (Emphasis added).
The divorce decree, provided, inter alia, “[tjhat the Plaintiff [Gloria] shall not be entitled to any alimony but the Court shall reserve jurisdiction of the question of alimony should the Plaintiff become unable to work because of physical impairment.” This provision was the fruit of a stipulation between the Hahnes, as noted in a subsequent order of the Minnesota Court, dated January 15,1974. This 1974 order directed Anthony to pay $1,600 alimony, in monthly payments of $100, after Gloria lost four months employment through temporary physical disability in 1973, due to an injury Gloria suffered during the marriage. That 1974 court order continued:
The granting of this lump sum alimony for the year 1973 should not be considered by the parties as an indication that the Court approves of continued applications for alimony by the plaintiff (Gloria) as it is this Court’s feeling that both parties should readjust their lives so as to become self-supporting without reliance upon each other in the future.
Thereafter, Gloria maintained employment as manager of a lounge or liquor store until September 1984. Her health deteriorated, as evidenced by five hospitalizations in 1981. By September 24, 1984, she became, according to a Social Security Administration ruling, totally disabled, entitling her to disability insurance benefits (now $304 per month). Gloria, by her testimony, has no income other than the disability payments. She owns her own home, worth $45,000, which she paid for with funds she received from an inheritance.
In 1983, Gloria returned to the Minnesota court seeking alimony and child support arrearages. The resulting court order, dated January 11, 1983, noted that Anthony owed no obligations for the older children (Anthony had custody of a son, Paul, while Debra had become emancipated), but established Anthony’s child support payments for Brenda at $200 per month, starting in February 1983.
*362Anthony testified in the current proceedings that he stopped paying child support for Brenda in August 1983, although she was at that time nineteen and support was to be paid until she attained the age of twenty-one or became independent. The Minnesota court held a hearing on August 10, 1984, at which Gloria was represented by counsel, but Anthony appeared pro se. The Minnesota Court’s findings and order, dated August 28, 1984, contains the following provision regarding child support:
5. The Court further finds that the daughter of the parties, Brenda, now age 20, resides with the Petitioner, that she is self-sufficient and under the terms and conditions of the original decree is no longer the obligation of the Respondent to support.
The court denied Gloria alimony at that time, but retained jurisdiction over the issue. The judge who signed the order of August 28, 1984, subsequently wrote, in a letter to Gloria’s counsel, dated October 1, 1984, that:
I have reviewed the file and find that I am unable to amend the same as it relates to child support or attorney’s fees, absent a specific motion to do so.
It was my intention that support be awarded as per the Order, and I was of the opinion that Mrs. Hahne, currently being the moving party, should have provided for her own attorney’s fees.
The above is the entire text of the judge’s letter. On October 16, 1987, Anthony’s counsel sent a letter to the Minnesota judge requesting that he indicate whether his 1984 order meant that no child support was due in 1983 or 1984. The judge responded in a letter dated October 22, 1987: “I have again reviewed my file. I find that I did not make any order requiring Mr. Hahne to pay support. The issue of support was litigated and the Court made no order. To me that obviously means that none was due and owing.” Gloria now maintains that the matter of child support arrearages was not before the Minnesota court in 1984 although Anthony admitted in the current South Dakota proceeding that he had not been paying child support since August 1983. Anthony, on the other hand, testified that the Minnesota court had “told me I didn’t have to pay child support ar-rearages” but produced no court documents substantiating his claim.
In 1987, notwithstanding the Minnesota decree and hearings in Minnesota thereon, before the circuit court for Campbell County, South Dakota, Gloria sought, and was granted, an order for Anthony to show cause why he should not be held in contempt for not paying his past due child support for Brenda. He was also ordered to show cause as to his failure to transfer ownership of his life insurance policy to Gloria, as mandated by the original 1973 divorce decree. Gloria also requested alimony. By then, Gloria was residing in Iowa, and Anthony resided in South Dakota. The circuit court, after a hearing held on June 11, 1987, during which Gloria’s counsel asked the court for an alimony award of $1,000 a month, issued findings of fact and conclusions of law to the effect that 1) Anthony had failed to pay thirteen months of child support, from August 1983 through August 1984, at which point the Minnesota Court had terminated his future obligations, 2) Gloria was entitled to the net cash value, plus interest, of the life insurance policy, as of June 19, 1983, the date the youngest child, Brenda, became eighteen years old, and 3) the South Dakota court did not have jurisdiction to consider the question of alimony. These appeals followed.
DECISION
A. ANTHONY’S NOTICE OF APPEAL (No. 16043)
I. CHILD SUPPORT
Child Support Is Barred by Res Judicata
Anthony first argues that Gloria’s claim for child support arrearages incurred in 1983 and 1984 is barred by the doctrine of res judicata. We agree.
“The doctrine of res judicata serves as claim preclusion to prevent relitigation of an issue actually litigated or which could have been properly raised and determined *363in a prior action.” Black Hills Jewelry Mfg. Co. v. Felco Jewel Industries, 336 N.W.2d 153, 157 (S.D.1983). See, also, Schmidt v. Zellmer, 298 N.W.2d 178, 180 (S.D.1980). For the purposes of res judica-ta, a cause of action is comprised of the facts which give rise to, or establish, the right a party seeks to enforce. Nelson v. Hawkeye Security Ins. Co., 369 N.W.2d 379, 381 (S.D.1985); Black Hills Jewelry, 336 N.W.2d, at 157. In applying these rules to Gloria’s claim for child support, we must determine whether the wrong sought to be redressed is the same in both actions. Black Hills Jewelry, 336 N.W.2d, at 157.
The facts upon which Gloria relies to establish her claim for child support arrearages are the existence of the 1983 Minnesota court order directing Anthony to pay $200 child support per month for Brenda, and Anthony’s nonpayment of such support since August, 1983. In 1984, as revealed by the Minnesota court order dated August 28,1984, according to both of these parties, Anthony had not been paying child support for a full year. The operative facts at the time of the 1984 Minnesota proceeding, by the testimony given at the 1987 show cause hearing in South Dakota, were Anthony’s obligation to pay child support for . Brenda, and Brenda’s emancipation, which Anthony used as justification for his nonpayment of such ordered support. These facts resulted in the Minnesota court’s order which ended Anthony’s responsibility for child support. They are likewise, the foundation of Gloria’s current request for arrearages. Clearly, the wrong addressed in 1984 was Anthony’s stoppage of support, the same wrong for which Gloria seeks redress now, as the facts are the same in both the 1984 Minnesota and 1987 South Dakota proceedings. Under Black Hills Jewelry, supra Gloria’s claim for child support is barred:
Res judicata is premised upon two maxims: A person should not be twice vexed for the same cause and public policy is best served when litigation has a repose, (citation omitted) These maxims are served when the parties have had a fair opportunity to place their claims in prior litigation, (citation omitted).
Black Hills Jewelry, 336 N.W.2d, at 157.
We reject Gloria’s argument that res ju-dicata does not apply for the simple reason that Anthony’s nonpayment of child support was an existing fact which was either known or should have been known and litigated in the 1984 Minnesota action. See, e.g., Nelson, 369 N.W.2d, at 381. She has had her day in court. This Court wrote, in Keith v. Witters Truck Service, 64 S.D. 274, 266 N.W. 256 (1936):
There is a difference between the effect of a judgment as a bar or estoppel against the prosecution of a second action upon the same claim or demand, and its effect as an estoppel in another action between the same parties upon a different claim or cause of action. In the former case, the judgment, if rendered upon the merits, constitutes an absolute bar to a subsequent action. It is a finality as the claim or demand in controversy, concluding parties and those in privity with them, not only as to every matter which was offered and received to sustain or defeat the claim or demand, but as to any other admissible matter which might have been offered for that purpose. * * ⅜ ‘Where it is sought to apply the estoppel of a judgment rendered upon one cause of action to matters arising in a suit upon a different cause of action, the inquiry must always be as to the point or question actually litigated and determined’.
Keith, 64 S.D., at 275-6, 266 N.W., at 257 (quoting, in part, Cromwell v. County of Sac, 94 U.S. (4 Otto) 351, 352, 24 L.Ed. 195, 198 (1876)). Here, Gloria’s 1987 child support claim in South Dakota was occasioned by the same facts as her 1984 Minnesota claim, and, essentially, constituted the same cause of action.
We note, in this regard, that Minnesota Courts have authority to forgive past child support arrearages, as the Minnesota court did in 1984. See, e.g., Stich v. Stick, 435 N.W.2d 848 (Minn.App.1989); LaValle v. LaValle, 430 N.W.2d 224 (Minn.App.1988); Young v. Young, 356 N.W.2d 823 *364(Minn.App.1984). The Minnesota court thus had jurisdiction to rule as it did, a requirement for application of the doctrine of res judicata. See, Black Hills Jewelry, 336 N.W.2d, at 157.
In reaching our decision, which is consistent with the import of the two letters penned by the Minnesota court, we do not rely on those letters. These letters, as statements, other than one made by the declarant while testifying at the trial or hearing, offered in evidence to prove the truth of the matter asserted, are hearsay as defined by SDCL 19-16-1. We do, however, take note of Gloria’s testimony, at the 1987 show cause hearing, to the effect that she came to the South Dakota courts because the Minnesota judge was unfair. This indicates forum-shopping on her part. Also, the record below, specifically reflected by Gloria’s affidavit in support of her motion to show cause, contains an allegation that she was entitled to child support for Brenda from January to July of 1985, after the Minnesota court determined Brenda to be emancipated. This reinforces our conviction that Gloria was attempting to relitigate issues decided in 1984. The trial court’s decision regarding child support is, therefore, reversed.
II. STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS
Statute of Limitation Bars Claim on Insurance Policy
Anthony also maintains that Gloria’s claim for the cash value of the insurance policy, valued at $4,000, is barred by a statute of limitations. We agree and reverse the trial court on this issue.
The Minnesota court’s divorce decree, which directed Anthony to place the insurance policy under Gloria’s ownership, was dated January 29, 1973, fourteen years before Gloria sought to enforce this order in the current proceedings. Anthony argues that Gloria’s claim is barred under either SDCL 15-2-8,1 the ten-year statute of limitations which applies to actions upon judgments of sister states or SDCL 15-2-13(4). The latter statute provides for a six-year limitation on “[a]n action for taking, detaining, or injuring any goods or chattels, including actions for specific recovery of personal property.” Of these two statutes, it is clear that SDCL 15-2-8, governing foreign judgments, applies. See, e.g., Matson v. Matson, 333 N.W.2d 862, 866-8 (Minn.1983) (10-year limitation on actions or foreign judgments applies to action to collect foreign child support arrearages). A specific statute, i.e., SDCL 15-2-8, does control over the general statute. Hartpence v. Youth Forestry Camp, 325 N.W.2d 292, 295 (S.D.1982).
To avoid the application of statutes of limitation in this case, Gloria argues that she was not entitled to the full benefits conferred by ownership of the insurance policy until June 18, 1983, the time when the parties’ youngest minor child became 18. We disagree. The 1973 divorce decree directed Anthony to endorse the policy “showing ownership therein in the Plaintiff [Gloria].” Her right to enforce the order to ownership provision vested at that time, January 29, 1973. Gloria asserts that all elements of her cause of action did not manifest themselves until 1983, relying on Grimm v. Ford Motor Company, 157 Mich.App. 633, 403 N.W.2d 482 (1986). We find Grimm wholly distinguishable, as it concerned wrongful death, for which the cause of action was held to accrue when death occurred. Gloria was entitled to ownership from the outset, i.e., 1973. Further, Gloria testified that she had unsuccessfully attempted to ascertain the actual ownership in the past. She, by her own words, had some realization that she should check the ownership of the policy, yet she failed to do so. There is no evidence of *365fraud on Anthony’s part.2 Likewise, there is no evidence of any affirmative act by fraudulent concealment on Anthony’s part which would toll the statute. See, e.g., Delany v. Delany, 402 N.W.2d 701, 704 (S.D.1987).
In the absence of some trust or confidential relationship between the parties there must be some affirmative act or conduct on the part of the defendant designed to prevent, and which does prevent, the discovery of the cause of action. Mere silence, in the absence of a duty to speak, is not ordinarily sufficient.
Glad v. Gunderson, Farrar, Aldrich and DeMersseman, 378 N.W.2d 680, 682 (S.D.1985) (quoting Hinkle v. Hargens, 76 S.D. 520, 525, 81 N.W.2d 888, 891 (1957)).
Here, the cause of action accrued immediately, there was no fraud or fraudulent concealment, and no trust or confidential relationship. Gloria’s action was time-barred. Accordingly, the trial court is reversed on this issue. In view of this holding, we do not reach Anthony’s argument that Gloria failed to prove service of the 1973 divorce decree to him.
B. GLORIA’S NOTICE OF REVIEW, No. 16052
Minnesota Has Alimony Jurisdiction— Not South Dakota
By notice of review, Gloria seeks reversal of the trial court’s refusal to take jurisdiction to consider her request for alimony. She asks for alimony under a 1973 Minnesota divorce decree and subsequent order reserving jurisdiction over the matter entered in 1984.
We begin by noting that the Minnesota decree and order which she now seeks to enforce in South Dakota do not order Anthony to pay alimony. There is simply no alimony order to enforce. Restatement, Conflict of Laws, § 109, provides that a judgment rendered in one state need not be recognized or enforced in another state insofar as that judgment remains modifiable in the state of rendition. Patently, the decree and order do not direct Anthony to pay alimony. Any responsibility for alimony under the Minnesota judgments is conditional on Gloria’s becoming physically incapacitated. A court, either of law or equity, has no authority to enforce conditional foreign child support orders when the occurrence or nonoccurrence of that condition has not been adjudicated in the original court. Whitfield v. Saulsberry, 247 Ala. 690, 26 So.2d 93, 94 (1946). As the Minnesota court expressly retained the power to modify as to any possible alimony award, we deem it is Minnesota’s jurisdictional forum, not ours.
We further note, as we did regarding Issue I, Gloria’s statement under cross-examination that she did not return to the Minnesota court because she thought that the Minnesota judge was very unfair; further, she maintains she was never really given the relief for which she prayed. We observe that this is naked forum-shopping. The intent of the Minnesota court can, perhaps, be gleaned from its language in the decree of January 17, 1974, whereby Gloria was awarded lump sum alimony for her last employment during 1974: “It is the Court’s feeling that both parties should readjust their lives so as to become self-supporting without reliance upon each other in the future.”
We affirm the trial court in its declination of jurisdiction. No final judgment on alimony existed, only a conditional award with the condition unadjudicated. As the Minnesota court reserved jurisdiction over this matter, we leave determination of this issue to that forum.
Although Gloria has petitioned this Court for appellate attorney’s fees, we do not, on this record, award such.
Affirmed in part, reversed in part.
MORGAN and MILLER, JJ., concur.
WUEST, C.J., and SABERS, J., dissent.
. SDCL 15-2-8 provides, in pertinent part:
Except where, in special cases, a different limitation is prescribed by statute, the following civil actions other than for the recovery of real property can be commenced only within ten years after the cause of action shall have accrued:
(1) An action upon a judgment or decree of any court of the United States, or any state or territory other than this state within the United States; ....
. SDCL 15-2-3 provides that causes of action for relief on the grounds of fraud do not accrue until the aggrieved party discovers, or has actual or constructive notice of the facts constituting fraud.

=== CASE 9739031 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:33.206536+00 ===

*366SABERS, Justice
(dissenting).
1.Child support.
I would affirm the trial court on child support. The January 11, 1983, order states that Anthony was “current through the month of June, 1982,” but must pay $116 per month thereafter until February 1983 when the monthly payments will increase to $200. The August 28,1984, order merely states that Anthony “no longer” is obligated to make the child support payments. Gloria subsequently instituted this action seeking to have the child support order enforced. The trial court reasonably concluded that Anthony had not fulfilled his obligation and found him in contempt of the Minnesota court’s orders.
Contrary to the opinion of the majority, Gloria was not attempting to relitigate the issue of child support. Instead she was simply requesting that South Dakota give full faith and credit to the Minnesota orders and enforce them. The trial court enforced the orders in accordance with its interpretation of the orders. “[I]t is the court’s responsibility to construe the judgment so as to give effect to the intention of the trial court[.]” In re Marriage of Cross, 55 Or.App. 422, 425, 637 P.2d 1386, 1388 (1981); see also Erbe v. Eady, 406 So.2d 936 (Ala.Civ.App.1981) (court interpreted uncertainty in a California divorce decree), writ denied, 406 So.2d 939 (Ala.1981), cert. denied, 456 U.S. 990, 102 S.Ct. 2270, 73 L.Ed.2d 1285 (1982); Lester v. Lester, 104 Idaho 244, 245, 658 P.2d 915, 916 (1983) (Court may “refer to the circumstances surrounding the making of the judgment in attempting to interpret it.”). Since the trial court’s interpretation of the Minnesota orders is reasonable and supported by the evidence, it should be upheld. See Halverson v. Halverson, 381 N.W.2d 69 (Minn.Ct.App.1986).
2.Endorsement of life insurance policy.
I would also affirm the trial court on this issue because the statute of limitations does not run on a judgment which requires continuing payments and transfer of ownership. The situation may be otherwise if the life insurance policy were paid up. The statute of limitations would start to run from the expiration of the judgment or from a known breach.
3.Alimony.
The Minnesota trial court reserved judgment on alimony. Although the South Dakota court can accept jurisdiction and modify judgment, it does not have to. Restatement (Second) of Conflict of Laws § 109(2) (1971); * see also People of the State of New York ex rel. Halvey v. Halvey, 330 U.S. 610, 614, 67 S.Ct. 903, 906, 91 L.Ed. 1133, 1136 (1947) (“So far as the Full Faith and Credit Clause is concerned, what Florida could do in modifying the [divorce] decree, New York may do.”). But here, the trial court (Judge Berndt) concluded he could not accept jurisdiction and modify the judgment on the basis that he thought he had no jurisdiction. He was incorrect in this and it should be remanded to him to correct and for him to determine if he will modify, since he can.
An additional reason to remand for this purpose is the fact that we have an Iowa plaintiff attempting to obtain relief from a South Dakota defendant and it would be extremely inequitable to require her to return to the original state, Minnesota, for the purpose of obtaining a judgment, and then to require her to return to South Dakota to enforce that judgment against the South Dakota resident.
4.Appellate attorney’s fees.
In consideration of the various factors I would award Gloria appellate attorney’s fees of $1,000. Storm v. Storm, 400 N.W.2d 457 (S.D.1987).
5.Motion to strike.
I would grant Gloria’s motion to strike Exhibits C and D because they were produced and obtained ex parte after Judge Berndt’s memorandum opinion was issued.
*367Accordingly, I would dissent from the majority opinion.
I am authorized to state that WUEST, C.J., joins in this dissent.
The trial court and the majority have misread, the Restatement. Section 109 is a permissive grant of power to the second court. Although the second court is not obligated to enforce a modifiable judgment, it is free to do so. Moreover, as comment c explains, the second court is as free to modify the judgment as is the original court.

=== CASE 9739032 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:38.961078+00 ===

POPOVICH, Chief Justice.
Pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 480.061 (1988) the Honorable Edward J. Devitt, of the United States District Court, District of Minnesota, Sixth Division, certified the following questions to this court after denying a motion to dismiss:
1. Does Minn.Stat. § 65B.49, subd. 3a(7), preclude underinsured motorist coverage where the motorcycle is an insured vehicle but not for uninsured/underinsured motorist coverage?
2. Pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 65B.49, subd. 3a(5), when a person is injured while operating his own motorcycle which is insured for liability coverage only, is he considered to be “occupying a motor vehicle” for purposes of claims to underinsured motorist benefits?
3. May an insurer enforce an exclusion in its policy of insurance which provides that underinsured motorist coverage does not apply to bodily injury sustained by a person “while occupying a motor vehicle owned by you or a relative for which insurance is not afforded under this part, or when struck by the motor vehicle”?
I.
In its order of October 20, 1988, the federal district court set forth the following facts giving rise to the certified questions:
On September 9, 1986, Randy Donald Roering was involved in a collision with a motor vehicle operated by Kenneth Proell. Randy Roering was operating a motorcycle he owned and was killed as a result of the collision. The motorcycle, which was owned and operated by Randy Roering, was insured through a policy of insurance issued by Foremost Insurance Company. This policy did not provide uninsured/underinsured motorist coverage.
On the date of the accident, Donald Roer-ing, the deceased’s father, was insured by respondent Grinnell Mutual Reinsurance Company. Randy Roering was a member of Donald Roering’s household on September 9, 1986. The Grinnell policy of insurance contained underinsured motorist coverage in the amount of $50,000. The vehicles for which insurance was afforded under Grinnell’s policy issued to Donald Roering were a 1977 GMC pickup truck and a 1979 Chevrolet Caprice.
Donald Roering submitted a claim to Grinnell Mutual for underinsured motorist benefits to cover the accident of September 9,1986, when his son was riding the motorcycle. Grinnell denied coverage, pursuant to the exclusions portion of Donald Roer-ing’s policy governing uninsured/underin-sured motorist coverage. The policy states:
This coverage [uninsured motorist/underinsured motorist] does not apply to bodily injury sustained by a person:
(1) while occupying a motor vehicle owned by you or a relative for which insurance is not afforded under this part, or when struck by the motor vehicle.
(Emphasis in original).
Donald Roering, as trustee for the heirs of Randy Donald Roering, decedent, brought this action seeking a declaration by the federal district court, pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 2201 (1982), establishing the rights and obligations of the parties under Minnesota law and the insurance policy issued by Grinnell Mutual Reinsurance Company.
II.
Minn.Stat. § 65B.49, subd. 3a(7)
Respondent argues that underin-sured motorist coverage under the Grinnell policy is precluded by Minn.Stat. § 65B.49, *831subd. 3a(7). The statute provides in pertinent part:
(7) The uninsured and underinsured motorist coverages required by this subdivision do not apply to bodily injury of the insured while occupying a motor vehicle owned by the insured, unless the occupied vehicle is an insured motor vehicle.
Under subdivision 3a(7), an insured operating a motor vehicle owned by the insured, but not covered by insurance, is precluded from obtaining uninsured or underinsured motorist coverage under a policy issued on another car for which he is insured. This policy is designed to encourage motor vehicle owners to secure insurance on all of their vehicles. See Balderrama v. Milbank Mutual Ins. Co., 324 N.W.2d 355, 358 (Minn.1982).
Appellant argues that Randy Roering was occupying an “insured motor vehicle” at the time of his accident and therefore is eligible to receive uninsured and underin-sured motorist coverage under his father, Donald Roering’s, policy. Randy Roering purchased the necessary level of coverage required by Minn.Stat. § 65B.48, subd. 5 (1988), the Minnesota statute governing insurance for motorcycles.1 The insurance policy on his motorcycle contained only liability coverage and did not have any provision for underinsured motorist coverage, since such coverage is not required for motorcycles in Minnesota.
In Hanson v. American Family Mutual Ins. Co., 417 N.W.2d 94 (Minn.1987), we interpreted the language of Minn.Stat. § 65B.49, subd. 3a(7). The plaintiff Thomas Hanson was injured when an uninsured jeep struck the uninsured motorcycle he was operating. In addition to the motorcycle, Hanson owned a 1974 Ford pickup truck at the time of the accident. The truck was insured by defendant American Family under a policy that included uninsured motorist coverage in the amount of $25,000 per person. Hanson filed a claim under the policy on his pickup truck, alleging that coverage extended to an accident that occurred while he was operating his motorcycle. We denied coverage to Hanson based on our reading of the intent of the legislature in enacting subdivision 3a(7) under the 1985 amendments to the No-Fault Act:
The amendments also designated the occupied motor vehicle as the primary source of uninsured or underinsured motorist coverage, and otherwise limited the occupant’s ability to collect additional like coverage. Minn.Stat. § 65B.49, subd. 3a(5). The legislature hoped, by these changes, to stem rising insurance costs, which it traced in part to prior law requiring expansive interpretation of vehicle insurance coverage. Allowing a claimant to extend uninsured motorist coverage from an automobile to an owned but uninsured motorcycle runs counter to the thrust of the 1985 legislation.
Id. at 96 (citation omitted).
This case differs from Hanson since Roering’s motorcycle was fully insured under the law. Judge Devitt reached the same conclusion in denying respondent’s motion to dismiss:
Section 65B.49, subd. 3a(7), as construed in Hanson, does not preclude coverage in this case because here the motorcycle was insured, not uninsured. Following the Hanson court’s lead, this court looks to the definition of “uninsured motor vehicle” in § 65B.43, subd. 16, for guidance in construing “insured motor vehicle’*’ in § 65B.49, subd. 3a(7). From that definition, the court concludes that decedent’s motorcycle was an “insured motor vehicle” for purposes of subd. 3a(7) because it carried the mandatory coverage required by the Act. Subdivision 3a(7) does not preclude coverage where “the *832occupied vehicle is an insured motor vehicle."
Since Roering carried the necessary amount of insurance required under the law, his motorcycle qualifies as an “insured motor vehicle” under subdivision 3a(7).2 We agree with the federal district court and answer the first certified question in the negative.
III.
Minn.Stat. § 65B49, subd. 3a(5)
Minn.Stat. § 65B.49, subd. 3a(5) provides:
(5) If at the time of the accident the injured person is occupying a motor vehicle, the limit of liability for uninsured and underinsured motorist coverages available to the injured person is the limit specified for that motor vehicle. However, if the injured person is occupying a motor vehicle of which the injured person is not an insured, the injured person may be entitled to excess insurance protection afforded by a policy in which the injured party is otherwise insured. The excess insurance protection is limited to the extent of covered damages sustained, and further is available only to the extent by which the limit of liability for like coverage applicable to any one motor vehicle listed on the automobile insurance policy of which the injured person is an insured exceeds the limit of liability of the coverage available to the injured person from the occupied motor vehicle.
If at the time of the accident the injured person is not occupying a motor vehicle, the injured person is entitled to select any one limit of liability for any one vehicle afforded by a policy under which the injured person is insured.
This subdivision provides different levels of coverage for an injured person based on whether he was “occupying a motor vehicle” at the timé of the accident. If the injured person is occupying a motor vehicle under the policy of which he is an insured, his limit of liability for uninsured and underinsured motorist coverage is the limit specified for that particular motor vehicle. If the injured person is not occupying a motor vehicle, he is entitled to select any one limit of liability afforded by another policy under which he is insured.
Appellant argues that Roering was not “occupying a motor vehicle” at the time of his accident since a motorcycle is not a “motor vehicle” under this statute. Minn. Stat. § 65B.43 (1988) sets forth three definitions involving the term “motor vehicle”:
Subd. 2. “Motor vehicle” means every vehicle, other than a motorcycle or other vehicle with fewer than four wheels, which (a) is required to be registered pursuant to chapter 168, and (b) is designed to be self-propelled by an engine or motor for use primarily upon public roads, highways or streets in the transportation of persons or property, and includes a trailer with one or more wheels, when the trailer is connected to or being towed by a motor vehicle.
[[Image here]]
Subd. 16. “Uninsured motor vehicle” means a motor vehicle or motorcycle for which a plan of reparation security meeting the requirements of sections 65B.41 to 65B.71 is not in effect.
Subd. 17. “Underinsured motor vehicle” means a motor vehicle or motorcycle to which a bodily injury liability policy applies at the time of the accident but its limit for bodily injury liability is less than the amount needed to compensate the insured for actual damages.
Motorcycles are excluded from the general definition of “motor vehicle” in subdivision 2, but are considered motor vehicles when the motorcycle is uninsured or underin-sured as defined in subdivisions 16 and 17.
In past cases we have held that motorcycles are motor vehicles when the motorcycle involved in the accident was either uninsured or underinsured. See Hanson v. American Family Mutual Ins. Co., 417 *833N.W.2d 94, 96 (Minn.1987) (plaintiff injured when an uninsured jeep struck the uninsured motorcycle he was operating); Gudvangen v. Austin Mutual Ins. Co., 284 N.W.2d 813, 817 (Minn.1978) (minor injured while a passenger on an uninsured motorcycle). In the present case, Randy Roer-ing’s motorcycle was fully insured and does not qualify as an uninsured or underin-sured vehicle under subdivisions 16 or 17. Thus, the general definition of “motor vehicle” contained in subdivision 2 applies in this case and Roering’s motorcycle does not qualify as a motor vehicle under that definition. Since Roering was not “occupying a motor vehicle” under Minn.Stat. § 65B.49, subd. 3a(5) at the time of the accident, he is entitled to select any one limit of liability for any one vehicle afforded by a policy under which he is insured. We answer the second certified question in the negative.
IV. ■
The Grinnell Policy Exclusion
Appellant argues that restrictive language in the Grinnell policy conflicts with the 1985 Minnesota law mandating underinsured motorist coverage and therefore is unenforceable. Donald Roering’s policy provides:
This coverage [uninsured motorist/underinsured motorist] does not apply to bodily injury sustained by a person:
(1) while occupying a motor vehicle owned by you or a relative for which insurance is not afforded under this part, or when struck by the motor vehicle.
(Emphasis in original). As a result of this exclusionary language, appellant would be unable to obtain coverage under the Grin-nell policy. Since Randy Roering’s motorcycle was a “vehicle owned by you or a relative” but was not “afforded insurance” under the Grinnell policy, the exclusion would apply and he would not qualify for coverage.
This court has held that contract provisions which conflict with statutory law will not be enforced. AMCO Ins. Co. v. Lang, 420 N.W.2d 895, 900 (Minn.1988); Burgraff v. Aetna Life & Casualty Co., 346 N.W.2d 627, 632 (Minn.1984). Under the facts of this case, Grinnell’s exclusion would deny appellant coverage guaranteed under the No-Fault Act. The Act provides that:
If at the time of the accident the injured person is not occupying a motor vehicle, the injured person is entitled to select any one limit of liability for any one vehicle afforded by a policy under which the injured person is insured.
Minn.Stat. § 65B.49, subd. 3a(5). The Grin-nell policy language results in an exclusion broader than permitted under the No-Fault Act. Although appellant would be entitled to recover under the Act, the policy exclusion restricts his recovery to accidents occurring with vehicles owned by himself or a relative that are afforded insurance by Grinnell. Such an exclusion conflicts with the coverage guaranteed by the No-Fault Act and is invalid. Therefore, appellant is not excluded from underinsured coverage under Donald Roering’s policy. We answer the third certified question in the negative.3
Certified questions answered.
. Minn.Stat. § 65B.48, subd. 5 provides:
Subd. 5. Every owner of a motorcycle registered or required to be registered in this state or operated in this state by the owner or with the owner’s permission shall provide and maintain security for the payment of tort liabilities arising out of the maintenance or use of the motorcycle in this state. Security may be provided by a contract of liability insurance complying with section 65B.49, subdivision 3, or by qualifying as a self insurer in the manner provided in subdivision 3.
. The dissent relies on 1974 legislative history to interpret the meaning of "insured” status under Minn.Stat. § 65B.49, subd. 3a(7). Subdivision 3a(7), however, was not discussed by the legislature in 1974 and was not adopted until the No-Fault Act of 1985.
. The certified question asks broadly whether an exclusion similar to the one in the Grinnell policy is enforceable. We limit our answer to the facts of the present case and the particular exclusion contained in the Grinnell policy.

=== CASE 9739033 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:38.965735+00 ===

COYNE, Justice
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent. I read neither Minn.Stat. § 65B.49, subd. 3a (1988) nor our decision in Hanson v. American Family Mut. Ins. Co., 417 N.W.2d 94 (Minn.1987), as excluding bodily injury sustained by a motorcyclist from the underinsured motorist coverage afforded by a plan of reparation security insuring an automobile as punishment for the motorcyclist’s failure to procure liability insurance on the motorcycle. Both statute and decision, it seems to me, are intended to preclude the transfer of uninsured and underinsured motorist coverage provided in a plan of reparation security from the vehicle de*834scribed in that plan to an owned vehicle— regardless whether it has four or fewer than four wheels — which is not described in a plan of reparation security affording uninsured and underinsured motorist coverage.
Like the present case, Hanson v. American Family Mut. Ins. Co., came to this court as a question certified by the United States District Court, District of Minnesota. In that case we answered in the affirmative the question — does Minn.Stat. § 65B.49, subd. 3a(7) (1986), preclude uninsured coverage when the injured claimant is riding an uninsured motorcycle at the time of the injury?— a question almost identical to the first question posed here. In so doing we recognized that the 1985 amendments governing uninsured and underinsured motorist coverage, Act of June 27,1985, ch. 10, § 68,1985 Minn. Laws 1840-42, codified as amended at Minn.Stat. § 65B.49, subd. 3a, had overridden the principle adopted in Nygaard v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 301 Minn. 10, 221 N.W.2d 151 (1974), that uninsured motorist coverage followed the person and not the vehicle. Because the no-fault act “placefd] no geographical limits on coverage and [did] not purport to tie protection against uninsured motorists to occupancy of the insured vehicle,” in Nygaard and its progeny the court had invalidated policy language designed to exclude from coverage claims for injuries sustained while the insured person occupied an owned but uninsured vehicle. Id. at 19, 221 N.W.2d at 156.
In Hanson, however, we recognized both the broad policy decision reflected in the 1985 amendments to tie uninsured and underinsured motorist coverage to the particular vehicle involved in the accident and the legislative expectation that the imposition of geographical limitations and the elimination of stacking of coverages would stem rising insurance costs, which the legislature attributed in part to “prior law requiring expansive interpretation of vehicle insurance coverage.” Hanson, 417 N.W.2d at 96. See also Hearing on H.F. 345, Senate Committee on Economic Development and Commerce, 74th Minn.Leg., Apr. 16, 1985 (audio tape) (comments of Senator Petty, senate sponsor of the 1985 amendments).
Noting that “[ajllowing a claimant to extend uninsured motorist coverage from an automobile to an owned but uninsured motorcycle runs counter to the thrust of the 1985 legislation,” we held in Hanson that “Minn.Stat. § 65B.49, subd. 3a(7), precludes uninsured motorist coverage when the claimant at the time of the injury is riding an uninsured motorcycle he or she owns.” Hanson, 417 N.W.2d at 96.
Our decision in Hanson comports not only with the 1985 amendments to the no-fault act, but also with the original legislative treatment of motorcycles in connection with the no-fault act. In February of 1973 when the Minnesota no-fault automobile insurance act was before the legislature, there was a good deal of discussion about the application of the no-fault act to motorcycles. For the most part the discussion revolved around the extremely high cost of first party coverages for a motorcyclist, who usually sustains injury and oftentimes serious injury in any accident involving the motorcycle. The dilemma prompted Senator Jack Davies, one of the chief proponents of the no-fault act, to suggest to the joint conference committee inclusion of a reallocation provision which would provide basic economic loss benefits for a motorcyclist injured in a collision with an automobile by imposing liability for only one-half of those benefits on the insurer of the motorcycle and liability for the other one-half of those benefits on the automobile insurer. That proposal elicited the following response from one of the conferees:
What you’re saying is that the motorcyclist only has to take out liability coverage, which they can get at a reasonable rate at the present time, and which I’m in agreement with, but you’re also saying that if they have an accident, and normally it’s with another automobile, that they’re also going to pick up the first party benefits that the automobile driver pays premiums for and which they do not pay premiums for. What you’re really doing is giving them all the benefits of *835the no-fault bill and they re not paying the premium that the automobile driver has to pay for the same coverage.
Hearing on S.F. 96, Joint Conference Committee Hearing, 73rd Minn.Leg., Feb. 18, 1974 (audio tape).
The Minnesota Automobile Liability Commission, created by the legislature in 1971, considered it obvious from the unfavorable loss statistics involving motorcycles that premium rates would be high and that availability might be restricted, encouraging operation of motorcycles without insurance. Minnesota Automobile Liability Study Commission, Report to the 1973 Legislature, at 86 (1973). Citing the limited availability and high cost of first party benefits for motorcyclists — of the four leading automobile insurance carriers in Minnesota, only one even offered medical payments coverage and that coverage had maximum limits of $500, with a $100 deductible, at an annual premium of $136 — a representative of the Minnesota Motorcycle Dealers’ Association said that every state that had enacted no-fault automobile insurance legislation had, with one exception (where premiums had risen to a minimum of $900 per year) excluded motorcyclists from its purview. Hearing on S.F. 96, Senate Subcommittee on Commerce and Insurance, 73rd MinmLeg., April 9, 1973 (audio tape) and Minnesota Automobile Liability Study supra, at 86 (comments of Gordon Nesvig). While recognizing that the frequent and severe injuries to motorcyclists indicate a need for reparation, the National Association of Independent Insurers, in its statement to the Commission, suggested that the unusual characteristics of motorcycles make first party benefits less important in the case of motorcycles than in the case of automobiles:
(Motorcyclists) have recognized the extraordinary hazard involved in motorcycle riding and are willing to assume the risk themselves, much as other sports participants do. Moreover, the passenger hazard has not been as much a factor in motorcycle operation as it is in the operation of automobiles and there has been, therefore, less incentive for a motorcyclist to purchase medical payments coverage to protect passengers than there is for the owner of an automo- » bile.
Minnesota Automobile Liability Study, supra, at 87.
Ultimately, the motorcyclists prevailed. The Minnesota no-fault automobile insurance act adopted as Laws 1974 ch. 408, § 8, made liability insurance covering the maintenance and use of motorcycles compulsory, Minn.Stat. § 65B.48, subd. 5 (1988), but otherwise exempted motorcyclists from its provisions, an exemption which remains unchanged in the no-fault act as it exists today. It is true, of course, that in Hanson the motorcyclist had failed to procure the mandated liability insurance while here there was compliance with the statutory requirement. It is equally true, however, that the absence of statutory mandate does not preclude the inclusion of uninsured and underinsured motorist coverage in the motorcycle liability insurance policy or any other first party coverage. That was the result of an election on the part of plaintiff’s decedent — just as the exemption of motorcyclists from all the first party coverages required by the no-fault act was the result of an election by the motorcycling public. To say, as does the majority, that the applicability of section 65B.49, subd. 3a(7) turns on whether the motorcyclist carries a policy of liability insurance is to convert subdivision 3a(7) into a penal statute.
More importantly, whether the owner or operator of a motorcycle is insured or uninsured with respect to liability arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of the motorcycle is absolutely immaterial to the construction or application of subdivision 3a of section 65B.49. That subdivision addresses uninsured and underinsured motorist coverage only. The requirement in section 65B.49, subd. 3a(7) that an owned vehicle be an insured vehicle in order for the owner to claim uninsured or underinsured motorist coverage serves none of the purposes of the 1985 amendments unless the occupied vehicle is insured with respect to uninsured and underinsured motorist coverage. If, despite the extreme vulnerability *836of motorcyclists to injury in the event of accident, motorcyclists are exempted from the obligation to carry uninsured and underinsured motorist coverages because the cost is prohibitive, allowing a claimant to extend uninsured motorist coverage from an automobile to an owned motorcycle uninsured with respect to uninsured and underinsured motorist coverages can hardly be said to advance the legislative intention to stem rising insurance costs. Accordingly, I would answer the first certified question in the affirmative.
The majority responds negatively to the second certified question — under Minn. Stat. § 65B.49, subd. 3a(5), when a person is injured while occupying his own motorcycle which is insured for liability coverage only, is he considered to be “occupying a motor vehicle” for purposes of claims to underinsured motorist benefits? If, as we held in Hanson, a motorcyclist is “occupying a motor vehicle” within the meaning of Minn.Stat. § 65B.49, subd. 3a(7) (1988), I fail to see how that same motorcyclist “is not occupying a motor vehicle” within the meaning of Minn.Stat. § 65B.49, subd. 3a(5) (1988). Therefore, I would answer the second certified question in the affirmative.
Finally, for the reasons which prompt me to conclude that a motorcyclist may not look to the underinsured motorist coverage afforded under his automobile plan of reparation security as the source of underin-sured motorist coverage for injuries sustained while the cyclist is occupying his or her own motorcycle, I would answer the third certified question in the affirmative. In my judgment an insurance policy exclusion which provides that underinsured motorist coverage does not apply to bodily injury sustained by a person “while occupying a motor vehicle owned by you or a relative for which insurance is not afforded under this part, or when struck by the motor vehicle” is consonant with the public policy underlying the 1985 amendments of the no-fault act and is, therefore, enforceable.

=== CASE 2218561 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:50.279175+00 ===

178 Mich. App. 416 (1989)
444 N.W.2d 162
OLD KENT BANK-SOUTHEAST
v.
CITY OF DETROIT
Docket No. 102691.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided July 17, 1989.
William R. Aycock & Associates, P.C. (by William R. Aycock), for plaintiff.
Donald Pailen, Corporation Counsel, and Kay D. Schloff and Dennis A. Mazurek, Assistant Corporation Counsel, for defendant.
Mager, Monahan, Donaldson & Alber (by Phillip G. Alber and Lita Masini Popke), for cross appellee.
Before: CYNAR, P.J., and SHEPHERD and MARILYN KELLY, JJ.
MARILYN KELLY, J.
The City of Detroit appeals from an order denying it summary disposition against Old Kent Bank-Southeast and granting Old Kent summary disposition against the city. *418 Old Kent cross appeals from an order denying its motion for summary disposition against Reliance Insurance Company and granting summary disposition to Reliance. We affirm the trial court's orders.
This case involves the competing claims of the surety (Reliance) and the lender (Old Kent) of a defaulting contractor (Morrison Company). Old Kent argues its rights prevail, as it was the first perfected secured creditor under the Uniform Commercial Code. Reliance asserts its rights are superior, as they predate Old Kent's under the doctrine of equitable estoppel.
In 1985, Reliance and Old Kent both were owed money by Morrison, as was the Internal Revenue Service. The city was indebted to Morrison. When the IRS levied against the city for the Morrison debt, the city paid the IRS. Reliance and Old Kent each claim the city should have paid it, instead.
I
In 1975, Reliance entered into an indemnity agreement with Morrison. It filed the agreement with the Secretary of State but not until October 18, 1984. Also in 1975, Morrison executed an agreement which gave Reliance a security interest in its accounts receivable and contract balances. Reliance perfected this security interest on January 7, 1985.
Morrison assigned all balances due it on its construction contracts to Reliance. Among the contracts Morrison entered into were three with the City of Detroit dated April 27, 1977, August 1, 1979, and December 4, 1981. Reliance issued payment and performance bonds on all three as surety for Morrison.
On August 2, 1979, Morrison and Old Kent *419 entered into a loan and financing agreement in which Morrison gave Old Kent a security interest in certain of its assets. Old Kent perfected a security interest in Morrison's goods and equipment on September 13, 1979. It perfected one in Morrison's accounts receivable on June 1, 1982. MCL 440.9101 et seq.; MSA 19.9101 et seq.
Morrison experienced financial problems during performance of the last of its three contracts with the city, and was unable to pay its subcontractors. In addition, it accrued debts for federal taxes in the amount of $985,000. From October 1, 1984, through December 13, 1985, Reliance paid $79,000 to complete Morrison's third contract with the city.
On December 12, 1984, Old Kent sent a certified letter to the city informing it that Morrison had assigned its accounts receivable to Old Kent. The letter stated that Old Kent was foreclosing on the accounts and instructed the city to pay any monies owing Morrison directly to Old Kent. It sent a second notice of assignment on November 29, 1985. Reliance also notified the city of its claim against Morrison. This was done by letter dated June 28, 1985.
On October 7, 1985, the IRS sent a notice of levy to the city. The city did nothing in response to the earlier letters from Old Kent and Reliance, but honored the IRS levy in full by paying $85,001.82 on October 14, 1985.
II
On April 2, 1986, Reliance filed an action in federal district court charging the IRS with wrongful levy. Old Kent was denied intervention under the statute of limitations. Reliance and the IRS settled, and the IRS paid Reliance $79,000.
*420 Old Kent filed this action on January 18, 1986, alleging rights superior to those of Reliance in the funds paid out by the city. Old Kent relied on its status as the first perfected secured creditor. It moved for summary disposition against the city and Reliance. They in turn moved for summary disposition against Old Kent.
The trial court held that Reliance, as a surety, was equitably subrogated to the rights of Morrison. It held in addition that Reliance's rights prevailed over those of Old Kent. This is so even though Old Kent was a secured creditor having a prior perfected interest under Article 9 of the Uniform Commercial Code. The court relied on National Shawmut Bank of Boston v New Amsterdam Casualty Co, 411 F2d 843 (CA 1, 1969). It awarded Old Kent $6,001.82 ($85,001.82  $79,000.00) against the city. The court held that Old Kent's letter to the city was sufficient notice of assignment under UCC § 9-318(3), MCL 440.9318(3); MSA 19.9318(3).
III
On appeal, Old Kent argues that the trial court erred in relying on National Shawmut, because it is based on Massachusetts law which is not controlling in Michigan. It contends that in this case the provisions of the UCC prevail over the theory of equitable subrogation. Its position is that, when Reliance perfected its security interest, it elected to use its legal remedy and waived its equitable one.
The issue was addressed by this Court in American Oil Co v L A Davidson, Inc, 95 Mich. App. 358; 290 NW2d 144 (1980). We held that a surety does not waive its right to assert equitable subrogation by perfecting an assignment of accounts. Assignment *421 rights are independent of those derived from equitable subrogation. American Oil, supra, p 361. Therefore, Reliance did not lose its ability to assert equitable subrogation by perfecting its security interest.
Reliance's rights under the doctrice of equitable subrogation predate Old Kent's security interest. The action of Old Kent in perfecting its interest under the UCC did not move it up in the line of priorities ahead of Reliance. In accord with American Oil, we conclude that the interest of Reliance in the disputed funds has priority.
The UCC at § 1-103 provides: "Unless displaced by the particular provisions of this act, the principles of law and equity ... shall supplement its provisions." MCL 440.1103; MSA 19.1103. Moreover, a proposed UCC provision which would have brought sureties under Article 9 coverage was expressly rejected by its drafters. American Oil, supra, p 362.
The surety's priority is well established in common law and was not adversely affected by the adoption of the UCC. American Oil, supra, pp 362-363, and cases cited there. The trial court did not err in granting summary disposition to Reliance.
IV
The city attacks the trial court's award to Old Kent. It urges the court erred in finding that the Old Kent letter to the city dated December 12, 1984, was sufficient notice of assignment under the UCC.
The pertinent UCC section provides in part:
(3) The account debtor is authorized to pay the assignor until the account debtor receives notification that the amount due or to become due has *422 been assigned and that payment is to be made to the assignee. A notification which does not reasonably identify the rights assigned is ineffective. [MCL 440.9318(3); MSA 19.9318(3).]
Notice under the UCC has been defined in MCL 440.1201; MSA 19.1201:
(26) A person "notifies" or "gives" a notice or notification to another by taking such steps as may be reasonably required to inform the other in ordinary course whether or not such other actually comes to know of it. A person "receives" a notice of notification when:
(a) It comes to his attention; or
(b) It is duly delivered at the place of business through which the contract was made or at any other place held out by him as the place for receipt of such communications.
(27) Notice, knowledge or a notice or notification received by an organization is effective for a particular transaction from the time when it is brought to the attention of the individual conducting that transaction, and in any event from the time when it would have been brought to his attention if the organization had exercised due diligence. An organization exercises due diligence if it maintains reasonable routines for communicating significant information to the person conducting the transaction and there is reasonable compliance with the routines. Due diligence does not require an individual acting for the organization to communicate information unless such communication is part of his regular duties or unless he has reason to know of the transaction and that the transaction would be materially affected by the information.
Old Kent's certified letter was addressed to "Treasurer, City of Detroit." The envelope read: "City of Detroit, 2 Woodward Avenue, Detroit, Mich 48226." The letter stated:
*423 Please be advised that your organization has been listed by The Morrison company as an account receivable in documents previously delivered to Peoples Bank & Trust Company (the "Bank"). Pursuant to various agreements executed by the Morrison Company granting the Bank a security interest in all of its accounts receivable, the Bank is presently proceeding to foreclose on those accounts receivable.
Consequently, please be advised that your organization should no longer transmit any funds, payments, or property to The Morrison Company in satisfaction of all or any portion of an outstanding account receivable balance. The Bank hereby demands that all such transmittals of funds, payments or property be delivered to the Bank at the above referenced address to my attention.
Please be advised that it is the position of the Bank that any transmittals of consideration by your organization to the Morrison Company after the date of receipt of this letter by your organization may result in double liability for your organization.
The city contends that the notice was insufficient. It was not sent to the proper office and did not reasonably identify the accounts which Morrison had assigned to Old Kent. The appropriateness of notice and the reasonableness of the identification of assigned accounts under § 9-318(3) are issues of first impression in Michigan.
The city argues that Old Kent's notice was sent to an improper office because it was received by the city's agent in Room 128 of the City-County building. We disagree. The facts of this case are similar to the facts of Ertel v Radio Corp of America, 261 Ind 573; 307 NE2d 471 (1974). When interpreting uniform laws such as the UCC, we may look to decisions from another state for guidance in construction of a provision. Yamaha Motor *424 Corp, USA v Tri-City Motors & Sports, Inc, 171 Mich. App. 260, 270; 429 NW2d 871 (1988).
The notice in Ertel was received by the defendant's employee who was authorized to sign receipts for certified mail. The Ertel court found irrelevant the fact that the accounting department never received the notice. The negligence of the defendant's employees could not be charged to the secured creditor. Ertel, supra, p 576.
We find this reasoning persuasive as applied to the facts of the instant case. The evidence indicates that both Morrison and the IRS had been paid by the City Treasurer's Department. It was reasonable to assume that Old Kent's notice should have been sent to the Treasurer's Department by Old Kent. It was also reasonable to assume the city's agent would send it to the Treasurer's Department once it got to the city offices at 2 Woodward Avenue.
Our decision might have been different had the letter and the envelope both been addressed simply: "City of Detroit, Detroit, Michigan." But here, the letter was directed to the Treasurer's Department. The negligence of the city's employees will not be charged to Old Kent. MCL 440.1201(27); MSA 19.1201(27).
We conclude also that the letter reasonably identified the rights which were assigned to Old Kent by Morrison. It stated that Morrison had granted Old Kent "a security interest in all of its accounts receivable." Old Kent explicitly demanded that all payments made in satisfaction of monies owing Morrison be transmitted to Old Kent. This was sufficient to constitute reasonable identification.
The city points out that the notice failed to inform the city's agent how many accounts and *425 what city departments were affected by the assignment. We hold that it did provide the city the notification it needed to initiate the necessary inquiries. Although preferable, it was not essential that the city's accounts with Morrison be identified in Old Kent's letter of notice to the city. What must be specified are not primarily the accounts but the claimant's entitlement to the accounts. The cases cited by the city as authority to the contrary are factually distinguishable from this case.[1]
V
Finally, the city contends that Old Kent does not have standing in this case, as it was barred from intervening in the federal action by the federal statute of limitations. This is actually a res judicata argument. Res judicata is inapplicable here, as the federal action did not involve the same parties as does this state court action. Van-Deventer v Michigan National Bank, 172 Mich. App. 456, 464; 432 NW2d 338 (1988).
Affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  See S & W Trucks, Inc v Nelson Auction Service, Inc, 80 NM 423; 457 P2d 220 (1969) (letter merely authorized payment but did not state assignment had actually been made), Citizens State Bank of Corrigan v J M Jackson Corp, 537 S.W.2d 120 (Tex Civ App, 1976) (purported notice of assignment consisted merely of notation on invoice to make check payable to bank and debtor, no sufficient notice of assignment), First Trust & Savings Bank of Glenview v Skokie Federal Savings & Loan Ass'n, 126 Ill App 3d 42; 81 Ill Dec 246; 466 NE2d 1048 (1984) (notification did not include explicit demand that payment be made to assignee), Bank of Salt Lake v Corp of President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, 534 P2d 887 (Utah, 1975) (bank sent letter to specific employee of account debtor without ascertaining that the employee could reasonably be supposed to receive notice sufficient to bind account debtor, bank failed to prove notice of assignment), and Progressive Design, Inc v Olson Brothers Mfg Co, 200 Neb 291; 263 NW2d 465 (1978) (bank president had telephone conversation with and sent an uncertified letter to account debtor without retaining a copy, bank failed to prove sufficient notice of assignment).

=== CASE 9739036 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:42.918448+00 ===

Shepherd, J.
Defendants, Dr. Joel Freedland and Griggs Clinic, P.C., were tried jointly on charges of conspiracy to commit Medicaid fraud, MCL 400.606; MSA 16.614(6), and Medicaid fraud, MCL 400.607; MSA 16.614(7). The other alleged coconspirators, Drs. Tocco and Kelly, entered guilty pleas to lesser charges in exchange for their testimony against defendants. A jury found defendants guilty of one count of conspiracy and twenty-two counts of Medicaid fraud. By the time of sentencing, the clinic was dissolved. Defendant Freedland was fined $50,000 and sentenced to five to ten years imprisonment for the conspiracy conviction and concurrent terms of two to four years imprisonment for the Medicaid fraud convictions. Defendant appeals as of right, challenging the jury instructions and raising one evidentiary issue. We affirm.
During 1981, Drs. Tocco and Kelly submitted false Medicaid claims to the state for x-ray and osteopathic manipulative therapy (omt) services *763provided at Griggs Clinic. The clinic’s services included a large low back pain practice. It was operated by Dr. Freedland, who hired Drs. Tocco and Kelly and instructed them on the protocol to follow for all new patients. From a technical standpoint, both doctors understood that they could deviate from the protocol. However, Dr. Tocco testified that it was clear that he was expected to order all procedures in the protocol and Dr. Kelly testified that she did not think she could stay employed by defendant if she consistently deviated from the protocol.
The new patient protocol required prescribing Talwin and Valium for outpatients, on whom a full set of x-rays, numerous diagnostic laboratory tests and procedures (the comprehensive profile), and an omt would be done and billed to Medicaid. An omt is a technique used to correct abnormal bodily motions or restrictions by manipulating muscles, joints, etc. When Dr. Kelly applied for the job in 1981, she was near bankruptcy. Dr. Kelly twice informed defendant that she did not feel qualified to do omts and was told she would not have to do so. She was also advised that she need not apply if she had a problem prescribing a lot of Talwin and Valium. Once hired, Dr. Kelly ordered the protocol for new patients even when not medically necessary. Two-week prescriptions of Talwin and Valium were given to every patient. Dr. Kelly only performed omts once or twice, but she charted omts for every patient because it was clear that defendant expected her to do so. At one point, Dr. Kelly discussed the lack of omts with defendant, who responded "What is an omt anyway? ... A patient walks in a room. You follow them. You watch their head follow you and you watch the range of motion in their neck.”
Dr. Tocco, who was hired in 1980, similarly *764testified that he was instructed to and did order the protocol for all new patients, even if unnecessary. Defendant told him to write up a diagnosis to justify ordering the tests. Dr. Tocco performed very few omts because he had very little use of his left arm and wore a wrist brace, but charted that he performed the omt anyway. Dr. Tocco claimed that he ordered unnecessary services and billed for procedures not done because defendant wanted him to and he liked the money he was paid to do it.
Both Drs. Tocco and Kelly were hired at a salary of $78,000, which was paid by the clinic. For purposes of billing Medicaid, however, Drs. Tocco and Kelly enrolled in the Medicaid program individually pursuant to defendant’s instructions. They were issued individual provider identification numbers by the state and both authorized a third-party billing service to submit Medicaid claims to the state on their behalf. Under this arrangement, Drs. Tocco and Kelly completed patient charts and indicated the services performed for the Medicaid patients. The patient charts were reviewed by billing clerks and the billing information transferred to forms provided by the third-party service. The forms were given to the third-party service which then put the information on a computer tape. The tape was sent to Medicaid, which processed the information and issued state treasury warrants made payable to Dr. Tocco or Dr. Kelly, in care of defendant, for services rendered. Defendant’s office manager received the warrants, used signature stamps of Drs. Tocco and Kelly to endorse their respective warrants, and deposited the warrants into the clinic’s bank account.
According to Corrine McCall, one of the 'clinic’s billing clerks, defendant instructed her directly regarding how to bill for certain procedures and *765patients. On one occasion, McCall was instructed to bill complete spinal x-rays as four separate x-rays instead of one complete procedure because of its more favorable Medicaid reimbursement. On another occasion, when Medicaid lowered the amount that it would pay for some testing, defendant took the time to find out which tests would be paid at a higher rate and changed the comprehensive profile to include them. Another billing clerk, Lola Holton, testified that defendant instructed her concerning omt billings "to note that everyone that comes through the door would have their neck cracked and make sure I bill it.”
The conspiracy and fraud statutes1 underlying defendant’s convictions provided:
(1) A person shall not enter into an agreement, combination, or conspiracy to defraud the state by obtaining or aiding another to obtain the payment or allowance of a false, fictitious, or fraudulent claim under Act No. 280 of the Public Acts of 1939, as amended. [MCL 400.606; MSA 16.614(6).]
(1) A person shall not make or present or cause to be made or presented to an employee or officer of the state a claim under Act No. 280 of the Public Acts of 1939, as amended, upon or against the state, knowing the claim to be false, fictitious, or fraudulent. [MSA 400.607; MSA 16.614(7).]
The prosecutor’s theory was that defendant conspired with employees of the clinic to defraud Medicaid by means of the protocol he devised, that defendant knew that various procedures and testing in the protocol were either medically unnecessary or were not performed, that Drs. Tocco and Kelly implicitly agreed to further the conspiracy by falsifying records, and that defendant caused *766Medicaid claims to be submitted by Drs. Tocco and Kelly with knowledge that the claims were false. The defense was that defendant instituted safeguards at the clinic to insure that services being billed were actually performed, that the work done at the clinic was medically necessary, and that defendant had no knowledge that the claims submitted by Drs. Tocco and Kelly were false.
i
On appeal, defendant claims that the instructions given to the jury on two statutory rebuttable presumptions allowed in Medicaid fraud cases require reversal. Since defendant did not object to the instructions, relief will be given only if necessary to avoid manifest injustice to the defendant. People v Kelly, 423 Mich 261, 272; 378 NW2d 365 (1985). In deciding whether manifest injustice occurred, we review the instructions as a whole. Our responsibility as a reviewing court is to balance the general correct, clear tenor of the instructions in their entirety against the potential misleading effect of a single sentence isolated by a defendant. Id., p 275.
The instructions on the rebuttable presumptions given in this case were taken from MCL 400.608; MSA 16.614(8) and preceded by general instructions on permissive presumptions and the standard of proof imposed on the prosecutor. Specifically, the court instructed:
A rebuttable presumption is an inference of fact based upon the existence of other basic established facts or circumstances.
A rebuttable presumption has the effect of evidence and may be used as evidence. You as jurors may but need not infer the existence of the presumed fact from the basic facts.
*767The prosecutor still has the burden of proof beyond a reasonable doubt of all of the elements of the offense.
[Examples.]
In these examples, the presumed facts may be used as evidence unless rebutted by competent evidence to the contrary.
I’m now going to instruct you on the rebuttable presumption you may utilize as evidence of the defendant’s knowledge in this case.
It shall be a rebuttable presumption that a person knowingly made a claim for Medicaid benefit if the person’s actual, facsimile, stamped, typewritten or similar signature is used on the form required for the making of a claim for Medicaid benefit.
If a claim for Medicaid benefit is made by means of computer billing, tapes or other electronic means, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that the person knowingly made the claim if that person has notified the Department of Social Services in writing that claims for Medicaid benefits will be submitted by use of computer billing, tapes or other electronic means.
It is important to note that defendant does not challenge the above instructions or the validity of the statutory presumptions, other than the use of the word "shall,” which defendant claims may have left the jury with the impression that the presumptions were mandatory. We find no merit in this argument. The use of the word "shall” merely informed the jury that the court’s definition of the rebuttable presumption must be followed. Read in their entirety, the instructions clearly did not require the jury to utilize the presumptions as evidence, but merely suggested to the jury a possible conclusion to be drawn if the *768prosecutor proved certain predicate facts. Hence, the presumptions were permissive. See Kelly, supra, pp 273-274, n 4; Francis v Franklin, 471 US 307, 314; 105 S Ct 1965; 85 L Ed 2d 344 (1985).
It is also important to note that defendant does not challenge the specific instructions given by the court on the intent and knowledge elements of the charged offenses. Defendant’s principal attack on the jury instructions is based on the following statement made by the court immediately following the court’s instructions on the knowledge element of the Medicaid fraud offense and immediately preceding the above-quoted instruction on the rebuttable presumptions. Specifically, the court stated:
Now, because this is a prosecution for false claims under the Medicaid False Claims Act, there are two rebuttable presumptions which you may consider on the issue of the intent of the defendants, knowledge required for establishing the knowledge, elements of the offenses charged. [Emphasis added.]
Defendant claims that this prefatory statement misinterpreted the purpose of the presumption and may have persuaded a reasonable jury that the use of a computerized billing constituted proof beyond a reasonable doubt of defendant’s intent and knowledge unless the defendant persuaded the jury otherwise. In other words, defendant claims that the instructions had the effect of shifting the burden of persuasion to defendant.
A jury instruction that shifts the burden of persuasion to the defendant on the elements of the crime is erroneous because it violates a defendant’s constitutional right to due process. Kelly, supra, pp 273-274, n 4; and see People v Belanger, 158 Mich App 522, 528-529; 405 NW2d 405 (1987). *769Whether or not a defendant has been accorded his constitutional rights depends upon the way that a reasonable juror could have interpreted the instruction. Id., p 529.
Here, we agree with defendant’s contention that the court erred in its presentment of the rebuttable presumptions to the jury. The first presumption should not have been given at all since there is no evidence that would have allowed the jury to utilize this presumption. Because the subject Medicaid claims were all made by means of computerized billing, only the second rebuttable presumption was arguably applicable to this case.
As for this second presumption, the trial court correctly instructed the jury that it applies to persons making the claim by means of computerized billing. However, the claims at issue in this case were all made by Drs. Tocco and Kelly. The jury was instructed that defendant’s criminal responsibility was based on his conduct in conspiring with and causing Drs. Tocco and Kelly to make or present the claims. Hence, the trial court’s prefatory language that the jury could consider the rebuttable presumption as evidence of defendant’s knowledge (rather than Drs. Tocco and Kelly) was error. This error, however, did not cause manifest injustice. The presumption was only permissive and would only have permitted the jury to infer that the person making the claim did so knowingly. In essence, it allowed the jury to infer that the persons making the claims had knowledge of the claims submitted to Medicaid by means of a computer tape, despite the fact that someone else, such as the third-party billing service here, actually put the billing information onto the tape. Since the evidence was overwhelming that Drs. Tocco and Kelly actually made the claims, it is not reasonably possible that the jury would have uti*770lized the presumption to infer that defendant made them. Further, the central issue at trial was whether defendant had knowledge that the claims made by Drs. Tocco and Kelly were false. Here also, the evidence against defendant was overwhelming.
Read in their entirety, we conclude that a reasonable juror would not have interpreted the instructions as shifting the burden of persuasion to defendant. Since we find no injustice, we do not reverse on this issue. We do, however, take this opportunity to caution the bench and bar to carefully examine statutory presumptions before using them in order to insure their appropriateness to the case at hand.
ii
Defendant also claims that the trial court erred by allowing the prosecutor to admit evidence obtained as a result of a grand jury subpoena. This issue was previously raised and addressed by this Court in an interlocutory appeal. See People v Freedland, unpublished opinion per curiam of the Court of Appeals decided April 29, 1986 (Docket No. 79865), lv den 426 Mich 858 (1986). There have been no material changes in the facts since the prior appeal. Accordingly, we hold that the law of the case doctrine precludes us from reviewing this issue. CAF Investment Co v Saginaw Twp, 410 Mich 428, 454; 302 NW2d 164 (1981); Muilenberg v The Upjohn Co, 169 Mich App 636, 641; 426 NW2d 767 (1988), lv den 432 Mich 889 (1989). Defendant’s only recourse on this issue, if any, is to seek leave to appeal to the Supreme Court. See Tebo v Havlik, 418 Mich 350, 379-381, ns 17 and 18; 343 NW2d 181 (1984) (Levin, J., dissenting).
Affirmed.
*771Doctoroff, J., concurred.
The statutes were subsequently amended by 1984 PA 333 to delete the "fictitious or fraudulent” language.

=== CASE 9739052 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:54.861004+00 ===

BAKER, Judge.
Respondent-appellant Robert C. Penning ton (Bob) appeals that portion of his marriage dissolution decree pertaining to a restriction placed upon his visitation rights with his nine-year-old son, Nathan. Bob asserts the trial court abused its discretion by ordering that Bob's adult male friend not be present during overnight visitations. We affirm.
FACTS
Bob and petitioner-appellee Lisa M. Pennington married on May 22, 1983. One child, Nathan, was born of the marriage the following year. The dissolution petition was filed on February 25, 1991.
Bob and Lisa agreed that Lisa would have custody of Nathan and that Bob would enjoy reasonable visitation and pay child support. Bob objects to the following portion of the trial court's order:
[Bob's] overnight visitation is restricted only to the extent that Ashley D. Barrow shall not be present during said visitation, for the reason that the Court specifically finds that said presence would be injurious to the minor child's emotional development.
Record at 88. The trial court imposed this restriction based on Lisa's testimony that it appeared to her that Bob was living almost totally with a male friend, Ashley Barrow, that she was suspicious about the pair's *306possible homosexuality, and that she did not want Nathan to be around Ashley. In support of her suspicions, Lisa offered photographs of a Valentine's Day card Ashley had given Bob. On the inside was printed: "'There's a place within my heart that only you can fill," and "On Valentine's Day and every day in every thought in every way, more than words could hope to say: I love you. Happy Valentine's Day." The card was signed, "With all my love, Ashley." She admitted, however, she had witnessed no impropriety between Bob and Ashley, and could not say Bob was certainly homosexual. For his part, Bob denied his relationship with Ashley was homosexual. He described the relationship as a close friendship and testified the Valentine's Day card was a joke based on Lisa's insinuations of homosexuality.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
In all visitation controversies, courts are required to give foremost consideration to the best interests of the child. IND.CODE 81-1-11.5-24. When reviewing the trial court's resolution of the visitation issue, we reverse only when the trial court manifestly abused its discretion. In re Marriage of Julien (1979), Ind.App., 397 N.E.2d 651. If the record reveals a rational basis supporting the trial court's determination, no abuse of discretion occurred. Carter v. Dec (1985), Ind.App., 480 N.E.2d 564. We will not reweigh evidence or reassess the credibility of witnesses. Id.
It is not puritanical or unreasonable to attempt to shield a child of tender age, like Nathan, from the sexual practices of the visiting parent, whether those practices are homosexual, as Lisa alleges, or heterosexual. Such protection is a sound practice designed to foster the child's emotional well-being, and is widely employed. See generally Wilson v. Wilson (1959), 171 Cal. App.2d 810, 341 P.2d 780 (no abuse of discretion to prohibit father from visiting child when in presence of female companion not his wife or not within the third degree of consanguinity); Gallo v. Gallo (1981), 184 Conn. 36, 440 A.2d 782 (no abuse of discretion to forbid father from allowing visiting child to stay overnight while father was living with woman "without the benefit of wedlock"); Commander v. Commander (1986), Fla.Dist.Ct.App., 493 So.2d 530 (no abuse of discretion to deny mother visitation while she was living with boyfriend and pregnant by him); Lasseigne v. Lasseigne (1983), La.Ct.App., 484 So.2d 1240 (no abuse of discretion to prohibit father's visitation while woman he was living with was present); Duplantis v. Monteaux (1982), La.Ct. App., 412 So.2d 215 {no abuse of discretion to condition father's visitation rights on his refraining from keeping company with any woman to whom he was not married during visits with his children, except during daylight hours); Larroquette v. Larroquette (1974), La.Ct. App., 298 So.2d 628 (no abuse of discretion to prohibit visitation in father's home where father maintained "illicit" relationship with woman on permanent basis); De Vita v. De Vita (1976), 145 N.J.Super. 120, 366 A.2d 1350 (no abuse of discretion to prohibit father from allowing father's female friend to stay overnight during child's visitation, even absent evidence of any sexual activity between father and woman in the household); In re Marriage of Fulwiler (1975), 22 Or.App. 811, 588 P.2d 958 (no abuse of discretion to prohibit father from allowing child to see woman father was living with until father and woman were married) Drum v. Drum (1979), 268 Pa.Super.Ct. 248, 897 A.2d 1192 (no abuse of discretion to limit father's visitation in presence of woman with whom he was living); Edwards v. Edwards (1973), Tenn.Ct. App., 501 S.W.2d 283 (no abuse of discretion to refuse mother visitation due, in part, to mother's home's proximity to man with whom mother had allegedly been sexually involved)} and Palmer v. Palmer (1980), 138 Vt. 412, 416 A.2d 148 (no abuse of discretion to prohibit children from staying overnight with father at any time woman living with father was present). Al though the circumstances giving rise to these cases vary widely, the cases all stand for the proposition that the best interests of the child often demand the child be shielded from the visiting parents' heterosexual practices. There are an equal number of cases upholding trial courts' visitation restrictions when the partner is homo*307sexual, as well. See Annotation, Visitetion Rights of Homosexual or Lesbian Parent, 36 A.L.R.Ath 997 (1985); Propriety of Provision of Custody or Visitation Order Designed to Insulate Child from Parent's Extramarital Sexual Relationships, 40 A.L.R.A4th 812 (1985).
Here, after observing Bob's demeanor in court and hearing testimony regarding Ashley, the trial court specifically found Ashley's presence would be injurious to Nathan's emotional development. The trial court was obviously concerned enough about the testimony it heard and the demeanor it observed that it felt compelled to make its finding specific We were not present at the hearing and are in no position to second guess the trial court's conclusion. Carter, supra. The record reveals a rational basis supporting the restriction. Id. The trial court acted within the discretion afforded it when it ordered Ashley not be present during Bob and Nathan's overnight visitation.
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
CONOVER, J., concurs.
ROBERTSON, J., dissents with separate opinion.

=== CASE 9739054 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:55.150487+00 ===

MOSER, P.J.
Elijah Jones (Jones) appeals from a judgment convicting him of one count of sexual assault, in violation of sec. 940.225(l)(d), Stats., and from an *490order denying his sec. 809.30, Stats., motion for modification of his ten-year prison sentence, which was imposed pursuant to his conviction. We conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion by admitting certain "other acts" evidence at tried. Furthermore, the record before this court establishes that the trial court committed no abuse in determining Jones' sentence. Therefore, the judgment and order must be affirmed.
This case stems from events which occurred in the early morning hours of September 10, 1986. Testimony at trial established that Jones returned home after an evening of heavy drinking with friends. His wife, Jennifer, was asleep on a couch in the living room, and her eleven-year-old daughter, K.T., and her two sons were asleep in their bedroom. K.T. testified that she was awakened by Jones. He already had removed her clothing, told her to put on her bathrobe, and motioned for her to go into his exercise room, where he often slept. Over objection by defense counsel, K.T. stated that she knew Jones wanted to do "[w]hat he always do to me." K.T. went into Jones' room, where she claimed he placed his penis in her vagina. This sexual activity continued for approximately fifteen to twenty minutes, until Jones and K.T. heard Jennifer's movements in the next room. K.T. stated that Jones told her to leave his room, and that he left to find her mother.
Jennifer testified that she heard a child's whimper, awoke, and found that K.T. was in neither her bedroom nor the adjoining bathroom. Jennifer was met by Jones in the living room, and when she later went back into K.T.'s room, K.T. was in her bed. K.T. informed her mother of Jones' actions, and Jennifer brought her to Children's Hospital in Milwaukee for treatment. A physical examination established that K.T.'s vaginal diameter was three times the normal diameter of a girl her age, *491and that the area below her vaginal opening showed signs of trauma. No semen or other physical evidence was found. Jones was later arrested, and charged with sexually assaulting K.T.
As noted above, K.T. maintained at trial that Jones had assaulted her on more than one occasion. Specifically, K.T. testified that Jones had placed his penis in her vagina on six or seven prior occasions. Jones' arresting officer testified that when initially arrested, Jones made statements to the effect that he had not engaged in intercourse with K.T., but that he had inserted his finger into her vagina and had done so on prior occasions when intoxicated. The prosecution was allowed to introduce this evidence of "other acts" to determine motive, plan and the general scheme of the crime. At trial, Jones denied any sexual contact with K.T. whatsoever.
The jury returned a guilty verdict on March 22, 1988. Judgment was entered accordingly and Jones was sentenced on July 1, 1988. In sentencing Jones to ten years of imprisonment, the trial court noted that both K.T. and her mother were devastated by Jones' conduct, so much that the family moved away from the community. The court also recognized that Jones: (1) had no prior record; (2) had no history of undesirable behavior patterns; (3) did not appear to be a vicious person; (4) was seeking help for his alcoholism; (5) had improved his employment record; (6) was twenty-nine years old; and (7) had limited education. The court also noted that until the sentencing hearing itself, Jones denied committing the assault against K.T., and thus took no responsibility for his actions and expressed no remorse.
The trial court also discussed the vicious and aggravated nature of Jones' crime. The court described it as "conduct that's so devastating to children and an innocent parent that it just cannot be allowed in a civilized *492society." The court also noted that "[tjhere's an entire school of thought with regard to the therapist and behavioral people that the first step of rehabilitation as far as the damaged victim is a substantial period of incarceration for the offender." One of the court's con-clusory remarks was that it was "trying to tailor a sentence here to meet the needs of the defendant, the community and this little victim and her mother,. . .."
On November 22, 1988, Jones filed a motion to modify his sentence, pursuant to sec. 809.30, Stats. In support of his motion, Jones argued that the trial court abused its discretion by considering the "rehabilitative needs of the victim" factor in determining his sentence. This motion was denied in an order entered on December 6, 1988.
Jones now appeals from his judgment of conviction and sentence, and from the order of December 6, 1988. Jones brings two issues before this court: (1) whether the trial court abused its discretion by admitting the "other acts" evidence; and (2) whether the trial court abused its discretion by considering the above-noted sentencing factor.
ADMISSION OF "OTHER ACTS" EVIDENCE
Appellant argues that evidence of his alleged prior sexual contacts with K.T. was wrongfully admitted by the trial court, because K.T. did not elaborate on the specific circumstances surrounding those contacts by providing the court with time and place details. Our review of this issue is governed by the "abuse of discretion" standard, and the trial court's decision to admit the "other acts" evidence will be upheld if it is in accordance with legal standards and facts of record, if the trial court undertook a reasonable inquiry and examination of *493the underlying facts, and if there exists a reasonable basis for the determination.1
Section 904.04(2), Stats., "does allow admission of other acts evidence if used for specific purposes, such as proof of motive or identity."2 To be admissible, the other acts evidence must be relevant to one of the statutory exceptions, and its probative value must substantially outweigh its prejudicial effect.3 We note that "[t]he prejudice which must be avoided is the potential harm of a jury reaching the conclusion that because the defendant committed a bad act in the past, the defendant necessarily committed the current crime."4 However, we further note that "Wisconsin historically has allowed the introduction into evidence of prior sexual acts by the accused with the same person who was the victim in the case being prosecuted."5 Also, "a greater latitude of proof is to be allowed in the admission of other acts evidence in sex crime cases, particularly those involving a minor child."6
Our review of the record illustrates that the trial court reasonably inquired into the facts of the case, examined them and then applied the facts to proper legal standards. K.T.'s assertion that she had been assaulted six or seven times in the same manner as the assault *494which led to Jones' arrest is relevant to motive, plan and the general scheme of the crime. K.T.'s testimony suggested that on prior occasions, Jones sought sexual gratification by placing his penis into her vagina. These assaults took place in the home Jones shared with his wife and her three children.
Any possible prejudicial effect of the "other acts" evidence was offset by the trial court's instructions, which explained to the jury that such evidence was "admitted solely on the issue of opportunity, preparation or plan." Furthermore, the jury was informed of the State's burden to establish the truth of the other occurrences, and that the alleged other contacts could not be used to evaluate Jones' character. Finally, the jury was instructed that K.T.'s inability to remember particulars about Jones' prior sexual contacts could be used to assess her credibility.
Therefore, there exists a reasonable basis for admission of evidence of Jones' alleged prior sexual contacts with K.T., and we must affirm the trial court's decision. We also note that given the strength of the evidence against Jones, which included the testimony of K.T. and Jennifer, and the physical evidence produced from K.T.'s medical examination, if the trial court had been in error for admitting the "other acts" evidence, such error would have been harmless because there is no reasonable probability that the error contributed to Jones' conviction.7
ABUSE OF SENTENCING DISCRETION
Appellant next argues that the trial court abused its discretion by considering the rehabilitative needs of *495K.T. as a sentencing factor. Appellant asserts that the "rehabilitative needs of the victim" is not a factor supported by legal precedent, and should thus not have been considered.
It is a well-settled principle of law in Wisconsin that sentencing is left to the discretion of a trial court, and that appellate review is limited to determining if an abuse of discretion has occurred.8 The three primary sentencing factors a trial court must consider are: (1) the gravity of the offense; (2) the character of the offender; and (3) the need for the protection of the public.9 Additional factors that the trial court may take into consideration are: (1) the past record of criminal offenses; (2) any history of undesirable behavior patterns; (3) the defendant's personality, character and social traits; (4) the results of a presentence investigation; (5) the vicious or aggravated nature of the crime; (6) the degree of the defendant's culpability; (7) the defendant's demeanor at trial; (8) the defendant's age, educational background and employment record; (9) the defendant's remorse, repentance and cooperativeness; (10) the defendant's need for close rehabilitative control; (11) the rights of the public; and (12) the length of pretrial detention.10 An abuse of discretion might be found if the trial court failed to state on the record the factors influencing the sentence, or if it gave too much weight to one factor in the face of other contravening factors, but the weight given each of the factors is particularly within the discretion of the trial court.11
*496We now address the question of whether, under Wisconsin law, the "rehabilitative needs of the victim" is an appropriate factor for a trial court to consider in determining the sentence for a convicted criminal. We conclude that the "rehabilitative needs of the victim" is a logical extension of one of the secondary factors, i.e. the rights of the public. This is especially true in cases such as this, where a minor child has been the victim of a sexual crime, and where the trial court finds that significant incarceration of the perpetrator of that crime will have a positive influence on the child's recovery from its effects. While this factor is not deemed to rise to the level of consideration due a primary sentencing factor, it may be considered by a trial court where appropriate. In other words, the decision to consider the rehabilitative needs of a victim when sentencing a convicted offender is within the discretion of the trial court. Thus, the trial court here committed no abuse of discretion when it incorporated the rehabilitative needs of K.T. in its decision-making.
By the Court — Judgment and order affirmed.
State v. Mink, 146 Wis. 2d 1, 13, 429 N.W.2d 99, 104 (Ct. App. 1988).
Id. at 12, 429 N.W.2d at 103.
Id. at 13,429 N.W.2d at 103; State v. Schindler, 146 Wis. 2d 47, 51-52, 429 N.W.2d 110, 112 (Ct. App. 1988); See sec. 904.03, Stats.
Mink, 146 Wis. 2d at 17, 429 N.W.2d at 105.
State v. Conley, 141 Wis. 2d 384, 399, 416 N.W.2d 69, 75 (Ct. App. 1987).
Mink, 146 Wis. 2d at 13, 429 N.W.2d at 104.
See State v. Dyess, 124 Wis. 2d 525, 543, 370 N.W.2d 222, 231-32 (1985).
State v. Larsen, 141 Wis. 2d 412, 426, 415 N.W.2d 535, 541 (Ct. App. 1987).
Id. at 427, 415 N.W.2d at 541.
Id. at 426-27, 415 N.W.2d at 541.
Id. at 428, 415 N.W.2d at 542.

=== CASE 9739055 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:55.155465+00 ===

FINE, J.
(concurring). Although I agree with most of the majority decision, I write separately to expand on one point, the use of victim impact considerations in sentencing, and to clarify another, the scope of Rule 904.04(2), Stats.
In discussing sentencing factors, the majority holds that the rehabilitative needs of the victim "may be considered by a trial court where appropriate." Majority opinion at page 496 (emphasis in original). I believe that *497the current state of the law makes it an appropriate consideration in every case.
" 'Two lives — the defendant's and the victim's — are profoundly affected by a criminal sentence. The court cannot make an informed decision on a just punishment if it hears only from one side.' " McLeod, Victim, Participation at Sentencing, 22 Crim. L. Bull. 501, 506-507 (1986) (quoting President's Task Force on Victims of Crime, Victims of Crime (1982) [hereinafter President's Task Force]). In a similar vein, the United States Sentencing Commission has written that any sentence "should be effective, just, and efficient for the defendant, the victim, and society." United States Sentencing Commission, Revised Draft Sentencing Guidelines 2 (Jan., 1987).
Crime takes a terrible toll on its victims. A 1985 survey of crime victims in Kentucky, for example, reported the typical devastation left in crimé's wake:
Results made from the victimization study suggest that in the short term (within a year of the incident) victims of crime were significantly more depressed and more fearful than non-victims, victims of violent crime reported the highest level of depression and fear, and victims of multiple incidents of crime during one year reported higher levels of depression and fear than did those who reported only one crime incident or no crime. In the long term, the level of fear in victims continued to be higher than the level of fear in non-victims and the long-term effects of violence on fear of crime are more pronounced than are the long-term effects of experiencing property crime.
7 Criminal Justice Statistic Ass'n, Inc., The CJSA Forum 2 (May, 1989). The heart of the matter is a perception of helplessness that infuses victims with a sense of their own vulnerability. Zehr & Umbreit, Victim *498Offender Reconciliation: An Incarceration Substitute?, 46 Fed. Probation 63, 64 (Dec., 1982). Thus, "[vjictims need to be given a voice and listened to if they are to experience that restoration of power which is necessary for psychological wholeness." Ibid. Cf. Morris v. Sloppy, 461 U.S. 1, 14-15 (1983) (Sparing victim the potential trauma of having to testify at new trial is an appropriate factor to consider in deciding whether to reverse a conviction based on an alleged marginal violation of defendant’s constitutional rights because "courts may not ignore the concerns of victims."). As the trial court and we recognize, victim rehabilitation is assisted "by responding to the victim's desire for retributive justice." McLeod, supra, at 505.
Any sentencing decision must assess not only the crime and the criminal but the needs of the community as well. See In re Judicial Administration: Felony Sentencing Guidelines, 120 Wis. 2d 198, 201, 353 N.W.2d 793, 795 (1984). As our decision in this case acknowledges, we serve the community by accommodating the rehabilitative needs of victims. Majority opinion at page 496.
Punishment tends to right the scales of justice that have been set askew by crime. See President's Task Force, supra, at 76-78. Charles E. Silberman has put it this way: "We punish criminals, in short, because justice, i.e., fairness, requires it; punishment is a way of restoring the equilibrium that is broken when someone commits a crime." C. Silberman, Criminal Violence, Criminal Justice 188-189 (1978). The efficacy of punishment thus extends beyond the utilitarian goals of deterrence, incapacitation, and rehabilitation:1
*499"It is a mistake to consider the objects of punishment as being deterrent or reformative or preventive, and *500nothing else . . .. The truth is that some crimes are so outrageous that society insists on adequate punishment, because the wrongdoer deserves it, irrespective of whether it is a deterrent or not."
C. Silberman, supra, at 185 (quoting Lord Justice Den-ning of Great Britain). Thus, the Supreme Court has "long recognized that retribution itself is a valid peno-logical goal of the death penalty," South Carolina v. Gathers, 490 U.S. —, —, 109 S. Ct. 2207, 2214 (O'Connor, J., dissenting), and that it " 'is an element of all punishments society imposes.' " Ibid, (quoting Spaziano v. Florida, 468 U.S. 447, 462 [1984]).
A victim's suffering is not only a good measure of the crime's seriousness but, indeed, is a useful gauge with which to determine appropriate punishment. See President's Task Force, supra, at 76-78. Thus, felony victims in Wisconsin are entitled "[t]o have the court provided with information pertaining to the economic, physical and psychological effect of the crime" and to "have the information considered by the court." Sec. 950.04(2m), Stats, (emphasis added).2 Unless this information can actually affect the criminal's punishment, however, giv*501ing victims this voice is a mere gesture without meaning or substance — a whisper into the wind — and would contravene this state's legislatively expressed policy. Just as tort defendants, guilty of only negligence, take those they injure as they find them and are responsible for ensuing damages even though those damages may be aggravated by the injured person's special susceptibility to harm, Restatement (Second) of Torts sec. 461 (1965); Colla v. Mandella, 1 Wis. 2d 594, 600, 85 N.W.2d 345, 349 (1957), criminals, who intentionally inflict harm, are also subject to penalty enhancement that will vary with the psychological needs of their victims. Cf. Gathers, 490 U.S. at —, 109 S. Ct. at 2214 (O'Connor, J., dissenting) ("That the harm caused by a defendant's actions is relevant to the capital sentencer's moral judgment concerning the appropriate penalty, even if the defendant did not specifically intend that harm, is a principle recognized both in the decisions of this Court, and in legislative decisions concerning appropriate levels of punishment.").3
*502In sum, I agree that victim rehabilitation was an appropriate sentencing consideration in this case. It is, in my view, appropriate in every case; the precise weight that should be given to the victim's rehabilitative needs will, of course, vary with the circumstances and any decision in that regard rests within the sentencing court's sound discretion.
1 — 1 HH
In discussing Rule 904.04(2), Stats., the majority states: "To be admissible, the other acts evidence must be relevant to one of the statutory exceptions . . .." Majority opinion at page 493. This is misleading because it implies that the listed exceptions are exclusive rather than illustrative.4 That is not the case. State v. Bedker, 149 Wis. 2d 257, 264-265, 440 N.W.2d 802, 804 (Ct. App. 1989); State v. Shillcutt, 116 Wis. 2d 227, 236, 341 N.W.2d 716, 720 (Ct. App. 1983), aff'd on other grounds, *503119 Wis. 2d 788, 350 N.W.2d 686 (1984); 1 G. Joseph and S. Saltzburg, Evidence in America, ch. 14, sec. 14.2, at 3 (1987). Indeed, the rule's text is specifically not restrictive:
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the character of a person in order to show that he acted in conformity therewith. This subsection does not exclude the evidence when offered for other purposes, such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, or absence of mistake or accident.
Rule 904.04(2), Stats., (emphasis added). Thus, for example, State v. Pharr, 115 Wis. 2d 334, 340 N.W.2d 498 (1983), recognized "that other crimes evidence is admissible '[t]o complete the story of the crime on trial by proving its immediate context of happenings near in time and place,' " Id. at 348, 340 N.W.2d at 504 (quoting Bailey v. State, 65 Wis. 2d 331, 347, 222 N.W.2d 871, 880 (1974)), even though complete-the-story evidence is not within the rule's listed examples. Accord, Shillcutt, 116 Wis. 2d at 236-237, 341 N.W.2d at 720.
The utilitarian aspects of punishment are clear:
A study conducted by Kenneth Wolpin (then at Yale) compared *499what would happen if imprisonment was increased by 1% with what would happen if probation was increased by 1%. The conclusion was that twice as many crimes would be deterred by increasing imprisonment. Similarly, a study by Michael Block at the University of Arizona concluded that moving a typical property offender from probation to a two-year prison sentence would prevent 80 property crimes.
Abell, The Costly Crisis in Corrections, Wall St. J., Mar. 21,1989, editorial page. Incarceration not only reduces crime, it is cost effective as well. Thus, a National Institute of Justice study has shown that imprisonment of an additional 1,000 dangerous criminals would cost $25 million more per year but would prevent about 187,000 felonies, saving some $430 million in social costs attributable to those crimes not committed. E. Zedlewski, Making Confinement Decisions, National Institute of Justice, 4 (July, 1987).
The conclusion [that the costs of crime far exceed the costs of incarceration to prevent it] holds even if there are large errors in the estimates: Doubling the annual cost of confinement, halving the average crimes per offender, and halving the average cost per crime would indicate that $50 million in confinement investments would avert $107 million in social costs.
Ibid. In contrast, efforts at non-coercive rehabilitation have failed.
No approach to rehabilitation seems to work. Whether offenders are given traditional one-to-one psychotherapy or newer methods of group therapy, they return to crime at about the same rate as those given no therapy at all. Nor are recidivism rates affected by education, vocational training, social work counseling, or any other approach that has yet been tried.
C. Silberman, supra, at 184. In fiscal year 1985, Wisconsin spent a mere 1.5% of state and local direct expenditures for "corrections," which "includes costs and employment for jails ["with authority to hold prisoners beyond arraignment"], prisons, probation, parole, pardon, and correctional administration." Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S. Department of Justice, Justice Expenditure and Employment, 1985, 6, 8 (Mar. 1987).
Rule 32(c)(2)(D) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure also requires that federal sentencing courts be given "an assessment of the financial, social, psychological, and medical impact upon, and cost" of the crime to the victim. Ibid. More than two/ thirds of the states have similar provisions. McLeod, supra, at 507-508 n. 22.
On August 3, 1989, after this opinion was released, sec. 972.14(3), Stats., was enacted. 1989 Wis. Act. 31, sec. 2858e. Section 972.14(3)(a) provides: "Before pronouncing sentence in a felony case, the court shall also allow a victim or family member of a homicide victim to make a statement or submit a written statement to be read in court. The court may allow any other person to make or submit a statement under this paragraph. Any statement *501under this paragraph must be relevant to the sentence." (Emphasis added.)
The United States Supreme Court has prohibited consideration of so-called "victim impact statements" in capital cases. Booth v. Maryland, 482 U.S. 496, 502-503 (1987). This five to four decision was specifically limited by the majority to cases where the death penalty is at issue, id. at 507 n. 10, 509 n. 12. Booth's demise, however, may be just below the horizon. Four justices have questioned its analysis, Gathers, 490 U.S. at —, —, 109 S. Ct. at 2212, 2217 (O'Connor, J., dissenting, joined by Rehnquist, C.J. and Kennedy, J.; Scalia, J., dissenting), and Justice White, a dissenter in Booth, 482 U.S. at 515, joined with the majority in Gathers only because the Court was not yet ready to overrule Booth. See Gathers, 490 U.S. at —, 109 S. Ct. at 2211 (White, J., concurring). Neither Booth nor Gathers, however, con*502cerned or considered punishment's rehabilitative effect on the victim, which is the issue before us here.
The majority's statement is borrowed almost verbatim from State v. Mink, 146 Wis. 2d 1, 13, 429 N.W.2d 99, 103 (Ct. App. 1988): "Other acts evidence must pass a two-step test prior to being admissible. First, the evidence must be relevant to one of the statutory exceptions." Id. at 13, 429 N.W.2d at 103 (citation omitted). Mink cites State v. Danforth, 129 Wis. 2d 187, 202, 385 N.W.2d 125, 131 (1986) in support of this proposition. Danforth phrased the test's first prong in similar language: "First, the trial court must fit the evidence within one of the sec. 904.04(2), Stats., exceptions," Danforth, 129 Wis. 2d at 202, 385 N.W.2d at 131, as did State v. Alsteen, 108 Wis. 2d 723, 729, 324 N.W.2d 426, 429 (1982), upon which the Danforth court relied. None of these cases, however, concerned a situation where "other acts" evidence was excluded because it did not fit one of the designated cubbyholes.

=== CASE 9739056 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:55.420715+00 ===

JUSTICE WELCH delivered the opinion of the court: Defendant, Isreal Clarke, was charged by information with felony retail theft under section 16A — 3(a) of the Criminal Code of 1961 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 16A—3(a)). He was found guilty in a trial by jury on March 18, 1991, and was sentenced to three years’ imprisonment in the Illinois Department of Corrections on May 6, 1991. He asserts that the trial court erred in failing to grant his motion to dismiss the charge against him for failure to provide him with a prompt preliminary hearing. We affirm. Defendant was taken into custody on November 30, 1990. A preliminary hearing was scheduled for December 28, 1990, but because a snowstorm interfered with the operation of the court, it was not held at that time. A preliminary hearing date was reset for January 8, 1991. The record does not demonstrate that the defendant agreed to the delay, and defendant moved on January 7, 1991, for discharge from the county jail and dismissal of the charges against him, citing sections 109 — 3.1(b) and 114 — l(a)(11) of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 (the Code) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, pars. 109 — 3.1(b), 114 — l(a)(11)). On January 8, 1991, the circuit court denied the motion to dismiss, finding that the original preliminary hearing date was within the 30-day period, but due to the snowstorm, it was not possible to have the hearing. The circuit court proceeded to hold defendant’s preliminary hearing at that time. We initially note that our constitution provides that a prompt preliminary hearing to establish probable cause is necessary where a person is held to answer for a crime punishable by imprisonment in the penitentiary. (Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, §7.) The right to a prompt preliminary hearing was statutorily mandated in section 109 — 3.1 of the Code, effective January 1, 1984, which provides in pertinent part, “[ejvery person in custody in this State for the alleged commission of a felony shall receive either a preliminary examination *** or an indictment by Grand Jury *** within 30 days from the date he or she was taken into custody.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 109 — 3.1(b).) Though not applicable in the instant case, this section of the Code further provides that “[ejvery person on bail or recognizance for the alleged commission of a felony shall receive either a preliminary examination *** or an indictment by Grand Jury *** within 60 days from the date he or she was arrested.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 109 — 3.1(b).) Thus, under section 109 — 3.1(b), a “prompt” preliminary hearing is one which is held within 30 or 60 days, as the case may be. People v. Roby (1990), 200 Ill. App. 3d 1063, 1066, 558 N.E.2d 729, 731.  Until 1984, no constitutional or statutory remedy existed for the violation of a defendant’s constitutional or statutory rights to a prompt preliminary hearing. However, effective January 1, 1984, section 114— l(a)(11) of the Code was enacted, which provides that where a defendant makes a written motion prior to trial, either before or after a plea has been entered, the court may dismiss the indictment, information, or complaint against the defendant for failure to provide a preliminary hearing in accordance with the requirements of section 109 — 3.1. (See People v. Roby (1990), 200 Ill. App. 3d 1063, 1066-67, 558 N.E.2d 729, 731.) However, the legislature further provided that where a charge is dismissed for failure to comply with section 109 — 3.1, it does not preclude the State from returning a new indictment or filing a new charge, and where a court dismisses a complaint for failure to provide a preliminary hearing, the defendant may be held in custody pending the filing of a new charge. (See 111. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 114 — 1(e).) This recognized legislatively what case law had repeatedly recognized: the remedy of dismissal of the charge with prejudice was not available to the defendant as a sanction for violation of the requirement for a prompt preliminary hearing. See People v. Howell (1975), 60 Ill. 2d 117, 122-23, 324 N.E.2d 403, 406; People v. Holman (1984), 103 Ill. 2d 133, 155, 469 N.E.2d 119, 130; People v. Riddle (1986), 141 Ill. App. 3d 97, 101, 489 N.E.2d 1176, 1178. In defendant’s motion for dismissal of the charges against him, he asserted that he had not contributed to the delay in this proceeding, and he pointed out that inclement weather caused the courthouse to be closed on the day the hearing was scheduled, December 28, 1990. Defendant cites several cases in support of his thesis that delay cannot be attributed to the defendant where the record is silent as to whether the defendant agreed to the delay (People v. Cunningham (1979), 77 Ill. App. 3d 949, 951, 396 N.E.2d 876, 877); that delays caused by docket crowding and prosecutorial overloads are attributable to the prosecution and not to the defendant (People v. DeCarlis (1980), 88 Ill. App. 3d 634, 638, 410 N.E.2d 677, 680); and that discharge is a proper remedy for failure to afford to defendant a speedy trial (People v. Love (1968), 39 Ill. 2d 436, 441, 235 N.E.2d 819, 822). All of the above-cited cases involved the running of the speedy trial period, as opposed to the time period in which a prompt preliminary hearing must be held. Section 103 — 5 of the Code provides in pertinent part that “[e]very person not tried in accordance with subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this Section [the speedy trial provisions] shall be discharged from custody or released from the obligations of his bail or recognizance.” (Emphasis added.) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 103 — 5(d).) Such mandatory discharge language is distinctly absent from the legislature’s enactment in 1984 of sections 109 — 3.1, 114 — l(aXll) and 114— 1(e). Indeed, as noted above, the 1984 legislation specifically included a provision that dismissal of an information or indictment for failure to comply with the prompt preliminary hearing provisions would not preclude the return of a new indictment or the bringing of a new charge. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 114 — 1(e).) We therefore feel that the rules applicable to speedy trial calculation do not have a valid application in our determination in the instant case, whether failure to hold the preliminary hearing within 30 days absolutely mandates dismissal under section 114 — l(aXll) or whether, under certain circumstances, the court may properly deny a motion made pursuant to section 114 — l(aXll). Because section 114 — l(aXll) of the Code provides that the court may dismiss the information because the requirements of the prompt preliminary hearing statute were not complied with, the precise issue which we must review is whether the circuit court abused its discretion in denying defendant’s motion to dismiss where such dismissal would, pursuant to section 114 — 1(e) of the Code, be without prejudice. In this regard, section 109 — 3.1 only provides that delay occasioned by the defendant shall temporarily suspend, for the time of the delay, the period within which the preliminary examination must be held. (111. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 109 — 3.1.) As noted above, neither the State nor the defendant was responsible for the delay of 10 days in the holding of defendant’s preliminary examination. To be sure, the court could have exercised its discretion and dismissed the charge, without prejudice. The State maintains, however, that had the trial court granted defendant’s motion to dismiss, the trial court would have then ordered that the defendant be held over until the State could file new charges rather than discharge the defendant from custody pursuant to section 114 — 1(e) of the Code. The purpose of the right to a prompt preliminary hearing is to ensure that a defendant will not be held in custody or to bail, that is, that his freedom will not be restricted, without a prompt showing of evidence that a crime has been committed. (Roby, 200 Ill. App. 3d at 1067, 558 N.E.2d at 731, citing People v. Bartee (1988), 177 Ill. App. 3d 937, 941, 532 N.E.2d 997, 999.) It is readily apparent that a delayed preliminary hearing of only 10 days without dismissal of the charge worked to shorten the aggregate length of time defendant would have been held in custody without a preliminary hearing if a new charge had to be brought, defendant’s custody was continued, and a new preliminary hearing date had to be reset.  We therefore find that the trial court did not abuse its discretion under the circumstances of this case in denying defendant’s motion to dismiss the charge against him for failure to hold a prompt preliminary hearing within the period of time specified in section 109 — 3.1 of the Code. By this decision we do not mean to give wholesale approval to any attempt to ignore the time limitations specified in section 109 — 3.1 for preliminary hearings of persons charged with felonies. Accordingly, we affirm the March 18, 1991, judgment of defendant’s conviction of felony retail theft, entered by the circuit court of Jackson County. Affirmed. HARRISON, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739057 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:55.424672+00 ===

JUSTICE H. LEWIS, dissenting: I respectfully dissent. I believe, as does the majority, that a person held to answer for a crime punishable by imprisonment in the penitentiary is entitled to a prompt preliminary hearing. Under section 109 — 3.1(b) of the Code, effective January 1, 1984, “[e]very person in custody in this State for the alleged commission of a felony shall receive either a preliminary examination *** or an indictment by Grand Jury *** within 30 days from the date he or she was taken into custody.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 109 — 3.1(b).) A “prompt” preliminary hearing is thus one which is held within 30 days. Until 1984, no constitutional or statutory remedy existed for the violation of a defendant’s constitutional or statutory rights to a prompt preliminary hearing. However, effective January 1, 1984, section 114— l(aXll) of the Code was enacted. It provides that where a defendant makes a written motion prior to trial, either before or after a plea has been entered, the court may dismiss the indictment, information, or complaint against the defendant for failure to provide a preliminary hearing in accordance with the requirements of section 109 — 3.1. The majority relies heavily on that portion of section 114 — l(aXll) which states the court “may” dismiss. Section 114 — 1(a) recites a litany of reasons why a court may dismiss a case, one of which, set forth in section 114 — l(aXll), is that the requirements of section 109 — 3.1 have not been complied with. I believe that under section 109 — 3.1(b), unless one of the exceptions applies, dismissal without prejudice is mandatory. Section 109 — 3.1(b), providing for preliminary examination or indictment within 30 days, says “shall” and means “shall.” The legislature also provided an “out” for the State when it did not preclude the State from the opportunity to return a new indictment or to file a new charge. The majority hypothesizes that “a delayed preliminary hearing of only 10 days without dismissal of the charge worked to shorten the aggregate length of time defendant would have been held in custody without a preliminary hearing if a new charge had to be brought, defendant’s custody was continued, and a new preliminary hearing date had to be reset.” (Emphasis in original.) (231 Ill. App. 3d at 508.) What the trial court may or may not have done had it granted defendant’s motion requires speculation well beyond the purview of this court. The majority also says that it does not mean to give wholesale approval to any attempt to ignore the time limitations specified by the statute. I am sure it does not, but what it is saying is that, unless the trial court abuses its discretion, this court will not reverse. However, I believe the statute is clear. Unless a preliminary hearing is conducted within 30 days, in the absence of an applicable exception, the cause shall be dismissed without prejudice. In this case, clearly, none of the exceptions apply. The trial court found that the preliminary hearing had been set within the 30-day period but, due to a snowstorm, it was not possible to have the hearing. This incident does not fall within any exception. I also believe, contrary to the majority’s view, that the cases involving the running of the speedy-trial period and those cases involving faulty indictments give us guidance. See People v. Meier (1992), 223 Ill. App. 3d 490, 585 N.E.2d 232. The trial court committed reversible error when it failed to grant defendant’s motion to dismiss the charge against him without prejudice for failure to hold a prompt preliminary hearing within the statutorily mandated period of time. I would reverse the defendant’s conviction.

=== CASE 2218615 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:51.272879+00 ===

444 N.W.2d 77 (1989)
Ronald Wayne BREWER, Appellant,
v.
STATE of Iowa, Appellee.
No. 88-873.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
July 19, 1989.
*79 Philip B. Mears and Jean C. Lawrence of Mears, Zimmerman & Mears, Iowa City, for appellant.
Thomas J. Miller, Atty. Gen., and Ann E. Brenden and James Kivi, Asst. Attys. Gen., Denise Riley, Student Legal Intern, for appellee.
Considered by HARRIS, P.J., and LARSON, NEUMAN, SNELL, and ANDREASEN, JJ.
NEUMAN, Justice.
This is an appeal from postconviction rulings that have denied appellant Ronald Brewer relief from his 1975 murder conviction. We affirm.
In January 1975, Brewer was an inmate at the men's reformatory at Anamosa, Iowa. While incarcerated, he gained the friendship of a guard named Herbert Pennock. Pennock frequently accompanied Brewer on authorized outings beyond the prison walls.
Such an outing occurred the evening of January 29, 1975. Brewer was scheduled to teach a first-aid class at the Anamosa High School. Pennock was to provide the transportation. More importantly, Pennock knew Brewer viewed the event as a chance to escape.
Part of Brewer's plan was to take a prison employee, Patricia Edwards, with him. In order to help Brewer "ward off" Patricia's husband, Pennock furnished Brewer a rifle and ammunition. On the night of the class, Pennock dropped off Brewer at the Edwards' home before proceeding to the high school. Brewer later returned to the high school to tell Pennock that he had shot the Edwards. Pennock then drove Brewer to Dubuque to make his getaway.
Pennock advised prison authorities that he had been kidnapped by Brewer and forced to aid his escape. It was not until some months later that Pennock admitted his role in this escapade. At Brewer's trial, Pennock acknowledged that he was given immunity from prosecution before he would concede his involvement.
At trial, defense counsel developed an alibi theory that suggested Brewer had already escaped to Dubuque by the time the Edwards were slain. They painted Pennock as a liar, and attempted to convince the jury that he had nothing to lose by concocting the story described above. They suggested it was as likely that Pennock, or someone else, had committed the murders. On the strength of Pennock's testimony, however, and circumstantial evidence placing Brewer at the scene of the crime, the jury found Brewer guilty of first-degree murder. We upheld the conviction on direct appeal. State v. Brewer, 247 N.W.2d 205, 208 (Iowa 1976).
Based on alleged constitutional infirmities preserved at trial, Brewer sought habeas corpus relief in federal court. That action was dismissed because of his failure to exhaust state remedies. He then filed the present application for postconviction relief in accordance with Iowa Code chapter 663A (1987).
Brewer's postconviction action advances three principal grounds for reversal of his conviction. First, he contends that newly discovered evidence and a change in the law merit re-evaluation of his original claim that the statutory exclusion of persons aged sixty-five and over from his jury panel violated his sixth and fourteenth amendment rights to a fair and impartial jury. Second, he asserts that documents discovered posttrial demonstrate the State's failure to reveal exculpatory evidence in violation of Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83, 83 S. Ct. 1194, 10 L. Ed. 2d 215 (1963). Finally, he claims prejudice resulting from several instances of alleged ineffective assistance of trial and appellate counsel.
All three grounds for relief were rejected by the trial court, the first by way of summary judgment and the latter two after trial on the merits. Because of the *80 constitutional questions involved in all three, our appellate review is de novo. Hinkle v. State, 290 N.W.2d 28, 30 (Iowa 1980).
I. Impartial Jury. When Brewer was tried in 1975, Iowa Code sections 607.2 and 609.2 (1975), taken together, exempted persons aged sixty-five and older from serving as jurors. Brewer challenged the composition of his jury panel, claiming that such a systematic and intentional exclusion of an identifiable group of persons deprived him of his constitutional right to be tried by a jury representing a cross section of the community.
We rejected Brewer's contention on direct appeal. Brewer, 247 N.W.2d at 208-10. Our decision was based on a survey of state and federal authority that revealed broad discretion vested in the states to prescribe juror eligibility requirements. See id. at 209-10. Notably, we discerned no criticism of statutory provisions that included maximum age restrictions as a means of achieving a panel of competent jurors. Id. at 210. We concluded that classification of jurors by age, as well as other factors, struck a reasonable balance between the State's interest in a defendant's right to a fair trial and its concern for citizen-jurors' varying responsibilities. Id. Given this "rational basis for [the State's] special exclusion of persons over sixty-five," and Brewer's lack of proof that the excluded class "has any special perspective not attainable from the balance of the community," we found no merit in his contention that his jury panel did not represent the required cross section of the community. Id.
In support of his claim for postconviction relief, Brewer urged the trial court's consideration of new evidence bearing on the special perspective held by persons over age sixty-five, and refinements in the United States Supreme Court's interpretation of the sixth amendment's fair-cross-section-of-the-community requirement. Like the trial court, however, we are convinced that neither argument sustains Brewer's request for a new trial.
In order to prevail on a claim of newly discovered evidence, a postconviction applicant must show:
(1) the evidence in question could not have been discovered before judgment in the exercise of due diligence; (2) the evidence is material to the issue and not merely cumulative or impeaching; and (3) its admission would likely change the result if a new trial were granted.
Stanford v. Iowa State Reformatory, 279 N.W.2d 28, 32-33 (Iowa 1979).
The first factor defeats Brewer's claim. Brewer's "new evidence" consists of the affidavits of two experts expressing their respective views that persons over age sixty-five comprise "a distinct, cognizable group in American society," the majority of whom are "physically well ... [and] mentally able to serve on jury duty." Neither the affiants, nor Brewer, assert that the data and conclusions contained in the affidavits could not have been discovered with due diligence at the time of Brewer's trial. In fact, the more detailed of the two documents claims to be premised on studies published in 1975 and earlier. Clearly, such proof is insufficient to justify relief under section 663A.2(4).
Alternatively, Brewer argues that Duren v. Missouri, 439 U.S. 357, 99 S. Ct. 664, 58 L. Ed. 2d 579 (1979), modified the standard to be applied in fair-cross-section challenges, and that this "new law" should be applied retroactively to grant him an opportunity to relitigate the issue. The thrust of Brewer's argument is that Duren rejected the rational basis test analysis we applied in Brewer and, in its place, called for a showing "that a significant state interest be manifestly and primarily advanced by those aspects of the jury-selection process, such as exemption criteria, that result in the disproportionate exclusion of a distinctive group." Duren, 439 U.S. at 367-68, 99 S. Ct. at 670, 58 L.Ed.2d at 589. We are convinced for at least two reasons, however, that Brewer is not entitled to the retroactive benefit of this "significant State interest" test under the facts of this case.
*81 Significantly, Duren and its predecessor Taylor v. Louisiana, 419 U.S. 522, 95 S. Ct. 692, 42 L. Ed. 2d 690 (1975), involved jury service exemption for a class of persons comprising over half of the forum counties' populationswomen. In Taylor, the court held that the systematic exclusion of women from jury service violated the defendant's sixth amendment right to a jury drawn from a fair cross section of the community. Taylor, 419 U.S. at 537, 95 S. Ct. at 701, 42 L.Ed.2d at 702. The holding was premised on the obvious conclusion that women as a class are numerous and distinct from men. Id. at 531, 95 S. Ct. at 698, 42 L.Ed.2d at 698. Duren echoed the same sentiment four years later, modifying Taylor only insofar as it clarified the following three-part test by which a defendant may establish a prima facie violation of the fair-cross-section requirement:
(1) that the group alleged to be excluded is a "distinctive" group in the community; (2) that the representation of this group in venires from which juries are selected is not fair and reasonable in relation to the number of such persons in the community; and (3) that this under-representation is due to systematic exclusion of the group in the jury-selection process.
Duren, 439 U.S. at 364, 99 S. Ct. at 668, 58 L.Ed.2d at 587.
While rejecting jury panels that were "almost totally male," the court in Taylor reserved to the states the right to "prescribe relevant qualifications ... and ... reasonable exemptions so long as it may be fairly said that the jury list or panels are representative of the community." Taylor, 419 U.S. at 537-38, 95 S.Ct. at 701, 42 L. Ed. 2d at 702. It is this latter standard that we applied in Brewer, 247 N.W.2d at 209. Neither Taylor nor Duren suggest that age qualifications, as distinct from gender-based exemptions, would result in the exclusion of a "distinctive" and numerous group of persons to the end that the resulting jury panel would not be "fair and reasonable in relation to the number of such persons in the community." Duren, 439 U.S. at 364, 99 S. Ct. at 668, 58 L.Ed.2d at 586-87. Nor does the record before us support a factual basis for such a conclusion.
Even assuming, arguendo, that the court in Brewer should have applied Duren's "significant state interest" test rather than a rational basis test to measure the constitutionality of age-based juror restrictions, we would still be left with the question whether Duren's higher standard should be given retroactive application on postconviction review. In a strikingly similar case, the United States Supreme Court recently held that new constitutional rules of criminal procedure generally should not be applied retroactively to cases on collateral review. See Teague v. Lane, ___ U.S. ___, ___, 109 S. Ct. 1060, 1075-78, 103 L. Ed. 2d 334, 356-60 (1989). We concur in the Court's conclusion and adopt it here.
Like the present case, Teague's fair-cross-section challenge (based on race) had been rejected by the Illinois Supreme Court in 1982 and then, in light of the Supreme Court's decision in Batson v. Kentucky, 476 U.S. 79, 106 S. Ct. 1712, 90 L. Ed. 2d 69 (1986), he reasserted it by way of habeas corpus in federal court. Teague, ___ U.S. at ___, 109 S.Ct. at 1065-67, 103 L. Ed. 2d at 344-46. On appeal from the denial of habeas corpus relief, the Supreme Court drew a bright line between the need for evenhanded justice that compels the retroactive application of newly announced constitutional principles to similarly situated defendants awaiting appeal, and the negative consequences flowing from repeated collateral attacks on judgments that were constitutionally sound when rendered. See id. at ___, 109 S.Ct. at 1072-75, 103 L. Ed. 2d at 352-56.
Prompted by principles of finality that are at the foundation of the criminal laws' deterrent effect, the Court reasoned that new rules should not be applied retroactively to cases on collateral review unless the change: (1) places certain types of individual, private conduct beyond the ability of lawmakers to proscribe, or (2) creates a "watershed" rule of criminal procedure implicating issues of fundamental trial fairness. Id. at ___, 109 S.Ct. at 1075-76, 103 L. Ed. 2d at 356-57. The Court then held:
*82 Because the absence of a fair cross section on the jury venire does not undermine the fundamental fairness that must underlie a conviction or seriously diminish the likelihood of obtaining an accurate conviction, we conclude that a rule requiring that petit juries be composed of a fair cross section of the community would not be a "bedrock procedural element" that would be retroactively applied under the second exception we have articulated.
Id. at ___, 109 S.Ct. at 1077, 103 L. Ed. 2d at 359; accord Daniel v. Louisiana, 420 U.S. 31, 32, 95 S. Ct. 704, 705, 42 L. Ed. 2d 790, 792 (1975) (refusing to apply Taylor retroactively). Applying this same reasoning to the case before us, we find no error in the trial court's rejection of Brewer's claim that Duren v. Missouri announced new law that should be retrospectively applied to furnish Brewer a new trial.
II. The "Brady" Claim. Brewer's second assignment of error centers on the deal struck between the State and its star witness, Herbert Pennock. Brewer claims that the State failed to fully disclose the extent of the deal and thereby violated Brewer's due process right to exculpatory evidence under Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83, 87-88, 83 S. Ct. 1194, 1197, 10 L. Ed. 2d 215, 218 (1963). The State counters that there was no suppression here because Brewer knew, and used at trial, the same information he now claims was suppressed.
Several requirements attend any Brady challenge. First, the prosecution must have withheld evidence from the defendant; second, the evidence must be favorable; and third, the evidence must be "material," that is, "such that there is a reasonable probability its disclosure would have changed the outcome." State v. Schatz, 414 N.W.2d 840, 841 (Iowa App. 1987) (citing United States v. Bagley, 473 U.S. 667, 682, 105 S. Ct. 3375, 3382, 87 L. Ed. 2d 481, 494 (1985)); see also State v. Anderson, 410 N.W.2d 231, 232-34 (Iowa 1987). A defendant asserting a Brady violation must shoulder the burden of establishing proof of materiality. Anderson, 410 N.W.2d at 235.
The exculpatory evidence claimed to have been suppressed is a BCI memorandumdictated posttrialthat verifies the details of Pennock's "deal" as follows:
Subject arrested and charged with following felonies:
1. Suffering a Life Prisoner to escape.
2. Perjury.
3. Illegal possession of a firearm by a felon.
Subject given immunity by the prosecution and all these charges dismissed on condition that subject testify against Ronald Wayne Brewer in Homicide charge.
Brewer concedes the trial testimony established that Pennock had certain State charges against him dismissed, and that he had received immunity. Brewer claims, however, that the State never divulged the quid pro quo evident in the BCI memo; that is, that the immunity was specifically given in exchange for Pennock's testimony against Brewer.
Brewer contends that if the defense could have established this quid pro quo for the jury, it would have seriously damaged Pennock's credibility. He points out that the consequences for refusing to testify after a deal conditional on giving testimony would include refiling of charges; for simple immunity and dismissal of charges, the maximum consequence would be a thirty-day jail sentence for contempt. Thus Brewer claims the deal gave Pennock a large incentive to testify against Brewer as he did, and that the defense and jury should have been given this information in order to accurately assess Pennock's credibility.
There may be merit in the fine line Brewer has drawn between what he knew in advance of trial and what was later revealed by the State's memo. But we think he is relying on a distinction without a material difference in this case.
As noted by the State, the record is replete with evidence that the defense had a *83 good understanding of the scope of Pennock's deal and made good use of it at trial. The transcript of pretrial proceedings quotes Brewer's counsel as being aware that Pennock had "been granted immunity in return for his testimony against Mr. Brewer." Counsel used that knowledge in his opening statement:
So what did [the State] do? They said, well, Mr. Pennock, that's simple enough, we will assure you that anything you say won't matter any because you are not ever going to be charged. That's what they have done. They have made a plea bargain that is second to none probably in this State.
As a preface to his own testimony, Pennock told the jury he was testifying under an order granting him immunity from a charge of perjury and suffering a life prisoner to escape. The defense pursued Pennock's understanding of the deal at length on cross-examination. The State, in its closing argument, conceded that Pennock was "probably not a very nice guy" and had testified only because of the grant of immunity. The defense then followed with the argument that Pennock was only now "telling the truth" because the State had "virtually put [Pennock] beyond the clutches of the law" and
last, but far from least, he got the ultimate governmental immunity for everything he said here, governmental immunity for all this factual situation, a deal bought, paid for and delivered to the State not for money, but for the more valuable coin, a whitewash of his crimes and those of his family forever.
We are at a loss to see how defense counsel could have made better use of this evidence as a tool to impeach the State's chief witness had the "deal" set out in the BCI memo been reduced to writing and revealed before trial. Even assuming, for the sake of argument, that some nuance of the deal was suppressed by the State, no due process violation occurs unless the suppressed evidence is material to defendant's guilt. Brady, 373 U.S. at 87, 83 S. Ct. at 1196-97, 10 L.Ed.2d at 218. Evidence is "material," for Brady purposes, only if the defendant shows a reasonable probability that if the evidence had been produced, the outcome of the trial would have been different. Anderson, 410 N.W.2d at 233. Brewer has not met that standard here. Viewing the totality of the circumstances, we are persuaded the district court was correct in denying a new trial on this ground.
III. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel. The rules guiding our review of Brewer's ineffectiveness claims are well established. Fundamentally, Brewer must show that counsel "failed to perform an essential duty," and that "prejudice resulted therefrom." State v. Miles, 344 N.W.2d 231, 233-34 (Iowa 1984); see also Nims v. State, 401 N.W.2d 231, 234 (Iowa App. 1986). Brewer bears the burden of proof on both of these requirements and must establish them by a preponderance of the evidence. Taylor v. State, 352 N.W.2d 683, 685 (Iowa 1984). To prove failure of an "essential duty," Brewer must overcome a presumption that counsel is competent, and demonstrate that under the entire record and totality of the circumstances, counsel's performance was not within the range of normal competency. Taylor, 352 N.W.2d at 685; Henderson v. Scurr, 313 N.W.2d 522, 524 (Iowa 1981); Nims, 401 N.W.2d at 233. Because a petitioner like Brewer is not entitled to perfect representation, we will not reverse where counsel has made a reasonable decision concerning trial tactics and strategy, even if such judgments ultimately fail. Fryer v. State, 325 N.W.2d 400, 413-15 (Iowa 1982); Nims, 401 N.W.2d at 233.
As for proof of prejudice, Brewer must show that counsel's failure worked to his substantial and actual disadvantage, to the end that
there is a reasonable probability that, but for counsel's unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been different. A reasonable probability is a probability sufficient to undermine confidence in the outcome.
Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 694, 104 S. Ct. 2052, 2069, 80 L. Ed. 2d 674, 699 (1984).
*84 Brewer raised four claims of ineffective assistance of counsel before the postconviction trial court. All were rejected by the court. Only two merit our brief consideration here: (1) counsel's failure to preserve error on the prosecutor's alleged comment on Brewer's silence; and (2) counsel's failure to request an accomplice instruction. We consider the arguments in turn.
A. Prosecutor's remarks. As a general rule, a prosecutor's comment on the defendant's failure to testify violates a defendant's due process rights. Anderson v. Nelson, 390 U.S. 523, 523-24, 88 S. Ct. 1133, 1134, 20 L. Ed. 2d 81, 83, reh'g denied, 391 U.S. 929, 88 S. Ct. 1812, 20 L. Ed. 2d 670 (1968). In Iowa, we view the issue as being whether the "language used by the prosecutor, in context, would `naturally and necessarily' be understood by a jury to be a comment on the failure of the accused to testify." State v. Bishop, 387 N.W.2d 554, 563 (Iowa 1986); State v. Taylor, 336 N.W.2d 721 at 727 (Iowa 1983).
At trial, Brewer stood on his right to remain silent. His counsel asked the court to instruct the jury regarding his right to do so free from adverse inference. The prosecutor then made the following statement in closing argument:
You will be instructed that not only is the Defendant presumed to be innocent, he also has his constitutional right not to testify, and you cannot take that to mean anything. You can't hold that against him. That's the law and ...that's the instruction.
On rebuttal, the prosecutor added:
You know, I don't like Mr. Pennock, I don't like anything about it, but at least he testified as to what the facts and circumstances were. He testified and you had an opportunity to hear him testify.
Brewer claims that these statements, in combination with the prosecutor's repeated suggestion that only the defendant knew what really happened, amounts to unlawful comment on Brewer's right to remain silent. He claims his counsel's failure to object or move for mistrial on this ground amounted to ineffective assistance of counsel. See Brewer, 247 N.W.2d at 215 (error not preserved for appeal on prosecutor's comments). The State argues that the first remark was merely an accurate statement of the law and the second was fair response to defense counsel's closing argument and, therefore, no claim for ineffective counsel can be predicated on failure to preserve error. We agree.
The prosecutor's first comment was no more than an affirmative statement of the law that would shortly be repeated by the trial court. No unfairness meriting objection appears.
The rebuttal statements, though troublesome when taken out of context, strike us as invited and fair comment in light of the double-barreled thrust of defense counsel's argument: the alleged failure by the State to prove essential facts and the assault on Pennock's credibility.
In State v. Bishop, we found no due process violation where a prosecutor made comparable remarks in response to defendant's attack upon a void in the State's evidence. Bishop, 387 N.W.2d at 562-64. We reasoned that a prosecutor may make such statements when a defendant's strategy is to put the State's case and witnesses "on trial," so long as the prosecutor's remarks do not "shift the burden of proof or refer to the defendant's failure to testify." Id. at 564. Our review of the record reveals no such shifting of burdens here. Moreover, the comments were not directed at Brewer's failure to testify, but at general prosecutorial frustration over developing evidence when the crime scene is controlled by the perpetrator of the crime. The assignment is without merit.
B. Accomplice instruction. As noted earlier in this opinion, the State's caseconveyed through the testimony of Herbert Pennockestablished that Pennock purchased the murder weapon, gave it to Brewer, drove Brewer to the Edwards' residence, and later drove Brewer to Dubuque to facilitate his escape. Brewer's defense rested on the alibi that he was already in Dubuque by the time someone *85 (such as Pennock) shot and killed the Edwards.
Given these two scenarios, Brewer contends his counsel were ineffective for having refused to request an accomplice instruction. Had they done so, the jurors would have been instructed that they could not convict Brewer based on Pennock's testimony alone. Because he views the remaining corroborative evidence as very weak, Brewer claims a reasonable probability that the outcome of the trial would have been different had the accomplice instruction been given.
Preliminarily, we are unable to agree with Brewer's assessment of the corroborating evidence. Without further lengthening this opinion by detailing that evidence here, the record reveals numerous pieces of persuasive physical and circumstantial evidence corroborating Pennock's version of the evening's events. The evidence placed Brewer at or near the crime scene when shots were heard; other witnesses observed a man resembling Brewer running from the scene with a rifle at his side shortly thereafter. Contrary to Brewer's assertion, we find the corroborative evidence strong, not minimal.
More importantly, as revealed by Brewer's trial counsel at his postconviction hearing, their election not to pursue an accomplice theory was a matter of deliberate trial strategy. They testified that no accomplice instruction was requested because they thought it would seriously weaken their best theory of defense, alibi. As one of these experienced trial counsel opined, a jury was unlikely to believe a theory of defense that attempted to "ride two horses."
Counsel need not urge the giving of every possible instruction to display competency, even where an instruction would otherwise be available. Wycoff v. State, 382 N.W.2d 462, 472 (Iowa 1986); Frank v. State, 376 N.W.2d 637, 640-41 (Iowa App.1985). This is particularly true where the decision is based on trial strategy. Wycoff, 382 N.W.2d at 472.
Here, counsel's failure to request an accomplice instruction was calculated to effectuate a reasonable trial strategy. That strategy was to avoid the duplicitous argument that defendant was not there, but if he was, he had an accomplice. Even though this strategy was ultimately unsuccessful, we cannot say that counsel's decision breached an essential duty that in any way prejudiced the defendant. The court correctly rejected this claim of ineffective assistance.
For all of the foregoing reasons, we affirm the trial court's dismissal of Brewer's postconviction action on its merits.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 9739058 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:07:59.232804+00 ===

BAKER, Judge.
In this joint appeal, defendant-appellants Columbus D. Ratliff and Steven L. Heavrin appeal the denial of their petitions for post-conviction relief in which they sought relief from their convictions of operating while intoxicated. They raise two issues for our review:
I. Whether the guilty plea court erred when it ordered them to make contributions to a charity of their choice as they agreed to do in their plea agreements.
II. Whether the guilty plea court erred when it denied their petitions for post-conviction relief without hearings when there were no genuine issues of material fact.
FACTS
The facts in these cases are not in dispute.
Ratliff
On April 16, 1986, Ratliff signed a plea agreement, with counsel present, in which he agreed to plead guilty to Class A misdemeanor operating while intoxicated,1 and the State agreed to dismiss the charges of driving while privileges suspended, a Class A misdemeanor,2 and leaving the scene of an accident, a Class B misdemeanor.3 The *242State also agreed to recommend a one year sentence, with either all but five days suspended or eighty hours of community service, a one year term of probation, and a 120-day license suspension. In addition, Ratliff agreed to pay restitution to the victims and to donate $50 to a charity of his choice.
On October 15, 1986, the guilty plea court conducted a hearing and accepted the plea agreement. At the guilty plea hearing, the trial judge acknowledged that Ratliff elected to make his $50 donation to the WHAS Crusade for Children.
Heavrin
On April 16, 1986, Heavrin entered a plea agreement, with counsel present, in which he agreed to plead guilty to Class A misdemeanor operating while intoxicated, and the State agreed to dismiss the charge of operating a vehicle with at least a .10% blood alcohol content.4 The State also agreed to recommend a one year suspended sentence, a one year term of probation, a 30-day license suspension, and a 180-day restricted license. In lieu of paying a fine to the State, Heavrin agreed to donate $75 to a charity of his choice.
At the guilty plea hearing conducted on May 7, 1986, the court accepted the plea agreement and Heavrin indicated he would make his donation to the Kosair Charities.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
I
Charitable Contributions
Ratliff and Heavrin first argue the guilty plea court erred when it ordered them to make contributions to a charity of their choice as they agreed to do in their plea agreements.
When a trial court accepts a plea agreement, the terms of the agreement are binding upon the court provided the court has the power to order them, and the agreement was not obtained through fraud. IND.CODE 835-35-8-8(e) Reffett v. State (1991), Ind., 571 N.E.2d 1227, 1229-30. In this case, Ratliff and Heavrin contend the guilty plea court did not have the power to order them to make charitable contributions because the legislature has not specifically authorized this penalty.
We agree there is no statutory provision that specifically authorizes a sentencing court to order a criminal defendant to make a charitable contribution in lieu of paying a fine. Nonetheless, this court has affirmed previously the permissibility of charitable contribution options in some cases. See Campbell v. State (1990), Ind.App., 551 N.E.2d 1164. In Compbell, the defendant stole $257,908.52 from his employer, Indiana University, and eventually agreed to plead guilty to three counts of theft and two counts of forgery. In addition to requiring full restitution, the court gave Campbell the choice of making a $40,000 contribution to Indiana University-Kokomo Foundation or paying a $50,000 fine. Campbell chose the contribution, and the court suspended his fine. Because suspending the fine was discretionary, we held it was proper to condition the suspension on any reasonable conditions the court deemed appropriate. Id. at 1169.
Charitable contribution options are not always proper, however. In an Advisory Opinion of the Indiana Commission on Judicial Qualifications (December 16, 1986), the Commission expressed its disapproval of a plea agreement that required the defendant to contribute to a county "victim fund" in lieu of paying a fine. The commission lik ened the practical effect of this sentencing practice to a "pay-off" in order to receive decisional favor.
Furthermore, courts have also struck down charitable contribution options when they conflicted with penalties imposed by statute. In cases arising under the Sherman Antitrust Act, for example, federal circuit courts have rejected sentences when fines mandated by the Act were suspended on the condition that a charitable contribution was made. See United States v. John A. Beck Co. (6th Cir.1985), 770 F.2d 83 (Sherman Antitrust Act does not provide *243for paying fine to third parties) United States v. Wright Contracting Co. (9th Cir. 1984), 728 F.2d 648 (requiring defendant to contribute $175,000 to a city sponsored jobs-program in exchange for suspending all but $50,000 of $400,000 fine is not a permissible sentence under Sherman Antitrust Act); United States v. Missouri Valley Constr. Co. (8th Cir.1984), 741 F.2d 1542 (district court improperly suspended all but $325,000 of $2,000,000 fine, and made payment of $1,475,000 to University of Nebraska Foundation a condition of probation).
The facts in the present case are distinguishable from the facts above. First, Ratliff and Heavrin chose the term in their plea agreements they now challenge. Both reached agreements with the State in which they agreed to make donations to a charity of their choice, and both asked the court to accept their agreements. Even if the terms were improper, which we do not find them to be, we will not now hear Ratliff and Heavrin complain about the error they invited. See Soucerman v. State (1990), Ind. App., 555 N.E.2d 1851, 1854 (because defendant invited court's use of reinstatement procedure by voluntarily agreeing to reinstatement in plea agreement, he was not permitted to complain on appeal that procedure was erroneous).
Second, both Ratliff and Heavrin chose the recipient of his donation. There is no danger of it appearing the court accepted a "pay-off" to benefit a chosen entity. The concerns expressed by the Indiana Commission on Judicial Qualifications are therefore not present.
Third, there is no Indiana statute that prohibits the charitable contribution options accepted by the guilty plea courts in this case. Both Ratliff and Heavrin were sentenced for Class A misdemeanors, and imposing fines for Class A misdemeanors is discretionary. IND.CODE 85-50-38-2. As this court held in Campbell, supra, a sentencing court may properly suspend a discretionary fine based on any reasonable condition the court finds appropriate. Here, Ratliff and Heavrin agreed in their plea agreements that in lieu of paying fines, they would make charitable dona tions in the amount of $50 and $75, respectively. Requiring a donation to a charity of their choice in lieu of a fine was a reasonable and proper condition. There was no error.
II
Petitions for Post-Conviction Relief A. Summary Denial
Ratliff and Heavrin also argue the post-conviction court erred when it summarily denied their petitions for post-conviction relief without hearings and without making specific findings and conclusions. We disagree.
Ind. Post-Conviection Rule 1(4)(f)} provides: "If the pleadings conclusively show that petitioner is entitled to no relief, the court may deny the petition without further proceedings." Ind. Post-Conviction Rule 1(4)(g) also provides for summary disposal of petitions when there is no genuine issue of material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Under these rules, a hearing on a petition for post-conviction relief is required only when an issue of material fact is presented. Pharris v. State (1985), Ind., 485 N.E.2d 79, 81. "Where the allegations of the petition conclusively demonstrate the petitioner is entitled to no relief, a hearing on the matter is unnecessary." Id. (citing Colvin v. State (1982), Ind., 441 N.E.2d 1858). In this case, it is clear from the records there were no genuine issues of material fact, and the State was entitled to judgment as a matter of law.5 The post-convietion court properly denied Ratliff's and Heavrin's petitions without hearings.
*244B. Lack of Specific Findings
Ratliff and Heavrin also allege the post-conviction court erroneously failed to issue specific findings and conclusions. Ind. Post-Conviction Rule 1(6) provides, in relevant part: "The court shall make specific findings of fact, and conclusions of law on all issues presented, whether or not a hearing is held." The purpose of this rule is to effectuate a meaningful review. Carter v. State (1990), Ind.App., 560 N.E.2d 687, 690, trams. denied.
We agree the court did not make specific findings and conclusions in this case. When the issues are sufficiently presented for review and addressed by the parties, however, the court's failure to enter specific findings and conclusions is not reversible error. Id. Here, the only substantive issue Ratliff and Heavrin raised was the permissibility of the charitable contribution options in their sentences. Because this issue was easily identifiable and reviewable, the court's failure to make specific findings and conclusions was harmless.
Judgment affirmed.
ROBERTSON, J., concurs.
RATLIFFE, C.J., coneurs with separate opinion.
. IND.CODE 9-30-5-2.
. IND.CODE 9-1-4-52 (repealed); CODE 9-24-18-5. now IND.
. IND.CODE 9-4-1-43 (repealed); now IND. CODE 9-26-1-3, IND.CODE 9-26-1-8.
. IND.CODE 9-1i1-2-1 (repealed); now IND. CODE 9-30-5-1.
. In their petitions for post-conviction relief, both defendants also argued the criminal docket records failed to show they were advised of their rights before the court accepted their guilty pleas. See Boykin v. Alabama (1969), 395 U.S. 238, 89 S.Ct. 1709, 23 L.Ed.2d 274. AL though neither defendant raises this argument on appeal, and thus each waives it forever, we note the transcripts from both guilty plea hearings affirmatively show each was sufficiently informed of his Boykin rights before the court accepted his guilty plea.

=== CASE 9739060 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:01.488051+00 ===

Nolan, J.
The sellers commenced this action in May, 1984, seeking a declaratory judgment that the defendant broker was not entitled to any commissions on the sales of the assets of two automobile dealerships, which included interests in real estate and both tangible and intangible personal property, because the broker was not a licensed real estate broker as required by G. L. c. 112, § 87RR (1990 ed.).3 The broker, seeking to recover commissions and damages under G. L. c. 93A, counterclaimed and contended that the sellers were estopped to use G. L. c. 112, § 87RR, to deny commissions to the broker. On appeal of summary judgment in favor of the sellers and against the broker on its counterclaim, this court vacated that decision and remanded the case to the Superior Court. Turnpike Motors, Inc. v. Newbury Group, Inc., 403 Mass. 291, 297 (1988) (Turnpike Motors I). In Turnpike Motors I, a majority of this court held that: (1) while an unlicensed broker is not entitled to collect a commission on the sale of real estate under G. L. c. 112, § 87RR, that statute does not bar the collection of a commission on the sale of personal property as part of the same transaction; and (2) G. L. c. 112, § 87RR, will not bar full recovery of a commission to an unlicensed broker if that *121broker reasonably relied to its detriment on the sellers’ representations that the sale was a sale of corporate stock.
On remand, the jury, in answer to special questions, found that the sellers were estopped to raise G. L. c. 112, § 87RR, as a bar to the broker’s claim for commissions, and awarded damages to the broker in the amount of $343,000. The sellers then filed a motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdiet or, alternatively, for a new trial. The trial judge granted the motion in part, entering judgment for the broker in the amount of $69,479.15, which reflected commissions on only the tangible personal property interests. The judge then ruled that, in the event that an appellate court reversed his decision, the sellers would be entitled to a new trial. The judge also dismissed the broker’s counterclaim under G. L. c. 93A. We granted the broker’s application for direct appellate review.
On appeal, the broker contends that it was error for the judge to: (1) allow the sellers’ motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict; (2) grant a new trial conditionally; and (3) deny the broker any recovery under c. 93A.4 We agree with the broker that the judge erred in granting the sellers’ motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict or, alternatively, a new trial, but we affirm the judge’s dismissal of the broker’s c. 93A counterclaim. We therefore direct the Superior Court judge to enter judgment in accordance with the jury’s verdict.
1. The judgment notwithstanding the verdict. In reviewing a judge’s allowance of a motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, we determine whether “anywhere in the evidence, from whatever source derived, any combination of circumstances could be found from which a reasonable inference could be drawn in favor of the [broker].” Dobos v. Driscoll, 404 Mass. 634, 656, cert, denied sub nom. Kehoe v. Dobos, 493 U.S. 850 (1989), quoting Poirier v. Plymouth, *122374 Mass. 206, 212 (1978). The judge concluded that judgment notwithstanding the verdict was warranted because the broker failed to present evidence sufficient to warrant an estoppel. Specifically, the judge ruled that the evidence did not warrant a finding of reasonable reliance by the broker, and that the broker did not present adequate evidence of two of the four factual elements that we considered in Turnpike Motors I, supra at 295-296.5
In Turnpike Motors /, supra at 296, we discussed four facts alleged in the broker’s pleadings, and we stated that, if these facts were true, the sellers would be estopped to deny the broker full commissions. Both the judge and the sellers, as well as the dissent in this appeal, have taken that discussion to mean that Turnpike Motors I holds that the sellers can only be estopped to deny the broker full commissions if the broker is able to prove that these four specific facts are true.6 Our conclusion in Turnpike Motors I, however, that certain of the facts alleged by the broker, if true, would lead *123to an estoppel, does not prevent the broker from making its case based on other facts alleged within the pleadings, nor does it necessarily require that proof of each of these specific facts is a threshold step that the broker must climb in order to prove its case.
“It was said in Greenwood v. Martins Bank, Ltd. [1933] A.C. 51, 57: ‘The essential factors giving rise to an estoppel are ... (1.) A representation or conduct amounting to a representation intended to induce a course of conduct on the part of the person to whom the representation is made. (2.) An act or omission resulting from the representation, whether actual or by conduct, by the person to whom the representation is made. (3.) Detriment to such person as a consequence of the act or omission.’ ” Cleaveland v. Malden Sav. Bank, 291 Mass. 295, 297-298 (1935). These essential factors are present in this case. As the judge found, there was adequate evidence presented by the broker at trial to establish that the defendant David Hackett informed the sellers’ representative, the plaintiff Eugene F. Looney, that Hackett was not a licensed real estate broker, and that Looney told Hackett that a license would not be necessary because the transaction would be structured as a sale of stock of a corporation rather than real estate. The agreements signed between the broker and the sellers reflected Looney’s representation that the potential sales would involve corporations whose assets would include real estate.7 The jury reasonably could have inferred from Looney’s testimony that he did not intend to pay the agreed-upon commissions *124when he signed the agreements with the broker.8 Following the signing of those agreements, the broker sought out and procured buyers for the sellers’ businesses, but the sellers have refused to compensate the broker for these services in accordance with their agreements with the broker. All of these factors would support the jury’s conclusion that Looney’s representations to the broker induced the broker to procure buyers for the sellers, and that the broker suffered detriment from its uncompensated, but successful, efforts on behalf of the sellers.9
*125It is also necessary, however, that the reliance of the party seeking the benefit of estoppel must have been reasonable. See O’Blenes v. Zoning Bd. of Appeals of Lynn, 397 Mass. 555, 558 (1986), and cases cited. The jury could reasonably have inferred from the evidence that the broker’s reliance was reasonable. Looney’s representations induced Hackett to undertake efforts on behalf of the sellers. The formal agreements between the broker and the sellers supported those representations. Hackett, who had been in business only a short time and had little education beyond high school, dealt directly with both Looney, a sophisticated businessman, and Looney’s attorney from whom, it was reasonable for Hackett to assume, the sellers sought advice.10 All the sellers, as well *126as their attorney, consulted with the broker in the preparation of the agreements. The asking prices for the automobile dealerships included the amounts necessary to pay the broker’s commissions. Several agreements between the sellers and buyers of the businesses, which, according to Looney’s testimony, were signed after he became aware of the broker’s lack of a license, explicitly referred to the sellers’ obligation to pay commissions to the broker.11 In these circumstances, the broker’s reliance was reasonable and the jury were warranted in concluding that the sellers should be estopped to raise the issue of the broker’s lack of a real estate license, and we reverse the judge’s grant of the sellers’ motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict.12
*1272. The motion for a new trial. The grant or denial of a motion for “a new trial on the ground that the verdict is against the weight of the evidence rests in the discretion of the judge.” Robertson v. Gaston Snow & Ely Bartlett, 404 Mass. 515, 520, cert, denied, 493 U.S. 894 (1989), quoting Bergdoll v. Suprynowicz, 359 Mass. 173, 175 (1971). The judge, however, “should not decide the case as if sitting without a jury; rather, the judge should only set aside the verdict if satisfied that the jury ‘failed to exercise an honest and reasonable judgment in accordance with the controlling principles of law.’ ” Robertson, supra, quoting Hartmann v. Boston Herald-Traveler Corp., 323 Mass. 56, 60 (1948). Moreover, a judge should exercise this discretion only when the verdict “is so greatly against the weight of the evidence as to induce in his mind the strong belief that it was not due to a careful consideration of the evidence, but that it was the product of bias, misapprehension or prejudice.” Scannell v. Boston Elevated Ry., 208 Mass. 513, 514 (1911). The grant or denial of a new trial, however, will only be disturbed if the judge has abused his discretion. Robertson v. Gaston Snow & Ely Bartlett, supra at 520-521.
In the same memorandum granting the sellers’ motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, the judge ruled as follows: “Assuming that a Reviewing Court rules that this Justice has decided the Rule 50(b) motion improperly, this Justice pursuant to the provisions of Rule 50(c) rules that on the issue of estoppel the verdict is against the weight of the evidence and conditionally allows the motion for new trial pursuant to the provisions of Rules 59 and 50(c).” Rule 50(c) *128does permit the conditional ruling on a motion for a new trial, as the judge made here, but the same rule requires the judge to “specify the grounds for granting or denying the motion for the new trial.” Mass. R. Civ. P. 50 (c), 365 Mass. 814 (1974). The judge in this case, however, failed to specify any grounds for his conditional ruling beyond his brief statement that the verdict was against the weight of the evidence.
We have held that the requirement that a litigant state specific grounds in support of a motion for a directed verdict is important in order to allow the judge knowingly to rule on the question before him, and to allow the opposing party an opportunity to rectify any deficiencies in its case. See Bonofiglio v. Commercial Union Ins. Co., 411 Mass. 31, 34-35 (1991), S.C., 412 Mass. 612 (1992). Similarly, the requirement that a judge specify the grounds for a conditional ruling on a motion for a new trial is important in order to allow a reviewing court knowingly to rule on the question before it, and to allow the opposing party an opportunity to rectify any deficiencies in its case before retrial. See Robertson v. Gaston Snow & Ely Bartlett, supra at 521 n.3 (judge’s express finding indicates he understood and applied correct legal standard); Powell v. Lititz Mut. Ins. Co., 419 F.2d 62, 65 (5th Cir. 1969) (“Our review is greatly hampered by the fact that the court below . . . did not specify the grounds for [conditionally] granting the motion for a new trial”). While the judge wrote extensively on the sufficiency of the evidence to warrant the jury’s verdict, we have already concluded that the judge applied an incorrect legal standard. The problem is • that, outside of the judge’s inappropriate conclusions concerning the sufficiency of the evidence, we have no knowledge of what else may have caused the judge to conclude that the jury failed to exercise “honest and reasonable judgment in accordance with the controlling principles of law.”13 Robert*129son v. Gaston Snow & Ely Bartlett, supra at 520. To the extent that the judge’s ruling on the motion for a new trial rests on the same inappropriate legal standards, his ruling is insupportable.14
Moreover, the judge himself later raised serious questions about his motivation for the conditional grant of the motion for a new trial. In a hearing on the sellers’ motion to dissolve postverdict security and to dismiss reach and apply claims, the judge stated as follows: “Part of my decision, I don’t know how to put it diplomatically, is a suggestion to [the Justices of this court] that they re-examine more closely what they did and, perhaps, they take umbrage at that. So, I mean, in terms of the probability of success . . . frankly, if I were a betting man standing apart from it, I would think that the opposing party is going to prevail.” This statement certainly does not reflect a strong belief that the jury’s verdict was not due to a careful consideration of the evidence. Instead of a strong belief that the jury’s verdict was the result of bias, misapprehension, or prejudice, this statement reflects the judge’s underlying difference of opinion with this court’s reasoning in Turnpike Motors I.
Given the judge’s inadequate specification of grounds for the conditional grant of a new trial, along with his stated intention that this court reexamine Turnpike Motors I, even while believing that the broker would prevail on appeal, it appears that the judge has not followed the applicable standards in his conditional grant of the sellers’ motion for a new trial. Moreover, we find nothing in the record or in the sellers’ arguments on appeal to convince us that the jury failed to exercise an honest and reasonable judgment in accordance
*130with controlling principles of law.15 See Ross v. Chesapeake & O. Ry., 421 F.2d 328, 330 (6th Cir. 1970) (review of record disclosed “no sound basis” for contingent grant of new trial where judge failed to specify grounds). For these reasons, we reverse the judge’s conditional grant of a new trial.
3. Unfair and deceptive practices under G. L. c. 93A. The broker challenges the judge’s conclusion that the sellers did not violate G. L. c. 93A, § 11, by refusing to pay the broker a finder’s fee. The broker argues that the judge erred as a matter of law in concluding that the sellers justifiably withheld payment of the fee to the broker on advice of their counsel. The broker asserts that, even if reliance on the advice of counsel were recognized as a defense to a c. 93A claim, no reasonable view of the facts in this case would support that defense. The broker’s c. 93A claim alleges that the sellers never intended to honor their obligation to pay the agreed brokerage commissions.16 We grant due regard to the judge’s findings of fact unless they prove to be clearly errone*131ous. Mass. R. Civ. P. 52 (a), 365 Mass. 816 (1974). The judge found that the sellers refused to pay the broker commissions only after they were so directed by counsel on the ground that Hackett was an unlicensed broker and could not legally collect commissions for effectuating the sales. The judge further found that the sellers were unaware at the time ■they entered into the commission agreements that the broker did not have a license. We cannot say that these findings are clearly erroneous, because the testimony of the sellers, if believed, supports these conclusions. To be sure, the conflicting testimony presented in this case allowed for opposing conclusions as to whether the sellers engaged in unfair and deceptive practices of the unscrupulous type condemned by c. 93A, but where the evidence leads equally to competing conclusions, judges and juries are in the best positions to make the ultimate choice, especially given their superior opportunity to assess the credibility of the witnesses. Whitehall Co. v. Barletta, 404 Mass. 497, 503 (1989). Notwithstanding the fact that we might arrive at a different conclusion with respect to this issue, we cannot state that the judge was completely unjustified in viewing this matter as a legitimate dispute of rights and obligations.
To summarize, the order allowing the sellers’ motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict is reversed as is the conditional allowance of the motion for a new trial. The broker’s c. 93A counterclaim was properly dismissed. Judgment is to be entered in accordance with the jury’s verdict.
So ordered.
Section 87RR provides that one who acts as a real estate broker “directly or indirectly, either temporarily or as an incident to any other transaction, or otherwise” must be licensed by the Commonwealth, and that no one shall recover in any action “for compensation for services as a broker performed within the commonwealth unless he was a duly licensed broker at the time such services were performed.”
Given our rulings on these issues, we need not consider the broker’s argument on appeal concerning the judge’s calculation of damages for commissions on the sale of the personal property interests.
“The broker’s claim is based on its assertion that, when it told a representative of the sellers that it was not a real estate broker, the sellers’ representative answered that the absence of a license would not be a problem. The broker claims that the sellers agreed that the sales of the two businesses could be in the form of sales of corporate stock. It further claims that it easily could have obtained, as it now has, a real estate broker’s license if it had known one would be needed and that the sellers restructured the sales as sales of assets rather than of stock for the purpose of defeating the broker’s commissions.” Turnpike Motors I, 403 Mass. 291, 295-296 (1988).
The judge did find that there was adequate evidence at trial concerning the first two of those four factual elements. Additionally, there was evidence from which the jury could have concluded that the other two factual elements were proved. There was evidence that Hackett’s friend and attorney, John Zizza, did easily become an officer of the broker and a licensed real estate broker. Contrary to the judge’s finding that there was “not a scintilla of evidence” that the sellers ever represented that they intended to transfer the real estate to their corporations prior to the sales of the automobile dealerships, the agreements between the broker and the sellers specifically state that the assets of the corporations “will include all the real estate” (emphasis added). The jury could have reasonably concluded from these agreements, therefore, that the sellers intended to transfer the real estate to the corporations in order that, at the time of the actual sale of the corporations, the sales could be of corporate stock and not real estate.
The agreement between the broker and the sellers for one of the businesses, Boston Mazda, included the following language: “Newbury Group, Inc. shall be owed one hundred and eighty thousand dollars ($180,000) even if the sales price of said corporation is sold for less than one million eight hundred thousand dollars. ... It is understood that the assets of the corporation will include all the real estate at 201 Cambridge street, the entire parts inventory, equipment, and office furnishings” (emphasis added). The agreement concerning the other business, Gene’s Foreign Car Service, Inc., contained similar language except for the amount of the commission and the location of the business.
Looney testified on direct and cross-examination that, although he signed the agreements with the broker, he never read these documents. Looney also testified as follows on cross-examination:
Counsel for the broker: “One of the reasons that you didn’t pay the commission due to my client is because you thought it was too high, right?”
The witness: “One of the reasons, yes.”
Counsel for the broker: “And how high was it? How much was it did you think that it was too high by?”
The witness: “About 6 percent.”
Counsel for the broker: “About 6 percent. Did you tell Mr. Hackett that?”
The witness: “No, sir.”
Counsel for the broker: “Did you tell him that on September 21st, 1983?”
The witness: “No, sir.”
Counsel for the broker: “But it was 6 percent too high on September 22nd, 1983 [when the parties signed the agreement], wasn’t it?”
The witness: “Maybe the 23 [rd] or 4th.”
Counsel for the broker: “You told him on the 23rd or 4th?”
The witness: “I didn’t tell him anything. I thought it was too high.”
Counsel for the broker: “Right after you signed this agreement you decided not to pay him 10 percent, didn’t you, sir?” 66
The witness: “Yes, sir.”
The dissent characterizes the issue in this case as whether there was evidence that, when the broker performed the services for which it seeks commissions, it could and would have been licensed as a real estate broker if it had not been misled into thinking that the sales were to be sales only of corporate stock. The dissent appears to argue that only an omission on the part of the broker, its failure to seek a real estate license, can give rise to estoppel. Estoppel, however, can arise from either an omission or an act by the person to whom the representation is made. See Cleaveland v. Malden Sav. Bank, 291 Mass. 295, 298 (1935) (essential factor in an estoppel is “an act or omission” resulting from the representation); Restatement *125(Second) of Contracts § 90 (1981) (promise which promisor should reasonably expect to induce “action or forbearance” can be binding); 1A A. Corbin, Contracts § 200, at 215 (1963) (“action or forbearance” in reliance on a promise can be sufficient reason for enforcing the promise). In this case, it is clear to a majority of this court that there were sufficient acts by the broker to justify an estoppel, and it is not necessary to consider the issue whether the broker could have or would have procured a license but for the sellers’ representations.
We note, however, that G. L. c. 112, § 87RR, explicitly required the broker to be licensed only “at the time . . . services were performed,” and not at the time the agreements were reached. See generally Annot., Procurement of Real-Estate Broker’s License Subsequent to Execution of Contract for Services as Entitling Broker to Compensation for Services, 80 A.L.R.3d 318 (1977). Hackett testified that he would not have taken steps to perform services for the sellers unless they signed the agreements, which reflected Looney’s representation that the sales would involve corporations and not real estate. Hackett’s friend and attorney, John Zizza, did easily become an officer of the broker and a licensed real estate broker, and he could just as easily obtain a license for the broker pursuant to G. L. c. 112, § 87UU (1990 ed.). Even though Hackett himself could not have easily become licensed, the broker could take any number of steps to adhere to the statute, such as hiring a licensed salesman. All of these steps could have been taken after the agreement was signed but before the broker performed any services for the sellers. While, as the dissent points out, there is no evidence that the broker would have undertaken such steps, such evidence is unnecessary because Looney’s representations made such speculation a moot point.
Looney testified that he generally consulted with his attorney every time he had a legal issue. Another plaintiff, John Ryan, who also signed the agreements with the broker, testified that he relied on the advice of counsel for any contract he signed.
A letter of intent concerning the Boston Mazda business, dated December 22, 1983, included the following language: “Sellers acknowledge that they have engaged David Hackett to act as broker in connection with finding a buyer for the assets that are the subject matter of this letter of intent. It is understood and agreed that the Sellers are solely responsible for all fees and commissions due and owing to said broker by reason of the transactions contemplated by this letter of intent.” A subsequent agreement concerning the Boston Mazda business, dated April 25, 1984, included the following clause: “Except for the engagement of David Hackett, whose fees and commissions, as agreed by and between the Seller and David Hackett, the Seller hereby agrees to pay . ...” A purchase and sale agreement concerning Gene’s Foreign Car Service, Inc., dated March 2, 1984, included the following clause: “Seller agrees, simultaneously with the Closing, to pay the full amount of the commission due [the broker] for its services in connection with this transaction.”
The dissent somehow finds it strange, in spite of our decision in Turnpike Motors I, that a majority of this court would, under equitable principles, affirm the jury’s award of damages to the broker who engaged in these activities without meeting the requirements of G. L. c. 112, § 87RR. We recognize, however, that “[i]t is in the main to accomplish the prevention of results contrary to good conscience and fair dealing that the doctrine of estoppel has been formulated and taken its place as a part of the law.” McLearn v. Hill, 276 Mass. 519, 524 (1931). While it is true that the broker in this case will receive commissions to which it is not entitled under statute, a different result would enable the sellers to reap a windfall because, according to Looney’s own testimony, the sale prices of the businesses took into account the commissions owed to the broker. In our opinion, to allow the sellers to reap such a windfall, after knowingly inducing the broker to undertake successful efforts on their behalf, is contrary to good conscience and fair dealing. As this court said in Town Planning & Eng’g Assocs. v. Amesbury Specialty Co., 369 Mass. 737, 747 (1976), *127quoting 6A A. Corbin, Contracts § 1512, at 713 (1962), “justice and sound policy do not always require the enforcement of licensing statutes by large forfeitures going not to the state but to repudiating defendants.” See Joffe v. Wilson, 381 Mass. 47, 55-56 (1980) (certified public accountant with agreement in violation of intermediation rule entitled to recover agreed-upon fees); Harness Tracks Sec., Inc. v. Bay State Raceway, Inc., 374 Mass. 362, 366-367 (1978) (unlicensed detective business entitled to recovery for services in accordance with terms of written contract); Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 181 (1981) (promise not necessarily unenforceable if one party fails to comply with licensing statute).
The dissent, apparently recognizing that no one can know exactly what caused the judge to conclude as he did, can only speculate on what the judge’s reasoning was. Post at 145-147. The dissenting Justice apparently believes that the deficiency on the part of the judge mandates an affirmance of his ruling. Such an approach, however, would deny parties a *129proper appellate review of new trial decisions. See Champeau v. Fruehauf Corp., 814 F.2d 1271, 1274 (8th Cir. 1987).
The sellers’ supplement to their motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, or, alternatively, a new trial, does not differentiate between the two remedies and only argues that the evidence of estoppel was legally insufficient. See Champeau v. Fruehauf Corp., supra at 1275 (where trial judge fails to state grounds for decision on new trial motion, decision should be affirmed only if it can be supported by a specific ground stated in motion).
The dissent chides the court for even considering the role of the jury in this matter. Post at 146. We believe, however, that, “[wjhile we must guard against usurping the trial court’s prerogative with respect to seriously erroneous jury verdicts, we must be equally diligent in protecting the jury’s function. Direction of a new trial on an issue determined by a jury without the articulation of a sufficient basis for such action effects ... ‘a denigration of the jury system and to the extent that new trials are granted the judge takes over, if he does not usurp, the prime function of the jury as the trier of facts.’ ” Crane v. Consolidated Rail Corp., 731 F.2d 1042, 1051 (2d Cir.), cert, denied, 469 U.S. 854 (1984), quoting Lind v. Schenley Indus., 278 F.2d 79, 90 (3d Cir.), cert, denied, 364 U.S. 835 (1960).
The broker also argues on appeal that the judge improperly concluded that “it would appear that the [broker’s] failure to appeal the adverse ruling on [the c. 93A] claim [as part of the first appeal to this court] has resulted in a waiver.” It is the broker’s position that it did not waive the c. 93A claim by omitting to discuss it specifically in the original appeal to this court. The broker claims that it did not have to appeal from the adverse decision respecting the c. 93A claim because the fate of that claim depended entirely on the central issue of the applicability of the § 87RR bar to recovery of commissions and thus was implicitly included in the appeal. In any event, the broker points out that, on remand, it amended the complaint to assert a c. 93A claim against the sellers, which was not objected to and was allowed by the judge. It is our opinion that the c. 93A claim, as raised by the amendment, was properly before the judge.

=== CASE 9739061 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:08:01.49501+00 ===

O’Connor, J.
(dissenting). In my view, the court’s reversal of the trial judge’s allowance of the sellers’ motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict as to the broker’s claim for real estate commissions is wrong. It is also my view that the court’s reversal of the conditional allowance of the sellers’ motion for a new trial is wrong, and it is my further view *132that the flaws in the court’s reasoning on both issues are serious and they are numerous.
1. Judgment notwithstanding the verdict. In Turnpike Motors, Inc. v. Newbury Group, Inc., 403 Mass. 291, 295-296 (1988) (Turnpike Motors I), the court said: “We come then to the broker’s claim that the sellers should be estopped to deny the broker’s right to recover a full commission. The broker’s claim is based on its assertion that, when it told a representative of the sellers that it was not a real estate broker, the sellers’ representative answered that the absence of a license would not be a problem. The broker claims that the sellers agreed that the sales of the two businesses would be in the form of sales of corporate stock. It further claims that it easily could have obtained, as it now has, a real estate broker’s license if it had known one would be needed and that the sellers restructured the sales as sales of assets rather than of stock for the purpose of defeating the broker’s commissions.” (Emphasis added.)
The court continued: “If the facts are as the broker claims, the sellers would be estopped to deny the broker a full commission. There is, of course, the question whether the broker reasonably relied on the sellers’ representations. See O’Blenes v. Zoning Bd. of Appeals of Lynn, 397 Mass. 555, 558 (1986), and cases cited.” (Emphasis added.) Id. at 296. Now, in the present appeal (Turnpike Motors II), the court says, “In Turnpike Motors I, supra at 296, we discussed four facts alleged in the broker’s pleadings, and we stated that, if these facts were true, the sellers would be estopped to deny the broker full commissions. Both the judge and the sellers, as well as the dissent in this appeal, have taken that discussion to mean that Turnpike Motors I holds that the sellers can only be estopped to deny the broker full commissions if the broker is able to prove that these four specific facts are true. Our conclusion in Turnpike Motors I, however, that certain of the facts alleged by the broker, if true, would lead to an estoppel, does not prevent the broker from making its case based on other facts alleged within the pleadings, nor does it necessarily require that proof of each of these specific *133facts is a threshold step that the broker must climb in order to prove its case.” Ante at 122-123. It should surprise no one that, at the trial following Turnpike Motors /, the trial judge and the sellers, and indeed the broker, too, took the quoted discussion in Turnpike Motors I to mean that the four facts, which this court identified as the only facts on which the broker based its claim, were essential to the broker’s case. As the quoted passage states, “[t]he broker’s claim is based on its assertion” of those four facts, including the assertion that “it [the broker] easily could have obtained, as it now has, a real estate broker’s license if it had known one would be needed.” Indeed, in so characterizing the broker’s claim, the court not only had the broker’s pleadings before it, but had the broker’s appellate brief before it as well. In that document, the broker argued: “The Sellers should not be allowed to trick the Broker into failing to get its broker’s license (something it could have done easily . . .) and then assert that they can refuse to pay the agreed commissions because the Broker is not a licensed real estate broker.”
It is most unfair for the court now, after trial, effectively to amend the law of the case that it established in Turnpike Motors /, on which the judge and the parties properly relied. It is unfair for the court now to declare for the first time that the broker really did not have any burden to prove that it forwent obtaining a real estate broker’s license in reliance on the sellers’ representations, as it alleged, and, instead, only had to prove that it produced buyers as a result of the sellers’ representations. It is beyond reasonable question that the judge’s conduct of the trial and the parties’ trial strategies were dictated to a large degree by the court’s clear statement in Turnpike Motors I that, to make out estoppel, the broker would have to prevail on the four identified questions. Indeed, the briefs in the present appeal do not even address the question whether the evidence would warrant the jury in finding that the sellers’ representations to the broker induced the broker to procure buyers for the sellers. Such a distortion of the issue defined by the pleadings and by Turnpike Mo*134tors I, and on which the trial focused, cannot be the right way to do judicial business.
Unfairness in the form just mentioned is not the only problem, however. Even if, somewhere in the record, the court could point to a shred of evidence that the sellers’ representations about the lack of need for a real estate broker’s license induced the broker to produce buyers, which the court cannot do because there is no such evidence,1 that evidence, if believed, would not result in the sellers’ being estopped under heretofore declared estoppel principles from relying on G. L. c. 112, § 87RR, to deny the broker an agreed commission. The court has said that “[i]n order to work an estoppel it must appear that one has been induced by the conduct of another to do something different from what otherwise would have been done and which has resulted to his harm and that the other knew or had reasonable cause to know that such consequence might follow” (emphasis added). O’Bienes v. Zoning Bd. of Appeals of Lynn, supra at 558, quoting Boston & A.R.R. v. Reardon, 226 Mass. 286, 291 (1917). If, as the court says, the evidence would have warranted a finding that the sellers’ representation about the form the contemplated sales would take and about a resulting lack of need for a broker’s license induced the broker to produce buyers for the automobile dealerships, traditional estoppel principles would require that, for estoppel to obtain, the broker also would have to show that the broker was harmed by the induced conduct, namely the production of buyers. How was the broker harmed by producing buyers? The broker’s claim is that it was harmed by not receiving substantial real estate commissions, not by the fact that it produced buyers. The court tells us that “the broker suffered detriment from its uncompensated, but successful, efforts on behalf of the sellers.” Ante at 124. If the court is relying on the broker’s fail*135ure to be paid as the detriment needed for estoppel, the court should explain how the failure to be paid was due to the broker’s production of buyers rather than the broker’s failure to obtain the licensing required by G. L. c. 112, § 87RR. It is no mere happenstance that the broker’s claim has always been that the broker reasonably relied on the sellers’ representations and, as a result, did not obtain a real estate broker’s license which it easily could have obtainedIf those facts had been proved, which, as I shall show, they were not, then and only then would the broker have shown that the sellers’ representations induced the broker to refrain from taking steps necessary to entitle it to the agreed real estate commissions. Only by proving those facts could the broker have demonstrated the detrimental reliance required for estoppel.
The court states that the evidence “would support the jury’s conclusion that Looney’s representations to the broker induced the broker to procure buyers for the sellers” (emphasis added). Ante at 124. As I have said, there was no such evidence, but, even if there were, it is clear that the jury did not conclude that Looney’s representations induced the broker to procure buyers for the sellers. The judge’s relevant jury instructions were as follows:
“Now what do we mean by estoppel ... ‘it must appear that one has been induced by the conduct of another to do something different from what otherwise would have been done, and which has resulted to his harm, and that the other knew or had reasonable cause to know that such consequence might follow.’. . . [T]he reliance of the party seeking the benefit of estoppel must have been reasonable. . . . That would mean that the Newbury Group would have to establish more probably than not that it was induced by the conduct of Eugene Looney ... to do something different from what it otherwise would have done, and that has resulted in Newbury’s harm and that Eugene Looney knew or had reasonable cause to know that such consequences might *136follow. . . . [Y]ou will have to determine whether or not Looney . . . said that the absence of a license would not be a problem . . . agreed that the sale of the two businesses would be in the form of sales of corporate stock . . . [b]ecause corporate stock would be a sale of the business without involving separate sales of real estate . . . that conduct or statements allegedly made by Eugene Looney ... led the Newbury interest to do something other than they would have done; namely, to obtain a real estate broker’s license, if they were acting in what courts refer to as reasonable reliance on the representations allegedly made by Mr. Looney.” (Citation omitted; emphasis added.)
As the court has frequently said, juries will be presumed to have followed judges’ instructions. O’Connor v. Raymark Indus., 401 Mass. 586, 590 (1988), and cases cited. Here, there is nothing in the judge’s instructions that would authorize the jury to consider whether Looney’s representations to the broker induced the broker to procure buyers for the sellers. Rather, the jury were told that their task was to determine whether the sellers’ representations, through Looney, to the broker induced the broker not to do what the broker otherwise would have done, namely, obtain a real estate broker’s license.
The question, then, that the court should have addressed in reviewing the judge’s allowance of the sellers’ motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict is whether the broker produced evidence at the trial that it was reasonably induced by the sellers’ representations to forgo obtaining a real estate broker’s license. The judge ruled that the broker failed to meet its burden of production of evidence, and in my view he was correct.
As the court recognizes, ante at 121, the question is whether “anywhere in the evidence, from whatever source derived, any combination of the circumstances could be found from which a reasonable inference could be drawn in favor of the [broker].” Dobos v. Driscoll, 404 Mass. 634, *137656, cert, denied sub nom. Kehoe v. Dobos, 493 U.S. 850 (1989), quoting Poirier v. Plymouth, 374 Mass. 206, 212 (1978). I shall set forth the relevant evidence with that standard in mind. David Hackett owned all the stock in Newbury Group, Inc., whose business before September, 1983, was “mainly the employment agency business,” and he was its sole employee. One day Hackett went to see “someone” about “getting a car” and that person told him that he had a brother who might be looking for an automobile dealership. As a result, Hackett called Eugene Looney, who was the president of Turnpike Motors, Inc., and asked him if he would be interested in selling his dealership. Looney said he would be. Hackett told Looney that he was not a real estate broker, but that he would like to sell Looney’s business.
Hackett testified that two or three days later he met with Looney and he brought to that meeting “a simple agreement that said [he] would get... 10 percent of the proceeds of the business, of all the monies.” He testified that Looney said Hackett would have to talk with Attorney Gary Widett about it. According to the evidence, Mr. Widett was the sellers’ attorney. Hackett testified that he later told Mr. Widett in Looney’s presence that he would want ten per cent commissions on the possible sale of the businesses owned by Turnpike Motors, Inc. and Gene’s Foreign Car Service, Inc. Mr. Widett answered that a ten per cent commission was “ridiculous.” According to Hackett’s testimony, “Widett was not very cooperative.”
Hackett also testified that on September 22, 1983, he was at the Boston Mazda dealership owned by Turnpike Motors, Inc., and from there he spoke with Mr. Widett on the telephone. He then and there typed two agreements reflecting terms that he and Mr. Widett had discussed, and he, the two Ryans (plaintiff sellers), and Looney signed them. One agreement was between Newbury Group, Inc., and Turnpike Motors, Inc., doing business as Boston Mazda (seller). Dated September 22, 1983, it provided in relevant part, “Newbury Group, Inc. shall be owed one hundred eighty thousand dollars ($180,000) even if the sales price of said corporation is *138sold for less than one million eight hundred thousand dollars. If the sales price is more than one million eight hundred thousand dollars, Newbury Group, Inc. will be owed ten percent of the difference between one million eight hundred thousand dollars and the actual sales price. ... It is understood that the assets of the corporation will include all the real estate at 201 Cambridge Street, the entire parts inventory, equipment, and office furnishings. . . The other agreement, also dated September 22, 1983, was between Newbury Group, Inc., and Gene’s Foreign Car Service, Inc. (seller). Its material provisions were as follows: “Newbury Group, Inc. shall be owed one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000) even if the sales price of said corporation is sold for less than one million five hundred thousand dollars. If the sales price is more than one million five hundred thousand dollars, Newbury Group, Inc. will be owed ten percent of the difference between one million five hundred thousand dollars and the actual sales price. ... It is understood that the assets of the corporation will include all the real estate at 1280 Cambridge Street, the entire parts inventory, equipment, and office furnishings. ...”
Asked whether Hackett and Looney had a discussion prior to September 22, 1983, about how the companies would be sold, Hackett answered that they had. Hackett was then asked, “What did he say?” and Hackett answered, “That since I wasn’t a broker we have to structure the deal as a sale of assets.” At that point, the court took a recess. Following the recess, Hackett returned to the witness stand and said that he wished to change his testimony about what Looney had said to him. When again asked what Looney had said about how the sale would be structured, Hackett answered, “If we structured the sale as a sale of stock we could — that would allow me to sell the business not as a real estate agent, but it would still be legal.”
On cross-examination of Hackett, the following questions were asked and answers given:
Q.\ “Now you testified on direct examination that you knew the assets of the corporation were being sold. Correct?”
*139A.: “The stock, yes. I thought it was the same thing. But I remembered they said they wanted to sell the stock of the corporation.”
Q.: “You testified under oath in your deposition that you knew the assets were being sold, didn’t you?”
A.: “I thought it was the same thing that they said was stock. However the agreement is written up, okay. Just however the agreement is written up. Mr. Widett, he’s the one who was the engineer.”
“You said he’s the engineer. Did he dictate the agreement to you?”
A.: “No.”
Q.: “Oh, okay.”
A.: “I did. But he changed whatever he wanted to change.” 66
Q.\ “Did he dictate the agreement to you?”
A.: “I told him what I wanted and he changed the words that he wanted. And finally what I did is I insisted that in there we put that a minimum commission be paid.”
Q.: “A minimum commission be paid?”
A.: “That’s right.”
Q.: “And that was for the sale of real estate and assets and whatever was going to be sold. Right?”
A.: “That was considered part of the stock of the corporation.”
Hackett testified with respect to the question whether, in reliance on the sellers’ representations, the broker refrained from obtaining a real estate broker’s license which it easily could have obtained before performing the services for which the broker now claims commissions. The broker’s claim that it easily could have obtained a broker’s license before the services were performed was premised on an officer of Newbury Group, Inc., being an attorney (in Turnpike Motors I, supra at 295, the court observed, “The broker’s omission was relatively minor in view of the fact that it could have easily obtained a license because one of the officers was an attorney”). Hackett testified that, in September, 1983, Attorney John
_________ *140Zizza, Hackett’s friend, was attorney for Newbury Group, Inc. Asked whether Mr. Zizza ever became an officer of Newbury Group, Inc., Hackett said, “Yes, he did.” Asked when that occurred, Hackett answered, “I think it was in the spring of ’84. I’m not, I’m not 100 percent sure, but I think it was around the spring of 1984. Winter or spring. I’m not sure.” Hackett also testified as follows:
Q.: “Could you have had Mr. Zizza file an application for a real estate broker’s license back in September, 1983 if you thought you had to do it?”
A.: “Sure.”
The evidence disclosed that the services for which commissions are sought in this case were completed in 1983.
In allowing the sellers’ motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, the judge reasoned that the evidence at trial did not warrant a finding either that the broker easily could have obtained a real estate broker’s license before brokering the dealership sales or that, even if such a license were obtained, its brokerage activities would have been lawful. The judge also reasoned that the evidence did not warrant a finding that the sellers restructured the deals from sales of corporate stock to sales of real estate and personalty for the purpose of defeating the broker’s commissions. I agree with the judge’s reasoning. I also am satisfied, as I discuss below, that there are other inadequacies in the evidence that are fatal to the broker’s counterclaim. Of course, on review, the judge’s reasoning, no matter how informative it may be, is not critical. “If any valid basis exists for allowing a judgment notwithstanding the verdict, [the court must] affirm the allowance, even if the judge based his decision on an erroneous principle.” Service Publications, Inc. v. Goverman, 396 Mass. 567, 572 (1986).
Hackett was Newbury Group, Inc.’s, only employee and the only representative of Newbury Group, Inc., to deal with the sellers. Would the evidence have warranted the jury in finding that Hackett reasonably relied on representations by Looney that the sales would be in the form of corporate stock and therefore the lack of a real estate broker’s license would *141not be a problem? The broker argues, “There is no factual basis in the record to indicate that Hackett should not have relied upon the combination of: 1) Looney’s representations; 2) his own reasonable assumption that Looney’s representa-' tions were based on the advice of his counsel, Widett; and 3) the terms of the finder’s fee agreements which reflected the representation [s].” Of course, the sellers shouldered no burden to produce evidence that Hackett should not have relied on Looney’s representations and other things. The burden was on the broker to show that Hackett did rely, and relied reasonably, thereon. In any event, the only evidence of Looney’s representations that could possibly be viewed as supporting the broker’s position was Hackett’s testimony that, prior to September 22, 1983, Looney told Hackett that, “[i]f [they] structured the sale as a sale of stock, [they] could — that would allow [Hackett] to sell the business not as a real estate agent, but it could still be legal.” In my view, no fact finder would have been warranted as a matter of law in finding that observation by Looney to be a commitment to structure the sale as a sale of corporate stock. Also, in my view, no fact finder would have been warranted in finding that Hackett relied reasonably on the stated opinion of an automobile dealer, not shown to have received legal training, concerning the proper construction and application of statutes dealing with real estate transactions, brokers, and commissions. My view finds support in the broker’s second argument, that is, that Hackett reasonably assumed that Looney’s representations were based, not on his own training or experience, but on the advice of Mr. Widett.
Would the jury have been warranted in finding that Hackett reasonably assumed Looney’s representations were based on the advice of Mr. Widett? The answer is clearly “No.” As the broker argues elsewhere in its brief, “There is no evidence in the record when Looney’s counsel learned of New-bury’s lack of license. There is no evidence in the record that Looney’s counsel advised Looney that such a defect barred recovery.” In short, there is no evidence that, if Looney did suggest that the deals could be structured as sales of corpo*142rate stock, and that therefore Hackett would not need a real estate broker’s license, those matters previously had been discussed by Looney and Mr. Widett. A finding that Hackett reasonably assumed that such a discussion had occurred clearly would have been unwarranted. Moreover, the record is silent with respect to any evidence reasonably entitling Hackett to assume that Looney’s representations reflected advice from Mr. Widett concerning proper protection of the broker. Mr. Widett, after all, was the sellers’, not the broker’s, attorney, and there is no evidence to suggest that Looney ever consulted with Mr. Widett on Hackett’s (or the broker’s) behalf or ever told Hackett he would do so.
Contrary to the broker’s third argument, the terms of the finder’s fee agreements, dated September 22, 1983, neither reflect, nor support, the contention that Hackett reasonably relied on a representation that the deals would take the form of sales of corporate stock. The broker points to the following language in those agreements: “It is understood that the assets of the corporation will include all real estate at 201 Cambridge Street [in one agreement, and 1280 Cambridge Street in the other], the entire parts inventory, equipment, and office furnishings.” The broker argues that that language “contributed by Widett, confirmed in writing that the transactions would not require separate sales of real estate, because the real estate was represented to be an asset that would be included as an asset of the corporations whose stock Looney said would be sold.” There was no evidence that that language “was contributed by Widett” and not by Hackett. Furthermore, the terms of one of the finder’s fee agreements, that “the sales price of said corporation [s],” and the terms of both of the finder’s fee agreements, that the “assets of the corporation [s] will include all real estate,” as a matter of law could not have been found to confirm an understanding that the sales would be sales of stock. The agreements focused on computation of the finder’s fee. They only made clear that the computation would take into account the fact that the transactions involved real estate as well as other property. The jury would not have been warranted in finding that the *143agreements referred to the form of the contemplated transactions rather than their substance only.
The court’s reliance on the agreements between the sellers and buyers as constituting evidence that the broker reasonably relied on the sellers’ representations concerning the lack of necessity for the broker to be licensed, ante at 126, is misplaced. Expressions of understanding as to who, between the sellers and the buyers, would be responsible for real estate commissions, cannot be viewed as commitments to the broker. Furthermore, the agreements between the sellers and the buyers were obviously executed after the broker’s services had been performed. Therefore, the broker could not have been induced by those agreements to produce the buyers or to do so without first obtaining proper licenses.
It is clear that the evidence did not warrant a finding that the broker relied reasonably on representations by Looney concerning either the form the sales would take or the legal effect thereof with respect to the broker’s entitlement to commissions. On that basis alone, the judge properly ordered judgment for the sellers.
That brings me to the broker’s claim that the broker “easily could have [and, inferentially would have] obtained, as it now has, a real estate broker’s license if it had known one would be needed.” Turnpike Motors I, supra at 296. The court opined that, on the basis of the summary judgment materials, the broker “could have easily obtained a license because one of the officers was an attorney. See G. L. c. 112, § 87SS (1986 ed.).” Id. at 295. The question before the judge, however, and now before the court on appeal, is whether there was evidence at trial that, when the broker performed the services for which it seeks commissions, it could and would have been licensed as a real estate broker if it had not been misled into thinking the sales were to be sales only of corporate stock. As the judge recognized, there was no such evidence. There was no evidence that prior to, or even during, the performance of its brokering services, one of Newbury Group, Inc.’s, officers was an attorney. Specifically, there was no evidence that Mr. Zizza was an officer of the *144corporation at the relevant time. To the contrary, the only evidence on that matter was that Mr. Zizza became an officer in the winter or spring, 1984, after the “finder” services had been fully performed. Furthermore, as the judge also recognized, there was no evidence that, if Hackett had not been told that the sales would involve only corporate stock, Hackett would have made Mr. Zizza an officer immediately so that Mr. Zizza could become a licensed real estate broker and then obtain a license for the corporation pursuant to G. L. c. 112, § 87UU (1990 ed.). The judge correctly points out in his memorandum that, even if Mr. Zizza had obtained these licenses, the broker could not have brokered transactions involving real estate. This is because Hackett, the corporation’s sole employee and the only person with whom Looney dealt, was not himself licensed as a “salesman” as required by c. 112, §87RR (1990 ed.), and could not easily have become licensed. Chapter 112, § 87SS, provides among other things that every individual applicant for a license as a salesman must not only pass a written examination but also “as a prerequisite to taking such examination, submit proof . . . that he has completed [approved] courses in real estate subjects.” In addition, c. 112, § 87VV (1990 ed.), provides, “No salesman who is not licensed shall be affiliated with a broker.” The judge was correct, then, in concluding that the evidence as a matter of law did not warrant a finding that the broker forwent obtaining a real estate broker’s license in reasonable and detrimental reliance on representations by the sellers. The judgment for the plaintiffs (defendants in counterclaim) that the broker is not entitled to real estate commissions notwithstanding the verdict should be affirmed.2
*1452. The conditional allowance of the motion for a new trial. Had my view expressed above prevailed, there would be no need to discuss the judge’s conditional allowance of the sellers’ motion for a new trial. Since my view has not prevailed, however, I turn to the court’s reversal of the judge’s conditional grant of a new trial. The judge granted a new trial pursuant to Mass. R. Civ. P. 50 (c). The court con-eludes that this was error. The court’s conclusion appears to be based on three reasons: (1) “Rule 50 (c) does permit the conditional ruling on a motion for a new trial, as the judge made here, but the same rule requires the judge to ‘specify the grounds for granting or denying the motion for the new trial.’ . . . The judge in this case, however, failed to specify any grounds for his conditional ruling beyond his brief statement that the verdict was against the weight of the evidence”; (2) the judge “raised serious questions about his motivation,” by stating his “intention that this court reexamine Turnpike Motors 7”; and (3) “we find nothing in the record or in the sellers’ arguments on appeal to convince us that the jury failed to exercise an honest and reasonable judgment in accordance with controlling principles of law.” Ante at 127-130.
The judge did all that a judge can reasonably be required to do with regard to specifying his reasons for conditionally granting the sellers a new trial. After devoting several pages in a nineteen-page memorandum to the question of the sufficiency of the evidence to warrant findings in the broker’s favor on the reasonable reliance aspect of the estoppel issue, the judge stated that, even if the evidence was sufficient on that sub-issue to withstand the sellers’ motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, the verdict was against the weight of the evidence. See Hartmann v. Boston Herald-Traveler Corp., 323 Mass. 56, 59 (1948) (“One of the most common and well recognized grounds in law for the setting aside of a verdict is that it is against the weight of the evidence” [emphasis added]). The court gives no clue as to what more rule 50 (c) requires for a statement of the grounds on which a new trial is conditionally granted than a *146statement, as here, that, with respect to specified issues, the verdict is against the weight of the evidence. The court does not cite a single case, State or Federal, that supports the court’s holding here that the judge’s specification of grounds was inadequate. Rule 50 (c)’s requirement that grounds be specified was clearly met in this case.
The judge’s statement, made at a hearing on the sellers’ motion to dissolve postverdict security and to dismiss reach and apply claims, that “[p]art of [his] decision is a suggestion to [the Justices of this court] that they re-examine more closely what they did” in Turnpike Motors I does not suggest that his conditional grant of a new trial was motivated by a desire for such a reexamination. Indeed, it is difficult to comprehend how a new trial following this court’s review of the judge’s rulings as to the sufficiency of the evidence would be likely to produce such a reexamination.
The court says that the Justices are not convinced that the jury failed to exercise reasonable judgment. That statement betrays a serious misapprehension of the issue. The question is not whether the Justices are convinced that the jury acted reasonably. The question is whether the trial judge could have arrived at the opposite conclusion conscientiously, intelligently, and honestly. Hartmann v. Boston Herald-Traveler Corp., supra at 60. The judge’s discretion is to be disturbed only if it has been abused, id., and “[a]buse of discretion in granting or refusing a new trial can so seldom be found that actual instances in which this court has set aside the action of the trial judge on that ground are almost nonexistent.” Id. at 61. See Robertson v. Gaston Snow & Ely Bartlett, 404 Mass. 515, 520-521, cert, denied, 493 U.S. 894 (1989). Indeed, neither the court nor the broker points to a single case in which this court has held that a judge had abused his or her discretion in granting a new trial based on the judge’s decision that the verdict was against the weight of the evidence. Yet, here the court reverses the judge’s conditional allowance of the sellers’ motion for a new trial without acknowledging the superior position of the judge, compared to the position of this court, to assess the credibility of wit*147nesses, and without discussing the evidence that may have prompted the judge conscientiously, intelligently, and honestly to conclude that the jury had not exercised honest and reasonable judgment in accordance with the law.
Looney testified that he never told Hackett that the transactions would involve transfers of stock rather than assets, that he never told Hackett that a real estate broker’s license would not be necessary, and that Hackett never told him that Hackett was unlicensed. Furthermore, Hackett first testified that Looney had told him that, since Hackett was not a broker, the deal would have to be structured as a sale of assets, not stock. Only after a recess did Hackett change his testimony to say that Looney had told him the deal would involve a transfer of stock, not assets. Subsequently, on cross-examination, Hackett testified that he thought a sale of assets meant the same thing as a sale of stock. The court cannot fairly say, based on the record, that the judge abused his discretion in conditionally granting the sellers a new trial on the ground that the verdict was against the weight of the evidence.
I would affirm the judgment. Failing that, I would let stand the judge’s grant of a new trial.
Surely, if there is evidence in the record that the broker was induced by the sellers’ representations to produce buyers for the sellers’ businesses, as the court claims there is, the court should be able to quote the relevant testimony or at least identify the places in the trial transcript where it may be found.
The court orders the entry of judgment for the broker in accordance with the verdict. Thus, Newbury Group, Inc., realizes several hundreds of thousands of dollars in return for illegally brokering transactions involving real estate and for illegally affiliating with an unlicensed real estate salesman, and Hackett is similarly compensated for illegally acting as an unlicensed real estate salesman. The court orders all of this in the name of equity (which apparently is no respecter of the law). Strange - the law!

=== CASE 2218623 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:51.441069+00 ===

151 Wis.2d 463 (1989)
444 N.W.2d 455
MILWAUKEE COUNTY, A Municipal Corporation, as agent for the State of Wisconsin, Department of Health & Social Services, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
The HARTFORD CASUALTY COMPANY, a foreign insurance corporation, Defendant-Respondent.[]
No. 88-2185.
Court of Appeals of Wisconsin.
Submitted on briefs February 22, 1989.
Decided June 21, 1989.
*467 For plaintiff-appellant the cause was submitted on the briefs of Milwaukee County Corporation Counsel, with John Jorgensen, principal assistant corporation counsel, and Robert G. Ott, acting corporation counsel, of Milwaukee.
For the defendant-respondent the cause was submitted on the briefs of deVries, Vlasak & Schallert, S.C., with Joel P. Borowiec of counsel, of Milwaukee.
Before Moser, P.J., Sullivan and Fine, JJ.
SULLIVAN, J.
Milwaukee County (County) appeals from an order dismissing its subrogation complaint against the Hartford Casualty Company (Hartford). The claim arose from medical assistance benefits received by James Szczesny under Title XIX.[1]
The facts are undisputed. Szczesny and his wife, Donna Szczesny, who were residents of Texas, filed a lawsuit against St. Mary's of the Plains Hospital (hospital), located in Lubbock, Texas, alleging that the hospital had been negligent in the care and treatment of Szczesny. Hartford had issued a liability insurance policy to the hospital. Subsequently, Szczesny moved to Milwaukee and began receiving Title XIX medical assistance benefits, which were administered by the Milwaukee County Department of Social Services. Under sec. 49.65(1), Stats., the County acted as an agent for the State of Wisconsin and was subrogated for payments *468 made to Szczesny. On June 7, 1988, the lawsuit was settled for $1,500,000. Although the County was not notified of the settlement negotiations, a check for $60,000 was sent to it as full payment of its subrogation interest. See sec. 49.65, Stats. On July 18, an assistant corporation counsel for the County wrote the attorney for the hospital to explain that the benefits amounted to $105,373.52. Because the balance of the bill was not paid, the County filed this action against Hartford on August 8.
Hartford moved to dismiss the complaint because it alleged that the circuit court lacked personal jurisdiction over it. The circuit court concluded that since sec. 801.05(10), Stats., did not apply, it had no jurisdiction. We reverse because, as a matter of law, sec. 801.05 vested the court with jurisdiction over Hartford.
[1, 2]
The County raises one issue on appeal: whether sec. 801.05, Stats., vested the trial court with personal jurisdiction over Hartford. Hartford alleges that sec. 801.05(10), Stats., resolves the issue. The application of a statute to a set of undisputed facts presents a question of law which we review independently without deference to the trial court. Ball v. District No. 4, Area Bd., 117 Wis.2d 529, 537, 345 N.W.2d 389, 394 (1984). The parties do not argue that sec. 801.05 is ambiguous, and we conclude that reasonable persons could not understand the statute differently. See City of Milwaukee v. Dyson, 141 Wis.2d 108, 110, 413 N.W.2d 660, 661 (Ct. App. 1987). Absent ambiguity, we are required to give the language in the statute its ordinary and accepted meaning. DNR v. Wisconsin Power & Light Co., 108 Wis.2d 403, 408, 321 N.W.2d 286, 288 (1982).
*469 [3]
The trial court dismissed the complaint because it concluded that sec. 801.05(10), Stats., conferred no personal jurisdiction over Hartford. It provides:
(10) Insurance or Insurers. In any action which arises out of a promise made anywhere to the plaintiff or some 3rd party by the defendant to insure upon or against the happening of an event and in addition either:
(a) The person insured was a resident of this state when the event out of which the cause of action is claimed to arise occurred; or
(b) The event out of which the cause of action is claimed to arise occurred within this state, regardless of where the person insured resided.
On appeal, the parties agree that sub. (10) is not applicable. We concur because Szczesny did not reside in Wisconsin when the malpractice occurred, and the malpractice did not happen in Wisconsin. However, the trial court's premise that because sub. (10) did not apply, Hartford was subject to no other provision in sec. 801.05, is erroneous.
[4]
Hartford argues that under Garrity v. Rural Mut. Ins. Co., 77 Wis.2d 537, 541-42, 253 N.W.2d 512, 514 (1977), a subrogee's rights are derivative and subject to all the defenses that a liable party might have against the subrogor. It further asserts that because it believed that the subrogor, Szczesny, could not obtain personal jurisdiction over Hartford in Wisconsin, the County, as subrogee, is also unable to do so. We conclude that there is no validity to this argument since common law subrogation principles generally do not apply to subrogation under sec. 49.65, Stats. See Waukesha County v. Johnson, 107 Wis.2d 155, 161-62, 320 N.W.2d 1, 3-4 (Ct. *470 App. 1982); see also sec. 49.65(7), Stats.[2] In any event, the County is not limited by the direct action statute, sec. 803.04(2), Stats., since it is asserting that Hartford is directly liable to it by virtue of its statutory subrogation rights. Hartford also argues that to permit an insurer to be sued in every state where it does business will promote forum shopping on a chaotic scale.[3] Whatever the academic merits of these arguments, we deem them inapposite to this case.
[5-7]
The due process clause of the fourteenth amendment to the United States Constitution requires that the defendant have "certain minimum contacts with [the state] such that the maintenance of the suit does not *471 offend `traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice.'" International Shoe Co. v. Washington, 326 U.S. 310, 316 (1945) (citations omitted). Compliance with sec. 801.05 raises a rebuttable presumption of compliance with due process. M.C.I., Inc. v. Elbin, 146 Wis. 2d 239, 243, 430 N.W.2d 366, 368 (Ct. App. 1988). This presumption may be rebutted by the defendant through use of a five-factor test which questions (1) the quantity of contacts with the state; (2) the nature and quality of the contacts; (3) the source of the cause of action; (4) the interest of Wisconsin in the action; and (5) convenience. Id. at 244, 430 N.W.2d 368-69. The Wisconsin Supreme Court has held that the long-arm statute should be liberally construed in favor of exercising jurisdiction. Lincoln v. Seawright, 104 Wis.2d 4, 9, 310 N.W.2d 596, 599 (1981).
[8]
Chapter 262, Stats. (1957), concerning the commencement of a civil action, was rewritten to include sec. 262.05 [now sec. 801.05, Stats.] in 1959. We review the revision notes of the reporter for the Judicial Council, Professor G.W. Foster, Jr., as a guide to interpreting sec. 801.05, Stats. See Lincoln, 104 Wis.2d at 11, 310 N.W.2d at 599-600; Fields v. Playboy Club of Lake Geneva, Inc., 75 Wis.2d 644, 651, 250 N.W.2d 311, 315 (1977). Professor Foster noted that "[s]ubs. (1) and (2) retain with little change the grounds for personal jurisdiction recognized under the old law. Subs. (3) through (11) are new and incorporate grounds which expand the exercise of personal jurisdiction in cases having substantial contacts with Wisconsin." Wis. Stat. Ann. sec. 801.05 (West 1960), Revision Notes, at 54 (emphasis added) [hereinafter Foster]. In reviewing sec. 801.05(10)(a), concluded that sub. (10)(a) "found broad support in statutes and cases aimed at insurers who, *472 without complying with requirements of state insurance regulations, sell mail order insurance to residents of the state." Id. at 78. Because the insurer's contact with Wisconsin may be isolated, and therefore sec. 801.05(1)(d)[4] would not apply, sec. 801.05(10) was enacted to protect the insured. See id. Also, sub. (b) vests the trial court with jurisdiction, although the insurer's contacts with Wisconsin may be isolated, when the insurer promises to insure the insured and the insured has contacts with Wisconsin as a result of an injury occurring here. See id. at 78-80. Therefore, sec. 801.05(10), Stats., expands on the jurisdiction already created by subs. (1) and (2).
[9]
Since we conclude that sec. 801.05(10), Stats., is not the exclusive means to vest a trial court with personal jurisdiction over an insurance company, we must examine the rest of sec. 801.05 to determine if personal jurisdiction exists. The County argues that both subs. (1) and (4)[5] of sec. 801.05, Stats., vested the trial court *473 with personal jurisdiction. Under sub. (4), three jurisdictional facts are required: "[1] an act or omission outside the state by the defendant or his agent; [2] an injury to person or property within the state which is claimed to arise out of the foreign act or omission; and [3] some additional contact, not necessarily related to the injury sued on, which links the defendant to the state." Foster, at 62. We conclude that sub. (4) is applicable. Hartford's failure to properly settle the County's subrogation interest constituted the foreign act. The injury was "local" in that the County was unable to recover its total subrogation interest. Finally, "[s]olicitation or services were carried on within this state by or on behalf of" Hartford. Hartford is authorized to do business in Wisconsin and has designated the commissioner of insurance to receive process for it in "any proceeding arising from or related to any transaction having any connection with this state." Sec. 601.72(1)(a), Stats. Also, it has a business office in Wisconsin. Although we conclude that the factors of sub. (4) have been met, we must conduct a separate inquiry into whether due process requirements have been met. McCarthy v. McCarthy, 146 Wis.2d 510, 513, 431 N.W.2d 706, 707 (Ct. App. 1988).
[10]
We apply the five due process factors set forth in M.C.I. to determine whether the trial court has personal jurisdiction over Hartford. The County's complaint establishes the quality and quantity of the contact. The County, as agent of the state to collect Title XIX disbursements, gave Hartford notice of its subrogation *474 claim before Hartford settled with and paid the subrogor, Szczesny. Hartford sent to the County what it believed was the County's share of the recovery, thereby intending to discharge its obligation. Wisconsin and its agent for collection, the County, had a monetary interest.[6]See sec. 49.65, Stats. As to inconvenience, the controversy between Hartford and the County is limited to the balance due for subrogation payments. Apparently Hartford concedes the validity of the subrogation claim.[7] Also, Hartford is authorized to do business in Wisconsin. The exercise of jurisdiction by a Wisconsin court over Hartford in this simple accounting matter, under these circumstances, imposes no undue burden upon it.
[11]
We also conclude that sub. (1)(d) of sec. 801.05 vested the trial court with personal jurisdiction over Hartford. Hartford engaged in "substantial and not isolated activities within this state...." Sec. 801.05(1)(d), Stats. Hartford is licensed to sell insurance in Wisconsin and maintains a Wisconsin business office. Although this court generally conducts a separate inquiry into whether due process considerations have been met, "[w]hen dealing with sec. 801.05(1)(d), however, the inquiry can be streamlined because facts that satisfy due process will necessarily also satisfy the statutory requirement of `substantial and not isolated activities.'" McCarthy, 146 Wis.2d at 513, 431 N.W.2d at 707.
*475 [12]
Applying the due process factors and subs. (1) and (4) of sec. 801.05, Stats., we conclude that Hartford had the necessary minimum contacts with Wisconsin, that it did not rebut the presumption of due process compliance, and that the circuit court had personal jurisdiction over it.
By the Court.Order reversed and cause remanded for proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.
NOTES
[]  Petition to review denied.
[1]  The county's subrogation interest is created by sec. 49.65, Stats., enacted to comport with 42 U.S.C. sec. 1396(a)(25).
[2]  Section 49.65(7), Stats., provides in part:
Welfare Claims Not Prejudiced by Recipient's Release. (a) No person who has or may have a claim or cause of action in tort or contract and who has received assistance under this chapter as a result of the occurrence that creates the claim or cause of action may release the liable party or the liable party's insurer from liability to the units of government specified in sub. (1). Any payment to a ... recipient of assistance under this chapter in consideration of a release from liability is evidence of the payer's liability to the unit of government that granted the assistance. [Emphasis added.]
[3]  Hartford relies upon the statement found in Bowman v. Rural Mut. Ins. Co., 53 Wis.2d 260, 264, 191 N.W.2d 881, 883 (1971): "It is only where the policy was issued or delivered outside of this state and the accident occurred outside of this state that the right to an action against the insurer is by statute denied." (citations omitted). This statement is irrelevant because the Bowman decision was referring only to the operation of the "direct action" statute, sec. 260.11(1) (1973), Stats. [Section 260.11 was repealed by Supreme Court order, 67 Wis.2d 585, 757, effective January 1, 1976; the "direct action" statute has been renumbered as sec. 803.04(2).] Milwaukee County, by contrast, is not suing under the direct action statute, but rather it has a claim directly against Hartford by virtue of its subrogation rights.
[4]  Section 801.05(1)(d), Stats., provides:
801.05 Personal jurisdiction, grounds for generally. A court of this state having jurisdiction of the subject matter has jurisdiction over a person served in an action pursuant to s. 801.11 under any type of the following circumstances:
(1) Local Presence or Status. In any action whether arising within or without this state, against a defendant who when the action is commenced:
. . .
(d) Is engaged in substantial and not isolated activities within this state, whether such activities are wholly interstate, intrastate, or otherwise.
[5]  Section 801.05(4), Stats., provides:
(4) Local Injury; Foreign Act. In any action claiming injury to person or property within this state arising out of an act or omission outside this state by the defendant, provided in addition that at the time of the injury, either:
(a) Solicitation or service activities were carried on within this state by or on behalf of the defendant; or
(b) Products, materials or things processed, serviced or manufactured by the defendant were used or consumed within this state in the ordinary course of trade.
[6]  "A State generally has a `manifest interest' in providing its residents with a convenient forum for redressing inquiries inflicted by out-of-state actors." Burger King Corp. v. Rudzewicz, 471 U.S. 462, 473 (1985).
[7]  In its statement of uncontroverted facts, Hartford informed the trial court that when it paid the $60,000, Hartford believed this was approximately the total amount of the County's claim.

=== CASE 2218624 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:51.488953+00 ===

444 N.W.2d 569 (1989)
Kathryn JOHNSON, as Trustee for the Heirs and Next of Kin of Lewis W. Johnson, deceased, Appellant,
v.
Dr. James P. KROMHOUT, et al., Defendants,
Lufkin Medical Laboratories, et al., Respondents.
No. C9-89-266.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
August 8, 1989.
Opinion Publication Ordered August 23, 1989.
Steve Gaskins, Faegre & Benson, Minneapolis, for appellant.
Donald F. Hunter, P.A., Gislason, Dosland, Hunter & Malecki, Minnetonka, for respondents.
Heard, considered and decided by SCHUMACHER, P.J., and HUSPENI and THOREEN[*], JJ.
OPINION
SCHUMACHER, Judge.
Kathryn Johnson won a wrongful death negligence verdict against respondents Lukfin Medical Laboratories (Lufkin) in August 1988. The trial court ordered judgment entered in the amount of $290,643.48, which included prejudgment interest of $38,321.48. Lufkin objected to the amount of prejudgment interest, and the trial court, after hearing the arguments of the parties, reduced the amount of prejudgment interest to $3,428.21. Kathryn Johnson appeals, contending the trial court erred in its computation of the amount of prejudgment interest. We reverse.
FACTS
The parties have submitted an agreed statement of the record. Appellant Kathryn Johnson filed this wrongful death action for the death of her husband on October 22, 1986. No written settlement demand was made before the action was commenced. On October 15, 1987, appellant submitted a written settlement offer of $425,000 to counsel for Lufkin and to counsel for Dr. James P. Kromhout. (Kromhout was found not to be negligent by the jury, and he is not involved in this *570 appeal.) No counteroffer was received within 60 days. On May 2, 1988, Lufkin offered to settle the case for $50,000. Appellant made a counteroffer of $375,000 on June 8, 1988. This counteroffer was not accepted.
Following trial, a jury returned a verdict of $265,717 in favor of appellant against Lufkin. Counsel for appellant submitted proposed findings of fact and an order for judgment which included prejudgment interest calculated from the date of the commencement of the action. The trial court signed the submitted order on August 19, 1988. The next day, counsel for Lufkin notified the trial court that Lufkin objected to the order for judgment, arguing that prejudgment interest had been overstated.
The parties were unable to agree on the amount of prejudgment interest owed, and in November 1988 appellant moved the court to grant prejudgment interest on the entire verdict, a total amount of $38,321.48. Lufkin opposed the motion and made a cross-motion seeking to limit prejudgment interest to $3,428.21; this represented the amount of interest from the date of appellants' counteroffer (June 8, 1988) to the date of verdict (August 9, 1988). On January 10, 1989, the trial court denied appellant's motion, granted Lufkin's cross-motion, and ordered the judgment amended to include $3,428.21 in prejudgment interest. Appellant seeks reversal of the trial court's determination that Lufkin owes prejudgment interest only from the date of appellant's last counteroffer, rather than from the date of the commencement of the action.
ISSUES
1. Did Lufkin's failure to respond to appellant's first settlement offer result in a waiver of the right to contest calculation of prejudgment interest?
2. Did the trial court err in calculating prejudgment interest from the date of appellant's last written settlement offer?
ANALYSIS
Appellant, citing Kulkay v. Allied Central Stores, Inc., 398 N.W.2d 573 (Minn.Ct. App.1986), pet. for rev. denied (Minn. Feb. 13, 1987), contends Lufkin's failure to respond to appellant's initial settlement offer forfeits Lufkin's right to contest the issue. In Kulkay, an employee sued a former employer for breach of an employment contract. The employee offered to settle the case; the employer did not respond. There were no other offers or counteroffers. This court held that the provisions of the statute relating to situations where both parties make offers of settlement was inapplicable. Id. at 578.
In the present case, Lufkin made an offer to settle the case for $50,000. This offer came six months after appellant's original offer. The relevant portion of the state reads:
If either party serves a written offer of settlement, the other party may serve a written acceptance or a written counteroffer within 60 days. * * * Subsequent offers and counteroffers supersede the legal effect of earlier offers and counteroffers.
Minn.Stat. § 549.09, subd. 1(b) (1988) (emphasis added). If Lufkin had made no offer, Kulkay would be controlling; however, Lufkin's subsequent offer supersedes the legal effect of appellant's earlier offer.
Appellant argues the statute requires a counteroffer within 60 days or the right to make a counteroffer is waived. The statute's language, however, is permissive ("the other party may serve * * * a written counteroffer within 60 days"). Adopting appellant's argument would lead to undue inflexibility in the operation of the statute.
2. The prejudgment interest statute reads:
Except as otherwise provided by contract or allowed by law, preverdict or prereport interest on pecuniary damages shall be computed as provided in clause (c) from the time of the commencement of the action, or the time of a written settlement demand, whichever occurs first, except as provided herein. The action must be commenced within 60 days of a written settlement demand for interest to *571 begin to accrue from the time of the demand. * * * After that time interest on the judgment shall be calculated by the judge in the following manner. The prevailing party shall receive interest on any judgment from the time the action was commenced or a written settlement demand was made, or as to special damages from the time when special damages were incurred, if later, until the time of verdict or report only if the amount of its offer is closer to the judgment than the amount of the opposing parties' offer.
Minn.Stat. § 549.09, subd. 1(b) (1988).
One commentator has set out four events which trigger the accrual of prejudgment interest. These are: (1) from commencement of the action, i.e., service of process, if subsequent to July 1, 1984; (2) from July 1, 1984, the effective date of the statute; (3) from the date of occurrence of a special damage that is incorporated into the ultimate verdict; and (4) from the date of a written settlement demand, made prior to the commencement of the action. Sanner, Minnesota's Prejudgment Interest Statute, 57 Hennepin Lawyer 8, at 29 (1987); see also Note, The Minnesota Prejudgment Interest Amendment: An Analysis of the Offer-Counteroffer Provision, 69 Minn.L.Rev. 1401 (1985). The trial court in this case concluded that the statute required the court to award interest on the judgment from the date of the written settlement offer closest to the date of the verdict. The commentators contend that the written settlement offer referred to in the statute is a written settlement offer made prior to commencement of an action.
The latter interpretation is consistent with the language of the statute. The first sentence provides that prejudgment interest is to be computed from the time the action is commenced or from the time of a written settlement demand, whichever occurs first.
Lufkin contends the phrase "* * * except as provided herein" requires a different result. That phrase, combined with "if later" following the clause on special damages, means that if an offer or counteroffer is made, prejudgment interest is to be computed from the time of the offer or counteroffer if later than commencement of the action, according to Lufkin. The phrase "if later," however, plainly refers to the time special damages are incurred. See Sanner, 57 The Hennepin Lawyer at 29.
The prejudgment interest statute serves two purposes: (1) compensation of the plaintiff for the loss of use of money, and, by implication, deprivation of any gain to the defendant resulting from the use of money rightfully belonging to the plaintiff; and (2) promotion of settlement. Burniece v. Illinois Farmers Insurance Co., 398 N.W.2d 542, 544 (Minn.1987). In construing a statute, it is this court's function to ascertain and give effect to the intention of the legislature. Minn.Stat. § 645.16 (1988). In interpreting section 549.09, this court should give the statute a meaning which will carry out its dual purpose.
In attempting to give effect to the intention of the legislature, the trial court erred. The interpretation given the statute by the trial court would discourage settlement. A plaintiff making a settlement offer or counteroffer would shorten the time in which prejudgment interest accrues. This would encourage plaintiffs not to make such offers. A defendant would be encouraged to wait until the eve of trial to begin serious settlement negotiations. Neither result would be consistent with the intent of the legislature.
DECISION
The trial court erred in its computation of prejudgment interest.
Reversed.
NOTES
[*]  Acting as judge of the Court of Appeals by appointment pursuant to Minn. Const. art. VI, § 2.