=== CASE 9740029 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:10.268487+00 ===

RUCKER, Judge.
Richard A. Rosi (Rosi) was employed by Business Furniture Company (BFC) as a sales manager. When BFC was purchased by new owners, Rosi's department was eliminated and he was discharged. Rosi then filed suit against his former employer alleging that he was entitled to more than $75,000.00 in unpaid compensation. As a part of his complaint Rosi attached a copy of a document purporting to represent the compensation agreement between Rosi and BFC. BFC filed its motion for summary judgment arguing the document was not an enforceable contract. The trial court agreed and granted the motion. Rosi now appeals arguing the trial court erred in entering summary judgment in favor of BFC.
We reverse.
The undisputed facts reveal in May, 1984, BFC hired Rosi to manage its floor covering department. BFC agreed to pay Rosi $40,000.00 per year against a commission of 26% of the adjusted gross profit from sales. Rosi worked for BFC without incident until 1987 when new owners purchased the company and eliminated the floor covering department. As a result, the newly organized BFC terminated Rost's employment on October 18, 1987.
Rosi filed this action against BFC alleging that Rosi was not compensated according to the terms of his employment agreement. According to Rosi, the agreement was reduced to writing in the form of an internal memorandum entitled a "Personal Action Request" (PAR). Rosi claimed BFC misrepresented the adjusted gross profits for the years 1985 thru 1987 and shortchanged him by calculating the 26% commission from the misrepresented figures. In addition, Rosi's complaint included a count alleging fraud and a count alleging that he was entitled to liquidated damages under Ind.Code § 22-2-5-2.1 BFC denied the material allegations of Rosi's complaint and after conducting discovery, the parties filed cross motions for summary judgment. The trial court granted BFC's motion and denied Rosi's motion. In so doing the court entered detailed findings indicating, among other things, (a) Rosi's contract claim was based exclusively on the PAR, and (b) the PAR was not an enforceable contract. «Rosi now appeals the trial *410court's grant of summary judgment in favor of BFC. He does not challenge the trial court's denial of his own motion for summary judgment.
Findings entered by the trial court regarding its reasons for entering summary judgment are helpful to the reviewing court and afford the appellant an opportunity to address the merits of the trial court's rationale. Fort Wayne Patrolman's Benevolent Ass'n, Inc. v. City of Fort Wayne (1980), Ind. App., 408 N.E.2d 1295, reh. denied, 411 N.E.2d 630. However, this court is not bound by such findings. Green v. Perry (1990), Ind.App., 549 N.E.2d 385, trans. denied. Rather, when reviewing the propriety of a ruling on a motion for summary judgment, this court applies the same standard applicable to the trial court. Ayres v. Indiana Heights Volunteer Fire Dep't, Inc. (1986), Ind., 498 N.E.2d 1229. We must consider the pleadings and evidence sanctioned by Ind.Trial Rule 56(C) without deciding its weight or credibility. All evidence must be construed in favor of the non-moving party, and all doubts as to the existence of a material issue must be resolved against the moving party. Even if facts are not in dispute, summary judgment is inappropriate if conflicting inferences arise. ITT Com. Finance v. Union Bank & Trust (1988), Ind. App., 528 N.E.2d 1149. In order to determine whether a genuine issue of fact exists, we must accept as true all facts alleged by the non-moving party and resolve any doubt as to the existence of a genuine issue of fact against the moving party. Whitebirch v. Stiller (1991), Ind. App., 580 N.E.2d 262.
Both parties to this action devote considerable time discussing whether the PAR is an enforceable written contract. Even if we were to agree with BFC that the document is not a contract and therefore not enforceable, our inquiry does not end. In his second amended complaint Rosi alleged he negotiated a compensation package with BFC for 26% commission on the adjusted gross profits of his department. Rosi goes on to allege that he was not fully compensated because BFC misrepresented the amounts of its adjusted gross profits. In his complaint Rosi identifies the PAR as the "compensation agreement reduced to writing." Record at 781. However, a written instrument may demonstrate the existence of an agreement even though the instrument itself is not an enforceable contract. Tuthill Corp., Fill-Rite Div. v. Wolfe (1988), Ind.App., 451 N.E.2d 72.
In its motion for summary judgment BFC did not allege there was no compensation agreement between the parties during the time of Rosi's employment. Nor did BFC allege that it properly represented the adjusted gross profits of the floor covering department for the years 1985 through 1987. Rather, BFC argued three issues in support of its motion for summary judgment: 1) there was no agreement to compensate Rosi for sales completed after his discharge, 2) there were no facts supporting Rosi's fraud claim and 3) the PAR was not an enforceable contract.
A party moving for summary judgment bears the burden of proof to demonstrate the absence of a material factual issue. LaPorte County v. James (1986), Ind.App., 496 N.E.2d 1825. Where the defendant is the party moving for summary judgment, the defendant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law only when it demonstrates undisputed material facts which negate at least one element of the plaintiff's claim. Moore v. Sitzmark Corp. (1990), Ind.App., 555 N.E.2d 1305. In this case, neither of BFC's allegations in support of its summary judgment motion show undisputed facts negating an element of Rost's claim that an enforceable agreement existed.
BFC insists it is entitled to summary judgment because Rosi's sole theory of recovery before the trial court was the PAR's existence as an alleged written agreement. According to BFC, the PAR is not a contract and Rosi is now attempting, for the first time on appeal, to advance the alternative theory of an oral agreement. We do not agree with BFC's assessment.
The pleadings in this case, including BFC's designated material contemplated by *411Trial Rule 56(C), demonstrate at the very least that Rosi alleged an agreement existed between the parties. That the complete details of the agreement were or were not reduced to writing does not alter the fact that Rosi alleged an agreement existed. It is well settled that an agreement need not be in writing in order to be enforceable. Foster v. United Homes Improvement Co., Inc. (1981), Ind.App., 428 N.E.2d 1351.
We also note that the parties submitted their lists of witnesses and contentions in compliance with the trial court's order. Rosi's contentions dictated in part:
4. The Defendant and the Plaintiff agreed that the Plaintiff would be paid a draw of $40,000.00 per year (later raised to $44,000.00) against a commission of 26% of the sales minus cost of sales of the Defendant's Floor Covering Department.
In commenting on this contention, BFC observed "Paragraph 4 above merely asserts immaterial undisputed facts regarding the method of draw payment. This fact was never in dispute...." Appellee's Brief at 14 (emphasis added). It is Rosi's contention, however, that BFC breached its agreement by misrepresenting the amount of sales for the department. BFC presented no facts challenging this contention.
As the moving party for summary judgment, BFC had the burden of showing it had not entered into any agreement with Rosi. BFC has failed to carry its burden. Therefore, summary judgment in favor of BFC is inappropriate.
We reverse.
BARTEAU, J., concurs.
HOFFMAN, J., dissents with opinion.
. Indiana Code § 22-2-5-2 dictates in relevant part:
Payment violation-Penalty and damages. Every such person, firm, corporation, or association who shall fail to make payment of wages to any such employee as provided in section 1 [LC. § 22-2-5-1] of this chapter shall, as liquidated damages for such failure, pay to such employee for each day that the amount due to him remains unpaid ten percent of the amount due to him in addition thereto, not exceeding double the amount of wages due....

=== CASE 9740030 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:10.272456+00 ===

HOFFMAN, Judge.
I respectfully dissent.
According to Ind.Trial Rule 56(C), summary judgment is appropriate if the designated evidentiary matter shows that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Where, as here, the defendant is the party moving for summary judgment, the defendant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law when it demonstrates undisputed material facts which negate at least one element of the plaintiff's claim. Pitcock v. Worldwide Recycling, Inc. (1991), Ind.App., 582 N.E.2d 412, 416. The majority opinion states that BFC failed to show undisputed facts negating an element of Rosi's claim that an enforceable agreement existed; however, the evidentiary matter Rosi specifically designated to the trial court concerned only the PAR document. As BFC notes, it was not until Rosi's Motion to Reconsider Ruling on Motions for Summary Judgment that he put forth the alleged oral agreement as an alternative theory of recovery. Under TR. 56(H), this Court cannot reverse summary judgment on the ground that there is a genuine issue of material fact unless the material fact and the evidence relevant thereto were specifically designated to the trial court.
I agree with the trial court's finding that the PAR document was merely an interoffice memorandum rather than an employment contract. I also agree with the trial court's finding that, due to the lack of an agreement as to compensation for profits acquired after termination of employment, Rosi had no entitlement to such compensation. Therefore, I would affirm the trial court's grant of summary judgment in favor of BFC. j

=== CASE 2221920 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:23.719977+00 ===

232 Wis.2d 138 (1999)
2000 WI App 5
606 N.W.2d 196
STATE of Wisconsin, Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
JIMMIE R.R., Defendant-Appellant.[]
No. 98-3046-CR.
Court of Appeals of Wisconsin.
Oral argument September 14, 1999.
Decided December 8, 1999.
*142 On behalf of the defendant-appellant, the cause was submitted on the briefs of Martha K. Askins, assistant state public defender.
On behalf of the plaintiff-respondent, the cause was submitted on the brief of James E. Doyle, attorney general, and Sally L. Wellman, assistant attorney general.
Before Nettesheim, Anderson and Snyder, JJ.
¶ 1. NETTESHEIM, J.
Jimmie R.R. appeals from a judgment of conviction for three counts of first-degree sexual assault and three counts of incest with a child.[1] The judgment followed verdicts of guilty at a jury trial.
¶ 2. On appeal, Jimmie argues that the trial court erred by refusing to strike a juror for cause because the juror's wife had been the victim of a sexual assault as a child. We disagree. We conclude that the challenged juror was not subjectively or objectively biased. Jimmie also argues that the trial court erred by admitting the videotaped testimony of the child victim pursuant to § 908.08(3)(c), STATS. He contends that the State did not establish that the victim understood that "false statements are punishable" as required by the *143 statute. While the tape reveals that the interviewers did not extract that precise understanding from the victim, we hold that the tape, assessed in its totality, satisfied this statutory requirement. Therefore, the trial court did not err by admitting the videotape into evidence.
FACTS
¶ 3. The convictions resulted from an incident on September 13, 1997. On that day, Cassandra S. claimed that she was sexually assaulted by Jimmie, her father, while she was visiting him in his home. At the time of the assault, Cassandra was five years old. These events came to light because Cassandra's brother, Mitchell S.R., who was also visiting at the time, called their mother, Lori S., after becoming suspicious about what was going on between Cassandra and Jimmie upstairs in Jimmie's bedroom. In response, Lori came to Jimmie's residence and took the children home.
¶ 4. Later that evening, Lori questioned Cassandra about what had happened at Jimmie's house. After some reassurances from Lori that she would not be angry with her, Cassandra described various sexual acts that were performed on her by Jimmie. Lori then called the police and took Cassandra to the hospital for an examination. It was late by the time Lori and Cassandra arrived at the police station, so arrangements were made to return the following Monday for a videotaped interview of Cassandra at the Walworth county courthouse. In the meantime, Jimmie was arrested.
¶ 5. On the following Monday, September 15, 1997, a social worker and an investigator from the Lake Geneva police department conducted the video-taped interview of Cassandra. She described to them *144 the same events that she had described two days earlier to her mother.
¶ 6. On September 18, 1997, the State filed a criminal complaint against Jimmie charging three counts of first-degree sexual assault of a child contrary to § 948.02(1), STATS., and three counts of incest with a child contrary to § 948.06(1), STATS. Later, the State filed a notice of the videotaped interview of Cassandra and requested a hearing to determine its admissibility under §§ 908.08(2)(b) and 970.03(14)(b), STATS. Judge Robert J. Kennedy conducted a hearing on this request in conjunction with the preliminary hearing on October 3, 1997.
¶ 7. At this hearing, Jimmie argued that the videotape failed to establish that Cassandra understood that "false statements are punishable" at the time the interview was conducted as required by § 908.08(3)(c), STATS. After viewing a portion of the videotape and hearing testimony from a police investigator that the tape was unaltered, Judge Kennedy ruled that the tape satisfied the criteria for admissibility under § 908.08(3). Based on this ruling, Judge Kennedy determined that the tape constituted evidence sufficient to establish probable cause and bound Jimmie over for trial. The ensuing information charged the same offenses as alleged in the complaint.
¶ 8. The matter was then assigned to Judge James L. Carlson for trial. Jimmie again challenged the admissibility of Cassandra's videotaped interview at a motion hearing held before Judge Carlson on January 14, 1998.[2] Judge Carlson ruled that Judge Kennedy had properly admitted the videotape into evidence *145 at the preliminary hearing. Acknowledging that Cassandra's interviewers had not used the precise words of the statute, Judge Carlson nonetheless held that "the exact words [did not] have to be put to the child as set forth [in the statute]."
¶ 9. When the case moved forward to trial on January 28, 1998, Jimmie again challenged the video-taped interview of Cassandra. Judge Carlson again rejected the challenge.
¶ 10. As to the second issue on appeal, during the jury selection Judge Carlson asked the prospective jurors whether they, or anyone among their families or friends, had been involved in any situations involving sexual assault. Those who raised their hands were then individually questioned further in the judge's chambers. During this questioning, prospective juror Daniel K. disclosed that his wife had been the victim of a sexual assault when she was a young girl. He explained that he and his wife did not talk about this experience. When Judge Carlson asked if he could make his decision based on the evidence and the law without being swayed by his wife's experience, Daniel K. responded, "I think I could."
¶ 11. Jimmie's counsel then questioned Daniel K., eliciting some additional responses that showed some hesitancy by him on the matter. Based on these answers, counsel requested Judge Carlson to dismiss Daniel K. for cause. Judge Carlson denied the request, finding that Daniel K.'s response established that he would "react to the evidence" and decide "on the evidence." Jimmie later exercised one of his peremptory strikes to remove Daniel K. from the jury panel.
*146 ¶ 12. The jury found Jimmie guilty of all the counts charged in the information and a judgment of conviction was entered. Jimmie appeals.
DISCUSSION
¶ 13. On appeal, Jimmie renews the arguments he made in the trial court. First, he argues that Judge Carlson erred by refusing to strike Daniel K. for cause. Second, he argues that Judge Carlson erred by admitting Cassandra's videotaped interview into evidence.
1. Failure to Strike Daniel K. for Cause
[1]
¶ 14. As a general principle, a criminal defendant has a right to a fair trial by a panel of impartial jurors. This right is embodied in principles of due process and guaranteed by the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution and Art. I, § 7 of the Wisconsin Constitution. See State v. Faucher, 227 Wis. 2d 700, 715, 596 N.W.2d 770, 777 (1999). An impartial juror is one who is "indifferent and capable of basing his or her verdict upon the evidence developed at trial." Id. (citing Irvin v. Dowd, 366 U.S. 717, 722 (1961)). The requirement that a juror be impartial is also codified in § 805.08(1), STATS. To insure that a juror is impartial, this section directs the trial court to "examine on oath each person who is called as a juror to discover whether the juror . . . has expressed or formed any opinion, or is aware of any bias or prejudice in the case." Id. "If a juror is not indifferent in the case, the juror shall be excused." Id. The appearance of bias should also be avoided. See State v. Louis, 156 Wis. 2d 470, 478, 457 N.W.2d 484, 488 (1990).
*147 ¶ 15. In a recent series of decisions, our supreme court reformulated the terminology for juror bias.[3] The former categories of bias"implied," "actual" and "inferred"were replaced by new ones"statutory," "subjective" and "objective." See Faucher, 227 Wis. 2d at 716, 596 N.W.2d at 777.[4] "Statutory bias," the most easily described form of bias, see id. at 717, 596 N.W.2d at 778, is not at issue in this case.[5] "Subjective bias" and "objective bias," on the other hand, are squarely before us.
*148 a. "Subjective Bias"
[2]
¶ 16. "Subjective bias" is "bias that is revealed through the words and the demeanor of the prospective juror." Id. Like the prior term "actual bias," "subjective bias" refers to "the prospective juror's state of mind." Id. As with any inquiry into a person's state of mind, this is an especially difficult determination to make because there are rarely occasions where there is direct proof in the form of a juror explicitly admitting to a prejudice or an inability to set aside a prejudice. See id. at 718, 596 N.W.2d at 778. Usually, a prospective juror's subjective bias will only be revealed through his or her demeanor, and, as a result, the determination often turns on a prospective juror's "responses on voir dire and a circuit court's assessment of the individual's honesty and credibility, among other relevant factors." Id. This type of determination is one that trial courts are in a superior position to make because they are able to assess the demeanor and disposition of prospective jurorsthrough nonverbal signals that do not appear in a written recordto determine whether a subjective bias exists. See id. As such, a trial court's factual finding that a prospective juror is or is not subjectively biased will be upheld unless it is clearly erroneous. See id.
b. "Objective Bias"
[3]
¶ 17. While a "subjective bias" inquiry searches for bias as seen from the individual prospective juror's point of view and state of mind, an "objective bias" inquiry focuses on the "reasonable person in the individual prospective juror's position." Id. at 718, 596 *149 N.W.2d at 778-79. In other words, a subjective inquiry decides whether an individual prospective juror possesses a willingness and ability to be impartial, while an objective inquiry would look at that same juror's situation and ask whether a reasonable person in those circumstances could be impartial. See id. Important to an objective bias inquiry are the "facts and circumstances surrounding the voir dire and the facts involved in the case." Id. at 718, 596 N.W.2d at 779.
[4]
¶ 18. Under prior case law, appellate review of a trial court's determination as to whether a prospective juror was objectively biased was done under varying standards of review. See id. at 719, 596 N.W.2d at 779. As a result, the Faucher court sought to create some consistency by announcing that a trial court's "determination on the question of objective bias should be reviewed under a deferential standard." Id. The court concluded that objective bias presented a mixed question of fact and law. See id. at 720, 596 N.W.2d at 779. Operationally, this means that the trial court's "findings regarding the facts and circumstances surrounding voir dire and the case will be upheld unless they are clearly erroneous." Id. Whether those facts satisfy the legal standard of objective bias, however, is a question of law. See id. But due to the interrelation between the ultimate conclusion regarding objective bias and the trial court's factual findings that serve as its foundation, an appellate court gives weight to the trial court's conclusion on the question of law. See id. This conclusion will be reversed only if, as a matter of law, a reasonable judge could not have reached such a conclusion. See id. at 721, 596 N.W.2d 780.
*150 ¶ 19. From our examination of the supreme court's recent decisions, we conclude that the exclusion of a prospective juror for objective bias requires either: (1) some direct or personal connection between the challenged juror and some important aspect of the particular case, or (2) a firmly held negative predisposition by the juror regarding the justice system that precludes the juror from fairly and impartially deciding the case.
¶ 20. For example, in Faucher, the prospective juror was acquainted with a key witness for the State and expressed a firmly held opinion that the witness was a "person of integrity . . . [who] wouldn't lie." See Faucher, 227 Wis. 2d at 708, 596 N.W.2d at 774. The supreme court held that the trial court's determination that the prospective juror was not subjectively biased was not clearly erroneous. See id. at 731, 596 N.W.2d at 784. However, the court concluded that the juror was shown to be objectively biased because "a reasonable person in [the juror's] position could not set the opinion aside despite the best of intentions to do so." Id. at 733, 596 N.W.2d at 785.
¶ 21. In State v. Kiernan, 227 Wis. 2d 736, 596 N.W.2d 760 (1999), the supreme court ruled that several jurors were objectively biased because they had rejected the same theory of defense tendered by the same defense attorney in a similar case completed several days earlier. The court concluded that the challenged jurors could not judge the instant case solely on the evidence, but rather had effectively decided the case before hearing any of the evidence. See id. at 750, 596 N.W.2d at 767. Like the Faucher juror who had committed in advance to the credibility of the State's key witness, the Kiernan jurors had committed *151 in advance to a rejection of the defendant's theory of defense.
¶ 22. State v. Erickson, 227 Wis. 2d 758, 596 N.W.2d 749 (1999), reveals the opposite side of Faucher and Kiernan. In Erickson, a prospective juror in a sexual assault case had herself been sexually assaulted as a child many years earlier. See id. at 762, 596 N.W.2d at 753. The supreme court rejected the defendant's argument that the juror was objectively biased. The court found nothing in the juror's voir dire responses or the trial court's findings that suggested that the juror was anything other than a person who was willing and able to act as an impartial juror. See id. at 777, 596 N.W.2d at 759. The court stated that it has been repeatedly reluctant to exclude groups of persons from serving as jurors as a matter of law. See id. Unlike the Faucher and Kiernan jurors, the Erickson juror had no direct or personal connection to the case at bar. Nor did her voir dire responses reveal any ingrained predisposition against the judicial system because of her prior experience as the victim of a similar crime.
¶ 23. State v. Mendoza, 227 Wis. 2d 838, 596 N.W.2d 736 (1999), represents a combination of the above cases. There, the trial court had dismissed certain prospective jurors because of their past or pending experiences with the criminal justice system. The supreme court held that this "blanket decision" to exclude a class of jurors was error. See id. at 853, 596 N.W.2d at 744. Instead, the Mendoza court individually analyzed each juror's situation and voir dire responses. See id. at 854-56, 596 N.W.2d at 744-45. After this particularized review, the Mendoza court concluded that the trial court had properly dismissed three of the prospective jurors because of their hostile and negative attitudes about the criminal justice system. *152 See id. at 856, 596 N.W.2d at 745. However, the Mendoza court concluded that a fourth prospective juror was improperly dismissed where the juror's prior conviction was thirty years ago and the juror had responded on voir dire that "he had no problem with the manner in which the police or prosecutor handled [his] case." Id.
c. The Remedy
[5]
¶ 24. Once a reviewing court determines that a trial court failed to properly dismiss a biased juror for cause, the next step is to determine the remedy. The basic remedy was announced in State v. Ramos, 211 Wis. 2d 12, 564 N.W.2d 328 (1997), which held that "the use of a peremptory challenge to correct a trial court error is adequate grounds for reversal because it arbitrarily deprives the defendant of a statutorily granted right." Id. at 24-25, 564 N.W.2d at 334. Under those circumstances, a new trial is necessary because the effect of such an error is to put the State at an advantage over the defendant who has unnecessarily been forced to expend a peremptory strike to correct the error. See id. at 23, 564 N.W.2d at 333.
[6]
¶ 25. However, in the inverse situation where a juror is improperly removed (as opposed to retained), the supreme court has held that automatic reversal is not necessary because, even though the prospective juror was improperly dismissed, the defendant was not required to expend a peremptory strike against the challenged juror. See Mendoza, 227 Wis. 2d at 856-64, 596 N.W.2d at 745-49. Instead, the analysis is conducted under the law of harmless error, asking *153 whether a fair and impartial jury nonetheless convicted the defendant. See id. at 864, 596 N.W.2d at 749.
d. Subjective and Objective Bias Applied to This Case
1. Subjective Bias
¶ 26. In this case, Judge Carlson did not have the benefit of the supreme court's recent decisions when he made his ruling regarding prospective juror Daniel K. Nonetheless, we view the judge's ruling as the functional equivalent of a determination that Daniel K. was not subjectively biased. Because the judge was able to observe Daniel K. in person, including his demeanor and the manner in which his words were spoken, we must give appropriate deference to the judge's assessment under the clearly erroneous test. See Faucher, 227 Wis. 2d at 718, 596 N.W.2d at 778.
¶ 27. When Judge Carlson asked Daniel K. if he could listen to the evidence and apply the law as explained by the court, Daniel K. responded: "I think I could." When told by Judge Carlson that he would have to react to the evidence presented, rather than to outside events, Daniel K. responded, "Right." It was not until defense counsel started posing questions based on hypothetical situations that Daniel K. expressed some hesitancy about whether he would be able to prevent outside factors from influencing him. When the prosecutor and defense counsel started arguing over the form of defense counsel's questions, Judge Carlson terminated the debate and paraphrased Daniel K.'s voir dire responses as, "He said it's hard to judge what [he] would feel and that he would try to base [his decision] on the evidence." With that, Judge Carlson rejected Jimmie's request to remove Daniel K. for cause.
*154 [7]
¶ 28. Although Daniel K. gave varying responses during his voir dire and, at times, indicated some hesitancy about his ability to serve as a juror in light of his wife's past experience as a sexual assault victim, the supreme court has held that a prospective juror need not utter magical words in order to qualify as an acceptable juror. See State v. Ferron, 219 Wis. 2d 481 501, 579 N.W.2d 654, 662 (1998). In addition, the court has said that a prospective juror need not unambiguously state his or her ability to set aside bias. See id.; Faucher, 227 N.W.2d at 731 n.8, 596 N.W.2d at 784. Rather, a reviewing court looks to the trial court's resolution of the question from the standpoint of the trial judge's better position.
¶ 29. Judge Carlson was in a far better position than we are to evaluate Daniel K.'s conduct, demeanor, tone of voice and other nonverbal cues as the judge considered the ultimate question whether Daniel K. had exhibited any subjective bias. This evaluation is very much like a fact finder's assessment of a witness's credibility. That is why the supreme court has placed this determination under the "clearly erroneous" standard of appellate review. Giving due deference to the better position of Judge Carlson, we conclude that the judge's decision to retain Daniel K. as a juror in the face of Jimmie's challenge was not clearly erroneous.
¶ 30. We make a final observation regarding this matter based on the steady stream of juror selection cases that come before us. Because lawyers may ask leading questions on voir dire and because they are also skilled in obtaining desired answers, the responses of a prospective juror to such questions are often contradictory, depending on which party is asking the questions. Thus, on appeal, both parties are *155 usually able to point to voir dire answers that support their competing positions regarding the challenged juror. Given this situation, it is all the more appropriate for us to defer to the trial court's better position to assess the prospective juror's credibility and honesty.
2. Objective Bias
¶ 31. Because the recent supreme court decisions had not yet been released at the time of the trial in this case, Judge Carlson did not make an express determination on the question of objective bias. The same situation existed in Faucher, but the supreme court nonetheless went on to decide the issue as a matter of law. See Faucher, 227 Wis. 2d at 732-35, 596 N.W.2d at 784-86. We will do the same here.
¶ 32. Daniel K. did not know, nor was he otherwise aligned in any manner with, any of the principals involved in this case. Thus, this case is not like Faucher. Nor did he exhibit any knowledge, much less any prejudice, towards any aspect of the case, particularly Jimmie's theory of defense. Thus, this case is not like Kiernan. In short, unlike the jurors in those cases, Daniel K. was not committed in advance against any aspect of Jimmie's case.
¶ 33. In addition, Daniel K.'s potential bias arises out of the experiences of his wife, not his own. Moreover, his wife's experience was remote in time, occurring when she was six years old. Even in the face of his wife's prior experience as a sexual assault victim, there is no showing that Daniel K. harbored a negative, ingrained attitude or predisposition regarding the judicial system that would preclude him from serving as a fair and impartial juror. Thus, the juror in this case is not like some of the jurors in Mendoza.
*156 ¶ 34. Factually, this case is more like Erickson. There, in a sexual assault case, the supreme court upheld a trial court ruling rejecting a challenge for cause against a prospective juror who had been the victim of a sexual assault as a child many years earlier. See Erickson, 227 Wis. 2d at 777, 596 N.W.2d at 759. The court disagreed with the defendant's claim that the juror was objectively biased. The court found nothing in the juror's voir dire responses which suggested that the juror was anything other than a person who was willing and able to act as an impartial juror. See id. The court further stated that it has "been `repeatedly reluctant to exclude groups of persons from serving as petit jurors as a matter of law.'" Id. (quoted source omitted).
¶ 35. Erickson thus teaches that a prospective juror who has been victimized by the same kind of crime charged in the instant case may nonetheless qualify as a juror if the juror otherwise passes muster under the objective bias test. If that is so as to a juror who was a direct victim, it follows that the same can also be so as to the spouse of such a victim.
[8]
¶ 36. In summary, there is no showing that Daniel K. had any direct or personal connection with any persons involved in this case or with some important aspect of this case. Nor is there any showing that Daniel K. harbored a firmly held predisposition regarding the justice system that precluded him from fairly and impartially deciding the case. See supra at 8. Based upon all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Daniel K.'s voir dire and after a consideration of the recent cases, we conclude, as a matter of law, that Daniel K. was not objectively biased. We uphold *157 Judge Carlson's ruling rejecting the challenge for cause.
2. Admissibility of Child's Videotaped Statement
¶ 37. Next, Jimmie argues that the trial court erred by admitting Cassandra's videotaped interview into evidence. Jimmie contends that the State did not establish a threshold requirement for admissibility pursuant to § 908.08(3), STATS., namely that Cassandra understood that "false statements are punishable."
¶ 38. Section 908.08(3)(c), STATS., is part of the evidence code. It governs the admissibility of videotaped statements of children in various types of proceedings, including criminal trials. We set out the full statute in the accompanying footnote.[6] The statute *158 allows for evidentiary use of a child's videotaped statements subject to certain conditions. The condition at issue in this case is that set out at para. (3)(c), which requires that the child have an "understanding that false statements are punishable and of the importance of telling the truth."
[9]
¶ 39. Ordinarily, a determination of whether a child understands that false statements are punishable is a question of fact. See State v. Tarantino, 157 Wis. 2d 199, 209-11, 458 N.W.2d 582, 586-87 (Ct. App. 1990). However, since the only evidence on this question is the videotape itself, we are in as good a position as Judge Kennedy at the preliminary hearing and Judge Carlson at the trial proceedings to make that determination. As a result, the question becomes one that we review de novo. See State v. Pepin, 110 Wis. 2d 431, 439, 328 N.W.2d 898, 901-02 (Ct. App. 1982) ("We note that this against-interest statement is documentary; that it was made is undisputed; its maker chose not to testify and so no demeanor evidence exists. The trial court would be in no better position to determine this question of law than are we.") (footnote omitted).
¶ 40. We have reviewed the videotape. Regina Greetham, an investigator with the Lake Geneva police department, and Paula Hocking, a social worker with Walworth County Human Services, conducted the interview. At the beginning of the interview, the following exchange took place with Cassandra:
[Social worker]: Cassie, do you know the difference between telling the truth and telling a lie? If I was to say that I was wearing a purple shirt today, is that telling the truth or telling a lie?
Cassandra: Lie.
*159 [Social worker]: Why?
Cassandra: Cause you have a green shirt on.
[Social worker]: Very good. Do you know how important it is to always tell the truth? Okay, it's real important to make sure that you tell us the truth today. Can you do that? You're shaking your head yes.
As the interview came to a close, Cassandra was asked again:
[Social worker]: Everything that we've talked about today is that the truth? Have you told us the truth?
[Police investigator]: And you're shaking your head.
Cassandra: Yeah.
¶ 41. Jimmie argues that these excerpts satisfy "the importance of telling the truth" prong of the statute, but not the "child's understanding that false statements are punishable" prong. He agrees with Judge Carlson that the exact words of the statute need not be used, but he contends that the words actually used must "demonstrate the child knows . . . that there are consequences in failing to tell the truth." We agree with this premise. Thus, the issue narrows to whether the exchanges between the interviewers and Cassandra satisfied this "punishment" prong of the statute.
¶ 42. At times, Jimmie's argument appears to treat the statutory provisions of "the importance of telling the truth" and "that false statements are punishable" as discrete and unrelated concepts. We disagree. We see the two as very much interrelated. We think that, in most instances, a reasonable child would associate a warning about the importance of telling the *160 truth with the related concept of untruthfulness and the consequences that might flow from such deceit.[7] We see nothing in the facts surrounding the interview with Cassandra which suggest that she did not make that association in this case.
¶ 43. First, we take note that the warnings given to Cassandra did not utilize only words about the importance of telling the truth. Rather, the social worker also twice used the word "lie" when cautioning Cassandra: "Cassie, do you know the difference between telling the truth and telling a lie? If I was to say that I was wearing a purple shirt today, is that telling the truth or telling a lie?" (Emphasis added.) And Cassandra replied that she understood that a "purple shirt" response would be a "lie."
¶ 44. Second, this interview was no ordinary event in Cassandra's life. Strangers in an unfamiliar setting were interviewing her about a difficult and sensitive topic. The solemnity and importance of such a moment would not be lost on a young child.
¶ 45. Considering the entire interview, the language employed and the surrounding circumstances, we conclude that the "punishment" prong was satisfied despite the lack of the express words recited in § 908.08(3)(c), STATS.
[10]
¶ 46. Alternatively, if the trial judges who ruled on this issue were in error, we hold that such error was harmless. The test for harmless error is "whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error contributed to the conviction." State v. Dyess, 124 Wis. 2d 525, 543, 370 N.W.2d 222, 231-32 (1985). Here, the error was *161 harmless because the essential information conveyed by the videotape was also admitted into evidence via other sources and means.
¶ 47. On the day that Cassandra was sexually assaulted, her brother, Mitchell, was also present at Jimmie's home. Mitchell became suspicious about what was going on upstairs in Jimmie's bedroom between Cassandra and Jimmie. Mitchell testified that he heard Jimmie tell Cassandra "hurry up and put on your dress" when he knocked on the locked door of the bedroom. Based on his suspicion, Mitchell called his mother.
¶ 48. Cassandra's mother, Lori, testified that after she went to Jimmie's home to pick up Cassandra and Mitchell, she discovered that Cassandra was not wearing any underwear. An ensuing search led to the underwear being discovered upstairs in Jimmie's bedroom on the floor, next to the bed. Lori also found Jimmie lying in bed, covered only by a sheet from the waist down.
[11]
¶ 49. Furthermore, all of the details of the assault that Cassandra gave during her videotaped interview were also told to others on several different occasions shortly after the event took place. First, Lori testified that when she, Cassandra and Mitchell returned home in the evening after the assault occurred, she and the victim went into her room to talk in private about what had happened. After some encouragement and reassurance, Cassandra described to Lori in detail the sexual acts that were performed on her by Jimmie. Second, the social worker who would later conduct the videotaped interview of Cassandra testified that she saw a "scared" and "tearful" child at the hospital the night of the assault. She also testified *162 that she had overheard Cassandra at the hospital tell her mother some of the details of the assault. Given this evidence from other sources, the videotape was, in effect, duplicative. As such, any error regarding the videotape did not contribute to Jimmie's conviction.
CONCLUSION
¶ 50. We hold that Judge Carlson properly rejected Jimmie's challenge to remove juror Daniel K. for cause. We also hold that both Judge Kennedy and Judge Carlson properly ruled that the videotape was admissible evidence pursuant to § 908.08(3)(c), STATS. Alternatively, we hold that any error regarding the videotape was harmless. We affirm the judgment of conviction.
By the Court.Judgment affirmed.
NOTES
[]  Petition to review denied.
[1]  Jimmie R.R. was convicted as a repeat offender.
[2]  Actually, this motion was brought under the label of a motion for stay pending appeal. Jimmie argued for a stay of the trial so that he could appeal Judge Kennedy's bind over based on the videotape evidence. Judge Carlson denied the stay because the trial date was imminent.
[3]  The decisions are: State v. Faucher, 227 Wis. 2d 700, 596 N.W.2d 770 (1999); State v. Kiernan, 227 Wis. 2d 736, 596 N.W.2d 760 (1999); State v. Erickson, 227 Wis. 2d 758, 596 N.W.2d 749 (1999), cert. denied, 120 S.Ct. 987 (2000); and State v. Mendoza, 227 Wis. 2d 838, 596 N.W.2d 736 (1999).
[4]  The supreme court cautioned that the new terms do not neatly correspond to the old ones. For purposes of providing guidance, the court acknowledged that "subjective bias" is most like "actual bias" and "objective bias" contemplates use of both "implied" and "inferred" bias. See Faucher, 227 Wis. 2d at 716-17, 596 N.W.2d at 777-78. The court also said that "statutory bias" and "subjective bias" most closely corresponded, respectively, to "implied bias" and "actual bias." See id. at 716 n.5, 596 N.W.2d at 777.
[5]  "Statutory bias," generally corresponding to "implied bias," has its roots in § 805.08(1), STATS., and is premised on the idea that there are specific grounds that automatically disqualify prospective jurors, regardless of whether they are actually biased. See Faucher, 227 Wis. 2d at 716 n.5, 596 N.W.2d at 777. In the statutes, this is expressed as situations where a prospective juror "is related by blood or marriage to any party or to any attorney appearing in the case, or has any financial interest in the case." Section 805.08(1).
[6]  Section 908.08(3), STATS., reads as follows:
(3) The court or hearing examiner shall admit the videotape statement upon finding all of the following:
(a) That the trial or hearing in which the videotape statement is offered will commence:
1. Before the child's 12th birthday; or
2. Before the child's 16th birthday and the interests of justice warrant its admission under sub. (4).
(b) That the videotape is accurate and free from excision, alteration and visual or audio distortion.
(c) That the child's statement was made upon oath or affirmation or, if the child's developmental level is inappropriate for the administration of an oath or affirmation in the usual form, upon the child's understanding that false statements are punishable and of the importance of telling the truth.
(d) That the time, content and circumstances of the statement provide indicia of its trustworthiness.
(e) That admission of the statement will not unfairly surprise any party or deprive any party of a fair opportunity to meet allegations made in the statement.
[7]  The same would be true in the converse situation. When warned about the consequences of lying, a reasonable child would understand the importance of being truthful.

=== CASE 9740031 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:13.18458+00 ===

HOFFMAN, Judge.
Appellant-plaintiff Anthony A. Koenig appeals the trial court's entry of summary judgment in favor of appellee-defendant Aetna.
The facts relevant to the appeal disclose that in March 1979, Anthony was seriously injured in an automobile tractor-trailer collision. Anthony, who was six-years old at the time, was a passenger in a car driven by Debra Bedell. Bedell turned her vehicle into the path of a tractor-trailer rig causing the collision.
Anthony and his siblings were in the foster care of Barbara Koenig at the time of the collision. Barbara learned of the incident on the day it occurred. Although Barbara never spoke to Bedell about the collision, Barbara was told by Bedell's mother that Bedell was an uninsured motorist. Barbara did not notify her insurance agent or the insurer, Aetna, of the incident or of any possible claim.
Barbara adopted Anthony. in 1986. At some point, Barbara became aware that the insurance policy through Aetna contained uninsured motorist provisions which should cover the injuries sustained by Anthony. On October 2, 1986, Aetna was given notice of Anthony's claim under Barbara's policy. In 1987, Anthony filed suit against Bedell and Aetna.
Barbara was unable to provide a copy of the insurance contract at the time of filing suit. Further, Barbara did not know the effective dates of the policy or the specific policy provisions.
In Bedell's answer, she did not admit that she was an uninsured motorist at the time of the collision. However, for summary judgment purposes, the trial court assumed that she was uninsured.
In December 1989, finding that the notice of claim given seven and one-half years after the incident was unreasonable as a matter of law, the trial court entered summary judgment in favor of Aetna. In September 1991, Anthony and Bedell entered into an Agreed Entry of Judgment in favor of Anthony in the amount of $200,000.00. Other facts appear below as necessary.
As restated and consolidated, Anthony raises one issue for review: whether a genuine issue of material fact exists as to the reasonableness of the notice of claim given to the insurer, and even if the seven and one-half year delay is unreasonable, whether any prejudice occurred.
As of the January 1, 1991 amendment to Ind. Trial Rule 56, the parties to a summary judgment proceeding must expressly designate to the trial court evidentiary matter which supports their respective positions. Ind. Trial Rule 56(C) provides in pertinent part:
"At the time of filing the motion or response, a party shall designate to the court all parts of pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, admissions, matters of judicial notice, and any other matters on which it relies for purposes of the motion. A party opposing the motion shall also designate to the court each material issue of fact which that party asserts precludes entry of summary judgment and the evidence relevant thereto."
Summary judgment is appropriate if the designated evidentiary matter shows that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.
In reviewing a motion for summary judgment, this Court stands in the shoes of the trial court. This Court must liberally construe all designated evidentia-ry matter in favor of the non-moving party *455and resolve any doubt against the moving party. State Bd. of Tax Com'rs v. New Energy Co. (1992), Ind.App., 585 N.E.2d 38, 39. Even if it appears that the non-moving party will not succeed at trial, summary judgment is inappropriate where material facts conflict or undisputed facts lead to conflicting inferences. The existence of a genuine issue of material fact shall not be a ground for reversal on appeal unless such fact was designated to the trial court and is included in the record.
See Block v. Loke Mortgage Co., Inc. (1992), Ind.App., 601 N.E.2d 449, 450; T.R. 56(H).
Furthermore, this Court will affirm summary judgment so long as the designated evidentiary matter supports a legal theory which supports summary judgment.
First, Anthony contends that the notice of the claim given to Aetna seven and one-half years after the collision was not unreasonable and that Aetna was not actually prejudiced by the delay. Insurance governing statutes allow policy provisions requiring that "[wJjritten notice of [an insured's] claim must be given to the insurer within twenty (20) days after the occurrence ... covered by the policy, or as soon thereafter as is reasonably possible." IND. CODE § 27-8-5-8(a)(5) (1982 Ed.).
For summary judgment purposes, Aetna does not challenge the trial court's assumptions: that Barbara had a valid contract of insurance at the time of the collision which contained an uninsured motorist endorsement; that Anthony as a foster child would have qualified for coverage; and that the contract contained a standard clause requiring notice of a claim to be given within a reasonable time as contemplated by the above referenced statute. When the facts regarding the notice are undisputed, the issue of reasonableness is a question of law for the court. See Miller v. Dilts (1984), Ind., 463 N.E.2d 257, 263, quoting London Guarantee and Accident Co., Ltd. v. Siwy (1904), 35 Ind.App. 340, 66 N.E. 481.
Unlike other policy provisions requiring the cooperation of the insured, noncompliance with notice of claim provisions resulting in an unreasonable delay triggers a presumption of prejudice to the insurer's ability to prepare an adequate defense. Miller at 265. The court stated:
"The requirement of prompt notice gives the insurer an opportunity to make a timely and adequate investigation of all the cireumstances surrounding the accident or loss. This adequate investigation is often frustrated by a delayed notice. Prejudice to the insurance company's ability to prepare an adequate defense can therefore be presumed by an unreasonable delay in notifying the company about the accident or about the filing of the lawsuit. This is not in conflict with the public policy theory that the court should seek to protect the innocent third parties from attempts by insurance companies to deny liability for some insignificant failure to notify."
Id. Further, as noted in Miller:
"late notice given to an insurer places it in a position that could have been avoided through timely notice, and ... the 'most cooperative insured cannot erase this prejudice suffered by the insurer' in situations where the scene of the accident changes, or witnesses move away or ... their memories lapse, due to the passage of time. [Citation omitted.]"
Td.
Anthony was 13 years old when the notice of claim was given to Aetna. Anthony contends that his minority, especially when coupled with the mentally incapacitating injuries he received in the collision, justify a tolling of the notice provisions until he attained majority or upon removal of his disability. Because the notice requirement under an insurance policy is material and of the essence of the contract, Miller at 265, such a rule would place insurers in an untenable position with respect to the coverage of infants.
In Allstate Insurance Co. v. Furman (1981), 84 AD.2d 29, 445 N.Y.S.2d 236, order affirmed, 58 N.Y.2d 613, 458 N.Y.S.2d 532, 444 N.E.2d 996, the infant plaintiff filed suit against his parents for an injury which occurred six years earlier. *456The parents, as defendants in the suit, forwarded the suit papers to their homeowner's insurance carrier. | The insurer disclaimed liability due to the late notice of claim. The Furman court determined the notice was unreasonably late despite attempts to cireamvent the notice requirement through a suit filed by the child.
Here, as in Furman, infancy or disability alone will not excuse an unreasonably late notice. Under the circumstances, Barbara's failure to provide timely notice renders the notice unreasonable as a matter of law. Barbara admitted that she knew of the incident on the day of its occurrence. Further, she attributed her failure to provide notice of the claim to "stupidity." Thus, it is presumed that the unreasonable notice caused Aetna prejudice to its ability to adequately investigate the claim.
Anthony has failed to rebut the presumption of prejudice resulting from the unreasonable delay. Anthony did not demonstrate that the scene of the accident had not changed, that the witnesses were still available, or that their memories of the incident had not faded over the passage of time to the extent that Aetna could still meaningfully investigate the claim.
Also, Barbara did not retain a copy of the contract of insurance under which Anthony asserts a claim. Through depositions and affidavits, Aetna representatives asserted that records from the year the policy was issued are no longer available. The declaration sheets including the types and limits of coverage for each customer's policy were retained for a minimum of three years. Such information was often kept by the insurer for five or six years. Consequently, the seven and one-half year delay foreclosed Aetna's opportunity to determine the viability of the claim through its own records.
Because Anthony has failed to demonstrate a genuine issue of material fact or an error in law, the judgment is affirmed.
Affirmed.
RATLIFF, J., concurs.
ROBERTSON, J., dissents with opinion.

=== CASE 9740032 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:13.189563+00 ===

ROBERTSON, Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent. I agree with the majority that neither Anthony's infancy nor his disability excuses the unreasonable delay in the provision of notice to Aetna in this case. I agree further that Miller v. Dilts (1984), Ind., 463 N.E.2d 257, dictates that the legal result of this unreasonable unexcused delay is that Aetna is aided with a presumption that it was actually prejudiced by the delay in its ability to prepare an adequate defense. However, under the designated facts most favorable to Anthony, I cannot conclude that, as a matter of law, Aetna has suffered actual prejudice as the result of the delay and is therefore entitled to summary judgment despite being aided with the presumption that prejudice accrued from the delay.
In Miller, our supreme court held that an insurance company must show actual prejudice from an insured's unreasonable delay in providing notice before it can avoid liability under the policy. 463 N.E.2d at 265. The Miller court held that while actual prejudice could be presumed by an unreasonable delay in the provision of notice, this presumption could be rebutted by evidence that prejudice did not occur in the particular situation. Id. The Miller court went on to hold that, once such a conflict in the evidence is created, the question of whether any prejudice actually accrued to the insurer becomes one for the trier of fact. 463 N.E.2d at 265, 266.
First of all, I do not find the fact that Anthony failed to demonstrate that the scene of the accident had not changed, that the witnesses were still available, or that their memories of the incident had not faded over the passage of time dispositive of the factual issue of whether Aetna was actually prejudiced by the passage of time. (Majority opinion p. 456) The police report of the accident is in evidence and frankly, I believe the fact that Bedell was an uninsured motorist at fault for causing the accident by failing to yield the right of way *457to the semi-tractor trailer has never been the subject of serious dispute.
Moreover, I believe that absolutely no prejudice can be found to flow from the unavailability of the specific declaration sheets pertaining to Barbara's 1979 policy in effect at the time of the accident. Barbara had testified in her deposition that she thought she had $50,000.00 worth of uninsured motorist coverage under her Aetna policy and that she had never changed her uninsured motorist coverage during the life of the policy. In addition to its motion for summary judgment on the issue of the unreasonable delay in the provision of notice, Aetna moved for partial summary judgment requesting the trial court to find that Barbara's policy in effect at the time of the accident had uninsured motorist coverage limits in the amounts of Fifteen Thousand Dollars ($15,000.00) per person and Thirty Thousand Dollars ($30,000.00) per occurrence. In support of this motion, Aetna submitted the affidavit of Bruce F. Warner, Manager of the Underwriting Department for the Aetna Casualty and Surety Company's Personal Financial Security Division, which stated in pertinent part:
Attached hereto as Exhibit "A" is a true and accurate photocopy of a Claim and Underwriting Record of and concerning the Aetna insured Barbara J. Koenig for the specific time period January 24, 1981 to July 24, 1981 and of and concerning automobile insurance maintained by the insured, Barbara J. Koenig, with Aet-na which had an original effective date of January 24, 1977 and which included uninsured motorist coverage limits of liability in the amounts of Fifteen Thousand Dollars ($15,000.00 per person and Thirty Thousand Dollars ($30,-000.00) per occurrence. After diligently searching the Aetna Underwriting Records for records containing additional information as to the limits of uninsured motorist liability coverage that the insured, Barbara J. Koenig, had for the calendar years 1977 to 1980, I have been unable to locate any other such additional information and/or records. (Emphasis added)
I do not think there can be any serious dispute but that Anthony had precisely $15,000.00 worth of uninsured motorist coverage in effect under his mother's Aet-na automobile policy at the time of the accident. Certainly, there can be no serious dispute but that Anthony's injuries/damages far exceed these policy limits.
In conclusion, I simply do not believe that, under the designated facts most favorable to Anthony, we can decide as a matter of law that Aetna was actually prejudiced by the unreasonable delay in the provision of notice despite the presumption in Aetna's favor on this issue. I take seriously the admonition issued by the majority that summary judgment is inappropriate even if it appears that the non-moving party will not succeed at trial. (Majority opinion at p. 455 citing Block v. Lake Mortgage Co., Inc. (1992), Ind.App., 601 N.E.2d 449. Moreover, I am reminded that summary judgment is a lethal weapon and courts must be mindful of its aims and targets and beware of overkill in its use. Mayhew v. Deister (1969), 144 Ind.App. 111, 244 N.E.2d 448, trans. denied. Therefore, I would reverse and remand in order that the factual issue regarding whether Aetna was actually prejudiced by the unreasonable delay in the provision of notice be determined by the trier of fact.

=== CASE 2221923 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:23.782219+00 ===

601 N.E.2d 1048 (1992)
235 Ill. App.3d 281
176 Ill.Dec. 350
Hugo and Barbara THURMOND, Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
Ambrose MONROE, Individually and as Agent of Schwerman Trucking Co. and Schwerman Trucking Company, Defendants-Appellants.
No. 1-90-2602.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, First Division.
September 14, 1992.
*1049 Office of Sweeney and Riman, Ltd., Chicago (Mary Jo Connelly, Georgene M. Wilson and Kenneth J. Barrish, of counsel), for defendants-appellants.
Office of Beermann, Swerdlove, Woloshin & Barezky, Chicago (Alvin R. Becker, Joel M. Horwich and David C. Thomas, of counsel), for plaintiffs-appellees.
Justice MANNING delivered the opinion of the court:
This case involves a negligence action for personal injuries sustained in a vehicular collision on September 19, 1981, between a Chevy Blazer driven by plaintiff Hugo Thurmond (Hugo) and a tanker-truck driven by defendant Ambrose Monroe (Monroe) on behalf of his employer Schwerman Trucking Co. (Employer). Plaintiffs alleged in the amended complaint that defendant Monroe, while operating his vehicle in an easterly direction, crossed over the dividing line separating westbound and eastbound lanes of traffic on Route 64 by Chana Road in Oregon, Illinois and entered into Hugo's lane. Monroe thereby caused his own vehicle to come into contact with Hugo's vehicle and collide with great force. Defendants denied the substantive allegations of the complaint and filed a counterclaim against plaintiff Hugo for property damage to the employer's truck. Hugo settled the counterclaim prior to trial.
Before the trial, which commenced on March 13, 1990, defendants brought a motion for partial summary judgment arguing that the findings in a prior traffic court proceeding in which Hugo was found guilty of a minor traffic infraction, collaterally estopped Hugo from proceeding in the instant action upon the theory that it was defendant Monroe who crossed the center line. Following a full hearing, the trial court denied defendants' summary judgment motion and granted plaintiff Hugo's motion in limine to bar any testimony regarding the traffic court proceeding or the issuance of the traffic citation to plaintiff Hugo for improper lane usage. The trial court also granted plaintiffs' motion in limine to exclude the testimony of the investigating police officer regarding the point of impact.
The trial then proceeded with witness testimony as follows. Plaintiff Hugo testified that he planned to go hunting in Savanna, Illinois on September 19, 1981, and that before he went to bed the preceding night at 9:30 p.m., he drank a couple of beers. He arose at 1:30 a.m. At about 5 a.m. as plaintiff drove his Chevy Blazer proceeding westbound on Route 64 at the Chana Road intersection, he saw the headlights of an 18-wheeler tractor-trailer truck approaching him from the eastbound lane of Route 64. He testified that as the truck got closer, he saw the headlights cross into his lane, but did not have time to avoid a collision. Because he placed his hands over his face and eyes, he did not see what happened next. Upon impact, Hugo was rendered unconscious until he awoke in the hospital. He was treated for emergency care and then transferred to another hospital where he remained for approximately two weeks. He was forced to stay home from work for four months due to the extent of the seriousness of his injuries.
Plaintiff Barbara Thurmond, wife of Hugo, testified about the condition of the Chevy Blazer when she saw it in the garage where it had been taken after the accident. However, she acknowledged that she neither went to the scene of the accident nor observed the condition of the Blazer prior to its removal from the scene. She also testified in detail regarding the extent and effect of her husband's injuries on their home life after he was released from the hospital.
Next, the jury heard detailed evidence deposition from two examining physicians, Dr. Srivastava and Dr. Bartucci regarding the nature and permanency of the injuries suffered by Hugo. Dr. Srivastrava was the neurologist who treated him immediately after the accident. The doctor testified *1050 that Hugo's blood alcohol level was .10 which is in the toxic range and, in his opinion, impairs a person's judgment. He also performed a physical examination and diagnosed Hugo's injuries. Six years had elapsed from the original date of the injury until the time Dr. Srivastava saw Hugo again, and, in his opinion, Hugo had made an excellent recovery.
Defendant Monroe testified that he was travelling eastbound on Route 64 in his truck when Hugo's car crossed the center line into his lane thereby causing the accident. Finally, the investigating officer, Denis Rauch, testified as a post-occurrence witness. He stated that at the time of the accident he had been working for the Sheriff's Department for over a year. He received training at the academy which included basic instruction on the investigation of accidents and had investigated 15-20 accidents prior to the present incident. He arrived at the scene of the accident at 4:54 a.m. and observed two vehicles; Hugo's Blazer was in the westbound lane of the road and the employer's tanker truck was lying in a ditch on the south side of the road.
Rauch stated that during the time he investigated this accident, which took a total of eight or nine hours, he looked for skid marks in relation to the center line, damage and gouge marks on the roadway and the location of debris and the placement of vehicles. He then recorded those observations on the police report and took photographs. He stated that he did not observe any skid marks or damage to the highway in the westbound. He took a statement from defendant Monroe and issued a citation to Hugo for improper lane usage.[1] However, on cross-examination, Rauch admitted that he forgot to put certain observations in the written report such as the location of the skid marks and certain gouge marks. He also conceded that he improperly identified a utility pole in the diagram which he drew at the scene of the accident. Neither could he recall the incident without referring to the report.
The trial court entered judgment on the jury's verdict in favor of Hugo Thurmond and against defendants in the amount of $319,642, reduced by 16.5% for plaintiff Hugo's comparative negligence to $266,901. The jury also returned a verdict of $5,000 in favor of Barbara Thurmond.
Defendants first contend that the trial court erred by denying their motion for partial summary judgment. They assert that their motion was based on the doctrine of collateral estoppel, as it is clear there had been a determination of who crossed the center line by a court of competent jurisdiction in a prior cause of action. (See Blair v. Bartelmay (1986), 151 Ill. App.3d 17, 104 Ill.Dec. 362, 502 N.E.2d 859.) Under Illinois law, the denial of a motion for summary judgment is not reviewable on appeal. (Tripi v. Landon (1986), 140 Ill.App.3d 230, 94 Ill.Dec. 611, 488 N.E.2d 610.) It is well settled that a prior order denying a motion for summary judgment is not reviewable following an evidentiary trial, because the result of any error in such denial is merged by law in the subsequent trial. (See Home Indemnity Co. v. Reynolds & Co. (1962), 38 Ill.App.2d 358, 187 N.E.2d 274; Peters v. United Van Lines, Inc. (1980), 82 Ill.App.3d 104, 37 Ill.Dec. 488, 402 N.E.2d 378; Paulson v. Suson (1981), 97 Ill.App.3d 326, 53 Ill.Dec. 51, 423 N.E.2d 243; Schroeder v. Meier-Templeton Associates, Inc. (1984), 130 Ill. App.3d 554, 85 Ill.Dec. 784, 474 N.E.2d 744.) Thus, even where the evidence indicates that the motion for summary judgment should have been granted the error cannot be reviewed. (Home Indemnity Co., 38 Ill.App.2d 358, 187 N.E.2d 274.) Accordingly, we need not review the trial court's order denying partial summary judgment. Moreover, although defendants' motion for summary judgment was based upon a collateral estoppel argument *1051 to preclude an allegedly new determination by the trial court of who crossed the center line, this question was the material issue of fact in dispute to be decided by the jury as the trier of fact.
Defendants next contend that the trial court erred in granting plaintiffs' motion in limine which precluded evidence of Hugo's conviction in a prior traffic court proceeding. We disagree. Hugo was convicted following a plea of not guilty under the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code for driving off the roadway. (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1989, ch. 951/2, par. 11-709(a).) The conviction stemmed from the same occurrence that serves as the basis of the instant lawsuit. Defendants maintain that the trial court's exclusion of evidence as to who crossed the center line and about Hugo Thurmond's conviction were relevant factors that affected Hugo's credibility and was also prima facie evidence of his negligence. To support this theory, they rely upon Thornton v. Paul (1978), 74 Ill.2d 132, 23 Ill.Dec. 541, 384 N.E.2d 335 and Smith v. Andrews (1964), 54 Ill.App.2d 51, 203 N.E.2d 160, wherein the Illinois courts sanctioned the admission of a previous conviction in a criminal matter in a subsequent civil proceeding.
In Smith, the court found for the first time in Illinois that under certain circumstances, proof of a criminal conviction may be admitted into evidence at a subsequent civil trial to prove the facts upon which the conviction was based. In Smith, the defendant's prior criminal convictions for robbery and forcible rape were admitted as evidence against him in a subsequent civil proceeding brought to terminate his parental rights. Defendant argued that proof of the prior criminal convictions violated the hearsay rule and were inadmissible to prove that he actually committed the crimes of which he was convicted. The appellate court disagreed and held that the defendant's previous conviction of rape, a felony, was admissible in a later civil case as prima facie evidence that the defendant had in fact committed a rape. In reaching its decision, the court commented upon the distinction between allowing a defendant's plea of guilty into evidence under the judicial admission exception to the hearsay rule and allowing a defendant's actual conviction following a plea of not guilty to be used as evidence of the facts supporting the conviction.
Fifteen years later, the Illinois Supreme Court remarked that the Smith court did not limit its holding to the admissibility of convictions of felonies only, although a number of courts limited the admissibility of prior convictions in civil cases to convictions of serious offenses, on the ground that convictions of misdemeanors do not represent sufficiently reliable determinations. (Thornton v. Paul, 74 Ill.2d at 149-50, 23 Ill.Dec. 541, 384 N.E.2d 335.) In Thornton, defendant was charged with a felony but was convicted of a serious misdemeanor. Because he was represented at all times during the criminal proceedings by counsel, the court there concluded that the likelihood of an unjust conviction had been minimized and that the defendant's conviction was reliable evidence of the fact that he did commit a battery. Thus, the court found that evidence of defendant's conviction of battery should have been admitted in the later garnishment proceeding as prima facie evidence that his striking of the plaintiff constituted a battery.
As a result of the Smith and Thornton decisions, the Fourth District of the Appellate Court in 1981, without further elaboration, concluded that plaintiff was entitled to present proof of defendant's conviction of driving too fast for conditions for the jury's consideration in the wrongful death action therein. In O'Dell v. Dowd (1981), 102 Ill.App.3d 189, 192, 57 Ill.Dec. 650, 429 N.E.2d 548, the court found that proof of a traffic conviction is admissible in a civil case as prima facie evidence but may also be explained and contradicted by defendant.
However, a few years later, also in reliance on the Smith and Thornton rationales, the First District of the Appellate Court rendered an opinion completely opposite to the O'Dell decision. In the case of Hengels v. Gilski (1984), 127 Ill.App.3d 894, 83 Ill.Dec. 101, 469 N.E.2d 708, we commented *1052 that "[t]he courts of Illinois have not yet decided whether minor criminal matters such as traffic offenses should be included in the hearsay exception carved out by Smith and Thornton. * * *" In dicta, however, the court in Smith stated:
"[W]e would not want our decision in this case to be interpreted as a holding that every conviction following a plea of not guilty is admissible in evidence in a later case involving the facts upon which the conviction is based. * * * For example, our holding in this case would not be authority for the admissibility of a traffic court conviction in a later civil case arising out of a traffic accident. Defendants in traffic cases are frequently unrepresented by counsel, and the proceedings are relatively informal. In view of the comparatively modest penalty a defendant faces on a judgment of conviction, the charge is rarely contested with the vigor that characterizes the adversary system at its best." Hengels, 127 Ill. App.3d at 907-08, 83 Ill.Dec. 101, 469 N.E.2d 708 quoting Smith, 54 Ill.App.2d at 62, 203 N.E.2d 160.
The court there also considered an annotation on the subject found in the American Law Reports which offered as an additional rationale the perfunctory nature of minor traffic violation proceedings. Finally, the Hengels court, in considering the decisions handed down by other State courts, wherein it encountered a similar rationale for the exclusion of traffic court convictions, found the case law and the authorities to be persuasive.
Thus, in finding the Smith reasoning to be sound, Hengels held that the trial court therein did not commit error when it excluded the defendant's prior traffic court conviction from evidence. Hengels reiterated that the first case in Illinois which allowed criminal convictions to be admissible in later civil actions limited its ruling so as to specifically exclude the admission of traffic court convictions. The court in Hengels stated:
"A traffic court conviction will often result from expediency, convenience and compromise; the constitutional safeguards are often perfunctory and the defendant's opportunity and motive to defend vigorously are often lacking. We do not believe that such a traffic court conviction possesses the adequate assurance of reliability necessary to justify its admission into evidence at a later civil trial based upon the same facts. To hold otherwise, we believe, could conceivably turn a mechanical and summary traffic court hearing into the cornerstone of a significant civil action filed after the conclusion of the criminal proceedings." Hengels, 127 Ill.App.3d at 910, 83 Ill.Dec. 101, 469 N.E.2d 708.
In the present case, we find that the trial court properly granted plaintiffs' motion in limine to exclude evidence of Hugo's prior traffic citation and conviction. First, we believe that the instant factual matrix is distinguishable from the cases cited to by defendants. Plaintiff's conviction here for the traffic citation did not involve a serious crime. (Cf. Smith, 54 Ill.App.2d 51, 203 N.E.2d 160.) The conviction, to the contrary, was of a nonserious nature, involved a minor charge and a modest penalty. The Thornton defendant, on the other hand, was convicted for a serious offense.
O'Dell, 102 Ill.App.3d 189, 57 Ill.Dec. 650, 429 N.E.2d 548, is distinguishable because defendant there was convicted after pleading guilty to the charge against her. It has been held that a plea of guilty is admissible as an admission against interest by the party charged. (Hartigan v. Robertson (1980), 87 Ill.App.3d 732, 42 Ill.Dec. 751, 409 N.E.2d 366.) We find no such admission by plaintiff here. (Cf. Wright v. Stokes (1988), 167 Ill.App.3d 887, 891, 118 Ill.Dec. 853, 522 N.E.2d 308, where the fifth district reversed the trial court's decision and held that plaintiff should have been allowed to introduce evidence of defendant's plea of guilty.) In the O'Dell case, the appellate court relied upon the established evidentiary rule which treats a guilty plea as an admission by defendant of the facts upon which the conviction is based as long as those facts are relevant to some issue involved in the civil proceeding.
*1053 Neither is the Wine v. Bauerfreund (1987), 155 Ill.App.3d 19, 107 Ill.Dec. 491, 507 N.E.2d 155, case dispositive here. In Wine, the first district again agreed with both the Smith reasoning and Hengels holding. We noted the general rule against admitting evidence of traffic convictions in civil cases, but upheld the trial court's finding that "in order to eliminate any confusion in the jurors' minds and to avoid inappropriate and time-consuming speculation by them during deliberation, it would inform them that defendant had been found guilty of negligent driving." However, Wine concluded that the trial court's decision to advise the jury of the conviction needed to be considered in the context of the events preceding it.
In that case, while attempting to impeach the officer's testimony, plaintiffs' counsel questioned the officer about issuing a traffic citation to defendant, about appearing in court to testify against the defendant, and about his knowledge as to whether or not defendant was found guilty on that citation. On redirect examination, defense counsel inquired whether it was true that defendant was found not guilty and later elicited more testimony from the officer as to his opinion that had the vehicle not been illegally parked, the accident might not have occurred. Thus, the trial court allowed into evidence a copy of defendant's conviction to counter the contrary inference raised by defense counsel's question. The Wine case, we believe is markedly different from Hengels, and the admission of the conviction therein was further safeguarded where the trial court instructed the jury that the conviction was of no relevance and should not be considered in reaching a decision in the case.
When we look at the careful and considered analysis of Hengels, 127 Ill.App.3d 894, 83 Ill.Dec. 101, 469 N.E.2d 708, we agree with that court's conclusion and its interpretation of Smith as "specifically limiting its ruling to exclude the admission of traffic court convictions." (Hengels, 127 Ill.App.3d at 910, 83 Ill.Dec. 101, 469 N.E.2d 708.) While there is some indication here that witnesses testified and counsel presented arguments in the prior traffic court proceeding, we are inclined to rely on Hengels' rationale that "to allow the admission of a traffic conviction into a later civil action, `could conceivably turn a mechanical and summary traffic court hearing into the cornerstone of a significant civil action filed after the conclusion of the criminal proceedings.'" Hengels, 127 Ill.App.3d at 894, 83 Ill.Dec. 101, 469 N.E.2d 708.
Defendants next assert that the trial court abused its discretion by: (1) finding the investigating police officer was not qualified to render an expert opinion on the point of impact of the collision and (2) excluding his testimony as improper reconstruction testimony. They contend that the testimony of an investigating police officer regarding the disputed point of impact in a collision is admissible as an aid to the jury, even when there has been eyewitness testimony. Kassela v. Stonitsch (1978), 57 Ill. App.3d 817, 15 Ill.Dec. 262, 373 N.E.2d 608.
An expert is one who, because of his education, training or experience, possesses knowledge and skill of a specialized nature which is beyond the knowledge of the average person. (See Schaffner v. Chicago & N. W. Transportation Co. (1989), 129 Ill.2d 1, 133 Ill.Dec. 432, 541 N.E.2d 643.) The trial court below determined that Officer Rauch did not qualify as an expert (see Duffy v. Midlothian Country Club (1985), 135 Ill.App.3d 429, 90 Ill. Dec. 237, 481 N.E.2d 1037.) While some decisions of Illinois reviewing courts approve the use of police officers' opinion evidence relating to point of impact (see Kassela, 57 Ill.App.3d at 822, 15 Ill.Dec. 262, 373 N.E.2d 262 and the cases cited therein), they have done so where the proffered expert was deemed qualify to testify. Different from Kassela, where therein the officer had three and one-half years experience and had investigated 100 accidents, at the time of the accident here, Rauch had been with the department only one year and had only investigated 15 accident cases. Furthermore, the training he received in traffic investigation was strictly limited to the general tasks of taking measurements and collecting evidence at the scene of the accident.
*1054 Accordingly, we conclude there was no abuse of discretion by the trial court in refusing to qualify Officer Rauch as an expert witness based upon his limited experience and training. (In re Marriage of Aud (1986), 142 Ill.App.3d 320, 96 Ill.Dec. 615, 491 N.E.2d 894.) The proponent of the testimony bears the burden of establishing the qualifications of a person to testify as an expert witness on a particular subject, and that determination is a matter generally reserved to the sound discretion of the trial judge. (Schaffner, 129 Ill.2d 1, 36, 133 Ill.Dec. 432, 541 N.E.2d 643.) Moreover, unlike the situation in Augenstein v. Pulley (1989), 191 Ill.App.3d 664, 138 Ill. Dec. 724, 547 N.E.2d 1345, the proffered expert here, Rauch, lacked sufficient qualifications to testify as an expert witness.
The trial court also found that Rauch's testimony was reconstruction expert testimony which is generally not permitted where there exists physical and eye witness evidence for the jury to draw its own conclusions. (See Levin v. Welsh Brothers Motor Service, Inc. (1987), 164 Ill.App.3d 640, 115 Ill.Dec. 680, 518 N.E.2d 205.) Although like Kassela, the testimony of Rauch here primarily "was not offered to reconstruct the accident, but only to show the point of impact based on his observation of the location of the debris" (Kassela, 57 Ill.App.3d at 823, 15 Ill.Dec. 262, 373 N.E.2d 608), the record shows that Rauch was allowed to testify fully about location of debris, placement of vehicles and other conditions of the road. While Rauch's accident investigatory skills were found to be limited, the record demonstrates that the jury was allowed to get a full and precise description of exactly what he saw upon arriving at the scene and in conducting his investigation.
Our holding today is not meant to change the law with respect to the issue of the admissibility of reconstruction evidence. (See Augenstein, 191 Ill.App.3d 664, 138 Ill.Dec. 724, 547 N.E.2d 1345.) We are mindful that most trial courts' reluctance to accept the testimony of police officers as reconstruction experts is based "at least in part on the witnesses' inability to provide expertise in a truly scientific field." (Deaver v. Hickox (1967), 81 Ill.App.2d 79, 87, 224 N.E.2d 468.) We believe such to be the case here where the record does not reflect that Officer Rauch had such superior and truly scientific training, knowledge, and experience to qualify as an expert in the field of accident investigation and determination of point of impact. As previously pointed out, there was even some question as to the accuracy of information contained in his report and the actual location of certain markings and poles at the scene. Accordingly, we find no error on the part of the trial court.
Finally, defendants contend that the jury verdict is against the manifest weight of the evidence due to several erroneous rulings by the trial court. Defendants urge error in: (1) the admission into evidence of photographs of plaintiff's vehicle based upon the testimony of his wife, although a proper foundation was not laid; (2) the preclusion of Officer Rauch's proffered testimony about an admission purportedly made by plaintiff Hugo at the time of the traffic court proceeding; and (3) the admission of the highly prejudicial and inflammatory testimony of Dr. Bartucci regarding the permanency of plaintiff's injuries.
A verdict is considered to be against the manifest weight of the evidence only when the jury's verdict is palpably erroneous or appears to be unreasonable, arbitrary and not based on the evidence. (Gabrenas v. R.D. Werner Co. (1983), 116 Ill.App.3d 276, 71 Ill.Dec. 940, 451 N.E.2d 1307.) Here, we believe counsel for plaintiffs clearly laid the proper foundation when plaintiff Barbara testified that the photograph was an accurate representation of the Blazer when she saw it after the accident. (See Gaunt & Haynes, Inc. v. Moritz Corp. (1985), 138 Ill.App.3d 356, 92 Ill.Dec. 880, 485 N.E.2d 1123.) We also find that the trial court properly excluded any evidence of Hugo's purported admission to Rauch where Rauch testified as to what he "basically" said to him, which is no more than unreliable testimony (see Nardi v. Kamerman (1990), 196 Ill.App.3d 591, 143 Ill.Dec. 462, 554 N.E.2d 397), and can *1055 not be said to constitute an admission against interest.
As to the purported error regarding Dr. Bartucci's testimony, it is well settled that only a physician may testify as to the permanent nature of an injury (Gray v. Hallett (1988), 170 Ill.App.3d 660, 121 Ill. Dec. 283, 525 N.E.2d 89), and no Illinois court has barred such testimony because the examination of the patient took place several years before the trial. Hendricks v. Nyberg (1976), 41 Ill.App.3d 25, 353 N.E.2d 273, relied upon by defendants, is not instructive here because therein the court held that a physician's testimony at trial must be based on a recent examination, when that testimony concerns the prognosis of a patient. In the instant case, the testimony of Dr. Bartucci was given to detail the nature, extent and permanency of plaintiff's injuries.
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the judgment of the circuit court of Cook County.
Affirmed.
BUCKLEY, P.J., and O'CONNOR, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  As a result of this traffic citation, there was a traffic court proceeding at which Thurmond pleaded not guilty. Officer Rauch was called as a witness and Thurmond and Monroe also testified. After consideration of the testimony, exhibits, and argument of counsel, Thurmond was found guilty of crossing the center line and fined $25. Allegedly, following the traffic court trial, Thurmond admitted to Officer Rauch that he had crossed the center line.

=== CASE 2221925 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:23.81904+00 ===

601 N.E.2d 1217 (1992)
235 Ill. App.3d 499
176 Ill.Dec. 519
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Raymond NICHOLS, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 1-91-0992.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Second Division.
September 22, 1992.
*1220 Dennis A. Giovannini and Herbert L. Goldberg, Chicago, for defendant-appellant.
Jack O'Malley, State's Atty., Cook County, Chicago (Renee Goldfarb, Brian Clauss and George J. Arnold, of counsel), for plaintiff-appellee.
Presiding Justice HARTMAN delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant appeals his conviction by a jury of murder (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 38, pars. 9-1(a)(1), 9-1(a)(2)), and attempted murder (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 38, pars. 8-4, 9-1). He questions whether (1) the court erred in admitting evidence and extensive State comment regarding his gang affiliation and involvement, and the prevalence of gangs in the area of the occurrence; (2) he was denied his right to due process and a fair trial when the State elicited testimony and commented during closing arguments regarding the connection between gangs and drug trafficking in the area of the offense; (3) the court improperly denied his motion in limine to exclude evidence of the location of his arrest; and (4) the court erred in allowing the State to inquire about his failure to call a supposedly exonerating witness.
Defendant was charged by indictment with two counts of first degree murder, three counts of aggravated battery and one count of attempted first degree murder. The case was tried on the murder and attempted murder counts. Defendant's motions in limine to exclude evidence of the nature of his prior conviction for possession of a controlled substance with intent to deliver, and to bar reference to the fact that he was exiting a courtroom when police arrested him, were denied.
At trial, Chicago Police Officer Barbara Pillows testified that about 9:25 p.m., January 3, 1990, she responded to a call of a man shot at 7204 South Green Street, where she found the decedent, Farrell Lamont Lee, lying near the curb, who appeared to be dead. Pillows learned there was another man inside the house, Robert Prince, who also had been shot. Decedent was pronounced dead on arrival at the hospital.
Robert Prince testified that about 9 p.m. on the evening of the occurrence he left his home with his cousin Socrates Houston and the decedent and drove to Houston's home at 7204 South Green. The three men exited the car and were conversing outside Houston's home, when they saw defendant and another youth walking towards them on Green Street. Defendant shouted "BD," meaning "Black Disciples," and then pulled a gun out of his pants and began firing in the direction of Prince, Houston and decedent. Prince heard additional gunfire as he fled into the Houston house; he subsequently felt weak and realized he had been shot. The decedent was lying dead on the sidewalk. Prince was later treated for gunshot wounds to the liver and colon. On March 7, 1990, Prince positively identified defendant in a lineup. Prince never "hung out" in the area of 72nd and Green, and testified the decedent had never been there prior to the occurrence.
Prince testified that neither he nor decedent had ever known defendant before the date of the shooting, nor had they known Quintius Taylor, the youth who had accompanied defendant that night. Prince denied that he or the decedent were street-gang members. He knew the meaning of "BD" because "he was surrounded by it on the south side. Although he was unable to remember exactly what defendant or his companion were wearing the night of the shooting, he would never forget their faces.
The parties stipulated that if called, Dr. Mary Jumbelic, a forensic pathologist, would testify that decedent died as a result of a gunshot wound to the neck and the manner of death was homicide.
Kevin Green testified that he lived in the area of 72nd and Green from the time he was 5 years old until age 19, and moved back to 7210 South Green in August of last year. Green, who was a funeral director, described the area in January 1990 as having gang activity, being "drug ridden" and "like a war zone." Over defense objections, Green described characteristics of the neighborhood gangs around the time of *1221 the offense: there were "BD," or Black Disciples, and "GD," or Gangster Disciples; both gangs were "folks," and their colors were black and blue; both gangs were aligned under the six-point star symbol. The term "BD" was "common knowledge" in the neighborhood because it was heard very frequently. Green had conducted Black Disciples' funerals, where it was common to see the gang colors as well as wreaths in the shape of a six-point star.
On the night of the occurrence, Green was entering his home when he heard gunshots coming from the direction of the home of his neighbor, Socrates Houston. Green subsequently saw a man who "looked like he was dead" lying on the ground in front of Houston's house. Green did not know anyone named Robert Prince or Quintius Taylor, nor did he know defendant. On cross-examination, Green stated that the "vast majority" of young men in his area belonged to street gangs. He did not know whether Houston was a gang member.
Socrates Houston substantially corroborated Prince's testimony as to the events leading up to the shooting. He heard a male voice holler "BD," but did not turn around because he "hear[s] it every day around there." He denied being a member of a street gang.
Cassandra Brown testified that in December 1989, she resided in an apartment at 7108 South Green with Kim Smith and Kim's baby. Defendant "got" the apartment for Kim and Cassandra, and initially paid rent. Defendant was a member of the BD street gang. In early January 1990 defendant came to the apartment and unloaded and then reloaded a gun he kept in the apartment closet. When Brown heard sirens and saw an ambulance on Green Street, defendant said "he just killed some pussy motherfuckers down the street." Defendant later stated the police would have to kill him before they took him back to jail, and instructed Brown to wear royal blue silk to his funeral. Brown moved out of the apartment in February 1990. She was beaten up by five men, four of whom she recognized as friends of defendant, on February 26, 1990.
Quintius Taylor testified that he has known defendant about 2 years. Taylor denied ever being in a gang, or that he knew the meaning of BD or Black Disciple. Taylor resided for the past year at 7005 South Carpenter, "not too far" from the shooting, and previously resided about one block from the shooting for approximately three years. Taylor denied seeing defendant on the day of the occurrence, or that he knew the decedent or Prince.
Taylor admitted testifying before the grand jury that he was with defendant the day of the occurrence; that defendant yelled "BD" to a group of people who responded "GD," after which defendant fired his gun about 5 times; and that he knew the initials BD designated a street gang. Taylor did not know whether black and blue were "gangster colors," but acknowledged that he wore those colors the previous day.
Chicago Police Officer James Hardaway testified that on February 26, 1990, during a conversation with Brown regarding an incident unrelated to the shooting, she provided him with information that prompted him to contact Area 3 violent crimes.
Chicago Police Officer John O'Mara testified he received this call from Officer Hardaway and interviewed Brown, who gave him the names of defendant and Quintius Taylor. On March 7, 1990, having obtained a warrant for defendant's arrest, O'Mara and his partner, Officer Phillip Collins, proceeded to a courthouse on Chicago Avenue, after learning defendant was there. When they arrived, defendant was already in custody of Officer Craig Cegielski. Cegielski was breathing heavily, his clothing was disheveled, and his glasses were broken. Defendant was transported to headquarters and viewed in a lineup by Prince.
Chicago Police Officer Phillip Collins testified he was Officer O'Mara's partner and was present at the lineup. When Prince saw defendant, he jumped up and said "[t]hat's him, that's the son of a bitch * * * I'll never forget his face."
*1222 Officer Craig Cegielski testified that on March 7, 1990, being aware that a warrant had been issued for defendant's arrest, he went to the courthouse on Chicago Avenue when he learned defendant was there. He saw defendant in the hallway, informed him of the warrant, and instructed him to put his hands on the wall. Defendant initially complied; but as Cegielski reached for his handcuffs, defendant turned and punched him in the face, rib cage, and knee, and attempted to kick him in the groin. A struggle ensued, but Cegielski eventually subdued defendant. Officers Collins and O'Mara subsequently arrived and assisted in transporting defendant to headquarters.
Defense witness Chicago Police Officer Martin Lee testified that, in the emergency room following the shooting, Prince described his assailants simply as two male blacks, one of whom wore an eskimo coat. Lee was uncertain whether the term "eskimo coat" was actually used by Prince or was his interpretation of Prince's description.
Greg Jackson, called by the defense, testified that he resided in an apartment on the northeast corner of 72nd and Green. About the time of the occurrence, Jackson saw a group of men conversing near his apartment while another two men approached on Green Street. One of the two men, wearing a "sky-blue jacket," raised his arm and began shooting. Jackson was unable to see the men's faces and was unable to identify defendant as the shooter.
The State inquired on cross-examination "what type of neighborhood" it was and Jackson responded "terrible," that there were drugs and gangs; he had heard the terms "BD" and "folks" before, and heard them "every day" walking down his street.
Defendant testified on his own behalf. On the date of the occurrence, he lived at 6859 South Throop Street with his girlfriend Edna Johnson. He is a member of the Black Disciple street gang. It is not unusual for people his age in his neighborhood to be involved with gangs. Defendant denied knowing decedent, denied shooting decedent or Prince, denied being in the area of 72nd and Green when the shooting occurred, but could not recall where he was at that time. Defendant admitted knowing Taylor, who is also a Black Disciple. Defendant requested that Brown move out of 7108 South Green because she was stealing items from the apartment.
Defendant testified to the circumstances of his arrest, stating that he was in a courthouse on March 7, 1990 when someone grabbed him by the back of his neck. The man was not uniformed and did not identify himself as a policeman. Defendant turned around and hit him. Defendant denied telling Brown that "the police aren't going to take me alive," or words to that effect.
After the jury found defendant guilty of murder and attempted murder, he was sentenced to 45 years' imprisonment for murder, and 25 years for attempted murder.
I.
Defendant contends that the State's repeated reference to the pervasiveness of gangs in the area of the shooting, and to defendant's gang membership, was extremely prejudicial and totally irrelevant in light of the scant evidence suggesting the offense was gang-related. Specifically, defendant disputes the extensive testimony by Green regarding gang classification, colors, symbols and funerals; Brown's testimony of defendant's membership in the Black Disciples; the cross-examination of Taylor concerning gang initials and colors; and defendant's cross-examination regarding initials, colors, slogans, symbols, tattoos and the like.
Although a deep and widespread public prejudice may exist against street gangs, gang-related evidence will not necessarily be excluded if it is otherwise relevant and admissible. (People v. Gonzalez (1991), 142 Ill.2d 481, 489, 154 Ill.Dec. 643, 568 N.E.2d 864; People v. Smith (1990), 141 Ill.2d 40, 58, 152 Ill.Dec. 218, 565 N.E.2d 900; People v. Hairston (1970), 46 Ill.2d 348, 372, 263 N.E.2d 840.) "An accused may not insulate the trier of fact *1223 from his gang membership where it is relevant to a determination of the case, simply because prejudice attaches to that revelation." (People v. Rivera (1986), 145 Ill. App.3d 609, 618, 99 Ill.Dec. 353, 495 N.E.2d 1088.) Evidence indicating defendant's gang affiliation or involvement in gang-related activity is admissible to show common purpose or design, or to provide a motive for an otherwise inexplicable act. (Smith, 141 Ill.2d at 58, 152 Ill.Dec. 218, 565 N.E.2d 900; People v. Hairston, 46 Ill.2d at 372, 263 N.E.2d 840.) Such admissibility is premised, however, upon proof that gang membership or activity is related to the crime charged. (Smith, 141 Ill.2d at 58, 152 Ill.Dec. 218, 565 N.E.2d 900.) It is the circuit court's function to weigh the probative value of such evidence against its prejudicial affect in determining whether it should be admitted; the court's decision on this issue will not be reversed on appeal absent an abuse of discretion. See Gonzalez, 142 Ill.2d at 489, 154 Ill.Dec. 643, 568 N.E.2d 864.
The State has no obligation to prove motive to sustain a murder conviction; nevertheless, any evidence tending to show that an accused had a motive for killing the deceased is probative because it makes more probable the fact that the accused did kill the deceased. (Smith, 141 Ill.2d at 56, 152 Ill.Dec. 218, 565 N.E.2d 900.) Such evidence is competent when it tends to establish the existence of the motive relied upon; when the State undertakes to prove facts purportedly demonstrating motive, the accused must be shown to have known of these facts. Smith, 141 Ill.2d at 56, 152 Ill.Dec. 218, 565 N.E.2d 900.
Initially, we note that defendant has waived any dispute regarding his cross-examination by failing to object thereto either at trial or in a post-trial motion. (People v. Enoch (1988), 122 Ill.2d 176, 199, 119 Ill.Dec. 265, 522 N.E.2d 1124.) Although an exception to the waiver rule will be applied when the evidence is "closely balanced," in order to correct grave errors involving fundamental fairness (People v. Thurman (1984), 104 Ill.2d 326, 329-30, 472 N.E.2d 414), this exception is inapplicable here, because the evidence in this case was overwhelming despite defendant's cross-examination testimony. Additionally, it is not likely that the evidence prejudiced defendant, in light of his cavalier admission on direct examination, that he was a member of the Black Disciples, which, having thousands of members, was "one of the largest" gangs around.
The assailant's identity was a critical issue in the case at bar, and the most telling evidence of this question was the fact that the shooter shouted "BD" before firing his weapon. The evidence regarding the Black Disciples, including the extent of their activity in the neighborhood, was therefore relevant not only to give meaning to the term BD, but to establish a motive for a seemingly unprovoked, inexplicable killing. Further, Brown's testimony that defendant, a Black Disciple, had bragged around the time of the occurrence that he had "just killed two pussy motherfuckers," served to link defendant to the gang as well as to the occurrence. For these reasons, the gang evidence was properly admitted.
Defendant also claims excessive reference was made to gangs during closing and rebuttal argument, and disputes the State's characterization of him as "the big bad bragging gangbanger" and "the big stuff gangbanger."
Again, defendant failed to raise these objections before the circuit court, and therefore waived them; in any event, his claims lack merit. Prosecutors are allowed great latitude in closing argument, and the circuit court's determination of the propriety of argument will be upheld absent a clear abuse of discretion. (People v. Weatherspoon (1978), 63 Ill.App.3d 315, 322, 20 Ill.Dec. 14, 379 N.E.2d 847.) Both parties have a right to comment on the evidence, and to draw any legitimate inferences therefrom. (Weatherspoon, 63 Ill. App.3d at 322, 20 Ill.Dec. 14, 379 N.E.2d 847.) If evidence regarding gangs and gang membership was properly admitted during the trial, it is subject to comment during closing argument. See Gonzalez, *1224 142 Ill.2d at 491, 154 Ill.Dec. 643, 568 N.E.2d 864.
The record shows that each of the disputed remarks were simply a review of properly admitted evidence. As stated above, gang evidence was relevant to establish the shooter's motive and identity, and there was nothing in closing argument that constituted an unjustified characterization of the evidence here. This case involved fourteen witnesses and much evidence; the State gave equal attention to all this evidence in its closing. The reference to gang colors, and to defendant as a "big bragging gang banger" derived from his alleged admission to Brown that he just killed two "motherfuckers," and from his subsequent comment that she wear "royal blue silk" to his funeral.
Assuming, arguendo, that the gang evidence was somewhat cumulative, it seems highly unlikely that this prejudiced defendant in light of his own admissions, both to Brown and on the witness stand. In response to his own attorney's questioning, defendant admitted his gang membership, and responded without objection to each of the State's questions regarding gang colors, slogans and whether he wore a gang tattoo; indeed, the record indicates he wore gang colors on each day of the trial. His argument, therefore, is without merit.
II.
Defendant next alleges error in the State's inquiry, over his objection, during his cross-examination as to whether a past gunshot wound, unrelated to the charges at bar, was due to his gang activity.
The State commenced its cross-examination of defendant with the following:
"Q. Anybody ever shoot at you, Raymond?
A. No.
Q. No?
A. I've been shot, [but] nobody ever shot at me.
* * * * * *
Q. You say you have been shot?
A. Yes, I have.
Q. Was that as part of your gang activity?
MR. GIOVANNINI [Defense counsel]: Objection, Judge.
THE COURT: Overruled.
THE WITNESS: Excuse me?
Q. [Assistant State's Attorney]: Was that as part of your gang activity that you were shot?
A. No, it wasn't.
Q. Had nothing to do with gangs?
A. No, it did not.
Q. Did you ever tell anybody that shooting had something to do with gangs?
A. No, I did not.
MR. GIOVANNINI: Objection.
THE COURT: Oh, I'll allow the answer to stand."
Defendant contends this questioning had no relevance to this cause, conveyed to the jury that defendant had a propensity toward violence, and only served to compound the error in allowing extensive testimony relating to gangs and gang membership. Further, defendant contests the State's failure to perfect this questioning by introducing rebuttal evidence to support it.
Evidence of other crimes or misconduct is admissible only if relevant to show criminal intent, common design, identity and motive, rather than a mere propensity on defendant's part to commit the offense charged. (People v. Kimbrough (1985), 138 Ill.App.3d 481, 93 Ill.Dec. 82, 485 N.E.2d 1292; People v. Henenberg (1976), 37 Ill.App.3d 464, 346 N.E.2d 11.) Even if relevant, such evidence is only admissible if its probative value clearly outweighs its prejudicial effect. (People v. Gordon (1981), 94 Ill.App.3d 764, 767, 50 Ill.Dec. 199, 419 N.E.2d 66.) A reference to prior criminality does not require reversal in all circumstances; unless there is a reasonable probability that improperly admitted evidence contributed to the conviction or influenced the jury's determination of guilt, reversal is unnecessary. (Schneble v. Florida (1972), 405 U.S. 427, 432, 92 S.Ct. 1056, 1059-60, 31 L.Ed.2d 340; Henenberg, 37 Ill.App.3d at 469, 346 N.E.2d 11; see also People v. Tranowski (1960), 20 *1225 Ill.2d 11, 17, 169 N.E.2d 347.) Application of the harmless error rule here requires an assessment of the probable impact of the [evidence] on the minds of the average jury. (Henenberg, 37 Ill.App.3d at 469, 346 N.E.2d 11.) Reversal is unwarranted where the evidence otherwise proves defendant's guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Tranowski, 20 Ill.2d at 17, 169 N.E.2d 347.
Initially, we note that the State did attempt to introduce evidence to prove-up defendant's impeachment here, albeit in a somewhat untimely manner. Based upon defendant's objection, however, the court disallowed the evidence finding that it was collateral. In any event, assuming arguendo that the questioning was improper, the error was harmless. As demonstrated above, the evidence of defendant's guilt here was overwhelming. Furthermore, defendant admitted he was a member of the Black Disciples. He testified regarding the gang symbol and colors, admitted he wore gang tattoos, and wore gang colors during trial. He bragged to Brown about his gang membership. In light of defendant's statements and conduct, the questions casting light on defendant's own victimization caused no further prejudice. See Henenberg, 37 Ill.App.3d 464, 346 N.E.2d 11.
III.
Prior to trial, defendant moved in limine to exclude for impeachment purposes any reference to the nature of his prior felony conviction, which was for possession of a controlled substance with intent to deliver. The circuit court denied the motion, finding that the crime was not sufficiently similar to the crime charged to prejudice defendant.
On appeal, defendant does not assign error to the denial of this motion; rather, he argues he was deprived of his right to a fair trial and due process when the State subsequently elicited testimony from Green and Jackson linking gangs with drug dealing in the neighborhood, and commented on this connection twice during closing argument.
In People v. Montgomery (1971), 47 Ill.2d 510, 268 N.E.2d 695, the supreme court held that evidence of a prior felony conviction is admissible to attack the credibility of a witness as long as the conviction or defendant's release from confinement occurred no more than ten years prior to the trial in which the felony evidence is proffered. (Montgomery, 47 Ill.2d at 516, 519, 268 N.E.2d 695; see also Ill.Rev.Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 155-1.) Introduction of such evidence is limited to the purpose of impeachment, and not to prove the defendant's propensity to commit the crime charged; when the conviction shows propensity more than lack of credibility, the evidence should not be allowed. (People v. Siebert (1979), 72 Ill.App.3d 895, 902, 28 Ill.Dec. 732, 390 N.E.2d 1322.) Defendant concedes that the ruling on the motion in limine was "perfectly logical" at the time it was made "in light of the fact that there should have been absolutely no mention of drugs, drug dealing, or their connection with local gangs" in this case. Once the State knew of the ruling, however, it succeeded in "bringing through the back door" an inference that because defendant was a convicted drug dealer and gang member, and the local gangs were the source of drug dealing and the cause of the offense at bar, the defendant was the "perfect suspect" for this crime.
Defendant principally relies on Green's description of the neighborhood as a "drug ridden war zone," "infested with gang activity." The record suggests, however, that the State did not purposefully elicit this testimony and, in any event, that the testimony probably did not harm defendant. Green gave the above responses when the State asked him generally to describe the neighborhood around the time of the offense; the inquiry made no allusion to drugs. Green's answer did not link defendant, or even the gangs, to this chronic drug dealing. It simply described the neighborhood. Moreover, following a defense objection, the State never again mentioned drugs during Green's testimony.
Defendant also complains of the cross-examination of defense witness Jackson, who described the neighborhood as "terrible," as having "drugs and everything *1226 which is in every neighborhood," as well as "gangs." Again, the questions merely asked for a description of the witness' neighborhood; they did not necessarily link drugs to gangs, or to defendant. It requires a strained inference to construe this testimony as demonstrating that defendant had a propensity to commit murder.
Defendant similarly takes issue with a statement in the State's closing argument, in relevant part as follows:
"* * * But he doesn't just throw away the gun he still has the gun (sic), he is a gangbanger, he's not going to throw away a good gun he's just going to get rid of the shells he used.
But, in any event, no one said this guy is smart. He is nothing like Kevin Green from that same neighborhood. I mean, does he sound real smart, you heard him on the stand, the type of character he is. I mean you know a little bit about him now, you know a little bit about his background. You know about his felony conviction for possession of controlled substance with intent to deliver."
Defendant's argument lacks merit. Soon after this statement, the State suggested that the felony evidence was to be considered on the issue of defendant's credibility. The comment itself refers to defendant's conviction in context of his character. Defendant also attacks a subsequent statement in which the State said drug trafficking in the neighborhood, along with gangs, was a "way of life."
Defendant does not allege prosecutorial misconduct, but merely implies that the resulting effect of the cumulative evidence prejudiced him. Neither this comment alone, nor the witness' testimony regarding the instance of drugs, portrayed defendant as having a tendency toward murder. Accordingly, this argument is unpersuasive.
IV.
Defendant next contends the court erred in denying his motion in limine to exclude reference to the fact that he was exiting a courtroom located above a police station at the time of his arrest, because he was present there for an offense totally unrelated to the case at bar. Defendant argues that this error "aggravates and compounds" the errors alleged above.
Evidence of other crimes or misconduct by an accused is not admissible if offered simply to show he is criminally predisposed. (Henenberg, 37 Ill.App.3d at 468, 346 N.E.2d 11.) In considering what constitutes "other crimes" evidence, direct proof of a criminal act is not necessary; it is sufficient that the evidence could lead the jury to infer prior criminality on defendant's part. (Henenberg, 37 Ill.App.3d at 468, 346 N.E.2d 11.) Illinois courts have denounced evidence which, without independent relevance, implies that defendant was well-known by police because of frequent presence both at headquarters and in court. People v. Blakely (1977), 50 Ill. App.3d 536, 542-44, 8 Ill.Dec. 610, 365 N.E.2d 996; see also People v. Cherry (1971), 130 Ill.App.2d 965, 267 N.E.2d 744.
In the case at bar, Brown testified that defendant told her on the night of the shooting that the police would have to kill him in order to take him back to prison. To corroborate this testimony, the State presented evidence of defendant's arrest, during which he punched and kicked Officer Cegielski. In denying defendant's motion to exclude reference to the location of the arrest, the court stated as follows:
"I will allow them to indicate the location of the arrest and to describe the circumstances * * *.
Again if you want I will certainly give the jury a limited instruction at that point that the location of the arrest is not to be considered in any way other than establishing where the arrest occurred. But I think under those circumstances I would allow (sic) because it is a circumstance to attempt to flee maybe on the street is different than attempting to plea (sic) in a courthouse although I will certainly indicate that the State cannot go into the fact as to why he was there."
According to the State, the court properly found relevance in the fact defendant resisted arrest in a courthouse, because this deterred defendant from having a gun as *1227 he had predicted in his conversation with Brown.
At trial, brief references to the courthouse or police station were made in the testimony of Officers O'Mara, Collins, and Cegielski in context of the circumstances leading to the arrest. The State made similar references in its closing and rebuttal arguments. Nevertheless, no mention was made of the reason defendant was at the courthouse; there was no suggestion that he was present in response to allegations against him. When the testimony was first commenced, the court interrupted to instruct the jury that the evidence was to be received for a limited purpose, and that no significance was to attach to the fact that it was a court facility. Defendant's mere presence in a courthouse on one occasion does not require an inference of criminal activity on his part. Defendant's argument here lacks merit.
V.
Defendant lastly argues that the court erred in overruling his objection to the State's "repeated questioning," during his cross-examination, regarding his failure to call a potentially exonerating witness.
Defendant testified during direct examination that he could not recall his whereabouts on January 3, 1990, at the time of the occurrence. On cross-examination, defendant admitted he told police the night of his arrest that he was at home with his girlfriend, Edna Johnson, at the time of the shooting, and stated that he "misspoke" at that time. The following colloquy then took place:
"Q. Edna Johnson?
A. Right.
Q. She was your girlfriend?
A. Right.
* * * * * *
Q. Is she here today?
A. I don't see her.
Q. The person that you say you were with at home January the 3rd, 1990, the night that you don't remember is not here. You don't see her, right?
MR. GIOVANNINI: Objection, Judge * * * [a]sked and answered.
THE COURT: Overruled, (sic) it has been asked and answered."
Defendant maintains this questioning was reversible error because he had not asserted an alibi defense, and "the obvious inference" raised by these questions was that, since she was not present in court, her testimony would have been unfavorable to him.
When a party specifically objects to certain evidence, all grounds not specified are waived. (People v. Eyler (1989), 133 Ill.2d 173, 139 Ill.Dec. 756, 549 N.E.2d 268.) As the foregoing reveals, defendant objected only on the ground that the question had been asked and answered. Therefore, he waived the issue on appeal. 134 Ill.2d R.615(a).
Were we to consider this issue, any error in the State's questioning was harmless in light of the overwhelming evidence against defendant, and in view of the fact that the State ceased all reference to the absence of the witness after defendant's objection.
For the foregoing reasons, the jury's conviction of defendant cannot be disturbed and the judgment of the circuit court must be affirmed.
Affirmed.
DiVITO and McCORMICK, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9740033 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:18.679928+00 ===

JUSTICE STEIGMANN delivered the opinion of the court: United Cities Gas Company (United Cities) appeals from the orders of the Illinois Commerce Commission (Commission) entered following a proceeding to reconcile revenues collected by United Cities in 1988 with the actual cost of gas purchased for that year. (Illinois Commerce Comm’n v. Kaskaskia Gas Co. (Oct. 4, 1991), _ Ill. Commerce Comm’n Rep. _ (ICC Nos. 89 — 0357, 89 — 0365 cons.) (United Cities Gas Co., respondent in ICC No. 89 — 0365) (hereinafter Kaskaskia).) Specifically, United Cities appeals from that portion of the Commission’s orders which denied recovery of $260,553 of gas costs allocated to United Cities’ Illinois customers and the Commission’s order to refund, with interest, that amount. We affirm. I. Facts In September 1989, the Commission commenced reconciliation proceedings in accordance with section 9 — 220 of the Public Utilities Act (Act) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch.1112/3, par. 9 — 220) and directed United Cities to present evidence showing its reconciliation of purchased gas adjustment (PGA) clause revenues with the actual cost of gas purchased for the 12 months ending December 31, 1988. A. The Administrative Process In Citizens Utilities Co. v. Illinois Commerce Comm’n (1988), 124 Ill. 2d 195, 200-01, 529 N.E.2d 510, 512-13, the supreme court explained the process by which revenues are received by public utilities as follows: “In establishing the rates that a public utility is to charge its customers, the Commission bases the determination on the company’s operating costs, rate base, and allowed rate of return. A public utility is entitled to recover in its rates certain operating costs. A public utility is also entitled to earn a return on its rate base, or the amount of its invested capital; the return is the product of the allowed rate of return and rate base. The sum of those amounts — operating costs and return on rate base — is known as the company’s revenue requirement. The components of the ratemaking determination may be expressed in ‘the classic ratemaking formula R (revenue requirement) = C (operating costs) + Ir (invested capital or rate base times rate of return on capital).’ (City of Charlottesville, Virginia v. Federal Energy Regulatory Comm’n (D.C. Cir. 1985), 774 F.2d 1205, 1217, citing T. Morgan, Economic Regulation of Business 219 (1976).) The same formula is used by the Commission in ratemaking determinations for Illinois. The revenue requirement represents the amount the company is permitted to recover from its customers in the rates it charges. Ratemaking is done in the context of a test year ***.”  Under section 9 — 220 of the Act, the Commission may authorize utilities in Illinois to recover all gas purchases through the application of the Commission’s PGA clause. That section reads as follows: “Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 9 — 201, the Commission may authorize the increase or decrease of rates and charges based upon changes in the cost of fuel used in the generation or production of electric power, changes in the cost of purchased power, or changes in the cost of purchased gas through the application of fuel adjustment clauses or purchased gas adjustment clauses. *** Cost shall be based upon uniformly applied accounting principles. Annually, the Commission shall initiate public hearings to determine whether the clauses reflect actual costs of fuel, gas or power purchased to determine whether such purchases were prudent, and to reconcile any amounts collected with the actual costs of fuel, power or gas prudently purchased. In each such proceeding, the burden of proof shall be upon the utility to establish the prudency of its cost of fuel, power or gas purchases and costs.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 1112/3, par. 9-220. Gas supply costs are recovered exclusively under the PGA clause, while all other costs of service are recovered in base rates. Base rates are set in periodic rate hearings or cases. (See Citizens Utilities, 124 Ill. 2d at 200-01, 529 N.E.2d at 512-13.) Under the PGA clause, a gas utility’s gas costs are first estimated and then incorporated into a formula that determines in a gas cost rate. This gas cost rate is then used in combination with the base rate to determine a customer’s monthly bill. Any fluctuations in the cost of fuel and power incurred by a utility are passed on to the consumer on a monthly basis through the PGA clause. See Business & Professional People for the Public Interest v. Illinois Commerce Comm’n (1988), 171 Ill. App. 3d 948, 955, 525 N.E.2d 1053,1056.  Section 9 — 220 of the Act requires a gas utility to reconcile the revenues received from customers through the gas cost rate with the gas supply costs it actually incurred for the prior year. Because the gas cost rate as determined by the PGA clause is based on estimates, and actual gas prices can change during the year, there can be either an over collection or an under collection of gas costs by the utility. After reconciliation, the utility collects any “underrecovery” for the year from the customers or refunds any “overrecovery” by adjustments to a factor (R4) of the PGA clause. Any adjustment takes effect the following year. Accordingly, the Commission conducts annual proceedings to reconcile costs and revenues. The proceedings at issue in this case involve the reconciliation of the gas supply costs and revenues of United Cities in 1988 for its Illinois customers. (This reconciliation procedure is known as a “true-up.”) B. Evidence Adduced at the Hearings United Cities is an investor-owned public utility regulated by the Commission. It provides natural gas service to five separate Illinois service areas, including Harrisburg, Illinois. United Cities provides natural gas service in seven other States and is subject to the regulatory jurisdiction of those States. Texas Eastern Transmission Corporation (Texas Eastern) is the pipeline supplier for United Cities’ Harrisburg service area, as well as for Unitéd Cities’ Franklin and Murfreesboro service areas in Tennessee. United Cities’ contracts with individual pipeline suppliers are approved by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC). United Cities purchased gas from Texas Eastern under a demand/commodity rate schedule that included a fixed demand charge, and a commodity charge based on volume usage. The demand charge is composed of two fees: a contract demand charge and a storage demand charge. In exchange for the contract demand charge, Texas Eastern guaranteed that it would have gas and pipeline capacity to deliver to United Cities’ customers. This contract demand charge was a fixed monthly amount paid by United Cities to Texas Eastern. The storage demand charge guaranteed that Texas Eastern would have field storage and tank capacity and actual gas up to the contracted daily maximum quantity required for United Cities’ customers. The demand charge paid by United Cities to Texas Eastern was determined by estimating the demand volume (the company used 19,785 decatherms per month as its estimate) multiplied by the demand rate. This amount was United Cities’ gas supply expense that United Cities paid and which was, in turn, passed on to United Cities’ customers. These costs were recovered from United Cities’ Tennessee and Illinois customers by allocating these costs portionate to each service area’s estimated peak day consumption. That is, using the estimated peak day demand for both its Illinois and Tennessee customers, United Cities calculated the proportion of gas used by Tennessee customers and the proportion of gas used by Illinois customers. In 1988, these proportions were 42% for Illinois and 58% for Tennesseé. Consequently, United Cities billed 42% of its Texas Eastern demand charge to Harrisburg, Illinois, customers in 1988. Using these allocation factors, United Cities recovered 42% of its demand charge costs from Illinois customers through the PGA clause. These allocation percentages were determined in 1984 as part of a study performed for and submitted in a rate case before the Tennessee Public Service Commission (Tennessee Commission). United Cities used these allocation percentages when it went before the Tennessee Commission in 1984, 1986, and 1989. These 1984 allocation factors were used for determining customer rates for Harrisburg from 1986 through 1988, and most of 1989, without any interim review by United Cities. United Cities did not review its allocation factors in 1988 because it had just gone before the Tennessee Commission in 1986 and had used the allocation percentages presented at that time to bill its Harrisburg customers. The allocation factors for Harrisburg were not changed until December 1989, at which time Harrisburg’s allocation factor was lowered from 42% to approximately 28%. At the hearing on the 1988 reconciliation, Bobby J. Cline, a rate analyst for United Cities, testified that reconciling the revenues billed under the PGA clause with the gas supply costs under the Texas Eastern contract for 1988 resulted in an “undercollection,” and a net amount due United Cities, of $171,170.88. Of that net amount, the underrecovery due from the Harrisburg service area was $72,090.57. That undercollection for 1988 was applied to the R4 factor of the PGA clause in 1989, and was billed and collected from Harrisburg customers from April 1, 1989, through March 31, 1990. (Despite the fact that revenues and costs for 1988 are at issue, the Commission did not initiate these proceedings until September 22, 1989, midway through the year in which the 1988 adjustment was being collected from customers.) Cline explained the methodology United Cities used to allocate its Texas Eastern demand charges to its Tennessee and Illinois customers (as discussed above). Cline, who was United Cities’ only witness in these proceedings, testified that the company did not review the demand cost allocation percentages used in the 1986 Tennessee rate case and applied to both Illinois and Tennessee customers in 1987 because “[ejvidently a person at the work did not see a need to revise the allocation factorfs].” Furthermore, United Cities did not redetermine these allocation percentages for Texas Eastern demand charges in 1988 because it did not file a 1988 rate case challenge in Tennessee. United Cities continued to allocate 42% of its Texas Eastern demand charges to its Harrisburg customers until December 1989, when it changed Harrisburg’s allocation of Texas Eastern demand charges to approximately 28%. Cline added that Tennessee does not have a cost recovery system. In Tennessee, the majority of gas costs are included in the base rates (unlike in Illinois, where gas costs are recovered exclusively under the PGA clause and all other costs of service are recovered in the base rate). Cline testified that, unlike in Illinois, there is no true-up or reconciliation of gas costs and revenues in Tennessee. Cline testified that differences between Illinois and Tennessee administrative procedures prevent United Cities from changing its Tennessee allocation. He explained as follows: “The Illinois and Tennessee Commissions have different methodologies for recovery of this cost. The gas cost recovery in Illinois is accomplished through the Uniform PGA Clause. The gas cost recovery in Tennessee during 1988 was accomplished through the inclusion of gas cost in both base rates and the PGA. For the period in question, in Tennessee, there is no true-up of gas costs, and there can be no change in demand allocation except in a future general rate case filing.” John A. Link, an accountant for the Commission’s public utilities division, testified on behalf of the Commission’s staff (Staff) and disputed United Cities’ reconciliation only with respect to its Harrisburg service area. Link testified that Harrisburg’s actual percentage of peak day demand in 1988 was 28.69% as compared to the 42% projected and allocated by United Cities in 1988. Consequently, Link recommended that the company refund $260,553 (the difference between actual Harrisburg demand and the allocation percentage), plus interest, to the customers in the Harrisburg service area. (This amount would be refunded to Harrisburg customers by applying it to the R4 factor of the PGA clause.) Link testified that this adjustment was necessary because United Cities used outdated allocation percentages in its internal apportionment of demand costs. Link emphasized that United Cities should have used more current data in allocating demand costs. According to Link, the allocation percentages are nothing more than an internal accounting methodology United Cities used to allocate its fixed Texas Eastern demand charge. He added that, as far as he knew, this was the first case addressing the allocation of demand charges. Finally, Link suggested that the actual costs incurred by United Cities for gas purchased in 1988 had already been collected from Tennessee customers through a combination of PGA revenue and base revenue because of increased unit sales which recovered demand charges along with other expenses. However, neither United Cities nor Staff had ever determined whether and to what extent United Cities “overrecovered” or “underrecovered” from its Tennessee customers the 58% of the demand charges allocated to Tennessee. C. The Commission Order The Commission issued its order on October 4, 1991, agreeing with Staffs adjustment because of the change in proportionate use between Harrisburg and Tennessee customers, and United Cities’ failure to review its allocation percentages. That order states, in part, the following: “The Commission, having considered the entire record herein and being fully advised in the premises, is of the opinion and finds that: * * * (4) the evidence indicates that Respondent [United Cities] acted reasonably and prudently in its purchases of natural gas during calendar year 1988; (5) for calendar year 1988, Respondent’s reconciliation evidence indicates that it experienced an undercollection of gas costs in the amount of $171,170.88; this amount was reflected in Respondent’s R4 factor filed in 1989 [and recovered from customers between April 1, 1989, and March 31, 1990]; Staff’s proposed adjustment, which reflects a decrease in gas cost in the Harrisburg service area due to a revision in the Texas Eastern demand charge allocation factor, is reasonable and should be approved; Staff’s proposed adjustment is necessary to prevent Respondent’s customers in the Harrisburg service area from being billed for PGA revenues in excess of the cost of gas prudently purchased; Respondent should refund its overcollection of Texas Eastern demand charges in the amount $260,553 plus interest to its customers in the Harrisburg service area through the R4 factor of the PGA in accordance with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code 525.60; (6) Respondent should review the Texas Eastern demand charge allocation factors at the time of each Tennessee rate case; Respondent should submit its study of such allocation factors to the Accounting Department of the [Illinois Commerce] Commission’s Public Utilities Division at the same time that it is submitted for review in Tennessee.” (Emphasis added.) Kaskaskia (Oct. 4, 1991), _ Ill. Commerce Comm’n Rep. at _ (ICC Nos. 89 — 0357, 89 — 0365 cons., slip op. at 17-18). The Commission filed an amendatory order on October 17, 1991, that did not substantively affect its previous findings. Illinois Commerce Comm’n v. Kaskaskia Gas Co. (Oct. 17, 1991), _ Ill. Commerce Comm’n Rep. __ (ICC Nos. 89 — 0357, 89 — 0365, cons.). II. Standard Of Review An appellate court’s jurisdiction of direct appeals from the Commission is governed by section 10 — 201 of the Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 1112/3, par. 10 — 201). The Commission’s findings of fact are to be considered prima facie true, and the burden of proof on all issues raised by an appeal is on the party appealing the Commission’s order. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 1112/3, par. 10 — 201(d).) Commission decisions are “entitled to great weight as being the judgment of a tribunal appointed by law and informed by experience.” (Village of Apple River v. Illinois Commerce Comm’n (1960), 18 Ill. 2d 518, 523, 165 N.E.2d 329, 332.) In considering the record before it, the Commission is not required to make a finding on each evidentiary claim. (United Cities Gas Co. v. Illinois Commerce Comm’n (1971), 48 Ill. 2d 36, 40, 268 N.E.2d 32, 34.) Its findings need only be specific enough to permit an intelligent review of its decision. (Illinois Central R.R. Co. v. Illinois Commerce Comm’n (1952), 411 Ill. 526, 528, 104 N.E.2d 796, 797.) Further, an order of the Commission will not be set aside unless it is against the manifest weight of the evidence. Rural Electric Convenience Cooperative Co. v. Illinois Commerce Comm’n (1979), 75 Ill. 2d 142, 148, 387 N.E.2d 670, 673. III. Analysis  United Cities raises 10 issues on appeal, all of which (it argues) require a reversal of the Commission orders. However, section 10 — 201 grants an appellate court the power to remand, reverse, or affirm, in whole or in part, an order of the Commission in only four circumstances: if (1) the Commission’s order is not supported by substantial evidence on the record; (2) the Commission acted outside its authority, or lacked jurisdiction to enter the order; (3) the Commission’s rule, regulation, order or decision violates the State or Federal constitution or laws; or (4) the order, or the proceedings from which it ensued, violated the State or Federal constitution or laws. See Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 1112/3, par. 10 — 201(e)(iv); see also Illinois Bell Telephone Co. v. Illinois Commerce Comm’n (1973), 55 Ill. 2d 461, 469, 303 N.E.2d 364, 369. A. Recovery of Demand Costs United Cities argues that the Commission orders must be reversed because they prevent it from recovering all of its costs. United Cities argues that the demand charge is akin to an insurance premium to be paid by Illinois consumers, explaining as follows: “As is the case [with] coverage under insurance policies, the contract demand and the storage demand do not change over the life of the pipeline contract. Therefore, as Mr. Cline testified, contract demand services and storage demand services are established by means of long-term contracts from five to twenty-five years in length. The contracts, therefore, necessarily are future oriented. Any historical data used to develop the contract demand and storage demand must be adjusted, at the time of contract, for weather normalization, customer growth and conservation expected for the life of the contract. Otherwise, a ga tility may not secure enough gas supply to meet customers’ requirements.” Cline’s surrebuttal testimony referred to in this argument was as follows: “By way of analogy, if a person paid medical insurance premiums for a year but did not become ill, no one would argue that the person had been overcharged. The person benefitted from the security of the insurance. Likewise, the Harrisburg customers in 1988 benefitted from the security that a certain level (42%) of contract demand — [i.e.], capacity — was reserved for them. That the projected peak day demand (amount of insurance) may not have been fully called upon does not detract from the fact that the security was there for them. No one has questioned that the capacity reserved for them was not reasonably forecasted.” (Emphasis added.) Therefore, United Cities concludes that the Commission “erroneously disregarded the fact that Illinois ratepayers received the full benefit of 42% of the Texas Eastern contract and storage demand in 1988. Having received the benefit, the Illinois ratepayers properly were charged 42% of the cost of that demand.” (Emphasis in original.) 1. Case Law In United Cities Gas Co. v. Illinois Commerce Comm’n (1992), 225 Ill. App. 3d 771, 587 N.E.2d 581, this court ruled that a consulting and noncompetition agreement conferred a benefit to United Cities’ ratepayers. Accordingly, we reversed the decision of the Commission and decided that the costs associated with that agreement were “a legitimately incurred cost of service which it [(United Cities)] is entitled to recover in its rates.” (United Cities, 225 Ill. App. 3d at 778, 587 N.E.2d at 585.) However, in allowing United Cities to pass on this expense, United Cities was only able to bill Illinois consumers for that amount “attributable to Illinois” consumers. (See United Cities, 225 Ill. App. 3d at 773, 587 N.E.2d at 582.) Therefore, that United Cities decision is not persuasive here where the issue is not the legitimacy of the cost, but rather the reconciliation of costs and revenues. An earlier decision of the Commission, referred to by these parties as the “Barnsley order” (United Cities Gas Co. (Nov. 19, 1990), _ Ill. Commerce Comm’n Rep. _ (ICC Nos. 90 — 0008, 90 — 0152 cons.)), involved United Cities’ acquisition of the Barnsley gas storage field in Kentucky in 1989. United Cities proposed that the cost of acquiring the Barnsley field should be allocated 24.06% to Illinois customers and 75.94% to Tennessee customers. United Cities’ manager of accounting for its regulatory affairs department testified that these allocations were based on estimated peak day usage of the Barnsley field by Illinois and Tennessee customers. (United Cities Gas Co. (Nov. 19, 1990), _ Ill. Commerce Comm’n Rep. at _ (ICC Nos. 90 — 0008, 90 — 0152 cons., slip op. at 11).) Recognizing that the statute does not specifically indicate how demand costs should be allocated (a problem that has now come to fruition in the present case), the Commission accepted the compromise position of basing allocation on the cost of capital, and not on estimated peak day demand. The Commission further held that these allocation factors were to be reviewed at the time of the Company’s next Tennessee rate case. See United Cities Gas Co. (Nov. 19, 1990), _ Ill. Commerce Comm’n Rep. at _ (ICC Nos. 90 — 0008, 90 — 0152 cons., slip op. at 17). In Illinois Commerce Comm’n v. Iowa-Illinois Gas & Electric Co. (1989), 105 Pub. Util. Rep. 4th 353, the Commission reviewed the collection and allocation of nuclear power plant decommissioning costs which were recovered through base rates, not the PGA clause. These costs were allocated by using a three-year average of the noncoincident peak demand in the two States Iowa-Illinois served. The Commission decided that these costs should be recovered through a rider mechanism, and not through the PGA clause or a rate case proceeding. The Commission also accepted Iowa-Ulinois’ allocation method, but the decision included that the allocations would be subject to a true-up for over- or underrecovery. See Iowa-Illinois, 105 Pub. Util. Rep. 4th at 364. 2. Statutory Guidance Section 36 of the former Act (see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 1112/3, par. 36), the predecessor to section 9 — 220, was interpreted in Business & Professional People (171 Ill. App. 3d at 957-58, 525 N.E.2d at 1058), wherein the appellate court said the following: “The language of section 36 demonstrates a grant of broad discretion to the Commission by the legislature. The Commission was authorized to investigate the feasibility of adopting uniform fuel (and gas) adjustment clauses, discretion to implement such clauses, and authority to promulgate rules and regulations therefor. The only precise legislative directives were that the Commission hold an annual reconciliation proceeding and that costs imposed through the UFAC [(now the PGA)] be actual, prudent, and based upon uniformly applied accounting principles. * * * Thus, under both the Public Utilities Act and the Public Utilities Regulatory Policies Act of 1978, the Commission had authority to inquire into production management in determining whether fuel purchases were ‘prudently’ made. To conclude otherwise would result in an extremely narrow interpretation of a broad grant of statutory power and would also defy common sense. *** If, in a fuel reconciliation proceeding, the Commission could not examine the reasons that necessitated a fuel purchase, the prudence standard would have no effect on ensuring a just and reasonable rate as required by sections 36 and 41 of the Act; a utility could generate electricity in any manner it chose, efficiently or inefficiently, and the Commission would be limited to determining merely whether the utility paid a prudent price for the fuel. We do not believe that this was the intent of either our State legislature or Congress in enacting the fuel adjustment clauses legislation.” (Emphasis added.) 3. Conclusion: Demand Costs  We believe that the refund ordered against United Cities is consistent with the responsibilities delegated to the Commission under section 9 — 220. United Cities may continue to allocate its demand charges by the same allocation methodology, but these cost recoveries are subject to a true-up under section 9 — 220. To rule otherwise would reject the applicability of the statute to these costs. “[Wjhere administration of a broad statutory standard has been delegated to an agency’s discretion, courts shall rely upon the agency’s interpretation where there is reasonable debate as to the statute’s meaning.” Business & Professional People, 171 Ill. App. 3d at 957, 525 N.E.2d at 1057. We disagree with United Cities’ characterization of the demand cost allocations as insurance for which the company contracted with Texas Eastern in order to meet its obligations to Illinois ratepayers. While Illinois ratepayers are required to pay for the security that a certain level of contract demand will be reserved for them, that does not mean that these costs are not subject to a true-up. Indeed, the very purpose of section 9 — 220 is to reconcile legitimate costs, such as payments United Cities made to Texas Eastern, with revenues received to cover those costs. Oddly, despite the Commission’s specific finding that United Cities “acted reasonably and prudently in its purchases of natural gas during calendar year 1988” (see Kaskaskia (Oct. 4, 1991), _ Ill. Commerce Comm’n Rep. at _ (ICC Nos. 89 — 0357, 89 — 0365 cons., slip op. at 18)), the Attorney General argues the contrary to this court. Despite this argument, we need not address the prudence of United Cities’ purchases because (1) they are not relevant to a cost recovery true-up proceeding, and (2) the Commission’s finding that United Cities’ purchases were prudent is not against the manifest weight of the evidence. B. Res Judicata  United Cities argues that the “Barnsley order” establishes precedent that the Commission must follow. Although the Commission agreed with United Cities’ proposed cost allocations in that docket, it also held that these allocation factors were to be recalculated at the terms of the next Tennessee rate case. (See United Cities Gas Co. (Nov. 19, 1990), _ Ill. Commerce Comm’n Rep. at _ (ICC Nos. 90 — 0008, 90 — 0152 cons., slip op. at 17).) The Iowa-Illinois case cited by United Cities is similarly unpersuasive in that it maintained the allocation method, but did not address the accuracy of the allocation percentages or the ability of the Commission to reconcile revenues in a true-up proceeding. Decisions of the Commission are not res judicata. “The concept of public regulation includes of necessity the philosophy that the commission shall have power to deal freely with each situation as it comes before it, regardless of how it may have dealt with a similar or even the same situation in a previous proceeding.” (Mississippi River Fuel Corp. v. Illinois Commerce Comm’n (1953), 1 Ill. 2d 509, 513, 116 N.E.2d 394, 396-97.) Thus, like other administrative agencies, the Commission is free to change its standards so long as such changes are not arbitrary and capricious. (City of Chicago v. Illinois Commerce Comm’n (1985), 133 Ill. App. 3d 435, 440-41, 478 N.E.2d 1369, 1373-74.) In fact, as we view this case (and as the Commission argued it), the Commission is not changing its methodology at all. Instead, the Commission is merely exercising its rights and obligations under section 9 — 220. Citing to both Mississippi River Fuel and Iowa-Illinois in its conclusion, the Commission order stated the following regarding the “Barnsley order”: “The Commission’s adoption of an allocation method in the Barnsley Order is based on the facts and circumstances in that docket. *** * * * The evidence in this proceeding does not establish that there has been any double recovery of pipeline demand charges through the use of Respondent’s allocation factors. Furthermore, the evidence does not indicate that Respondent recovered more than 58% of the Texas Eastern contract and storage demand charges from its Tennessee service area in 1988. *** *** There is no evidence, however, that the increased sales resulted in overcollection of the demand charges in Tennessee. *** We distinguish the lack of any evidence of overcollection by Respondent of its total Texas Eastern demand charges from the overcollection by Respondent of Illinois ratepayers’ share of those demand charges. *** This evidence, which was not relevant in the Barnsley case, represents a change in circumstances that justifies departure from the allocation methodology adopted in that Order.” (Emphasis added.) (Kaskaskia (Oct. 4, 1991), _ Ill. Commerce Comm’n Rep. at _ (ICC Nos. 89 — 0357, 89 — 0365 cons., slip op. at 14-16).) Despite the last part of this order, we do not agree that there has been a change in allocation methodologies; rather, it is merely a true-up of expenses. United Cities argued that if it had recalculated its peak day demand estimates in 1988, the allocation factors would still have been the same. We do not see this as a matter of contention. As stated before, the allocation methodology adopted by United Cities in this docket and the Barnsley docket may still be used; however, as in the Barnsley docket, the costs recovered from Illinois customers are still subject to reconciliation under section 9 — 220. C. Multijurisdictional Nature of United Cities  United Cities argues that because it must deal with two different jurisdictional methods of cost reconciliation, the Commission’s order will deprive it of its statutory right to recover costs. Specifically, United Cities alleges that the Commission’s order illegally “traps” the demand costs incurred by it, in violation of the Federal “filed rate” doctrine. The United States Supreme Court defined this doctrine as follows: “[T]he ‘filed rate’ doctrine *** holds that interstate power rates filed with FERC or fixed by FERC must be given binding effect by state utility commissions determining intrastate rates. * * * *** The filed rate doctrine ensures that sellers of wholesale power governed by FERC can recover the costs incurred by their payment of just and reasonable FERC-set rates. When FERC sets a rate between a seller of power and a wholesaler-as-buyer, a State may not exercise its undoubted jurisdiction over retail sales to prevent the wholesaler-as-seller from recovering the costs of paying the FERC-approved rate. [Citation.] Such a ‘trapping’ of costs is prohibited.” Nantahala Power & Light Co. v. Thornburg (1986), 476 U.S. 953, 962-70, 90 L. Ed. 2d 943, 951-56, 106 S. Ct. 2349, 2354-59.  There are two problems with this argument. First, United Cities has failed to carry its burden of proving that underrecovery of costs cannot be obtained in prospective rate increases to its Tennessee customers. (See Stro-Wold Farms v. Finnell (1991), 211 Ill. App. 3d 113, 118, 569 N.E.2d 1156, 1159 (“[Plaintiffs suggested that law other than Illinois law might apply, but did not state what that other law was”); see also O’Brien v. Rautenbush (1956), 10 Ill. 2d 167, 169, 139 N.E.2d 222, 224 (“When a litigant relies upon the laws of another State as the basis for his cláim, he must plead and prove such laws, for the broad rule prevails that, in the absence of a showing to the contrary, such laws will be presumed to be the same as the laws of the forum”).) While Bobby Cline testified that the Tennessee demand charge allocations cannot be changed until the next rate case, no evidence reveals whether Tennessee would allow recovery of these costs after our decision in this case. Second, Illinois is not violating the filed rate doctrine. Section 9 — 220 and this decision do not deny United Cities recovery of FERC-set rates. (Indeed, one could argue that Tennessee is violating the filed rate doctrine for not allowing for adjustments in costs and revenues.) However Tennessee decides to govern utilities is of no moment for Illinois courts or the Commission when applying Illinois statutes. D. Interest Due on Refund  United Cities argues that the Commission’s order to refund the $260,553 plus interest is erroneous. The Commission order on this point reads as follows: “United Cities Gas Company shall refund the amount of $260,553 plus interest to its customers in the Harrisburg service area through the R4 factor of its PGA in accordance with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code 525.60.” (Kaskaskia (Oct. 4, 1991), _ Ill. Commerce Comm’n Rep. at _ (ICC Nos. 89— 0357, 89 — 0365 cons., slip op. at 18).) United Cities’ argument on appeal suggests a misreading of the Commission’s order, interpreting the order as requiring a refund plus interest, as if there were interest on a judgment. We agree with the Attorney General, and read the order as directing the refund to be applied through the PGA clause as set forth in section 525.60 of title 83 of the Illinois Administrative Code (see 83 Ill. Adm. Code §525.60 (1991)) with interest to be applied consistent with the formula contained in that section. IV. Conclusion For the reasons set forth above, the decision of the Commission is affirmed. Affirmed. KNECHT, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9740034 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:18.685023+00 ===

JUSTICE LUND, dissenting upon denial of rehearing: This dissent follows United Cities’ petition for rehearing. My apologies to the esteemed members of this panel who continue to participate in the majority opinion. I do not intend to repeat the history of the proceedings as set forth so well in the majority opinion. I do not apologize to counsel for my belated dissent. As appellate judges, we are compelled to consider various subject matter in both criminal and civil cases. Utility law is a very specialized field, and we find ourselves relying upon the experts in that field who practice before us. It appears to me that, in rate regulation cases, the art of simplicity is nonexistent. With this preface, I warn the readers of this dissent that I wrote this as simply as I could, in hopes that even I can understand what this case is about. As a result, some of the terminology is mine. We are concerned with allocation of “demand costs” between Illinois and Tennessee gas customers of United Cities. “Demand costs,” for purpose of this dissent, are costs incurred by United Cities over and above the normal unit of gas cost purchased by utilities. In the present case, the “demand costs” were divided between Illinois customers and Tennessee customers, based upon an earlier pro rata use history. The pro rata expense allocation of demand costs was used in prior Illinois and Tennessee Commissions rate determinations. The present dispute arises as a result of a 1991 Commission determination that the Harrisburg, Illinois, “demand cost” allocations for 1988 and subsequent years must be based upon up-to-date actual use by Illinois and Tennessee customers. The current actual use evidence indicates that, since the original allocation compilation, Tennessee users’ percentage of total use has increased. Problems arise because both Tennessee and Illinois utility regulators, separately, determine the rate United Cities can charge, and Illinois cannot require Tennessee to allow retroactive recovery for United Cities. The Commission has provided for a retroactive allocation of “demand cost,” providing for a smaller percentage of the “demand cost” expense be paid by the Illinois customers. Without concurrent action by the Tennessee regulatory commission reflecting retroactive charges (surcharges) to Tennessee customers, United Cities will not recover all of the “demand cost” expense. There is a strong temptation to say United Cities was in the best position to know of any unfair allocation costs and should stand the loss. United Cities was doing the customer billing for actual use and, in today’s computer-oriented world, the use by Tennessee customers and" Harrisburg, Illinois, customers should be easily ascertainable. Perhaps the monkey should be on United Cities’ back for not petitioning earlier for allocation adjustments before both regulatory commissions. This position sounds simple but, for reasons I will not discuss here, it is not. After further consideration of this case, I conclude the Commission indulged in retroactive rate adjustment. The 1988 United Cities rates included an allocation of 42% of the “demand cost” to the Harrisburg customers. The rate billed was consistent with orders of the Commission. The Commission is now ordering United Cities to refund, based upon an allocation of 28% of the “demand costs” to Illinois users. Once established, a rate is effective unless stayed pending review, and refunds are not allowed because the rate is too high, nor are surcharges allowed because the rate is too low. This rule introduces stability. Citizens Utilities Co. v. Illinois Commerce Comm’n (1988), 124 Ill. 2d 195, 207, 529 N.E.2d 510, 515-16. If the rule set forth in Citizens has been adopted in Tennessee, odds are that the loss to United Cities resulting from the Commission order will not be offset by surcharges in Tennessee. As a result of my conclusion of retroactive rate making, I now dissent from the majority opinion.

=== CASE 9740035 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:23.274339+00 ===

JUSTICE NICKELS delivered the opinion of the court: On December 28, 1988, plaintiff, the office of the Lake County State’s Attorney, filed a complaint for an order of prohibition and declaratory judgment in the circuit court, seeking a determination that defendant, the Illinois Human Rights Commission (Commission), lacked jurisdiction to adjudicate a charge of discrimination originally brought by defendant, Marian McElroy (claimant), against plaintiff in December 1985. McElroy was suspended from her position as an assistant State’s Attorney in Lake County in December 1985 and was discharged on January 3,1986. In October 1988, the Department of Human Rights filed a complaint against plaintiff, alleging that plaintiff discriminated against claimant because of her race and sex and that she was suspended and discharged in contravention of the Illinois Human Rights Act (Act) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 68, par. 1 — 101 et seq.). Among other things, the Department’s complaint alleged that claimant was not given the same number of trial opportunities as similarly situated white male employees; that the State’s Attorney informed her that she “was not fitting in with the boys because she did not go out drinking with the boys and that she was not bubbly like another black female attorney”; that she was not promoted to the position of principal assistant State’s Attorney because of her lack of experience; that the State’s Attorney claimed she was suspended for ignoring the policies and objectives of the office in negotiating criminal cases and for being insubordinate to a supervisor; and that the State’s Attorney’s reasons for not promoting her, suspending and discharging her were pretextual. In support of plaintiff’s assertion that the Commission was without jurisdiction to adjudicate this claim, plaintiff argued that assistant State’s Attorneys are not “employees” and that the office of the State’s Attorney is not an “employer” as defined in the Act. See Ill. Rev.'Stat. 1985, ch. 68, pars. 2-101(A), (B), 1-103(L). On defendants’ motion, the circuit court initially dismissed plaintiff’s complaint, finding that the Commission had exclusive jurisdiction of the cause and that plaintiff must exhaust its administrative remedies before the Commission before seeking further review. Plaintiff then appealed to this court, which concluded that the exhaustion of remedies doctrine did not preclude a challenge in the circuit court to determine the jurisdiction of the Commission and that the circuit court had subject-matter jurisdiction to consider plaintiff’s complaint for an order of prohibition and declaratory judgment. Accordingly, the judgment was reversed and the cause remanded for further proceedings. Office of the Lake County State’s Attorney v. Illinois Human Rights Comm’n (1990), 200 Ill. App. 3d 151. Upon remand, plaintiff filed a motion for summary judgment, again arguing that the Commission had no jurisdiction to adjudicate the claim because plaintiff is not an employer and claimant is not an employee as defined by the Act. Plaintiff prayed for an order of prohibition to prevent defendants from proceeding on this claim. The Commission maintained its position that it had jurisdiction to adjudicate the claim, but otherwise declined to address further, on the merits, the issue whether plaintiff and claimant met the statutory definitions of “employer” and “employee,” respectively. On September 9, 1991, the circuit court granted plaintiff’s motion for summary judgment, finding that, for purposes of proceeding on the discrimination charge, claimant was not a covered employee and plaintiff was not an employer as defined by the Act. Therefore, the Commission had no authority to adjudicate the civil rights complaint. As a result of its findings, the court issued a writ of prohibition preventing defendants from proceeding on the discrimination charges. Claimant appeals from this order, arguing that the circuit court erred in granting summary judgment for plaintiff by ruling as a matter of law that (1) she was not an “employee” as defined by the Act; and (2) the plaintiff was not an “employer” as defined by the Act. This court has treated the question as jurisdictional in Lake County State’s Attorney (200 Ill. App. 3d at 156), and the precise question of the employer-employee relationship now presented is one of first impression in this court as it has never been answered (see Joliet Mass Transit District v. Illinois Fair Employment Practices Comm’n (1978), 66 Ill. App. 3d 296).  One of the stated purposes of the Illinois Human Rights Act is to “secure for all individuals within Illinois the freedom from discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, physical or mental handicap, or unfavorable discharge from military service in connection with employment, real estate transactions, access to financial credit and the availability of public accommodations; and to prevent sexual harassment in employment” and in higher education. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 68, par. 1— 102(A).) The Act is intended to implement State constitutional guarantees against discrimination and to assure “that all State departments, boards, commissions and instrumentalities rigorously take affirmative action to provide equality of opportunity and eliminate the effects of past discrimination in the internal affairs of State government and in the relations with the public.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 68, pars. 1 — 102(C), (D).  The present dispute centers on whether plaintiff is an “employer” and claimant is an “employee” covered by the Act. The pertinent provisions of the Act defining covered employers state: “(B) Employer. (1) ‘Employer’ includes: (a) Any person employing 15 or more employees within Illinois during 20 or more calendar weeks within the calendar year of or preceding the alleged violation; *** (c) The State and any political subdivision, municipal corporation or other governmental unit or agency, without regard to the number of employees.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 68, par. 2— 101(B).) A “person” is defined as “one or more individuals, partnerships, associations or organizations, *** the State of Illinois and its instrumentalities, political subdivisions, units of local government, legal representatives, [and] trustees in bankruptcy or receivers.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 68, par. 1 — 103(L).  The pertinent provisions of section 2 — 101(A) of the Act define “employee” in the following terms: “(A) Employee. (1) ‘Employee’ includes: (a) Any individual performing services for remuneration within this State for an employer; (b) An apprentice; * * * (2) ‘Employee’ does not include: (a) Domestic servants in private homes; (b) Individuals employed by persons who are not ‘employers’ as defined by this Act; (c) Elected public officials or the members of their immediate personal staffs; (d) Principal administrative officers of the State or of any political subdivision, municipal corporation or other governmental unit or agency.” (Emphasis added.) Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 68, par. 2 — 101(A). We address first the question whether the office of the State’s Attorney is an “employer” under the Act. Plaintiff argues that it is neither a “person” defined by the Act, nor a legal representative, or a unit of (local) government. Further, plaintiff argues, in a non sequitur and without explanation, that, because the State’s Attorney is a constitutional officer of the State, he is not an employer pursuant to section 2 — 101(B) of the Act. Plaintiff appears to avoid arguing specifically whether it is the legal equivalent of the State itself. The thrust of plaintiff’s argument appears to be that it is not specifically enumerated as an employer by the Act (and somehow falls through the cracks). In general support of its position, plaintiff cites Morton v. Hartigan (1986), 145 Ill. App. 3d 417, an irrelevant case dealing with the common-law immunity defense applicable in tort law; there, the plaintiff mistakenly sued the Attorney General and three other officials in their individual capacities rather than suing the employer, the real party in interest — the State of Illinois. The common-law immunities of public officials described in Morton have nothing to do with the statutory cause of action under consideration here, where, pursuant to the State Constitution (see Dilley v. Americana Healthcare Corp. (1984), 129 Ill. App. 3d 537; see also Ritzheimer v. Insurance Counselors, Inc. (1988), 173 Ill. App. 3d 953, 959-60), the legislature has specifically authorized a cause of action against the sovereign State, its political subdivisions, municipal corporations, or governmental units and agencies. The claimant here has sued the office of the State’s Attorney as an entity of the State. The question before us does not concern the absolute immunity doctrine discussed in Morton, and we need not discuss it further. Indeed, the State’s Attorney specifically argued at the hearing on his motion for summary judgment that he was not interposing the defense of absolute immunity. For purposes of suit, if the office of the State’s Attorney is not the equivalent of the State or one of its political subdivisions, governmental units, instrumentalities or agencies, what is its identity? We will endeavor to answer this question. While we agree with the State that the State’s Attorney is an elected constitutional officer (People v. Thompson (1980), 88 Ill. App. 3d 375, 377; Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, §19), this certainly does not end the inquiry. The Attorney General, another constitutional officer, was, at common law, the law officer of the English crown and its chief representative in the courts. (See People ex rel. Kunstman v. Nagano (1945), 389 Ill. 231, 248-49.) Of course, under our form of government, all the prerogatives which pertained to the crown of England under the common law are now vested in the People. (People ex rel. Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois v. Barrett (1943), 382 Ill. 321, 346.) Historically, the State’s Attorney has had rights and duties analogous to or largely coincident with the Attorney General in representing the county or the People in matters affected with a public interest. (Nagano, 389 Ill. at 249.) While the State’s Attorney has previously been characterized as a county officer (Ashton v. County of Cook (1943), 384 Ill. 287, 297), our supreme court now treats the State’s Attorney as a member of the executive branch and as a State, rather than a county, officer. Ingemunson v. Hedges (1990), 133 Ill. 2d 364, 369. The office of the State’s Attorney, then, is part of the executive branch of State government, and the powers exercised by that office are executive powers. (Thompson, 88 Ill. App. 3d at 377.) Among other things, it is the duty of the State’s Attorney to commence and prosecute all actions, suits, indictments and prosecutions, civil and criminal, in the circuit court for his county, in which the people of the State or county may be concerned; to commence and prosecute all actions and proceedings brought by any county officer in his official capacity; to defend all actions and proceedings brought against his county, or against any county or State officer, in his official capacity, within his county; and “[t]o assist the Attorney General whenever it maybe necessary.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 14, pars. 5(1), (3), (4), (8).  The real question before us is whether, for purposes of this discrimination suit, the office of the State’s Attorney is indeed the legal equivalent of the State itself. We readily conclude that it is. First, the definition of “person” in the Act shows that the legislature meant to include within the ambit of this legislation the State and its instrumentalities, political subdivisions, units of local government and legal representatives. In the context of the stated purposes of the Act, this broad definition evinces a legislative intent to include as a “person” the State or any governmental entity acting on its behalf. Second, the more specific provision defining “employer” also broadly includes the State and any political subdivision, municipal corporation or other governmental unit or agency without regard to the number of employees — in other words, all State governmental entities. A broader definition hardly seems possible. Obviously, when a State official is sued in his or her official capacity, the official is a real, natural person. However, “a suit against a state official in his or her official capacity is not a suit against the official but rather is a suit against the official’s office. [Citation.] As such, it is no different from a suit against the State itself.” Will v. Michigan Department of State Police (1989), 491 U.S. 58, 71, 105 L. Ed. 2d 45, 58, 109 S. Ct. 2304, 2311 (holding that, because the eleventh amendment bars suits against the State unless the State has waived immunity, neither the State nor its officials acting in their official capacities are “persons” under the Federal civil rights statute (42 U.S.C.A. §1983 (West 1981)); see Houston v. Cook County (N.D. Ill. 1990), 758 F. Supp. 1225, 1226. In adopting the Act and its forerunner (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 48, par. 851 et seq.), the legislature intended to give its remedial provisions the widest constitutional application that could be achieved. (Fair Employment Practices Comm’n v. Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke’s Medical Center (1976), 41 Ill. App. 3d 712, 716.) We see no reason why the office of the State’s Attorney should be allowed to circumvent the legislative intent to cover State governmental employees by the use of a mere pleading device: that the State’s Attorney is not specifically enumerated in the Act. In view of our discussion, we find that the office of the State’s Attorney exercises certain executive powers of the sovereign as established by our State Constitution and statutes, and we hold that, for all practical purposes, in a suit of the kind before us, the office of the State’s Attorney is the legal equivalent of the State itself and is an “employer” as defined in the Act. To conclude otherwise would effectively negate the stated purposes of the Act whenever a public employer-defendant claims that its particular State office or official has not been specifically enumerated in the Act.  The next question is whether claimant is a section 2 — 101(B) “employee” entitled to protection from discrimination under the Act. We hold that she is such an employee. Plaintiff argues that claimant, an assistant State’s Attorney, is exempted from the protection of the Act because the Act does not include elected public officials or “members of their immediate personal staffs” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 68, par. 2 — 101(A)(2)(c)). Plaintiff relies on the loosely analogous Federal statutory provisions of title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C.A. §2000e(f) (West 1981)) and earlier cases interpreting the Federal title VII exemption in relation to District Attorneys in particular States (see, e.g., Teneyuca v. Bexar County (5th Cir. 1985), 767 F.2d 148; Ramirez v. San Mateo County District Attorney’s Office (9th Cir. 1981), 639 F.2d 509; Wall v. Coleman (S.D. Ga. 1975), 393 F. Supp. 826). Plaintiff also relies on Liras v. Petka (7th Cir. 1983), 711 F.2d 798. Although Liras described certain attributes of the office of State’s Attorney in the context of a dismissal of an assistant State’s Attorney for his conduct or because of alleged, pretextual political reasons, it did not decide whether an assistant State’s Attorney was an exempt employee under the Federal “personal staff” exemption, and the case is not applicable here. While we have considered the cases cited by plaintiff, we point out that, in construing our own State statutes, we are not bound by Federal court decisions other than, in appropriate cases, those of the United States Supreme Court; although such decisions are entitled to respect, they have only advisory effect upon the decisions of this court. City of Chicago v. Loitz (1973), 11 Ill. App. 3d 42, affd (1975), 61 Ill. 2d 92. Under the exempt employee provisions of title VII of the Federal Civil Rights Act, an employee “shall not include any person elected to public office in any State or political subdivision of any State by the qualified voters thereof, or any person chosen by such officer to be on such officer’s personal staff, or an appointee on the policy making level or an immediate adviser with respect to the exercise of the constitutional or legal powers of the office. The exemption set forth in the preceding sentence shall not include employees subject to the civil service laws of a State government, governmental agency or political subdivision.” (Emphasis added.) (42 U.S.C.A. §2000e(f) (West 1981).) We observe in passing that previously exempt members of the personal staffs of State and local elected officials now have a remedy under Federal law for acts of discrimination committed against them. (See 2 U.S.C.A. §1220 (West Supp. 1992)(effective Nov. 21, 1991).) As can readily be seen, the language of our State statute (“immediate personal staffs”) differs from that of the Federal provision, a difference we shall explore later. The legislative history of title VII and its extension to public officials demonstrates that Congress intended the exemptions from “employee” status to be narrowly construed. See, e.g., Anderson v. City of Albuquerque (10th Cir. 1982), 690 F.2d 796, 800 (where staff director of human rights board dealt primarily -with other appointees, had minimal interaction with mayor who did not directly appoint director and director did not formulate policy or advise mayor, there was no intimate and sensitive association or immediate personal relationship required by the exemption); Bostick v. Rappleyea (N.D.N.Y. 1985), 629 F. Supp. 1328, 1332 (legislative budget analyst sued State assemblymen under title VII; her contacts were mostly with other staff members; although she engaged in drafting, research and providing input in formulating policy and she was supervised by an administrator, she did not occupy sensitive and intimate position or appear to be “frontline adviser” exempt from employee status), following Gearhart v. Oregon (D. Or. 1976), 410 F. Supp. 597, 600, 601 (former deputy legislative counsel to State whose duties included drafting, research and other assistance to members of legislature was more than “just a law clerk” but was not a “first line adviser” so as to establish “immediate” relationship which Congress deemed necessary to invoke very limited exemption from strong policy of ending impermissible discrimination in public employment). When title VII was amended in 1972 to apply to State and local governments and to provide for the personal staff exemption, Senator Ervin first proposed that the definition of employee exclude only officials who were elected and their legal and constitutional advisors, that is, any elected person or “ ‘any person chosen by such person to advise him in respect to the exercise of the constitutional or legal powers of his office.’ ” (Equal Employment Opportunity Comm’n v. State of Vermont (2d Cir. 1990), 904 F.2d 794, 798-99, quoting 118 Cong. Rec. 4483 (1972).) Senator Williams suggested that the exception be expanded to include the elected official’s personal staff, saying the purpose of the amendment was “ ‘to exempt from the coverage those who are chosen by the Governor or the mayor or the county supervisor, whatever the elected official is, and who are in a close personal relationship and an immediate relationship with him. Those who are his first line of advisers. Is that basically the purpose of the Senator’s amendment?’ ” (Emphasis in original.) (Vermont, 904 F.2d at 799, quoting 118 Cong. Rec. 4492-93 (1972).) Senator Ervin agreed that it was. Senator Javits urged that further study be given to the scope of the “adviser” phrase, observing that, when he was Attorney General of New York he had some 500 employees, some 200 of whom were lawyers and that he would have to have “overnight” to check into what would be the status of that large group of employees. He concluded by saying, “ T realize that the Senator is seeking to confine [the exemption] to the higher officials in a policymaking or policy advising capacity.’ ” (Vermont, 904 F.2d at 799, quoting 118 Cong. Rec. at 4097.) Later Senator Javits added that, by immediate advisors, he was thinking “ ‘more in terms of a cabinet, of a Governor who would call his commissioners a cabinet, or he may have a cabinet composed of three or four executive officials, or five or six, who would do the main and important things.’ ” (Vermont, 904 F.2d at 799, quoting 118 Cong. Rec. at 4493.) The section that eventually became section 2000e(f) was reported out of conference with the following explanation: “ ‘It is the intention of the conferees to exempt elected officials and members of their personal staffs, and persons appointed by such elected officials as advisors or to policymaking positions at the highest levels of the departments or agencies of State or local governments, such as cabinet officers, and persons with comparable responsibilities at the local level.’ ” (Emphasis in original.) Vermont, 904 F.2d at 800, quoting Joint Explanatory Statement of Managers at the Conference on H.R. 1746, 92d Cong., 2d Sess. 1972, reprinted in 1972 U.S. Code Cong. & Admin. News 2180. An example of a case involving a narrow construction of the exemption in a judicial setting is Goodwin v. Circuit Court (8th Cir. 1984), 729 F.2d 541. There, the court narrowly construed the exemption in holding that a former judicial hearing officer in a State circuit court was entitled to sue under title VII for sex discrimination when she was transferred by the presiding judge of the juvenile court from the position of hearing officer to the position of staff attorney. The court noted that the “immediate adviser” exemption was intended to apply to those employees who are in a close personal relationship to the official. The court explained that the complainant and the judge had very few personal contacts, the position did not entail the sort of personal relationship contemplated in the exemption, and the hearing officer job itself required the complainant to assert her independent judgment free from any direction from others. When she offered advice to the judge, it was of a formal, detached nature, from one judicial officer to another. Goodwin, 729 F.2d at 548. Probably the earliest reported case construing the Federal exemption in relation to an assistant District Attorney is Wall v. Coleman (S.D. Ga. 1975), 393 F. Supp. 826, a case cited by plaintiff. There, the court relied heavily on dictionary definitions of the phrase “personal staff” in examining the duties of the assistant District Attorney under Georgia law and applying the exemption to this position without citation to precedent. The court concluded that the assistant District Attorney was a member of the District Attorney’s personal staff and was exempt from the protection of the Federal Act. The court noted that the circuit court in which the District Attorney served had a county population of 187,816 and had a superior court served by three judges. By law, the District Attorney could appoint a minimum of three assistant District Attorneys and could delegate to each of them all or so much of the general authority, duties and responsibilities of his office as he wished to delegate. The meager facts seem to suggest that the office was a relatively small one by present standards, and there is no indication that there was a hierarchy within the office. In Ramirez v. San Mateo County District Attorney’s Office (9th Cir. 1981), 639 F.2d 509, a Mexican-American who was not hired as a deputy District Attorney for the county was found to have no claim under the personal staff exemption. The court relied on Wall and concluded that the position of the deputy District Attorney was that of a member of the “personal staff” of an elected official because deputy District Attorneys served at the pleasure of their superior, the District Attorney, who had plenary powers of appointment and removal; the deputies performed to the District Attorney’s personal satisfaction and because of the highly sensitive and confidential nature of the work which deputies performed in representing the District Attorney, there was a level of personal accountability to the elected official which exempted them from the protection of title VII. Again, detailed facts surrounding the actual working conditions in the office are meager, and it must be presumed that there was direct interaction between the deputy and his superior. In Teneyuca v. Bexar County (5th Cir. 1985), 767 F.2d 148, the court was called upon to determine whether summary judgment for the defendants was proper where it was alleged that the assistant criminal District Attorney was not an “employee” entitled to the protection of title VII. Plaintiff claimed she had been denied a position as assistant county criminal District Attorney on the basis of her sex. The District Attorney, an elected official, presented some evidence in support of his motion for summary judgment that he had wide discretion in hiring and firing such employees, but the plaintiff failed to present any evidence in response to the motion as required under the Federal rules of civil procedure. The court pointed out that the highly factual nature of the inquiry necessary to a determination of the “personal staff” exemption did not lend itself well to a disposition by summary judgment, but the court ultimately concluded that plaintiff failed to demonstrate the presence of a material factual issue so as to defeat defendants’ motion for summary judgment. The Teneyuca court set forth a nonexhaustive list of factors that could be used in determining whether a complainant falls within the “personal staff” exemption. These factors include: (1) whether the elected official has plenary powers of appointment and removal; (2) whether the person in the position at issue is personally accountable to only that elected official; (3) whether the person in the position at issue represents the elected official in the eyes of the public; (4) whether the elected official exercises a considerable amount of control over the position; (5) the level of the position within the organization’s chain of command; and (6) the actual intimacy of the working relationship between the elected official and the person filling the position. (Teneyuca, 767 F.2d at 151.) Unfortunately, the court did not engage in any substantial application of those factors to the very limited facts stated in the case. Thus, Teneyuca has little persuasive value on the limited facts presented, but it does provide insight into the factors that may be considered. We find that Wall, Ramirez, and Teneyuca are limited by their facts, and, additionally, these cases seem to have construed the exemption more broadly than we believe it should be in the case of our own State statute, which uses the term “immediate personal staff.” These Federal cases do not seem to give much weight to the hierarchical structure of the office of the State’s Attorney now common today and noted, but not expressly applied, in Teneyuca. They seem to rely too much on the wide discretion of the official to hire and fire subordinates. This discretion of a top-ranking official is found in most at-will employment situations and, without more, is not determinative of whether the relationship between the official and the subordinate is close or intimate. Our research of the legislative history of the Illinois statute sheds no light on the intent of the term that was used. The language “immediate personal staff” first appears in the 1963 version (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 48, par. 852(c)) of the amended Fair Employment Practices Act which was enacted in 1961 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1961, ch. 48, par. 851 et seq.). Because of the lack of available history from that time period, we are uncertain of the provenance of the term; it seems to antedate the language used in the Federal provision. In any case, the use of the term “immediate personal staff” rather than “personal staff” appears to create an even narrower exemption than might be found in the Federal provision. Additionally, exceptions or provisos in a statute, being designed to qualify or limit what is affirmed in the body of an act, should be strictly construed; it is a fundamental rule of statutory construction that each word, clause, and sentence in a statute must, if possible, be given some meaning. (Mid-South Chemical Corp. v. Carpentier (1958), 14 Ill. 2d 514, 519; see Thoman v. Village of Northbrook (1986), 148 Ill. App. 3d 356, 358.) The use of the word “immediate” is a restrictive qualifier, and the word implies a legislative intent to exempt only those employees who interact directly with the elected official without some intervening layer of supervisors. In its plain and ordinary sense, “immediate” means “acting or being without the intervention of another object, cause, or agency” or, when applied to persons, “having no individual intervening: being next in line or relation.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 1129 (1986). Our research has also disclosed a more recent and more closely analogous case interpreting the Federal provision using the narrower construction we now adopt in construing our own statute. In Rabouin v. Colorado Department of Law (D. Colo. 1990), 754 F. Supp. 171, a former assistant Attorney General brought suit against the Colorado Department of Law and the Attorney General of Colorado and others. She alleged that she was passed over for a promotion, was denied opportunities for advancement, and was subject to a racially hostile environment. She was not subject to the civil service laws or personnel rules of the State of Colorado. In the context of a summary judgment proceeding, the court construed the Federal “personal staff” exemption of title YII narrowly, stating that it is intended to exempt those who are chosen by an elected official and who are in a close, personal, and immediate relationship with the elected official. It applies only to those individuals who are in highly intimate and sensitive positions of responsibility on the staff of the elected official. Rabouin, 754 F. Supp. at 174, citing Owens v. Rush (10th Cir. 1981), 654 F.2d 1370, 1375. The Rabouin court considered that plaintiff was the most junior level of attorney in the office; she was several supervisory levels below the Attorney General and had no policy-making authority. Far from being a “first line advisor” to the Attorney General, plaintiff was but one of some 140 staff attorneys in the office, and she had minimal contact with the Attorney General. The court concluded that plaintiff made a sufficient showing of a factual dispute regarding the immediate and personal relationship required under the narrow exemption. 754 F. Supp. at 174. In the case at bar, the parties agree that claimant was not a supervisor, and plaintiff concedes this in his brief. At the hearing on the initial motion to dismiss held on August 21, 1989, the State’s Attorney stated that claimant was fired because of the manner in which she negotiated a case contrary to the wishes of her supervisors. He stated that “assistant state’s attorneys [sic] do not set policy in the office.” At the hearing on the motion for summary judgment, the State’s Attorney agreed that claimant was not a supervisor and agreed to the statement made in her answer to the complaint which stated: “Defendant was never a supervisor, unit or division chief or a deputy chief in any of the Divisions of the State’s Attorney’s Office.” The statement also averred that claimant “did not participate in policy formation or the implementation of the broad goals of the office,” nor did she “make decisions about the operation of the office.” The State’s Attorney argued that all assistant State’s Attorneys were members of the immediate personal staff whether they were supervisors or not and that they affected policy regardless of their position within the office. Plaintiff equates policy-making as implicit in the duties of an assistant State’s Attorney as an agent of his office in the ordinary handling of cases. The State’s Attorney agreed at the hearing that there was no question of fact, but that there was a question of law and that the motion could be decided by the court on the basis of the claimant’s statement quoted above. Our narrow construction of the Illinois statute and the persuasiveness of Rabouin lead us to conclude that, on the agreed facts, claimant was not a supervisor and was therefore not a “first line advisor.” The pleadings, arguments, and undisputed facts in the record show that there were intervening supervisors between her and the State’s Attorney. She was not in a close, personal and immediate relationship with the State’s Attorney and did not operate at the highest level of policy-making staff in the office. As a matter of law, we hold that claimant was not exempt from the protection of the Act since she was not a member of the “immediate personal staff” of the State’s Attorney. She should therefore be allowed to pursue her claim before the Commission. For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court is reversed, and the cause is remanded for further proceedings before the Illinois Human Rights Commission. Reversed and remanded. BOWMAN, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9740044 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:29.094878+00 ===

JUSTICE STOUDER, dissenting: I disagree with the result reached by the majority of the court. I believe the decision of the Commission is against the manifest weight of the evidence. I have no quarrel with the rules as recited by my colleagues. It is the application of those rules to the facts of this case which disturbs me. So far as I am concerned, the claimant was performing a normal activity at the time of the incident, and he conducted this activity for many years as a matter of course. The additional activity of sneezing, which the medical evidence indicates triggered the incident, is likewise a normal activity. These activities are no different from those of the general public. Even viewing the medical evidence most favorable to the claimant, the most that can be said is that the incident occurred while the claimant was working. Since the activities were normal, the incident could have occurred at some other time and place without being related to the claimant’s employment activities. There seems to be a tendency to hold a compensable injury occurs if it happens on the employer’s premises. This is not the rule. I do not believe the evidence shows the activities of the claimant exposed him to risks different from those of the general public, and I would reverse the Commission’s result.

=== CASE 2221969 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:24.977986+00 ===

601 N.E.2d 316 (1992)
236 Ill. App.3d 1080
175 Ill.Dec. 919
CITY NATIONAL BANK OF MURPHYSBORO, ILLINOIS, a National Banking Corporation, Plaintiff-Appellee and Cross-Appellant,
v.
Willard Dean REIMAN, Defendant-Appellant and Cross-Appellee (Frank Stokes, Patricia Stokes, Hoke Investments Co., John F. Edwards, State of Illinois, William McChesney d/b/a Chez Pizza, Nelson Ferry d/b/a Creative Images, Billie Pritchett d/b/a Hunker's Lounge, Unknown Owners, and Nonrecord Claimants, Defendants).
No. 5-90-0812.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Fifth District.
October 19, 1992.
*317 Donald E. Elmore, Wolff & Jones, Murphysboro, for defendant-appellant.
Edward J. Heller, Reed, Heller & Mansfield, Murphysboro, for plaintiff-appellee.
Presiding Justice GOLDENHERSH delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant, Willard Dean Reiman, appeals from a judgment of the circuit court of Jackson County in the amount of $55,862.36 for plaintiff, City National Bank of Murphysboro, entered after a jury verdict for plaintiff in that amount. In this cause defendant raises the following contentions: (1) that the trial court improperly granted summary judgment on defendant's first affirmative defense, impairment of collateral, (2) that the trial court improperly granted *318 summary judgment on defendant's third affirmative defense, demand for suit by surety pursuant to section 1 of "An Act to revise the law in relation to sureties" (the Act) (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 132, par. 1), (3) that the trial court improperly sustained objections to tendered testimony, exhibits, and offers of proof, (4) that the jury instructions contained errors and read as a whole failed to sufficiently instruct the jury and/or misled the jury, (5) that the submission of special interrogatories to the jury was error, (6) that the instruction of the jury prior to final argument was error, (7) that the trial court improperly responded to questions from the jury during deliberations, and (8) that the trial court's acceptance of special interrogatories which were not signed by all jurors was error. We affirm and remand.
This case arises from a loan guaranty agreement dated December 31, 1985, made between defendant, a voluntary guarantor, and plaintiff. The guaranty was to cover a loan made to Frank and Patricia Stokes and their company, Hoke Investment Company, for $133,000. A debtor-creditor relationship had existed for several years prior to 1985 between plaintiff and the Stokes. In December 1985, the Stokes had an outstanding indebtedness to plaintiff for $55,-000.
The Stokes operated three businesses, namely Hunker's Lounge, Frank's Cleaning Service, and a concession business. In December 1985, the property in which Hunker's Lounge was housed was owned by Hoke Investment Company. This property consisted of a two-story building with Hunker's Lounge and three other business fronts on the ground floor and at least three furnished apartments on the second floor. The Stokes had possession of the entire premises in December 1985 under a purchase agreement entered into in 1981 in which the Stokes agreed to purchase the stock of Hoke Investment Company for $127,000. In 1985, the Stokes made arrangements with plaintiff to borrow an additional $78,000 to complete the purchase of Hoke and to consolidate their debts. The loan was evidenced by a $133,000 promissory note from the Stokes to the bank. As security for the note, plaintiff took a security interest in, among other things, all equipment, fixtures, and furniture owned by Frank and Patricia Stokes and used in the operation of Hunker's Lounge, the cleaning business, the concession business, and the apartment rentals. A detailed list of the items was compiled and attached to the agreement. Plaintiff also took mortgages on the building housing Hunker's Lounge (hereinafter business property) and a residence and farm owned by the Stokes in a rural area near Murphysboro (hereinafter rural property). Plaintiff requested that the Stokes obtain a guarantor for the debt, which is how defendant became involved.
Defendant was a friend of the Stokes and at their request went to plaintiff on or about November 25,1985. Defendant gave personal financial information to the president of the bank, Robert Streuter. On December 31, 1985, defendant received a call from Frank Stokes requesting that he go to the bank and sign papers. According to defendant, he signed the guaranty with the understanding that all property owned by the Stokes was to stand as security for the debt. The security interest was granted by a written agreement, which included an extensive list of furniture, fixtures, equipment, and inventory owned by the Stokes. As part of the loan transaction, Streuter appraised the business property at $165,000 and the rural property at $25,000. Streuter believed that the value of the equipment in Hunker's Lounge was around $17,000.
In December 1987, Streuter contacted defendant concerning problems the Stokes were having meeting their loan obligations. At Streuter's request, defendant went to the bank where he was informed by Streuter that the Stokes were in default under their loan obligation. Streuter requested that defendant cure the default. Defendant then told Streuter that if there were problems with the Stokes' payments, the bank should proceed against the Stokes on their security.
After this meeting, defendant sent plaintiff a revocation of guaranty giving notice *319 that his guaranty, signed on December 31, 1985, was revoked effective upon receipt of notice. The revocation was dated and delivered on December 22,1987. Accompanying the revocation was a request by defendant for "specific information regarding any acceptance of the loan guaranty agreement by City National Bank and any indebtedness or obligation of Hoke Investment Company * * * and Frank Stokes and Patricia Stokes * * * which City National Bank considers guaranted [sic] by the above referenced loan guaranty agreement." Defendant specifically asked for the following information: (1) the date of making of any obligations and indebtedness, (2) photocopies of all documentation relating to any indebtedness and obligations, (3) a statement with respect to the balance due as of December 22, 1987, under any indebtedness and obligation, and (4) a statement with respect to any default as to any indebtedness and obligations, and if there was a default, the nature and extent of such default. On December 24, 1987, three payments were applied on the loan account, presumably by the Stokes. Plaintiff made no reply to defendant's notice of revocation or defendant's request for information.
The next correspondence between the parties occurred on July 21, 1988, when plaintiff sent a letter to defendant by certified mail requesting and demanding that he pay past-due amounts due under the note for the months of May, June and July 1988. On July 26, 1988, defendant sent a response to plaintiff reminding plaintiff of his December 1987 revocation and request for specific information regarding any acceptance of the loan guaranty agreement by plaintiff and any obligations of Hoke Investment Company or the Stokes. Defendant further stated in his letter that he took plaintiff's failure to respond as an acknowledgement that no extension of credit had been made under the loan guaranty agreement which he had revoked on December 22, 1987. Defendant also demanded that plaintiff sue the Stokes immediately, claiming rights under section 1 of the Act (Ill.Rev.Stat.1987, ch. 132, par. 1).
Plaintiff received a request from the Stokes to purchase the release of the rural property from the mortgage. Plaintiff apparently had received an offer on the rural property. There was also a prospective purchaser for the business property. Neither sale was made. With no sale on either the mortgaged business property or the rural property, plaintiff filed a complaint for foreclosure on both pieces of property on November 10, 1988. On December 31, 1988, plaintiff received $20,000 from Pauline Leedy, who purchased the rural property. The rural property was subsequently released from the lien created by plaintiff's mortgage on the property. Plaintiff credited $5,835 of the proceeds of the sale to principal under their indebtedness, $5,506.08 to interest under the indebtedness through December 3, 1988, $6,941.37 to back taxes, and $1,717.55 for outstanding legal fees.
On January 10, 1989, judgment was rendered on the foreclosure and on the note against the Stokes in the amount of $118,-006.60. Plaintiff, as mortgagee, was placed in possession of the mortgaged business property, subject to the pending foreclosure action. Patricia Stokes testified that she turned over the keys to the business property in January 1989. Streuter was not sure when plaintiff received possession of personal property. He further stated that the bank had no policy for making regular inspections or inventory of the personal property covered by the security agreement and that no inventories had been made during the course of the loan. Mrs. Stokes opined that the personal property that was left was not worth carrying off. She testified that some of the property listed on the security agreements did not exist, some was worn out, and some was sold at flea markets. She further testified that there was a fire in 1987 at the rural property. At the time of the fire there was insurance coverage on the residence, but plaintiff was not listed as an additional insured as required by the mortgage. $12,896.13 was paid by the insurance carrier to the Stokes. The proceeds were not used to rebuild the residence. According to Mrs. *320 Stokes, $6,000 of the insurance proceeds was used to make three regular payments on the note. Plaintiff received no other money from the insurance proceeds.
On June 16,1989, plaintiff purchased the business property at the foreclosure sale for $80,000. Using the following formula, a deficiency of $42,862.13 remained:
"a) Pursuant to Judgment January 10, 1989                         $118,006.60
b) Interest on Judgment to date of sale 157 days at $29.10/day      4,568.70
c) Additional Expenses and Attorney Fees                            1,124.30
d) Less Funds Applied From Rents                                    - 837.47
TOTAL DUE DATE OF SALE                                        $122,862.13
Amount of Bid                                                   80,000.00
Amount of Deficiency                                            42,862.13 "
The personal property was sold at a public sale at which time plaintiff purchased the personal property for $1,350.
Defendant was originally joined as a defendant under counts I and II but was later dismissed as an improperly joined party in both counts. Defendant answered count III of the complaint and raised the following three affirmative defenses: (1) that subsequent to the execution of the loan agreement, plaintiff unjustifiably impaired the collateral held for the underlying indebtedness of Hoke Investment Company, Frank Stokes and Patricia Stokes, (2) that defendant delivered a revocation of his guaranty to plaintiff on December 22, 1987, as well as a request for plaintiff to provide defendant with additional information, and that plaintiff in failing to provide the requested information acknowledged that there had been no acceptance of the guaranty or extension of credit thereunder, and (3) that plaintiff did not within a reasonable time and with due diligence commence suit and proceed with collection against Hoke Investment Company, Frank Stokes and Patricia Stokes, and defendant Willard Dean Reiman, and, therefore, defendant has been discharged from any obligation that may have existed under the abovereferenced loan guaranty agreement pursuant to section 1 of the Act (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1987, ch. 132, par. 1).
Plaintiff filed a motion attacking defendant's answer and requested that defendant's three affirmative defenses be stricken, and defendant filed a response to the motion attacking his answer. The matter was heard by the trial court which entered an order denying plaintiff's motion attacking defendant's answer. Plaintiff subsequently filed its response to defendant's affirmative defenses. On September 21, 1990, plaintiff filed a motion for summary judgment, to which defendant filed a response. The trial court heard arguments on plaintiff's motion for summary judgment. The judge who heard these arguments was not the same judge who had heard plaintiff's motion attacking defendant's answer and request that defendant's three affirmative defenses be stricken. On October 2, 1990, the trial court entered an order denying plaintiff's request for summary judgment with regard to the issue of acceptance and reliance, and granting summary judgment in favor of plaintiff on the issues of impairment of collateral and due diligence, defendant's first and third affirmative defenses. The case then proceeded to trial on the remaining issues. Ultimately, the jury rendered a verdict for plaintiff in the amount of $55,862.36. Defendant filed a post-trial motion seeking a new trial, which was denied by the trial court. Defendant appeals this denial.
I
The first issue we are asked to consider is whether the trial court's entry of summary judgment on the affirmative defense of impairment of collateral was error. Defendant argues that impairment of collateral as alleged in his first affirmative defense is still a viable defense under the laws of our State, and that this difference was not obliterated by adoption of the Uniform *321 Commercial Code (the Code) (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1989, ch. 26, par. 1-101 et seq.). Defendant further argues that it was error not to allow him to present his defense of impairment of collateral which would have included evidence of plaintiff failing to monitor collateral, failing to insist on insurance coverages which were required, and failing to service the loan in a reasonable manner for a bank by regularly checking on collateral. Finally, defendant argues that the case relied upon by the trial court in making its decision to grant plaintiff's motion for summary judgment on the impairment of collateral issue, Ishak v. Elgin National Bank (1977), 48 Ill.App.3d 614, 6 Ill.Dec. 630, 363 N.E.2d 159, is distinguishable. Plaintiff responds that the trial court's order granting summary judgment was proper because the loan guaranty agreement is clear and unambiguous, and in it defendant waived diligence in collection and gave consent without notice to making settlements and compromises and taking and releasing collateral. Plaintiff further argues that the right of a guarantor to require a bank to use due diligence to collect from the principal may be waived and, if waived, the contract is conclusive on this issue.
Illinois courts have repeatedly emphasized that the purpose of summary judgment is not to try an issue of fact, but to determine whether a triable question of fact exists. (Hadley v. Witt Unit School District 66 (1984), 123 Ill.App.3d 19, 23, 78 Ill.Dec. 758, 762-63, 462 N.E.2d 877, 881-82.) Summary judgment is a drastic remedy. It must be awarded with caution to avoid preempting a litigant's right to trial by jury or his right to fully present the factual basis of a case where a material fact is in dispute. (Holbrook v. Peric (1984), 129 Ill.App.3d 996, 998, 85 Ill.Dec. 163, 166, 473 N.E.2d 531, 534.) In passing on a summary judgment motion, the trial court is therefore required to construe the pleadings, affidavits, depositions and admissions on file strictly against the moving party and liberally in favor of the opponent. (Wysocki v. Bedrosian (1984), 124 Ill.App.3d 158, 164, 79 Ill.Dec. 564, 569, 463 N.E.2d 1339, 1344.) Only if these materials establish that the movant's entitlement to summary judgment is clear and free from doubt may such a motion be granted. Fremont Indemnity Co. v. Special Earth Equipment Corp. (1985), 131 Ill.App.3d 108, 112, 86 Ill.Dec. 12, 16, 474 N.E.2d 926, 930.
In order to determine whether summary judgment was proper, we must consider the guaranty signed by defendant. Defendant signed a guaranty which was on a preprinted form with a few of the items typed in to allow for differences between such agreements. The guaranty signed by defendant provided in pertinent part:
"LOAN GUARANTY AGREEMENT
FOR VALUE RECEIVED and to enable Hoke Investment Company, formerly Cochran-Webster, Inc. A Delaware Corporation, having authority to transact business in the State of Illinois and Frank Stokes and Patricia Stokes of Murphysboro, Illinois, hereinafter designated as `Debtor,' to obtain credit, from time to time, of City National Bank of Murphysboro, we hereby request said Bank to extend to said Debtor such credit as said Bank may deem proper, and we hereby jointly and severally guarantee the full and prompt payment to said Bank at maturity, and at all times thereafter, and also at the time hereinafter provided, of any and all indebtedness, liabilities and obligations of every nature and kind of said Debtor to said Bank, and every balance and part thereof, whether now owing or due, or which may hereafter, from time to time, be owing or due, and howsoever heretofore or hereafter created or arising or evidenced, to the extent of One Hundred Thirty Three Thousand and .00/100 ($133,000.00) Dollars, and we jointly and severally also agree to pay in addition thereto, all costs, expenses and reasonable attorney's fees at any time paid or incurred in endeavoring to collect said indebtedness, liabilities and obligations, and in and about enforcing this instrument.
All diligence in collection, and all presentment for payment, demand, protest, *322 notice of protest and notice of non-payment, dishonor and default, and of the acceptance of this guaranty, and of any and all extensions of Credit hereunder, are hereby expressly waived.
The granting of credit from time to time by said Bank to said Debtor in excess of the amount of this guaranty and without notice to the undersigned, is hereby authorized and shall in no way affect or impair this guaranty. We hereby subordinate any sums now or hereafter due us from said Debtor to the payment of any sums now or hereafter due you.
Authority and consent are hereby expressly given said Bank from time to time, and without any notice to the undersigned, to give and make such extensions, renewals, indulgences, settlements and compromises as it may deem proper with respect to any of the indebtedness, liabilities and obligations covered by this guaranty, including the taking or releasing of security and surrendering of documents."
The meaning of a guaranty is a matter of law to be determined by the trial court. Guaranty agreements must be strictly construed in favor of the guarantor. (King Korn Stamp Co. v. Guaranty Bank & Trust Co. (1969), 114 Ill.App.2d 428, 437, 252 N.E.2d 734, 739.) This is especially true where, as here, the guaranty is on a printed form supplied by the party to whom the guaranty runs, and where, as here, the guarantor is receiving no compensation. (Kesner v. Faroll (1932), 268 Ill.App. 531, 540.) However, where the language of a contract is clear and unambiguous, extrinsic facts are not to be considered. Katz v. Diabetes Ass'n of Greater Chicago (1975), 31 Ill.App.3d 240, 243, 333 N.E.2d 293, 295.
In the instant case, plaintiff contends that the language in the contract specifically waived the defense of impairment of collateral and diligence in collection. Defendant argues he revoked his guaranty as of December 22, 1987, and at the same time made a specific request for information regarding the acceptance of the loan guaranty agreement by plaintiff and any indebtedness plaintiff considered guaranteed by defendant's guaranty, which request plaintiff ignored.
A continuing guaranty may be revoked at any time provided due notice is given. (Panknin v. Inspiration Placers, Inc. (1940), 307 Ill.App. 241, 29 N.E.2d 864 (abstract of opinion); Mamerow v. National Lead Co. (1903), 206 Ill. 626, 69 N.E. 504.) When a guaranty is revoked, a guarantor's liability extends only to transactions occurring pursuant to the guaranty before notice of revocation. (206 Ill. at 635, 69 N.E. at 507.) However, a guarantor's revocation does not release him from liabilities incurred prior to the revocation. We agree with plaintiff that the language in the contract, quoted above, waived the defenses of impairment of collateral and diligence in collection. We also note that the loan in question was made, and the guarantor's liability incurred, prior to defendant's revocation.
Section 3-606 of the Code in force at the time, provided, in pertinent part:
"(1) The holder discharges any party to the instrument to the extent that without such party's consent the holder
* * * * * *
(b) unjustifiably impairs any collateral for the instrument given by or on behalf of the party or any person against whom he has a right of recourse." (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 26, par. 3-606(1)(b) (repealed by P.A. 87-582, § 2, January 1, 1992).)
In its order granting summary judgment for plaintiff on the issue of impairment of collateral, the trial court found that the defense based on section 3-606(1)(b) of the Code did not lie as a matter of law and cited the case of Ishak v. Elgin National Bank (1977), 48 Ill.App.3d 614, 6 Ill.Dec. 630, 363 N.E.2d 159. The trial court specifically stated:
"i. `Impairment of collateral' is created by the Uniform Commercial Code (Illinois Revised Statutes, ch. 26, par. 3-606(b)). However, the statutory reference *323 relates to negotiable instrument. Ishak v. Elgin National Bank, 48 Ill. App.3d 614, 6 Ill.Dec. 630, 363 N.E.2d 159 (1977) Second District stated in a case with a separate guaranty such as is presented in the instant case,
Thus, the plaintiff will not be discharged from any liability arising under the guaranty by the Bank's failure to file a financing statement with the Secretary of State under Section 9-401(i)(c) because the guaranty is not a negotiable instrument and the Uniform Commercial Code is not applicable to it."
The trial court followed our colleagues on the Second District Appellate Court who found that the impairment of collateral defense under section 3-606(1)(b) is unavailable to a guarantor executing a separate contract from the instrument. (Ishak v. Elgin National Bank (1977), 48 Ill.App.3d 614, 6 Ill.Dec. 630, 363 N.E.2d 159.) We agree with Ishak; see also First City Bank, N.A. v. Air Capitol Aircraft Sales, Inc. (10th Cir.1987), 820 F.2d 1127.
In light of our conclusions concerning waiver by defendant and section 3-606, the trial court's entry of summary judgment in favor of plaintiff on defendant's first affirmative defense was proper.
II
The next issue we are asked to address is whether the trial court's entry of summary judgment on the affirmative defense of demand for suit by surety pursuant to section 1 of the Act (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1989, ch. 132, par. 1) was error. Defendant contends that the trial court's determination as to this issue failed to consider that defendant had revoked his guaranty and any waiver or release contained in the document.
Section 1 of the Act provides:
"§ 1. When any person is bound, in writing, as surety for another for the payment of money, or the performance of any other contract, apprehends that his principal is likely to become insolvent or to remove himself from the state, without discharging the contract, if a right of action has accrued on the contract, he may, in writing, require the creditor to sue forthwith upon the same; and unless such creditor, within a reasonable time and with due diligence, commences an action thereon, and prosecutes the same to final judgment and proceeds with the enforcement thereof, the surety shall be discharged; but such discharge shall not in any case affect the rights of the creditor against the principal debtor." (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 132, par. 1.)
This law protecting sureties was first passed in 1874. The statute was enacted to compel diligence by a creditor to make certain that a surety is protected against loss. (Wurster v. Albrecht (1925), 237 Ill.App. 284, 287.) This protection may be waived by the language in a contract of guaranty. (Continental & Commercial National Bank of Chicago v. Cobb (1st Cir.1912), 200 F. 511.) In Continental & Commercial National Bank, the following language was found to supersede the statute:
"It is also stipulated that said bank may, at any time, in such manner and upon such terms as it may see fit, extend the time and alter the manner for the payment of said indebtedness or any part thereof of said Albert W. Cobb and Lawrence, without notice to John C. Cobb, he hereby agreeing beforehand that no such alteration of time or terms of credit shall in any manner affect the liability of John C. Cobb hereunder." (200 F. at 516.)
In finding that the language of the contract took precedence over section 1 of the Act, the Continental & Commercial National Bank court stated:
"Now, the claim to apply the Illinois statute to this agreement, if successful, would cut this part up by the roots; and it must be conceded that the statute yields to the contract as it exists, so that, by virtue of the plain letter of the contract, the statute cannot be used to require the plaintiff to bring a suit at any specific time in direct contravention of the obligation which itself provides that the plaintiff might give the principal obligor any time it saw fit, and might also *324 renew this grace or favor from time to time." (200 F. at 516.)
In light of the guarantee language quoted above, we conclude that defendant waived this defense. Summary judgment for plaintiff therefore was proper.
III
Defendant raises a number of issues along with his affirmative defenses. He claims the trial court committed error in sustaining plaintiffs objections to defendant's tendered testimony and exhibits concerning the value of real estate, the monitoring of the loan in question, plaintiff's failure to check the maintenance of the secured property, and the failure to require proper maintenance of that property and insurance. Plaintiffs objections to these elements of testimony were generally sustained or resulted in severely restricted proof by defendant. Plaintiff argues, and we agree, that in light of the trial court's proper disposition of defendant's first and third affirmative defenses, the trial court's rulings on the relevancy objections by plaintiff were proper.
Defendant also claims error by the trial court on numerous instructions, both in giving instructions tendered by plaintiff and refusing those tendered by defendant. Defendant claims plaintiff's instructions individually, and read as a whole, misstated the law and gave undue emphasis to the factual matters at issue in plaintiff's case. After review of the instructions, we determine that the instructions as a whole gave proper guidance to the jury, did not mislead the trier of fact, and accurately stated the law and that those terms defined, such as "guarantor," were defined in such a manner as to help the jury and not to mislead it.
In particular, plaintiff's instruction No. 11, construing a written guaranty agreement, reads as follows:
"A written guaranty agreement is a contract. Where there is a written contract in evidence, the intentions of the parties must be determined from its language alone, not from what the parties thought."
This was a non-IPI instruction based on Dee v. Bank of Oak Brook Terrace (1980), 84 Ill.App.3d 1022, 40 Ill.Dec. 494, 406 N.E.2d 195. Defendant argues that this non-IPI instruction confused the jury while plaintiff claims it accurately stated the law in the Dee case. The court in Dee summarized the applicable law as follows:
"The meaning of a guaranty is a matter of law, to be determined by the court. Guaranty agreements are to be strictly construed in favor of the guarantor. (King Korn Stamp Co. v. Guaranty Bank & Trust Co. (1969), 114 Ill.App.2d 428, 437, 252 N.E.2d 734, 739.) This is especially true where, as is the case here, the guaranty is on a printed form supplied by the party to whom the guaranty runs, and where the guarantor is a volunteer receiving no compensation. (Kesner v. Faroll (1932), 268 Ill.App. 531, 540.) The agreement is to be construed to give effect to the intentions of the parties. (Scovill Manufacturing Co. v. Cassidy (1916), 275 Ill. 462, 474, 114 N.E. 181, 186.) But where there is a written contract in evidence, the intentions of the parties must be determined from its language alone, not from what the parties thought. (Saddler v. National Bank of Bloomington (1949), 403 Ill. 218, 228, 85 N.E.2d 733.) Where the language of the contract is clear and unambiguous, extrinsic facts are not to be considered. (Katz v. Diabetes Association (1975), 31 Ill.App.3d 240, 243, 333 N.E.2d 293.) Only where the guaranty agreement is ambiguous or where there is a question of the parties' intention may the subsequent acts of the parties be used as evidence of their intentions. Claude Southern Corp. v. Henry's Drive-In, Inc. (1964), 51 Ill.App.2d 289, 299-300, 201 N.E.2d 127, 132." (Dee, 84 Ill. App.3d at 1024-25, 40 Ill.Dec. at 496, 406 N.E.2d at 197.)
(See also United States v. Crispen (N.D.Ill. 1985), 622 F.Supp. 75.) We conclude that the matters of law determined by the trial court relating to the guaranty agreement in this cause were accurately determined by that court and appropriately reflected in *325 the instructions given to the jury. We also determine that those instructions tendered by defendant, in light of the trial court's ruling on its affirmative defenses and its construction of the guaranty agreement, were properly refused.
Defendant further claims that the special interrogatories submitted by the trial court also constituted error since the court accepted the return on the special interrogatories without their being signed by the jury. Section 2-1108 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 110, par. 2-1108) indicates that special interrogatories are to be treated as instructions. Given this general directive, we do not conclude the trial court committed reversible error by not requiring jury signatures on the return on the special interrogatories. We also note that the answers to those special interrogatories were consistent with the general verdict rendered by the jury and properly framed issues for the jury, i.e., whether plaintiff relied on the guaranty agreement, what amount was due under the guaranty agreement, and whether defendant executed the guaranty agreement to induce plaintiff to loan the funds, to which an answer in conflict with the general verdict would have controlled the general verdict.
Defendant further alleges error in the court's handling of two written questions from the jury. The first question was: "Please define subordinate. A verb," to which the trial judge returned a note stating: "You have received all the instructions that you are going to receive. I'm sorry that I cannot further define terms. Please retain this note for the file." In a second note, the jury asked: "We have forms to fill out. RE: Proposition Number one. Made a loan. Three, Plaintiff relied on loan guaranty. Five, amount due. Do we need to fill out forms on Prop, two and four. RE: Inducing the Loan and the Default:" The trial court's answer on the note was: "You need to fill out one verdict form and three additional forms which pose specific questions. Those are the only forms which need to be completed. Save this note for the file." The court did not notify the attorneys of these communications and its answers prior to accepting the verdict and discharging the jury. Defendant claims error from this, in effect that he was prejudiced by this denial of an opportunity to comment upon the jury's questions and help formulate an answer. Plaintiff responds that there was no prejudice shown and that this is required before setting aside a jury verdict, citing People ex rel. Walker v. Pate (1973), 53 Ill.2d 485, 292 N.E.2d 387.
Upon consideration of this entire record, we agree with plaintiff that there was no prejudice shown as is required by People ex rel. Walker. By this ruling we do not endorse or encourage this method of handling inquiries from juries, since the preferable practice is to attempt to contact the attorneys before responding. (Hunter v. Smallwood (1975), 28 Ill.App.3d 386, 328 N.E.2d 344; see also Hunter, Trial Handbook for Illinois Lawyers (Civil) §§ 65.14, 65.10 (6th ed. 1989).) If responding to the jurors' inquiries without contacting the counsel in this case was error, it was harmless error which resulted in no prejudice to either party.
A unique aspect of this case was also a point of error alleged by defendant. In this cause the trial court instructed the jury before counsel's closing argument, stating:
"Gentlemen, it is my intention to do something somewhat unusual, and that is to instruct the jury before the closing arguments so that they know what the law is during the course of the closing arguments. Then I will allow you to proceed to closing arguments.
* * * * * *
MR. ELMORE [defense counsel]: * * * On the record I would like to object to the presenting of the instructions prior to the arguments, because I believe the instructions are the directions to the jury allowing the argument after the reading of instructions and it puts undue emphasis on the arguments, and it takes away the emphasis that is due and owing to the instructions.
*326 THE COURT: The alternative to that is that the jury knows what the law is and when they hear the instructions or hear the arguments they can apply it in a more meaningful fashion. That's why I decided to do it that way. Your objection is noted, Mr. Elmore."
Defendant claims that this action by the trial court was in violation of section 2-1107 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Ill. Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 110, par. 2-1107), and plaintiff concedes that the sequence of instruction of this jury was not in accord with section 2-1107. Plaintiff also argues, however, that defendant must show prejudice by this action (Allen v. Dorris (1974), 16 Ill.App.3d 980, 307 N.E.2d 225) and argues that no prejudice has been shown. We agree with the parties that it was in contravention of section 2-1107. We also agree with plaintiff that the standard for review of this action is whether the complaining party has been prejudiced. We find no prejudice to defendant in the manner in which the court instructed the jury. Based on the above findings, the trial court's denial of defendant's post-trial motion was proper.
Plaintiff also appears before us as cross-appellant requesting this court to remand this cause for a determination of attorney fees for post-trial and appeal services. Considering our disposition of the issues in this cause, we agree that remand would be appropriate so the trial court may determine this issue. American Savings Association v. Conrath (1984), 123 Ill.App.3d 140, 78 Ill.Dec. 730, 462 N.E.2d 849.
In light of the disposition of the issues in this cause, as noted above, the judgment of the circuit court of Jackson County is affirmed and the cause is remanded for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.
Affirmed and remanded.
HARRISON and CHAPMAN, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9740045 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:36.85363+00 ===

PER CURIAM.
In this attorney disciplinary proceeding, the Iowa Supreme Court Board of Professional Ethics and Conduct charged attorney Oscar E. Jones with several violations *6of the Iowa Code of Professional Responsibility. The alleged violations stem from Jones’ conduct in persuading a former client to loan $5000 to Jones’ current client. The grievance commission recommended a reprimand. On our de novo review, we find the violations serious enough to warrant suspension.
I. Facts.
Jones, a solo practitioner, has practiced law in Iowa for approximately forty-seven years. He has a general practice, consisting of personal injury work, family law, probate, and real estate.
In 1995 Leon Currie of Waterloo, Iowa, contacted Jones. Before this time, Jones had never represented Currie, nor did he know him.
Currie told Jones that he had negotiated a contract with the Nigerian National Petroleum Company to build a pipeline in Nigeria. He also told Jones that he had completed his end of the contract, but had yet to be paid what was owed him — $25,-300,000.
Currie told Jones he needed $25,300 to pay for risk insurance for delivery of the $25,300,000. He also told Jones he had obtained most of the $25,300 for the premium, but was short $5000. Currie asked Jones to find a lender to cover this remaining amount. Currie agreed to purchase a two million dollar annuity for Jones if Jones were successful in securing a lender and obtaining payment of the $25,300,000.
Jones did not try to independently verify Currie’s story. Instead, he accepted Cur-rie’s story at face value.
Currie told Jones that American banks wanted no part of any activities concerning Nigerian ventures because the banks considered such ventures “quite risky.” Several banks that Jones contacted confirmed Currie’s statement. Jones then tried, unsuccessfully, to borrow the $5000 from several individuals, but they were not interested.
On Saturday, May 17, 1997, Jones contacted Delbert Jones (no relation). Jones has known Delbert for over thirty years, and according to Jones, Delbert “liked to venture into things like this as long as he was satisfied that he could make some money off of it.” Jones had represented Delbert in a divorce more than twenty years before but was not representing him at the time of the call. Delbert, a carpenter, is seventy-four years old with a high school education.
Jones told Delbert that Currie was due money on a pipeline contract but needed to pay an insurance premium before receiving payment. Jones told Delbert that, if he, Delbert, loaned Currie $5000 within two days to pay the premium, Currie would repay Delbert $15,000 within thirty days. Jones described the venture as an opportunity “to make some fast money ... some good money.”
In explaining the purpose of the loan, Jones showed Delbert two letters. One letter, dated March 7, 1997, was addressed to Currie and purportedly came from the Nigerian Deposit Insurance Co., Ltd. The letter stated that the company was prepared to issue Currie risk insurance “for delivery of your funds” in the amount of $25,300,000. The letter also stated that the company’s liability to Currie
commences upon receipt of your commitment of U.S. $25,300, and we guarantee that your funds will be remitted to you insured in conjunction with the Federal Ministry of Finance as soon as we receive your payment confirmation through our established service channel.
The other letter, dated March 26, 1997, purportedly came from the director of investigations for the Federal Republic of Nigeria. The letter was not addressed to anyone but purported to be a “Letter of Clearance and Confirmation of Funds.” The letter stated that the director had “thoroughly investigated the source of the sum of U.S. $25.3 million belonging to Mr. Leon Currie as proceeds due for a contract executed in Nigeria in 1985.” The letter *7also stated that “[t]he payment is not for laundering or drug business. You may accept the funds in the beneficiary’s account as it has been certified genuine and incontroversial [sic].”
Delbert asked Jones why he could not make the loan. Jones replied, “I can’t do that. He’s my client.” Jones never told Delbert that banks and other individuals had refused to loan money for the endeav- or or that the transaction was risky. Nor did Jones tell him that, if Jones successfully secured the $5000 loan and the contract money, Currie would purchase for Jones a 2 million dollar annuity. When Delbert commented that he did not know Currie, Jones replied, “Well, he’s my client. He’s good. He’s good.”
Delbert trusted Jones, and based on Jones’ representations that the endeavor was sound, Delbert borrowed $5000 for thirty days from his credit union and obtained a cashier’s check in that amount payable to Jones. Delbert delivered the check to Jones, who endorsed it and forwarded it to Currie. When Delbert commented that he had no guarantee of repayment, Jones signed on Currie’s behalf, a handwritten, thirty-day promissory note payable to Delbert.
Not surprisingly, Delbert has not received any money from the transaction, and according to Jones, Currie is in poor financial condition. The credit union gave Delbert two thirty-day extensions on his $5000 loan. At the end of ninety days, Delbert paid the loan together with interest at nine percent.
II. Proceedings.
The board filed a complaint against Jones, alleging misconduct on his part arising out of the $5000 debt that Delbert incurred. The complaint charged that Jones had violated Iowa Code of Professional Responsibility for Lawyers DR 1-102(A)(4) (lawyer shall not engage in conduct involving misrepresentation); DR 1-102(A)(6) (lawyer shall not engage in conduct reflecting adversely on fitness to practice law); and DR 7-102(A)(7) (lawyer shall not counsel or assist client in conduct that lawyer knows to be illegal or fraudulent). Jones responded to the board’s requests for admissions and later appeared at a hearing on the matter before the grievance commission. Jones and Delbert were the only witnesses the commission heard.
Following the evidentiary hearing, the commission filed its findings of fact, conclusions of law, and recommendation of discipline. The commission noted that there was no evidence that Jones knew— at the time of requesting the loan — that the Nigerian transaction was fraudulent. Based on this lack of evidence, the commission found that Jones had neither assisted nor counseled Currie in the commission of a fraud and had not himself otherwise engaged in fraudulent activity. The commission therefore concluded that the board had not proven a violation of DR 7-102(A)(7).
However, the commission did find that Jones’ actions and omissions in obtaining the $5000 loan from Delbert constituted a misrepresentation. The commission therefore concluded that the board had proven a violation of DR 1-102(A)(4) and DR 1-102(A)(6). The commission recommended a public reprimand.
III. Scope of Review and Burden of Proof.
Jones has not appealed from the commission’s recommendation under Court Rule 118.11. Nevertheless, we review the record de novo. Ct. R. 118.10. We give respectful consideration to the commission’s recommendations. We, however, ultimately decide what discipline is appropriate under the unique facts of each case. Iowa Supreme Ct. Bd. of Prof'l Ethics & Conduct v. Beckman, 557 N.W.2d 94, 95 (Iowa 1996).
The board must prove its allegations of lawyer misconduct by a convincing preponderance of the evidence. Id. This *8burden of proof is greater than in a civil case but less than in a criminal case. Id.
IV. The Violations.
A. DR 7-102(A)(7) (lawyer shall not counsel or assist client in conduct that lawyer knows to be illegal or fraudulent). Like the commission, we find the record does not establish that Jones (1) knew that the Nigerian transaction was fraudulent and (2) intended to deceive Delbert. In fact, there is no evidence that the transaction is fraudulent other than that the story sounds incredible.
Jones continues to believe the funds will be forthcoming. He testified that the funds are currently tied up in Chicago and that he had documentation to prove it. The problem, however, is that Jones did not present any such documentation. (The commission offered to recess so Jones could produce the documentation. Jones, however, declined the offer.) Nor did he have Currie at the hearing to explain the transaction and to verify the funds were in Chicago and would be forthcoming. Jones’ failure in this regard troubled the commission, and it troubles us too.
Nevertheless, we think what we have here is not an attorney who intended to deceive but an attorney who naively believed the “pie in the sky” story that Cur-rie handed him. Perhaps the allure of the two-million-dollar annuity blinded Jones’ judgment. Delbert himself believed Jones had not intended to deceive him. He testified: “Well, [Jones has] always been an honest fellow to me as long as I’ve known him. I never known him to do anything wrong. I don’t think [Jones] thought .this would happen. I think he thought like I did — that the man was coming through.” We therefore agree with the commission that the board failed to prove a violation of DR 7-102(A)(7). ■
B. DR 1-102(A)(4) (lawyer shall not engage in conduct involving misrepresentation) and DR 1-102(A)(6) (lawyer shall not engage in conduct reflecting adversely on fitness to practice law). Jones claimed he was acting not as a lawyer but as a business or investment adviser. There are two problems with this assertion. First, the assertion is not entirely accurate. Although Delbert was not a client of Jones at the time, Currie was Jones’ client. Second, such an assertion has little significance for our purposes because lawyers do not shed professional responsibilities in their personal and business transactions. See Iowa Supreme Ct. Bd. of Prof'l Ethics & Conduct v. Hansel, 558 N.W.2d 186, 188-89 (Iowa 1997) (finding misconduct in lawyer’s farm loan dealings with bank).
In a business transaction with an unrepresented person, an attorney’s failure to recognize and correct potentially misleading situations is unethical even though the lawyer has no intent to deceive. Committee on Prof'l Ethics & Conduct v. Wunschel, 461 N.W.2d 840, 847 (Iowa 1990). We find that under the circumstances Jones’ statements and omissions went beyond potentially misleading Delbert — -they did mislead him and caused him to make the loan.
Jones was aware that Delbert had no experience in the kind of venture Jones was describing to him and that Delbert did not know Currie. Given the longtime friendship and trust between the two, Jones knew Delbert’s decision whether to make the loan would depend on Jones’ representations to him. In fact, Delbert testified he told Jones as much: “I said, 'Okay.’ I said, T don’t know [Currie], but I’ll make the loan because I know you, and I know you’re going to do right by me. You always have done right by me.’ ” Delbert further testified that he made the loan because Jones assured him that Cur-rie was “good” for the money and promised he — Delbert—would make a $10,000 profit.
Jones knew the venture was risky. He should have conveyed this information to Delbert, an obviously unsophisticated and elderly gentlemen. At the very least, he *9should have explained to Delbert that American banks had refused to loan money for the insurance premium because of concern over the stability of the Nigerian government and fraudulent transactions coming out of that country. Jones should also have told Delbert about the several other individuals who indicated they were not interested in making the loan. Finally, Jones should have told Delbert about Cur-rie’s promise of a $2 million annuity if Jones were successful in securing a lender and obtaining payment of the $25,300,000. The record clearly shows that, while Delbert may not have looked to Jones for legal advice, he clearly looked to him for protection.
What also concerns us is the urgency for the loan. Jones should not have rushed Delbert into making a decision during two weekend days, thereby depriving Delbert of any real opportunity to seek outside advice.
We agree with the commission that Jones’ misstatements and omissions constituted misrepresentation in violation of DR 1 — 102(A)(4) and reflected adversely on his fitness to practice law in violation of DR 1-102(A)(6).
V. Discipline.
The commission gave no reason for its recommendation of public reprimand. While we give respectful consideration to the findings and recommendations of the commission, we disagree with the commission’s recommendation in this case.
In the past, we have publicly reprimanded Jones, and we take that into consideration in imposing discipline. See Iowa Supreme Ct. Bd. of Prof'l Ethics & Conduct v. Wagner, 599 N.W.2d 721, 730 (Iowa 1999) (holding that prior discipline is an aggravating factor). We also take into consideration that Jones’ conduct caused Delbert harm. See id. (holding that harm is an aggravating factor).
These aggravating factors together with the nature of the present violation convince us that the appropriate discipline is suspension. We therefore suspend Jones’ license to practice law in this state with no possibility of reinstatement for two months from the filing date of this opinion. This suspension shall apply to all facets of the practice of law. See Ct. R. 118.12. Any application for reinstatement shall be governed by Court Rule 118.18. As a condition of reinstatement, Jones shall make restitution to Delbert for the amount of the $5000 loan and all interest Delbert has paid in connection with the loan.
Costs are assessed to Jones under Court Rule 118.22.
LICENSE SUSPENDED.
All justices concur except LAVORATO, LARSON, and NEUMAN, JJ., who dissent.

=== CASE 9740046 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:36.858836+00 ===

LAVORATO, Justice
(dissenting).
I dissent because I think for several reasons the discipline in this case is too severe.
First, we have a lawyer here who has been in practice for forty-seven years. Except for a previous reprimand, his record is unblemished. The public reprimand occurred in 1986 for a minor probate delinquency, conduct totally unrelated to what was charged here. See Committee on Prof'l Ethics & Conduct v. Wunschel, 461 N.W.2d 840, 848 (Iowa 1990) (imposing reprimand even though lawyer had previously been reprimanded for probate delinquency). I think we can assume therefore that what occurred here was an isolated incident of misconduct, something that was out of character for Oscar Jones and therefore not likely to reoccur.
Second, Delbert testified that he filed this complaint, not because he thought Oscar had defrauded him, but because Delbert thought the complaint would result in a return of his money. Had Oscar paid Delbert back, this case would never have seen the light of day.
Third, what we have here is a scam perpetrated, not by Oscar, but by Currie. *10In a sense, Oscar was just as much a victim as Delbert. Both Delbert and Oscar naively believed Currie would come through.
Fourth, Delbert was not as unsophisticated as the majority paints him out to be. I think it is clear from the record that Delbert was no. novice when it came to risky ventures in which he could make some “fast money.”
Fifth, Oscar cooperated fully from the beginning. After Delbert filed a complaint with the Polk County Bar Association Grievance Committee, Oscar wrote a lengthy letter setting out the details surrounding the transaction. He also cooperated with the Board of Professional Ethics and Conduct after Delbert’s complaint was forwarded to it.
Sixth, at the disciplinary hearing Oscar made no lame excuses for his actions. He admitted all the details of the transaction. He told the commission that, if his actions were wrong, he was ready to accept whatever punishment the commission thought was appropriate. His only denial was to the claim that he had defrauded or aided Currie in defrauding Delbert.
Last, I think the misconduct here is no more egregious than what occurred in Wunschel, a case in which we only reprimanded the attorney, who had been practicing law for thirty-five years. Id. at 848. The commission had recommended a six-month suspension, a recommendation the lawyer on appeal claimed was “unduly severe.” Id. at 844, 848.
As we said in Wunschel, “the case presents a lesson in how a prudent lawyer ought not to act when consummating a $2 million real estate transaction with strangers who appear to be unrepresented by counsel.” Id. at 841. In finding that the attorney violated DR 1-102(A)(4) by engaging in conduct amounting to misrepresentation, we said:
Nevertheless, substantial evidence in the record supports the Commission’s conclusion that Wunschel misled the Noyes “into passive trust ... to secure an unfair gain for himself.” Interpreting DR 1 — 102(A)(4) in its broadest sense, Wunschel effectively misrepresented his role in this transaction. Even absent an intent to deceive, an attorney’s failure to recognize and correct potentially misleading situations is unethical. Given the size and complexity of the transaction, and his personal stake in it, Wunschel should have bent over backwards to assure that the Noyes had someone looking out for their interest. He did not do so. Instead, he at b.est kept silent on the question of whether the Noyes should seek independent counsel. Like the Commission, we infer from the record that Wunschel perceived a personal advantage in the Noyes’ ignorance.
Id. at 847-48.
It is beyond me how in Wunschel we could reject a commission’s recommendation of a six-month suspension in favor of a reprimand, and in Oscar’s case, which I think is no more egregious, we reject a commission’s recommendation of reprimand in favor of a two-month suspension. To me there is something not quite right about this picture.
Oscar testified he was retiring. He was operating out of his home in the process of winding down his practice. We should let this lawyer retire without besmirching an almost unblemished record of forty-seven years with the type of discipline that I feel is unjustified.
I agree with the commission’s recommendation of a reprimand, and that is what I would impose. However, I would strongly suggest to Oscar that he pay Delbert the $5000 and the interest he incurred. However innocent Oscar might think his actions were, the fact remains that, but for his representations and omissions, Delbert would probably have said he was not interested either.
LARSON and NEUMAN, JJ„ join this dissent.

=== CASE 2221978 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:25.263774+00 ===

601 N.E.2d 1317 (1992)
235 Ill. App.3d 732
176 Ill.Dec. 619
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Theron JACKSON, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 4-91-0926.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Fourth District.
October 8, 1992.
*1318 Daniel D. Yuhas, Deputy Defender, Office of the State Appellate Defender, Susan E. Alesia, Asst. Defender, Springfield, for defendant-appellant.
John B. Leonard, State's Atty., Mt. Sterling, Norbert J. Goetten, Director State's Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor, Robert J. Biderman, Deputy Director, Beth McGann, Staff Atty., Springfield, for plaintiff-appellee.
Justice KNECHT delivered the opinion of the court:
After a bench trial in Brown County on March 15, 1991, defendant, Theron Jackson, and his codefendant, Carnell Willis, were convicted of mob action. (Ill.Rev. Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. 25-1(a)(2).) Defendant was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment. He appeals his conviction, arguing: (1) defense counsel was ineffective because he did not comply with the requirements of section 3-8-10 of the Unified Code of Corrections (Unified Code) (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. XXXX-X-XX), entitled "Intrastate Detainers," thereby defeating dismissal of the charge against him based on denial of his right to a speedy trial; and (2) the State committed reversible error by cross-examining defendant about a previous drug problem and a drug-related conviction. Defendant also contends the trial judge's sentence was not sufficiently specific because it did not designate the sentence to which the imposed sentence was made consecutive. We affirm defendant's conviction and remand only for clarification of which judgment *1319 and sentence the imposed sentence was made consecutive.
I. FACTS
A. Defense Counsel's Pretrial Actions
The offense of which defendant was convicted arose from an attack on Gregory Pope, another inmate in the Western Illinois Correctional facility. Defendant was charged by information on March 15, 1991. On April 14, 1991, defense counsel was appointed to represent defendant. On April 15, defense counsel filed a motion for a speedy trial pursuant to section 103-5 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 (Code) (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. 103-5).
On September 12, 1991, defense counsel filed a motion to dismiss because more than 160 days had elapsed since the State charged defendant. The court denied the motion, ruling that when the defendant is in a Department of Corrections (DOC) facility, the procedures listed in the intrastate detainers provision must be followed in order to preserve a speedy-trial issue.
B. Trial Testimony
Pope testified he met defendant, codefendant Willis, and the inmate who struck him, Terrance Davis, a few days before the incident. Pope was being extorted by inmate Lee Johnson. Defendant, Willis, and Davis approached Pope and told him they could protect him from Johnson. Pope stated defendant, Willis, and Davis gave him a commissary list on three occasions and ordered him to obtain the items listed. They warned if he did not obtain the items he would get hurt.
On the day the incident occurred, defendant, Willis, and Davis followed Pope into his cell after dinner. Pope had notified prison officials of Johnson's extortion attempt and the officials agreed to move him to another cell. When defendant, Willis, and Davis noticed Pope's things were packed, they called him a "stool pigeon" and said "stooling" was not tolerated in prison. According to Pope, Willis told Davis to "bring the G down" and Davis hit Pope twice in the face.
Randy Spertzel, an inmate and Pope's friend, testified he saw three men in Pope's cell the night of the attack. The men told Spertzel to leave them alone. Later that night, Willis came to Spertzel's cell and told Spertzel if he said anything they would put "a hit" out on him.
After Davis struck Pope, the men gave him an aspirin and discouraged him from going to the infirmary. They ultimately allowed him to seek medical treatment, but told him he would be hurt if he did not report that he fell and hurt his face. He required surgical placement of metal plates and screws in his head for the injuries he sustained.
Prison official Marty Winston interviewed Pope in the prison health unit shortly after the incident. Pope told Winston the cell numbers of the men involved. Pope also identified defendant, Willis, and Davis from a six-photograph array.
Davis, who pleaded guilty to aggravated battery for striking Pope, testified that when he entered Pope's cell, defendant and Willis were present. Davis asked Pope what he told the prison officials about Johnson. When Pope admitted he told the officials about Johnson's extortion, Davis hit Pope in the face. Davis testified neither defendant nor Willis told him to strike Pope. Defendant's and Willis' testimony supported Davis' testimony. Defendant testified he did not know Davis was going to strike Pope.
During cross-examination, the State asked defendant if he had a drug problem. Defendant stated he currently had no problem because he had been rehabilitated a year or so earlier. The State inquired about when defendant was incarcerated for the sentence he was presently serving. Defendant responded he had been incarcerated since 1986 for violating his parole. The State inquired whether the offense for which defendant had been incarcerated was a drug offense. Defendant stated he was originally sentenced for drugs.
II. ANALYSIS
A. Ineffective Counsel
Defendant's trial began 210 days after defense counsel filed his speedy-trial demand. *1320 Defendant argues defense counsel was ineffective in his efforts to ensure defendant received a speedy trial because counsel filed the motion demanding speedy trial pursuant to section 103-5 of the Code (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. 103-5), rather than the provision applicable to inmates during incarceration, a proper demand under which requires the defendant be tried within 160 days (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. XXXX-X-XX).
Resolution of defendant's speedy-trial issue requires consideration of the speedy-trial provision of the Code in conjunction with the intrastate detainers provision. Section 103-5(a) of the Code states, in relevant part, every person in custody in the State for an alleged offense shall be tried within 120 days from the date he was taken into custody. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. 103-5(a).) Section 103-5(b) of the Code provides that persons on bail or recognizance shall be tried "within 160 days from the date defendant demands trial." (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. 103-5(b.) Unless the delay is caused by defendant, failure to try him within the statutory time is cause for the discharge of the accused. Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. 103-5(d).
Section 3-8-10 of the Unified Code makes section 103-5(b) of the Code applicable to defendants "committed to any institution or facility or program of [DOC]" who have untried complaints or indictments pending against them. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. XXXX-X-XX.) Defendant was in DOC custody when this mob action charge was filed against him. Defense counsel was required to make the speedy-trial demand under section 3-8-10 of the Unified Code and include a statement of the place of present commitment, the term, and length of remaining term, charges pending against him, and county where the charges were lodged, addressed to the State's Attorney of the county where he is charged, with a copy to the clerk of that court and the proper DOC officer of the facility to which defendant is committed. The State's Attorney would then have been required to ensure defendant was brought to trial within 160 days. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. XXXX-X-XX.) However, because defense counsel requested a speedy trial for defendant pursuant to section 103-5, i.e., the wrong statutory provision, the 160-day period never began to run.
The State contends defense counsel was not ineffective because the mob action charge against defendant would not have been dismissed even if the appropriate speedy-trial demand had been made, i.e., one brought under the intrastate detainers provision (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. XXXX-X-XX). If a proper demand had been made in compliance with the latter provision, the State would simply have tried defendant within the requisite 160 days.
To establish counsel was ineffective, defendant must show counsel's representation fell below an objective standard of reasonableness and it is reasonably probable that but for counsel's unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been different. Strickland v. Washington (1984), 466 U.S. 668, 687-88, 694,104 S.Ct. 2052, 2064, 2068, 80 L.Ed.2d 674, 693, 698; People v. Horton (1991), 143 Ill.2d 11, 23, 155 Ill.Dec. 807, 812, 570 People v. Jackson (1987), 162 Ill.App.3d 476, 482, 113 Ill.Dec. 581, 585, 515 N.E.2d 390, 394.
The State directs us to this court's ruling in People v. Keys (1990), 195 Ill. App.3d 370, 375-76, 141 Ill.Dec. 917, 921, 552 N.E.2d 285, 289, in arguing defense counsel's action did not fall below an objective standard of reasonableness because defendant did not instruct his attorney to demand a speedy trial and because the decision on whether to demand a speedy trial is a strategic matter left for defense counsel.
Our ruling in Keys is inapplicable to the present scenario. There, defendant requested that the matter be resolved as soon as possible, but made no specific request for a speedy-trial demand, and defense counsel had then explained his reasons for not filing a speedy-trial demand to defendant. (Keys, 195 Ill.App.3d at 371-72, 141 Ill.Dec. at 918-919, 552 N.E.2d at 286-87.) Although whether to demand a speedy trial may be a strategic decision, in this case *1321 defense counsel intended to demand this on behalf of defendant. Defense counsel demanded a speedy trial, but did so incorrectly.
Defense counsel contends when he filed the motion he did not know defendant was incarcerated in the State penitentiary. The record available to defense counsel indicated defendant was incarcerated in a DOC facility. The notice he received that he had been appointed to represent defendant indicated a copy was also sent to defendant and to DOC. The State's Attorney's April 4, 1991, writ of habeas corpus summoning defendant to testify was sent to the warden at Pontiac Correctional Center. The order of continuance noted a copy went to defendant and to DOC. Defense counsel filed the speedy-trial motion April 15, 1991. The record already included these indications defendant was in DOC custody.
Defendant correctly notes that by the preliminary hearing held on April 29, 1991, defense counsel knew defendant was an inmate. Testimony at the hearing included an account of what allegedly occurred between the inmates when Pope was injured. Defense counsel had a duty to represent defendant competently. Competence requires the legal skill, knowledge, thoroughness and preparation reasonably necessary for the representation. (134 Ill.2d R. 1.1(a).) The intrastate detainers provision became law effective November 14, 1973. See Pub. Act 78-939, § 1, eff. Nov. 14, 1973 (1973 Ill.Laws 3023, 3032).
In People v. Davis (1981), 92 Ill.App.3d 869, 874, 48 Ill.Dec. 190, 193, 416 N.E.2d 85, 88, the court stated:
"The statutory speedy trial scheme provides that a person in custody must be tried within 120 days (section 103-5(a)); persons on bail or recognizance (section 103-5(b)) and persons who have been committed to the Department of Corrections for other offenses (section 3-8-10) must be tried within 160 days of their demand for trial. Those persons imprisoned in another State against whom a detainer has been lodged must be brought to trial within 180 days after making demand for trial. (Section 1003-8-9, art. Ill(a).) We note too that a prisoner's right to a speedy trial under the Federal Speedy Trial Act (18 U.S.C.A. § 3161(j) (Supp.1980)) also requires a demand for trial. United States v. Bryant (4th Cir.1979), 612 F.2d 806, 811.
As defendant failed to comply with the terms of the intrastate detainer statute to which she was subject the trial court erred in granting her motion for discharge."
There, the defendant was committed to DOC on a Cook County judgment, and the trial court granted a motion for discharge and dismissed pending Du Page County charges pursuant to section 103-5(a) of the Code, although no speedy-trial demand under section 3-8-10 of the Unified Code had been made. The Second District Appellate Court reversed that judgment. See generally 5 L. Pieczynski, Illinois Practice § 10.3, at 274 (statutory right to a speedy trial); § 10.24, at 285-86 (intrastate detainer act) (1989).
Defense counsel should have known section 3-8-10 of the Unified Code governed defendant's right to a speedy trial. His actions in this case with respect to the speedy-trial motion fell below a reasonably competent standard.
To conclude defense counsel's conduct rose to the level of incompetency requiring reversal of the conviction, however, also requires a finding it is reasonably probable the outcome of the proceeding against defendant would have been different had defense counsel acted competently. Strickland, 466 U.S. at 694, 104 S.Ct. at 2068, 80 L.Ed.2d at 698; Horton, 143 Ill.2d at 23,155 Ill.Dec. at 812, 570 N.E.2d at 325; Jackson, 162 Ill.App.3d at 482, 113 Ill.Dec. at 585, 515 N.E.2d at 394.
The State contends even if counsel was ineffective the error was harmless because the evidence presented against defendant was overwhelming.
Defendant was incarcerated for 210 days between the date defense counsel filed the speedy-trial motion and the date of trial. Defendant should have been tried within *1322 160 days. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. XXXX-X-XX.) The record does not indicate any reason for the delay. Although the State may have had no duty to bring defendant to trial where it relied on a State law that required defendant to make a demand for trial (Jackson, 162 Ill.App.3d at 480, 113 Ill.Dec. at 584, 515 N.E.2d at 393), neither should it evade a defendant's right to a speedy trial. (Cf. People v. Fosdick (1967), 36 Ill.2d 524, 528, 224 N.E.2d 242, 245 (use of voluntary dismissal without notice to defendant).) The record indicates it did so in this case.
The State's brief contains the following concession: "[The] State's Attorney * * * was clearly apprised that the speedy trial was controlled by the Intrastate Detainer Act and that this 160-day period could not begin to run unless the formal requirements of section 3-8-10 were fulfilled. Had [defense counsel] refiled under the controlling statutory provision and preserved defendant's speedy trial request, it is much more than probable that [the State] would have brought the case to trial within the 160-day period."
The State made a similar argument during the hearing on the motion to dismiss the charges against defendant. The State's Attorney stipulated there was no mechanical reason, no "court-clogging" reason, that prevented the case from being brought to trial within the requisite 160 days. It was not tried within this time period because the "requisite conditions to commence the running of the 160-day period were not satisfied." The prosecutor here is not contending the press of duties prevented proper preparation of the case or that witnesses were unavailable. He does not suggest other cases with proper speedy-trial demands preempted this defendant's case from being brought to trial. He does not assert he was understaffed or overburdened. We commend the prosecutor on his candor, but not his practice. The State simply relied on defense counsel's error in failing to set defendant's trial within 160 days.
The prosecutor is an administrator of justice and an advocate who must exercise sound discretion in the performance of his or her functions. (ABA Standards, Criminal Justice § 3-1.1 (2d ed. Supp. 1986).) We question the exercise of that discretion in this case. A prosecutor should not intentionally use procedural devices to support delay when there is no legitimate basis. (ABA Standards, Criminal Justice § 3-2.9(a) (2d ed. Supp.1986).) The State's Attorney knew defendant was incarcerated in DOC. The State's brief indicates defendant's trial was not delayed because of case backlog. Rather, the State's Attorney did not try defendant within the 160 days of the purported speedy-trial demand because he knew defense counsel erroneously cited section 103-5 of the Code, rather than section 3-8-10 of the Unified Code, and did not fulfill the terms of the latter section in requesting a speedy trial. This was an inappropriate reliance on the procedural requirements of section 3-8-10 of the Code, particularly when the information that would have been contained in a proper demand was already known to the prosecutor.
However, the record does not support the conclusion that if defense counsel had filed the appropriate speedy-trial demand the State would not have brought defendant to trial within 160 days. We cannot presume the State would not have tried defendant within the required time. We simply do not know what would have happened had defense counsel filed a proper intrastate detainers motion. Based on the evidence, defendant cannot meet the second prong of Strickland, i.e., a reasonable probability that but for his counsel's error in preparing his speedy-trial demand, the result of the proceeding would have been different. Despite this inadequacy in legal representation by defense counsel, and conduct by the State's Attorney which was imprudent for one in that position, we are not bound to reverse defendant's conviction on this issue.
Defense counsel should competently prepare their cases. Criminal defendants have a right to adequate representation to ensure their statutory, as well as constitutional, *1323 rights are protected. Prosecutors should proceed with trials in a timely manner. If counsel in this case properly carried out their duties defendant would have been timely prosecuted and would have had no timeliness complaint to raise on appeal. In addition, the lawyers in this case provide reason for defendants and the public to be suspect when dealing with members of the legal profession. More attention to their duties would advance justice and promote faith in the process. Neither goal is achieved by the examples set in this case.
B. Improper Cross-Examination
Defendant argues the State committed reversible error when it improperly cross-examined him on whether he had a drug problem without supporting that point with proof. He also argues reversible error occurred when the State confronted him with a previous drug conviction because this type of impeachment must be accomplished by producing the record or an authenticated copy of the conviction.
The State contends it was not cross-examining defendant under the method afforded by the rule allowing impeachment by introduction of conviction records. Rather than seeking to prove the fact of the drug conviction, the State maintains it was attempting to elicit evidence that defendant was a drug user. The State argues defendant's admission that he was originally sentenced for a drug offense established he was a drug user without the prosecutor furnishing a record or authenticated copy of the conviction, and written proof was not necessary. It also argues defendant has waived review of this issue by failing to object at trial or to raise the issue in a post-trial motion.
Defendant argues that when asked whether he had a drug problem, he answered he had been rehabilitated; he contends his admission of a drug conviction did not rebut the claim of rehabilitation. He also argues the State did not use his drug conviction to prove he had used drugs, but that the prosecutor instead argued in closing that defendant had tried to "conceal" this problem and his conviction, i.e., to show defendant lied to the court.
1. Waiver
To preserve an argument for appeal, both an objection at trial and a written post-trial motion raising the issue are required. (People v. Enoch (1988), 122 Ill.2d 176, 186, 119 Ill.Dec. 265, 271, 522 N.E.2d 1124, 1130; People v. McCarthy (1991), 213 Ill.App.3d 873, 884, 157 Ill.Dec. 755, 762, 572 N.E.2d 1219, 1226.) Here defendant made no objection to this cross-examination at trial, nor did he raise the issue in a post-trial motion. Defendant by reply brief suggests since defense counsel raised an objection during the State's earlier cross-examination of codefendant Willis, which objection was overruled, that objection sufficiently preserved these matters in his case. This premise is incorrect and we find this issue has been waived. Moreover, we note the objection made during cross-examination of codefendant Willis was about his impeachment with prior arrests rather than with felony convictions or crimes of dishonesty. That specific objection waived all others and no objection was made to Willis' cross-examination on whether he had a drug problem or drug-related convictions.
2. Consideration on the Merits
Defendant argues these matters destroyed his credibility and affected the outcome of his trial. (See 134 Ill.2d R. 615(a).) He directs us to the trial judge's comment before pronouncing judgment that the case presented a question of credibility. The case necessarily presented a credibility issue. Defendant's witnesses were himself, codefendant Willis, and Davis, who had pleaded guilty to the aggravated battery of Pope; the testimony of defendant and Willis could reasonably be viewed as self-serving, and Davis had nothing to lose by testifying on behalf of defendant and codefendant Willis, since he had already been sentenced. By contrast, the victim and the other witnesses who identified defendant and codefendant Willis, and whose testimony intimated that defendant and codefendant Willis had ordered the attack on Pope, had nothing to gain by their testimony and had no motive or reason to lie.
*1324 Evidence which suggests a defendant committed crimes other than the one charged is generally inadmissible unless relevant to some issue in the case. (People v. Herrett (1990), 137 Ill.2d 195, 207, 148 Ill.Dec. 695, 700, 561 N.E.2d 1, 6; People v. Lindgren (1980), 79 Ill.2d 129, 137, 37 Ill.Dec. 348, 352, 402 N.E.2d 238, 242.) The rule has been stated that it is improper to cross-examine a defendant as to his conviction of a crime. (See, e.g., People v. Flynn (1956), 8 Ill.2d 116, 120, 133 N.E.2d 257, 259; People v. Adams (1982), 106 Ill.App.3d 467, 472, 62 Ill.Dec. 231, 235, 435 N.E.2d 1203, 1207.) The proper method for impeaching a defendant's credibility is by means of the record of conviction or an authenticated copy thereof. (See People v. Madison (1974), 56 Ill.2d 476, 488, 309 N.E.2d 11, 18.) An exception to the rule permits cross-examining a defendant about convictions when he has testified about his prior convictions on direct examination. People v. Johnson (1990), 206 Ill.App.3d 318, 322, 151 Ill.Dec. 255, 258, 564 N.E.2d 232, 235.
Cross-examination of a defendant about a prior conviction has been held improper where direct examination has not covered the subject. (Adams, 106 Ill. App.3d at 472, 62 Ill.Dec. at 235, 435 N.E.2d at 1207.) Nevertheless, reversible error does not result unless the error has deprived defendant of substantial justice or influenced the determination of his guilt. (Madison, 56 Ill.2d at 488-89, 309 N.E.2d at 18; Adams, 106 Ill.App.3d at 472, 62 Ill.Dec. at 235, 435 N.E.2d at 1207.) We note, however, that Adams, cited by defendant, and other cases cited on this point arose in the context of jury trials. As stated in Madison, this rule is founded upon the possibility a defendant might be prejudiced during a jury trial if he is forced to testify concerning prior convictions. (Madison, 56 Ill.2d at 488, 309 N.E.2d at 18.) This case was a bench trial, with the circuit judge sitting as trier of fact.
As to the cross-examination on whether defendant had a drug problem, or the suggestion of drug use, it is under limited circumstances that drug use may be relevant to impeach a witness ability to observe or narcotics addiction to undermine a witness' credibility (see People v. Smith (1968), 41 Ill.2d 158, 161, 242 N.E.2d 198, 200). (See generally 6 L. Pieczynski, Illinois Practice § 22.64, at 48 (1989); R. Hunter, Trial Handbook for Illinois Lawyers, Criminal § 40.16, at 547-49 (6th ed. 1989).) We fail to see how any of these or other circumstances made this evidence relevant to this case.
Nevertheless, in a bench trial, there is a presumption the court considered only competent and proper evidence in reaching its decision. (People v. Nuccio (1969), 43 Ill.2d 375, 394, 253 N.E.2d 353, 363.) This presumption is negated when the trial court admits improper evidence over defendant's objection and the record shows it was improperly considered, as in the case cited by defendant, People v. Alford (1982), 111 Ill.App.3d 741, 744, 67 Ill. Dec. 340, 343, 444 N.E.2d 576, 579. Unlike Alford, here there was no objection and nothing in the record suggests the trial court gave this evidence any consideration whatsoever. There was sufficient proper evidence to sustain the conviction and the evidence was not so closely balanced as to require a new trial.
C. Insufficient Explanation For Sentence
Defendant argues the trial court erred by not identifying the sentence to which his mob action sentence was made consecutive. After sentencing defendant to 18 months' imprisonment, the trial judge stated, "[t]he sentence[s], of course, * * * are consecutive sentences to what they are now serving with the [DOC] with the State of Illinois."
The State concedes the trial judge erred by not specifically identifying which sentence(s) the mob action sentence would follow. We agree the trial judge's error requires the case be remanded for further clarification. A sentence must be specific so it does not require additional construction. People v. Freeman (1981), 95 Ill. App.3d 297, 301, 50 Ill.Dec. 846, 849, 420 *1325 N.E.2d 163, 166; People v. Logan (1974), 23 Ill.App.3d 41, 42, 318 N.E.2d 94, 95-96.
Defendant's case must be remanded for the limited purpose of allowing the trial judge to state with particularity the sentence(s) to which the sentence in this case is to be consecutive.
Affirmed in part, and remanded in part.
GREEN, P.J., and COOK, J., concur.

=== CASE 2221982 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:25.353429+00 ===

606 N.W.2d 825 (2000)
258 Neb. 941
STATE of Nebraska ex rel. NEBRASKA STATE BAR ASSOCIATION, relator,
v.
Eugene M. FRESE, respondent.
No. S-00-148.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
March 3, 2000.
John W. Steele, Lincoln, for relator.
Robert J. Mathias, of Piper Marbury Law Firm, for respondent.
HENDRY, C.J., WRIGHT, CONNOLLY, GERRARD, STEPHAN, and McCORMACK, JJ.
PER CURIAM.
On February 11, 2000, Eugene M. Frese, respondent, filed with this court a voluntary surrender of license to practice law. Respondent states that he voluntarily consents to an order of disbarment in the State of Nebraska.
Respondent was admitted to the practice of law in the State of Nebraska on June 19, 1959.
In his voluntary surrender of license, respondent admits that pursuant to a plea agreement with the United States, he entered a plea of guilty to one count of a pending indictment. Specifically, he pled that he had violated 18 U.S.C. § 1029(a)(1), fraud and related activity in connection *826 with access devices, and 18 U.S.C. § 2, aiding and abetting. Judgment on these criminal charges was entered on January 6, 2000.
In his voluntary surrender of license, respondent freely, knowingly, and voluntarily admits that his conduct violated Canon 1, DR 1-102(A)(1), (3), and (4), of the Code of Professional Responsibility, as adopted by the Nebraska Supreme Court.
In his voluntary surrender of license, respondent freely, knowingly, and voluntarily waives his right to notice, appearance, or hearing prior to the entry of an order of disbarment.
Upon due consideration of the pleadings in this matter, the court accepts respondent's surrender of his license to practice law, finds that respondent should be disbarred, and hereby orders respondent disbarred from the practice of law in the State of Nebraska, effective immediately. Respondent shall forthwith comply with Neb. Ct. R. of Discipline 16 (rev.1996), and upon failure to do so, he shall be subject to punishment for contempt of court.
JUDGMENT OF DISBARMENT.
MILLER-LERMAN, J., not participating.

=== CASE 2221984 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:25.394542+00 ===

33 Mass. App. Ct. 465 (1992)
601 N.E.2d 478
STANLEY SLAWSBY
vs.
ETHEL V. SLAWSBY, coexecutrix, & another.[1]
No. 91-P-993.
Appeals Court of Massachusetts, Middlesex.
September 10, 1992.
October 26, 1992.
Present: WARNER, C.J., BROWN, & GILLERMAN, JJ.
Lee H. Kozol (Penny Kozol with him) for Ethel V. Slawsby & another.
Jack J. Mikels for Stanley Slawsby.
GILLERMAN, J.
When Stanley Slawsby was a young man, and on several occasions thereafter, his father, Benjamin Slawsby, promised him that he would inherit a one-eighth share of Double S Realty Company, Inc. (Double S), a real estate company owned by Benjamin, but only if Stanley *466 worked and stayed with Benjamin's supermarket business (Capitol Supermarkets) until Benjamin died.[2]
After completing college, Stanley worked for twenty-five years with Capitol Supermarkets until the business was liquidated in bankruptcy proceedings in 1982. Benjamin died shortly thereafter, leaving a codicil to his will, executed in 1981, which disinherited Stanley and left all the stock of Double S to his wife. Stanley brought suit, seeking to recover in quantum meruit for the value of his services in reliance on the unenforceable oral promises. See G.L.c. 259, §§ 5 & 5A. During the five-day trial, Stanley presented evidence to the jury, repeatedly objected to by the defendants,[3] that the value of a one-eighth share of Double S at the time of Benjamin's death was $463,965.50. The jury returned a verdict in the amount of $443,985.67, excluding interest. The defendants subsequently filed a motion for a new trial, which was denied. We affirm the judgment and the denial of the motion for a new trial.
On appeal, the defendants' principal claim is that it was error for the trial judge to allow the plaintiffs to introduce in evidence the value of Double S. They argue that, by this error, the judge allowed the jury to enforce Benjamin's unenforceable promise, thereby circumventing the Statute of Frauds, G.L.c. 259, §§ 5 & 5A. Lending force to the argument is the jury's award to Stanley of an amount close to the value of a one-eighth share of Double S.
It is settled law in Massachusetts that "[o]ne who has rendered valuable services pursuant to an oral agreement, which cannot be enforced on account of the statute of frauds, may recover the fair value of the services. This remedy is allowed, not as a means of indirectly avoiding the statute, but to prevent the statute from being employed as an instrument of fraud. The remedy compels the defendant to pay for what he has received by virtue of the express contract." Heil v. McCann, 360 Mass. 507, 511 (1971). See also Downey v. Union *467 Trust Co. of Springfield, 312 Mass. 405, 411 (1942) (recovery in quantum meruit for an unenforceable promise may be allowed "in order to prevent the statute [of frauds] from being employed as an instrument of fraud"); Green v. Richmond, 369 Mass. 47, 49-50 (1975) (oral agreement to make a will is not binding, but "if the oral agreement were legal and not contrary to public policy, the plaintiff could recover the fair value of her services").
The reasonable value of the services to the promiser, that is to say, the value of the benefit conferred upon the promisor, is the appropriate restitutional measure of damages. Hastoupis v. Gargas, 9 Mass. App. Ct. 27, 35 (1980). 3 Williston, Contracts § 536, at 835 (Jaeger 3d ed. 1960). Further, "[w]hen the unperformed promise is to leave a percentage of the estate, reliable evidence of the estate's value becomes some proof of `the reasonable value of the performance that [the decedent] has received.'" Hastoupis v. Gargas, supra at 35-36, quoting from 5 Corbin, Contracts § 1113, at 601 (1964). Massachusetts cases have admitted the value of the promise, in this case, the value of the one-eighth share of Double S, "on the basis that the value of the estate is the `price' put on the services by one of the contracting parties." Green v. Richmond, supra at 56. See also Downey v. Union Trust Co., supra at 413-414 (value of promised annuity admissible as an admission of what testator considered services worth); Hastoupis v. Gargas, supra at 37 (evidence of the estate's value admissible as an admission against interest of the value of the services).
Without disputing these propositions, the defendants argue that the value of the contract is admissible only with respect to services which are "unique"[4] and not capable of valuation by ordinary pecuniary standards.[5] In this case, say the defendants, *468 the services were not unique because the agreement was "in its entirety, a business deal."
Assuming (but not deciding) that the value of the contract is admissible only with respect to services which are unique, we do not agree that in this case there was no evidence of unique services. The nub of the distinction between services that can be valued by ordinary pecuniary methods and those that cannot is whether the services can be purchased in the marketplace at an ascertainable price. In this case, there was evidence that what Benjamin sought, and Stanley provided, was not only the routine, readily obtainable services of an executive in the supermarket business, but also the undeviating filial loyalty of Stanley to Benjamin, something unobtainable in the market place. This contractual purpose is evident in Benjamin's insistence that Stanley would not be permitted to have any outside business interests and could obtain his share of Double S only if he "stayed" with the supermarket business. It was also evident when Benjamin insisted that Stanley's brother, Jeffrey, return his stock in the supermarket when he decided to leave the business. Benjamin's other sons also had to work in the supermarket or forfeit their stock. While conceding that "[d]oubtless, personal considerations motivated Benjamin to make the deal," the defendants add, "but that fact does not alter its essential nature." The defendants would have us attach no importance to Benjamin's motives  his purpose in making the agreement  and instead ask us to consider only the day-to-day services rendered by Stanley. That purpose, however, was the very essence of the matter for Benjamin; he wanted, and received, the certainty of his son's loyalty, both to the business and to Benjamin. True, Benjamin may be seen as having purchased Stanley's loyalty  a suspect but not an unheard-of event in family histories  but that is of no importance. What counts is that Benjamin could not go into the marketplace and *469 purchase a son who agrees to commit his loyalty so long as his father lives. Services of a filial nature have been held to be compensable. See Downey v. Union Trust Co., 312 Mass. at 410; Hastoupis v. Gargas, 9 Mass. App. Ct. at 36 n. 8 & 37 (compensable services included "five years of consanguineous companionship").
Assuming (as the defendants argue) that the services of Stanley as an executive were not unique, this case involves services some of which were "unique" and some of which could be purchased and valued in the marketplace. These are circumstances which permit the value of the contract price to be admitted in evidence. In both Green v. Richmond, 369 Mass. at 49, and Hastoupis v. Gargas, supra at 37, the services rendered were a mixture of those that were unique and those that could readily be valued by ordinary pecuniary standards, and in both cases it was decided that the value of the estate was admissible. To be sure, the value of the estate is not to be taken as conclusive evidence, Hastoupis v. Gargas, supra at 38, because the ultimate issue to be determined by the jury is the value of the plaintiff's services based on all the evidence. The judge's instructions made it clear to the jury that they might consider the value of Double S, but not as conclusive evidence, and that it was for the jury to determine the fair value of Stanley's services "based on all the evidence you heard at the trial." In this fashion the judge properly left the entire and possibly difficult matter of valuation to the trier of fact for final resolution. See ibid. at 38. Even though the award of the jury was close to the value of Double S, this, too, was of no importance because the issue of the fair value of the services of the plaintiff was carefully given to the jury under proper instructions. See ibid. ("The fact that damages are sizeable does not require the award to be rejected out of hand where there is no indication that the estate's value was applied as a per se measure").
The defendants also argue that the proper valuation date for Double S was the date of the agreement, not the date of death. That issue was left open in Green v. Richmond, supra at 58 n. 3, and in Hastoupis v. Gargas, supra at 38-39. The *470 issue in this case is raised for the first time on appeal and we decline to exercise our discretion to consider the argument, see Pryor v. Holiday Inns, Inc., 401 Mass. 506, 509 (1988), and cases cited, other than to note that we see no good reason why, once faced with the certainty that the value of Double S would be admitted at trial, the defendants did not request that the judge admit evidence of the value which they now claim was fair.
The judge's rulings, as well as her instructions to the jury, were without error, as were the denial of the motion for a directed verdict and the denial of the motion for a new trial. The judgment and the order denying the motion for a new trial are therefore affirmed.
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  Richard Towers, coexecutor with Ethel V. Slawsby of the estate of Benjamin Slawsby.
[2]  Double S owned and leased to Capitol Supermarkets the real estate on which Capitol Supermarkets conducted its business.
[3]  The defendants also moved for a directed verdict, which was denied.
[4]  This characterization by the defendants is appropriately derived from Hastoupis v. Gargas, supra at 36.
[5]  Williston appears to take the same position. See Williston, supra § 536, at 835. Corbin takes a more lenient position. See Corbin, supra § 1113, at 601 ("No one doubts, however, that the contract price or rate agreed upon by the parties is admissible in evidence to show what is the reasonable value of the performance that the defendant has received"). Both commentators would admit evidence of the contract price at least where the services are not capable of valuation by ordinary pecuniary standards.

=== CASE 9740047 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:41.500351+00 ===

SULLIVAN, Judge.
Steven Menifee appeals the trial court's revocation of his in-home detention,1 and its deviation from a previous plea agreement in imposing consecutive sentences upon three separate convictions which were rendered at different times.
We affirm.
Upon appeal, Menifee presents three issues for our review, which we restate.
I. Whether the trial court improperly revoked Menifee's in-house detention upon Notice of Probation Violation when it had not issued an order advising him of the terms of his in-house detention;
II. whether the trial court erred by ordering consecutive sentences upon three convictions which were rendered in separate proceedings, when a previous plea agreement upon probation violation required that Menifee serve the three sentences as two four-year sentences to be served consecutively, concurrent with a six-month sentence followed by one year of probation;
III. whether there was sufficient evidence to sustain the trial court's finding that Menifee violated the terms of his in-home detention?
(On October 80, 1989, Menifee was convicted of Burglary, a Class B felony,2 upon his plea of guilty. The court sentenced Menifee as follows:
"'The defendant is sentenced to the Indiana Department of Correction for a period of six (6) years. The Court suspends the execution of sentence except for one year, which defendant shall spend in treatment at Richmond State Hospital with credit for time spent in such treatment. If defendant should fail to complete treatment the remainder of the sentence shall be served at the Department of Correction. Further, the defendant shall be placed on probation for a period of five (5) years." Record at 3.
On October 15, 1990, Menifee pleaded guilty to violation of probation. The bases for the probation violation were his convictions of Theft, a Class D felony,3 and Criminal Mischief,4 and his failure to: 1) keep the Probation Department advised as to his address; 2) complete a court-ordered community service restitution program; 3) pay restitution to the victim of the burglary; and 4) participate in a vocational rehabilitation program, participate in an alcohol dependency program, and submit to a urine test upon the request of the Probation Department. Menifee's sentence upon viola*361tion of his probation was reflected in the trial court's docket entry:
"The Court now finds that the defendant has violated the terms of his probation, orders his probation revoked and his incarceration for a period of four (4) years. Said sentence shall be served at the Riverside Community Corrections Corp. and shall run consecutive to the sentence [for Theft and Criminal Mischief]." Record at 6.
Menifee had received a sentence of one year upon the Theft conviction, and a sentence of six months upon the Criminal Mischief conviction. Also relevant to the resolution of the issues herein presented is Menifee's conviction of Attempted Robbery, a Class C felony,5 for which he received an eight-year sentence, which was suspended.6
Upon finding Menifee guilty of probation violation, the trial court ordered that four years of his original six-year sentence be executed, and further ordered that it be served consecutive to the sentences for Theft and Criminal Mischief. Six months of the sentence for Theft and Criminal Mischief was executed and one year was suspended. The court further ordered that four years of a previously suspended eight-year sentence for Attempted Robbery be executed, with the remaining four years suspended. Finally, the court ordered that the two four-year executed terms be served concurrently, and that they be served consecutive to the six-month executed sentence.
On June 21, 1991, the trial court held a hearing on Menifee's Petition to Modify Sentence, in which he requested that his sentence be changed to in-home detention. The court granted his request, ordering that Menifee be placed on in-home detention and probation for the balance of his sentence.
On September 25, 1991, the Probation Department filed another Notice of Probation Violation,7 based upon allegations of domestic violence between Menifee and his girlfriend. A hearing was held on September 30, 1991, regarding the violation, after which the court issued the following order:
"The Court finds after hearing evidence that the defendant has violated the conditions of probation.... The Court re-yokes defendant's suspended sentence and probation and finds as follows:
1) Defendant was previously sentenced to the Indiana Department of Correction on Cause No. 48D083-8909-CP-123 for the Crime of Burglary, a Class B Felony, for a term of six (6) years;
2) Defendant was previously sentenced to the Indiana Department of Correction on Cause No. 48D083-8911-CP-156 for the crime of Attempted Robbery, a Class C Felony, for a term of eight (8) years;
3) Defendant was previously sentenced to the Indiana Department of Correction on Cause No. 48D03-9008-CFP-106 for the crime of Theft, a Class D Felony, for a term of one-and-a-half (1'%) years.
*362The Court now executes said suspended sentences and runs them consecutively resulting in the defendant's incarceration at the Indiana Department of Correction for a period of fifteen-and-a-half (15%) years for violating conditions of probation." Record at 40.
Menifee appeals from the above Order.
We note at the outset that this appeal arises in a somewhat unique posture. Menifee has prosecuted three separate appeals in challenging the trial court's Order. The three appeals are virtually identical, differing only in that they are premised upon the three separate convictions (Theft/Criminal Mischief, Attempted Robbery, and Burglary) upon which the probation violation hearing was held. The legal issues presented and the arguments supporting those issues are the same in each appeal. Our Fourth District has affirmed the trial court's Order in a consolidated appeal combining separate appeals premised upon the Attempted Robbery conviction, Cause No. 48A05-9201-CR-11, and the Theft/Criminal Mischief conviction, Cause No. 48A04-9201-CR-11. See Menifee v. State, (1992) 4th Dist. Ind.App., 600 N.E.2d 967; see footnote 6, supra.
I. AND IIL
As stated previously, the issues in the instant case are identical to the issues presented in the appeals brought upon the Attempted Robbery and Theft/Criminal Mischief convictions. We agree with the prior resolution of the issues concerning the substantive and procedural correctness of the trial court's revocation of Menifee's in-house detention, and discern no need to restate herein our Fourth District's capable treatment of those issues. Accordingly, we incorporate by reference the portions of the Fourth District's Menifee v. State, supra, which discuss and decide the issues identified therein as issues "1" and "83".
II. SENTENCE
We treat separately, however, the trial court's imposition of consecutive sentences upon the three separate convictions. The Fourth District identified this as issue "2", and phrased it as: "whether the trial court erred in sentencing him." 600 N.E.2d at 968. That opinion addresses the sentence-ing issue narrowly-in the context of the variation between the plea agreement and the sentence imposed. However, we examine the sentencing more broadly; specifically, we examine the trial court's judgment for fundamental error committed in imposing consecutive sentences.
Menifee argues that the imposition of consecutive sentences was improper because the sentence pronounced by the trial court at the October 15, 1990 hearing effectively superseded the respective sentences he had initially received upon conviction of the three separate offenses.
Trial courts may order that sentences be served consecutively only when expressly authorized to do so by statute. Kendrick v. State (1988) Ind., 529 N.E.2d 1311. Statutory authority for imposition of consecutive sentences is contained in I.C. 35-50-1-2 (Burns Code Ed.Supp.1992):
"Consecutive and concurrent terms. (a) Except as provided in subsection (b), the court shall determine whether terms of imprisonment shall be served concurrently or consecutively.
(b) If, after being arrested for one (1) crime, a person commits another crime:
(1) Before the date the person is discharged from probation, parole, or a term of imprisonment imposed for the first crime; or
(2) While the person is released:
(A) Upon the person's own recognizance; or
(B) On bond;
the terms of imprisonment for the crimes shall be served consecutively, regardless of the order in which the crimes are tried and sentences are imposed."
Section (b) requires that a court impose consecutive sentences in instances in which a defendant commits a crime while on probation or parole for another crime. Section (a) confers discretion upon the court when imposing consecutive sentences. This discretion is limited, however, to cases in which a court is contemporaneously impos*363ing two or more sentences. Bartruff v. State (1990) Ind., 558 N.E.2d 485, 488.
We begin with recitation of the principle that a trial court may not order that a sentence be served consecutive to another sentence which the defendant has already received in a different proceeding at a different time. In Kendrick v. State, supra, the defendant had charges pending against him in two separate divisions of the Marion County Superior Court. He pleaded guilty and was sentenced upon the charges in one division. He subsequently pleaded guilty to the charges in the other division. Upon his guilty plea to the second set of charges, the trial court sentenced him and ordered that the sentence be served consecutive to the sentences upon the first guilty plea. The defendant appealed, arguing that his guilty plea was not knowingly made because he was not advised of the possibility of consecutive sentences. Our Supreme Court, although discussing a different question, indicated that consecutive sentences upon the second sentence were improper:
"In the case on appeal, the Division One sentencing court [in the first case] was imposing a single sentence upon a plea of guilty to one of several counts, upon a plea agreement which called for a single sentence. There was therefore no occasion for the exercise of the general authority to order consecutive sentences granted by I.C. § 85-50-1-2(a). [Citations omitted.] Furthermore, and most importantly here, there would at a later time in the future, when sentencing upon [the second set of charges], in the absence of some agreement between the defense and the prosecution, be no occasion for the exercise of that same authority." 529 N.E.2d at 1312.
Later, in Seay v. State (1990) Ind., 550 N.E.2d 1284, our Supreme Court reaffirmed that generally a court may not impose consecutive sentences for unrelated separate crimes when sentences have been imposed for the two crimes at separate times. In Seay, the defendant was found guilty upon two separate counts and sentenced to fifteen and thirty years, respectively, upon Count I, and to fifteen years upon Count II; the trial court ordered that the sentence for Count II be served consecutive to Count I. The defendant appealed, inter alia, that the State improperly delayed filing the charges in that case (instead of filing them along with similar charges upon which he was convicted earlier that year) in order to obtain successive habitual offender enhancements. Citing the limitations of 1.C. 35-50-1-2(a), the court held that the State may not seek multiple habitual offender sentence enhancements by bringing successive prosecutions for charges which could have been consolidated into one trial. Seay, supra, 550 N.E.2d at 1289. In so holding, the court stated:
"However, the sentence appellant had previously received from another court in another cause was not a proper subject for this court's consideration in determining the propriety of consecutive sentences, and the court acted beyond the seope of its authority when it ordered the . commencement of the instant sentence to be postponed until the completion of the sentence imposed in [the previous case]." Td.
In Arnold v. State (1989) 2d Dist. Ind.App., 589 N.E.2d 969, trons. denied, we specifically addressed the situation in which a crime is committed while on probation. In Arnold, the defendant was charged with several criminal offenses which he allegedly committed while on probation. After a probation violation hearing, the defendant's original sentence was reinstated. He later was convicted of the subsequent crimes for which the trial court sentenced him and ordered that the sentence for the subsequent crime be served consecutive to the reinstated sentence. The court noted that "once probation [upon the original conviction] was revoked, it became statutorily mandated that the sentences for the instant crimes be served consecutive to the executed sentence ordered by the probation hearing court." 589 N.E.2d at 978.
In the instant case, while on probation for the first crime (Burglary), Menifee committed and was sentenced for the sec*364ond pair of crimes (Theft/Criminal Mischief). At the October 15, 1990 probation violation and sentencing hearing, the trial court ordered that the Theft/Criminal Mischief convictions sentence be served consecutive to the remainder of the Burglary sentence, which was reinstated. - The court's action in this regard was proper in light of .C. 35-50-1-2(a) because the same court contemporaneously imposed sentence on the first crime (reinstating the suspended sentence) while at the same time pronouncing sentence upon the second set of crimes. Inasmuch as that original order of consecutive sentences was proper, the court was within its power to reinstate that same sentence at the September 80, 1991 probation violation hearing at which the challenged consecutive sentences were imposed.
As noted previously, the record in the instant case contains seant information concerning the Attempted Robbery conviction. It is not clear when the crime was committed, when judgment was pronounced, or when sentence was imposed. In order to permissibly "stack" the consecutive sentences for the three separate convictions, the original imposition of each separate consecutive sentence must have been proper, ie., must have been authorized by statute. Without knowing when the Attempted Robbery was committed, without knowing precisely what sentence was imposed for that crime (i.e., whether it was consecutive to the sentence for any other crime) and without knowing Menifee's status (e., whether incarcerated, on probation or parole) at the time of commission of the crime, it is impossible to discern from the record before us whether the original imposition of consecutive sentences, if indeed it was so ordered, was proper. Nevertheless, we are able to conclude that the Fourth District's resolution of this issue is proper.
Our research indicates that the Fourth District's determination is appropriate in view of the respective records of the two cases consolidated in that appeal, those records being adequate to make such a determination. Although the record in the instant case does not afford us the same latitude in deciding the same issue in the instant case, the record in the Fourth District's consolidated appeal does so. See Hudson v. Hudson (1985) 24 Dist. Ind.App., 484 N.E.2d 579, 581 ("our examination of the record in that case reveals that 2.2.7").
The record there reveals that Menifee was convicted of Theft and Criminal Mischief while on probation for Burglary, and that he was convicted of Attempted Robbery while on probation for the other three convictions. The statutory prerequisites for imposition of consecutive sentences having thus been met, the trial court's sentencing in this regard was proper.
In summary, because we know the relevant facts with certainty, albeit gleaned from the record in a separate but substantially related and similar appeal, it would be inappropriate to reverse the consecutive aspect of the trial court's sentencing when to do so would create directly conflicting determinations in our Court of Appeals. This is especially so here because a contrary determination in the instant case, based upon an incomplete record, would be clearly wrong in view of what we know from a review of the record in the Fourth District's consolidated appeal.
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
BUCHANAN, J., concurs.
CHEZEM, J., concurs in result and files separate opinion.
. The in-home detention was a provision of an order granting Menifee's Petition to Modify Sentence. In addition to placing Menifee on in-home detention, the order also placed him on "probation for the balance of the time of his sentence under the ordinary and usual conditions of probation." Record at 25.
. LC. 35-43-2-1 (Burns Code Ed.1985).
. LC. 35-43-4-2 (Burns Code Ed.Supp.1992).
. LC. 35-43-1-2 (Burns Code Ed.Supp.1992).
. LC. 35-41-5-1 (Burns Code Ed.1985).
. - It is not clear from the record before us exactly when Menifee was convicted of this offense. Although the Fourth District in a consolidation of companion appeals, Menifee v. State, 600 N.E.2d 967 infra, stated: "On July 23, 1990, the trial court sentenced Menifee to eight years after he pled guilty to attempted robbery." The record in the case before us does not contain such information. The docket sheet for the instant case states that the Attempted Robbery charge was "pending" as of February 5, 1990, but the presentence report, filed on October 24, 1989, reflects an Attempted Armed Robbery charge on November 2, 1982, which was not prosecuted. It does not reflect an Attempted Robbery Charge or disposition other than that. However, in a combined guilty plea/probation violation hearing on October 15, 1990, the trial court indicated that Menifee had already been convicted of, and sentenced for, Attempted Robbery. The record is similarly unhelpful with regard to the particulars of the sentence imposed upon the Attempted Robbery conviction. However, the record contains several collateral references to the length of the sentence (8 years), and indicates that the sentence was suspended.
. The Fourth District opinion reflects that this Notice of Violation was filed September 12, 1991.

=== CASE 9740048 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:41.505232+00 ===

CHEZEM, Judge,
concurring in result.
I concur with the majority's result; however, I do not agree with the majority's path to that result. First, the majority cites Kendrick v. State (1988), Ind., 529 N.E.2d 1311 and Seay v. State (1990), Ind., 550 N.E.2d 1284 for the premise that Indiana Code 85-50-1-2(a) restricts the trial court's authority to order consecutive sentences to only those occasions where the court is meting out two or more terms of imprisonment. Regardless of the correctness or the true meaning of those decisions however, Kendrick and Seay do not apply to the case at hand.
*365The majority does correctly state that section (b) of I.C. 35-50-1-2 requires a court to impose consecutive sentences in instances where a defendant commits a crime while on probation or parole for another crime or while out on bond or his own recognizance. Further, the majority correctly makes note of the sparse record before us on the Attempted Robbery convietion and appropriately recites Fourth District's determination of the sentence relat ed to the Attempted Robbery conviction. However, I would also note that the appellant holds the obligation to provide a complete record to the reviewing court. Rondon v. State (1989), Ind., 584 N.E.2d 719, 729, cert. denied, 498 U.S. 969, 110 S.Ct. 418, 107 LEd.2d 388. Failure to provide evidence of alleged error precludes our review of the alleged error. Id. Since the defendant has provided us no information regarding the timing of the commitment of the Attempted Robbery, we cannot know whether the imposition of consecutive sentences was improper. The defendant's decision to file three separate appeals for each probation violation has left this panel with an insufficient record as to the Attempted Robbery conviction which was before the Fourth District; therefore, we cannot determine when the Attempted Robbery was committed. In addition, the Fourth District, missing some of the facts supplied in this appeal, may have reached a different result if it would had some of the record from this appeal.
However we do not base our decisions on speculative and imaginary facts not before us. To hold otherwise encourages future litigants to provide us with only the parts of the trial court record which are most favorable to them. Thus, for the foregoing reasons, I respectfully concur with the majority's result.

=== CASE 2221994 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:25.604932+00 ===

232 Wis.2d 400 (1999)
2000 WI App 20
606 N.W.2d 572
HILLHAVEN CORPORATION, Vencor, Inc., Petitioners-Respondents,
v.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY SERVICES of the State of Wisconsin, and Bureau of Health Care Financing, Respondents-Appellants.
No. 99-0684.
Court of Appeals of Wisconsin.
Submitted on briefs October 8, 1999.
Decided December 23, 1999.
*401 On behalf of the respondents-appellants, the cause was submitted on the briefs of James E. Doyle, attorney general, and Thomas C. Bellavia, assistant attorney general.
On behalf of the petitioner-respondent, the cause was submitted on the brief of Richard J. Krill and Ralph J. Ehlinger of Ehlinger & Krill, S.C., of Milwaukee.
Before Dykman, P.J., Vergeront and Deininger, JJ.
¶ 1. DYKMAN, P.J.
The Department of Health and Family Services (DHFS) and the Bureau of Health *402 Care Financing appeal from an order of the Dane County Circuit Court reversing a DHFS decision. DHFS determined that a trust set up by the Hillhaven Corporation, Vencor, Inc., to provide health benefits to its employees was "self-insurance" for purposes of DHFS's Medical Assistance Program reimbursement methodology. The circuit court concluded that there was no basis by which to categorize the Hillhaven trust was self-insurance. DHFS argues that the circuit court erred because DHFS's determination that the trust was self-insurance was consistent with the purpose of its reimbursement rules and consistent with the commonly understood definition of self-insurance under Wisconsin law. Because we conclude that DHFS's determination was both reasonable and consistent with the purpose of the reimbursement rules, we defer to DHFS's decision and reverse the decision of the circuit court.
I. Background
¶ 2. Hillhaven owns several nursing homes in Wisconsin that are certified providers under the Medical Assistance Program. Hillhaven provides health insurance as a fringe benefit for the employees at these nursing homes. Rather than contracting with a commercial insurer, Hillhaven created the Hillhaven Corporation Voluntary Participant Benefit Trust. Instead of paying more expensive premium payments to a third-party insurance company, Hillhaven and the participating employees make contributions to the trust fund. The fund is used to provide health-care benefits to participating Hillhaven employees, former employees, and their dependents, and to pay administrative expenses. Under the terms of the trust, Hillhaven has the right to determine the amounts and *403 the times of its contributions, but Hillhaven contracted with an insurance company to administer the trust and set the amount of the contributions. The assets of the trust fund can be used only for providing health benefits to employees and for administrative expenses. Contributions to the trust fund may never revert to Hillhaven's control.[1] If the trust funds are ever inadequate to pay any claims under Hillhaven's health plan, Hillhaven must cover the deficiency.[2]
¶ 3. Under § 49.45(6m)(ag), STATS.,[3] DHFS is charged with establishing the rate system for reimbursing *404 nursing homes participating in the Medical Assistance Program. As stipulated in § 49.45(6m)(ag), DHFS updates its rate-setting methodology each year in the "Methods of Implementation For Title XIX Nursing Home Payment Rates" (Methods).[4] DHFS's Bureau of Health Care Financing (Bureau) is primarily responsible for establishing the nursing home payment rates. The Methods states that its purpose is "to ensure that nursing homes . . . are paid appropriately for care provided to Medicaid residents in a cost-efficient fashion." The Methods includes a section devoted to reimbursement for nursing homes that use self-insurance plans. Section 1.248, "Self-Insurance Costs," provides:
The allowable expense for self-insurance plans is the actual claims paid during the cost reporting period. At the facility's option, accrual of pending claims may be made to the extent that such claims are paid within 75 days of the close of the cost reporting period. Such accrued claims may not be expensed in the following year's cost report. If a facility's self-insurance fund is managed by an independent (non-related) trustee, the fee paid to the trustee may be included in allowable self-insurance costs. If actuarial determinations are performed by an independent (non-related, non-employee) actuary, the fee paid to the actuary may be included in allowable self-insurance costs. Allowable self-insurance costs may also include the premium costs of reinsurance ("stop loss") policies purchased from an *405 unrelated company and any costs to administer the self insurance plan. Any proceeds from these policies will be offset against the claims paid during the cost reporting period of receipt.
¶ 4. For the July 1, 1992 through June 30, 1993 reimbursement rate period, the Bureau determined that Hillhaven's trust constituted a self-insurance plan, as covered by § 1.248 of the Methods. Thus, Hillhaven's reimbursement rate was based on the administrative expenses of the trust and the benefit claims actually paid out, rather than on the amount of Hillhaven's contributions to the trust. Hillhaven petitioned DHFS to review the Bureau's decision.
¶ 5. After a hearing, the DHFS hearing examiner decided that the Bureau correctly determined that Hill- haven's trust was self-insurance. The examiner acknowledged that "self-insurance" was not defined in the Methods or in § 49.45, STATS. She stated that "the Trust fits neither the classic example of self-insurance . . . nor the requirements of an unrelated insurance company," but:
[u]nder the Methods, a nursing home is either self-insured or uses an unrelated outside insurance company. The Trust is not an unrelated outside insurance company because it was created to insure only persons related to Hillhaven by employment; it does not write insurance contracts with a larger public. There are many ties to Hillhaven.
The examiner also relied on the definitions of "self-insurance" and "insurance company" from BLACK'S LAW DICTIONARY.[5] Finally, she stated, "If I were to accept Hillhaven's premise that the Trust is not a self-insurance *406 plan because the Trust is not insuring the Trust (self), I doubt that any segregated fund or trust could ever be characterized as self-insurance."
¶ 6. Hillhaven petitioned the Dane County Circuit Court to review the hearing examiner's decision. The circuit court determined that Hillhaven's trust was not easily categorized as self-insurance or insurance for purposes of the Methods. It remanded the action so that DHFS could determine the history and intent behind the applicable sections of the Methods and issue another decision.
¶ 7. On remand, the hearing examiner again decided that the Bureau had correctly determined Hillhaven's trust to be a self-insurance plan. She acknowledged that:
The legislative history on this section can be charitably described as minimal. The Bureau has been able to come up with no documented commentary that explains the intended parameters of § 1.248.... There is no "smoking gun" in these documents that compellingly places the Trust into the category of self-insurance or a third-party insurance company.
The examiner explained that the only useful legislative history was that, from 1988 through 1990, § 1.248 of the Methods included an exception for contributions to Medicare self-insurance plans during any fiscal year ending on or before December 31, 1988. For those *407 plans, DHFS could base reimbursement on the contributions to the plans, rather than on the actual claims paid out. This exception was removed in 1991. The examiner concluded that this indicated that the Methods drafter could have allowed reimbursement for contributions to certain self-insurance plans, instead of just for actual claims paid, but elected not to.
¶ 8. The examiner stated that, although the legislative history of the Methods was not persuasive, she had to "make a decision one way or the other." She concluded that the reasoning in her original decision was still sound. She also adopted the following argument from the Bureau's brief on remand:
In creating its Methods of Implementation section concerning self-insurance, the Bureau was obviously mindful that an insurance system controlled by a nursing home presents an inherent risk that the amounts of the nursing home's premiums will be inflated. Accordingly, to reduce the likelihood of abuse by an insurance program operated by the nursing home, the Bureau relied on costs less likely to be artificially increased: namely the claims paid out in benefits, rather than the amounts paid by the nursing home as premiums.
There may indeed be nursing homes who operate their own insurance systems and who are not in fact attempting to inflate their costs. However, as the federal courts have noted, it is perfectly appropriate to create a requirement for prophylactic purposes. In the Hillhaven situation, the fact that its Trust is under the control of Hillhaven officials and that Hillhaven itself determines the timing and amounts of contributions to the Trust points to the conclusion that Hillhaven presents the very situation about which the Methods of Implementation *408 are concerned: the potential for cost inflation, even if costs are not inflated in actuality.
¶ 9. Hillhaven petitioned the Dane County Circuit Court to review DHFS's decision on remand. The circuit court reversed, concluding that there was no basis by which to categorize Hillhaven's trust as "self-insurance" for purposes of § 1.248 of the Methods. DHFS appeals.
II. Standard of Review
¶ 10. DHFS argues that its decision to apply § 1.248 of the Methods in this case is entitled to due deference because of its expertise in administering the Medical Assistance Program's reimbursement system. DHFS asserts that we should uphold the hearing examiner's decision if we conclude that it was reasonable. Hillhaven contends that the hearing examiner's decision is subject to de novo review because the interpretation of "self-insurance" was an issue of first impression for DHFS.
¶ 11. Hillhaven also argues that DHFS waived any argument that a standard other than de novo review should be applied to the hearing examiner's decision. Hillhaven points out that, in its first decision, the circuit court reviewed DHFS's decision de novo. Hillhaven argues that the court's order to remand was a final determination of the action, and since DHFS did not appeal that determination, the court's decision to use de novo review must stand. However, in an appeal of an administrative agency decision, we review the decision of the agency, not that of the circuit court. See Lilly v. DHSS, 198 Wis. 2d 729, 734, 543 N.W.2d 548, 550 (Ct. App. 1995). The trial court's decision regarding the proper standard of review is not relevant to our review of DHFS's decision.
*409 [1-3]
¶ 12. The interpretation of an administrative rule or regulation, like the interpretation of a statute, is a question of law that we review de novo. See Gorchals v. DHFS, 224 Wis. 2d 541, 545, 591 N.W.2d 615, 617 (Ct. App. 1999); Franklin v. Housing Auth. of Milwaukee, 155 Wis. 2d 419, 425-26, 455 N.W.2d 668, 672 (Ct. App. 1990). However, an administrative agency's interpretation of its own rules or regulations is controlling unless plainly erroneous or inconsistent with the language of the rule or regulation.[6]See State *410 v. Busch, 217 Wis. 2d 429, 441, 576 N.W.2d 904, 908-09 (1998); Irby v. Bablitch, 170 Wis. 2d 656, 658, 489 N.W.2d 713, 714 (Ct. App. 1992). We will defer to DHFS's interpretation of "self-insurance" under § 1.248 of the Methods if it is reasonable and consistent with the purpose of the regulation. See Franklin, 155 Wis. 2d at 426, 455 N.W.2d at 672.
III. Analysis
¶ 13. DHFS argues that we should uphold the hearing examiner's conclusion that the Bureau correctly determined Hillhaven's trust to be a self-insurance plan, as covered by § 1.248 of the Methods. DHFS contends that the examiner's decision was reasonable and consistent with the Methods' purpose of preventing inflated reimbursement rates. It also argues that categorizing the trust as self-insurance is consistent with Wisconsin law under Hillegass v. Landwehr, 176 Wis. 2d 76, 499 N.W.2d 652 (1993), because Hillhaven did not transfer risk to another party under the terms of the trust.
*411 ¶ 14. Hillhaven asserts that the hearing examiner was incorrect because the trust does not fit the legal definition of self-insurance. Hillhaven argues that, because it did not simply set aside a fund to meet losses, but instead established a separate legal entity to which it made non-reverting payments, it was not self-insuring. Hillhaven explains that any contributions it makes to the trust in excess of the health benefit claims for the year are kept in reserve as property of the trust. Since Hillhaven has no control over these reserves and they are used only to cover future health benefit claims, the full amount of the contributions should be reimbursable.
¶ 15. We conclude that the hearing examiner's decision that the trust was self-insurance under § 1.248 of the Methods was reasonable. The term "self-insurance" is not defined in the Methods or in the statute under which DHFS promulgates the Methods. However, DHFS's application of § 1.248 of the Methods to the Hillhaven trust was consistent with the commonly understood definition of self-insurance as explained in Hillegass.
¶ 16. In Hillegass, the supreme court examined the definitions of insurance from BLACK'S LAW DICTIONARY and WEBSTER'S NEW COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY, and stated that "the critical element in both definitions is a contractual shifting of risk in exchange for premiums." Hillegass, 176 Wis. 2d at 81, 499 N.W.2d at 654-55. The court then explained the difference between contractual, third-party insurance and self-insurance:
Whereas contractual insurance policies involve a third-party insurer underwriting the insured's risk in exchange for premium payments, self-insurers retain their own risk in exchange for not paying *412 premiums. The parties implicated in the risk-shifting may change depending on the particular arrangement, but the essence of the transaction remains the same: exchanging future liability for premium payments. In the words of the circuit court: "self-insurance is just a form of insurance. . . . the modifying term `self just indicates where it emanates. . . ."
Id. at 81-82, 499 N.W.2d at 655 (footnote omitted). In Hillegass, Burlington Air Express self-insured by retaining its own risk "for the first $1 million rather than pay premiums to a third-party insurer." Id. at 82, 499 N.W.2d at 655. The supreme court explained that in doing so, "Burlington was able to exercise its business discretion in devising a scheme of risk management that it considered most advantageous. A different company might have reached a contrary conclusion and contracted for coverage with a third-party insurer." Id.
¶ 17. In this case, Hillhaven made a similar decision to reduce expenses by covering employee health benefits through its trust, instead of paying premiums to a third-party insurer. In doing so, Hillhaven retained the risk associated with health insurance coverage. Under the terms of the trust, in the event that benefit claims in a particular year exceed the contributions to the trust fund, Hillhaven must pay the difference. Had Hillhaven contracted with a third-party insurer, the insurer would have accepted the risk of paying all possible claims in exchange for receiving premiums. Although the trust fund should be sufficient to cover most claims, Hillhaven retains the ultimate responsibility to ensure that all claims covered under *413 their health plan are paid. As the court in Hillegass explained, this is the essence of self-insurance.[7]
¶ 18. We also conclude that the hearing examiner's determination that Hillhaven's trust is covered by § 1.248 of the Methods was consistent with the Methods' purpose. As stated in § 1.110 of the Methods, its purpose is "to ensure that nursing homes . . . are paid appropriately for care provided to Medicaid residents in a cost-efficient fashion." Under the chapter on "Allowable Expenses," § 1.210 provides that "[n]ecessary and proper expenses are usually expenses incurred by a reasonably prudent buyer. . . ." Section 1.230 further states that a "prudent and cost-conscious buyer not only refuses to pay more than the going price for an item or service, but also seeks to economize by minimizing cost." The Methods are thus designed to promote cost-efficiency.
¶ 19. The hearing examiner's conclusion that the Hillhaven trust was self-insurance was consistent with *414 the policy of promoting cost-efficiency. Under § 1.248, self-insurers are reimbursed only for actual claims paid out, along with the related expenses of self-insuring. Although Hillhaven contracts with an insurance company to determine the amount of its contributions to the trust fund, Article I, § 5 of the trust states that Hillhaven "shall make contributions to the Fund in such amounts and at such times as it shall determine." The expertise of the insurance company may be useful in determining the amount of contributions, so as to reduce the risk that the trust will have insufficient funds to cover any potential claims, but Hillhaven retains the authority to set the amount of its contributions. The trust mandates that "[t]he contributions shall be based on the amounts necessary to pay any premiums becoming due, [and] to provide for the benefits expected to become payable under the Plan." However, the trust does not prevent Hillhaven from overestimating the amount of benefits expected to become due. If Hillhaven were reimbursed for its contributions to the trust, rather than for the actual claims paid out, then Hillhaven, by setting the amount of its contributions, would also be setting the amount of its reimbursement, at least as to its percentage of Medicaid patients. Such an arrangement could open the door to inefficiency, and would be contrary to the purpose of the Methods.
¶ 20. Hillhaven argues that determining the trust to be self-insurance under § 1.248 of the Methods will not prevent cost inflation. Hillhaven asserts that its trust provides no incentive to inflate costs because once Hillhaven contributes to the trust, it loses all control of the money. However, if § 1.248 is not applied to the trust, Hillhaven would recover a significant portion of the money it contributes. If we were to accept Hillhaven's *415 argument that the trust is not self-insurance, it would have little incentive not to inflate the amount of its contributions in a particular year because it would be largely reimbursed for those contributions regardless of whether they were needed to pay actual claims. Whether or not Hillhaven would actually inflate its costs, it was reasonable for the hearing examiner to interpret the Methods in a manner that would most likely reduce cost inflation.
¶ 21. Hillhaven further contends that the hearing examiner's conclusion that § 1.248 applies to the trust is contrary to the "prudent buyer approach to payment for services" called for in § 49.45(6m)(ag)1, STATS. Hillhaven asserts that by setting up a trust in order to avoid paying higher premiums to a third-party insurer, it was a "prudent buyer." It argues that if nursing homes are not fully reimbursed for their contributions to such trusts, they will have little incentive not to use third-party insurers, thus incurring more expensive premiums and more costly reimbursement rates. We disagree. As stated in § 1.110 of the Methods, nursing homes are reimbursed only "for care provided to Medicaid residents." Thus, a nursing home will not be reimbursed for the percentage of employee health benefits not associated with providing service to Medicaid patients. A nursing home would have incentive to use a self-insurance plan in order to incur savings for that part of the plan not attributable to care provided to Medicaid patients.
¶ 22. Finally, Hillhaven argues that the legislative history the hearing examiner discussed in her decision on remand does not support DHFS's interpretation of self-insurance. Hillhaven asserts that the fact that the Methods drafter deleted the exception for contributions to pre-1989 Medicaid self-insurance plans is *416 ambiguous and does not demonstrate DHFS's intent regarding self-insurance in general. We will defer to an agency interpretation of its own regulations if it is reasonable and consistent with the purpose of the regulation. See Franklin, 155 Wis. 2d at 426, 455 N.W.2d at 672. The sparse history of § 1.248 may be open to varied interpretations, but the hearing examiner's interpretation of that history does not render her decision unreasonable.
[4]
¶ 23. We defer to the hearing examiner's determination that the Hillhaven trust is self-insurance as covered by § 1.248 of the Methods, as it was reasonable and consistent with the Methods' purpose. Accordingly, we reverse the decision of the circuit court.
By the Court.  Order reversed.
NOTES
[1]  Article VI of the trust, "NONREVERSION OF FUND," provides:
The assets of the Fund shall be held for the exclusive purpose of providing the Plan benefits and defraying reasonable expenses of administration as described in this Agreement and shall never inure or revert to the benefit of the Company with the exception that contributions paid by a mistake of fact shall be allowable, if returned within one (1) year after payment in the Fund.
[2]  Article II, § 3(a) of the trust provides:
The Fund shall be funded with Company and/or Participant Contributions made at such intervals and in such amounts and manner, through payroll deductions, or otherwise, as prescribed in the provisions of the Plan. In the event and to the extent such contributions are not sufficient from time to time to cover the benefits payable under the Plan and other payments from the Fund authorized pursuant to Section 2 of Article II, the Company shall contribute or cause to be paid to the Fund such amount or amounts as may be necessary to cover the deficiency.
[3]  Section 49.45(6m)(ag), STATS., provides, in pertinent part:
Payment for care provided in a facility under this subsection made under s. 20.435(1)(p) or (5)(b) or (o) shall, except as provided in pars. (bg), (bm) and (br), be determined according to a prospective payment system updated annually by the department. The payment system shall implement standards that are necessary and proper for providing patient care and that meet quality and safety standards established under subch. II of ch. 50 and ch. 150. The payment system shall reflect. . . .
1. A prudent buyer approach to payment for services, under which a reasonable price recognizing selected factors that influence costs is paid for service that is of acceptable quality.
[4]  Any reference to the "Methods" in this opinion is to the "Methods of Implementation For Title XIX Nursing Home Payment Rates For The Period July 1, 1992 Through June 30, 1993," the applicable Methods in this case.
[5]  The edition of BLACK'S LAW DICTIONARY used by the hearing examiner defines "self-insurance" as:
The practice of setting aside a fund to meet losses instead of insuring against such through insurance. A common practice of business is to self-insure up to a certain amount, and then to cover any excess with insurance. Workers' compensation obligations may also be met through this method if statutory requirements are met.
BLACK'S LAW DICTIONARY 1360 (6th ed. 1990). It defines "insurance company" as a "corporation or association whose business is to make contracts of insurance." Id. at 807.
[6]  The deference we apply to an agency interpretation of its own rule or regulation is different than the deference we give to an agency interpretation of a statute. Although the interpretation of a regulation and a statute are both questions of law, see Franklin v. Housing Auth. of Milwaukee, 155 Wis. 2d 419, 425-26, 455 N.W.2d 668, 672 (Ct. App. 1990), we determine the proper deference for agency statutory interpretations in a different manner. Agency statutory interpretations are generally entitled to one of three levels of deference: "great weight," "due weight" or no deference. See Zignego Co. v. DOR, 211 Wis. 2d 819, 823-24, 565 N.W.2d 590, 592 (Ct. App. 1997). When applying great weight deference, we "will uphold an agency's reasonable interpretation that is not contrary to the clear meaning of the statute, even if . . . an alternative interpretation is more reasonable." UFE Inc. v. LIRC, 201 Wis. 2d 274, 287, 548 N.W.2d 57, 62 (1996). Under the due weight standard, we will not overturn a reasonable agency interpretation that is consistent with the purpose of the statute unless there is a more reasonable interpretation. See id. at 286-87, 548 N.W.2d at 62.
In contrast, for agency interpretations of their own rules or regulations, we generally apply only one level of deference. This level of deference has been, at times, termed "controlling weight," or even "great weight." RTE Corp. v. DILHR, 88 Wis. 2d 283, 290, 276 N.W.2d 290, 293 (1979); Vonasek v. Hirsch & Stevens, Inc., 65 Wis. 2d 1, 7, 221 N.W.2d 815, 818 (1974); Irby v. Bablitch, 170 Wis. 2d 656, 658, 489 N.W.2d 713, 714 (Ct. App. 1992). However, it is described using different terminology than that used for the "great weight" deference applied to statutory interpretations. See State v. Busch, 217 Wis. 2d 429, 441, 576 N.W.2d 904, 908-09 (1998) (holding that an agency's interpretation of its own regulations "is controlling in determining their meaning unless plainly erroneous or inconsistent with the regulations"). Despite the different terminology, the deference for an agency interpretation of its own rules appears to be similar to the "great weight" level of deference applied to agency statutory interpretations, as both turn on whether the agency interpretation is reasonable and consistent with the meaning or purpose of the regulation or statute. See UFE, 201 Wis. 2d at 287, 548 N.W.2d at 62; Franklin, 155 Wis. 2d at 426, 455 N.W.2d at 672.
[7]  Hillhaven argues that its trust does not meet the definition of self-insurance under Hillegass v. Landwehr, 176 Wis. 2d 76, 499 N.W.2d 652 (1993), and BLACK'S LAW DICTIONARY. Hillhaven reads Hillegass and BLACK'S LAW DICTIONARY as supporting four specific distinctions between self-insurance and contractual insurance, regarding: (1) who pays claims; (2) who controls the funds used to pay claims; (3) who sets the amount of premiums or contributions to the funds; and (4) whether "the risk of loss is shifted to the third-party insurer up to (but not beyond) the limits of the insurance." It argues that based on these distinctions, the trust more closely resembles contractual insurance. However, Hillhaven's four distinctions appear to be self-serving and are not based on any specific reference to legal authority. We will not consider arguments that are not supported by reference to legal authority. See Phillips v. Wisconsin Personnel Comm'n, 167 Wis. 2d 205, 228, 482 N.W.2d 121, 130 (Ct. App. 1992).

=== CASE 9740049 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:46.321819+00 ===

STATON, Judge.
Melvin Holliday appeals his conviction of burglary,1 a Class B felony. Holliday raises three issues for our consideration, restated as:
I. Whether the trial court erred by admitting hearsay statements involving a prior unrelated crime purportedly committed by Holliday.
II. - Whether the trial court committed fundamental error when it instruct ed the jury that a defendant is presumed sane.
Whether a jury instruction on the State's burden of proof violated Holliday's due process rights. III.
We affirm.
The evidence favorable to the conviction indicates that on April 3, 1990, Stephen Hunter stepped out of the shower in his Elkhart, Indiana apartment and heard someone knocking at his door. Hunter, still in the bathroom, did not answer the door. A few moments later, Hunter heard something hit his apartment door, and the door opened. After the door closed, Hunter looked out his apartment window and saw two men talking outside. Shortly thereafter, one of the two men returned to the apartment and looked through some of Hunter's belongings. Hunter confronted the intruder, who quickly fled the scene. Hunter later identified Holliday as the intruder. Holliday took Hunter's checkbook, and wrote seven checks on the account without Hunter's permission. After being taken into police custody, Holliday gave a statement in which he admitted entering . the apartment and stealing Hunter's checkbook. Before trial, Holliday filed a notice of intent to interpose an insanity defense. After a three day trial, the jury found Holliday guilty of burglary, but mentally ill, Holliday appeals.
I.
Hearsay Evidence
During rebuttal, the State presented the testimony of police detective Brett Coppins. Over Holliday's hearsay objection, Coppins testified that an informant and one of Holli-day's relatives advised Coppins of Holli-day's participation in a prior unrelated robbery. Holliday claims the State offered Coppins' testimony as evidence of the truth of the third parties' statements, and his inability to confront and cross-examine these third parties resulted in a deprivation of his constitutional rights under the Sixth Amendment. The State contends that the testimony was offered to rebut Holliday's insanity claim and to explain the actions of an arresting police officer; therefore, the testimony was not hearsay.
Hearsay is an out-of-court statement offered in court to prove the truth of the matter therein. - Williams v. State (1989), Ind., 544 N.E.2d 161, 162, reh'g denied. Out-of-court statements introduced primarily to explain why a particular course of action was taken during a criminal investigation are not offered for the truth of the matter, and are not, therefore, hearsay statements. Johnston v. State (1988), Ind., 530 N.E.2d 1179. Moreover, when the defendant asserts the insanity defense, evidence otherwise inadmissible may be proper to bear upon the credibility of the conclusions drawn by doctors or for relevant observations of demeanor. Benefiel v. State (1991), Ind., 578 N.E.2d 338, 346, and Rogers v. State (1987), Ind., 514 N.E.2d 1259, 1261. However, when reviewing the admission of this evidence, the reviewing court requires "a reasonable level of assurance that such testimony was not offered by the proponent nor received by the trier of fact as evidence of the truth of the third party's statement." - Williams, supra, at 162-63. Despite Holliday's as*388sertions to the contrary, it is clear that such assurance was present in this case.
Holliday analogizes his case to Williams, supra, which is distinguishable from the present case. In Willioms, the officer's statements went to the issue of whether Williams was involved in the charged crime, and they supported the victim's trial testimony as to the perpetrator's identity. Supra, at 163. In the present case, the statements of the informant and Holliday's relative neither addressed the issue of the perpetrator's identity in the April 3 burglary, nor corroborated Hunter's testimony that Holliday was the perpetrator of the April 3 burglary.
The statements made here are similar to the statements made in Johnston, where the statements were offered to "explain how and why the ... transactions ... were initiated." Supra, at 1181. In the present case, the statements were not offered to prove that Holliday committed the purse snatching on March 8, but to explain how Coppins was placed in a position to apprehend Holliday on March 8. The March 8 encounter served as an additional basis of personal knowledge for Coppins to observe Holliday's physical demeanor and were offered to rebut the medical experts' conclusions. Benefiel, supra, at 346, and Rogers, supra, at 1261.
The admission of the statements of the informant and of Holliday's relative did not deny Holliday his right to confrontation, because Holliday was not on trial for the March 8 robbery. Johnston, supra, at 1181. By raising the insanity defense, Hol-liday made Coppins' March 8 observations relevant. There was a reasonable level of assurance that Coppins' testimony was offered to explain Coppins' actions and not for the truth of the matters asserted therein.
Second, Holliday argues "[tlhere is no absolute assurance that hearsay statements of third parties were considered for any purpose other than the truth of the matter asserted in their out-of-court statements." Brief of Appellant at 10. The jury received a limiting instruction as to the use of this testimony.2 On appeal, it is presumed that the jury obeyed the trial court's instructions. Chandler v. State (1991), Ind., 581 N.E.2d 1233, 1237. Because the statements here are like those in Johnston, supra, the limiting instruction provides reasonable assurance that the jury did not receive the testimony about the March 8 robbery as evidence of the truth of the matter asserted therein.
Third, Holliday argues that the limiting instruction did not admonish the jury against considering the hearsay statements of Holliday's relative and the informant as evidence of the proof of the matter asserted therein. The jury is presumed to follow the court's instructions. Chandler, supra, at 1237. By reviewing the complete language of the limiting instruction, it explains to the jury that the testimony is to be considered not for its "truth or falsity, but only to show what the officer did on a particular occasion, or how he arrived at, in this case, arresting the defendant." Record, p. 312. The instruction reasonably explains to a jury the proper use of the information making up Coppins' testimony about the March 8 arrest.
Fourth, Holliday argues that the limiting instruction he requested conflicts with the Court's Final Instruction No. 40,3 permitting the jury to improperly use Coppins' statements to conclude that Holliday committed the March 8 robbery. On appeal, the court presumes that the jury obeyed the trial court's instructions. Chandler, supra, at 1287.
The limiting instruction solely addressed Coppins' testimony regarding the events *389leading up to Holliday's arrest on March 8. Final Instruction No. 40 encompassed the other three crimes discussed by Coppins during his rebuttal testimony. We do not conclude that the jury was unable to perceive the limiting instruction an exception to the general rule stated in the final instruction. The instructions are not contradictory.
IL.
Presumption of Sanity
Holliday alleges error in the Court's Final Instruction No. 12, where the jury was instructed that "every person is presumed to be sane." Record, p. T2. Because Holliday failed to make a timely objection to this instruction, he raises this issue on appeal as fundamental error. Hol-liday argues two errors: first, Instruction No. 12 misled the jury with respect to Holliday's insanity defense; and second, the jury received no instruction explaining how the presumption of sanity could be overcome. - Fundamental error requires: (1) the error to be a blatant violation of basic principles; (2) the harm or the potential harm to be substantial; and (8) the resulting error denied the defendant fundamental due process. Okuly v. State (1991), Ind.App., 574 N.E.2d 315, 316, trans. denied.
The first prong of the fundamental error test requires the error to be a violation of basic principles. Both parties agree it was error for the jury to be instructed as to the presumption of sanity after Holliday produced some evidence on that issue. See Young v. State (1972), 258 Ind. 246, 280 N.E.2d 595, reh'g denied. Contra Corbin v. State (1990), Ind., 563 N.E.2d 86, 91, where the court stated that Darby v. State (1987), Ind., 514 N.E.2d 1049, "found the presumption of sanity ... instruction to be proper." In Darby, the defendant raised the insanity defense, presented evidence, and an instruction was given which stated, "[there is a presumption in the law that all persons are sane...." Supra, at 1055. We will accept for argument, based on Young, that the instruction was erroneous. Supra, at 597-98.
If the instruction error amounts to a blatant violation of basic principles, it would justify reversal. To justify reversal, the error must be of such a nature that the whole charge of which it forms, a part misleads the jury as to the law of the case. Sturgeon v. State (1991), Ind.App., 575 N.E.2d 679, 680.
When examining an error in a particular jury instruction, the instructions should be read as a whole and construed together. Darby, supra, at 1055. Final Instruction No. 3 stated, "In considering any one instruction, you should construe it in connection with, and in light of, every other instruction given." Record, p. 62. Therefore, Instruction No. 12 does not stand alone, but it must be considered in light of all other instructions.
Holliday allegeé the jury was misled as to his insanity defense. In Final Instruction No. 9, the jury was instructed:
* * # # # *
However, on the issue of insanity, the burden rests upon the Defendant to prove to each juror by a preponderance of the evidence that he was not sane at the time of the charged offense.
The term preponderance of the evidence means that you must be convinced from all of the evidence in the case that the Defendant was more probably insane than sane at the time of the act charged.
Record, p. 69. This instruction correctly explained Holliday's burden of proof to establish his insanity defense. When this instruction and the presumption instruction are construed together, the jury was not misled as to the law of the case and the error was not a blatant violation of basic principles.
Second, Holliday argues error because the jury was not instructed as to how the legal presumption of sanity could be overcome by the evidence. The instructions will be viewed as a whole and construed together. Darby, supra, at 1055. Final Instruction No. 7 explained:
* * % # L *
*390However, even if the State did prove each of the above elements beyond a reasonable doubt, and the Defendant also proved by a preponderance of the evidence that at the time of the offense, as a result of a mental disease or defect, he was unable to appreciate the wrongfulness of his conduct at the time of the offense, then you should find the Defendant not responsible by reason of insanity at the time of the offense.
* * * * * *
Record, p. 66. Instruction No. 7 explained to the jury the effect of Holliday's satisfaction of his burden of proof. The jury was appropriately instructed that the presumption of sanity was rebuttable.
When Instruction No. 12 is read with the other instructions, the jury was not misled as to the law of the case, and the instruction did not create an irrebutta-ble presumption of sanity. The error caused by Instruction No. 12 was corrected by other instructions and was not a blatant violation of basic principles.
Because the first prong of the fundamental error test is not satisfied, it was not fundamental error for the trial court to give Instruction No. 12.
IIL.
Burden of Proof
Holliday next argues that the trial court erred when it instructed the jury in the Court's Final Instruction No. 28 that:
You are instructed that where a specif-ie intent or kind of culpability is required to make an act an offense, such as in the charge preferred [sic] against the Defendant, the State is not required to make proof of specific intent by direct evidence, since purpose and intent are subjective facts. That is, they exist within the mind of man, and since you cannot delve into a person's mind and determine his purpose and intent, you may look at all the surrounding circumstances, including what was said and done in relation thereto. The State is only required to produce such evidence as will satisfy the jury beyond a reasonable doubt that the crime charged was committed by the Defendant with the degree of culpability charged in the information. You may, however, infer that every person intends the natural and probable consequences of his voluntary acts, unless the circumstances are such to indicate the absence of such intent. A determination of the Defendant's intent may be arrived at by the jury from a consideration of the Defendant's conduct and the natural and usual consequences to which such conduct logically and reasonably points.
Where an unlawful act, however, is proved to be knowingly dorie, no further proof is needed on the part of the State in the absence of justifying or excusing facts.
Record, p. 88.
Holliday alleges this instruction violated his due process rights. Because Holliday failed to make a timely objection to this instruction, he raises this issue on appeal as fundamental error. Holliday presents four arguments to establish this instruction as fundamental error: (a) the instruction relieved the State of its burden to prove the essential element of intent; (b) the final paragraph of the instruction automatically shifted the burden of production to Holli-day after the State showed a knowing breaking and entering; (c) the instruction contained infirm language not corrected by other instructions; and (d) there was cumulative error caused by this instruction and the presumption of sanity instruction. Fundamental error requires: (1) the error to be a blatant violation of basic principles; (2) the harm or the potential harm to be substantial; and (8) the resulting error denied the defendant fundamental due process. Okuly, supra, at 316.
(a)
Holliday asserts that the foregoing instruction is a blatant violation of basic principles because it relieved the State of its burden of proof on the intent issue, an essential element of the crime, in contraversion of Sandstrom v. Montana (1979), 442 U.S. 510, 99 S.Ct. 2450, 61 L.Ed.2d 89, and Francis v. Franklin (1985), 471 U.S. 307, 105 S.Ct. 1965, 85 L.Ed.2d 844. The *391court in Sandstrom rejected an instruction that presumes a person intends the ordinary consequences of his voluntary actions. The court in Francis rejected a mandatory, although rebuttable, presumption of intent based on the commission of an act. Elswick v. State (1991), Ind.App., 565 N.E.2d 1123, 1129, trans. denied.
The relevant inquiry is whether the challenged instruction creates a presumption or permits an inference. If the instruction relieves the State of its burden of persuasion on an element of the charged offense, it is violative of the Due Process Clause. Permissive inference instructions only violate the Due Process Clause if the suggested conclusion is not one that reason and common sense justify in light of the proven facts before the jury. Elswick, supra, at 1129, citing Francis, supra, 471 U.S. at 314-315, 105 S.Ct. at 1971-72.
An instruction substantially similar to that given at Holliday's trial was considered in Van Orden v. State (1984), Ind., 469 N.E.2d 1158, cert. denied, 471 U.S. 1104, 105 S.Ct. 2335, 85 LEd.2d 851. The court in Van Orden held the challenged instruction did not contain the limited and mandatory language rejected in Sond-strom and was properly given. Id. at 1161.
Instruction No. 23 used more permissive language than accepted in Van Orden. Holliday's instruction used the phrase "You may, however, infer" immediately proceeding the language approved by Van Orden, supra, at 1160. Elswick, supra, at 1129. Considering the intent instruction in its entirety, it permits, rather than mandates, a conclusion that an actor intends the consequences of his acts. The instruetion did not relieve the State of its burden of production on the intent issue. Id. Because it was not error to give the jury this intent instruction, it was neither blatant error, nor fundamental error.
(b)
Holliday's next argument contends that the final paragraph of Instruction No. 23 impermissibly allowed the burden of production to shift to Holliday to disprove the specific intent issue after the State had presented evidence that the breaking and entering was done knowingly. Holliday misreads this instruction. This Court in Warner v. State (1991), Ind.App., 577 N.E.2d 267, 271, where an instruction contained an identical final paragraph, stated:
"This language merely informs the jury that, once the State has established the culpability element of the offense, it need not put on additional evidence unless facts are elicited justifying or exceus-ing the criminal act, whether these facts are elicited by the State or [DJjefendant. The instruction clearly does not require the [Djlefendant to do anything."
As a whole, the instruction does not shift the burden to Holliday or amount to a blatant error violating basic principles. Holliday fails to demonstrate fundamental error in this argument.
(c)
Holliday also argues that Instrue tion No. 28 contains infirm language which was not corrected by other instructions. In particular, Holliday cites to Beecher v. State (1991), Ind.App., 567 N.E.2d 861, 864, reh'g denied, and Blackburn v. State (1988), Ind., 519 N.E.2d 554, 556-557, reh'g. denied. We will assume, in arguendo, Instruction No. 23 contains infirm language or error and will search for a blatant violation of basic principles.
Holliday, first, argues the jury was not instructed as in Beecher that "[the Defendant is not required to present any evidence to prove his innocence or to prove or explain anything". Supra, at 864. In Final Instruction No. 11, the jury was instructed "[the Defendant is not required to present any evidence to prove his innocence. However, in this case the Defendant has the burden of proving that he was insane at the time of the act charged by a preponderance of the evidence." Record, p. 71. This language accurately states the law after the insanity defense has been raised and performs the same remedial function as the language quoted from Beecher. Supra, at 864. Therefore, the alleged infirmity has been corrected by other instructions.
*392Holliday's second argument is the jury was not expressly instructed that the intent element was an essential element that the State "is bound to prove beyond a reasonable doubt." Blackburn, supra, at 557. Final Instruction No. 23 states that, "The State is only required to produce such evidence as will satisfy the jury beyond a reasonable doubt that the crime charged was committed by the Defendant with the degree of culpability charged in the information." Record, p. 88. Also, Final Instruction No. 7 states that "[t]lo convict the Defendant, the State must have proved beyond a reasonable doubt each of the following elements: the Defendant; (1) Knowingly, ...." Record, p. 66. It is clear from the instructions given, the jury was expressly instructed that the intent element was an essential element of the State's case to be proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
The alleged infirmities in Instruction No. 23 were corrected by other instructions. There was no blatant violation of basic principles. Therefore, the alleged infirmities do not amount to fundamental error.
(d)
Holliday's final argument is that Final Instruction No. 12 coupled with Final Instruction No. 23 creates fundamental error because these two instructions caused the proceedings as a whole to lack the necessary indicia of fairness. Final Instruction No. 12 was not a blatant violation of basic principles because any error was remedied by the other instructions. See Issue II, supra. Moreover, it was not error for the trial court to give Instruction No. 23 to the jury. Holliday has demonstrated no fundamental error. Holliday's due process rights were not violated by Instruction No. 28.
We affirm.
HOFFMAN, J., concurs.
MILLER, J., concurs in result and files separate opinion.
. IND.CODE 35-43-2-1 (1988).
. "THE COURT: Jury is admonished that the testimony which the witness is giving now is not being offered for the truth or falsity, but only to show what the officer did on a particular occasion or how he arrived at, in this case, arresting the defendant." Record, p. 312.
. "You have received evidence that the Defendant may have committed other crimes. You are instructed that this evidence can only be considered by you in deciding the issue of insanity." Record, p. 101. This instruction was submitted by Holliday and modified by the trial court. Record, p. 59.

=== CASE 9740050 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:46.32637+00 ===

MILLER, Judge,
concurring in result.
I agree with the result reached by the majority, although I feel that Officer Cop-pins' testimony was unnecessarily detailed. Holliday claimed in this case that medication he was taking for his mental illness always made him drowsy, lethargic, and essentially incompetent; thus, he did not know or understand what he was signing when he signed his confession. Coppins could have testified about his contact with Holliday a month earlier (when the evidence established he was also under medication) by describing it as an investigation without revealing that two witnesses had positively identified Holliday as the person committing the act.
As stated by the majority, sometimes it is necessary to admit some hearsay material to explain how and why transactions were initiated. But this rule should not be used as an excuse to permit unnecessary, damaging hearsay testimony.
In this case, I believe the error was harmless. Holliday took the stand and it became apparent from his testimony that he had an extensive criminal record. In addition, the evidence appears to be overwhelming and the jury, in fact, found Holli-day to be mentally ill.

=== CASE 2222006 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:25.935007+00 ===

606 N.W.2d 440 (2000)
STATE of Minnesota, Respondent,
v.
Deborah Ann KENARD, petitioner, Appellant.
No. C1-98-1211.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
February 10, 2000.
*441 John M. Stuart, Minnesota State Public Defender, Marie L. Wolf, Assistant State Public Defender, Minneapolis, for appellant.
Mike Hatch, Attorney General, St. Paul, Amy Klobuchar, Hennepin County Attorney, Linda K. Jenny, Assistant County Attorney, Minneapolis, for respondent.
Heard, considered, and decided by the court en banc.
OPINION
PAGE, Justice.
Appellant Deborah Ann Kenard was convicted of one count of aiding an offender under Minn.Stat. § 609.495, subd. 1 (1998) and one count of aiding an offender under Minn.Stat. § 609.495, subd. 3 (1998)[1], for her involvement in concealing Ronald Hare's murder. Kenard was sentenced to one year and one day for her conviction under Minn.Stat. § 609.495, subd. 1, which is a severity level I offense under the Minnesota Sentencing Guidelines. Aiding an offender under Minn. Stat. § 609.495, subd. 3, is an unranked offense under the sentencing guidelines. The sentencing court ranked her conviction under subdivision 3 at severity level VII and as a result, Kenard was sentenced to an executed term of 68 months in prison. Kenard appealed on various grounds, including sentencing, and the court of appeals affirmed. We granted Kenard's petition for further review, but limited our review to the sentencing issues raised in the petition. Those issues are whether the sentencing court abused its discretion when it assigned offense severity level VII to Kenard's unranked offense and whether it was an abuse of discretion for the sentencing court, having assigned the offense severity level VII, to have sentenced Kenard to an executed term of 68 months in prison. Based on our conclusion that the sentencing court abused its discretion in assigning offense severity level VII to Kenard's offense under Minn.Stat. § 609.495, subd. 3, we reverse the court of appeals and remand to the sentencing court for resentencing.
On December 31, 1997, Kenard spent the early afternoon in her apartment with her four-year old son, Robert, and another child taking down Christmas decorations. Kenard's fiancé, Emmett Thomas, lived in the apartment and was also present. At about 1:00 p.m., Ronald Hare came to the apartment to visit Thomas. Shortly after Hare arrived, Thomas and Hare began arguing and using profanity. As a result, Kenard took the children to a nearby grocery store to get them away from the argument.
*442 When Kenard and the children returned approximately 45 minutes later, there was blood on the apartment's walls and floor. When Robert asked about the blood, Kenard told him it was paint and rushed the children to a back bedroom, telling them to stay there and watch cartoons. Kenard then returned to the living room and found Thomas pointing to the closet, which led her to assume that Hare was in the closet. She did not, however, check the closet. When Kenard asked Thomas what happened, he responded that he was just trying to defend himself. When Kenard said to Thomas, "Well, you didn't have to kill him," Thomas responded, "I didn't kill him, I just knocked him out."
Thomas asked Kenard to help him clean up the blood, which she did out of concern for the children. The cleaning process took about ten minutes. After cleaning up the blood, Kenard opened the closet door, checked Hare's wrist for a pulse, and finding none, told Thomas that Hare was dead and that Thomas had to remove Hare's body from the apartment because she did not want her son to see it. According to Kenard, Thomas moved Hare's body "about 45 minutes or an hour after we had cleaned up the foyer." When he moved the body, Thomas asked Kenard to hold the closet and apartment doors open and she complied. Thomas evidently moved Hare's body to a storage room in the building because later that night Thomas again asked Kenard to assist him in moving the body. She complied with his request by holding open both the door to a storage room and a door to the outside as Thomas removed Hare's body from the building.
Hare's body was found across the street from the apartment building by passersby at about 4:00 a.m. on January 1 and the police were called. The investigation led the police to Kenard's apartment. That afternoon, the police executed a search warrant at the apartment. Evidence obtained during the search led the police to believe that Hare had been killed in the apartment. When the police first questioned Kenard, she was uncooperative and denied having any knowledge of Hare's death. Eventually, Kenard informed the police that Thomas had killed Hare and that she helped Thomas clean up Hare's blood and held doors open so that Thomas could take Hare's body from the apartment and later from the building.
The Minnesota Sentencing Guidelines set out the procedure for sentencing offenders. The presumptive sentence for an offender is determined by locating the appropriate cell on the Sentencing Guidelines Grid. See Minnesota Sentencing Guidelines II. The first step in determining the appropriate cell is to determine the offense severity level for the offense of conviction. See id. at II.A. The severity level of the offense of conviction is located on the vertical axis of the grid. See id. at IV. The guidelines assign a severity level from I to X to most offenses, but certain offenses, such as those in violation of section 609.495, subd. 3, are left unranked. See Minnesota Sentencing Guidelines II.A. "When persons are convicted of offenses excluded from the Offense Severity Reference Table, judges should exercise their discretion by assigning an offense a severity level which they believe to be appropriate." Id. at II.A.05 comment. Beyond indicating that the sentencing court is to exercise its discretion in assigning an offense severity level to unranked offenses, the sentencing guidelines do not give any direct guidance as to what considerations should go into the exercise of that discretion.
That lack of guidance notwithstanding, we conclude that the sentencing court, on the facts presented here, abused its discretion when it assigned an offense severity level VII to Kenard's offense. We reach that conclusion for two reasons. First, because the sentencing court did not indicate on the record what factors, if any, it considered when it assigned offense severity level VII to Kenard's offense, it is almost impossible for a reviewing court to *443 evaluate the sentencing court's exercise of discretion.[2]See State v. Kindem, 313 N.W.2d 6, 7 (Minn.1981). The second reason is that it appears from the record that the sentencing court, rather than first determining the offense severity level as required by the sentencing guidelines, took the sentence recommended in Kenard's presentence investigation report and worked backward to find an offense severity level that would support a sentence approximating the recommendation.
Because the sentencing guidelines do not give any direct guidance as to what should be considered when assigning an offense severity level to unranked offenses, we feel compelled to give some direction. The sentencing guidelines do provide a framework sentencing courts can use when determining the offense severity level of unranked offenses. The framework is found in the purposes of the sentencing guidelines, which are to:
establish rational and consistent sentencing standards which reduce sentencing disparity and ensure that sanctions following conviction of a felony are proportional to the severity of the offense of conviction and the extent of the offender's criminal history. Equity in sentencing requires (a) that convicted felons similar with respect to relevant sentencing criteria ought to receive similar sanctions, and (b) that convicted felons substantially different from a typical case with respect to relevant criteria ought to receive different sanctions.
Minnesota Sentencing Guidelines I. Relying on these purposes, we recommend that when assigning a severity level to unranked offenses, the sentencing court take into consideration the following: the gravity of the specific conduct[3] underlying the unranked offense; the severity level assigned to any ranked offense whose elements are similar to those of the unranked offense; the conduct of and severity level assigned to other offenders for the same unranked offense; and the severity level assigned to other offenders who engaged in similar conduct. No single factor is controlling nor is the list of factors meant to be exhaustive. Thus, while the sentencing court has discretion in sentencing for unranked offenses, information from the Sentencing Guidelines Commission on other offenders sentenced on the same or similar offenses can help guide the exercise of that discretion.
Kenard's conduct, while not as grave as that of Thomas, was nonetheless extremely serious. She was convicted of aiding the perpetrator to conceal the most serious of crimes, murder in the first degree. Her conduct, which included cleaning the crime scene, holding open doors so Thomas could dispose of Hare's body, and initially providing false information to the police, interfered with the investigation of Hare's death and had the potential to make Thomas' prosecution more difficult.
The ranked offense most similar to Kenard's offense is aiding an offender under Minn.Stat. § 609.495, subd. 1(a), which provides that:
Whoever harbors, conceals, or aids another known by the actor to have committed a felony under the laws of this or another state or of the United States with intent that such offender shall avoid or escape from arrest, trial, conviction, or punishment, may be sentenced *444 to imprisonment for not more than three years or to payment of a fine of not more than $5,000, or both.
This offense is ranked at severity level I under the guidelines. Minnesota Sentencing Guidelines V (Offense Severity Reference Table). The primary differences between subdivision 1 and subdivision 3 of Minn.Stat. § 609.495 are that subdivision 3's application is limited to certain enumerated offenses while subdivision 1 is not so limited; and that subdivision 3 provides that those convicted thereunder may be sentenced to up to one-half of the statutory maximum of the aided offense. Obviously, the legislature considers convictions under subdivision 3 more serious than those under subdivision 1.
For purposes of comparing the offense severity level assigned to other offenders found to have engaged in conduct similar to Kenard's to the severity level assigned to Kenard, the parties have identified only one case. As it turns out, the offense in that case is aiding an offender in violation of Minn.Stat. § 609.495, subd. 1. That case involves Arneatrice Shaw (Henn. Cty. File No. 98-123289), whose conduct was virtually identical to that of Kenard. Like Kenard, Shaw came home to find that a loved one, in Shaw's case her son, had killed someone in her home. Also like Kenard, Shaw proceeded to help remove the victim's body from the home and then cleaned the house and washed blood from clothes in order to help her son avoid arrest. Shaw was charged under section 609.495, subd. 3, but was allowed to plead guilty to violating section 609.495, subd. 1. Thus, Shaw's virtually identical conduct was ranked at offense severity level I while Kenard's was ranked at VII. Given the virtually identical conduct, equity and proportionality suggest that the severity levels assigned to Kenard and Shaw's offenses should not be so far apart. Such variations in severity level for the same conduct do not comport with the sentencing guidelines' goals of equity and proportionality. The legislature's intent of treating convictions under subdivision 3 more seriously than convictions under subdivision 1 may dictate a higher severity level for Kenard than Shaw, but there is nothing to suggest that Kenard's offense warrants a severity level six steps higher than Shaw.
For purposes of comparing the offense severity level assigned to Kenard's offense with that of others convicted of aiding an offender under section 609.495, subd. 3, our attention is drawn to cases involving Antonio Brayboy (Henn. Cty. File No. 96-071357), Eugene Myers (Benton Cty. File No. K9-96-521), Sathith Mevangsaksith (Henn. Cty. File No. 97-015813), Frank Soman (Ramsey Cty. File No. K3-96-4229), and Nickie Frank (Henn. Cty. File No. 98-095728) and Stacy Koerner (Henn. Cty. File No. 98-095714).[4] Brayboy was indicted for aiding and abetting first-degree murder but was allowed to plead guilty to one count[5] of aiding an offender under section 609.495, subd. 3, for his involvement in the brutal slaying of three people. Although Brayboy denied participating in the murders, he admitted to being present at the scene when they took place. See State v. Patterson, 587 N.W.2d 45, 47-48 (Minn.1998). He further admitted to helping the perpetrator flee the death scene. Brayboy's offense was assigned severity level VIII. Brayboy's presence at the time of the offense distinguishes his case from Kenard's.
Myers pleaded guilty to aiding and abetting attempted second-degree murder after he drove a stolen van while two other men severely beat the van's owner and then helped the two men drag the owner from the van into the woods, leaving him *445 to die. Myers offense, like Brayboy's, was also assigned severity level VIII. Mevangsaksith's offense of conviction arose out of his involvement in driving a car for friends who robbed two people at gunpoint. Mevangsaksith's offense was assigned severity level VII. Soman's offense of conviction arose as a result of Soman's presence during a robbery and grabbing some marijuana as he and another fled the scene. Soman's offense was assigned severity level VII. While the underlying offense in Kenard's case is far more serious than the underlying offenses in the cases of Myers, Mevangsaksith, and Soman, their conduct, which included some active participation in the underlying offenses, makes their offenses more serious. Thus, Kenard's offense should be ranked lower.
Frank and Koerner's offenses were assigned severity level VIII for their involvement in attempting to conceal the brutal rape and murder of a 13-year old Hmong girl. They became involved with the murder when the murderer, a classmate of theirs, called Frank and asked to use her car so that he could dispose of the victim's body. At sentencing, the court noted that Frank not only provided the car, but that she and Koerner voluntarily went along and helped the murderer dispose of the victim's body. While Frank and Koerner's offense is similar to Kenard's in terms of gravity, we note that it is distinguishable in that Frank and Koerner readily assisted the murderer when asked. In contrast, the murder in this case was thrust upon Kenard in her own home. Thus, we view Kenard's offense as less serious than theirs.
In each of these cases, Brayboy, Myers, Mevangsaksith, Soman, and Frank and Koerner, the offender was either present at the time of the underlying offense, participated to some degree in the underlying offense, or readily participated in covering up the underlying offense.[6] In contrast, Kenard was neither present at the time of, nor participated in, Hare's murder. Moreover, she did not choose to become involved in concealing Hare's murder, rather she walked into her own home with two young children to find blood on the walls and floor and took steps to hide the murder from her 4-year old son. With these cases in mind, we remand to the sentencing court for a determination of the severity level of Kenard's offense, consistent with this opinion. We decline to reach the sentencing issue presented by Kenard's appeal. While on this record the sentence imposed on Kenard seems to be on the high side, because of our remand, we need not reach that issue at this time.
Reversed and remanded.
NOTES
[1]  Minn.Stat. § 609.495, subd. 3 provides that:
Whoever intentionally aids another person known by the actor to have committed a criminal act, by destroying or concealing evidence of that crime, providing false or misleading information about that crime, receiving the proceeds of that crime, or otherwise obstructing the investigation or prosecution of that crime is an accomplice after the fact and may be sentenced to not more than one-half of the statutory maximum sentence of imprisonment or to payment of a fine of not more than one-half of the maximum fine that could be imposed on the principal offender for the crime of violence.
[2]  The sentencing court stated "the sentence is based on really what I think is appropriate, in light of the severity of the crime," but the judge never mentioned what factors made severity level VII appropriate.
[3]  By specific conduct, we mean that conduct underlying proof of the elements of the offense. While we have held that such conduct cannot be relied on to justify an upward departure, State v. Peterson, 329 N.W.2d 58, 60 (Minn.1983), we conclude that its use is appropriate for setting the severity level for unranked offenses. Once the sentencing court has determined the severity level by considering the conduct underlying proof of the elements of the offense, it is not prohibited, in appropriate cases, from considering whether there are also aggravating or mitigating circumstances that would justify departure.
[4]  This and the preceding cases, identified by court file number, are not reported cases but are from the records compiled on unranked offenses by the Sentencing Guidelines Commission for record keeping purposes.
[5]  Antonio Brayboy's plea agreement states that he pleaded guilty to one count of accessory to first-degree murder but State v. Patterson, 587 N.W.2d 45, 47 (Minn.1998), reports that Brayboy pleaded guilty to three counts of accessory to first degree murder.
[6]  We recognize that another factor at work here is that in some of the cases used for comparison purposes, involving conduct substantially more serious than that of Kenard, the defendants pleaded guilty to lesser offenses. As a result, factors beyond the conduct underlying proof of the elements of the offense were likely considered in setting the offenders' severity level. However, that procedural difference, while one more factor to consider in the analysis, does not make the comparisons any less valid for purposes of insuring that the sentencing guidelines' goals of equity and proportionality are met.

=== CASE 9740051 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:50.296608+00 ===

JUSTICE CUNNINGHAM delivered the opinion of the court: Shawn Finley was struck and killed on March 26, 1990, by a semitrailer driven by Alfred Lourdeau and owned by Allyn Enterprises and Flatbed Express Company. Shawn was six years old at the time of his death. Surviving were his father, Taoufik Zemmel, his mother, Pam Finley, his brothers Antron and Mark Finley, his half-brother, Allan Zemmel, and his half-sister, Amy Zemmel. All of Shawn’s siblings were minors. Taoufik Zemmel was appointed special administrator of Shawn’s estate by the circuit court of Champaign County. As special administrator, Zemmel filed a wrongful death action. Zemmel (hereinafter special administrator) entered into a settlement agreement with Lourdeau, Allyn Enterprises, Flatbed Express Company and their insurance companies. According to the terms of the settlement, Shawn’s siblings were not to be allowed to recover under the Wrongful Death Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 70, par. 1 et seq.). Robert Kirchner was appointed by the circuit court as guardian ad litem to represent the interests of Shawn’s siblings. The circuit court approved the settlement, concluding it was bound by Carter v. Chicago & Illinois Midland Ry. Co. (4th Dist. 1988), 168 Ill. App. 3d 652. The Appellate Court, Fourth District, held that siblings are barred from recovery for loss of society in a wrongful death action. The guardian ad litem filed written objections to the proposed settlement and referred the circuit court to decisions of other districts of the appellate court, specifically Sheahan v. Northeast Illinois Regional Commuter R.R. Corp. (1st Dist. 1986), 146 Ill. App. 3d 116, Singh v. Air Illinois, Inc. (1st Dist. 1988), 165 Ill. App. 3d 923, and Schmall v. Village of Addison (2d Dist. 1988), 171 Ill. App. 3d 344, all of which hold that siblings are not barred from recovering proven loss of society in a wrongful death action. The guardian ad litem argued that this court, were it to consider the issue whether siblings may recover for loss of society in a wrongful death action, would agree with the decisions of the appellate court in Sheahan, Singh and Schmall. The guardian ad litem also requested the circuit court set the matter for an evidentiary hearing to allow evidence to be presented as to the adequacy of the proposed settlement, and on the issue of how the settlement proceeds should be distributed amongst Shawn’s natural father, mother and siblings. The circuit court overruled the objections of the guardian ad litem, and approved a settlement of $185,000. The circuit court concluded it was bound by Carter. Of this amount, $61,666.66 went for attorney fees; $611.05 was reimbursed to the attorney’s firm; Mr. Zemmel was to receive $107,722.29; and Ms. Finley was to 0receive $15,000. The siblings and half-siblings of Shawn were to receive nothing. The guardian ad litem appealed the approval of the settlement. The appellate court affirmed (209 Ill. App. 3d 1112 (unpublished order under Supreme Court Rule 23)). This court allowed the guardian ad litem’s petition for leave to appeal (134 Ill. 2d R. 315). The issue raised is whether siblings are entitled to recover for proven loss of society under the Wrongful Death Act. Before reaching this issue, we must first address the argument, raised by the settling parties, that the appeal by the guardian ad litem must be dismissed because he did not have authority to bring this claim. The guardian ad litem filed the notice of appeal on July 30, 1990. The settlement agreement had been approved by the circuit court on July 16, 1990. On this date, the circuit court terminated the appointment of the guardian ad litem. The special administrator, Lourdeau and Flatbed Express Company now argue that the guardian ad litem is without authority to prosecute this appeal. The guardian ad litem argues that his authority as guardian ad litem extends to the filing and prosecution of an appeal and cites Sprague v. Beamer (1892), 45 Ill. App. 17, as support. In Sprague, the appellate court stated: “This suit being brought here by appeal is the same suit in which the guardian ad litem was appointed to defend the interests of minor defendants, and he is still acting in their defense as against alleged errors in the proceeding, by the only available method for the purpose. And we think his action in that regard is within the scope of his power.” Sprague, 45 Ill. App. at 19. The guardian ad litem notes that were a trial court able to vacate the appointment of a guardian ad litem and preclude the filing of an appeal on behalf of the minors whom the guardian ad litem represents, then the trial court would have the power to preclude any appeal by the minors from an order which the minors allege is in error. We agree. The guardian ad litem in the case at bar has the power to appeal the order of the circuit court’s approval of the settlement agreement. We now turn to the issue whether siblings may prosecute a cause of action for loss of society pursuant to the Wrongful Death Act. Section 2 of the Act governs all recoveries under the Act and provides in pertinent part: "Every such action shall be brought by and in the names of the personal representatives of such deceased person, and, except as otherwise hereinafter provided, the amount recovered in every such action shall be for the exclusive benefit of the surviving spouse and next of kin of such deceased person and in every such action the jury may give such damages as they shall deem a fair and just compensation with reference to the pecuniary injuries resulting from such death, to the surviving spouse and next of kin of such deceased person.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 70, par. 2. The purpose of the Wrongful Death Act is to compensate the surviving spouse and next of kin for the pecuniary losses sustained due to the decedent’s death. (Nudd v. Matsoukas (1956), 7 Ill. 2d 608, 612.) This court has noted that the phrase “next of kin,” for purposes of the Wrongful Death Act, are those blood relatives of decedent in existence at decedent’s death who would take decedent’s property if decedent had died intestate. (Wilcox v. Bierd (1928), 330 Ill. 571, 582, overruled on other grounds, McDaniel v. Bullard (1966), 34 Ill. 2d 487; Gustafson v. Consumers Sales Agency, Inc. (1953), 414 Ill. 235, 245; see also Nudd, 7 Ill. 2d at 612-13.) Under section 2 — 1(d) of the Probate Act of 1975 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. ll0½, par. 2 — 1(d)), if a decedent died intestate and there is no surviving spouse or descendant of decedent, but there is a surviving parent or sibling, the estate of decedent will be distributed to the parents and siblings in equal parts. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110½, par. 2 — 1(d). This court has, on several occasions, addressed the issue whether pecuniary injuries may, in certain circumstances, include loss of society. In Elliott v. Willis (1982), 92 Ill. 2d 530, this court held that pecuniary injuries could include loss of consortium for a widowed spouse. The Elliott court noted that in Hall v. Gillins (1958), 13 Ill. 2d 26, the court rejected a common law action in tort for destruction of the family unit in a case brought by the widow and a child of the decedent. In Hall, the plaintiffs alleged deprivation of the support, companionship, guidance, advice and affection of the decedent. The common law action was not allowed in Hall because that remedy “was not significantly different from the statutory remedy available under the Wrongful Death Act, which allows compensation for ‘pecuniary injuries.’ ” (Elliott, 92 Ill. 2d at 535.) The court in Hall stated: “The term ‘pecuniary injuries’ has received an interpretation that is broad enough to include most of the items of damage that are claimed by the plaintiffs in this case. Each plaintiff alleges deprivation of support as well as deprivation of the companionship, guidance, advice, love and affection of the deceased.” Hall, 13 Ill. 2d at 31. In Bullard v. Barnes (1984), 102 Ill. 2d 505, this court held that parents may recover for the loss of a minor child’s society in an action brought under the Wrongful Death Act. The court noted that “the trend in our more recent decisions under the Wrongful Death Act has been to expand the scope of pecuniary injury to encompass nonmonetary losses.” Bullard, 102 Ill. 2d at 514. This court in Bullard held that there would no longer be a presumption of loss of earnings upon the death of a child, but concluded that parents would be entitled to a presumption of pecuniary injury in the loss of a child’s society. Bullard, 102 Ill. 2d at 517. In Ballweg v. City of Springfield (1986), 114 Ill. 2d 107, this court held that the presumption of pecuniary injury for loss of society of a child applies to children who have reached the age of majority. The Ballweg court stated: “When children are wrongfully killed, the parents’ investment of money and in affection, guidance, security and love is destroyed. Society recognizes the destruction of that value, whether the child is a minor or an adult. The intent of Bullard was to recognize the intrinsic value of children to their parents regardless of which way financial support is flowing at death.” Ballweg, 114 Ill. 2d at 120. Most recently, this court in Seef v. Sutkus (1991), 145 Ill. 2d 336, held that a rebuttable presumption for loss of society exists in a wrongful death action for a stillborn child. As pointed out by both parties, our appellate court has reached differing results on this issue: the Fourth District has barred all siblings from the opportunity of proving loss of society as a pecuniary injury; the First and Second Districts allow siblings such an opportunity. We hold that proven loss of a sibling’s society is a pecuniary injury for which siblings may recover under the wrongful death statute. The siblings in this case are decedent’s next of kin, as are both natural parents. Nowhere in the wrongful death statute is there a distinction between the types of damages recoverable based upon who the next of kin is. The siblings should be given an opportunity to prove the “deprivation of the companionship, guidance, advice, love and affection of the deceased.” Hall, 13 Ill. 2d at 31. We believe this holding is in keeping with this court’s decisions in Elliott, Ballweg, and Seef. This line of cases “has recognized that pecuniary losses encompass loss of society damages for many facets of family relationships.” (Seef, 145 Ill. 2d at 338.) Our decision today does no more than give legal recognition to the often times extremely significant family relationship shared by some siblings. While we agree with defendants that the decisions of this court in Elliott, Bullard and Ballweg recognize the “special relationship between spouses, and between parent and child,” we reject the suggestion that there can be no “special relationship” between siblings. The parties have correctly pointed out that whether siblings may recover damages for loss of society for the wrongful death of a brother or sister is a separate and distinct issue from whether the law recognizes a presumption that loss of society exists. The guardian ad litem points out, and we agree, that simply because the parents and the siblings of the decedent may both suffer legally cognizable pecuniary injury which may include loss of society, it does not necessarily follow that both the parents and the siblings will be treated alike for purposes of the application of a presumption of loss of society. Defendants point out that there are differences in the emotional and economic interdependence present in the relationship shared by spouses and by parent and child, and the relationship shared by siblings. While we do not agree that these differences should result in a legal bar to all siblings asserting a claim for pecuniary injuries including loss of society for a deceased brother or sister, we do agree that these differences should result in a difference in the application of the presumption of pecuniary injury in the loss of the deceased's society. Siblings may recover for loss of society of a deceased brother or sister, but such damages must be proven. In the case at bar, the siblings were allowed neither the opportunity to allege nor the opportunity to prove loss of society as a result of the wrongful death of their brother or half-brother. The circuit court approved the settlement between the special administrator, Lourdeau, Allyn Enterprises, Flatbed Express Company and their insurance companies which expressly excluded any recovery for the siblings. The settling parties assert that, if this court holds that siblings may recover for proven loss of society in a wrongful death action, the settlement in the case at bar should not be reopened for consideration. The special administrator points out that the settling parties relied on existing law in the Fourth District and any change should be made prospective. Lourdeau and Flatbed Express argue that the personal representative of the deceased has the sole right to control any litigation brought pursuant to the Wrongful Death Act. Lourdeau and Flatbed Express assert that the guardian ad litem offered no evidence whatsoever that the amount of the settlement was not fair and that under no circumstances should the amount of the settlement be reopened. The guardian ad litem asserts that, since the circuit court held it was obligated to follow the decision of the appellate court in Carter, the guardian ad litem was precluded from objecting to the amount of the settlement, the amount of attorney fees paid therefrom, or the apportionment of the settlement proceeds. At the hearing on the proposed settlement, the guardian ad litem specifically noted that if the siblings were not entitled to recover for loss of society then the guardian ad litem “really [had] no grounds on which to object to the settlement proposal.” In his written objections to the amended petition to approve the settlement, the guardian ad litem requested that an evidentiary hearing be held for the purpose of allowing the court to hear testimony as to the adequacy of the proposed settlement agreement and to determine how any proceeds should be distributed amongst the decedent’s parents and siblings. The guardian ad litem also requested that the court not find the settlement to be in good faith because the amended petition did not advise the court of any potential cause of action against the estate other than those against the settling defendants. In this case, we hold that siblings may recover for proven loss of society in a wrongful death action. While the settling parties relied upon Carter as authority to preclude the siblings from asserting any claim for loss of society, the guardian ad litem argued that this court, were it to hear the issue, would most likely follow the cases of Sheahan, Singh and Schmall and allow recovery for siblings. All the parties knew of the split in the appellate court, and we see no reason to apply our holding prospectively. While it is true that the guardian ad litem offered no evidence that the amount of the settlement was not fair, this was not by oversight on his part; it was because the guardian ad litem was precluded from doing so by the ruling of the circuit court. The circuit court ruled as a matter of law that the siblings had no cause of action; therefore, the settlement amount reflects only the damages sustained by the parents. On remand, the guardian ad litem shall have the opportunity to present evidence as to any alleged loss of society to the siblings as a result of the wrongful death of decedent. If the circuit court finds that any or all of the siblings have proved they have sustained damages, the settlement amount shall be reopened to consideration by the circuit court. For the reasons stated, the judgments of the appellate and circuit courts are reversed, and the cause is remanded to the circuit court for proceedings consistent with this opinion. Appellate court reversed; circuit court reversed; cause remanded.

=== CASE 2222246 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:33.760924+00 ===

179 Ill. App.3d 832 (1989)
535 N.E.2d 56
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
MICHAEL K. BOUCHER, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 2-87-0708.
Illinois Appellate Court  Second District.
Opinion filed February 23, 1989.
*833 G. Joseph Weller and Patrick M. Carmody, both of State Appellate Defender's Office, of Elgin, for appellant.
James E. Ryan, State's Attorney, of Wheaton (William L. Browers and Martin P. Moltz, both of State's Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor's Office, of counsel), for the People.
Reversed and remanded.
JUSTICE NASH delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant, Michael K. Boucher, appeals from his conviction of criminal contempt of court and sentence to jail. In August 1986 defendant had pleaded guilty to forgery and was sentenced to 30 months of probation, 90 days' work release, 130 hours' public service work, restitution, and payment of a fine. In May 1987 a petition to revoke his probation was filed by the State's Attorney which alleged that defendant had violated the conditions of his probation by failing to report to his probation officer and perform the ordered public service work, and by willfully failing to pay the fine and restitution. At a hearing held on the petition to revoke probation, defendant admitted the allegations in the petition. The trial court found that defendant willfully violated the terms of his probation and indicated that he was going to order that defendant be incarcerated for 60 days, with credit for time served during this period of incarceration, in addition to his original term of probation. Arguments ensued between the State and defendant's counsel as to whether defendant was entitled to credit for time spent in custody on the original forgery charge. The trial court then determined that a more appropriate disposition of the matter would be to find defendant in contempt of court for violating the conditions of his probation; the judge did so and sentenced defendant to 30 days' incarceration in the Du Page County jail as a sanction. The court's order did not provide a means by which defendant could purge himself of contempt.
Defense counsel objected to this procedure on the ground no petition for a rule to show cause had been filed, and the trial court determined, based on the holding in People v. Patrick (1980), 83 Ill. App.3d 951, 404 N.E.2d 1042, that none was required. Defendant moved to withdraw his stipulation to the probation violations, raising issues concerning credit for time served, which the court denied.
 1 Defendant appeals, contending that: (1) his motion to withdraw his stipulation to the probation violations should have been *834 granted because he did so under a misapprehension of the State's burden of proof, and (2) the holding in People v. Patrick is no longer the law. These arguments were not presented to the trial court and, having been raised for the first time on appeal, they are subject to waiver. However, the waiver rule operates as a limitation on the litigant, not on the court, and a reviewing court may disregard the waiver rule in order to reach a just result (People v. Hoskins (1984), 101 Ill.2d 209, 219, 461 N.E.2d 941), and we do so here.
Defendant contends first that he should have been allowed to withdraw his stipulation to the probation violations because at the time of his stipulation, the State's burden of proof under the pending petition to revoke probation was by a preponderance of the evidence. Defendant argues that the elevation of the burden of proof to beyond a reasonable doubt by the court's substitution of the contempt charge meant that defendant made his admissions under a misapprehension of the burden of proof applicable. In support of his argument defendant cites People v. Braje (1985), 130 Ill. App.3d 1054, 1065, 474 N.E.2d 1364, which held that a defendant should be permitted to withdraw a guilty plea where he shows that he pleaded guilty based upon either a misapprehension of the law or facts.
 2 While we do not consider this issue because defendant has not cited authority pertinent to probation revocation proceedings, we do note that a probation revocation has been upheld over a defendant's objection that he was not advised of the State's burden of proof. People v. Beard (1974), 59 Ill.2d 220, 223-27, 319 N.E.2d 745.
Defendant next contends that in People v. Mowery (1983), 116 Ill. App.3d 695, 452 N.E.2d 363, the court tacitly concurred with the specially concurring opinion in People v. Patrick, where Justice Trapp stated that "an alleged violation of a condition of probation must be prosecuted as provided by the Unified Code of Corrections and not by means of contempt of court." (People v. Patrick (1980), 83 Ill. App.3d 951, 957, 404 N.E.2d 1042 (Trapp, J., concurring).) While we do not agree with defendant's analysis of Mowery, we do conclude that the trial court erred when it found defendant in contempt of court based upon the State's petition to revoke probation before it.
We note that the trial judge did find defendant in contempt based on his failure to pay fines, court costs and restitution ordered by the court. Because of our disposition of this case, we need not here determine whether defendant's failure to obey these orders was indirect civil or criminal contempt. Compare People v. Mowery (1983), 116 Ill. App.3d 695, 703, 452 N.E.2d 363 (where the defendant was sentenced for contempt of court for failing to pay costs and restitution, *835 and the order sentencing the defendant to jail did not provide a means of purging himself, court held that contempt was civil). Contra People v. Mowery (1983), 116 Ill. App.3d 695, 705-06, 452 N.E.2d 363 (Miller, J., dissenting) (contempt may be treated as criminal as an alternative to the revocation of probation, or as civil contempt if the court's purpose is to induce the defendant to comply with the court's order of payment).
 3, 4 Contempt, in addition to being characterized as civil or criminal, is also classified as direct or indirect. Direct contempt arises from conduct in the presence of the court, or any constituent part of it, of which the judge has personal knowledge. (In re Grand Jury Investigation of Swan (1981), 92 Ill. App.3d 856, 861, 415 N.E.2d 1354.) Indirect contempt occurs outside of the court's presence, and its proof is dependent upon evidence of which the judge has no personal, judicial notice. (People v. Waldron (1986), 114 Ill.2d 295, 302, 500 N.E.2d 17.) Indirect contempt can be punished summarily as direct contempt, without notice, written charges, plea, issue, or trial, if the contemnor admits his contempt in open court. Only willful violations of a court order can constitute contempt, whether direct or indirect. (In re Grand Jury Investigation of Swan (1981), 92 Ill. App.3d 856, 861, 415 N.E.2d 1354.) While defendant did admit the allegations of the petition to revoke probation that he willfully failed to pay the fine and restitution, we do not consider that he stipulated that his failure to report to his probation officer or to perform public service work was willful. Thus, his conduct cannot be summarily punished as direct contempt, and defendant must be afforded the procedural safeguards applicable to indirect criminal contempt.
 5 In a proceeding to punish for indirect contempt, the alleged contemnor must be: (1) informed of the charges against him by information, notice, citation, or rule to show cause; (2) allowed to file an answer to the charges; (3) afforded a full hearing thereon; and (4) allowed a jury trial in serious cases. (People v. Javaras (1972), 51 Ill.2d 296, 300, 281 N.E.2d 670.) While the petition to revoke his probation did inform defendant of the charged violations, and there is authority that defendant need not be directly informed that he can be held in contempt of court for those violations (see People v. Patrick (1980), 83 Ill. App.3d 951, 954-55, 404 N.E.2d 1042), we find the holding in People v. Waldron (1986), 114 Ill.2d 295, 500 N.E.2d 17, to be dispositive. There, the court found that due process requires that the alleged contemnor in an indirect criminal contempt proceeding be accorded notice and a fair hearing, which includes the requirement that he be advised of the possibility that he might be found in contempt. *836 Waldron, 114 Ill.2d at 302-04; see also People ex rel. Williams v. Williams (1987), 156 Ill. App.3d 438, 443, 509 N.E.2d 460 (the defendant who was held in indirect civil contempt was denied due process because he did not receive notice that the hearing concerned his alleged contempt).
 6 In the present case, the defendant was not charged with contempt, nor did the petition to revoke his probation inform him that he might also be found in contempt of court. The petition to revoke his probation only informed defendant, as grounds, that he had failed to report to his probation officer and perform public service work; it did not charge him with a willful failure to comply with these conditions of his probation. We note too that defendant did not have an opportunity to answer to a charge of contempt, nor was he granted a hearing thereon.
Accordingly, the order finding defendant to be in contempt of court and imposing sentence is reversed, and the cause is remanded for further proceedings.
Reversed and remanded.
DUNN AND REINHARD, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9740052 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:50.301511+00 ===

JUSTICE CLARK, specially concurring: I agree with the majority’s well-reasoned opinion. I write separately only to point out that today’s decision is the natural extension of several prior opinions of this court. In Elliott v. Willis (1982), 92 Ill. 2d 530, this court held that damages for loss of consortium are recoverable under the Wrongful Death Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 70, par. 2). In Bullard v. Barnes (1984), 102 Ill. 2d 505, this court held that under the Wrongful Death Act parents were entitled to a presumption of pecuniary injury related to the loss of a minor child’s society. At the time Bullard was decided, I wrote separately, in part, to point out my belief that the presumption of injury should also apply to the loss of society of a child who has attained the age of majority. (Bullard, 102 Ill. 2d at 521 (Clark, J., concurring).) In Ballweg v. City of Springfield (1986), 114 Ill. 2d 107, this court extended the Bullard presumption to include loss of society for adult children. In today’s decision the court is following these cases to their natural and logical conclusion. See also Hubbart, Siblings’ Right to Recover Loss of Society Under the Wrongful Death Act, 80 Ill. B.J. 60 (1992) (analyzing the above cases and reaching the same conclusion).

=== CASE 9740053 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:51.016683+00 ===

JUSTICE LINN delivered the opinion of the court: Plaintiff Kedzie & 103rd Street Currency Exchange, Inc., cashed a check for defendant Fred Fentress (who is not a party to this appeal). Defendant Beula M. Hodge, drawer of the check, notified her bank to stop payment on the check when Fentress, engaged to perform plumbing services, did not appear at her home to begin work. As a holder in due course, plaintiff sought damages from Hodge. The trial court, however, granted Hodge’s motion to dismiss, based on the defense of illegality, pursuant to section 2— 619 of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 110, par. 2—619) and section 3—305 of Illinois’ codification of the Uniform Commercial Code (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 26, par. 3—305). Plaintiff states the issue as whether a holder in due course of a check takes the check free from the defense of illegality, where the drawer of the check issued it as a partial advance payment for plumbing services to be rendered, but the payee was not licensed as a plumber. We affirm. Background Plaintiff, an Illinois corporation doing business as a currency exchange, filed suit after the $500 check it had cashed for Fentress was returned marked “payment stopped.” Hodge had made out the check to “Fred Fentress — A-OK Plumbing” as partial payment, in advance, for plumbing services at her residence. When he failed to appear on the date work was to begin, Hodge directed her bank to stop payment on the check. Fentress, in the meantime, cashed the check at plaintiff currency exchange, endorsing the back as “Fred Fentress A-OK Plumbing Sole Owner.” Plaintiff obtained a default judgment against Fentress. Hodge filed a motion to dismiss the action as to her, asserting the defense of illegality. She had discovered that Fentress was not a licensed plumber listed with either the State or Chicago. Under “An Act in relation to the licensing and regulation of plumbers ***” (Plumbers Licensing Act or Act) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 111, par. 1101 et seq.), plumbers must obtain a license before practicing their trade. A violation of the Act is a Class B misdemeanor for the first offense. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 111, par. 1128.) According to Hodge, the plumbing contract was illegal and void; therefore, plaintiff took the check subject to the illegality defense. The trial court agreed and entered judgment in favor of Hodge. Opinion  Under the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC), commercial instruments including checks are meant to be freely negotiable, and to that end, a holder in due course will take the instrument free from “all defenses of any party to the instrument with whom the holder has not dealt except *** [such] other incapacity, or duress, or illegality of the transaction, as renders the obligation of the party a nullity.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 26, par. 3—305(2)(b). Comment 6 to UCC section 3 — 305 explains that the question of illegality is a matter of State law, and if under the law governing the contract the effect of the illegality is to make the obligation entirely null and void, the defense is good. See Ill. Ann. Stat., ch. 26, par. 3—305, UCC Comment, at 184 (Smith-Hurd 1963). The dispositive issue before us, therefore, is whether under Illinois law the contract between Hodge and the plumber was null and void. If so, the defense of illegality was properly asserted and applied in this case. If the underlying obligation was merely voidable, however, the defense fails. In support of its position that the illegality defense is ineffective in this case, plaintiff relies on what it describes as two lines of cases. The first line, according to plaintiff, holds that the defense can only be asserted where an applicable statute makes the negotiable instrument itself void. The second line of cases holds that the defense can be asserted only where the applicable statute makes the underlying contract void. According to plaintiff’s rationale, therefore, the only way the illegality defense could prevail in the pending case would be if the plumbers’ licensing statute expressly declared that checks drafted as payment for unlicensed plumbing services were void or that contracts entered into in violation of the Act were null and void. In support of its argument that a statute must declare the negotiable instrument void, plaintiff cites two pre-UCC Illinois cases, Town of Eagle v. Kohn (1876), 84 Ill. 292, and Pope v. Hanke (1894), 155 Ill. 617, 40 N.E. 839. In Eagle (84 Ill. at 296), the court stated that “unless it has been so expressly declared by the legislature, illegality of consideration will be no defense in an action at the suit of a bona fide holder, without notice of the illegality.” (Emphasis in original.) In Eagle, however, the commercial paper in issue was not a product of illegality, and the court’s actual ruling is of limited relevance to this case. The plaintiffs, purchasers of bonds issued to finance a railroad project, were attempting to collect upon the interest warrants of the bonds. The town as issuer and payor of the bonds interposed as a defense the fact that the conditions of the bonds had not been met by the railroad company. The conditions, incorporated as part of the legislation enabling the bonds to be issued, expressly stated that the bonds would be not valid or binding until such conditions were satisfied. The court noted that ordinarily, conditions of a bond would not be a. defense against a bona fide indorser without notice. The court also remarked that the transaction was not illegal, nor were the bonds declared void by the statute. Nevertheless, the court held that because of the peremptory language stating that the bonds would not be valid and binding obligations until the conditions were satisfied, they would be treated as invalid and unenforceable at the time they were presented because the conditions had not been met. In Pope, the court held that a note given as part of a gambling transaction would be considered of no force or effect, even as against a holder who took the note in good faith without knowledge of its illegality, because the legislature had expressly declared such instruments null and void. This is still the law today, as the gambling legislation provides that all “promises, notes, bills *** made, given *** or executed *** in violation of *** this Article are null and void.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 28—7(a).) The court in Pope expressed concern that free negotiability of instruments would be threatened if courts could hold instruments void for illegality without an express declaration from the legislature declaring them void. Hodge maintains, and we agree, that Pope and Eagle do not defeat her ability to raise the illegality defense in the pending case because the Illinois legislature, by adopting section 3 — 305 of the UCC, has expressly declared that illegality is an available defense against a holder in due course, as long as the effect of the illegality is to render the obligation sued upon null and void. That requires consideration of all relevant authority, including case precedent. We cannot fairly assume an additional requirement that before the defense can be used against a holder in due course, there must be an express statutory provision that declares a particular category of contracts or negotiable instruments void. We do agree, however, that Illinois courts should not apply the illegality defense against holders in due course unless the illegal transaction is of the type that wholly nullifies the contract and thereby renders the instrument subject to the illegality defense.  In this State, the legislature has passed extensive legislation relating to the licensing of many trades and professions, recognizing that the regulation of these professions is essential to the public health, safety, and welfare. For example, the Plumbers Licensing Act, in its declaration of purpose and policy, states: “§1. It has been established by scientific evidence that improper plumbing can adversely affect the health of the public. [Examples omitted]. Faulty plumbing is potentially lethal and can cause widespread disease and an epidemic of disastrous consequences. To protect the health of the public it is essential that plumbing be installed by persons who have proven their knowledge of the sciences of pneumatics and hydraulics and their skill in installing plumbing. *** [T]his Act is therefore declared to be essential to the public interest.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 111, par. 1101. In furtherance of the legislative goals of providing standards and protecting the public health, the Act provides that one who attempts to practice plumbing without a license may suffer substantial penalties, including criminal prosecution and fines. By judicial construction, the unlicensed plumber also forfeits his right to compensation for (illegal) services rendered. In Wright v. Baird (1928), 249 Ill. App. 90, the court held that an unlicensed plumber could not recover a fee for his fully performed services because the contract violated the Plumbers Licensing Act. In reaching this conclusion, the court rejected the argument that such a result could not occur unless the licensing statute expressly declared such contracts illegal. Cf. Pascal P. Paddock, Inc. v. Glennon (1964), 32 Ill. 2d 51, 203 N.E.2d 421 (Mechanic’s lien would be enforced against owners of swimming pool, even though there was a question whether the unlicensed status of plumber precluded enforcement, where the plumbing equalled only 5½% of the construction contract price; company’s supervising official, who was licensed, oversaw plumbing work; and owners failed to establish that workers on the job were not supervised apprentices).  In another licensing case, the court noted, “In Illinois, generally, a statute which declares an act illegal and which imposes a penalty for its violation renders a contract for the performance of such an act void and unenforceable.” (T.E.C. & Associates, Inc. v. Alberto-Culver Co. (1985), 131 Ill. App. 3d 1085, 1095, 476 N.E.2d 1212 (Nonlicensed employment agency could not recover payment for services where licensing statute made violation of statute a criminal offense).) The court in T.E.C., like that in Wright v. Baird, held that the licensing statute need not expressly declare a contract made in violation of its provisions to be illegal in order for the court to find it illegal. See also Keenan v. Tuma (1926), 240 Ill. App. 448, 456 (Employment contract for services of unlicensed architect provided for illegal consideration and was therefore a nullity); E & B Marketing Enterprises, Inc. v. Ryan (1991), 209 Ill. App. 3d 626, 629, 528 N.E.2d 339, 341-42 (“[Sjtatute need not expressly declare a particular contract void to render it illegal under the regulatory scheme of the statute”) (voiding a contract that provided for physician fee-splitting); Leoris v. Dicks (1986), 150 Ill. App. 3d 350, 353, 501 N.E.2d 901, appeal denied (1987), 115 Ill. 2d 542, 511 N.E.2d 429 (contract made in contravention of public policy against certain types of attorney fee-splitting would be deemed void and unenforceable); Tovar v. Paxton Community Memorial Hospital (1975), 29 Ill. App. 3d 218, 330 N.E.2d 247 (contract between unlicensed physician and hospital for performance of physician services held to be illegal and void); Nutri-Pro, Inc. v. Phelps (1988), 172 Ill. App. 3d 505, 526 N.E.2d 891 (Illinois law holds that contracts in direct contravention of statutory purpose are not enforceable even though the statute itself inflicts a penalty and does not expressly declare related contracts void); see also Federal Land Bank v. Walker (1991), 212 Ill. App. 3d 420, 571 N.E.2d 242, appeal denied (1991), 141 Ill. 2d 539, 580 N.E.2d 112. The cited cases clearly defeat plaintiff’s argument that the contract in question is not void unless the Plumbers Licensing Act or other legislation expressly declares it to be. Courts can and do declare contracts void all the time. The more precise question, however, is whether a contract is truly “void” instead of merely “voidable,” the distinction being that a voidable contract can be ratified and enforced by the obligor, although not by the wrongdoer, while the void contract cannot be. (See Restatement of Contracts §475, Comment b (1932).) According to plaintiff, the rights of a holder in due course, as an innocent third party, cannot be defeated unless the obligation is truly void. The primary case plaintiff relies on is Bankers Trust Co. v. Litton Systems, Inc. (2d Cir. 1979), 599 F.2d 488, 491, a case applying New York law to a contract allegedly induced by commercial bribery. The court held that the subject matter of the contract itself (equipment leasing) was not illegal; therefore, the illegality defense could not be asserted against the banks which held an assignment of equipment leases. As holders in due course, the banks’ rights to collect under the leases were not defeated by the fact that the leases had been obtained by commercial bribery.  We agree that it is critical to determine whether a particular transaction is void or voidable when the rights of holders in due course are involved. As the Bankers Trust court noted, the relevant New York cases on illegal contracts induced by commercial bribery did not involve holders in due course and therefore it could be assumed that the authors of the opinions were using the term “void” loosely in characterizing the contracts before them. We also acknowledge that in the Illinois cases cited above, the illegal nature of the contracts was discussed in the context of a party attempting to seek compensation for performing services in violation of licensing laws or in violation of public policy. Accordingly, the fact that the courts used the term “void” to describe the contracts may not be conclusive on the question whether the rights of a holder in due course are extinguished by that characterization. See concurring and dissenting opinions in Vedder v. Spellman (Wash. 1971), 78 Wash. 2d 834, 480 P.2d 207 (affirming judgment for defendant homeowner who stopped payment on check given to plaintiff home repairman; noting contract should not be viewed as void ab initio for all purposes).  Unlike the Bankers Trust court, however, we do not so readily assume that the authors of the Illinois licensing cases were imprecise in their use of the term “void.” If contracts made in violation of licensing laws are merely voidable by the obligor, presumably they can be enforced or ratified by the obligor. In the pending case, we do not believe a contract made in violation of the plumbing licensing statute could be specifically performed or ratified, by Hodge or anyone else. To permit ratification of a criminal act, one that violates a strongly expressed legislative policy, would further no legal or equitable goal. Consequently, the contract made in violation of the Act must be viewed as a legal nullity. Not all acts that violate a statute form the basis of an illegality defense against a holder in due course, however, and it may be difficult at times to distinguish those that do from those that do not. (Compare Worthen Bank & Trust Co. v. United Underwriters Sales Corp. (1971), 251 Ark. 454, 474 S.W.2d 899 (contracts in violation of law governing the licensing of foreign corporations to do business in Arkansas are considered void ab initio), with Salitan v. Carter, Ealey & Dinwiddie (Mo. App. 1960), 332 S.W.2d 11 (under State statute, contracts of nonlicensed foreign corporations are not completely void but merely unenforceable until such time as the foreign corporation complies with Missouri law); see also Logen v. Panuska (Minn. 1980), 293 N.W.2d 359 (contract in violation of blue sky law does not defeat right of holder in due course to collect payment) (two judges dissenting); Middle Georgia Livestock Sales v. Commercial Bank & Trust Co. (1971), 123 Ga. App. 733, 182 S.E.2d 533 (holder in due course of checks for purchase of stolen cattle could not recover against maker of check who had no knowledge of theft; if the thing for which the note is given is outlawed, so is the note standing on such foundation outlawed).) At least one State takes the view that a contract which violates a business statute or regulation is not void unless made so by the express terms of the act and, if the statute provides a penalty for its violation, such penalty is the exclusive remedy and the courts will not imply an intent to void a negotiable instrument arising out of such violation. Stegall v. Kynaston (1980), 26 Wash. App. 731, 613 P.2d 1214. We could find no Illinois case that has ruled upon the precise illegality defense before this court, in the context of the rights of a holder in due course. At least two other jurisdictions, however, have determined that contracts in violation of trade or professional licensing laws are null and void even when holders in due course are involved. Columbus CheckCashiers, Inc. v. Stiles (1990), 56 Ohio App. 3d 159, 565 N.E.2d 883 (Check-cashing firm could not recover against homeowner who issued check to unlicensed contractor; contract was held illegal and void based upon violation of Ohio licensing law); Wilson v. Steele (1989), 211 Cal. App. 3d 1053, 259 Cal. Rptr. 851 (Contractor’s unlicensed status is a defect which may be asserted against a holder in due course). In Wilson v. Steele, the assignee of a note given in consideration for the services of an unlicensed home remodeling contractor attempted to enforce the note against its maker. Under California’s licensing statute, the unlicensed contractor could not bring an action to collect his fees without alleging and proving he was duly licensed. The court in Wilson found that the effect of this provision was to make the contract for unlicensed services illegal and void. The court went on to hold that the defense of illegality could be asserted, therefore, against the holder in due course. Plaintiff attempts to distinguish Wilson on the ground that the California statute expressly provides that an unlicensed contractor may not bring or maintain any action for collection on a contract unless he is licensed. In its brief, plaintiff comments, “Such a provision is virtually identical to a provision that deems the contract void.” According to plaintiff, since the Illinois Act does not have a similar provision, a different result should obtain.  We disagree. In Wright v. Baird the court construed the licensing act’s prohibitions as meaning that an unlicensed plumber could not collect any compensation, even though the statute did not so state in those words. In Illinois, therefore, the law by judicial construction equates with the California statute’s express provision. Since plaintiff agrees that such provision is virtually identical to one deeming the contract void, we conclude that the illegality defense asserted here rendered the contract void, not voidable. Hence, under the UCC, the defense is good against a holder in due course. As a matter of policy, plaintiff argues that it is unfair to expect a currency exchange to police the negotiable instruments it receives to ferret out possible illegalities in the underlying contracts. While the argument is reasonable enough, the same could be made for all of the defenses which defeat the rights of holders in due course. The currency exchange does not have a way to ascertain if a check has been drafted under duress, if it represents a gambling debt, or if it is the check of one without legal capacity to be bound. The so-called “real” defenses are nonetheless valid and cut off the rights of the innocent holder of the instrument to obtain recourse against makers or endorsers of the instrument in question. Currency exchanges are in the business of cashing checks and undertake the attendant risks. We conclude that the illegality defense asserted in this case is of the type to render the obligation a nullity under section 3 — 305 of the Code. Therefore, we affirm the trial court’s dismissal of the action against Hodge, as maker of the check. Affirmed. JOHNSON, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9740054 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:51.022281+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE JIGANTI, dissenting: This appeal brings into question the defense of illegality as asserted against the plaintiff, a holder in due course. The defendant was the drawer of a check. She issued the check as partial advance payment to a plumbing contractor. It is asserted on appeal that the plumbing contractor was unlicensed and the contract was therefore illegal and not merely voidable, but void. The majority holds that in fact it was void and not merely voidable. It reasons that the regulatory statute concerning plumbers enacts criminal sanctions for practicing plumbing without a license and that the contract therefore “violates a strongly expressed legislative policy, [and] would further no legal or equitable goal.” (234 Ill. App. 3d at 1024.) I suggest that a contrary result should prevail and respectfully dissent. Even as between the original parties criminal sanctions do not necessarily mean that a contract is void or unenforceable. (Charter Finance Co. v. Henderson (1975), 60 Ill. 2d 323, 326 N.E.2d 372.) The majority’s mechanical approach to this issue seems to suggest that even if the plumbing contractor had completed the work, it not only would not be entitled to the contract price but could not even bring a restitutionary action for the reasonable value of its services. Cf. Restatement (Second) of Contracts §§197, 198, 199 (Restitution) (1981). Whatever may be visited upon the original parties aside, this transaction involves a holder in due course. Bankers Trust Co. v. Litton Systems, Inc. (2d Cir. 1979), 599 F.2d 488, treats with the issue of the distinction between the original parties to the contract and holders in due course. In Bankers Trust, the court found that under New York law the alleged illegality in the situation before it, that is, a contract induced by bribery, rendered the contract between the parties void. However, as to a holder in due course it was merely voidable. The Bankers Trust court reasoned that the basic policy that would render a bribery induced contract void is discussed in section 598, Comment a, of the Restatement of Contracts, which states that courts deny relief because the plaintiff is a wrongdoer and not because they favor the defendant. Where an innocent third party, the holder in due course here, is suing on an illegal contract, the policy argument is inapplicable. Restatement of Contracts §598, Comment a (1932). Illinois addressed this issue in the case of McGregor v. Lamont (1922), 225 Ill. App. 451. There the defendant asserted that he was induced to enter into a contract for the purchase of stock by false and fraudulent representations and asserted this as a defense against a holder in due course. The court held in favor of the holder in due course, adopting the position of what it stated was the weight of authority that while the instrument might be void as between the parties, it was not void against the holder in due course. I believe that we should follow McGregor and Bankers Trust. The statement of the majority that to allow the holder in due course to recover “would further no legal or equitable goal” is not well taken. (234 Ill. App. 3d at 1024.) In my judgment, the holding unreasonably burdens commerce by inhibiting check cashers from freely accepting checks in an ostensible ordinary commercial transaction.

=== CASE 2222017 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:26.170939+00 ===

601 N.E.2d 457 (1992)
Alice SAMPLE, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 55A01-9205-CR-154.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, First District.
October 29, 1992.
*458 R. Stephen Donovan, Martinsville, for appellant-defendant.
Linley E. Pearson, Atty. Gen., Louis E. Ransdell, Deputy Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellee-plaintiff.
ROBERTSON, Judge.
Alice Sample appeals her conviction of neglect of a dependent, a class D felony. The conviction arises from Sample's failure to obtain prompt medical care for her four-month-old daughter after the child fell and fractured her skull.
We affirm.
First, Sample challenges the sufficiency of the evidence to sustain her conviction. She contends there was no evidence produced at trial which would establish that she "knowingly" failed to seek proper medical treatment for her daughter. In support of this contention, she insists that the definition of knowledge in neglect of dependent cases involves a subjective standard, i.e. whether the accused was subjectively aware of a high probability that she placed her dependent child in a situation involving an actual and appreciable danger to the child.
We cannot disagree with Sample on the level of proof required or that the factfinder applies a subjective rather than objective *459 test in these types of cases. See Armour v. State (1985), Ind., 479 N.E.2d 1294, 1297. But the State may prove Sample's actual knowledge by resort to circumstantial evidence. Hill v. State (1989), Ind. App., 535 N.E.2d 153, 154. And, the jury need not have believed Sample's testimony that the swelling occurred suddenly on December 31, 1990. "`[N]eglect is the want of reasonable care  that is, the omission of such steps as a reasonable parent would take, such as are usually taken in the ordinary experience of mankind... .'" White v. State (1989), Ind., 547 N.E.2d 831, 836 (quoting Eaglen v. State (1967), 249 Ind. 144, 150, 231 N.E.2d 147, 150. When we consider only that evidence which is favorable to the State together with all logical and reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom, McClaskey v. State (1989), Ind., 540 N.E.2d 41, 45, we must conclude that there was sufficient evidence of probative value from which the jury could find Sample knowingly neglected her dependent child beyond a reasonable doubt.
The State alleged in its information against Sample, that between December 21, 1990 and December 31, 1990, Sample, a person having the care, custody and control of A.L.S., her dependent, did knowingly place A.L.S. in a situation endangering her life or health, to-wit: "failed to seek prompt proper medical treatment for A.L.S. after she received a bump to her head, which bump resulted in swelling to the head and a skull fracture." Sample testified and told investigators that the "bump" to her four-month-old daughter's head occurred around lunch time on December 29, 1990. At trial, Sample testified that the child was in her "punkin" seat on the couch when she rolled off and struck her head. Sample was not in the room, but retrieved the baby immediately after the fall. She admits that she saw a mark and a bump on the child's head and her husband put ice on it immediately.
Two days later, on December 31, 1990, Sample arranged to have her sister baby-sit the child that evening. Within two minutes from the time Sample's sister Tonnie picked the baby up from Sample, Tonnie observed that the baby was crying and stiffening out in pain. She removed the child's hat and observed the child's swollen skull. She took A.L.S. back to Sample, and refused to care for her, indicating to Sample that something was seriously wrong with the child, that the child needed immediate medical care, and that she would not be responsible. Sample then took the baby to the emergency room.
Dr. Stone, the physician who treated A.L.S. at the hospital described the left side of the baby's head to the jury as "quite obviously swollen," and looking very unusual. The swelling was obvious to a lay person. Dr. Stone reported that A.L.S.'s scalp appeared to have been swollen for sometime, consistent with having been swollen for a period of two days. X-rays revealed a fairly large, long skull fracture directly underneath the swollen area. Given the kind of fracture experienced by A.L.S., Dr. Stone opined that there would be noticeable swelling within an hour, if not in minutes. Dr. Luerssen, the child's pediatric neurosurgeon at Riley Hospital, agreed that swelling from a skull fracture of this type almost always begins immediately, because the swelling is related to bleeding from the bone itself. When Dr. Luerssen observed A.L.S. on January 2, 1991, the swelling was in resolution phase and diffuse, at that time about the size of his hand. He opined that initially the swelling would have been quite firm and localized, but would spread out over the course of days.
On cross-examination, Sample admitted that she had told the investigating officer that she knew the bump looked kind of funny, and that it had been swelling "day by day." The jury could also infer from Sample's testimony that she had responded affirmatively when asked by her sister whether she knew the baby had a big bump on her head and had stated that she intended to take the baby to Riley Hospital to have the bump examined when she took in her other daughter later the next month.
Hence, in addition to the circumstantial evidence of knowledge offered from the child's physicians that the child would have been exhibiting symptomatology of a serious *460 injury and from Sample's sister that the child was behaving as if she was in pain at the time she took the child into her care, the record contains Sample's own admissions that she had observed changes in the bump after the fall and that she knew the injury needed medical attention. This is sufficient evidence to permit the jury to infer that Sample was aware of a high probability that by failing to obtain prompt medical treatment for her daughter, she was placing her child in a situation which endangered her life and health.
Sample also argues that the State failed to meet its burden of proving that she placed the child in actual or appreciable danger.[1] She points to testimony from the child's pediatric neurosurgeon that the delay in obtaining treatment for A.L.S. did not itself constitute an actual or appreciable threat to the child's life or health.
In order to convict a person under Ind. Code 35-46-1-4(a)(1), the State must prove that the actor subjected the dependent to a danger which was actual and appreciable. State v. Downey (1985), Ind., 476 N.E.2d 121, 123. However, this does not mean that a delay in seeking treatment must actually result in injury to the dependent. Johnson v. State (1990), Ind. App., 555 N.E.2d 1362, 1366. To hold otherwise "would require us to conclude that the legislature intended to engage in a roulette game whereby conduct or inaction with respect to the care of a child, albeit heedless or neglectful, could continue unchecked so long as it did not happen to harm the child." Id.
Both of the child's physicians testified that an injury to the skull of this seriousness posed a strong possibility of injury to the baby's brain underneath the fracture. Indeed, Dr. Luerssen testified that skull fractures are statistically associated with significant and potentially life threatening brain injury in babies. According to Dr. Luerssen, the most critical period of time following the injury was the first twenty-four hours because that is the period during which the vast majority of complications will occur. Dr. Luerssen opined that during this time, there was an actual and appreciable threat of danger to the child. This evidence is sufficient to establish that Sample subjected the child to an actual and appreciable danger.
Sample also argues that the trial court committed reversible error by modifying her tendered instruction on circumstantial evidence. The trial court deleted that portion of the instruction which charged the jury that "[w]here proof of guilt is by circumstantial evidence only, it must be so conclusive in character and point so surely and unerringly to the guilt of the accused as to exclude every reasonable theory of innocence."
As the case cited by Sample holds, an instruction of this nature "is required only if the evidence presented at trial was solely circumstantial." Nichols v. State (1992), Ind., 591 N.E.2d 134, 136. Direct evidence immediately establishes the main fact to be proved; circumstantial evidence immediately establishes collateral facts from which the main fact may be inferred. Id. at 136 (citing Herrick, Underhill's Criminal Evidence § 15 (1970 Supp.). Cases based solely on circumstantial evidence typically involve situations where there are no witnesses to the alleged crime. Prosecutions resting on direct evidence tend to feature testimony from someone who actually saw the defendant commit the crime. Id.
Here, the State did offer some direct proof of the crime: Sample's own statements to the investigating officer that after the fall she saw the "bump" on the baby's head and that it grew day by day; her statements to her sister that she knew about the injury and that it should have medical care; and her own admission that she did not act. Hence, although the State offered a considerable amount of circumstantial *461 evidence concerning the probable appearance of the injury to the baby's care-taker during the critical period, which independently proved knowing neglect, the jury need not resort to inference alone to conclude that Sample knew the bump suffered by the child deserved medical attention. A number of the witnesses observed this condition, including Sample herself. The State's evidence was thus not wholly circumstantial and Sample was not entitled to the benefit of an instruction which did not conform to the evidence.
Next, Sample argues that the trial court erred in admitting certain of her statements as admissions against her. But, we, like the State, find the basis of her argument to be less than clear. It seems to be Sample's argument, as the State suggests, that the statements were prejudicial to her because they reflected upon her truthfulness even before she had an opportunity to testify. We will not speculate about other possible grounds for exclusion not specifically argued.
[A]ll evidence introduced in a trial is introduced for the purpose of influencing the verdict of the jury... . All evidence, if it influences the jury, is prejudicial to one side or the other. Hence, the mere objection that evidence is prejudicial is not a sufficient objection in itself.
Wilson v. State (1966), 247 Ind. 680, 684, 221 N.E.2d 347.
Lastly, Sample argues that when the State used the term "consciously" in rebuttal, the State introduced a new point in the case and she was entitled to respond to this point. She cites I.C. XX-XX-X-X(4), which provides in pertinent part that
the prosecuting attorney shall disclose in the opening all the points relied on in the case, and if in the closing [she] refers to any new point or fact not disclosed in the opening, the defendant or [her] counsel may reply to that point or fact, and that reply shall close the argument of the case.
Where the State's rebuttal is invited by comments made by defense counsel during closing arguments, the defense has no right under the statute to respond to the rebuttal. Goodman v. State (1992), Ind., 588 N.E.2d 507, 508.
During closing argument, Sample's counsel asserted that the State was required to prove that Sample "knowingly  knowingly had an evil thought placed her child ... in a situation of appreciable danger." The State responded:
Mr. Donovan said that if we are going to show knowingly we needed to show that Alice Sample had an evil mind. That's not it at all, it's not that we have to show that Alice Sample sat around and plotted ways to hurt her baby, that's not the issue, all right. Don't make this harder than what it is, knowingly just means that she consciously did something, did she consciously decide not to take the baby to the hospital when she knows it had a bump on its head... .
The State's use of the word "consciously" was plainly a response to a misstatement of the law made by defense counsel. Defense counsel invited the comments and was not entitled to respond. But, even were we to assume that the use of the term "consciously" injected a new "point or fact" into the case, that the State rather than Sample injected the new point, and that Sample has properly preserved error, Sample has not shown us how she was harmed by the State's action. To obtain a reversal on appeal, the defendant must show that the complained of error affected her substantial rights. Ind.Trial Rule 61. Sample has not endeavored to meet this burden; accordingly, reversal is not warranted.
Judgment affirmed.
BAKER and CONOVER, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Sample argues that, because the State did not respond to her argument on this aspect of the sufficiency question, it is appropriate for us to apply a prima facie error standard. Even so, Sample must still demonstrate error, albeit prima facie error. Gardner v. State (1992), Ind. App., 591 N.E.2d 592, 593. As our analysis above demonstrates, Sample has not met this initial burden.

=== CASE 2222020 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:26.288074+00 ===

601 N.E.2d 916 (1992)
234 Ill. App.3d 912
176 Ill.Dec. 218
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Adrian MITCHELL and Rafael Mendez, Defendants-Appellants.
Nos. 1-89-1668, 1-89-1795.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Third Division.
September 2, 1992.
*917 Rita A. Fry, First Asst. Public Defender of Cook County, Chicago (Mary C. Arundel, Asst. Public Defender, of counsel), for defendant-appellant, Adrian Mitchell.
Mark W. Solock & Barry A. Spector, Michael J. Pelletier, Deputy State Appellate Defender, Chicago (Michael Katten, Asst. Appellant Defender, of counsel), for defendant-appellant, Rafael Mendez.
Jack O'Malley, State's Atty. of Cook County, Chicago (Renee Goldfarb, William Pistorius, Joseph P. Roody, Asst. State's Attys., of counsel), for plaintiff-appellee.
Justice TULLY delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendants Adrian Mitchell and Rafael Mendez were indicted and charged with murder, armed violence, attempted burglary, attempted armed robbery, attempted robbery and unlawful use of a firearm by a felon. Following a bench trial, defendants were convicted of murder, unlawful use of a firearm by a felon and armed violence. Each defendant received a sentence of 50 years' incarceration in the Illinois Department of Corrections. Defendants appeal both their conviction and sentences.
This case examines the 1988 shooting death of Theresa Demerin, who worked as a nurse at St. Mary's of Nazareth Hospital ("the hospital") in the City of Chicago. On the evening of February 25, 1988, Theresa completed her shift at the hospital and then walked to her car, which was parked in the northwest section of hospital parking lot "B." When Theresa did not arrive home by 1 a.m. as usual, her husband, Deolido, alerted hospital personnel. Around 4:15 a.m. on February 26, 1988, hospital security guards found Theresa's lifeless body *918 slumped over on the front seat of her red Escort.
Hospital security guard Alan Grelyek testified he was working the evening of February 25, 1988. While monitoring security cameras, Grelyek observed a black man with a "Jewel" shopping bag, looking into a parked car in lot "B." Around 1:15 a.m. another security guard, Shanen Beltran, observed a similar man looking into a red Escort in parking lot "B." The following day Beltran identified the man as defendant Adrian Mitchell.
Another hospital employee, Caridad Quidayan, recounted how she left the hospital around 12:10 a.m. As she exited the northwest corner of parking lot "B" she heard something which sounded like rocks hitting the back and side doors of her van. The next day, she discovered four bullet holes in the doors of the van.
Jesse Boone was in a nearby apartment on the night in question with Otis Mitchell, defendant Adrian Mitchell's uncle, when he heard several gun shots between 11 p.m. and 12 p.m. He and Otis Mitchell later observed defendants Adrian Mitchell and Rafael Mendez sitting in a parked car in the vicinity of the hospital. Both defendants were talking and laughing. They told Boone "there is a dead lady in the park" and that if Boone and Otis Mitchell wanted "money or something" they could take it. Mendez then commented they would read about it in the morning paper.
The following day, Boone told Officer Kusinski about the conversation with Adrian Mitchell and "a white guy with glasses." Boone then identified this other man as Rafael Mendez in a police photograph book. Boone also made in-court identifications of both defendants.
Prior to trial, Mendez motioned to quash his arrest and to suppress statements made while in police custody. Officer Paul Kusinski testified at the hearing on this motion that he was assigned to canvass the buildings surrounding the parking lot where the victim's body was found. Kusinski recovered several .22 caliber shell casings at the entrance to 2248 West Potomac. He later learned that Otis Mitchell told other officers that his nephew Adrian resided in a second floor apartment of that building and that there might be a rifle in his apartment. After entering a rear unlocked door to the apartment, Kusinski discovered several more .22 caliber shell casings and a .22 rifle wrapped in a bed sheet. Kusinski also noticed that the apartment's windows faced southward in the direction of the parking lot where the victim was shot.
Later that day, Kusinski interviewed Jesse Boone about his conversation with Adrian Mitchell and a "light-skinned Puerto Rican" the previous night. After learning that Adrian Mitchell had been arrested a few days previously with Rafael Mendez, Kusinski presented Boone with a police photo book containing Mendez' photograph. Boone identified Mendez as the man he spoke with the previous evening, who had been laughing and talking with Adrian Mitchell. Kusinski then prepared two supplementary arrest reports, wherein he failed to mention the photographic identification of Mendez and the recent joint arrest of Mitchell and Mendez.
During the hearing, the trial court referred to this as "slipshod" police work, but believed that Kusinski had in fact performed a photographic identification of Mendez. The trial court also noted that the arresting officer had probable cause to arrest Mendez, since Mendez appeared apprehensive and responded "Oh, no" when the officer approached him about the "death of a nurse." The motions to quash the arrest and suppress this evidence were both denied. Defense counsel than orally motioned to suppress the photographic identification as being suggestively presented. This motion was also denied.
Defendant Adrian Mitchell motioned to suppress statements made to Assistant State's Attorney David Lavin. Mitchell testified that Lavin promised he would not be charged with murder but with "reckless something." Mitchell then gave a full statement to Lavin in the presence of a court reporter. When asked whether he had been promised any leniency for his statement, Mitchell responded he had not.
*919 According to Mitchell, both he and Mendez were shooting a rifle from the window of his apartment. They aimed the rifle at people in the nearby hospital parking lot in order "to scare them." The defendants alternated shooting the rifle. Mitchell saw a woman enter the lot and approach a small red car. When she was about three feet from the car Mitchell shot toward the car. The woman then opened the car door and disappeared from view. Mitchell admitted he thought she was "probably dead." He and Mendez then attempted to search the woman's body for jewelry, but the car was locked. They later returned with a screw driver to pry open the car door, but were prematurely stopped by hospital security guards.
Although this is a consolidated appeal, we will consider the issues raised by each defendant separately. First, defendant Mitchell contends that his pre-trial motion to suppress his statement should have been granted. In support thereof, Mitchell claims he gave the statement only after Assistant State's Attorney Lavin promised to charge him with "reckless [homicide]" instead of murder.
After hearing the testimony of defendant Mitchell, Assistant State's Attorney Lavin and Detective Raymond Schalk, the trial court concluded that Mitchell's statement had been voluntarily given. The trial court's finding as to the voluntariness of a confession will not be reversed unless it is contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. (People v. Davis (1983), 97 Ill.2d 1, 72 Ill.Dec. 272, 452 N.E.2d 525.) The trial judge must decide whether the will of the defendant was overcome, given the totality of the circumstances. People v. Baine (1980), 82 Ill.App.3d 604, 38 Ill.Dec. 42, 403 N.E.2d 57.
Detective Ray Schalk was present when Assistant State's Attorney Lavin interviewed Mitchell. According to Schalk, Mitchell stated that he understood his Miranda rights prior to discussing the death of Theresa Demerin. The discussion lasted 15 to 20 minutes. Several hours later, Schalk and Lavin met again with Mitchell, who repeated his confession in the presence of a court reporter. This discussion lasted about 10 minutes. Under oath, Mitchell stated he had not received any promises of leniency in exchange for his confession. After the written report was prepared, Mitchell read and initialled it.
The trial judge weighed the testimony and credibility of Schalk, Lavin and the defendant, in finding the confession was voluntary. The record indicates an absence of any evidence of physical or mental abuse or coercion. Under the totality of the circumstances, we cannot agree that the finding of the trial court was against the manifest weight of the evidence presented.
Mitchell also argues that his murder conviction should be reduced to involuntary manslaughter. However, Mitchell failed to raise this issue at trial or in his written post-trial motion. Therefore, this issue has been waived and we need not consider it on review. People v. Enoch (1988), 122 Ill.2d 176, 119 Ill.Dec. 265, 522 N.E.2d 1124.
In any case, it is difficult to fathom how the calculated actions of the defendant in this case could be deemed mere recklessness. This is not a case of youthful indiscretion such as rock-throwing at passing cars or even taking "pot-shots" with a "BB" gun. Defendant loaded and aimed a.22 caliber rifle toward the parked car of Theresa Demerin, when he could clearly see that Mrs. Demerin was a mere three feet from the car. Certainly, a 19-year-old young man knew that pulling the trigger created a "strong probability of death or great bodily harm" to Mrs. Demerin. (See, Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. 9-1(a)(2), for the definition of "murder" in Illinois).) Moreover, instead of shock and dismay as to the result of his "recklessness," defendant walked to the car where Mrs. Demerin lay lifeless, in the hope of finding jewelry or other valuables. Defendant would have us excuse as "reckless," actions which ended the life of Theresa Demerin, a 25-year-old registered nurse with a husband and a 4-year-old son. Under the circumstances, we decline to do so.
Defendant next contends that his prior felony convictions were improperly *920 introduced to show his propensity to commit crime. Mitchell was charged with the unlawful use of a firearm by a felon. In Illinois, it is unlawful for a person to knowingly possess a firearm if he has been convicted of a felony under the law of Illinois or any other jurisdiction. (Ill.Rev. Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. 24-1.1(a).) We find that defendant's prior convictions were properly admitted to prove that he was a convicted felon at the time he possessed a firearm.
Finally, Mitchell requests that we reduce his sentence of 50 years' imprisonment for murder, given his rehabilitative potential and genuine remorse for the crime. We cannot disturb the sentence of the trial court absent an abuse of discretion. (People v. Cabrera (1987), 116 Ill.2d 474, 508 Ill.Dec. 397, 508 N.E.2d 708.) On review, the proper question is not what we think the sentence should have been, but whether the trial court properly weighed the relevant factors and rendered a decision which was within the statutory limits for the crime committed.
In arguing for an extended term of natural life imprisonment, the State presented the juvenile record, including two prior robbery convictions of Mitchell. The State further alluded to the heinousness of the crime, describing it as a cold-blooded "thrill kill" without any motive.
In mitigation, Charles Rankin, a teacher at the Cook County jail school, testified on behalf of Mitchell. Rankin noted that Mitchell had passed the GED examination and was "very gifted academically." Rankin also explained how Mitchell played a major role in presenting "Project Inside Out," a theatrical program which links jailhouse youths with high school students. The defense also presented exhibits of various ballads and poems written by Mitchell for the theater project.
Before imposing the sentence, the trial judge explained that he had read and considered all of the evidence presented on Mitchell's behalf. After evaluating all of the evidence, the trial court imposed a sentence of 50 years' imprisonment, which falls within the parameters of the sentencing statute. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 38, par. 1005-8-1(a)(1).) We, therefore, find no basis for reducing defendant Mitchell's sentence.
We now turn to the appeal of defendant Rafael Mendez. Prior to trial, Mendez motioned to quash his arrest and suppress evidence, alleging that the police lacked probable cause to arrest him. Because there were no police reports verifying that a photographic identification of Mendez was made prior to the arrest of Mendez, the defense asserts that no such identification took place. At the pre-trial hearing on the motion, Officer Kusinski testified that he interviewed a neighbor, Jesse Boone, who saw Adrian Mitchell laughing and talking to a "light-skinned Puerto Rican" about the shooting of a nurse in the nearby hospital parking lot. After checking police records, Kusinski learned that Mitchell had been arrested a few days prior with a man named Rafael Mendez. He then showed Boone several pages of photographs, one of which contained Mendez' picture. Boone positively identified Mendez. All of this information was then relayed to arresting Officer Martin, who also knew the license plate number and description of Mendez' car. Martin stated that when he approached Mendez, he was working on his car and he identified himself as Rafael Mendez. Martin told Mendez he wanted to question him about the recent death of a nurse. Mendez responded, "Oh, no. Can I put my tools away?" Mendez was then taken into custody for questioning. Mendez testified that he only told Martin his name, whereupon Martin put him in the back seat of an unmarked police car and drove him to the station, where he was read his Miranda rights.
The trial court weighed the testimony of Officers Kusinski and Martin against that of Defendant Mendez and concluded that there existed sufficient probable cause to arrest Mendez. Thus, Mendez' motion to quash his arrest and suppress evidence was denied.
On review, the decision of the trial court on a motion to suppress will be sustained unless it is against the manifest *921 weight of the evidence. (People v. Reynolds (1983), 94 Ill.2d 160, 68 Ill.Dec. 122, 445 N.E.2d 766.) Although the trial court commented on the "slipshod" police work of Officer Kusinski, who failed to record the photographic identification in his police reports, the court believed that the identification had taken place. Because this finding turns upon the credibility of the witnesses, we defer to the decision of the trial court in this matter. Moreover, even without the photo identification, the description of Mendez by Boone, the police information records and Mendez' reaction to arresting Officer Martin provided sufficient probable cause for his arrest. We also note that the subsequent trial testimony of Jesse Boone corroborated the claims of Officer Kusinski as to the photographic identification of Mendez.
Secondly, Mendez contends that the photographic identification by Boone was prejudicially suggestive. Four pages of photographs were shown to Boone, containing a total of nine Hispanic individuals and five black individuals. According to Kusinski, five were "light-skinned." Boone testified that he had described Mitchell's accomplice as a 19 or 20-year-old "white guy with glasses." During cross-examination by defense counsel, Boone revealed that there was only one picture of a white male wearing glasses on three of the four pages of photographs he examined. There was no clear testimony as to the photographs on the remaining page.
Prior to trial, defense counsel made an oral motion to suppress the photographic identification as suggestive, but did not submit a written motion until after trial began. Defendant claims the trial court improperly denied this motion without a hearing and requests that we remand for a hearing on the matter. Motions to suppress must be made in writing prior to trial. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 38, pars. 114-11, 114-12.) However, fundamental fairness may dictate otherwise, such as where defense counsel did not have adequate notice of the grounds for the motion. People v. Johnson (1967), 38 Ill.2d 399, 402-03, 231 N.E.2d 447.
During pre-trial discovery, defense counsel requested any information regarding the photographic identification of Mendez. The State did not produce any information prior to the hearing on Mendez' motion to quash his arrest, wherein Officer Kusinski described the photo album he presented to Jesse Boone. After the trial court denied this motion, defense counsel orally motioned to suppress the photographic identification as prejudicially suggestive, indicating that a written motion would be prepared. Judge Strayhorn denied the oral motion and said that a written motion would be denied as well. On the following morning, defense counsel presented its written motion, which was denied. During trial, the State then introduced into evidence the police photo album which was used by Officer Kusinski. Defense counsel objected on the basis that the admission of such evidence was a violation of the discovery rules and, moreover, defense counsel was never granted a hearing on his motion to suppress the photo album as being suggestive.
While we find that the trial court erred in denying defense counsel a hearing on the motion to suppress, we need not necessarily remand this cause for a hearing. Photographic lineups are not per se impermissibly suggestive where the defendant's photo is distinguishable from the other pictures or where, as in this case, the defendant is the only subject wearing glasses. (See, People v. Kubat (1983), 94 Ill.2d 437, 69 Ill.Dec. 30, 447 N.E.2d 247; People v. Bryant (1983), 94 Ill.2d 514, 69 Ill.Dec. 84, 447 N.E.2d 301.) In addition, even if the photographic arrangement was impermissibly suggestive, the subsequent in-court identification by Jesse Boone was based upon independent knowledge sufficient to overcome the taint of the photographic lineup. (Stovall v. Denno (1967), 388 U.S. 293, 87 S.Ct. 1967, 18 L.Ed.2d 1199.) Boone testified that he lived next door to Mendez for approximately one year and during that time he saw him between five and ten times per month.
*922 Mendez also requests that his sentence be reduced due to rehabilitation potential and a genuine remorse for the crime. The trial judge considered the mitigating factors presented on behalf of Mendez, including the fact that Mendez did not actually fire the rifle. Nevertheless, the trial court concluded that Mendez was "equally culpable" for the death of Theresa Demerin. Under the circumstances, we find no basis for reducing the sentence of defendant Mendez.
Lastly, both defendants request that we remand this matter to the trial court to correct errors in the mittimus to reflect the proper judgment of the trial court. The mittimus incorrectly states that defendants were convicted of six counts of murder, three counts of armed violence and two counts of unlawful use of a firearm by a felon. Pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 615, this court may correct the mittimus without remanding to the trial court. (111. Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 110A, par. 615(b)(1).) Therefore, we order that the mittimus be corrected to reflect a sentence of 50 years' imprisonment for each defendant on one count of murder. The remaining counts of murder, armed violence and unlawful use of a firearm by a felon shall be vacated.
Based upon the foregoing, the judgment of the Cook County circuit court is hereby affirmed in all other respects.
AFFIRMED IN PART; VACATED IN PART.
RIZZI and CERDA, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2222023 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:26.357497+00 ===

413 Mass. 647 (1992)
601 N.E.2d 470
COMMONWEALTH
vs.
ARTHUR ROUCOULET, JR.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Berkshire.
October 8, 1992.
November 6, 1992.
Present: LIACOS, C.J., ABRAMS, NOLAN, LYNCH, & GREANEY, JJ.
Nona E. Walker, Committee for Public Counsel Services, for the defendant.
Paul J. Caccaviello, Assistant District Attorney, for the Commonwealth.
GREANEY, J.
On December 3, 1990, the defendant, Arthur Roucoulet, Jr., entered a guilty plea in the Superior Court to an indictment charging him with trafficking in cocaine, G.L.c. 94C, § 32E (1990 ed.), after which he was sentenced to a term of from five to nine years.[1] On the same day, the defendant was tried, jury-waived, before the same Superior *648 Court judge who had accepted this guilty plea on an additional indictment brought pursuant to G.L.c. 94C, § 32J, as inserted by St. 1989, c. 227, § 2, the so-called school zone statute.[2] That indictment charged a violation of "section 32A and section 32E, of [G.L.c.] 94C, while in or on, or within [1,000] feet of the real property comprising a ... school."[3] The judge found the defendant guilty under this indictment and imposed an additional sentence of from three to five years to be served from and after the sentence imposed on the trafficking charge. The defendant appealed from his conviction on the school zone charge, and we allowed the defendant's petition for direct appellate review. He contends that the school zone statute requires for conviction that a defendant must intend to distribute the drugs inside the school zone and that, because the Commonwealth's proof was inadequate on this point, his motion for a required finding of not guilty should have been allowed.[4] We reject the argument and affirm the defendant's conviction.
There was evidence at the jury-waived trial of the following events. On September 25, 1989, a State police officer, working undercover, made arrangements to purchase cocaine from Joseph DiFilippo. DiFilippo was kept under surveillance as the transaction progressed and was observed meeting the *649 defendant, who was in a Dodge Caravan motor vehicle on Center Street in Pittsfield. After his contact with the defendant, DiFilippo sold cocaine to the officer.
A second drug sale was arranged between the undercover officer and DiFilippo for October 10, 1989. DiFilippo met with the officer at DiFilippo's home and was given marked money. DiFilippo advised the officer that he was waiting for a telephone call from his supplier, "Art," to obtain the drugs. After receiving a telephone call, DiFilippo left his home. Surveillance by other police officers disclosed that DiFilippo drove to the parking lot of a Cumberland Farms store located at First Street in Pittsfield where he met the defendant who again was driving a Dodge Caravan motor vehicle. The Cumberland Farms parking lot is located 325 feet from an elementary school.
DiFilippo entered the defendant's vehicle and the two drove around nearby streets for a short time before returning to the parking lot. At this point, officers began to move in on the vehicle to make arrests. Apparently, upon detecting the officers, the defendant immediately accelerated and drove the vehicle away. The police pursued, and during a short chase, officers observed various objects being thrown from the vehicle.[5] When the van was stopped DiFilippo and the defendant were arrested. A search of the vehicle led to the seizure of a large quantity of cocaine, cutting agents which could be used to increase the cocaine's quantity, and some of the marked money given DiFilippo by the undercover officer. Based on these events, the Commonwealth brought the aforementioned charges against the defendant.
In connection with his motion for a required finding of not guilty on the school zone charge, the defendant's trial counsel argued that, at best, the Commonwealth's evidence showed the defendant to have possessed cocaine within a school zone with the intent to distribute it outside of the zone to the undercover officer who remained at DiFilippo's home. *650 The defendant's trial counsel maintained "the mere possession of drugs within the zone, intended for distribution outside of the zone, is not conduct proscribed by the statute."[6] In dispute is the issue whether G.L.c. 94C, § 32J, applies if, within a school zone, a defendant is shown to have possessed cocaine with the intent to distribute it somewhere, whether within or outside the zone.
Section 32J does not logically permit the interpretation the defendant seeks to place on it. By its express terms, a violation is made out if a defendant is shown to have committed one of the enumerated acts that constitute crimes under G.L.c. 94C "while in or on, or within" 1,000 feet of a school. The quoted words are clearly meant to fix the location where the predicate crime must take place. General Laws c. 94C, §§ 32A and 32E, which in relevant part make criminal the possession with intent to distribute cocaine, do not require for conviction that a defendant have an intent to distribute within any specific area. Considered term by term, § 32J contemplates a violation in three instances  when one of the identified drug crimes is committed (a) in a school; (b) on school property; or (c) within 1,000 feet of school property. "After the elements of [the predicate] offense have been established, one need only take out the tape *651 measure to see if [the school zone provision of § 32J] has been violated." State v. Ivory, 124 N.J. 582, 593 (1991).[7]
The result we reach is the same result reached by better reasoned decisions which have considered the issue in connection with the interpretation and application of analogous school zone statutes. In State v. Ivory, supra, the New Jersey Supreme Court had before it the appeal of a defendant who was found to possess cocaine and marihuana with intent to distribute while within 1,000 feet of school property. The court upheld the trial court's determination that the possibility that the defendant intended to distribute the drugs outside the school zone was irrelevant under the New Jersey school zone statute, N.J. Stat. Ann. § 2C:35-7 (West 1991 Supp.). Id. at 585. The court noted that the New Jersey statute had to be given a fair and natural interpretation. "Clearly, the Legislature intended to create drug-free zones of safety where children could be, learn and play free of the potential infection of drugs. One contaminating these safety zones is liable, regardless of whether he or she intended to infect those here or others elsewhere. Such a stance is legitimate and warranted in the effort to prevent primary and secondary school students in this State from using drugs. The statute presents a rational and reasonable approach by the Legislature to reduce drugs around schools." Id. at 594-595.
In United States v. Wake, 948 F.2d 1422 (5th Cir.1991) cert. denied, 112 S.Ct. 2944 (1992), the Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit considered facts similar to the facts in this case and, in connection with the Federal school zone statute, 21 U.S.C. § 860 (1988 & Supp. II 1990), rejected identical arguments to those made here. The court concluded *652 that the Federal school zone "statute must be taken for what it says and be applied even in cases where schoolchildren may not be directly in danger," (emphasis in original), id. at 1432, and it noted that "the case before us is the paradigm of the conduct Congress sought to deter through the schoolyard statute penalty enhancements."[8]Id. at 1433 n. 9. These observations apply to § 32J, and to this case.
The conclusion that § 32J is clear in fixing the location of the crime also precludes resort to the so-called rule of lenity contended for by the defendant. That rule may be applied when a statute can plausibly be found to be ambiguous to give the defendant the benefit of the ambiguity. Section 32J, however, is not ambiguous, and the statutory language discloses a clear legislative purpose to create drug-free school zones. The following comments by Justice Kaplan in Commonwealth v. Tata, 28 Mass. App. Ct. 23, 25-26 (1989), have relevance at this point to the defendant's lenity argument. "The language of the statute easily permits [the] interpretation [we place upon it], and it is reason for accepting the reading that the defendant's contrary interpretation would create great practical difficulty in the enforcement of the law. We cannot suppose that a Legislature which has [adopted progressively stricter measures to stop drug sales and] trafficking would be content with the defendant's interpretation or its practical result. The maxim that penal statutes are to be strictly construed does not mean that an available and sensible interpretation is to be rejected in favor of a fanciful or perverse one. See Edgartown v. State Ethics Comm'n, 391 Mass. 83, 90 (1984) (quoting from Simon v. Solomon, 385 Mass. 91, 102-103 [1982]: the maxim `is a *653 guide for resolving ambiguity, rather than a rigid requirement that we interpret each statute in the manner most favorable to defendants'); United States v. Restrepo, 676 F. Supp. 368, 372 (D. Mass. 1987), aff'd, 867 F.2d 605 (1st Cir.1988) (`I must not construe the criminal statute so strictly as to defeat the obvious intention of the legislature.... Nor may I manufacture ambiguity to invoke the rule of lenity so as to defeat that intent')." (Footnotes omitted.)
Nothing else argued by the defendant persuades us to his position.
Judgment affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  The defendant also entered guilty pleas on two indictments charging assault and battery with a dangerous weapon, and one indictment charging him with trafficking in cocaine.
[2]  The part of this statute that applies to this case reads as follows:
"Any person who violates the provisions of section thirty-two, thirty-two A, thirty-two B, thirty-two C, thirty-two D, thirty-two E, thirty-two F or thirty-two I while in or on, or within one thousand feet of the real property comprising a public or private elementary, vocational, or secondary school whether or not in session shall be punished by [penalties as specified].
"Lack of knowledge of school boundaries shall not be a defense to any person who violates the provisions of this section."
[3]  General Laws c. 94C, § 32A, makes criminal the possession with intent to distribute cocaine. Section 32E of the same chapter defines the crime of trafficking to include the possession with intent to distribute a minimum of fourteen grams of cocaine.
[4]  The issue raised by the defendant was reserved in Commonwealth v. Taylor, ante 243, 248 n. 7 (1992). Other challenges raised by the defendant to the validity of G.L.c. 94C, § 32J, have been decided adversely to him in Commonwealth v. Alvarez, ante 224 (1992).
[5]  The objects were recovered and included baggies containing cocaine, money, and an "OZ" sheet which is a drug dealer's record of transactions.
[6]  The prosecution argued two theories to obtain a conviction on the school zone charge. These theories were based on the defendant and DiFilippo acting as joint venturers. First, the prosecutor argued that G.L.c. 94C, § 32J, does not require an intent to distribute within the school zone and, therefore, the presence of DiFilippo and the defendant in the parking lot, while in possession of drugs in a quantity inconsistent with personal use, brought them within the statute. Second, the defendant's intent to distribute, or to traffic, had been made out by a showing that the defendant was going to deliver cocaine to DiFilippo in the parking lot, which the latter would sell to the undercover officer waiting at DiFilippo's house. In finding the defendant guilty, the judge did not indicate which theory he adopted or whether he found both had been proved. The case, however, fairly raises the issue we are about to consider, which is important to an understanding on how a judge should apply § 32J and instruct a jury.
[7]  Because we conclude that § 32J is unambiguous, there is no occasion to examine legislative history. This notwithstanding, we note that what legislative history exists tends to confirm our interpretation of the statute's purpose. In a January 12, 1989, communication to the members of the Massachusetts Senate and House of Representatives, then Governor Michael S. Dukakis indicated that he was proposing the legislation that ultimately became G.L.c. 94C, § 32J, in order to "establish a 1,000 feet drug-free school zone.... [in order to make] every school and surrounding community safe from the destructive impact of drug trafficking and drug abuse."
[8]  The court in Wake also rejected contrary authority from three Federal District Courts. See United States v. McDonald, 777 F. Supp. 43, 45-46 (D.D.C. 1991); United States v. Testa, 768 F. Supp. 221, 223 (N.D. Ill. 1991); United States v. Liranzo, 729 F. Supp. 1012, 1014 (S.D.N.Y. 1990); United States v. Coates, 739 F. Supp. 146, 153 (S.D.N.Y. 1990); United States v. Roberts, 735 F. Supp. 537, 540-542 (S.D.N.Y. 1990). The reasoning in these decisions is conclusory and nonpersuasive in view of the unambiguous language of § 32J.

=== CASE 9740055 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:54.001316+00 ===

Hoekstra, J.
In this case, this panel is called on to review a state trial court’s decision to suppress evidence seized under a federal search warrant but used in a state prosecution. The lower court suppressed the evidence because the federal warrant did not recite the basis for probable cause or have attached to it the affidavit in support of probable cause, as required by state statute, MCL 780.654; MSA 28.1259(4). No affidavit was attached because federal law contains no such requirement, and a federal magistrate had ordered the affidavit sealed. Because I find that our Supreme Court’s decision in People v Moten, 233 Mich 169; 206 NW 506 (1925), requires suppression of evidence seized under these circumstances, I *497would affirm the lower court’s decision.1 Despite this Court’s previous efforts to depart from Moten's strict construction of Michigan’s warrant statute, the dated Supreme Court decision remains good law. Nevertheless, I urge our Supreme Court to reconsider this matter, but, until it does, I feel I must apply its decision in Moten. Further, because I am following authority that supersedes holdings of this Court, I do not believe that I am required to declare a conflict under MCR 7.215(H).
Neither party disputes the essential facts of this case. Agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation requested and obtained, from a federal magistrate, a search warrant authorizing agents to search defendant’s place of business and her home for records that might prove defendant had defrauded her worker’s compensation insurer. The search warrant, obtained under federal law, did not recite the basis for probable cause or have attached to it the affidavit in support of the warrant.
Both state and federal law enforcement agents executed the warrant. While searching defendant’s home, agents discovered and seized two handguns. After completing their search, and consistent with federal procedure, agents left a copy of the search warrant *498and a return listing the items seized. They did not leave a copy of the affidavit, and, as noted above, the warrant did not recite the basis for the probable cause supporting the warrant.
*497As the Court of Appeals repeatedly noted, it is the Supreme Court’s obligation to overrule or modify case law if it becomes obsolete, and until this Court takes such action, the Court of Appeals and all lower courts are bound by that authority. While the Court of Appeals may properly express its belief that a decision of this Court was wrongly decided or is no longer viable, that conclusion does not excuse the Court of Appeals from applying the decision to the case before it. [Citations omitted.]
*498Before her trial on the state charges, defendant moved to have evidence of the handguns suppressed, arguing that the search was defective under Michigan law, because no affidavit was attached to the search warrant left at the scene as required by MCL 780.654; MSA 28.1259(4).2 The trial court, holding that Moten, supra, controlled, reluctantly agreed and entered an order suppressing the evidence and dismissing the charges. On appeal, the prosecution argues that the trial court erred in relying on Moten without considering this Court’s decision in People v Pipok (After Remand), 191 Mich App 669; 479 NW2d 359 (1991). Defendant, on the other hand, argues that Pipok was wrongly decided because it contradicts Moten and should not be applied. Defendant further argues that because Moten remains good law as established by our Supreme Court, we are bound to apply it. I agree with defendant that Pipok was wrongly decided and that, under Moten, the evidence must be suppressed.
On appeal from a trial court’s ruling to suppress seized evidence, this Court reviews the trial court’s findings of fact for clear error and reviews de novo the ultimate decision. People v Darwich, 226 Mich App 635, 637; 575 NW2d 44 (1997). Further, in a joint operation between the state and federal government, *499state law governs the validity of a search warrant in a state court. People v Paladino, 204 Mich App 505, 507-508; 516 NW2d 113 (1994). Under Michigan law, the application for a search warrant must be supported by an affidavit “made on oath to a magistrate authorized to issue warrants in criminal cases.” MCL 780.651(1); MSA 28.1259(1)(1). The finding of probable cause “shall be based upon all the facts related within the affidavit.” MCL 780.653; MSA 28.1259(3). As noted above, in executing the warrant, the officer “shall forthwith give to the person from whom or from whose premises the property was taken a copy of the warrant and shall give to the person a copy of the tabulation upon completion.” MCL 780.655; MSA 28.1259(5). The warrant form is prescribed by statute:
A search warrant shall be directed to the sheriff or any peace officer, commanding such officer to search the house, building or other location or place, where any property or other thing for which he is required to search is believed to be concealed. Each warrant shall designate and describe the house or building or other location or place to be searched and the property or thing to be seized. The warrant shall also state the grounds or the probable or reasonable cause for its issuance, or in lieu thereof, a copy of the affidavit may be attached thereto. [MCL 780.654; MSA 28.1259(4) (emphasis supplied).]
Here, officials left the warrant at defendant’s home without the supporting affidavit, and the warrant itself did not state the probable cause grounds.
Under Moten, a record of the probable cause determination must be established, and a defendant must receive that record in order to know promptly the nature of the accusation being brought. Moten, supra at 173. Absent full compliance with the statute, the *500evidence should be suppressed. Id. In Pipok, supra, however, this Court attempted to distill from the revised warrant statute and Moten the general principal that a record of probable cause determination must be established so that a defendant can know the basis for the charge. Pipok, supra at 673. From that general principal, this Court then concluded that where a defendant has not shown prejudice from being denied access to that record at the time of the search, “the failure of the warrant to state the grounds for issuance or to have the supporting affidavit attached did not abrogate the purpose of the statute and that the error was one of procedure not requiring suppression of the evidence.” Id. In my opinion, however, Pipok was wrongly decided. Although I agree with the sentiment underlying its holding, the holding itself contradicts our Supreme Court’s decision in Moten, supra at 174, which states in pertinent part:
In our statute the mandate is positive that the warrant shall recite all material facts alleged in the affidavit, and a statutory form of search warrant is provided indicating just where to insert the recital which the law makes an essential part of a valid warrant. Unfortunately this essential requirement was ignored. The warrant is invalid, and the evidence procured thereunder inadmissible.
The Pipok Court correctly noted that the Legislature had revised the statute in question, MCL 780.654; MSA 28.1259(4), to permit the attachment of the affidavit itself, rather than requiring the warrant to recite the facts as stated in the affidavit:
Since the court’s decision in Moten, statutory law in this state has changed to permit a supporting affidavit to be *501attached to the warrant in place of stating the material facts, or grounds for issuance, on the warrant itself. Again, the provision is designed to guarantee that a record of probable cause is established. The Legislature has apparently recognized that the affidavit alone is sufficient to establish a record of probable cause and that it is not necessary to transcribe the material facts from the affidavit onto the warrant. [Pipok, supra at 672-673.]
To the extent that one could read Pipok to hold that its departure from Moten is justified by a change in the warrant statute, I find the decision mistaken.3 Although this change makes it easier for officials to comply with the statute, it does not modify the mandatory nature of the statute’s language. Consequently, the change in the statute’s requirements does not affect the authority of the Supreme Court’s holding in Moten, which clearly holds that a violation of this portion of the statute requires that the evidence be excluded.
In sum, our Supreme Court’s holdings in Moten requires us to find that where the warrant relies on an attached affidavit for its statement of “the grounds or the probable or reasonable cause for its issuance”4 and that affidavit is not attached to the warrant, “[t]he warrant is invalid, and the evidence procured thereunder inadmissible.”5 See also People v Galnt, 235 Mich 646; 209 NW 915 (1926), and People v Rules, 234 Mich 335; 207 NW 818 (1926). Under this holding, *502we are not free to decide if the general purpose of the statute has been satisfied.
Another panel of this Court recently reaffirmed Pipok in People v Garvin, 235 Mich App 90; 597 NW2d 194 (1999). In that case, the police initially attached the affidavit to the warrant, but they did not leave the affidavit at the scene. Although the Garvin Court held that “a copy of the affidavit becomes part of the ‘copy of the warrant’ that must be provided or left,” it also held that the officers’ failure to comply with the statute did not require suppression of evidence seized pursuant to the warrant. Garvin, supra at 99. In support of this finding, the Garvin Court quoted Pipok6 and concluded:
Thus, it follows that the failure of the police to provide or leave a copy of the affidavit as part of the copy of the warrant does not provide a basis for suppression of evidence, because Garvin ultimately has the opportunity to challenge probable cause supporting the warrant and because the requirement is merely procedural. [Garvin, supra at 99-100.]
*503I believe that this holding, along with that of Pipok, is in conflict with our Supreme Court’s holdings in Moten, Bules, and Galnt, which we are bound to follow.7 As the trial court noted, even though the cases requiring suppression are dated and seldom cited, they have not been overturned.
Until our Supreme Court decides to revisit this issue, I feel compelled to follow its precedent. However, I disagree with the result reached in Moten. While this particular statutory provision generally relates to a constitutional right, the specific portion of the statute requiring a recitation of the basis for probable cause or the attachment of the affidavit only barely relates to the substantive right the Legislature is seeking to protect. The requirement is more of a ministerial duty than a right. Consequently, were I able, I would hold that defendant must show some prejudice before the trial court suppresses the evidence seized using a statutorily defective warrant. In this case, for example, defendant was eventually afforded a chance to contest the basis for the warrant. I am unable to see how defendant was put at a disadvantage by being forced to delay her arguments until the parties obtained a copy of the federal affidavit. I think it is especially important that defendant be forced to show some level of prejudice given that the warrant met all the requirements of the federal warrant statute. Here, I find it necessary to exclude the evidence in question because the state warrant requirements differ from federal warrant requirements. Neither party has argued that the federal war*504rant requirements are unconstitutional, so it seems that I am forced to declare a search invalid because the ministerial duties associated with executing a federal warrant differ from those associated with executing a state warrant, a result I hope our Supreme Court will find equally unsettling.
Affirmed.
Cavanagh, P.J. I concur in the result only.
In Boyd v WG Wade Shows, 443 Mich 515, 523; 505 NW2d 544 (1993), our Supreme Court wrote:
Recently, this Court held that, under MCL 780.654; MSA 28.1259(4), the attached affidavit is part of the warrant. People v Garvin, 235 Mich App 90, 99; 597 NW2d 194 (1999). Although I ultimately disagree with Garvin, we agree with its determination that the affidavit becomes part of the warrant that must be served and left behind.
I do not mean to suggest, however, that I interpret Pipok to hold that the revised statute permitted this Court to deviate from our Supreme Court’s holding in Moten. Rather, I acknowledge that the Pipok Court’s reason for mentioning that the statute was revised is not clear, and one might attempt to justify the decision to depart from Moten by pointing out that the statute in question has been revised since Moten was issued.
MCL 780.654; MSA 28.1259(4).
Moten, supra at 174.
“In this case, there is an affidavit setting forth the facts on which the federal magistrate’s determination of probable cause was based. Defendants do not argue that the affidavit was insufficient to establish probable cause, and they do not articulate any prejudice that resulted from the noncompliance with [MCL 780.654; MSA 28.1259(4)]. Furthermore, defendants were furnished copies of the affidavit before the preliminary examinations and had the opportunity at those hearings to challenge probable cause supporting the search warrant. We therefore conclude that the failure of the warrant to state the grounds for issuance or to have the supporting affidavit attached did not abrogate the purpose of the statute and that the error was one of procedure not requiring suppression of the evidence.” [Garvin, supra at 99, quoting Pipok, supra at 673.]
I note that the Court in Garvin did not cite Moten, but instead merely accepted Pipok as authority for its conclusion. As noted above, I find Pipok to have been wrongly decided.

=== CASE 9740056 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:26:54.006137+00 ===

Gage, J.
(dissenting). I respectfully dissent from the lead opinion’s affirmation of the trial court’s suppression of evidence seized from defendant’s home. I believe that People v Pipok (After Remand), 191 Mich App 669; 479 NW2d 359 (1991), controls the outcome in this case and that this case is distinguishable from People v Moten, 233 Mich 169; 206 NW 506 (1925), and its progeny.
Both Moten, id. at 173-174, and Pipok, supra at 672, recognized that the Legislature enacted the provision currently designated MCL 780.654; MSA 28.1259(4), formerly 1917 PA 338, primarily to require that law enforcement officials make a record of the determination of probable cause in order to assure that this determination was made on proven facts and not opinions. The provision in effect at the time the Supreme Court decided Moten contemplated that the only manner by which law enforcement officials could satisfy this objective constituted recitation of all the probable cause affidavit’s material facts within the search warrant itself. Moten, supra at 172. Subsequently, the Legislature relaxed the requirement that officials repeat on the face of the warrant all the facts supporting a finding of probable cause, permitting officials instead to simply attach to the warrant the *505affidavit in support of probable cause. MCL 780.654; MSA 28.1259(4). In light of the Legislature’s expansion of the permissible statutory methods for incorporating the facts supporting a finding of probable cause, I disagree with the majority’s reliance on the Moten Court’s analysis of the preamendment statute.
I agree with the panels of this Court that have addressed the current statute and concluded that the mere failure to attach the required affidavit does not by itself demand suppression of evidence seized pursuant to the warrant. See People v Garvin, 235 Mich App 90, 99-100; 597 NW2d 194 (1999). The Court in Pipok, supra at 673, determined that under the circumstances in that case, any error in this respect was merely procedural:
In this case, there is an affidavit setting forth the facts on which the federal magistrate’s determination of probable cause was based. Defendants do not argue that the affidavit was insufficient to establish probable cause, and they do not articulate any prejudice that resulted from the noncompliance with § 4. Furthermore, defendants were furnished copies of the affidavit before the preliminary examinations and had the opportunity at those hearings to challenge probable cause supporting the search warrant. We therefore conclude that the failure of the warrant to state the grounds for issuance or to have the supporting affidavit attached did not abrogate the purpose of the statute and that the error was one of procedure not requiring suppression of the evidence. See People v Myers, 163 Mich App 120; 413 NW2d 749 (1987);[1] People v Tennon, 70 Mich App 447; 245 *506NW2d 756 (1976).[2]
This Court recently reaffirmed the Pipok Court’s analysis in Garvin, supra at 100-101.
We strongly agree with the pertinent holding [that, as a matter of Michigan law, a mere failure to attach an affidavit to a search warrant does not require the suppression of evidence seized pursuant to that warrant] by the Pipok Court. It is one thing, under certain circumstances, to order the drastic remedy of suppressing highly relevant evidence to enforce the fundamental constitutional guarantees against unreasonable searches and seizures of US Const, Am IV and Const 1963, art 1, § 11. It is quite another to extend the exclusionary rule to a technical deficiency, such as failing to provide or leave a copy of an affidavit in connection with the exercise of a reasonable search in which the law enforcement officers executing the search provide a copy of the search warrant itself, thereby providing notice that the search has been judicially authorized.
The Garvin Court concluded that because the defendant ultimately has the opportunity to challenge probable cause supporting the warrant and because the affidavit requirement is merely procedural, the failure of the police to provide or leave a copy of the affidavit as part of the copy of the warrant did not provide a basis for suppression of the evidence seized. Id. at 99-100.
In the instant case, while defendant received a copy of the federal search warrant, no one left her a copy of the supporting affidavit because a federal magis*507trate had placed it under seal. The warrant itself satisfied federal requirements, and defendant does not contend that these federal requirements are unconstitutional. Although defendant was not provided the affidavit before her preliminary examination, she eventually obtained a copy of the affidavit and clearly had the opportunity to challenge the basis for the warrant. Under these circumstances, I agree with the lead opinion that “I am unable to see how defendant was put at a disadvantage by being forced to delay her arguments until the parties obtained a copy of the federal affidavit.” Ante at 503. In the absence of any prejudice to defendant arising from the officials’ failure to attach the affidavit to the warrant, I would find that this technical, nonconstitutional, statutory deficiency does not by itself warrant invocation of the exclusionary rule. Garvin, supra at 99-101.
The fact that evidence was obtained pursuant to a defective warrant does not necessarily mandate suppression. Deterrence is the sole reason for the exclusionary rule. United States v Leon, 468 US 897, 916-918; 104 S Ct 3405; 82 L Ed 2d 677 (1984); Stone v Powell, 428 US 465, 486-487; 96 S Ct 3037, 49 L Ed 2d 1067 (1976). The conduct of the officers in this case had absolutely no effect on Ms. Sobczak-Obetts’ Fourth Amendment rights. The United States Supreme Court has recognized the high “costs of applying the exclusionary rule,” which include rendering unavailable reliable and highly probative information concerning a defendant’s guilt or innocence, “deflect[ing] the truthfinding process and often free[ing] the guilty.” Id. at 489-490. “The disparity in particular cases between the error committed by the police officer and the windfall afforded a guilty *508defendant by application of the rale is contrary to the idea of proportionality that is essential to the concept of justice.” Id. at 490. I believe that excluding the seized evidence solely on the basis that the warrant lacked the statutorily required attached affidavit represents a disproportionate windfall for defendant, and an unjust result.
I would reverse and remand.
1 Myers held that when the defendant received substantially all the information relevant to the search parameters through the affidavit for the search warrant and no apparent harm or prejudice to the defendant occurred, the failure of the police to leave the defendant a copy of the warrant itself, as required by MCL 780.655; MSA 28.1259(5), represented a hypertechnical defect not requiring suppression of the evidence seized.
2 Tennon held that a police officer’s failure to tabulate items seized in the presence of the defendant, as' required by MCL 780.655; MSA 28.1259(5), did not qualify as constitutional error requiring application of the exclusionary rule when the defendant signed the tabulation, presumably knew of its contents, and made no objection to the items on the list.

=== CASE 2222036 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:26.690647+00 ===

601 N.E.2d 1080 (1992)
234 Ill. App.3d 1082
176 Ill.Dec. 382
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Lavert JONES, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 1-87-2346.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Third Division.
September 16, 1992.
*1082 Jack O'Malley, State's Atty. of Cook County, Chicago (Renee Goldfarb, James E. Fitzgerald, Noreen M. Daly, of counsel), for plaintiff-appellee.
Rita A. Fry; First Asst. Public Defender of Cook County, Chicago (Hugh Stevens, of counsel), for defendant-appellant.
Presiding Justice GREIMAN delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant Lavert Jones was found guilty of attempted armed robbery, conspiracy to commit armed robbery and the murder of St. Clair Haywood, and was sentenced to concurrent terms of 10 years, 3 years and 40 years respectively.
Defendant contends on appeal that (1) there was no probable cause for his arrest; (2) the trial court should have granted his motion to suppress statements to police since the State failed to produce one of the police officers he alleges took part in coercing his statement; (3) prior consistent statements of a crucial prosecution witness were improperly admitted; (4) testimony regarding incriminating statements by the non-testifying co-defendants was admitted; (5) defendant's conviction and sentence for conspiracy to commit armed robbery should be vacated since they are based on the same act or acts as defendant's conviction and sentence for attempted armed robbery; (6) the trial court abused its discretion in sentencing defendant to the maximum non-extended term of 40 years for the offense of murder.
In a pro se supplemental brief, defendant also contends that: (1) he was not proven *1083 guilty beyond a reasonable doubt; (2) the trial court failed to properly instruct the jury as to self-defense and voluntary manslaughter; (3) defense counsel was ineffective in failing to tender an instruction on self-defense or voluntary manslaughter; (4) it was error when the State failed to produce the murder weapon; and (5) he was denied a fair trial by improper comments made by the prosecution in closing argument.
We affirm defendant's conviction and sentence on the issues presented, but remand to reopen the suppression hearing so that a material witness may testify.
At approximately 6 a.m. on December 20, 1983, St. Clair Haywood was found slumped over the steering wheel of his car across the street from his home, a victim of multiple gunshot wounds.
A neighbor of the victim, Venus Harris, testified that she heard gunfire and looked out her window to see two cars on the street. Ms. Harris stated that a young black male in his early 20s walked from the victim's car to an older two-door gray Chevrolet, while the victim's car slowly moved forward to rest against a tree.
While police investigated the murder, James Young was arrested several weeks later for unlawful possession of a .25 caliber handgun, and tests performed on the weapon revealed that it had fired the bullets recovered in the Haywood shooting.
When police questioned Young, he told them he had purchased the gun from defendant in the week between Christmas and New Year's Day, paying $25 for it. The officers then informed Young that the gun had been used to commit a homicide and when asked if he had any information about it, he acknowledged that he did.
Young testified at trial that he had known defendant for at least 11 years, they had socialized together but were not close friends. On December 19,1983, at approximately 10 a.m., Young was at a local game room when defendant and Craft engaged him in conversation and defendant told Young that he needed a gun so they could "stick-up some guy around fifty-something and State" streets to "make some money". When defendant asked Young if he knew where defendant might obtain a gun, Young replied that he did not know and did not wish to be involved in a holdup.
At approximately 7 p.m. that evening, Young again saw defendant and Craft at the game room and defendant again stated that they were going to "fifty-something and State to make some money" and Young again declined to accompany them. Later that evening, at approximately 10 p.m., Young and Mark Nunley saw defendant and Craft on the corner of 93rd and Marshfield Streets, and defendant confirmed to Young that he was "on his way" as he climbed into his gray Chevrolet with a black top.
The next morning, at approximately 6:30 a.m., Young encountered defendant and Craft getting out of defendant's car in front of defendant's house. Defendant then told Young that he, Craft and Alex Moore followed the victim home, that defendant shot the man, but that the other two were too frightened to get out of the car, so defendant got back into the car and they drove back to defendant's house.
Young stated that he was not aware that the gun he purchased from defendant was the gun used in the December 20 incident and that he was not aware of the victim's death.
Based upon the information received from Young, which correlated with the Harris statement, police arrested defendant at his grandparents' house where he lived much of the time.
Shortly after defendant arrived at the police station at about 2 a.m., detectives Peter Dignan and John Yucaitis talked with defendant.
Detective Dignan testified that defendant was handcuffed to the wall of an interview room, read his rights and told of the charges against him. When defendant denied his involvement, the detectives informed him of what Young had told them and defendant immediately stated "Man, you know it. I will tell you."
*1084 Dignan testified that defendant then told him that Craft approached him before Christmas in 1983 and told him of a drug dealer who was "an easy knock," but that he needed a gun. Defendant told Craft that Alex Moore, the third co-defendant, had one.
Dignan stated that defendant told him that on the evening of December 19, 1983, the three defendants went to 59th Street and Indiana Avenue and followed the victim out of the lounge to a downtown hotel where he stayed for quite a while. After the victim exited the hotel, they followed him to his home and pulled up near where he had parked at the curb.
The defendant told Dignan that when he walked up to the victim's car and asked him if he had any drugs, defendant said it looked as if Haywood was reaching for a gun. Defendant started shooting, but could not recall how many shots he fired. Defendant then ran to the car and they left the area. Defendant admitted he sold the gun to James Young one week later.
On cross-examination, Dignan testified that Young indicated that the hold-up was Craft's idea and that Young was never asked to sign a statement. Dignan's police report indicated that prior to his initial interview with defendant, Detective Kushner spoke with defendant and defendant denied any knowledge of, or involvement in Haywood's murder. Prior to making a court-reported statement to assistant State's Attorney John Lerner, Dignan arranged for defendant to telephone his mother. Dignan denied that either he or Detective Yucaitis ever struck defendant at any time.
Assistant State's Attorney John Lerner testified that he was at the police station at 9 a.m. on January 28, 1984, and spoke with James Young and the three defendants. At approximately 11 a.m., Lerner attempted to begin a court-reported statement of defendant's which he had agreed to give, but defendant then stated that he wanted additional time to think about it and asked him to come back later. After defendant made a phone call to his mother and Lerner had again advised him of his rights, he gave a court reported statement at approximately 1:15 p.m. with Lerner, Dignan and the court reporter present.
Lerner testified that the statement was substantially the same as that related to Detective Dignan, but with some additional information: that defendant met Craft through Young; that Craft told him that he knew of an old man who sold drugs and carried a lot of money; that Craft drove defendant's car that night.
The statement revealed that when defendant approached the victim's car, the victim rolled down his window and defendant asked if he had any dope. Defendant stated that the victim looked surprised and said yes at first but then asked defendant's identity. Defendant then stated that when the victim reached for a pistol on the seat next to him, defendant "got hysterical" and started firing at the victim. While defendant could not recall exactly how many times he fired the gun, he did recall that it was more than once. Defendant then ran to his car, jumped in and Craft drove away. Defendant admitted that he later sold the gun to Young.
Lerner further testified that after defendant gave the statement, defendant reviewed, edited and signed it, and a photograph of him was taken. Defendant also acknowledged in his statement that he had made a phone call, been fed, given cigarettes and was not mistreated at the station. Defendant never told Lerner that he had been hit by anyone while he was at the station, he never asked for any medical treatment, nor did Lerner observe any injuries to defendant when he spoke with him.
Defendant testified that he did not shoot or kill anyone; that he did not know Craft; that he had not seen Young in over a year; that the pictures taken of him at the time of his statement and when he arrived to the county jail showed injuries he sustained.
Defendant stated that between the time of his arrest and the court reported statement, he was beaten and kicked by three detectives whose names he could not recall. He estimated that he was hit in the head approximately 1000 times and stated that he vomited from the beatings. Defendant testified that when he asked to call his *1085 mother and a lawyer, the detectives left the room, returned a short while later and beat defendant until he passed out.
While defendant acknowledged that he was asked some questions that night, he could not remember answering any of them or remember whether an assistant State's Attorney was in the room. He also admitted that he signed every page of the statement, but denied giving any of the information in it. Defendant stated that he never requested medical treatment at any time nor did he tell anyone he was beaten. While defendant also denied he was advised of his constitutional rights, his court reported statement contained his acknowledgement of having been so advised.
Upon rebuttal, Detective Yucaitis stated that he never beat defendant, that he never saw defendant being beaten, that he never saw defendant vomit or show any signs of injuries. Detective Yucaitis also testified that defendant told him that he was unemployed, contrary to defendant's testimony that he was employed by Christ Hospital.
The State also called Almaz Ayodele, who was the medical technician at the Cook County Department of Corrections when defendant was first transported to the jail after leaving the police station. She examined defendant from the waist up and found no cuts, bruises, swelling or other marks of recent physical abuse. She stated that it was the duty of the "G.C." room to first examine defendant's lower body, and to note on defendant's chart if any bruises, scars or other marks are evident. Ms. Ayodele stated that no such notations were on defendant's chart when she received it.
Further, in the course of her examination, she asked defendant many questions regarding his health, including whether or not he had sustained any head or chest injuries, to which defendant replied he had not. Ms. Ayodele testified that the only problems of which defendant complained were sinus and asthma irritations for which he was taking medication.
Defense counsel first argues that the trial court erred in denying defendant's motion to quash arrest and suppress evidence because the police did not have probable cause to arrest him. Defendant contends that the information Young provided police was not reliable because Young was a suspect in the murder.
However, before the police spoke to Young, they were aware that the victim was an older man, known to traffic in drugs, who died of gunshot wounds in the early morning hours. They also had information from Ms. Harris that placed at the scene a gray two-door Chevrolet with three occupants, at least one of which was a young African-American male, in his early twenties and matching defendant's description, who entered the car after gunshots were fired.
Young provided police information to corroborate their evidence: defendant told Young that he intended to rob an old dope dealer who carried large sums of money; defendant also told Young on the morning of the murder that he and two others were involved in the shooting; Young described defendant's car as a two-door Chevrolet with gray primer and a black top.
We find that the totality of the circumstances supports a finding of probable cause to arrest defendant.
To determine probable cause in cases involving an informant's information, Illinois adopted the totality-of-the-circumstances test of Illinois v. Gates (1983), 462 U.S. 213, 230-31, 103 S.Ct. 2317, 2328-29, 76 L.Ed.2d 527. (People v. Tisler (1984), 103 Ill.2d 226, 245-46, 82 Ill.Dec. 613, 469 N.E.2d 147.) The test is whether by application of factual and practical commonsense considerations, a reasonable and prudent person would believe that the person arrested has committed the offense. People v. Adams (1989), 131 Ill.2d 387, 396-97, 137 Ill.Dec. 616, 546 N.E.2d 561; People v. Smith (1991), 222 Ill.App.3d 473, 478, 165 Ill.Dec. 32, 584 N.E.2d 211.
An informant's "veracity" or "reliability" and his "basis of knowledge" are examined and a deficiency in one may be compensated for, in determining the overall reliability of a statement, by a strong *1086 showing as to the other, or by some indicia of reliability. Gates, 462 U.S. at 233, 103 S.Ct. at 2329.
Therefore, we affirm the trial court's holding that the police had probable cause since we find Young's basis of knowledge, that is, his detailed conversations with defendant, credible and his reliability sufficiently established by independent corroboration with information that the police already knew prior to talking with him. For purposes of review, we consider the information available to police prior to arrest. Adams, 131 Ill.2d at 398, 137 Ill.Dec. 616, 546 N.E.2d 561; People v. Miller (1991), 212 Ill.App.3d 195, 201, 156 Ill.Dec. 480, 570 N.E.2d 1202.
Defendant next argues that the court erred in denying defendant's motion to suppress his statements since the State failed to produce without explanation one of the police officers defendant alleged to have beaten him.
Defendant contends that the incriminating oral and written statements that he made at the police station should be suppressed because he was beaten into making them by Sergeant Byrne and Detectives Dignan and Yucaitis. Although Dignan and Yucaitis testified, defendant claims Sergeant Byrne to be a material witness who did not testify at the pretrial hearing, thus violating the material witness rule.
Defendant testified at the pretrial hearing that although he could not remember the names of the three detectives who beat him, he could remember their faces. Defense counsel supplied the names "Dignan", "Yucaitis" and "Byrne" to defendant and he confirmed that they were the detectives who coerced him into making his statements by beating him.
Time and again on direct and cross, defendant confirmed that "three" policemen took part in the beatings that led to his statements. On cross-examination, the State failed to question defendant as to Byrne's appearance or any other matters that would touch upon Byrne's identity.
Detective Dignan testified that he and his partner, Detective Yucaitis, informed Sergeant Byrne, their superior, of the content of their initial interview with defendant. Sergeant Byrne accompanied the two detectives and defendant in the squad car to arrest codefendant Craft. However, defense counsel never cross-examined Dignan regarding Sergeant Byrne's role in the investigation or even inquired whether the sergeant had ever entered the interview room at any time.
Detective Yucaitis testified in rebuttal that neither he nor Detective Dignan ever beat the defendant and that Sergeant Byrne was not present for any interview with defendant.
The purpose of the material witness rule is to compel the State to produce those officers who were witnesses to, or who had a role in procuring the controverted statement. People v. Terrell (1989), 132 Ill.2d 178, 202, 138 Ill.Dec. 176, 547 N.E.2d 145; People v. Ralon (1991), 211 Ill.App.3d 927, 944, 156 Ill.Dec. 266, 570 N.E.2d 742; People v. Jones (1990), 196 Ill.App.3d 937, 958, 143 Ill.Dec. 581, 554 N.E.2d 516.
Where a police officer is alleged to have beaten a defendant prior to the defendant's confession, the officer's testimony is material to the issue of the voluntariness of the confession, regardless of whether the officer was actually present at the time the confession was made. People v. Armstrong (1972), 51 Ill.2d 471, 476, 282 N.E.2d 712; Ralon, 211 Ill.App.3d at 944-45, 156 Ill.Dec. 266, 570 N.E.2d 742; People v. Lumpp (1983), 113 Ill.App.3d 694, 699, 69 Ill.Dec. 528, 447 N.E.2d 963; People v. Lewis (1979), 75 Ill.App.3d 259, 279, 30 Ill.Dec. 751, 393 N.E.2d 1098; People v. Delk (1976), 36 Ill.App.3d 1027, 1035, 345 N.E.2d 197.
In the present case, defendant's testimony at the suppression hearing that Sergeant Byrne beat him made Sergeant Byrne a material witness. While the State argues that defense counsel's questions for the defendant as to the officers' identities were leading, the State failed to object to such questions. Although Detective Dignan testified that Sergeant Byrne was never present while defendant was being questioned, *1087 we find that testimony incomplete in describing Byrne's involvement in the case as the supervisor on duty at the time of the alleged beatings.
The material witness rule is intended as a safeguard against improperly induced confessions. (Ralon, 211 Ill.App.3d at 944, 156 Ill.Dec. 266, 570 N.E.2d 742.) While the trial judge found defendant's charges of coercion so "preposterous as to be an insult," such charges of coerced statements and brutality threaten the integrity of our judicial system and we believe that a trial court, in admitting evidence as to such charges, should be overinclusive and not underinclusive.
Since we find the State failed to carry its burden to call all material witnesses, we remand to reopen the suppression hearing so that Sergeant Byrne may testify. Since defendant failed to raise any issue as to other possible material witnesses who should have testified, the reopened hearing is limited to Sergeant Byrne's testimony. The testimony of the other witnesses has been heard and weighed by the trial court and unless Sergeant Byrne's testimony overcomes the prior finding of voluntariness, that finding shall stand and no new trial shall be granted defendant. Ralon, 211 Ill.App.3d at 949, 156 Ill.Dec. 266, 570 N.E.2d 742; see People v. Carr (1987), 168 Ill.App.3d 669, 672, 119 Ill.Dec. 785, 523 N.E.2d 393 and People v. Feagans (1985), 134 Ill.App.3d 252, 256-57, 89 Ill.Dec. 267, 480 N.E.2d 153.
Defendant next argues that Young's prior consistent statements contained in the testimony of Young and Detective Ryan were improperly admitted and were used only to bolster Young's credibility.
Defendant admits that his trial counsel failed to properly preserve the issue by objecting at trial and raising it in the post-trial motion. We agree and find this issue waived, having determined there is no plain error since the record does not clearly reflect an error affecting defendant's substantive rights. People v. Palmer (1989), 188 Ill.App.3d 414, 422, 137 Ill. Dec. 90, 545 N.E.2d 743.
However, it is clear from the record that these statements to police simply demonstrated how Young was integral to the investigation and that the investigation was thorough, contrary to defendant's contentions. Further, the statements which defendant disputes lack the details of Young's earlier testimony and, even if the statements had been found improper, they would not have prejudiced defendant's right to a fair trial. We find no error in the admission of this testimony.
Defendant next argues that the trial court erroneously admitted incriminating hearsay testimony of his codefendants which violated the hearsay rule and defendant's right to cross-examine and confront witnesses.
On redirect, the prosecution asked assistant State's Attorney John Lerner, who took defendant's court-reported statement, how he knew that defendant had taken a specific route in following the victim to his house. Mr. Lerner stated that he had already talked to defendant about it in his first oral statement and "had also talked to Moore and Craft," codefendants in the case.
Defendant here charges a Bruton violation, where admission into evidence of a nontestifying codefendant's statement violates a defendant's rights to confront and cross-examine the witnesses against him when the statement inculpates the defendant. Bruton v. United States (1968), 391 U.S. 123, 88 S.Ct. 1620, 20 L.Ed.2d 476.
Where the substance of a conversation with a nontestifying third party is not revealed, a police officer may properly testify concerning investigatory procedures, even though the jury could reasonably infer that the accomplice implicated the defendant. People v. Morgan (1991), 142 Ill.2d 410, 446-47, 154 Ill.Dec. 534, 568 N.E.2d 755. People v. Gacho (1988), 122 Ill.2d 221, 248, 119 Ill.Dec. 287, 522 N.E.2d 1146; People v. Moman (1990), 201 Ill. App.3d 293, 303, 146 Ill.Dec. 897, 558 N.E.2d 1231.
Here, we need not make that determination. The assistant State's Attorney *1088 acted in conjunction with police to take defendant's statement and to investigate the details of defendant's confession. However, we find no Bruton violation since the record demonstrates that the assistant State's Attorney's testimony was intended to rebut defendant's inference during cross-examination that the assistant State's Attorney had supplied defendant with the information as to the route taken in following the victim. Therefore, the testimony was not offered for the truth of the matter asserted, but rather, to rebut defendant's inference of a manufactured confession.
Defendant next contends that his conviction and sentence for conspiracy to commit armed robbery should be vacated since they are based upon the same act or acts as defendant's conviction and sentence for attempted armed robbery.
Although the record indicates that defendant has waived this issue by failing to raise it in the trial court or in his post-trial motion, we consider it under the plain error doctrine.
An accused cannot be convicted and sentenced for multiple crimes based upon the same physical act. (People v. King (1977), 66 Ill.2d 551, 6 Ill.Dec. 891, 363 N.E.2d 838; People v. Boulrece (1990), 195 Ill.App.3d 666, 142 Ill.Dec. 425, 552 N.E.2d 1166.) While a defendant may not be convicted of both a principal and inchoate offense, there is no bar against multiple convictions for the inchoate offenses of attempt armed robbery and conspiracy to commit armed robbery.
We find here that the acts in furtherance of the conspiracy to commit armed robbery and the substantial step towards the commission of armed robbery were separate and distinct and thus proper.
Defendant conspired with codefendants Craft and Moore to rob St. Clair Haywood. The three obtained a gun prior to Haywood's death, solicited Young to participate, waited outside the lounge the victim frequented until he exited, followed him to a hotel and waited again for him to emerge. After several hours of stalking the victim, they followed him to his home. All of these activities constitute a conspiracy to commit armed robbery.
The substantial step toward armed robbery occurred as defendant stepped from his car with a loaded gun, approached Haywood and feigned an interest in obtaining drugs so as to create an opportunity to rob him. The jury could have reasonably inferred that if defendant was only interested in buying drugs, a loaded pistol was not necessary.
A similar case is People v. Del Percio (1985), 105 Ill.2d 372, 86 Ill.Dec. 314, 475 N.E.2d 528, where the court upheld defendant's conviction for conspiracy to commit armed robbery and attempt armed robbery, finding that each offense had a different factual basis. The acts in furtherance of the conspiracy to rob a jewelry salesman were procuring a shotgun and tape and knocking on the door of the victim's apartment. The substantial step toward attempt armed robbery was "the threat of the imminent use of force and pointing the shotgun" at the victim. Del Percio, 105 Ill.2d at 384, 86 Ill.Dec. 314, 475 N.E.2d 528.
Defendant next argues that the trial court abused its discretion in sentencing defendant for the offense of murder to 40 years.
Defendant contends that the trial court failed to properly consider several factors in mitigation: (1) provocation where it appeared Haywood was drawing a gun; (2) defendant's panic, which, although not a defense, might be a justification for his criminal conduct; and (3) the idea that his conduct was induced or facilitated by Thomas Craft who approached him with the scheme.
At the time of the offense, the sentence for murder was a determinate period of not less than 20 years and not more than 40 years. (Ill.Rev.Stat.1983, Ch. 38, par. 1005-5-3(c)(2).) Further, defendant was eligible for an extended term of not more than 80 years since Haywood was 75 years old at the time of the shooting. (Ill.Rev. Stat.1983, ch. 38, par. 1005-5-3.2(b)(3).) Defendant's contention that he received the maximum number of years under the non-extended *1089 statute is uncertain since the record fails to demonstrate that the trial judge declined to apply the non-extended statute.
There is a rebuttable presumption that a sentence is proper and the presumption can be overcome only by an affirmative showing that the sentence is at substantial variance from the purposes and spirit of the law, or is manifestly violative of constitutional guidelines. (People v. Fletcher (1987), 156 Ill.App.3d 405, 108 Ill. Dec. 929, 509 N.E.2d 625.) It is presumed that the trial judge has a superior opportunity to consider the particular circumstances and defendant's credibility, demeanor, general moral character, mentality, social environment, habits and age. People v. Escobar (1988), 168 Ill.App.3d 30, 118 Ill.Dec. 736, 522 N.E.2d 191.
Defendant's argument that he was provoked into shooting Haywood, or that he panicked or that his conduct was facilitated by Craft, is inapposite to his trial defense that he was not involved in the crime and that his confession was coerced. Defendant cannot now rely on his allegedly coerced confession in which he stated that he acted in self-defense.
The trial judge discussed in detail the aggravating and mitigating factors. The court found aggravating the perjurious nature of defendant's trial testimony regarding the police beatings and the need for deterrence of such crimes; the age of the victim; the fact that defendant had coldly stalked an "easy mark," following his victim for hours with a loaded pistol, planning to rob him and approaching him when the victim was finally alone.
The court found mitigating the fact that defendant was 19 years old with no previous criminal record, but did not believe, based upon his observations of defendant's character and attitude, that defendant was unlikely to commit such a crime again.
We find that the trial court's sentence for murder is not improperly at variance with the purposes and spirit of the law or violative of constitutional guidelines. The trial court reasonably weighed the aggravating and mitigating factors, and because the extended-term sentence could apply in this case, we affirm defendant's sentence for the offense of murder.
We now address the issues raised in defendant's pro se supplemental brief.
Defendant first argues that he was not proved guilty beyond a reasonable doubt of either murder, attempt armed robbery or conspiracy to commit armed robbery.
A jury's verdict will not be disturbed on review unless the evidence is so contrary to the verdict or so unreasonable, improbable or unsatisfactory that it raises a reasonable doubt. (People v. Young (1989), 128 Ill.2d 1, 131 Ill.Dec. 78, 538 N.E.2d 453.) The trier of fact is in the unique position to observe the demeanor of the witnesses, assess their credibility and examine a witness's testimony for any motivational factor which would bear on its truthfulness, and a reviewing court, viewing the evidence in a light most favorable to the prosecution, should not substitute its judgement for that of the trial court unless its determination is so unsatisfactory as to justify a reasonable doubt as to defendant's guilt. Young, 128 Ill.2d at 48-49, 131 Ill.Dec. 78, 538 N.E.2d 453; People v. Brisbon (1985), 106 Ill.2d 342, 88 Ill.Dec. 87, 478 N.E.2d 402.
Upon a review of the evidence, we find that the jury could easily have found the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
We also reject defendant's next contention that it was error when the trial court failed to instruct the jury on self-defense or voluntary manslaughter.
The parties are usually responsible for preparing jury instructions, and a party generally may not raise on appeal a failure to give an instruction unless he tendered it. (People v. Reddick (1988), 123 Ill.2d 184, 122 Ill.Dec. 1, 526 N.E.2d 141.) When neither constitutional rights nor plain error are involved, a defendant must either object at the instruction conference to the instructions given, or tender those instructions which he desires, or he cannot claim *1090 error on appeal. Young, 128 Ill.2d at 57-58, 131 Ill.Dec. 78, 538 N.E.2d 453.
We find no constitutional rights here in question nor is there cause for examination under the plain error rule. Defendant failed to preserve this issue for review since the affirmative defense of self-defense was never advanced nor such an instruction requested nor was any instruction for voluntary manslaughter requested.
Also, the record demonstrates that defendant's desired instructions were neither legally or factually consistent with his defense theory. Because defendant was convicted under the felony murder doctrine, the jury was not required to find defendant intended to kill Haywood, therefore, self-defense cannot be an affirmative defense to this charge. (People v. Moore (1983), 95 Ill.2d 404, 411, 69 Ill.Dec. 640, 447 N.E.2d 1327.) The jury was properly instructed as to all elements of the crimes charged and the State's burden of proof as to each and the evidence is not so closely balanced that the lack of the desired instruction would, in any event, have deprived defendant of a fair trial.
Defendant next argues that he received ineffective assistance of counsel when his trial attorney failed to argue self-defense and failed to tender instructions on either self-defense or voluntary manslaughter.
We find that defendant's contention fails to meet the two-pronged test of Strickland v. Washington (1984), 466 U.S. 668, 104 S.Ct. 2052, 80 L.Ed.2d 674, as adopted by our supreme court in People v. Albanese (1984), 104 Ill.2d 504, 525, 85 Ill.Dec. 441, 473 N.E.2d 1246, requiring a defendant to establish (1) that his attorney's representation fell below an objective standard of reasonableness and (2) that there exists a reasonable probability that, but for counsel's unprofessional errors, the result of the trial would have been different.
A reviewing court evaluates the reasonableness of trial counsel's actions from trial counsel's perspective at the time of the alleged errors, not in hindsight, in light of the totality of the circumstances.
People v. Harris (1988), 123 Ill.2d 113, 122 Ill.Dec. 76, 526 N.E.2d 335.
A reviewing court will not examine an attorney's trial conduct where it involves the exercise of judgement, discretion, trial tactics or strategy. People v. Peterson (1989), 182 Ill.App.3d 756, 761, 131 Ill.Dec. 310, 538 N.E.2d 685.
In the present case, counsel's decision was a matter of trial strategy. Had defendant's counsel requested those jury instructions, defendant's credibility would have been greatly damaged since the theory of self-defense is inconsistent with the theory put forth at trial that defendant was not involved in the shooting and his confession was coerced.
Counsel's choice of trial strategy is virtually unchallengeable if such choice was made after a thorough investigation of the law and facts relevant to plausible options. (Strickland, 466 U.S. at 690, 104 S.Ct. at 2066, 80 L.Ed.2d at 695.) The record here establishes that defense counsel thoroughly investigated and prepared defendant's case and reasonably chose to argue defendant's complete innocence in the shooting, rather than a justification for it.
Defendant also argues that it was reversible error when the State failed to produce at trial the gun used in the murder. Because defendant failed to raise this issue in the trial court or in a post-trial motion, and because we find the evidence is not closely balanced and that defendant received a fair and impartial trial (Young, 128 Ill.2d at 47, 131 Ill.Dec. 78, 538 N.E.2d 453), we find this issue waived.
Finally, defendant argues that portions of the State's closing argument were improper and denied him a fair trial. However, defendant failed to raise this issue either at trial or in his post-trial motion, (People v. Enoch (1988) 122 Ill.2d 176, 186-188, 119 Ill.Dec. 265, 522 N.E.2d 1124) and the waiver rule is applicable even in cases where prosecutorial misconduct in closing argument is alleged. People v. Franklin *1091 (1990), 135 Ill.2d 78, 100, 142 Ill.Dec. 152, 552 N.E.2d 743.
For all of the foregoing reasons, we affirm in part, and remand for a reopened suppression hearing wherein only Sergeant Byrne shall testify.
Affirmed in part, remanded in part.
TULLY, and CERDA, JJ., concur.