=== CASE 9738114 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:43:00.156574+00 ===

LANSING, Judge
(concurring in part, dissenting in part).
I concur in the majority’s holding that the trial court properly awarded Mary Ann Roel a portion of Tom Roel’s non-marital property because, without that property, she would suffer unfair hardship. I cannot, however, agree that any part of the contract-for-deed payments that Tom Roel receives from the sale of his parents’ property is marital.
Tom Roel’s interest in this property arose from two transactions: a gift from his mother to each of her three children individually, and a later sale to them of her life estate interest. The gift is indisputably nonmarital property. The life estate interest was acquired by Tom Roel and his siblings in exchange for their promise to pay a fixed sum. No money was exchanged when the life estate was conveyed. The children sold the land in fee four days later and structured the transaction to satisfy the debt to their mother. The contract payments are applied first to the amounts owed to Florence Roel; the remaining proceeds are distributed among the three children. Although the amount received by Tom Roel may be a blend of gift, gain and purchase, the money is clearly traceable to nonmarital assets.
Tracing an asset to a nonmarital source is required in Minnesota when the owner shows by a preponderance of the evidence that the asset was “acquired in exchange for” nonmarital property. Kottke v. Kottke, 353 N.W.2d 633, 636 (Minn.Ct.App.1984), pet. for rev. denied, (Minn. Dec. 20, 1984). The record is clear that Tom Roel exchanged his nonmarital interest in the family farmland for the contract-for-deed payments. The record cannot support a determination that any part of the payments are marital.
*624Proper classification of this nonmarital income would result in a decrease of Mary Ann Roel’s available resources. For that reason, I would remand to the trial court to correct the marital-nonmarital classification of the contract-for-deed payments, redetermine what share of the nonmarital assets should be allocated to Mary Ann Roel, and to consider a reservation for future spousal maintenance.
Mary Ann Roel has significant health problems and a limited work history, which may prevent her from obtaining gainful employment. Tom Roel also has had health problems and his income is presently insufficient to warrant a maintenance award. However, he has a substantial employment history and prospects of future employment. Reserving the issue of maintenance would be appropriate. See Larson v. Larson, 383 N.W.2d 18, 20-21 (Minn.Ct.App.1986).

=== CASE 2213534 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:32.959784+00 ===

406 N.W.2d 70 (1987)
STATE of Minnesota, Respondent,
v.
James G. WINNINGHAM, Appellant.
No. C3-86-1379.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
May 26, 1987.
Review Denied July 15, 1987.
Hubert H. Humphrey, III, Atty. Gen., Paul R. Kempainen, William F. Klumpp, Jr., Spec. Asst. Attys. Gen., St. Paul, Richard Arney, Washington Co. Atty., Stillwater, for respondent.
C. Paul Jones, State Public Defender, Elizabeth B. Davies, Asst. Public Defender, Minneapolis, for appellant.
Considered and decided by PARKER, P.J., and SEDGWICK and LANSING, JJ., with oral argument waived.
OPINION
PARKER, Judge.
A jury convicted appellant James G. Winningham of one count of use of minors in sexual performances in violation of Minn. Stat. § 617.246, subd. 2 (1984), and one count of possession of photographic representations of minors in violation of Minn. Stat. § 617.247, subd. 4 (1984). On appeal Winningham claims inter alia that he was denied his constitutional right to a fair trial because certain exhibits, which had been previously ruled inadmissible as "highly prejudicial," were inadvertently delivered to the jury as they deliberated. We agree and reverse.
FACTS
James Winningham rented a room in Stillwater, Minnesota, from mid-April 1984 until mid-July 1985. During that time the other residents of the house were the landlord, the landlord's future wife and another renter. Each of the other three residents was divorced, and each had two children by their previous marriages. All six of the children stayed at the residence approximately two weekends each month.
On July 15, 1985, after Winningham had moved, he told an officer of the Stillwater Police Department, while being questioned about an unrelated matter, that he had a collection of pornography. He gave the detective a key to his room and told him where he could find it. The police officers found an album containing numerous photographs, many of which were of the clothed and unclothed genitals of young children, who were later identified as the children who had stayed at the Stillwater residence when Winningham lived there. Winningham was charged with "use of minors in sexual performance" in violation of Minn.Stat. § 617.246, subd. 2 (1984), and *71 "possession of photographic representations of minors" in violation of Minn.Stat. § 617.247, subd. 4 (1984).
At trial the State attempted to show Winningham's motive in committing the charged offenses by introducing letters he allegedly had written to commercial pornographers. The letters spoke in vulgar and graphic terms of the writer's fondness for photos of "baby dolls" or "little girls" in various stages of undress and erotic posture. Following a mid-trial hearing, the court ruled that the letters were inadmissible at trial. The court noted that the State's evidence showing the letters were written in Winningham's handwriting was "weak" and that the letters, which the court characterized as "highly prejudicial," would be "more prejudicial than probative." The court also noted the exhibits were not necessary to bolster the State's already "very strong" case.
About five minutes after the case had been submitted to the jury, the court's clerk discovered that the excluded letters had been delivered to the jury room along with the evidence that had been admitted. The correspondence was then found spread over the entire length of a table in the jury room. After the excluded evidence was removed, the trial court polled the jurors individually. Each of the jurors admitted having viewed the excluded evidence, and at least five of the jurors admitted reading at least a portion of one or more of the exhibits. One juror testified, "I read one paragraph in one letter, and it was enough." When asked by the court what he meant by "enough," the juror replied, "[w]ell, it described some photographs that he had received from someone and I made the comment, `[had] anybody read any of this garbage?'" The juror also testified that "there were a couple other comments" by other jurors, and one juror had commented, "[i]t's pretty bad, isn't it?" or "something like that." Another juror testified that some of the jurors had commented that the exhibits were "filthy."
The court then instructed the jury that the excluded documents were not a part of the case. Each juror affirmed that he or she could disregard the excluded evidence and reach a fair verdict. The jury resumed its deliberations and, about two and a half hours later, returned verdicts of guilty as charged. After the jury retired, Winningham moved for a mistrial. The court denied his motion, explaining:
I think, based on the fact that it certainly was an inadvertent error, that it was only on the table two or three minutes from the testimony of various jurors, and that each of them indicated that either they really hadn't seen much at all in it, or if they had seen some small portion of it, they could disregard that matter in reaching their final decision, it appears that what the jurors were attempting to do is merely compare handwriting on a tag to see if it was the same and hadn't reached beyond that to explore the contents of any of these documents, I will find that I'm satisfied that the jury can set any of this aside in their mind and reach a fair and just verdict, so the motion by the defense is denied.
Winningham's motion for a mistrial was renewed at a sentencing hearing and was again denied by the trial court. Winningham was subsequently sentenced to a prison term of 42 months for the felony offense of use of minors in sexual performances and to a consecutive 12-month sentence for the gross misdemeanor offense of possession of photographic representations of minors. Winningham appeals from the judgments of conviction and the sentence imposed.
ISSUE
Was Winningham denied his constitutional right to a fair trial because the jury was inadvertently allowed to view evidence that previously had been ruled inadmissible as "highly prejudicial?"
DISCUSSION
"The exposure of a jury to potentially prejudicial material creates a problem of constitutional magnitude, because it deprives a defendant of the right to an impartial jury * * *." State v. Cox, 322 N.W.2d 555, 558 (Minn.1982) (citing Parker v. *72 Gladden, 385 U.S. 363, 364, 87 S.Ct. 468, 470, 17 L.Ed.2d 420 (1966)). In Cox the supreme court set forth four factors to be considered in cases involving potentially prejudicial matters that inadvertently come before a criminal jury:
The relevant factors to be considered by this court, in an independent evaluation of the verdict, are the nature and source of the prejudicial matter, the number of jurors exposed to the influence, the weight of evidence properly before the jury, and the likelihood that curative measures were effective in reducing the prejudice.
State v. Cox, 322 N.W.2d at 559.
At least three of the four factors dictate reversal of Winningham's conviction. First, the nature of the evidence was described by the trial court itself as "highly prejudicial" and "more prejudicial than probative." The prejudicial nature of the evidence was also demonstrated by the jurors' comments describing the letters as "filthy" and "garbage."
The source of the evidence also dictates a reversal of Winningham's conviction. As this court recently held in State v. Cash, 391 N.W.2d 875, 880 (Minn.Ct.App.1986), "[e]ach party bears responsibility for its own exhibits." In that case the trial court ordered certain portions of an interrogation transcript to be deleted before it was delivered to the jury room, but the court clerk failed to delete all of the statements that had been ordered suppressed. This court held that prejudicial error had occurred, because "[i]t was incumbent on the State, as the party offering the exhibit, to insure that the exhibit offered into evidence did not contain the tainted phrases the court had ordered stricken." Id. Similarly, it was the State's responsibility here, as the source of the exhibits, to make sure the inadmissible evidence was not delivered to the jury.[1]
The number of jurors exposed to the tainted evidence also supports a finding of reversible error: all of the jurors were exposed to the exhibits; the exhibits "were strewn up and down the entire length of the jury deliberation table;" at least five jurors admitted reading at least a portion of one or more of the letters, and the remaining jurors admitted to looking at or glancing at the exhibits. Although many jurors testified that they had only attempted to compare the handwriting on the letters or envelopes with Winningham's handwriting on other exhibits, two jurors testified that they had heard comments describing the letters as "pretty bad" or "filthy." Even if some jurors did not actually read the letters, they would have heard their fellow jurors' strong comments.
Finally, we find it very unlikely that the trial court's curative measures, although properly administered, could realistically have been effective. Given the inflammatory nature of the evidence in question, as shown by both the trial court's characterization of the evidence and the jurors' comments, "[w]e would ignore reality and the common sense of a jury to conclude that [the] jury [was not] unduly prejudiced" by its inadvertent viewing of the letters. Id.
In light of the standard enunciated in Cox and the precedent of Cash, we hold that Winningham was denied his constitutional right to a fair trial. Therefore, his conviction must be reversed and the case remanded for new trial. Our holding makes it unnecessary to address any of the additional issues raised by the parties.
DECISION
Reversed and remanded.
NOTES
[1]  We find no merit in the State's attempt to distinguish Cash on the basis that "the inadvertent delivery of the excluded evidence to the jury room was simply a mistake for which neither party can be held responsible." The delivery of the tainted evidence to the jury in Cash was also inadvertent. See Cash, 391 N.W.2d at 880 ("No one appears to have acted wilfully but the harm was done.")

=== CASE 9738115 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:43:03.435171+00 ===

CHIEF JUSTICE MORAN delivered the opinion of the court: James B. Di Falco submitted to the board of trustees of the Firemen’s Pension Fund of Wood Dale Fire Protection District No. One (board) an application for a duty-related disability pension. The board dismissed the application as untimely. Thereafter, Di Falco, plaintiff herein, brought an action in the circuit court of Du Page County for administrative review against the defendants herein: the board; Wood Dale Fire Protection District No. One, Du Page County, Illinois (district); and the board of fire commissioners of Wood Dale Fire Protection District No. One (commissioners). The trial court affirmed the decision of the board to dismiss the application. The court also granted the motion of the commissioners to be dismissed as party defendants. On appeal, the appellate court reversed the dismissal of plaintiff’s application, finding that nothing within the Illinois Pension Code (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 108½, par. 4 — 101 et seq.) precluded discharged fire fighters from being eligible for a disability pension. The appellate court also affirmed the dismissal of the commissioners as party defendants. (151 Ill. App. 3d 409.) We allowed the remaining defendants’ petition for leave to appeal under Rule 315 (107 Ill. 2d R. 315). The issue presented for review is whether a probationary fire fighter is entitled to a disability pension when the fire fighter first applies for the pension a year after his discharge. The relevant facts are undisputed. On June 1, 1982, plaintiff was appointed a probationary fireman-paramedic. While on duty in October 1982, he allegedly sustained injuries to his spine, necessitating a disability leave beginning about December 2,1982. On May 2, 1983, plaintiff received a letter from the commissioners advising him that his probationary status would be extended for a period equal to the amount of time between December 2, 1982, to whenever he returned to full-time service. However, by letter dated May 26, 1983, the commissioners advised plaintiff that effective on that date he was no longer a member of the firefighting force of that district. Plaintiff has not contested in this court the legality of his discharge; therefore, for the purpose of review, we shall assume his discharge was proper. Almost a year later, on May 24, 1984, plaintiff submitted his application for a duty-related pension to the defendant board pursuant to the terms of the Pension Code (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 108½, par. 4 — 110). The board ordered plaintiff to undergo examinations by three physicians as provided for in section 4 — 112 of the Pension Code (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 108½, par. 4 — 112). Both the defendant board and the trial court found that, as a matter of law, plaintiff was not entitled to apply for a disability pension, and dismissed plaintiff’s application. The gist of the holding of the board and trial court, as well as of defendant’s argument here, is that in order to qualify for a duty-related disability pension under section 4 — 110, an individual must be a “fireman,” as used in that section, at the time of the application. Following this line of argument, defendants assert that, because plaintiff had been discharged May 26, 1983, he was no longer a “fireman” when he applied almost a year later for a pension, and therefore was not entitled to a pension. In the face of defendant’s argument concerning the meaning of “fireman” as used in section 4 — 110, the appellate court found that there was no provision in the Illinois Pension Code at the time plaintiff entered the pension system that precluded application for a pension after discharge. The appellate court concluded that to foreclose plaintiff’s right to apply for a disability pension after his discharge would have the effect of diminishing and impairing plaintiff’s pension benefit rights in violation of section 5 of article XIII of the Illinois Constitution. The Illinois Constitution provides that membership in a pension system of any local government unit in the State is “an enforceable contractual relationship, the benefits of which shall not be diminished or impaired.” (Ill. Const. 1970, art. XIII, §5.) After the effective date of the Constitution, the “contractual relationship” is governed by the actual terms of the Pension Code at the time the employee becomes a member of the pension system. (Kerner v. State Employees’ Retirement System (1978), 72 Ill. 2d 507, 514, cert. denied (1979), 441 U.S. 923, 60 L. Ed. 2d 397, 99 S. Ct. 2032.) Therefore, in determining plaintiff’s rights under the Pension Code, we must look to the language of the relevant statutes in effect in 1982 when plaintiff began paying into the pension fund. Plaintiff applied for a duty-related disability pension under section 4 — 110 of the Pension Code. Section 4— 110 provides in relevant part: “If any fireman, as the result of sickness, accident or injury incurred in or resulting from the performance of an act of duty or from the cumulative effects of acts of duty, is found, by the procedures specified in Section 4— 112, to be physically or mentally permanently disabled for service in the fire department, so as to render necessary his being placed on disability pension, such disabled fireman shall be granted a disability pension of 65% of the monthly salary attached to the rank held by him in the Fire Department at the date he is removed from the municipality’s Fire Department payroll.” (Emphasis added.) Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 108½, par. 4 — 110. The applicable definition of “fireman” is given in section 4 — 106(c) as “any person employed by a city in its fire service as a fireman, fire engineer, marine engineer, fire pilot, bomb technician, or scuba diver ***.” (Emphasis added.) Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 108½, par. 4 — 106(c). The central question in this case is whether the term “fireman” as used in section 4 — 110 is operative at the time of the disability, or also at the time of application. In other words, must an applicant for a duty-related disability pension be a “fireman” both at the time of impairment and application, or only at the time of impairment. When a statute is ambiguous on its face, as is section 4 — 110 even when read in conjunction with section 4— 106, the court should look to similar statutes as an aid to construction. (Kozak v. Retirement Board of the Firemen’s Annuity & Benefit Fund (1983), 95 Ill. 2d 211, 219.) In this case, upon reviewing article 4 of the Pension Code as a whole, it becomes apparent that the purpose of a duty-related disability pension is to help provide only for fire fighters (and their spouses and children) who, if not for the disability, would still be employed as fire fighters and drawing their regular salary. On the other hand, the scheme of the Pension Code indicates that the purpose of a duty-related disability pension would not be served by granting a disability pension to an applicant who is no longer employed as a fire fighter because he has been discharged. For example, section 4 — 101 provides that the firemen’s pension fund is established for the benefit of “firemen as defined in Section 4 — 106” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 108½, par. 4 — 101), that is, persons employed by a city in its fire service (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 108½, par. 4 — 106(c)). (See Peterson v. Board of Trustees of the Firemen’s Pension Fund (1973), 54 Ill. 2d 260, 263-64.) Therefore, the benefit of a duty-related pension is intended to go to a particular class and the purpose of the establishment of that benefit is much more selective than that of the Workers’ Compensation Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 48, par. 138.1 et seq.). Accordingly, a discharged fire fighter is obviously not “employed,” in any sense of the word, by a city in its fire service and the pension fund was not established for his benefit. Section 4 — 112 of the Pension Code stands as further evidence of the selective purpose of a duty-related disability pension. Section 4 — 112 governs the determination of disability and restoration to active service and provides in part: “§4 — 112. Determination of Disability — Restoration to active service. *** Medical examination of a fireman receiving a disability pension shall be made at least once each year prior to attainment of age 50, as a check of the continuance of disability for service as a fireman. *** Upon satisfactory proof being made to the Board that a fireman on the disability pension roll has recovered from his disability, the Board shall order that his pension cease. The fireman shall report to the marshal or the chief of the fire department, who shall thereupon order his reinstatement into active service in the same rank or grade which he held at the date he was placed on disability pension.” (Emphasis added.) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 108½, par. 4 — 112.) Thus, a fire fighter on disability is subject to annual physical examinations, and, if no longer disabled, has the absolute right to return to duty. The statute is written in mandatory terms — “[t]he fireman shall report to the marshal” who “shall thereupon order his reinstatement” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 108½, par. 4 — 112)—and does not allow for exceptions for discharged fire fighters. Section 4 — 112 does not allow the pension board to merely terminate a discharged fire fighter’s disability pension but rather requires that the pensioner be reinstated. If a fire fighter were to be discharged before applying for a disability pension, and yet still be given a disability pension, the discharge would make reinstatement to active duty impossible and would preclude compliance with the dictates of section 4 — 112. The provisions of section 4— 112 thus strongly indicate that disability pensions are to be given only to fire fighters who would still be employed as fire fighters if not for their disability. Section 4 — 113 further indicates that in order to begin receiving a disability pension, fire fighters must not have been discharged. Section 4 — 113 provides in part: “A fireman who has not completed 20 years of creditable service and is on the disability pension roll under any of the foregoing Sections whose disability continues for a period which when added to his period of active service equals 20 years may, if he is age 50 or more and he elects to retire from the fire service, exercise his option by written application to the Board and continue to receive a retirement pension equal to the same amount he was entitled to as a disabled fireman as of the date he was removed from the municipality’s payroll for disability. A fireman electing to exercise such option shall be entitled to automatic increase benefits as provided in subdivision (a) of Section 4 — 109.1.” (Emphasis added.) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 108½, par. 4 — 113.) Under section 4 — 113, a fire fighter on disability “under any of the foregoing sections,” including section 4 — 110, may under certain circumstances elect to “retire from the fire service” and receive a retirement pension. A discharged fire fighter cannot “elect to retire” from the fire service because he is no longer a part of the fire service. Only those fire fighters who have never been discharged may “elect to retire.” Therefore, that the terms of section 4 — 113 do not cover the possibility of a discharged fire fighter being on disability pension indicates that fire fighters on the disability roll under section 4— 110 cannot include discharged fire fighters. Instead, the scheme of the Pension Code is to provide a refund for discharged fire fighters who have not received disability before being discharged. Section 4 — 116 concerns the refunding of contributions paid by fire fighters into the pension fund and provides in pertinent part: “A fireman having less than 20 years of service who resigns or is discharged, and who has not theretofore received any disability pension payments, shall be entitled to a refund of the total amount contributed to the fund from his salary during such service.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 108½, par. 4 — 116.) Plaintiff is entitled to a refund under section 4 — 116, but not a disability pension under section 4 — 110. In summary, upon reviewing article 4 of the Pension Code as a whole, we conclude that the primary purpose of the establishment of a duty-related disability pension under section 4 — 110 is to provide for the benefit of fire fighters who would still be employed as fire fighters and receiving a salary if not for the disability. Discharged fire fighters are no longer fire fighters because of the discharge, not the disability. To allow fire fighters who have been discharged to apply for disability pensions under section 4 — 110 would disrupt the pension scheme established by the legislature. Accordingly, the term “fireman” as used in section 4 — 110 is operative both at the time of impairment and application. To receive a disability pension under section 4 — 110, a fire fighter must not have been discharged prior to application therefor. In so holding, we are merely determining the actual terms of the pension in effect at the time plaintiff became a member of the pension system. Therefore, it was not a subsequent legislative enactment but rather plaintiff’s failure to meet a condition precedent to his right to a pension — that is, to be a member of the fire service without termination at the time he applied for his pension — which prevented plaintiff from receiving a pension. Therefore, no rights or conditions of plaintiff’s contract effective at the time he began service are diminished or impaired by denying him a pension. Plaintiff asserts that the conclusion we reach today will lead to abuse. According to plaintiff, pension boards will in the future merely discharge injured fire fighters before they have an opportunity to file for a duty-related pension and thereby avoid having to pay for the pension. Plaintiff has presented no evidence whatsoever of any such abuse in this case. In addition, we note that there are safeguards to prevent such abuse and the possibility of it happening are extremely minimal, if not nonexistent. First, in municipalities such as the defendant district, the board of fire commissioners and not the pension board controls the power of discharge. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 127½, par. 37.13; cf. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 108, pars. 4 — 122 through 4 — 129.1.) Second, no member of any fire department may be removed or discharged except for cause, upon written charges, and after an opportunity to be heard in his defense. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 24, par. 10 — 2.1—17. See also Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 24, par. 10-1-18; ch. 127½, par. 37.13.) As for so-called probationary fire fighters, even assuming defendants are correct in asserting that probationary fire fighters may be discharged without cause, that possibility does not remove the obligation of the employing municipality to act in good faith. (See Kennedy v. City of Joliet (1942), 380 Ill. 15; Edwards v. Codd (1977), 59 A.D.2d 148, 398 N.Y.S.2d 153.) Attempting to save pension funds would not constitute cause for discharge nor would a discharge for that purpose be, in certain circumstances, a good-faith exercise of the asserted authority to summarily discharge probationary fire fighters. Plaintiff also argues that the provisions of section 4— 105b prevented him from applying for a disability pension before he was discharged. Section 4 — 105b provides: “ ‘Permanent disability’: any physical or mental impairment that (a) can be expected to result in death, (b) has lasted for a continuous period of not less than 12 months, or (c) can be expected to last for a continuous period of not less than 12 months.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 108½, par. 4-105b.) Section 4 — 105b is obviously written in the disjunctive. Plaintiff need not have demonstrated all three elements before he was discharged May 26, 1983. Plaintiff need only have demonstrated that his physical impairment could be expected to last at least 12 months. The procedure for demonstrating that is given in section 4 — 112. Section 4 — 105b in no way prevented plaintiff from making a timely application. Finally, plaintiff asserts that the term “fireman” is used in certain sections of the Pension Code to refer to persons other than those currently in service as fire fighters. For example, in section 4 — 109, the following language is used: “Any fireman age 50 or more who has creditable service of 20 years or more, and is no longer in service as a fireman, shall receive ***.” (Emphasis added.) Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 108½, par. 4 — 109. Plaintiff has ignored the effect of section 4 — 102. Section 4 — 102 provides that the term “fireman” shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 4 — 106, “except when the context otherwise requires.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 108, par. 4 — 102.) The phrase “no longer in service as a fireman” used in section 4 — 109 is a change in the context of the definition of “fireman” as used in that section. In section 4 — 110, to the contrary, there is no such contextual phrase and therefore the term “fireman” in section 4 — 110 refers only to fire fighters currently in service. In conclusion, fire fighters applying for a duty-related pension under section 4 — 110 of the Illinois Pension Code must still be employed as fire fighters at the time of application. Plaintiff was discharged from the fire service almost a year before he applied for a pension. Therefore, his application for a pension was properly dismissed. For the reasons stated, we reverse the appellate court and affirm the order of the trial court. Appellate court reversed; circuit court affirmed.

=== CASE 9738116 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:43:03.439294+00 ===

JUSTICE WARD dissenting: I consider that the statutory interpretation of the majority is overly restrictive and that the appellate court properly analyzed the statute’s intendment. Under the majority’s narrow and literal view, eligibility for a line-of-duty disability pension is restricted to actively serving firemen. One who has been discharged from service has no pension disability rights even though, under the majority’s view, the disability did not manifest itself until the fireman had been separated from municipal service. I do not consider that such a result was intended by the legislature. Judging from the record, the position of the appellants appears to be something less than admirable. The plaintiff served as a paid on-call fireman from September 1977 until June 1, 1982, when he was appointed to the position of a probationary fireman-paramedic. He began contributions to the pension fund at the time he began work as a probationary fireman. It appears he was on duty in October 1982 when he received injuries to his spine, requiring his being placed in December 1982 on full physical-disability leave. The following May he was informed that in February 1983 his probationary status had been extended for a period to be equal to the time he would be on physical-disability leave. Inexplicably, from the record, on May 26, 1983, he was informed that effective that date he was no longer a member of the department. That the plaintiff did not apply for a duty-related pension until almost a year later appears to be without significance, as he states that he was entitled to full salary for a year under an applicable statute (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 70, par. 91). Too, as the appellate court noted, the Illinois Pension Code does not prescribe a specific time period within which an employee must apply for a pension. I cannot agree with the majority’s holding that an applicant for a duty-related disability pension must in the literal sense of the word be a fireman both at the time of injury and at the time of application for disability benefits.

=== CASE 2213541 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:33.050466+00 ===

240 Cal.App.2d 880 (1966)
GORDON W. COOK et al., Petitioners,
v.
THE SUPERIOR COURT OF LOS ANGELES COUNTY et al., Respondents; HOUSTON- CALIFORNIA INVESTMENT CORPORATION et al., Real Parties in Interest.
Civ. No. 622.
California Court of Appeals. Fifth Dist.
Mar. 17, 1966.
Leon J. Garrie for Petitioners.
No appearance for Respondents.
Murray M. Chotiner, Edmond Gattone, Loeb & Loeb, Robert H. Holtzman, Ernest J. Gekas, John R. Engman, Everett H. Aspenson, J. Roger Gelsinger and Thomas L. Jensen, Jr., for Real Parties in Interest.
STONE, J.
This action is before us on a petition for a writ seeking review of Orange County Superior Court orders directing arbitration and staying further proceedings until the completion of arbitration, an order by the Superior Court of Los Angeles County staying proceedings until "releases are obtained in Orange County cases," and a subsequent order releasing one action from the stay.
Petitioners, owners of real property in Signal Hill, Los Angeles County, proposed to construct a convalescent hospital. After some preliminary negotiating, they entered into an agreement with Houston-California Investment Corporation (Houston) for the preparation of plans and specifications, and a separate agreement for financing. Changes were thereafter made in plans and specifications, estimated building costs were increased, and a financing agreement was finally arranged with a Glendale savings and loan association.
Petitioners, as owners, and Houston and MacDonald Construction Company (MacDonald), as contractors, then entered into a construction agreement for completion of the hospital. The Union Bank of Los Angeles replaced the savings and loan association as the financing agency. The contractors secured an indemnity bond from The Travelers Indemnity Company, as surety, guaranteeing performance to petitioners and also to Union Bank. *883
Controversies arose between the parties as to each progress payment, and when payments four and five became due neither Union Bank nor the job architect would approve them because Houston and MacDonald failed to provide invoices, receipted bills or other evidence of payments for construction items. Petitioners threatened to terminate the construction agreement with Houston and MacDonald, alleging numerous violations. In turn, MacDonald catalogued and notified the project engineers of 34 deficiencies in the plans and specifications. Shortly thereafter petitioners filed a complaint in Orange County Superior Court against Houston, MacDonald, Travelers Indemnity and Union Bank.
The first cause of action alleges Houston and MacDonald breached both the construction agreement and the plans and specifications agreement. The second cause of action alleges breach of warranty by Houston and MacDonald with reference to the plans and specifications agreement. The third cause of action asserts negligence by Houston and MacDonald in preparation of the plans. The fourth cause of action realleges the first cause of action and prays for recovery from Travelers under the surety bond. The fifth cause of action alleges misrepresentations by Houston and MacDonald that induced petitioners to enter into the construction agreement, and predicates alleged damages upon the misrepresentations. The sixth cause of action seeks declaratory relief from Houston, MacDonald, Travelers and Union Bank regarding sums of money already paid, and an interpretation of the termination clause of the contract. Petitioners ask $200,000 damages from Houston and MacDonald, and $150,000 damages from Travelers.
Houston and MacDonald petitioned the Orange County Superior Court for an order directing arbitration of the dispute raised by petitioners' complaint, pursuant to the arbitration clause in the construction agreement. The court, on November 6, 1964, ordered arbitration between petitioners and Houston and MacDonald, and stayed all other proceedings.
Meanwhile, a number of mechanics lienholders filed actions in the Los Angeles County Superior Court to foreclose liens on the property. Petitioners filed a cross-complaint as to each mechanics' lien action, alleging 11 causes of action, the first six of which are identical to those in the complaint in the Orange County action. The seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth and eleventh causes of action raise new matter not covered by the issues in *884 the Orange County case, and name a number of new cross- defendants who are not parties defendant in the Orange County action.
The Los Angeles County Superior Court, on its own motion, stayed all proceedings "until releases are obtained in Orange County cases." Thereafter one mechanics' lien action, Flannagan's, was severed and the parties ordered to proceed as to that one action.
Petitioners seek to have the stay orders vacated in both Orange and Los Angeles Counties, and also to have the order directing arbitration in Orange County set aside. However, petitioners have not requested severance of issues or parties in either the Orange County or the Los Angeles County action.
[1, 2] Since we conclude, for reasons set forth below, that the petition must be denied on its merits, we overrule the demurrers to the petition without comment other than to point out that (i) petitioners have alleged an abuse of discretion by both the Orange County and the Los Angeles County Superior Courts; (ii) although mandate will not lie to compel a trial court to exercise its discretion, once discretion is exercised mandate will lie to remedy an abuse thereof (State Farm etc. Ins. Co. v. Superior Court, 47 Cal.2d 428, 432 [304 P.2d 13]; Hays v. Superior Court, 16 Cal.2d 260, 265 [105 P.2d 975]; Gromeeko v. Superior Court, 114 Cal.App.2d 754, 757 [251 P.2d 29]; 3 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (1954) Extraordinary Writs, p. 2530, 1965 Supp. p. 985); (iii) mandamus will lie to correct a nonappealable order compelling arbitration and staying proceedings. (Bertero v. Superior Court, 216 Cal.App.2d 213, 222 [30 Cal.Rptr. 719].)
In determining whether there has been an abuse of discretion, we take up, first, the proceeding in the Orange County Superior Court. Houston and MacDonald, defendants therein, countered petitioners' complaint with a petition for arbitration in accordance with the arbitration clause in the construction agreement, which reads: "Should any disputes arise with respect to the true construction and meaning of this contract, the drawings or specifications or compliance therewith, or the value of any work added or deleted, the same shall be determined by arbitration which shall be conducted as follows:"
"Contractor and Owner each shall appoint one person to hear and determine the dispute and if they shall be unable to agree, then the two persons so chosen shall select a third impartial arbitrator whose decision shall be final and conclusive *885 upon both parties hereto. The cost of such arbitration shall be borne by the losing party or in such proportions as the arbitrator shall decide."
Since the complaint states causes of action against defendants not parties to the construction contract, and also raises issues predicated on the financing agreement which is not encompassed by the arbitration provision, the question arises whether the court abused its discretion in staying all proceedings. [3] Code of Civil Procedure section 1281.4 seems broad enough to vest the court with authority to stay "the action or proceeding" as to all issues, as to all causes of action, and as to all parties, until arbitration is concluded or such earlier time as the court specifies. It is possible, of course, that such a broad application of the statute might result in prejudice to a litigant in multiple issue or multiple party actions if all proceedings are brought to a standstill pending arbitration of issues that may be collateral. To prevent this result, the concluding paragraph of section 1281.4 vests the trial court with discretion to sever issues by providing: "If the issue which is the controversy subject to arbitration is severable, the stay may be with respect to that issue only."
Use of the word "may" in the exercise of the power of severance clearly denotes a discretionary power.
[4] The record discloses no motion by petitioners for severance as to issues or parties, and consequently reflects no abuse of discretion by the stay order. Petitioners did move the court to vacate its order for arbitration in its entirety, but this is quite different from a motion or petition requesting the court to exercise its discretion and sever issues to permit trial pending arbitration.
Absence of a complete record prevents us from considering petitioners' assertion that the trial court failed to define the issues submitted to arbitration. The trial judge ordered the parties to "arbitrate the controversy now existing between them and as is described in the Petition for Arbitration herein in accordance with the terms of the aforementioned contract." Since the petition for arbitration has not been made a part of the record, we have no way of knowing what the court ordered arbitrated.
Petitioners point out that their complaint alleges a number of changes and additions were made to the plans and specifications. They assert the trial court, not the arbitrators, must determine which plans and specifications were final and binding on the parties. [5] We conclude the language of the *886 arbitration clause that: "Should any disputes arise with respect to the true construction and meaning of ... the drawings or specifications or compliance therewith ...," is broad enough to include the question of which plans and specifications were final and binding as between the parties.
In O'Malley v. Wilshire Oil Co., 59 Cal.2d 482, at page 487 [30 Cal.Rptr. 452, 381 P.2d 188], it is said: " '... Doubts as to whether the arbitration clause applies are to be resolved in favor of coverage. The parties have contracted for the arbitrator's decision and not for that of the courts.' "
Although the foregoing language was used in discussing a collective bargaining agreement, the principle is applicable to the arbitration clause in the instant case.
"The California courts have held that, where the existence of an arbitration contract is admitted or found, it is for arbitrators and not the courts to resolve any doubts as to its meaning and extent. ..." (Berman v. Renart Sportswear Corp., 222 Cal.App.2d 385, at p. 388 [35 Cal.Rptr. 218].)
Petitioners argue, with some warmth, that the court abused its discretion in ordering arbitration to proceed in the face of their fifth cause of action alleging fraud in the inducement by Houston and MacDonald. [6a] The substance of the allegation is that Houston and MacDonald made certain representations as to the adequacy of plans and specifications to be prepared for a 205-bed convalescent hospital, that petitioners relied on the representations, that the plans and specifications provided by Houston and MacDonald were inadequate, that the representations were false, all to petitioners' damage in the sum of $150,000 general damages and $50,000 punitive damages.
Having in mind the general principles of contract law, it appears clear enough that had petitioners rescinded the contract upon the ground of fraud, the trial court would have been under a duty to determine the issue of fraud before directing arbitration. [7] As Professor Corbin points out (6A Corbin on Contracts,  1444, p. 446), an alleged defect which is ground for attacking a bargaining transaction as void or voidable, affects the provision for arbitration just as much as it affects the other provisions.
The critical fact here is that petitioners have not alleged a rescission, they have not alleged the contract is void or even voidable; rather, they affirm the contract and plead damages because of the failure of Houston and MacDonald to live up to its terms. [8] It is well established that: "An action for *887 damages is based on an affirmance of the contract; an action for rescission on a disaffirmance thereof. [Citations.] The two remedies are mutually inconsistent, although damages may be prayed for in the event rescission cannot be had." (Davis v. Rite-Lite Sales Co., 8 Cal.2d 675, 678-679 [67 P.2d 1039].)
[6b] Since petitioners have neither rescinded the contract nor pleaded a disaffirmance, they are in no position to argue that the trial court abused its discretion in not treating their fifth cause of action as an attack upon the validity of the agreement and, a priori, the arbitration provision.
[9] Petitioners complain that the arbitration has been at a standstill for months because the two arbitrators have disagreed on certain matters and neither will agree to the other's choice of a third arbitrator. Code of Civil Procedure section 1281.6 was designed to remedy just such an impasse by providing that on petition of either party the court shall appoint a neutral arbitrator. The section also delineates the method for accomplishing this end.
[10] In turning to the Los Angeles County case, we point out that Code of Civil Procedure section 1281.4 authorizes a court in one county to stay proceedings in an action before it if an issue involved is the subject of an order for arbitration pending and undetermined in an action in another county.
[11] Taking up, first, the mechanics and materialmen's lien actions, we were advised at oral argument that all except that of Flannagan have been settled. We find no abuse of discretion in permitting Flannagan to proceed with his action, since the final paragraph of section 1281.4 specifically vests the trial court with authority to sever issues. [12] Nor should an owner be permitted to frustrate the purpose of the mechanics lien law by filing a cross-complaint raising issues not pertinent to the claim of lien or bringing in parties as cross-defendants who are in no way concerned with the lien claim.
[13] Petitioners contend that the same principle applies to the converse situation, that is, they should be allowed to pursue issues raised by their cross-complaint that are not within the subject matter of the Orange County action. We find no quarrel with their reasoning, as section 1281.4 provides for severance in proper cases. But the record reflects no motion by petitioners for a severance or separation as to issues and parties; rather, petitioners attack each stay order in its entirety. *888
Since we conclude that the Orange County Superior Court did not err by ordering arbitration, petitioners must, in each action, seek to have the issues they contend are not within the purview of arbitration severed from the stay order, before either trial court can be said to have exercised its discretion, let alone abused it.
The writ is denied.
Conley, P. J., and Brown (R.M.), J., concurred.

=== CASE 9738117 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:43:04.864193+00 ===

RATLIFF, Chief Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
K-Mart Corporation (K-Mart) appeals from the Industrial Board of Indiana's (Board) award of workmen's compensation death benefits to Joseph Novak, husband and widower of Margaret Novak, deceased employee. We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand with instructions.
FACTS
On May 28, 1985, around 6:00 P.M. James Koslow engaged in a maniacal shooting spree in St. John, Indiana. Kos-low's shooting spree began on the eastside of U.S. Highway 41 and crossed to the west side of the highway into a K-Mart parking lot and ended inside the store. During the shooting spree Koslow shot and killed three (8) persons and wounded five (5) others. Margaret Novak was one of the persons killed. Margaret was employed by K-Mart as a clerk and was working at her station in the store at the time of her death. Margaret was the wife of Joseph Novak.
On May 81, 1985, K-Mart wrote to Joseph as follows:
"Pursuant to the Indiana Worker's Disability Compensation Statute, you are entitled to reasonable expenses of burial in the amount not to exceed $5,000."
Record at 10. Thereafter, K-Mart paid Joseph Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000) for burial expenses. Joseph received another letter from K-Mart which stated in part as follows:
"Please be advised that at this time we do not agree that Mr. Novak is a presumptive dependent."
On August 8, 1985, Joseph filed an application for compensation with the Board. K-Mart responded and argued among other things that Margaret's death did not "arise out of" her employment. On February 20, 1987, the Full Industrial Board found that Margaret's death was an accident which arose out of and in the course of her employment and awarded death benefit compensation to Joseph who was found to be a presumptive dependent. The Board found further that K-Mart was estopped by its representations from denying applicability of the Workmen's Compensation act and from challenging Joseph's right to recovery. K-Mart appeals the Board's findings and award.
ISSUES
Six (6) issues have been presented for review:
1. Whether the Board improperly determined that Margaret's death arose out of her employment?
2. Whether the Victims of Violent Crimes Compensation Act, Indiana Code sections 16-7-8.6-1 et seq. supersedes and prohibits recovery under the Workmen's Compensation Act, Indiana Code sections 22-8-2-1 et seq.?
3. Whether the decision of Portman v. Steveco (1983), Ind. App., 458 N.E.2d 284, should be overturned to the extent that presumptive dependency is applied to husbands?
4. Whether the Board determined improperly that K-Mart was estopped from denying applicability of the Workmen's Compensation Act and from raising defenses other than Joseph's status as a presumptive dependent?
5. Whether the Board erred by decreeing a lump sum payment?
6. Whether this court should assess attorney's fees and damages against K-Mart for challenging compensation and for filing an appeal without merit?
*1348DISCUSSION AND DECISION
In challenging an award of compensation by the Board, K-Mart confronts a strong standard of review. This court will not disturb the Board's findings unless the evidence is undisputed and leads unerringly to a contrary result. Sears Roebuck and Co. v. Murphy (1987), Ind.App., 508 N.E.2d 825, 829 (transfer pending) Blaw-Knox Foundry and Mill Machinery, Inc. v. Dacus (1987), Ind.App., 505 N.E.2d 101, 102; Burger Chef Systems, Inc. v. Wilson (1970), 147 Ind.App. 556, 558, 262 N.E.2d 660, 662. This court neither reweighs the evidence nor judges witness credibility as these are functions of the Board. Sears, at 829; Dacus, at 102; Wilson, 147 Ind.App. at 558, 262 N.E.2d at 662. This court must disregard all unfavorable evidence, and must examine only that evidence and the reasonable inferences that can be drawn therefrom which support the Board's findings and decision. Sears, at 829; Dacus, at 102.
Issue One
K-Mart argues first that the Board erred by determining that Margaret's death "arose out of" her employment as required by Indiana's Workmen's Compensation Act. Specifically, K-Mart argues that an accident does not "arise out of" the employment unless the employment is shown to involve a risk that is uncommon to the public, and peculiar to the employment. K-Mart suggests additionally that the risk of being shot by a lunatic was a risk common to the public and did not "arise out of" Margaret's employment. Thus, K-Mart argues the Board improperly awarded compensation.
K-Mart correctly points out that the person seeking the benefit of the Act carries the burden of proving its applicability. Lona v. Sosa (1981), Ind.App., 420 N.E.2d 890, 894, trans. denied; Wilson, 147 Ind.App. at 559, 262 N.E.2d at 662; Stanley v. Riggs Equipment Co. (1961), 133 Ind.App. 86, 90, 178 N.E.2d 766, 768. To recover under the Act a claimant must establish that an injury occurred "by accident arising out of and in the course of employment". Ind. Code § 22-3-2-5; Evans v. Yankeetown Dock Corp. (1986), Ind., 491 N.E.2d 969, 973. This court construes these terms of the Act liberally and in favor of the employee so that the humane purposes of the Act will not be defeated. Evans, at 971. K-Mart recognizes that "arising out of", and "in the course of" are two separate elements, and only challenges the Board's determination as to the "arising out of" element. The "in the course of" element, which refers to the time, place, and cireumstances of the accident, is unchallenged and clearly was established.
The "arising out of" element is referred to as the causal connection between the accident and the employment. An accident "arises out of" the employment when a causal relationship exists between the injury and the employment. Evans, at 975; Murphy, at 830. The causal connection is established by showing that a rational mind might comprehend that the accident was a risk incidental to the employment. Dacus, at 102. However, the risk need not be expected or foreseeable to be incidental to the employment. Id. at 102-08. The determination of whether the accidental risk was an incident of employment is fact sensitive, and accordingly, is entrusted to the Board. Murphy, at 829, Wayne Adams Buick, Inc. v. Ference (1981), Ind.App., 421 N.E.2d 733, 736, trans. denied.
As a general rule, under Indiana law a risk is incidental to the employment if the risk involved is not one to which the public at large is subjected. E.I. DuPont DeNemours v. Lilly (1948), 226 Ind. 267, 272, 79 N.E.2d 387, 389; Segally v. Ancerys (1985), Ind.App., 486 N.E.2d 578, 581; Lincoln v. Whirlpool Corp. (1972), 151 Ind.App. 190, 196, 279 N.E.2d 596, 599-600; Citizens' Independent Telephone Co. v. Davis (1950), 121 Ind.App. 20, 25, 94 N.E.2d 495, 498, trans. denied 229 Ind. 217, 97 N.E.2d 490. This general rule is referred to as the "increased risk" test. Olinger Const. Co. v. Mosbey (1981), Ind.App., 427 N.E.2d 910, 913, trans. denied; Lincoln, 151 Ind.App. at 196, 279 N.E.2d at 599. Our courts do not always require proof of an increased risk. For example in assault cases, especially in those involving travel*1349ing employees or employees subjected to street perils, the "arising out of" element can be satisfied without proof of an increased risk to the employee. Clem v. Steveco, Inc. (1983), Ind.App., 450 N.E.2d 550, 553; Suburban Ready Mix Concrete v. Zion (1983), Ind.App., 443 N.E.2d 1241, 1242; Ference, at 737, Mosbey, at 913; Burroughs Adding Machine Co. v. Dehn (1942), 110 Ind.App. 483, 503, 39 N.E.2d 499, 507; Lasear v. Anderson (1934), 99 Ind.App. 428, 434, 192 N.E. 762, 765. Our supreme court also appears to have dispensed with the need to show an increased risk in a recent case in which an employee was attacked and killed by a lunatic. Evans, at 975. These cases allow proof of a causal connection under the "positional risk" test. Olinger, at 918; 1 Larson, Workmen's Compensation Law § 6.50 (1985).
Larson comments on the "positional risk" test, as follows:
"An important and growing number of courts are accepting the full implications of the positional-risk test: An injury arises out of the employment if it would not have occurred but for the fact that the conditions and obligations of the employment placed claimant in the position where he was injured. It is even more common for the test to be approved and used in particular situations. This theory supports compensation, for example, in cases of stray bullets, roving lunatics, and other situations in which the only connection of the employment with the injury is that its obligations placed the employee in the particular place at the particular time when he was injured by some neutral force, meaning by 'neutral' neither personal to the claimant nor dis-tinetly associated with the employment."
1 Larson, at § 6.50. Larson suggests that the positional risk test is used increasingly in assault cases to show the causal connection when the assault is shown to fall into a category 1 of neutral risks. Id. at § 11.30. Larson's neutral category of assaults includes:
''Those assaults which are in essence equivalent to blind or irrational forces, such as attacks by lunatics, drunks, small children, and other irresponsibles; completely unexplained assaults and assaults by mistake."
1 Larson, § 11.80. The facts of the present case fit within Larson's category of neutral assaults. Margaret was killed during the shooting spree of a lunatic. Therefore, as in the traveling employee and the street risks cases, this court will determine whether Margaret's death arose out of her employment based on the "positional risk" test. Authority from other jurisdictions supports our decision to analyze lunatic attacks under the "positional risk" test. 1 Larson, at § 11.82(b).
K-Mart argues that the risk in the present case should not be analyzed under the "positional risk" test. K-Mart ac knowledges that Indiana does not adhere to a strict application of the "increased risk" test in all cases, but suggests that Indiana's deviations from this test are, and should be limited to traveling employee cases. K-Mart emphasizes the reasoning in the Court of Appeals decision in Citizens
*1350Independent Telephone Co. v. Davis (1950), 121 Ind.App. 20, 94 N.E.2d 495, trans. denied, 229 Ind. 217, 97 N.E.2d 490, which suggested that our supreme court specifically adopted and required the use of the "increased risk" test in E.I. DuPont DeNemours v. Lilly (1948), 226 Ind. 267, 79 N.E.2d 387. This court disagrees and K-Mart's reliance on the court of appeals reasoning is misplaced. Our supreme court denied transfer in Dovis and did so by written opinion. Citizens Independent Telephone Co. v. Davis (1951), 229 Ind. 217, 97 N.E.2d 490. Denial of transfer by written opinion was not the general practice of the supreme court at that time. The supreme court denied transfer in this manner to state that the denial was not an affirmance of the court of appeals reasoning and interpretation of Lilly. Davis, 229 Ind. at 219, 97 N.E.2d at 491. Thus, the court of appeals' reasoning in Davis that use of the "increased risk" test was mandated by the supreme court was rejected by implication. This court notes also that the Act does not require use of the "increased risk" test. Furthermore, this court believes that the policy of the Act favors a liberal construction which would grant compensation to the employees in cases involving neutral risks.
In the present case, the evidence established that Margaret was at her station in the K-Mart store because of her employment. Absent her employment, Margaret would not have been required to be at the store, and would not have been subjected to the risk of death at the hands of a lunatic gunman. Thus, the risk was connected causally to, and was an incident of Margaret's employment with K-Mart. Therefore, the Board did not err by finding that Margaret's death "arose out of" her employment.
This court notes also that the Board's finding that Margaret's death "arose out of" her employment with K-Mart would be supportable under the "increased risk" test. The facts presented to the Board, although conflicting, indicated that the risk of encountering dangerous people was higher for Margaret than the non-employed general public. Unlike persons who do not work in stores and who would not be required to deal with and encounter potential ly dangerous people, because of her job, Margaret was required to deal with the public and encounter potentially dangerous persons including lunatics. Therefore, the Board did not err by concluding that Margaret's death was compensable.
Issue Two
K-Mart argues next that Margaret's death is not compensable under the Workmen's Compensation Act. K-Mart suggests that the facts of the present case fall within the scope of the Victims of Violent Crimes Act, Indiana Code section 16-7-8.6-1 et seq., and that the more specific Crimes Act should be interpreted to supersede the Workmen's Compensation Act when injuries result from violent crimes. K-Mart is mistaken. When two statutes involve the same general subject matter, the statutes should be construed so as to give effect to both acts if possible. Bell v. Bingham (1985), Ind.App., 484 N.E.2d 624, 627. A later or more specific statute should not be construed to repeal or supersede the more general or previous statute unless an irreconcilable conflict exists or unless the legislature clearly intended such a result. Indiana State Highway Comm'n v. Bates and Rogers Const., Inc. (1983), Ind.App., 448 N.E.2d 321, 324. The legislature's intent is determined by a review of the whole statute. Adult Group Properties, Ltd. v. Imler (1987), Ind.App., 505 N.E.2d 459, 463.
This court's review of the Crimes Act, reveals that the legislature did not intend to supersede a victim's right to compensation under the Workmen's Compensation Act. In fact, the Crimes Act makes specific reference to the Workmen's Compensation Act in Indiana Code § 16-7-8.6-11, which provides, in part, as follows:
"Award modification to reflect other benefits or contributory fault of vietim-Refund for overpayment required. -(a) The division shall reduce an award made under this chapter by the amount of benefits received or to be received from the following sources, if those benefits result *1351from or are in any manner attributable to the bodily injury or death upon which the award is based:
(1) Restitution from the offender.
(2) Benefits from a third party on behalf of the offender.
(8) Benefits from public or private pension programs, including social security benefits.
(4) Benefits from proceeds of insurance policies.
(5) Benefits under IC 22-3-2 through IC 22-3-6.
(6) Unemployment compensation benefits.
(7) Benefits from other public funds.
Compensation shall be further reduced, or denied, to the extent that the claimant's loss is recouped from any other collateral sources. Additionally, the division shall determine whether the victim vigorously pursued recovery against available collateral sources described in this subsection. If the division finds that a victim has failed to pursue an applicable collateral source of recovery, the division shall reduce or deny an award under this subsection by the amount that is available to the vietim through the collateral source."
This section of the Crimes Act reveals that the legislature intended that a vietim could and should recover under both acts but would have to reduce his recovery under the Crimes Act by that amount which was received under the Workmen's Compensation Act. Therefore, the Board was not prohibited from awarding compensation.
Issue Three
K-Mart argues next that our decision in Portman v. Steveco (1983), Ind.App., 453 N.E.2d 284, should be overturned to the extent that presumptive dependency is applied to husbands as well as wives. In Portman, the Third District of this court held that Indiana Code section 22-8-3-19 unconstitutionally discriminated against male survivors as compared to similarly situated female survivors. Portman, at 287. K-Mart does not challenge this holding; 2 rather, K-Mart argues that the Third District fashioned an improper remedy. This court disagrees. In fashioning the remedy the Third District looked to the legislative intent of the Act and determined that an extension of presumptive dependency was favored. Portman, at 287-88. This intent was forwarded by striking the unconstitutional portion of the statute, and by extending the presumption of dependency to males as well as females. The Third District fashioned the proper remedy and this court will not reverse its determination.
Issue Four
K-Mart argues next that the Board erred by finding that K-Mart was estopped from arguing that compensation was not available under the Act. Regardless of the merit of this issue, our determination that the Board's award of compensation was proper under the Act and supported by the evidence renders this issue moot. Therefore, we do not decide this issue.
Issue Five
K-Mart argues last that the Board erred by awarding a lump sum payment. Under the Act the Board may award a lump sum payment pursuant to Indiana Code section 22-3-3-25, which provides as follows:
"Lump sum payment of commutable value of instalments.-In unusual cases, upon the agreement of the employer and the employee or his dependents, and the insurance carrier, and the approval of the industrial board, compensation may be redeemed, in whole or in part, by the cash payment, in a lump sum, of the commutable value of the instalments to be redeemed.
"The board may, at any time, in the case of permanently disabling injuries of a minor, require that he be compensated by the cash payment in a lump sum of the commutable value of the unredeemed *1352instalments of the compensation to which he is entitled.
"In all such cases, the commutable value of the future unpaid instalments of compensation shall be the present value thereof, at the rate of three per cent [8%] interest, compounded annually."
In the present case, neither of the pre-con-ditions to a lump sum award exists. Margaret was not a minor and K-Mart did not enter into an agreement with Joseph for a lump sum award. Therefore, the lump sum award was improper, and accordingly this portion of the Board's decision is reversed and remanded with instructions to award compensation according to Indiana Code section 22-3-8-17, which provides for payment over five hundred (500) weeks.
Issue Siz
Joseph argues that this court should award attorney's fees. Joseph improperly bases his claim on Indiana Code section 84-1-32-1. The proper statutory provision for attorney's fees in workmen's compensation cases is Indiana Code section 22-3-4-12. To collect fees under this seetion the claimant first must request them from the Board and present evidence thereon, then the Board must make a determination on the request. None of the foregoing conditions precedent to an award of attorney's fees exists in the present case. Thus, an award of fees cannot be sustained by this court under this statute. To the extent that Joseph's request for fees could be interpreted as a request for appellate attorney fees, this court holds such fees are not warranted. To award appellate attorney fees under Appellate Rule 15(G) for a mer-itless appeal the proponent must establish that the appeal was "utterly devoid of all plausibility". Orr v. Turco Mfg. Co. (1987), Ind., 512 N.E.2d 151, 153. The present appeal does not meet this test. Therefore appellate attorney's fees are denied.
Joseph argues last that the Board's award should be increased by ten percent (10%) under Indiana Code section 22-38-4-8(f) which provides, as follows:
"An award of the full board affirmed on appeal, by the employer, shall be in-creaged thereby five percent (5%), and by order of the court may be increased ten percent (10%)."
This court agrees the award should be increased, because the award was affirmed. However, since K-Mart successfully argued the impropriety of the lump sum award, the award is increased only by five percent (5%).
Affirmed in part, and reversed in part and remanded with instructions to order payment over five hundred (500) weeks and to increase the award by five percent (5%).
ROBERTSON, J., concurs.
NEAL, J., concurs with separate opinion.
. Larson outlines three (3) categories of risks: (1) risks distinctly associated with employment, (2) risks personal to the claimant, and (3) risks of neither distinctly employment nor distinctly personal character (%e., neutral risks). Larson notes that the neutral category presents risk of loss problems because unfortunately the risk of loss of this category does not fall clearly upon either the industry or the employee. In answering the question of who should bear the burden for neutral risks Larson states,
"[The usual answer in the past has been to leave this loss on the employee, on the theory that he must meet the burden of proof of establishing affirmatively a clear causal connection between the conditions under which he worked and the occurrence of the injury. More recently, some courts have reasoned in the following vein: Either the employer or the employee must bear the loss; to show connection with the employment, there is at least the fact that the injury occurred while the employee was working; to show connection with the employee personally there is nothing; therefore, although the work connection is slender, it is at least stronger than any connection with the claimant's personal life."
1 Larson, at §§ 7.00-7.30. Indiana appears to be among the trend of jurisdictions that place the burden on the industry for neutral risks. See e.g., Evans v. Yankeetown Dock Corp. (1986), Ind., 491 N.E.2d 969, 975.
. This court notes that the Legislature's subsequent amendment to the statute in P.L. 152, 1987, § 6 which retained the language that the court of appeals struck in Portman is subject to the same constitutional infirmity.

=== CASE 9738118 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:43:04.868606+00 ===

NEAL, Judge,
concurring.
I agree with the majority opinion in its totality, but I wish to add one more observation. In Wayne Adams Buick, Inc. v. Ference (1981), Ind.App., 421 N.E.2d 733, trans. denied, a bookkeeper of an automobile agency was mugged and robbed of personal possessions by hoodlums while mailing company letters in a mailbox just across the street from the agency. Based on the peril of the street doctrine, we held that her injuries arose out of the employment. In discussing the peril of the street doctrine, we note that on the streets of cities vehicles may collide, mad dogs may run wild, gunmen may discharge their weapons, madmen may be afoot, and police may shoot at fugitives. In such encounters an employee, while conducting his employer's business, may be injured, in which event the cases hold that his injuries arose out of the employment.
K-Mart is a large open concept store which is as accessible as the open street to lunatics and gunmen. The same philosophical underpinning which supported the recovery in Waynre Adams supports the recovery here. Recovery is not to be denied because Margaret Novak was performing her duties just inside the store, and not just outside the store as was Lu*1353cille Ference. Causation and results are identical in the two cases.

=== CASE 2214755 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:52.326105+00 ===

212 Cal.App.2d 773 (1963)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
MARTIN JAY ROSENBERG, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 8031.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Three.
Feb. 7, 1963.
Sam Bubrick, under appointment by the District Court of Appeal, for Defendant and Appellant.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, and William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
FORD, J.
By an information the defendant was accused of having committed four felonies. At the time of trial he withdrew his plea of not guilty and pleaded guilty to the charges contained in the first two counts. In one of those counts it was alleged that on or about April 20, 1961, the defendant had committed the crime of grand theft. (Pen. Code,  487, subd. 1.) It was stated that the property taken was merchandise of the value of $291.15 which belonged to Claude Steen. In the other count it was charged that on or about April 20, 1961, the defendant had committed the crime of forgery of a fictitious name (Pen. Code,  470) in that he "did willfully, unlawfully, fraudulently and feloniously make, pass, utter and publish a certain fictitious check and order in writing for the payment of money in the sum of Thirty Five and 00/100 Dollars ... knowing said check to be fictitious as aforesaid, with intent then and there to cheat and defraud Claude Steen." Probation was denied and on each count the defendant was sentenced to the state prison for the term prescribed by law, it being ordered that the *775 sentences were to run concurrently. The remaining two counts of the information were dismissed. The defendant has appealed from the judgment.  [fn. 1]
Only one contention is made by the defendant. He asserts that he could not be validly sentenced on both counts because "both violations of law arose out of but one single course of conduct directed toward dispossessing the victim of a television set." Reliance is placed on the provisions of section 654 of the Penal Code and on Neal v. State of California, 55 Cal.2d 11 [9 Cal.Rptr. 607, 357 P.2d 839]. [1] As succinctly stated in People v. McFarland, 58 Cal.2d 748 [26 Cal.Rptr. 473, 376 P.2d 449], at page 760: "The principles governing the application of section 654 were clarified by this court in Neal v. State of California, 55 Cal.2d 11, 18 et seq. [9 Cal.Rptr. 607, 357 P.2d 839]. It was there pointed out, upon an analysis of several earlier decisions, that the prohibition of the statute against double punishment applies not only where 'one "act" in the ordinary sense' is involved but also where there is a 'course of conduct' which violates more than one statute and comprises an indivisible transaction punishable under more than one statute within the meaning of section 654; that the divisibility of a course of conduct depends upon the intent and objective of the defendant; and that if all the offenses are incident to one objective, the defendant may be punished for any one of them but not for more than one."
[2] The difficulty in applying the reasoning of the Neal case to the present case arises from the fact that there was no trial on the issue of guilt with respect to either of the offenses stated in the first two counts of the information because the defendant pleaded guilty to them. By so pleading without reserving or attempting to reserve in any manner the question whether the use of the check and the obtaining of the merchandise constituted an indivisible transaction so as to prevent separate punishment for each under section 654 of the Penal Code, the defendant, at least prima facie, admitted that the crimes were separate and not *776 indivisible. (Seiterle v. Superior Court, 57 Cal.2d 397, 400-401 [20 Cal.Rptr. 1, 369 P.2d 697].) [3] However, if matter is before the trial court which suggests the probability that the several offenses constituted a course of conduct comprising an indivisible transaction, that court must pursue the matter further so that the question so raised may be resolved in harmony with the provisions of section 654 of the Penal Code and the reasoning of the Neal case.
Section 1203 of the Penal Code is in part as follows: "... in every felony case in which the defendant is eligible for probation, before any judgment is pronounced, and whether or not an application for probation has been made, the court must immediately refer the matter to the probation officer to investigate and to report to the court, at a specified time, upon the circumstances surrounding the crime and concerning the defendant and his prior record, which may be taken into consideration either in aggravation or mitigation of punishment. The probation officer must thereupon make an investigation of the circumstances surrounding the crime ... [and] must make a written report to the court of the facts found upon such investigation ... At the time or times fixed by the court, the court must hear and determine such application, if one has been made, or in any case the suitability of probation in the particular case, and in connection therewith must consider any report of the probation officer, and must make a statement that it has considered such report which must be filed with the clerk of the court as a record in the case. ..." Such a report was made in the present case. It has been brought before this court as part of the record on appeal on the court's own motion. (See Cal. Rules of Court, rule 12(a).  [fn. *]) The record shows that the trial judge read and considered the report before he pronounced judgment.
[4a] In the report of the probation officer a summary of the Steen transaction was set forth. It was there stated that on April 20, 1961, the defendant telephoned Mr. Steen, the owner of a television shop, with respect to the purchase of a television set. He gave Mr. Steen credit references, stating that his name was Jerome Hoffman. Later in the day the defendant came to Mr. Steen's store and presented a check for the sum of $35 as down payment on the set. He said that he had received the check a few days earlier from the maker *777 thereof. The set was then delivered to the defendant, it being placed in his automobile.
It is probable that if, in the light of the probation report, the court had made inquiry of counsel for the prosecution and for the defense prior to the imposition of sentence, the question of the applicability of the provisions of section 654 of the Penal Code would have been quickly resolved. That would have been the preferable course. [5] But, in any event, in reviewing the present record it must be presumed that the probation officer fully and fairly performed the duty imposed upon him by section 1203 of the Penal Code. (See People v. Wilson, 123 Cal.App.2d 673, 674 [267 P.2d 27].) [4b] His summary of the circumstances surrounding the offenses to which the defendant pleaded guilty is, as a matter of law, susceptible of only one inference, namely, that the use of the check and the taking of possession of the television set were parts of a continuous course of conduct and were motivated by one objective, the theft of the set, the use of the check being incident to and a means of perpetrating the theft. (Cf. People v. McFarland, supra, 58 Cal.2d 748, 762.) Consequently, the defendant can be punished for one of the offenses but not for both.
[6] The appropriate procedure is to eliminate the effect of the judgment as to the lesser offense insofar as the penalty alone is concerned. (People v. McFarland, supra, 58 Cal. 2d 748, 763; see People v. Brown, 200 Cal.App.2d 111, 118 [19 Cal.Rptr. 36].) Of the two offenses involved here, forgery is the one subject to the greater punishment. (Pen. Code,  473, 489.) Accordingly, it is necessary to reverse the judgment insofar as it relates to punishment for grand theft.
The attempted appeal from the order denying probation is dismissed. The judgment is reversed insofar as it imposes a sentence for grand theft, and in all other respects it is affirmed.
Shinn, P. J., and Files, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. While it is stated in the notice of appeal that the appeal is also from "the order denying probation," the governing law is as stated in People v. Walters, 190 Cal.App.2d 98 [11 Cal.Rptr. 597], at page 102: "Since an order denying probation is not an order specified in section 1237 of the Penal Code from which an appeal may be taken, and is an order before judgment, the order is reviewable on appeal from the judgment and any attempted appeal from the order must be dismissed."
[fn. *]  *. Formerly Rules on Appeal, rule 12(a).

=== CASE 2213545 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:33.087304+00 ===

167 Ill. App.3d 449 (1988)
521 N.E.2d 236
HICKORY CREEK NURSERY, INC., Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
JAMES G. JOHNSTON, Defendant-Appellant.
Nos. 3-87-0329, 3-87-0377 cons.
Illinois Appellate Court  Third District.
Opinion filed March 17, 1988.
Rehearing denied April 22, 1988.
*450 Daniel G. Litchfield, of Burditt, Bowles & Radzius, Ltd., of Chicago (Alan I. Becker, of counsel), for appellant.
James R. Fabrizio, of Garrison, Fabrizio & Hanson, Ltd., of Joliet, for appellee.
Reversed and remanded.
*451 JUSTICE SCOTT delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant, James G. Johnston, appeals the order entered by the circuit court of Will County determining his Hickory Creek, Inc., stock to be of no value, and the value of his interest in a land trust holding title to real estate upon which the corporation's principal place of business was located to be $33,759. Johnston also appeals the denial of a motion to reconvey his corporation stock which was surrendered to Hickory Creek Nursery, Inc., in 1982 pursuant to court order in partial satisfaction of a judgment entered against him in favor of the corporation.
In 1982, Johnston owned one-third of the outstanding stock in Hickory Creek Nursery, Inc., a closely held corporation. Johnston was also an employee of the corporation until 1980. In 1980, the corporation brought an action in the circuit court of Will County alleging that over a period of years Johnston had taken sales revenues for personal use before they were recorded on the corporation's books to the detriment of Hickory Creek and its shareholders. In March 1982, the trial court entered judgment against Johnston in the amount of $365,490. Following issuance of a citation to discover assets, the trial court ordered Johnston to transfer his corporate stock and his interest in the land trust to the corporation in partial satisfaction of the judgment. The court reserved for a later hearing the determination of the value of these transfers to be credited against the judgment.
A hearing was held in February 1987 to determine the value of the stock and the value of the land trust interest as of April 14, 1982. To present evidence as to the value of the corporation in 1982, Johnston called as an expert witness Gregory C. Vlasak. Vlasak stated that he held a bachelor's degree in economics and a master's degree in business administration from the University of Chicago, and that he had valued approximately 200 businesses over the past 10 years, nearly one-third of them being directly comparable to Hickory Creek in terms of assets or sales.
To determine a value for the corporation, Vlasak testified that he examined the corporation's financial statements and tax returns and compared them with two publicly owned nursery businesses. He then applied the valuation methodologies of normalized earning power, discounted cash flow, and balance sheet analysis to the corporation's financial figures. Vlasak concluded that the normalized earning power of the corporation was $75,000 per year after making adjustments for the sales Johnston did not report for the years 1977 through 1981, and for the extraordinary expenses of the instant litigation and the corporation's purchase of a house. He then applied a multiplier of six to the *452 normalized earning power figure and stated that the value of the corporation was $450,000. Vlasak stated he selected a multiplier of six based on a discounting of the multipliers of the two larger publicly held businesses because Hickory Creek was a closely held business.
In performing a discounted cash flow analysis of the corporation, Vlasak reported that Hickory Creek's sales had grown 15% annually during the period 1978 to 1981, and he projected that its sales would increase 10% annually the following 5 years and in 1987 there would be a 5% sales growth. The discounted cash flow analysis, i.e., the estimated amount of cash which would be available to the shareholders of the corporation, resulted in a corporation value of $430,000. Vlasak testified that his balance sheet analysis confirmed the values arrived at from the normalized earning power and discounted cash flow analyses and concluded that Johnston's one-third interest in the corporation should be valued at $150,000. He further testified that no "minority interest" discount should be applied to this value as his shares were surrendered to the corporation to the benefit of the remaining shareholders, but if a discount were applied because of a transfer to a third party, he stated it would range from 10% to 35%.
Hickory Creek presented Arthur L. Crandell, CPA, as its expert witness on corporation value. Crandell stated that in his opinion a normalized earnings power analysis was not appropriate for any business with sales or assets less than $12 million and that a formula or "cook-book" analysis was more appropriate to determine value for a corporation the size of Hickory Creek. To value a corporation using this valuation methodology, Crandell stated one first calculates the value of a corporation's tangible assets, i.e., its physical and financial assets, minus liabilities, and then assigns an intangible value to the corporation only if its earnings are above average for the industry classification of the corporation, or if the corporation has multiple lines of business, its earnings in these lines are above average. A capitalization rate is then assigned to both values to arrive at an overall corporation value.
In applying this methodology to Hickory Creek, Crandell reported that even though the corporation's 1981 earnings were $105,998, the value of Hickory Creek was zero, due in part to only a small percentage of its earnings exceeding average industry earnings and the value of its tangible assets failing to exceed its liabilities. Crandell testified, therefore, that Johnston's one-third interest in Hickory Creek Nursery, Inc., was valueless.
In contrast to Vlasak's balance sheet analysis, Crandell did not include as a financial asset Johnston's judgment debt to the corporation, nor did he include the value of the unreported sales revenues when he *453 calculated profitability. Further, in valuing the corporation's tangible assets, Crandell stated he valued the house owned by the corporation at $144,673, versus a balance of $225,000, which was used by Vlasak in his balance sheet analysis and which was the price the corporation was asking for the house.
To testify as to the value of his interest in the land trust, Johnston presented an MAI appraiser, William McCann, as an expert witness. Both parties stipulated that McCann was an expert in the field of real estate appraisal. In determining a land trust value, McCann stated he employed both a market analysis and a capitalized rate of return analysis using the actual land trust rental income. He testified that both valuation methods resulted in a land trust value estimated to be $550,000.
The corporation presented its own expert witness, Warren Albert, to testify as to the value of the land trust. Albert stated he was not an MAI appraiser, but had been involved in real estate appraising for nearly 30 years and had appraised properties in Will County. Albert testified that the highest and best use of the property in the land trust was commercial development and therefore the property should be valued as vacant land. As vacant land, Albert testified that the fair market value of the property was $315,000 in April 1982. Albert further stated he had appraised the property in 1980 in connection with the instant litigation and at that time had assigned the same value. He testified that between 1980 and 1982 the property had not appreciated because there had been little or no commercial development in the area during that period. Both parties stipulated that in April 1982 the property in the land trust was subject to a mortgage of $160,300.
On March 30, 1987, the trial court issued a minute order finding the total value of Johnston's property subject to the citation proceeding, his stock in Hickory Creek Nursery, Inc., and his interest in the land trust was $33,759. The trial court thereafter entered a written order finding the amount of the judgment on April 14, 1982, was $331,241, plus costs. Following denial of his motion for rehearing and the filing of notice of appeal, Johnston filed a motion to reconvey the stock which was subsequently denied and from which he also appeals. Both appeals are consolidated for review herein.
Johnston maintains the trial court's determination that his one-third interest in Hickory Creek Nursery, Inc., was valueless was based on legally erroneous premises and was against the manifest weight of the evidence, and that its determination his land trust interest was worth $33,759 was also against the manifest weight of the evidence. Johnston further maintains that his motion to reconvey was improperly *454 denied by the trial court.
 1 The first issue presented for review is whether the trial court's apparent acceptance of the valuation methodology advocated by Hickory Creek's expert produced a fair market valuation of Johnston's one-third interest in the corporation. It is well recognized that determination of the fair market value of a closely held corporation is not an exact science, as witnessed by the frequency with which appraisers differ in their opinions concerning the appropriate value to assign to a shareholder's interest in these corporations. In re Marriage of Rossi (1983), 113 Ill. App.3d 55, 446 N.E.2d 1198; In re Marriage of Mitchell (1981), 103 Ill. App.3d 242, 430 N.E.2d 716; Stewart v. D.J. Stewart & Co. (1976), 37 Ill. App.3d 848, 346 N.E.2d 475.
In determining the fair market value of closely held corporate stock for estate and gift tax purposes, the Internal Revenue Service has established guidelines for valuation which are set forth in Revenue Ruling 59-60. (Rev. Rul. 59-60, 1959-1 C.B. 237; see also Rev. Rul. 80-219, 1980-2 C.B. 18.) Among the factors outlined in this ruling to be considered when valuing the stock of a closely held corporation is the earning capacity of the company. Earning capacity is to be determined primarily from an analysis of the corporation's profit and loss statements. In assigning relative weights to the various factors to be considered in arriving at a value, e.g., book value, dividend-paying capacity, intangible value, etc., the appraiser is advised to "accord primary consideration to earnings when valuing stocks of companies which sell products or services to the public." (Rev. Rul. 59-60, § 5(a), 1959-1 C.B. 237.) Of the four valuation methodologies applied to value Johnston's interest in Hickory Creek by the experts, the normalized earning power analysis employed by Johnston's expert more closely approximates the suggested valuation guidelines proposed by the Internal Revenue Service.
The record reveals that without adjusting for Johnston's unreported sales, Hickory Creek reported significant net earnings four out of five years during the period 1977 through 1981. Hickory Creek's expert calculated the net earnings for 1981 to be $105,998, and Johnston's expert calculated the corporation's annual normalized earning power, based on adjusted net earnings during the period 1978 through 1982, which included unreported sales revenues, to be $75,000. When the unreported and reported earnings of Hickory Creek are combined, the second step of the formula method advocated by Hickory Creek's expert, which specifically analyzes earnings, results in corporation value of $458,000. This method, after subtracting the corporation's negative tangible value, i.e., liabilities exceeding assets, results in an *455 overall corporate value of $423,000. Further, the capitalization rate of 20% incorporated in the formula method advocated by Hickory Creek's expert is equivalent to a price/earnings ratio multiplier of five, compared to the multiplier of six selected by Johnston's expert which resulted in his overall corporation value estimate of $450,000.
 2, 3 Given that the amount of the unreported revenues for the period 1978 through 1980 were judicially determined and were unlikely to recur after Johnston's departure from the company, we find no error in adjusting reported revenues by these sums to ascertain the true earning capacity of Hickory Creek. Following this adjustment, the valuation methodologies employed by both experts produce a corporate value ranging from $423,000 to $450,000. A business which has a history of earnings cannot be considered as a matter of law to be without value. (Zokoych v. Spalding (1984), 123 Ill. App.3d 921, 463 N.E.2d 943.) Further, given the formula methodology advocated by Hickory Creek's expert incorporates indirectly a price/earnings ratio multiplier similar to the discounted multiplier selected by Johnston's expert, we find the issue of the appropriateness of comparing Hickory Creek with two publicly held nursery businesses versus comparisons of similarly sized companies drawn from the Federal government's Standard Industrial Classifications (SIC) to be moot, as the essential issue therein is whether an appropriate multiplier was selected by Johnston's expert in his normalized earning power analysis.
 4 Lastly, though Johnston's expert stated that a discounting of Johnston's interest would be in the range of 10% to 35% if it were marketed to an outsider as a minority interest and Hickory Creek's expert applied a minority discount of 25% in his unadjusted formula analysis, we find such discounting does not apply in the instant case when a minority interest is being assumed by the remaining shareholders resulting in a substantial pro rata increase in their share and control of the corporation.
 5 We thus conclude that the trial court's determination that Johnston's one-third interest in Hickory Creek Nursery, Inc., has no value is contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence and therefore reverse the trial court's determination that his interest does not reduce the judgment entered in this cause. We remand for a determination of the value of Johnston's interest in Hickory Creek Nursery, Inc., which is based on its earning capacity and which takes into consideration the determined unreported revenues for the years 1978 through 1980.
 6 The final issue for review is whether the value assigned to Johnston's land trust interest is against the manifest weight of the evidence. *456 Johnston maintains the trial court erred in accepting Hickory Creek's appraisal because it failed to include leases to subtenants, Hickory Creek's business and the value of the buildings on the property. His appraiser applied both a market valuation analysis, which included the buildings' value, in addition to comparable sales, and an income valuation analysis, which capitalized the rate of return the trust received from rentals. The record does not reveal that Hickory Creek disputes the calculations of Johnston's expert concerning rental income or his capitalization rate assumptions in determining value using an income analysis. Rather, Hickory Creek contends that the proper valuation methodology is highest and best use and that this is commercial development absent consideration of improvements and income produced therefrom.
We find no error in the trial court's rejection of the market valuation methodology proposed by Johnston's expert, as the record reveals insufficient comparable sales were introduced into evidence, i.e., only one sale of a comparable property during the period in question. We do assign as error the trial court's reliance on the highest and best use assertion of Hickory Creek's expert, which failed to consider the present productive use of the property, and the income generated therefrom, when the present use results in a value significantly greater than that arrived at from a "highest and best use" analysis. (Department of Transportation v. Keller (1986), 149 Ill. App.3d 829, 500 N.E.2d 982; Glassey v. County of Tazewell (1973), 11 Ill. App.3d 1087, 297 N.E.2d 235.) We conclude that the proper valuation methodology to be applied to value Johnston's land trust interest is an income analysis.
Johnston further maintains that Hickory Creek should have reconveyed certain stock to him. Having determined that the stock is of some value it is not necessary that we determine this question.
Based on the foregoing we reverse the trial court's determination that Johnston's interest in Hickory Creek Nursery, Inc., was without value and that the value of his interest in the land trust was accurately valued at $33,759. We remand, therefore, for a redetermination of both values and the application thereof against the judgment entered against Johnston in March 1982.
Reversed and remanded.
HEIPLE and WOMBACHER, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2213551 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:33.155049+00 ===

240 Cal.App.2d 312 (1966)
FRANK WILLIAM SCHMEDDING, as Administrator, etc., Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
HERMAN SCHMEDDING, Defendant and Respondent.
Civ. No. 7972.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Dist., Div. One.
Feb. 21, 1966.
Marsh & Graves and Ralph W. Graves for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Brooks Crabtree, Carlisle C. Lewis, Jr., and William G. Bailey for Defendant and Respondent.
FINLEY, J. pro tem.  [fn. *]
This appeal is by the plaintiff, as administrator of his sister Hilda's estate, from the judgment in a nonjury hearing in favor of defendant, also a brother of the deceased. The interveners are respectively a brother and sister of Hilda's deceased husband.
The judgment followed defendant's motion for judgment under the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure, section 631.8. The issue is ownership of funds held in joint tenancy by defendant and his sister, the deceased, during her lifetime.
On November 5, 1962, Hilda B. Kreis, hereinafter referred to as "Hilda", changed a savings account then standing in her sole name into a joint tenancy account between herself and her brother, Herman Schmedding, respondent herein. At the time there was in the account some $21,815.49. On January 25, 1963, respondent withdrew from this savings account the sum of $3,499.11 which he deposited in a checking account opened in the name of himself, his wife and Hilda as joint tenants. This checking account was used mainly to pay Hilda's bills and was closed approximately three months before Hilda's death. The balance of $18,316.38 remained in the joint savings account between Hilda and respondent and was so held at the time of Hilda's death, at the age of 64. Determination of the ownership of this deposit is the purpose of this action.
It appears that from time to time Hilda lived with various members of her family. She lived for a time with her brother, *314 Albert, in Coventry, Connecticut. She then came to California and moved into the home of her brother Frank. Following a heart attack in September 1962, as a result of which she was hospitalized for two weeks, she returned to Frank's home for approximately two weeks. On November 1, 1962, she moved to the home of her brother, Herman, respondent here, where she remained until she died intestate and without issue on December 29, 1963.
The only question presented is ownership of the $18,316.38. Appellant contends that this determination must rest upon two points:
1. Whether there was a confidential relationship existing between the decedent and respondent.
2. The nature of the savings account involved as joint tenancy or otherwise.
The trial court took the position, as does respondent, that no finding on the question of confidential relationship was necessary. In the words of the trial judge: "All I have to find is there was no over-reaching of her at any time by Herman, so it wouldn't make any difference whether there was a confidential relationship or not, and she knew what she was doing at all times."
With this position of the trial court and also respondent we agree. [1] The existence of a confidential relationship would be material only if there had been before the court some reasonable degree of proof that respondent had violated a duty to Hilda existing apart from any such confidential relationship. Had such violation been established the question of whether there existed a confidential or fiduciary relationship would then have become material in proving an index to the degree of permissible transgression, for it is elementary that a confidential relationship demands a higher degree of fides than that commonly existing between those dealing with each other at arms length.
Our review of the proof discloses no reason to differ with the trial court in its finding that: "... Defendant Herman Schmedding exercised no undue influence, persuasion, overreaching or any other type of control whatsoever over Hilda B. Kreis, ... prior to or on November 5, 1962, when she established the above-mentioned joint tenancy savings account with right of survivorship between herself and Defendant Herman Schmedding or thereafter up to the date of her death."
[2] Respondent properly calls attention to the fact that *315 an appellate court must accept the determination of fact made in the trial court if there is any substantial evidence, contradicted or uncontradicted, to support the findings made. (Crawford v. Southern Pac. Co., 3 Cal.2d 427 [45 P.2d 183]; Estate of Bristol, 23 Cal.2d 221 [143 P.2d 689].)
The above finding by the trial court, which the record adequately supports and with which we do not differ, obviates any obligation on the part of the trial court to find upon the suggested question of "confidential relationship".
The question of the interest of a surviving joint tenant in the property jointly held is discussed in the briefs at some length. Appellant calls attention to the conclusive presumption of ownership by the survivor upon the death of one joint tenant contained in former section 15 A of the California Bank Act, which presumption was not carried over when that section was finally re-enacted into Financial Code, section 852. He contends this fact implies that there is now no presumption that title passes to the surviving joint tenant upon death.
Respondent concedes that the conclusive presumption of section 15 A of the California Bank Act was not carried over into Financial Code, section 852, but he points to the cases of Paterson v. Comastri, 39 Cal.2d 66 [244 P.2d 902] and Medeiros v. Cotta, 134 Cal.App.2d 452 [286 P.2d 546] as authority for his contention that section 15 A of the California Bank Act was copied from the New York Bank Act and that in both states the courts have construed the act to have set up two presumptions: First, the rebuttable presumption that a deposit in the names of the depositor and another person, "in form to be paid to" either, or the survivor of them, became the property of such persons as joint tenants and second, the conclusive presumption that in the absence of fraud or undue influence, it was the intention of the depositor or depositors to vest title in the survivor. Respondent contends that although the conclusive presumption was not carried over, the rebuttable presumption was, and is as much a part of section 852 of the Financial Code as it was of section 15 A of the Bank Act. In 1949 this act became section 852 of the Banking Code which in turn in 1951 became Financial Code, section 852. Respondent maintains that: "With the deletion of the conclusive language contained in Section 15 A of the California Bank Act,--the Legislature intended to change the nature of the presumption to the title to the monies remaining on deposit at the date of *316 death of the owner-depositor from 'conclusive' to 'rebuttable'." Citing Abbey v. Lord, 168 Cal.App.2d 499 [336 P.2d 226]. That case implies the existence of such a rebuttable presumption with the statement that: "Section 852 of the Financial Code does not term the making of the deposit in a bank conclusive evidence of the intention of the depositors to vest title to the deposit in the survivor .... Parol evidence is competent to show the depositors' intention and equitable rights to the money."
In Medeiros v. Cotta, supra, 134 Cal.App.2d 452, and in Comastri v. Burke, 137 Cal.App.2d 430 [290 P.2d 663], it is held that Financial Code, section 852 is, as was section 15 A of the Bank Act, a part of the contract between the depositors and with the bank. [3] It therefore follows that the rebuttable presumption of the survivor being the owner of the money on deposit in the account at the date of death of the owner-depositor is applicable and in the absence of evidence to the contrary the rebuttable presumption of ownership by the survivor must prevail. (Perkins v. West, 122 Cal.App.2d 585 [265 P.2d 538].)
In DeBoer v. DeBoer, 111 Cal.App.2d 500, 505 [244 P.2d 953], it is said that "A determination by a trial court that the presumption has been rebutted is conclusive on a reviewing court unless it is manifestly without support in the evidence. (Estate of Baer, 81 Cal.App.2d 830, 833 [185 P.2d 412].)"
[4] In the instant case the trial court found in accordance with this rebuttable presumption which was a question for that court to resolve. (Paterson v. Comastri, supra, 39 Cal.2d 66, 73; Wheeland v. Rodgers, 20 Cal.2d 218, 222 [124 P.2d 816]; Spear v. Farwell, 5 Cal.App.2d 111, 113 [42 P.2d 391]; Copprell v. Copprell, 87 Cal.App.2d 4, 6 [195 P.2d 868].) We find ample evidence in the record to support that determination and but little to contradict it.
The judgment is affirmed.
Brown (Gerald), P. J., and Coughlin, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Retired judge of the superior court sitting under assignment by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.

=== CASE 2213554 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:33.175321+00 ===

240 Cal.App.2d 707 (1966)
In re OSCAR LEE RIDDLE on Habeas Corpus.
Crim. No. 4045.
California Court of Appeals. Third Dist.
Mar. 11, 1966.
Lawrence Goldstein, under appointment by the District Court of Appeal, for Petitioner.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, Doris Maier, Assistant Attorney General, Edsel W. Haws and Theodore T. N. Slocum, Deputy Attorneys General, for Respondent.
REGAN, J.
Petitioner is a prisoner at Folsom State Prison. He seeks a writ of habeas corpus to secure his delivery *708 to the prison authorities of the State of Oklahoma, there to complete a partially served Oklahoma prison sentence.
Petitioner's confinement at Folsom is pursuant to a valid judgment of commitment by the El Dorado County Superior Court for the crime of attempted armed robbery. The judgment of commitment provides that petitioner's sentence shall be served concurrently with any prior incompleted sentence. Petitioner raises no questions as to the validity of the El Dorado County judgment of commitment. He contends that the respondent warden of Folsom Prison is not the person authorized by law to imprison or have custody of him. He claims that at the time of his California sentence he was and still is wanted as a fugitive by the Oklahoma state parole authorities for violation of a "life term parole." Oklahoma considers petitioner a "parole violator whose parole has been revoked" and seeks his return there to continue service on a life sentence at such time as he is made available by California.
Respondent concedes that petitioner is entitled to be made available for delivery to Oklahoma for the purpose of providing him the benefit of the concurrent running of his sentences in California and Oklahoma. However, respondent contends he lacks jurisdiction to administratively transfer petitioner without an order of a court directing him to do so.
[1] "Under the so-called 'Stoliker rule' established by California case law [In re Stoliker, 49 Cal.2d 75, 78 (315 P.2d 12)], a California prisoner is entitled to be made available for delivery to the prison authorities of another jurisdiction, if his California commitment expressly decrees that the California sentence shall run concurrently with an unexpired sentence in the other jurisdiction." (In re Portwood, 236 Cal.App.2d 321, 323 [45 Cal.Rptr. 862].) This rule also applies where the sentencing judge has knowledge of the unexpired sentence in the other jurisdiction. (In re Altstatt, 227 Cal.App.2d 305, 307 [38 Cal.Rptr. 616], quoted in In re Portwood, supra.) Pursuant to the provisions of section 669 of the Penal Code and California case law, petitioner at the time of sentencing by the El Dorado County court was entitled to be made available for delivery to the Oklahoma authorities, so that the remaining time under his Oklahoma sentence will be credited to his California sentence. The California Director of Corrections is authorized and directed by Penal Code section 2900  [fn. 1] to designate *709 a California institution to which petitioner may be returned if his Oklahoma confinement ends before the expiration of his California sentence.
[2] "It is well established that habeas corpus is the proper remedy to secure confinement under the proper authority." (In re Stoliker, supra, 49 Cal.2d 75, 78.)
Unless petitioner is transferred to the Oklahoma authorities for the purpose of serving his Oklahoma sentence that portion of the California judgment of conviction providing that his state sentence should run concurrently with the Oklahoma sentence will be nullified and ineffectual. (In re Stoliker, supra.) Being entitled to such transfer now as well as at the time of his California sentence, we must determine the proper procedure to accomplish this act. The warden must proceed as the one having present custody and pursuant to section 2900 of the Penal Code to effectuate the transfer, and petitioner is entitled to be transferred under the administrative order of respondent. (In re Portwood, supra.)
[3] Where the conditions for the transfer clearly and unequivocally exist, this authorization for transfer should be made by the Director of the Department of Corrections without the necessity of a court order in each case. Section 2900 of the Penal Code gives him this power. It is a needless waste of time to compel a court to order in each individual case what is essentially an administrative function.
It is ordered that the Director of the Department of Corrections direct the warden of the state prison at Folsom to make petitioner available for delivery into the custody of the Oklahoma State Prison authorities for the purpose of serving his sentence under the Oklahoma judgment of conviction. The Director of the Department of Corrections is also ordered to designate a California institution for reception of petitioner in the event that actual confinement under the Oklahoma *710 sentence ends before the period of actual confinement required under his California commitment.
Pierce, P. J., and White, J. pro tem.,  [fn. *] concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. A 1963 amendment added the following provision to Penal Code section 2900: "In any case in which, pursuant to the agreement on detainers or other provision of law, a prisoner of another jurisdiction is, before completion of actual confinement in a penal or correctional institution of a jurisdiction other than the State of California, sentenced by a California court to a term of imprisonment for a violation of California law, and the judge of the California court orders that the California sentence shall run concurrently with the sentence which such person is already serving, the Director of Corrections shall designate the institution of the other jurisdiction as the place for reception of such person within the meaning of the preceding provisions of this section. He may also designate the place in California for reception of such person in the event that actual confinement under the prior sentence ends before the period of actual confinement required under the California sentence."
[fn. *]  *. Assigned by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.

=== CASE 9738119 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:43:09.833373+00 ===

GIVAN, Justice.
A jury trial resulted in the conviction of appellant of Burglary, a Class C felony, for which he received eight (8) years, enhanced by thirty (30) years by reason of his status as an habitual criminal, and Theft, a Class D felony, for which he received four (4) years.
The facts are: On September 20, 1985, the Commerce Insurance Agency in Evansville, Indiana, was burglarized. During the police investigation of the burglary, it was discovered that appellant's fingerprints were on the window where entrance was accomplished, and there was one identifiable fingerprint on a cash box inside the agency. When police eventually learned it was appellant's fingerprints they had found at the scene of the crime and that he had recently been released from the State Prison at Michigan City after serving time for a prior burglary conviction, they attempted to locate appellant.
On November 8, 1985, prior to beginning his patrol of the Evansville business district, Officer Gary Vogel was instructed by Officer Ted Mattingly that if he encountered appellant to arrest him on suspicion of burglary. Later, at approximately 1:30 a.m., as Officer Vogel was on patrol, he observed a person walking down the street in the business district. He testified that he did not recognize appellant at that time, but he did notice he was acting suspiciously. When appellant noticed that the officer was watching him, he changed direction and increased his speed. The officer stopped appellant and asked him for identification. When appellant identified himself as Tome Hailey, Officer Vogel realized he was the person Officer Mattingly had said he wanted arrested. The officer then con*1320ducted a search of appellant for his own safety. The search disclosed that appellant had two serewdrivers, an old National Bank money bag, a flashlight, and a .25 caliber semiautomatic handgun.
Appellant was taken to the police station where the Miranda warnings were read to him and he signed a waiver of rights form. He at first denied participation in the burglary at the Commerce Insurance Agency. However, when he was informed that his fingerprints were found at the scene, he admitted the burglary. Following that confession, Officer Earl Chapman advised appellant that if he confessed to committing other burglaries he probably would not be charged with those additional burglaries, but if the officers later discovered that he had in fact been involved in other burglaries, he would be charged with them. Appellant then gave a second confession in which he admitted to several burglaries in the Evansville area.
Appellant claims the court erred in overruling his motion in limine as to the objects found on his person at the time of his arrest and police contact with him on the date of his arrest. Appellant bases this contention on the fact that Officer Vogel did not know the identity of appellant at the time he saw him walking on the street and his actions were not sufficient to give Officer Vogel cause to justify an investigative stop. If the combination of time and place and the actions of the person in question "at the time of the 'stop' are such that a man of reasonable caution would believe that the action taken was appropriate, the command of the Fourth Amendment is satisfied." Gipson v. State (1984), Ind., 459 N.E.2d 366, 368.
The action of appellant in the case at bar is very similar to the action of Gip-son in that case. There is sufficient evidence in this record to justify Officer Vogel in making the initial investigatory stop. Once the stop had been accomplished and Officer Vogel learned the identity of the subject, the officer was justified in conducting a search of appellant for his own safety. Jones v. State (1985), Ind., 472 N.E.2d 1255. Even if the objects taken from appellant only inconclusively connect him with the crime under investigation, the question goes to the weight of the evidence not its admissibility. The weight to be given such evidence is for the determination of the jury. Id. We see no reversible error in the admission of the testimony of Officer Vogel as to his stopping and eventually arresting appellant or of his testimony as to the objects taken from appellant's person.
Appellant claims the trial court erred in overruling his motion to suppress any and all oral and written communications, confessions, statements, admissions, or tests obtained by the police as a result of his arrest. He bases this contention upon the premise that his stop, search, and arrest were all unlawful. As above stated, we find that the stop, search, and arrest were all lawful. This coupled with the fact that appellant was properly given the Miranda warnings before any interrogation commenced renders his subsequent confessions admissible.
Appellant further complains that his confession was in detrimental reliance upon a promise of leniency later violated by the prosecutor's office. As pointed out in the statement of facts, appellant had already confessed to the burglary of the Commerce Insurance Agency before any promise was made to him by a police officer. It was only after that confession that the police officer suggested to appellant that if he cleared up other burglaries which he might have committed in Evansville he would probably not be prosecuted on those additional burglaries. It was then that appellant made his second confession. The promise made by the police officer was in fact carried out in that appellant was prosecuted only for the burglary of the Commerce Insurance Agency.
No promises were made concerning habitual criminal charges. In fact, the subject was not discussed. We would further point out that being an habitual criminal is a status and not an offense. The fact that appellant has several prior felony convictions places him in that status and subjects him to the possibility of an enhanced sen*1321tence on any felony which he may commit including the case at bar. We find no deprivation of constitutional rights in this regard.
Appellant also claims the court erred in permitting testimony concerning statements he made as to where he was headed on the night of his arrest and whether the gun he was carrying was loaded. These were all matters which verified the authenticity of his confession and were admissible to be weighed as all other facts by the jury.
Appellant claims the court erred in overruling his motion to dismiss the habitual criminal count. His claim here is based upon the premise that such a charge was a violation of the promise made to him by a police officer. Pursuant to what we have said previously in this opinion, we find no error in the court's refusal to dismiss the habitual criminal count.
Appellant claims the court erred in overruling his motion for mistrial on the ground that his witnesses, Kelly Hailey and Ruth Dunbar, both alluded to the fact that he had just returned to Evansville from Michigan City, Indiana. Appellant argues that the jury could deduce from this that he had recently been released from prison. In the first place, we point out that both of these witnesses were appellant's witnesses, Kelly Hailey being his wife. The evidence to which appellant now complains was elicited from the witnesses on direct examination by appellant. The wit nesses did not mention the State Prison but only the town of Michigan City. Under the circumstances, we do not perceive the trial court abused its discretion in refusing the motion for mistrial.
Appellant claims the trial court erred in overruling his motion for mistrial based upon the fact that some of the jurors were excused by the court prior to the voir dire examination. Both by statute, Ind. Code § 88-4-5.5-15, and case law, Lytle v. State (1987), Ind., 503 N.E.2d 1222, the trial court has discretionary authority to excuse prospective jurors. It is clearly demonstrated from the record in the instant case that the judge did not abuse his discretion in this regard. Practical experience in the trial of jury cases demonstrates that in almost every case the trial judge finds it necessary to excuse some prospective veniremen for various legitimate reasons. There was no reversible error in this regard.
Appellant also claims the court erred in not granting his motion for mistrial for the reason that two of the jurors were taking notes during the trial. This situation was first discovered at the hearing on the habitual criminal phase of the trial. At that time, the trial judge interrogated, separately and apart from the other jurors, each juror who had taken notes. Juror Koehler testified that he did not refer to his notes during deliberations nor did he convey their content to any other juror. Juror VanDyne stated that he did review his notes and that he did discuss them with other jurors. Although the notes of the jurors did indicate their awareness of the fact that appellant had been in prison in Michigan City, the trial court found that there was no impermissible interference with the jury process. The granting of a motion for mistrial is at the discretion of the trial court. Coleman v. State (1986), Ind., 490 N.E.2d 325.
Absent a clear showing of error, the trial court's decision will not be reversed on appeal. We see no demonstration in this record that the taking of notes by the jurors placed appellant in such grave peril that the trial judge would have been justified in granting a motion for a new trial. See Morgan v. State (1981), 275 Ind. 666, 419 N.E.2d 964. The question of grave peril is to be determined by considering the probable persuasive effect of the misconduct on the jury's decision, not by the degree of impropriety of the conduct. Asbell v. State (1984), Ind., 468 N.E.2d 845. We see nothing in the record before us to indicate an abuse of discretion by the trial judge.
The trial court is affirmed.
PIVARNIK, J., concurs.
*1322DICKSON, J., concurs in result without separate opinion.
DeBRULER, J., dissents with separate opinion in which SHEPARD, C.J., concurs.

=== CASE 9738120 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:43:09.837154+00 ===

DeBRULER, Justice,
dissenting.
According to the testimony of Officer Vogel, he was patrolling at 1:30 a.m. in a squad car, travelling east in a business district, when he saw a young black male walking east on the sidewalk. The officer slowed and according to his testimony, ".. we both kept looking at each other until I got on by, and it seemed strange, so I pulled off two blocks up and pulled off the side of the road and backed my car out to see where he was going and I couldn't see him any longer. The next thing I saw him was, he was coming out of Lloyd's Ice Cream lot ..". During the time required for the officer to continue on down the street, stop and look back, and then retrace the same distance, the young man had somehow and in some manner turned around and had headed in the opposite direction, and was walking down the sidewalk at a more brisk pace. The officer did not recognize him or know anything more about him. Armed only with these observations, the officer stopped him and demanded identification. In so doing, the officer intruded upon the privacy of an individual in a manner inconsistent with the requirement of reasonableness in the 4th Amendment and Article 1, See. 11 of the Indiana Constitution. The young man's behavior was not such as would lead a man of reasonable caution to believe that the police action was appropriate. Gipson v. State (1984), Ind., 459 N.E.2d 366. Consequent ly, constitutional error occurred when the items seized from the young man during the pat down there on the street, and the confession he later gave at the police station, being the product of the unlawful action and unjustified by proof that they were not "fruit of the poisonous tree", were admitted over objection at trial. Moreover, the two serewdrivers, old money bag, and automatic were irrelevant to the charged burglary, regardless of the illegality of the stop or arrest.
SHEPARD, C.J., concurs.

=== CASE 2213559 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:33.237598+00 ===

240 Cal.App.2d 291 (1966)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
LE ROY EVANS et al., Defendants and Appellants.
Crim. No. 10855.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Three.
Feb. 21, 1966.
Bernard Grossman, under appointment by the District Court of Appeal, for Defendants and Appellants.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and David S. Sperber, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
FORD, J.
In a nonjury trial the defendant Evans was found guilty of grand theft as charged in Count I, of a violation of the Dangerous Weapons' Control Law (Pen. Code,  12090) as charged in Count II, and of burglary as charged in each of the Counts VI and VII. The defendant Roquemore was found guilty of grand theft as charged in Count I, of a violation of the Dangerous Weapons' Control Law (Pen. Code,  12090) as charged in Count IV, and of burglary as charged in each of the Counts VI and VII. Each defendant has appealed from the judgment. In addition, each has attempted to appeal from the order denying his motion for a new trial, but such an order is not separately appealable. (People v. Bernhardt, 222 Cal.App.2d 567, 570-571 [35 Cal.Rptr. 401].)
The defendants assert that, except as to the burglary charged in Count VI, the convictions "were solely based upon the introduction into evidence of loot obtained as a result of searches made of a motor vehicle in which the appellants were driving, and by a search of appellant Roquemore's apartment made well after he was taken into custody." They contend that each incident constituted an illegal search and seizure. A summary of pertinent evidence will be given.
Orley R. Barton, a police officer for the City of Los Angeles, testified that he arrested the defendants at 46th Street and Central Avenue on September 18, 1964, at approximately 4 p.m. Prior to the arrest the officer observed the defendant Evans' car as it proceeded westbound on 46th Street. The front license plate bore a number different from that on the rear license plate. He thought "possibly that the vehicle was stolen." He directed the defendant Evans to park his car at the curb. As Officer Barton approached the vehicle he looked into the car and "observed in the rear seat a typewriter, a sewing machine box, and a large red gas can, along with numerous items of clothing." Then, before Officer Barton or his partner, Officer Cron, said anything to him, the defendant Evans said, "It is not what you think; it belongs to my aunt." Officer Barton thought "possibly that the stuff might be stolen, due to his statement." He further testified that he *294 "immediately advised both defendants of their rights to an attorney; that they could remain silent; anything they stated could be held against them as evidence."
Officer Barton then told both of the men to alight from the vehicle and asked the defendant Evans for his driver's license or some identification. Evans produced a valid California operator's license. The defendant Roquemore then said that his identification was in the glove compartment. In response to a question as to whether, up to this point, he had placed the defendants under arrest, the officer stated: "Technically, yes, I had, for possible GTA, or possibly involved in the crime of burglary or robbery." He placed them under arrest when he "first had them pull to the curb, due to the switched plates on the vehicle." He regarded them as being under arrest at the time when he advised them of their constitutional rights.
There was no registration card on the steering column of the car. The defendant Evans produced a "pink slip" for the automobile which contained a reference to the number on the front license plate. At first Officer Barton refused to permit the defendant Roquemore to reenter the car to get his wallet out of the glove compartment because he feared that there might be "something in there besides his driver's license." Officer Barton's partner attempted to open the glove compartment but was unable to do so. The officers then, with their guns drawn, allowed Roquemore to open the glove compartment and he thereupon obtained his wallet and stepped out of the vehicle.
Further testimony of Officer Barton was: "Then my partner, Officer Cron, looked under the right front seat of the vehicle, where Mr. Roquemore had been sitting, at which time under a rag he found a .38 revolver, 3 inch blue steel ... my partner, Officer Cron, removed the cartridges. ... We then immediately placed the handcuffs on the defendants, both defendants, and placed them in the rear seat of our police vehicle, and asked for another unit to assist us; and also requested tow service on the defendants' vehicle. We had the two defendants transported to Newton Station Detective Bureau, and also, when the tow service arrived, we had them also tow the vehicle to Newton Police Station where we opened up the trunk of the car, and in the trunk of the car was a large 50 horsepower outboard motorboat engine."
The deputy public defender representing the defendants stated an objection as follows: "Your Honor, we will object to testimony in regard to anything recovered at the time the car was moved to Newton Station and searched there. I think *295 People vs. Burke indicates a search subsequent to the arrest, at a different location--that was an instance when it was in the impound--is improper." In response to that objection, the People made further inquiry of Officer Barton, who testified that after the gun was found he and his partner searched the rest of the car. They opened the trunk and observed the outboard motor, together with "several articles of clothing and different miscellaneous articles." The motor was very large; the officers did not have room in their vehicle in which to place it and they left it in the Evans car so that it could be hauled to the police station. The car was impounded. At the station, approximately 15 to 20 minutes after the arrest, Officer Barton removed the outboard motor from the car. As the motor was being lifted out of the vehicle, Officer Barton observed a ".22 automatic, blue steel, 7 inch" gun underneath the motor. The defendants' objection to the evidence as to the motor was overruled.
In the course of the booking process Officer Barton removed a Gruen watch from the defendant Roquemore's wrist. Officer Cron removed another watch from the wrist of the defendant Evans at the jail while he was being booked.
In the course of cross-examination, Officer Barton testified: "I arrested them on the switched plates. Due to the typewriter, the sewing machine, and the miscellaneous articles in the back seat, and due to the defendant Evans' statement, 'It is not what you think, it belongs to my aunt', on this assumption I placed them under arrest. ... Well, the initial stop was for possibly a stolen vehicle and/or possibly some other crime due to all the stuff in the vehicle. ... Q. I mean, you already had them under arrest at the time you began thinking of burglary and robbery? A. Yes, ma'am. Q. So, originally, you arrested them strictly on the switched plates? A. Switched plates, yes ma'am." At that time he had no report that any of the articles in the car were stolen. The defendant Evans stated that he did not have the money to register his car, so a friend gave him the license plate which was on the rear of the car.
When the People offered in evidence the guns removed from the car, two photographs of the outboard motor, and the watches taken from the persons of the defendants, defense counsel expressed an objection which was in part as follows: "I would object to all the Exhibits, your Honor, that have been offered here, on the theory that they were the product of an illegal arrest, and a search that was made without probable cause." The objection was overruled.
With respect to the articles which were in the defendant *296 Roquemore's apartment, the People called McArthur Campbell as a witness. He testified that he knew both defendants. In late September or early October of 1964, he received a letter bearing the defendant Roquemore's signature and he subsequently talked to him at the county jail. He told Roquemore that he had gone to his apartment, as he had been requested to do in the letter, but that the woman in charge there said that he could not take anything away until she consulted the owner of the premises. Thereafter he talked to her again and she said that he could enter the apartment if he could obtain the key. Roquemore told him to take the letter and show it to the arresting officer and see if that officer would give him the key so that Mr. Campbell could get the "things" in the Roquemore apartment.
Mr. Campbell further testified that thereafter he went to see Sergeant Ruddell and showed him the letter. Mr. Campbell, followed by Sergeant Ruddell and another officer, drove to the apartment. The officers then gave him the key. He opened the door and returned the key to the officers who then left. Thereupon Mr. Campbell entered the apartment and removed some articles, which he took to the Newton Street Police Station. He made two trips, taking everything he could, and turned the articles over to Sergeant Ruddell and his partner.
On cross-examination Mr. Campbell testified that the defendant Roquemore told him to take the articles to his (Mr. Campbell's) place. When he went to the Newton Street Police Station the officers said that they wanted to look at all of the things. He told them he did not want to have the "stuff" at his house. The officers asked him to bring the articles to the police station, and he did so at their request. On redirect examination he testified that he was not ordered to bring the property to the police station but that he did so freely and voluntarily.
Officer Ruddell testified that he was the investigating officer in the case. Mr. Campbell brought to him a shaving kit, a wrench and a watch.  [fn. 1] When the People offered those articles *297 in evidence, defense counsel objected. On behalf of the defendant Roquemore the objection was placed on the ground that Mr. Campbell was acting as an agent of the police when he removed the articles from the Roquemore apartment and took them to the police station. The objection on behalf of the defendant Evans was placed on the ground that he gave no permission to Mr. Campbell to enter the apartment. The objections were overruled.
The defendant Roquemore testified on his own behalf. Part of his testimony was: "Well, up until the officer went under the seat, we were neither--it wasn't indicated to us verbally, nor physically, that we were under arrest at no time until the officer went under the seat and under the floor mat and removed the revolver." With respect to Mr. Campbell, he testified that he did not give him authority to do anything with the property except to take it into his own control. His testimony as to the offenses charged was exculpatory in nature.
The defendant Evans testified on his own behalf. He said that he showed one of the officers "the registration to the car" and also the "pink" to the car. The other officer searched the vehicle and discovered a gun under the front seat. Then the defendants were handcuffed. The trunk of the car was opened and a "boat motor" was found to be in there. The officer asked him where he was going and he replied that he was taking the "stuff" to his sister's house. He did not say that it was not what it looked like and that the articles belonged to his aunt. He explained to the officers why the license plates were different. His testimony as to the offenses charged was exculpatory in nature.
[1a] The first question to be resolved is whether there was probable cause for the arrest of the defendants. [2] The governing law is stated in People v. Nebbitt, 183 Cal.App.2d 452, at page 456 [7 Cal.Rptr. 8]: "As to what constitutes 'reasonable cause', there is no formula for its determination, each case being dependent on its own facts and circumstances (Go-Bart Importing Co. v. United States, 282 U.S. 344 [51 S.Ct. 153, 75 L.Ed. 374]; People v. Wickliff, 144 Cal.App.2d 207 [300 P.2d 749]). [3] 'Reasonable cause' is defined by our Supreme Court 'to be such a state of facts as would lead a man of ordinary care and prudence to believe and conscientiously entertain an honest and strong suspicion that the person is guilty of a crime (citation). [4] Probable cause has also been defined as having more evidence for than against; supported by evidence which inclines the mind to believe, but leaves some room for doubt (citations)' (People v. Ingle, *298 53 Cal.2d 407 [2 Cal.Rptr. 14, 348 P.2d 577]; People v. Fischer, 49 Cal.2d 442 [317 P.2d 967]; People v. Kilvington, 104 Cal. 86 [37 P. 799, 43 Am.St.Rep. 73]). [5] As to how reasonable cause shall be determined in a given case, [the law is that] the court shall consider the facts and circumstances presented or apparent to the officer at the time he was required to act [citations]."
[6] In the light of the facts which have been related, it is clear that the officers had the duty to stop the Evans vehicle when they observed it being operated on a public street with a front license plate bearing a number different from that which was on the rear license plate since a violation of the Vehicle Code was evident. (See People v. Odegard, 203 Cal.App.2d 427, 431 [21 Cal.Rptr. 515]; People v. Nebbitt, supra, 183 Cal.App.2d 452, 457-458.) Moreover, as aptly stated in People v. Galceran, 178 Cal.App.2d 312, at page 316 [2 Cal.Rptr. 901]: "It is a matter of common knowledge that automobile thieves often switch license plates from one car to another in order to conceal the identity of the stolen vehicle and that the registration slips on stolen vehicles are often altered or forged."
[1b] Officer Barton testified that he initially arrested the defendants because of the "switched plates." But other facts were brought to his attention. He observed a typewriter, a sewing machine box, and miscellaneous articles in the back seat of the automobile. Before any question was asked or accusation made, the defendant Evans volunteered an exculpatory statement, "It is not what you think, it belongs to my aunt." Under the circumstances the presence of the articles of personal property in the car, viewed in the light of Evans' statement, constituted such a state of facts as would lead a man of ordinary care and prudence to believe and conscientiously entertain an honest and strong suspicion that the defendants had obtained the articles by theft. The existence of such reasonable cause justified Officers Barton and Cron in continuing to hold the defendants under arrest, even if the defendant Evans showed the officers proof that the automobile belonged to him.
[7] The search of the vehicle, including the trunk portion thereof, without a warrant was lawful as a search incidental to arrest. (See People v. Burke, 61 Cal.2d 575, 579-580 [39 Cal.Rptr. 531, 394 P.2d 67]; People v. Nebbitt, supra, 183 Cal.App.2d 452, 461.) Unlike the situation in the Burke case, the search of the trunk of the Evans car was made at the place of the arrest and contemporaneously therewith. That search *299 disclosed the outboard motor. The fact that, because of its size, it was conveyed to the police station in the Evans vehicle did not detract from the legality of the search and ensuing seizure made at the scene of the arrest. [8] Consequently, since no right of either defendant was violated by reason of the removal of the outboard motor from the car at the police station, Officer Barton was not required to overlook the gun which became visible when the motor was lifted from the trunk. Under such circumstances the possession of the gun was legally obtained by the police and it was properly received in evidence. (See People v. Galceran, supra, 178 Cal.App.2d 312, 317.)
[9] The problem remaining for consideration is whether the articles of property delivered by Mr. Campbell to the police were obtained by means of conduct which constituted an illegal search and seizure. A problem of a kindred nature was presented to the Municipal Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia in Moody v. United States, 163 A.2d 337. In that case the victim of a theft went with a police officer to the defendant's apartment. The door was open. The victim saw his property inside the apartment and he entered and retrieved it. He thereupon handed the articles to the officer who had remained in the hallway of the building. There was no evidence that the officer did anything to induce the victim's actions or that he made any effort to deter him. In holding that the evidence was inadmissible, the court stated in part (163 A.2d, at p. 340): "Under the aforementioned standard, we believe that there was a participation by the arresting officer and that the complaining witness acted as an arm of the police in reducing the articles to possession. The construction to be attached to the Fourth Amendment does not permit of evasion by circuitous means. The protection thus afforded may be violated just as effectively through the intervening agency of one not a policeman. While no objection can be raised to the propriety of the arresting officer's conduct in merely viewing the articles from the adjacent hallway, we cannot characterize him as a willing but innocent beneficiary in standing silently by while the appropriation was taking place. The officer certainly recognized the evidentiary value of the goods themselves. He could not therefore escape the necessity of obtaining a search warrant when he had the reasonable alternative of posting a guard at the door until the warrant could be procured."
"Admittedly, the complaining witness only recaptured goods to which he, as owner, was legally entitled; nevertheless, such fact is not controlling in considering the legality of the *300 means by which the stolen articles came into the possession of the police under the circumstances of this case. The problem rather is whether the physical goods could be used as evidence to convict the accused of the crime."
In State v. Scrotsky, 39 N.J. 410 [189 A.2d 23], the question involved was the legality of the search of the defendant's premises and the seizure therein of the incriminating articles. The complaining witness, Mrs. Seymoure, owned an apartment building. She rented an apartment to the defendant, reserving no right of entry as part of the letting. Mrs. Seymoure's apartment was entered and some personal effects were taken. Shortly thereafter she thought that she saw the defendant going over the back fence with a duffle bag. Later that evening Mrs. Seymoure and two police officers went to his apartment and the defendant's wife admitted them. Mrs. Seymoure pointed out certain articles which she said were stolen from her. The next day Mrs. Seymoure and the same officers returned to the defendant's apartment. No one was home but the door was unlocked. They entered and Mrs. Seymoure identified her property for the officers. They told her that a detective would be sent to bring the articles to headquarters. A day later Mrs. Seymoure, accompanied by a police detective, reentered the defendant's apartment. In the detective's presence she reclaimed her allegedly stolen property. The detective told her to put the property in a suitcase and bring it to headquarters. Thereafter they went to police headquarters where, after the articles were photographed, Mrs. Seymoure was permitted to take them home. Later the defendant was arrested on a public street.
In holding that there had been an illegal search and seizure which precluded the use of the evidence, the Supreme Court of New Jersey stated (189 A.2d, at p. 25): "But Mrs. Seymoure had no right of entry. ... Under the circumstances present at the time, her claim to admission was no greater than that of a stranger. She could not give any higher status to herself or to the officers as against the tenant. Obviously, she went into the apartment with the officers and seized the property under color of their authority and as a participant in a police action. ... It is idle to say that the officers did not conduct the search or seize the articles later used to convict Scrotsky; that they simply accompanied Mrs. Seymoure while she entered his apartment, searched for and reclaimed her property. For purposes of applying the test of the Fourth Amendment, she must be considered their instrument. The suggestion is that if she had gone there on her own, entered *301 and retrieved the allegedly stolen property, and turned it over to the authorities, it would have been admissible in evidence in the subsequent prosecution because there was no official participation in the illegal search and seizure. And, the argument proceeds, that since the officer, although entering with her, stood by while she located the property, and then told her to put it in a suitcase and take it along to headquarters, he was a spectator and not an efficient actor in the proceeding. The contention is unrealistic. Despite the existence of ample time to obtain a search warrant, the detective and Mrs. Seymoure went to the apartment without a warrant ... for a dual purpose, she to recover her property, he to investigate and obtain evidence of Scrotsky's crime. The search and seizure by one served the purpose of both, and must be deemed to have been participated in by both."
The Supreme Court of New Jersey further stated (189 A.2d, at p. 26): "In the present situation, the search and seizure resulted from unlawful concert of action on the part of Mrs. Seymoure and the police officers. Lustig v. United States (1949) 338 U.S. 74, 79 [69 S.Ct. 1372, 93 L.Ed. 1819, 1823]. Mrs. Seymoure simply acted as an arm of the police in reducing the articles to possession. Moody v. United States (Mun.Ct. App. D.C. 1960), 163 A.2d 337. Thus, Mapp v. Ohio [367 U.S. 643 (81 S.Ct. 1684, 6 L.Ed.2d 1081)] stands squarely in the path of their use against Scrotsky, and a conviction based upon their admission in evidence cannot stand."
In Green v. Yeager (D.C.N.J.) 223 F.Supp. 544 (affd. 332 F.2d 794), the factual situation was similar to that involved in State v. Scrotsky, supra, 39 N.J. 410 [189 A.2d 23], and the court followed the reasoning of the Scrotsky case.
In the recent case of People v. Fierro, 236 Cal.App.2d 344 [46 Cal.Rptr. 132], a motel manager entered the room of the defendant during his absence and observed articles which he thought gave support to his suspicion that the defendant was a narcotic user. He phoned the sheriff's office and reported what he had seen. A detective in that office told him to return to the room, obtain some samples of the pills and turn them over to the detective. The motel manager removed articles from the room and delivered them to the detective when he later came to the motel. The defendant was then arrested. In reversing the judgment the court stated in part (236 Cal.App.2d, at p. 347): "In this case official involvement in the lawless quest for evidence was so deep as to evoke the exclusionary rule. Having concluded his first foray into the *302 hotel room, the hotel manager conducted his second expedition as the emissary of the sheriff's office. Whatever was produced or found by that expedition was produced or found by the sheriff's emissary. The officer had sent him into the room for the purpose of collecting evidence for prosecution. All was grist which came to his mill. The agency did not expire nor the emissary revert to private status at the precise second he put the pills in his pocket. The citizen was the officer's agent throughout the span of his foray. The search and sequestration of evidence were just as 'official' as though the officer had acted in person." The court further said: "In brief, the question is one of the extent of government involvement in an invasion conducted by the private citizen."
When the facts of the present case are compared with those of the Moody, Scrotsky, Green and Fierro cases, differences are found to exist. The significance of such differences must be determined.
The police officers accompanied Mr. Campbell to the location of the Roquemore apartment and there handed the key to him. Mr. Campbell opened the door and returned the key to the officers who thereupon departed before Mr. Campbell entered the apartment. In obtaining the key and entering the apartment and removing the personal property, Mr. Campbell was doing what the defendant Roquemore had requested. To that extent the factual situation is different from that in each of the cases noted, inasmuch as possession of the articles of property was obtained with the consent of the defendant by the person who thereafter delivered those articles to the police.
The core of the problem presented is whether Mr. Campbell did in fact act as an arm of the police in the course of the events which culminated in the delivery of physical possession of the articles to the police. Mr. Campbell's testimony was that, while the officers asked him to bring the articles to the police station, he was not ordered to do so and that he acted freely and voluntarily. But such a request had more than ordinary significance because of its official character. The fact is that Mr. Campbell did what the officers asked him to do and thus complied with their wishes. Such conduct was obviously not consonant with the purpose for which the defendant Roquemore had given him authority to enter the apartment and remove articles therefrom. Accordingly, a conclusion that Mr. Campbell did not act as an arm of the police is unrealistic. Consequently, the articles which came from the Roquemore apartment were erroneously received in evidence. *303
Whether the error was prejudicial in nature is a question which remains for resolution. As has been noted in the footnote of this opinion, the defendants were found not guilty with respect to the burglary of the Martin residence as charged in Count V.
The evidence as to Count VI included testimony by Mrs. Herrera, who lived near the Hernandez residence, that on the afternoon of September 1, 1964, she observed the defendant Evans walk down the front walk on the Hernandez premises and go to the sidewalk. He had nothing in his hands. The defendant Roquemore was in an automobile in front of the Hernandez home. There was a white bundle in the front seat of the car. Mrs. Herrera had never seen the two men before this incident. After the two men drove away, Mrs. Herrera went over to the Hernandez house; the back door was open and the padlock was broken. It is obvious that such circumstantial evidence against the defendants was substantially strengthened by the evidence that a wrench bearing Mr. Hernandez' initials, and which was taken from his home in the burglary, was part of the property obtained by Mr. Campbell from the Roquemore apartment and delivered by him to the police. After a review of the entire cause, this court has formed the opinion that it is reasonably probable that a result more favorable to the defendants would have been reached as to Count VI if such illegally obtained evidence had not been introduced at the trial. Consequently, there has been a miscarriage of justice as to that count. (People v. Watson, 46 Cal.2d 818, 834-837 [299 P.2d 243].)
[10] We find no reasonable basis, however, for a conclusion that there was a miscarriage of justice with respect to Count VII which was based upon the burglary of the Henry home. While Mrs. Henry identified a watch found by Mr. Campbell in the Roquemore apartment and given by him to the police as being one of the items taken in the burglary, she also testified that both the watch removed from the defendant Evans' wrist and that removed from the defendant Roquemore's wrist in the course of the booking process at the jail were articles taken from her home in the burglary. Consequently, it does not appear to be reasonably probable that a result more favorable to the defendants would have been reached as to Count VII in the absence of the illegally obtained evidence.
The evidence made available by Mr. Campbell's actions had no bearing on the violations of the Dangerous Weapons' *304 Control Law (Pen. Code,  12090) alleged in Counts II and IV. The grand theft charge embodied in Count I was based on the alleged theft of the outboard motor from Joseph Jones. Mr. Jones testified that on the morning of September 18, 1964, he discovered that the motor had been taken from the yard where he kept it. The defendant Evans had been employed by him about two years prior to that time and had been on the premises with Mr. Jones. Under the applicable test, there is no reasonable basis for a conclusion that the introduction of the evidence improperly obtained by means of Mr. Campbell's actions caused any prejudice to the defendants in the determination of the issues relating to Count I.
The appeal of each defendant from the order denying his motion for a new trial is dismissed. The judgment with respect to the defendant Evans is affirmed as to Counts I, II and VII and is reversed as to Count VI. The judgment with respect to the defendant Roquemore is affirmed as to Counts I, IV and VII and is reversed as to Count VI.
Shinn, P. J., and Kaus, J., concurred.
Mr. Hernandez, who testified as to the burglary upon which Count VI was based, identified the wrench as one which had been taken from his home. His initials, "BH", were on the wrench.
Mrs. Henry, who testified as to the burglary upon which Count VII was based, identified the watch as one which had been taken from her home.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. Mrs. Martin, who testified as to the burglary upon which Count V was based, identified the shaving kit as being part of the property taken from the Martin home. The defendants were found not guilty as to this count.

=== CASE 2213561 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:33.255899+00 ===

167 Ill. App.3d 324 (1988)
521 N.E.2d 185
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
RONALD EDWARDS, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 2-86-0341.
Illinois Appellate Court  Second District.
Opinion filed March 11, 1988.
*325 G. Joseph Weller, Charles M. Schiedel and James E. Chadd, all of State Appellate Defender's Office, of Springfield, for appellant.
Fred L. Foreman, State's Attorney, of Waukegan (William L. Browers and Lori J. Miller, both of State's Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor's Office, of counsel), for the People.
Affirmed in part, and vacated in part and remanded.
JUSTICE HOPF delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant, Ronald Edwards, was charged by information with murder, voluntary manslaughter, attempted murder, and armed violence. *326 A jury found defendant not guilty of murder but guilty of voluntary manslaughter, attempted murder, and armed violence. The trial court entered a judgment of conviction on all three verdicts but imposed concurrent eight-year terms on only two of the convictions, voluntary manslaughter and armed violence. Defendant appeals from these convictions.
In this court, defendant contends that: (1) the trial court improperly excused a juror for cause; (2) the trial court abused its discretion in denying defendant's motions for continuance; (3) section 115-10.1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 115-10.1), which allows the use of prior inconsistent statements as substantive evidence, violates the separation of powers doctrine and is, therefore, unconstitutional; and (4) the trial court erred in entering a judgment of conviction on both the armed violence and the attempted murder guilty verdicts.
On October 28, 1985, defendant was charged by information with the offenses of murder, voluntary manslaughter, attempted murder, and armed violence. The case was set for trial on December 16, 1985, but on December 9 defendant moved to continue the case. The case was continued until January 6, 1986. On December 11, 1985, the State moved to continue the case until February 10, 1986. Defendant objected, commenting that a continuance would have the effect of setting the case over for more than 1 1/2 months. The court granted the continuance.
On January 29, 1986, defendant filed a motion for continuance alleging, as a reason for the motion, the fact that his counsel would be out of town on February 10, 1986. At the hearing on the motion, it was disclosed that defense counsel had planned a vacation during the week of February 10. Counsel for the defendant also indicated that the defense was not prepared for trial. The court denied defendant's motion after expressing its concern over the likelihood of obtaining the presence of certain witnesses if the case were continued from February 10. The court pointed out that in order to guarantee the presence of these witnesses on February 10, the date set for trial, the court had already had to have the witnesses picked up on body attachments and then released on recognizance bonds with orders to appear to testify on February 10.
Additionally, the court expressed its displeasure over the fact that defense counsel had apparently planned his vacation in November or December but had failed to advise the court of these plans and had allowed the case to progress without any indication that the defense did not intend to go to trial on February 10.
*327 On February 5, 1986, defense counsel moved again for a continuance. The court denied the motion. Defendant then filed a motion for substitution of counsel which the court allowed, based on the new counsel's promise to be ready for trial on February 10.
On February 10, the newly substituted counsel moved to continue the case, arguing that although he had been diligently investigating the case, he needed more time to complete the investigation since little investigation of the case had been accomplished by the previous attorneys. The court continued the case to February 18.
On February 18 jury selection began. During the voir dire a juror stated that he would not be able to decide the case fairly unless he knew what the possible punishments would be. The State asked that the juror be excused for cause. The court inquired further of the juror, explaining that the function of the jury was to determine the guilt or innocence of the defendant regardless of the penalties that could be imposed. The juror responded that he would be unable to be impartial unless he knew whether or not the death penalty was a possible punishment. The court excused the juror, stating the juror's excusal was based on the fact that the juror was unwilling to follow the law under certain circumstances.
On February 19, 1986, the trial commenced. Very briefly summarized, the evidence presented at trial showed that on October 13, 1985, at around 5 p.m., Carlton Williams, Jeff Williams, Clyde Lewis, Bret Steve Price, and Steve Taylor went to a house located at 603 South McAlister in Waukegan. A number of people were already at that house, including the defendant, Gary Beckwith, Adrian Sherrod, and Reginald Handy. When Carlton Williams' group arrived at the house, Williams challenged Gary Beckwith to a fight.
Defendant decided to get involved in the fight. The testimony varied as to whether Carlton Williams first fought Beckwith and then fought the defendant or whether Williams fought the defendant before fighting Beckwith. All the testimony, however, indicated that Carlton fought both defendant and Beckwith, knocking both of them repeatedly to the ground. Defendant's face was bleeding, and he was crying as his girlfriend, Bobbie Vaughn, pulled Carlton Williams off of defendant.
After fighting defendant and Beckwith, Carlton Williams began fighting Adrian Sherrod. It was during this fight while Carlton Williams was on top of Sherrod and hitting him that Williams was shot.
Some witnesses testified that they heard someone yell, "Pop him, Clyde," while Carlton Williams and Sherrod were fighting. One of these witnesses, Reginald Handy, stated that he saw Clyde Lewis pull *328 out a gun, aim it at Sherrod and fire two shots. Other witnesses testified that they saw defendant shoot Carlton Williams while Williams was fighting with Sherrod. Some of these witnesses also saw defendant fire shots at Bret Steve Price and Jeff Williams as they ran away from the scene. Jeff Williams was shot in the back as he fled.
One witness, Johnnie Gooden, testified that after the shootings she saw defendant enter the house with a gun in his hand, saying, "Here, take this," and that Gary Beckwith took the gun from defendant. Another witness, Cheri Cox, related that after defendant came into the house, she heard him discussing with several men whether he should turn himself in. The witness also heard defendant say, "That's good for him, that's why I popped him."
The State was permitted, over defense objection, to use prior inconsistent statements of two of its own witnesses, Aaron Whitfield and Bobbie Vaughn, as substantive evidence. Contrary to their testimony at trial, both witnesses stated in those prior statements that defendant shot Carlton Williams.
The jury found defendant not guilty of the murder of Carlton Williams but guilty of voluntary manslaughter. Additionally, the jury returned guilty verdicts against defendant for the attempted murder and armed violence as to Jeff Williams. The trial court entered judgment on the three convictions. Following a sentencing hearing on April 16, 1986, defendant was sentenced to concurrent eight-year terms for the voluntary manslaughter conviction and the armed violence conviction. No sentence was imposed for the attempted murder conviction.
 1 Defendant first contends that the trial court improperly excused a juror for cause when that juror indicated he could not decide the instant case fairly without knowing what possible punishments were applicable. Specifically, the juror informed the court that he could not be impartial if the death penalty was a possibility. Defendant maintains that the court's refusal to inform this juror of the death penalty's inapplicability to the present case resulted in the improper excusal of a fair and impartial juror.
The purpose of voir dire is to assure the selection of an impartial jury. (People v. Jackson (1977), 69 Ill.2d 252, 260; People v. Chamness (1984), 129 Ill. App.3d 871, 873.) The trial court is granted broad discretion in conducting and managing voir dire (107 Ill.2d R. 234), and the determination whether to ask certain questions of prospective jurors is within this discretion. (People v. Sequoia Books, Inc. (1987), 160 Ill. App.3d 750, 757.) It is also within the sound discretion of the trial court to decide whether to grant a challenge for cause (People v. Pecina (1985), 132 Ill. App.3d 948, 954), and a ruling excusing a juror *329 for cause should not be set aside unless it is against the manifest weight of evidence. (People v. Singletary (1979), 73 Ill. App.3d 239, 246.) Under the facts presented in the instant case, we do not believe it was an abuse of discretion to excuse the juror in question from serving on the panel.
 2 During voir dire, the prosecutor asked Kenneth Jacobs, the juror in issue, what his verdict would be if the charge of murder was proved beyond a reasonable doubt. Jacobs responded: "It would be based upon what the punishment is." The prosecutor, through questioning, attempted to explain to Jacobs that, in any particular case, the judge, and not the jury, determines the punishment. The prosecutor then inquired of Jacobs whether he could decide the case fairly without knowing what the possible punishments would be. Jacobs responded, "No."
The prosecutor in a sidebar conference expressed his concern to the court that Jacobs be excused for cause due to his admission that he could not be fair. Alternatively, the prosecutor asked the court to inquire further and determine whether Jacobs could be a fair juror. The court then proceeded to question the juror, and the following conversation occurred:
"THE COURT: The jury will not be apprised as to what the possible punishments if any are in this case. That is something that is reserved strictly for the determination of the court. The jury's function in this case will be to determine what the facts are. So now, with that information, will you be able to act as a fair and impartial juror, knowing that you will not be told what the possible punishments are, nor are you allowed to know what they are?
THE JUROR: I think I would like to ask if there is a death penalty in Illinois.
THE COURT: Well 
THE JUROR: I don't know. Am I entitled to know that?
THE COURT: The function that you have is to make a determination of guilt or innocence, and that function of guilty or innocence is regardless of what the possible penalties might be; so without any, without, since that is something that is beyond the scope of the province of the jury, can you act as a fair and impartial juror without knowing what the potential penalties are?
THE JUROR: I have to presume that there is a death penalty in Illinois, because I don't know contrary to that, and if I, if there is the possibility of that, then I cannot be impartial.
*330 THE COURT: You could not be impartial?
THE JUROR: If you told me there is no death penalty it would be different. I don't know what the law is.
THE COURT: I will excuse you for cause. You may step down."
Defense counsel expressed his objection to the decision by the court, arguing that the court was excluding this venireman from the jury because of his disbelief in the death penalty in a nondeath penalty case. The court responded:
"THE COURT: He was excused because he told me he will not follow the Court's instructions. I told him it is his obligation without regard to the penalty to make a determination, he told me he will not do that under certain circumstances. He does not have the option of dictating under what circumstances he will follow the law, therefore he was excused."
We find the court's explanation for the excusal of the juror to be proper, as the juror's comments clearly indicated that under certain circumstances, he was unwilling to accept and follow the law of the case. Furthermore, we recognize the superior position of a trial judge to ascertain the meaning which a venireman intends to convey by his responses, and in this case, Jacobs had already raised the question of his ability to follow the court's instructions during an earlier conversation regarding the juror's feelings regarding firearms.
"THE COURT: Do you own any firearms?
THE JUROR: No.
THE COURT: Do you have any strong feelings one way or the other about firearms?
THE JUROR: Yes.
THE COURT: Are you opposed to firearms, or 
THE JUROR: Yes.
THE COURT:  in favor of firearms? If the evidence was to show that firearms were involved in this case, would that fact cause you to be biased against either side?
THE JUROR: Probably would.
THE COURT: Do you think you would be able to put that out of your mind if I were to instruct you, and I do, that you should not let your personal feelings regarding firearms influence your decision in this case, can you do that?
THE JUROR: It would not be easy. I am a member of the Humanistic Church Temple, also.
THE COURT: I don't know what that is.
THE JUROR: I don't believe in those things.
*331 THE COURT: Well, on the other hand, I will be instructing you as to the law, and that is the law you must apply to the facts in this case.
THE JUROR: Okay.
THE COURT: Even if you think that the law should be different, you are still under an obligation and will be given an oath which says you will follow that law. Now, can you do that?
THE JUROR: Yes.
THE COURT: On the other than [hand], if you can't, you should tell me. I need to know that.
THE JUROR: I feel it would be difficult, but not impossible.
THE COURT: Well, will you do it?
THE JUROR: I guess I will."
As illustrated by this dialogue, Jacobs, contrary to defendant's contention in this court, expressed other concerns besides the death penalty and implied through his answers that he would have difficulty following the law. Thus, on the record before us we cannot conclude that the trial judge's excusal of Jacobs based on the juror's unwillingness to follow the court's instructions regarding the law was an abuse of the court's discretion.
Reversible error will only be found where the trial judge's conduct during voir dire amounted to an abuse of discretion and thwarted the selection of an impartial jury. (People v. Allen (1986), 148 Ill. App.3d 200, 206.) That has not been shown here, as defendant has failed to establish that the exclusion of this particular juror denied him a fair and impartial jury. Moreover, the right to a fair and impartial jury does not translate to a right to have a particular individual included on the panel. (People v. Campbell (1984), 126 Ill. App.3d 1028, 1040.) Furthermore, based on Jacobs' expressed bias against firearms, we question, as does the State, whether defendant would have ultimately favored this juror.
Finally, we note from the record that the State did not utilize its peremptory challenges, so if the challenge for cause had not been permitted, the State could have used its remaining challenge to eliminate the juror in question from the panel. People v. Nicholson (1978), 61 Ill. App.3d 621, 627.
 3 In his second contention defendant argues that the trial court abused its discretion in denying defendant's motions for a short and reasonable continuance because that denial had the effect of denying defendant his sixth and fourteenth amendment right to counsel.
The grant or denial of a motion for continuance is within the sound discretion of the trial judge (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 114-4(e); *332 People v. Burba (1985), 134 Ill. App.3d 228, 234) and is a matter to be determined under the particular facts and circumstances of the case (134 Ill. App.3d at 234; People v. Tyler (1984), 128 Ill. App.3d 1080, 1097). A continuance for the purpose of allowing defense counsel further time to prepare is not erroneously denied unless the denial serves to prejudice defendant in some way. (People v. Sayles (1985), 130 Ill. App.3d 882, 889.) To warrant reversal of the trial court's ruling regarding the denial of a continuance, the defendant must demonstrate that the denial embarrassed him in the preparation of his defense so as to prejudice his rights. People v. Davenport (1985), 133 Ill. App.3d 553, 556.
 4 In the instant case defendant was formally charged on October 28, 1985. Trial was set for December 16, 1985. On December 9, 1985, defendant continued the case until January 6, 1986. At that time defense counsel assured the court that the defense would be ready to go to trial on that date. On December 11, 1985, the State moved to continue the case until February 10, 1986. Defense counsel objected to the State's motion, pointing out that the State's continuance would result in more than 1 1/2 months' delay, implying thereby that this would create too great a delay in bringing defendant to trial. Yet, despite this implication and defendant's earlier assurance to the court that the defense would be ready to proceed on January 6, defendant moved for a continuance on January 29, 1986.
In his written motion for continuance, defendant alleged that his attorney would be out of town on February 10, 1986, the date of trial. At the hearing on defendant's motion, it was disclosed that defendant's attorney was taking a vacation with his family during the week of trial and that the attorney had scheduled the vacation trip in November or December. Additionally, it was brought out at the hearing that counsel for defendant was not prepared for trial.
The court denied defendant's motion for continuance based on its concern that if the trial were postponed a third time, many of the witnesses would fail to appear. The court pointed out that thus far certain potential witnesses were "at best recalcitrant" and that at least six of them had already been picked up on body attachments and released on recognizance bonds with orders to appear to testify on February 10. Additionally, the court based its denial of defendant's motion on the defense counsel's failure to apprise the court at the earliest opportunity of his unavailability for trial on February 10 due to vacation plans. Again, the court stressed the loss of witnesses and the fact that justice would not be accomplished if the trial did not proceed on the date those witnesses were ordered to appear.
*333 We agree with the State that both the facts related above and the statutory guidelines illustrate that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying defendant's motion for continuance. Although a court may grant a continuance if justice so requires (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 114-4(d)), justice required here that the cause proceed on February 10, 1986, the date previously scheduled for trial, because of the witness problem in the instant case. Moreover, all requests for continuance are to be considered in light of the diligence or lack thereof on the part of the movant (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 114-4(d); People v. Williams (1985), 131 Ill. App.3d 597, 606-07), and, in our view, the record evidences the defendant's lack of diligence.
On February 5, 1986, defendant renewed his motion for continuance which the trial court also denied. Defendant then moved for a substitution of attorneys. The court allowed this motion based on the substitute counsel's promise to go to trial on February 10. On February 10, however, the substituted counsel appeared before the court and sought a continuance, explaining to the court that although he had diligently investigated the case not much had been accomplished in the investigation by the previous attorneys. Additionally, counsel had recently received information concerning new and contradictory statements by certain State witnesses, which counsel wanted to explore. Also, counsel had been ill for two days after his substitution.
The court granted the substitute counsel's motion for continuance based on the facts that defendant was entitled to an adequately prepared trial and that prior to counsel's substitution, no substantial preparation had been done on defendant's case. The court continued the case until February 18, and on that date the case proceeded to trial.
From our review of the proceedings, we conclude that defendant did not suffer any prejudice as a result of the denial of his January 29 and February 5 motions to continue, which led to the substitution of counsel. At trial the substituted defense counsel conducted thorough and vigorous examination of the State's witnesses and raised numerous objections to the State's evidence, moved for a directed verdict at the close of the State's evidence and argued that motion before the trial judge, presented a comprehensive and powerful closing argument at the conclusion of the trial, and filed a post-trial motion which he argued in favor of during the post-trial proceedings. Given the substantial job the substituted counsel did for defendant, defendant cannot realistically argue that the trial court's denial of his motions to continue, which ultimately resulted in the substitution of counsel, prejudiced his rights in any way. We, therefore, conclude that the trial court did not *334 abuse its discretion in refusing to grant defendant's continuances.
 5 Defendant argues in his third contention that section 115-10.1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 115-10.1), which permits prior inconsistent statements to be used as substantive evidence, violates the separation of powers doctrine and is, therefore, unconstitutional. Specifically, defendant contends that in enacting section 115-10.1 the legislature has unconstitutionally infringed on the judiciary's inherent power to determine the manner in which evidence is to be considered and the trial to be conducted.
It is the undisputed duty of the Illinois Supreme Court to protect its judicial powers from encroachment by legislative enactments in order to preserve an independent judiciary. (People v. Joseph (1986), 113 Ill.2d 36, 46.) If a power is judicial in nature, the legislature is expressly prohibited from exercising it. (113 Ill.2d at 41; People v. Jackson (1977), 69 Ill.2d 252, 256.) The legislature, however, possesses the power to enact laws governing judicial practice, provided it does not unduly infringe upon the inherent powers of the judiciary. (People v. Mason (1986), 145 Ill. App.3d 218, 222.) "[W]hen this court has not acted in an area into which it is arguable that the `judicial power' extends, section 16 of article VI (Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, § 16) [granting the supreme court supervisory and administrative powers over the courts] does not purport to exclude the legislature from acting in any way which may have a peripheral effect on judicial administration." (Emphasis in original.) Joseph, 113 Ill.2d at 43.
For example, and, particularly applicable to the instant case, the supreme court has deemed the legislative enactment of rules of evidence to be peripheral to judicial administration. (People v. Rolfingsmeyer (1984), 101 Ill.2d 137.) In Rolfingsmeyer, the defendant argued that a statute rendering evidence of a refusal to submit to a breath test admissible in a trial on a charge of driving under the influence was unconstitutional because it invaded the judiciary's authority and, therefore, violated the separation of powers doctrine. The supreme court rejected the argument and held the statute to be constitutional because the legislature "`has the power to prescribe new and alter existing rules of evidence or to prescribe methods of proof.'" 101 Ill.2d at 140, quoting People v. Wells (1942), 380 Ill. 347, 354; see also People v. Blythe (1987), 153 Ill. App.3d 292, 294; People v. Buford (1982), 110 Ill. App.3d 46, 53.
Section 115-10.1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 115-10.1) reads as follows:
"Admissibility of Prior Inconsistent Statements. In all criminal *335 cases, evidence of a statement made by a witness is not made inadmissible by the hearsay rule if
(a) the statement is inconsistent with his testimony at the hearing or trial, and
(b) the witness is subject to cross-examination concerning the statement, and
(c) the statement 
(1) was made under oath at a trial hearing, or other proceeding, or
(2) narrates, describes, or explains an event or condition of which the witness had personal knowledge, and
(A) the statement is proved to have been written or signed by the witness, or
(B) the witness acknowledged under oath the making of the statement either in his testimony at the hearing or trial in which the admission into evidence of the prior statement is being sought, or at a trial, hearing, or other proceeding, or
(C) the statement is proved to have been accurately recorded by a tape recorder, videotape recording, or any other similar electronic means of sound recording.
Nothing in this Section shall render a prior inconsistent statement inadmissible for purposes of impeachment because such statement was not recorded or otherwise fails to meet the criteria set forth herein."
 6 Because section 115-10.1 constitutes a rule of evidence governing the substantive use of prior inconsistent statements in criminal cases, an area of law in which the supreme court has not exercised judicial power (People v. Winfield (1987), 160 Ill. App.3d 983, 994), we find no separation of powers violation here.
Defendant also argues, however, that the Illinois Supreme Court has specifically addressed the issue of the use of prior inconsistent statements as substantive evidence and found such uses to be impermissible. To support this position, defendant relies on People v. Collins (1971), 49 Ill.2d 179, and People v. Weaver (1982), 92 Ill.2d 545. In rejecting the use of a prior inconsistent statement as substantive evidence in Weaver, the supreme court stated that it could not accept such statements as substantive evidence "unless and until we decide in this State [that] such prior statements can be used against a defendant as substantive evidence." (Weaver, 92 Ill.2d at 564-65.) We submit that this use has been decided, as illustrated by the enactment of section 115-10.1. In Collins, the court stated that it was "unwilling, at this *336 time and upon the basis of the experience and opinion presently available, to adopt a rule which permits the substantive use of prior out-of-court statements of witnesses." (Emphasis added.) (Collins, 49 Ill.2d at 198.) Additionally, the court stated: "[I]t would be basically unfair to apply such a significant change in doctrine without advance notice to all parties." 49 Ill.2d at 197.
In the instant case, such a problem was not present as the record clearly indicates that all parties were very familiar with section 115-10.1 and the new rule regarding the substantive use of prior inconsistent statements. Moreover, the rule prohibiting the substantive use of prior inconsistent statements is no longer the rule generally in this country as it was in 1971 when the Collins case was decided. Today, the majority of States allow some form of substantive use of prior inconsistent statements. Comment, Prior Inconsistent Statements As Substantive Evidence: Illinois Takes the Sting Out of the Turncoat Witness, 19 J. Marshall L. Rev. 69 (1985).
Moreover, defendant's argument ignores the fact that our supreme court has acknowledged acceptance of the rule set forth in section 115-10.1. In People v. King (1986), 109 Ill.2d 514, 529-30, the supreme court found that a defense witness' prior inconsistent statement before the grand jury was proper impeachment. The court then noted, in obiter dictum, that under section 115-10.1, which was not in effect at the time the crimes occurred in King, a prior inconsistent statement would now be admissible as substantive evidence. Further, the appellate court has very recently addressed the issue of the use of prior inconsistent statements as substantive evidence and found such use to be permissible. See People v. Hastings (1987), 161 Ill. App.3d 714, 720-22; Winfield, 160 Ill. App.3d at 991-95.
In light of the foregoing discussion and the recent decisions in Hastings and Winfield, we conclude that no infringement of judicial powers was effected by the enactment of section 115-10.1 and that, therefore, section 115-10.1 is constitutional. Accordingly, the court's permitting the substantive use of the prior inconsistent statements of two of defendant's friends who had personal knowledge of the events related in their statements, who were shown to have signed those statements, and who were subject to cross-examination at trial was proper and did not deny defendant a fair trial.
 7 Last, defendant contends that the trial court erred in entering judgment on both the armed violence and the attempted murder guilty verdicts since both offenses arose from a single act. Defendant argues that he should have been convicted of only the more serious of the two offenses, attempted murder, and that, therefore, his conviction for *337 armed violence must be vacated.
The State acknowledges that it was improper for defendant to be convicted of both attempted murder and armed violence and that generally in a case such as the instant one, the conviction and sentence should be on the more specific offense. However, the State urges this court to vacate the attempted murder conviction rather than the armed violence conviction. It is the State's argument that vacatur of the armed violence conviction would leave the defendant with no sentence at all for the offenses committed against Jeff Williams since defendant was not sentenced on the attempted murder conviction. In the alternative, the State asks that if this court vacates the armed violence conviction, the court transfer the eight-year sentence imposed for the armed violence conviction to the attempted murder conviction.
When more than one offense arises from the same physical act, convictions for both cannot stand. (People v. Donaldson (1982), 91 Ill.2d 164, 170; People v. Baity (1984), 125 Ill. App.3d 50.) Judgment should be entered and sentence imposed only on the more serious offense. Donaldson, 91 Ill.2d at 170.
Both armed violence and attempted murder constitute serious offenses; both are Class X felonies, carrying a sentence from 6 to 30 years and, thus, the identical eight-year sentence imposed for the armed violence conviction is equally applicable to the attempted murder conviction. Nevertheless, attempted murder is a specific intent crime whereas armed violence is a general intent crime. Since attempted murder constitutes the more specific offense, it is the offense of the two in question upon which the court should have entered judgment and imposed sentence.
Although it may be likely that the trial judge would have imposed an identical eight-year sentence had he sentenced defendant on the attempted murder conviction instead of the armed violence conviction, such a conclusion on our part amounts to second-guessing. Moreover, it is not the function of a reviewing court to serve as a sentencing court (People v. Cox (1980), 82 Ill.2d 268, 280), and, therefore, we decline the State's request to transfer defendant's eight-year sentence for the armed violence conviction to the attempted murder conviction.
Accordingly, we affirm the judgment of the circuit court of Lake County but vacate the armed violence conviction and remand the cause for sentencing on the attempted murder conviction.
Affirmed, vacated, and remanded.
DUNN and UNVERZAGT, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9738150 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:43:31.384202+00 ===

WOLLE, Justice
(concurring specially).
I concur in the majority opinion but write separately on the question whether this consent decree so violated public policy as to be void.
Our focus is on a consent decree that was part of an elaborate settlement agreement negotiated and drafted by attorneys representing the parties, approved by the trial court, and duly executed. See McCarthy v. Iowa Dist. Court, 386 N.W.2d 122, 126 (Iowa App.1986). The plaintiff contends this document, though deliberately agreed to and intended to settle the parties’ rights and obligations, should be declared void and unenforceable because it contained terms inappropriate for a judgment rendered by the court. The majority opinion, like the dissent, recognizes that the consent decree was flawed in more than one respect. In my view, however, the majority has correctly parsed the entire document, refusing to uphold invalid portions of the consent decree but saving those portions that the district court had the power to enforce.
In division I the majority makes clear that the consent decree improperly enmeshed the court in the role of interpreter of four answers yet to be given by the Maharishi. But the involvement of the court did not prejudice the plaintiff whatsoever because the Maharishi’s answers clearly and unequivocally saddled the plaintiff with the restrictions it had agreed upon. As the majority emphasizes, a consent judgment is a settlement agreement, not a pure judicial decree. The majority appropriately gives the district court considerable discretion to approve or disapprove the terms of a settlement, then enforce those terms that are not violative of public policy. Indeed, the attorneys and district court were serving an important public purpose in attempting to resolve a complex lawsuit by settlement rather than prolonging the trial. We should commend judges who attempt to resolve disputes by settlement or other alternative methods that involve innovative techniques. See generally T. Lambros, The Judge’s Role in Fostering Voluntary Settlements, 29 Vil-lanova L.Rev. 1363, 1369-73 (1984).
The plaintiff also contends the consent decree was void because it was not promptly made a matter of public record in the office of the clerk of court. The majority opinion, like the dissent, does not approve the parties’ withholding of the decree from filing in the clerk’s office for nearly four months. Again, however, the plaintiff has not demonstrated that the side agreement to withhold the consent decree from public record caused any prejudice to the plaintiff or any other person. Certainly court records appropriate for filing should be made a matter of public record, but the rule is not without exception. Iowa Code section 675.30 permits enforcement of a written agreement, approved by the court, compelling support of a child even though there is no provision for filing the document or otherwise disclosing it to the public until a dispute arises in court concerning its validity. See In re Devine’s Estate, 255 Iowa 726, 731-32, 123 N.W.2d 898, 901-02 (1963); Hanke v. Burrier, 368 N.W.2d 729, 730-31 (Iowa App.1985); cf. Iowa Code ch. 678 (1985) (entitled “Submitting controver*180sies without action or in action”). In many cases and varied contexts we have long emphasized that courts should favor the settlement of disputes and encourage agreements to avoid or end litigation. See, e.g., Dyer v. National By-Products, Inc., 380 N.W.2d 732, 733 (Iowa 1986) (“[T]he law favors the adjustment and settlement of controversies without resorting to court action.”); Helms v. Helten, 290 N.W.2d 876, 882 (Iowa 1980) (“We have in the past encouraged [familial] settlements, [citing cases] and continue to do so.”); Moore v. Bailey, 163 N.W.2d 435, 437 (Iowa 1968) (“Offers of settlement are to be encouraged as a means of awarding prolonged, extensive and uncertain litigation.”); Horton Township v. Drainage Dist. No. 26, 192 Iowa 61, 66, 182 N.W. 395, 397 (1921) (“[T]he law favors compromises”; supervisors’ agreement with contractor upheld).
I concur in the majority opinion which holds the plaintiff to the agreements it made, but only to the extent public policy was not violated.
SCHULTZ, J., joins this special concurrence.

=== CASE 9738151 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:43:31.387739+00 ===

REYNOLDSON, Chief Justice
(dissenting).
I would sustain the writ on the ground the underlying “consent decree” is void for gross violation of public policy and Iowa law. Therefore, in my view, trial court had no jurisdiction to impose punishment for violation of its terms, nor award attorney fees to enforce it.
However much we may empathize with trial court’s understandable reluctance to referee an exotic and lengthy trial, the court permitted the parties to implicate it in a bizarre and overt scheme to violate our long-standing rules relating to judgments, a result that should not be condoned by enforcing some of the provisions of the instrument while ignoring others.
The “consent decree” was nothing more than a paper signed by the parties to the initial dispute, made a “decree” by the signature of the judge beneath a one-line endorsement. Obviously, the instrument was never intended to be filed and entered of record by the clerk of court as provided by Iowa Rules of Civil Procedure 226 and 227. “An entry in either or both the judgment index or combination docket which refers to a judgment is not sufficient to comply with the requirement that a judgment be entered of record.” Moreno v. Vietor, 261 Iowa 806, 811, 156 N.W.2d 305, 308 (1968).
Mr. Goldstein, one of the attorneys for defendants in the underlying action, brought the “decree” to the clerk on July 22, 1983, and asked that it be stamped “filed” and returned to him without entering it of record.1 The clerk testified without challenge that on the same day the court also told her it was not to be filed of record. Months later Mr. Goldstein brought the paper back and requested that it be filed. No judge ever ordered the document filed or countermanded the court’s July 22, 1983, instruction.
Article X of the “decree” provides further proof of the parties’ intent. In relevant part it states:
X. Non-Disclosure
Any ... consent judgments ... shall not be publicized or used by any party and others for legal, nonlegal, or extralegal purposes anywhere in the world.
I suggest a “decree” that the parties, and apparently the court, contemplated would be hidden from public view in violation of rules that have the force and effect of statutes, Kutrules v. Suchomel, 258 Iowa *1811206, 1210, 141 N.W.2d 593, 596 (1966), and was in fact so hidden until one of the parties found it advantageous to produce it, should be declared void and of no effect as a matter of public policy, see Scieszinski v. City of Wilton, 270 N.W.2d 450, 452-53 (Iowa 1978) (Petition filed with clerk but sealed under ex parte court order intentionally bypassing the requirement the original notice be contemporaneously delivered to clerk with directions for service will not serve to toll the statute of limitations.). Unfortunately the message of the majority opinion is that one of the parties should be rewarded. This result of course invites future litigants to pursue the same course.
HARRIS, McGIVERIN, and LAVORATO, JJ., join this dissent.
. It is more than anomalous that today the court condones the deliberate withholding of a decree from the record, an act for which we have disciplined lawyers. Thus in Committee on Professional Ethics & Conduct v. McGrevey, 395 N.W.2d 894 (Iowa 1986), we wrote:
We agree with the commission’s conclusion that McGrevey violated DR7-102(A)(3). Once signed by the district court, the order "was no longer a private paper and became a court document in the public domain." Committee on Professional Ethics and Conduct v. Hurd, 325 N.W.2d 386, 390 (Iowa 1982). The court entrusted McGrevey to file the order. Id. By his delay in filing it, he "concealed or knowingly failed to disclose that which he was required by law to reveal." Iowa Code Prof. Resp. DR7-102(A)(3).
Id. at 896.

=== CASE 2213822 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:37.086213+00 ===

205 Cal. App. 2d 640 (1962)
PACIFIC INTERMOUNTAIN EXPRESS CO., Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
BARBRO FRIDEN ALEXANDER, Defendant and Respondent.
Civ. No. 20221.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. Two.
July 16, 1962.
Heller, Ehrman, White & McAuliffe, Lawrence C. Baker and Paul T. Wolf for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Suren, Toomajian, Price, Macdonald & Knox, Knox, Goforth & Ricksen, Calvin T. Goforth and Ralph J. Moore, Jr., for Defendant and Respondent.
SHOEMAKER, J.
Plaintiff Pacific Intermountain Express Co. appeals from a summary judgment in favor of defendant and cross-complainant Barbro Alexander.
The record shows that on August 30, 1957, Mar Monte Corporation leased to plaintiff the second and third floors and a portion of the basement of a building located in Oakland, California. The lease provided for a 15-year term with options to renew for an additional 15-year period. Mar Monte was to undertake certain specified alterations in the building and was obligated to complete this remodeling by December 1, 1957, unless acts of God or other enumerated causes resulted in unavoidable delays. If for any reason Mar Monte failed to deliver possession by March 15, 1958, plaintiff was given the right to cancel the lease. The basic monthly rental was to be $7,704.40. Provision was also made that commencing with the year 1959, plaintiff was to pay 72 per cent of any increase *642 in city and county taxes levied upon the land and building over and above those levied for the fiscal year 1958-1959, and was to be paid in monthly installments of 6 per cent.
By March 3, 1958, Mar Monte had completed the contemplated alterations at a total cost of approximately $450,000. Plaintiff entered into possession of the demised premises on March 15, 1958. The assessed value of the building, for purposes of city and county taxes, was increased in the fiscal year 1958-1959, by $55,150 over that for the year 1957-1958. Although the physical condition of the building remained substantially the same as it had been on March 3, 1958, the assessed value of the building for the fiscal year 1959-1960 was increased by an additional $126,450. Meanwhile, on January 23, 1959, Mar Monte sold the land and building and assigned its lease with the plaintiff to Barbro Alexander.
On June 29, 1960, plaintiff filed this action for declaratory relief against Barbro Alexander.  [fn. 1] Plaintiff alleged that an actual controversy had arisen between the parties as to the proper interpretation of that provision in the lease requiring plaintiff to pay a portion of the increased property taxes. Although defendant contended that plaintiff was obligated to pay 72 per cent of the increased taxes, however caused, over those levied in the year 1958-1959, plaintiff was opposed to this interpretation in two respects.
Plaintiff's position, first of all, is that its obligation to pay increased taxes did not extend to any increase directly resulting from the remodeling work done by Mar Monte. Plaintiff points out that the "tax day" for the fiscal year 1958-1959 fell on March 3, 1958. On that date, although Mar Monte had completed its alterations to the building, the tax assessor failed to appraise the bulk of the improvements. As a result of this omission, the increased tax valuation which ought to have accrued in the fiscal year 1958-1959 was, in large part, deferred until the fiscal year 1959-1960. Since the lease specifically provided that the remodeling was to be completed, if possible, by December 1, 1957, plaintiff argues that the parties intended the improvements to be reflected in the 1958-1959 valuation. Plaintiff sought a declaration that its obligation to pay increased taxes did not encompass any increase resulting directly from the remodelling done by Mar Monte.
As a second element of controversy between the parties, *643 plaintiff asserts that a disagreement had arisen as to whether plaintiff's liability for increased taxes extended to an increase resulting from improvements made on portions of the premises not included under its lease. Plaintiff urges that its tax obligation did not include any such increase, and it accordingly prayed for a judicial declaration to that effect.
Defendant's answer consisted of a denial that the lease was susceptible of the interpretation contended for by plaintiff. Defendant also cross- complained for "additional rental" in the amount of $6,375.18, asserting that plaintiff had failed to pay 6 per cent of the increase in taxes above the base year 1958-1959 for the months of May through November 1960.
Defendant and cross-complainant then moved for summary judgment in her favor, contending that the written lease constituted a clear, unambiguous and complete expression of the parties' agreement, and that the court was therefore without power to receive other evidence in derogation of its terms; and further, that even though plaintiff might have been entitled, upon a proper showing, to obtain reformation of the lease, as against the original lessor, Mar Monte, such a remedy was not available against a bona fide purchaser such as defendant, who had purchased the lease in reliance upon its plain meaning.
After a hearing upon the motion, the court found the lease to be an integrated agreement which was both clear and unambiguous. The court further found that plaintiff was not entitled to any of the declarations prayed for in its complaint. Judgment was accordingly entered that plaintiff take nothing by its complaint, and that defendant recover the amount prayed for in her cross-complaint.
Appellant, both on this appeal and throughout the proceedings before the lower court, seeks to interpret a written lease in direct contravention of its express terms, but appellant does not seek reformation. [1] Since appellant did not commence this action until the original lessor, Mar Monte, had sold its interest in the real property and the lease to respondent, appellant was effectively foreclosed from seeking to reform the lease to express the intent of the original parties. Pursuant to Civil Code, section 3399, reformation is available, upon a proper showing, only "so far as it can be done without prejudice to rights acquired by third persons, in good faith and for value." (See West Coast Lumber Co. v. *644 Apfield (1890) 86 Cal. 335, 340 [24 P. 993]; Baines v. Zuieback (1948) 84 Cal. App. 2d 483, 491 [191 P.2d 67].) We must presume that respondent purchased Mar Monte's interest in reliance upon the plain meaning of the written lease. In this circumstance, appellant was not entitled to show that the original parties had actually intended to make a contract far different from that embodied in the writing.
Being thus precluded from reforming the document, appellant sought to establish (1) that the lease was reasonably susceptible of the interpretation that it contended for, or, (2) that certain of its terms were so unclear or ambiguous as to warrant the admission of extrinsic evidence of their meaning. The lower court, as above noted, found against appellant on both of these questions, a result with which we are in accord.
[2] That the lease was intended as a complete integration of the parties' agreement stands out very clearly, for it is a document of some 25 pages in length which thoroughly covers all of the subjects normally contained in such a contract. Article IV of the lease sets forth the rental for which appellant shall be liable. After providing for a basic monthly rental of $7,704.40, the lease goes on to state that appellant shall pay an "additional rental" based upon the amount of city and county taxes "which shall be levied upon the land and building appertaining thereto, in which said demised premises are located, as they will be for the fiscal year 1958- 1959. It is, therefore, agreed that, in the event that the amount of the said City of Oakland and County of Alameda taxes levied on said land and building for any of the years 1959 to the end of the term of this lease shall be greater than the said taxes thereon for the fiscal year 1958-1959, then the monthly instalments of rent due hereunder upon the first days of the twelve (12) consecutive months from and including May of the year next succeeding the year for which the taxes shall have been increased as aforesaid, shall be increased six per cent of the amount of the increase in City of Oakland and County of Alameda taxes as aforesaid over and above the said City of Oakland and County of Alameda taxes for the fiscal year 1958- 1959. ... The term 'taxes,' as used in this connection, means only the ordinary City and County taxes upon the real property described on page 1 hereof, and the improvements thereon, and excludes special assessments and other public charges." (Page 1 of the lease contains a legal description *645 of the real property upon which the building containing the demised premises is located.)
Although this rental clause would appear susceptible of only one interpretation, appellant contends that it is unclear from the language used whether or not the "additional rental" was to encompass tax increases resulting from the improvements installed by Mar Monte prior to March 3, 1958. In support of this position, appellant directs this court's attention to two alleged ambiguities in the lease.
[3] Appellant first points out that the lease provided that the "additional rent ... has been based upon the amount of City of Oakland and County of Alameda taxes which shall be levied upon the land and building ... as they will be for the fiscal year 1958-1959." It is appellant's position that the phrase "as they will be" refers to "land and building" rather than to "taxes." This argument is wholly without merit. Indeed, it is difficult to conceive of a more strained construction of language which is clear upon its face. The phrase "which shall be levied upon the land and building" is a subordinate clause modifying the word "taxes." While "taxes ... as they will be" in a given fiscal year has a readily understandable meaning, "land and building ... as they will be" during a similar period of time is at best a nebulous concept. Furthermore, the language which appellant seeks to construe in its favor is a mere preface to the provision specifically setting forth the "additional rental" for which appellant shall be liable. Pursuant to this provision, the sole condition to appellant's liability is an increase in taxes, for any of the years 1959 to the end of the term, over those levied in the fiscal year 1958-1959. In view of this express language in the rental covenant, it cannot be doubted that the previous reference was to "taxes ... as they will be for the fiscal year 1958-1959."
Appellant's second argument is that the "additional rental" provision becomes ambiguous when read in conjunction with the clause requiring the lessor, if possible, to complete its remodeling by December 1, 1957. Appellant contends that the two clauses, when read together, clearly indicate that its liability for increased taxes was dependent upon the completion within the base year of the specified alterations undertaken by Mar Monte. An examination of the two provisions reveals that this contention is similarly of little real merit. Although the lease does obligate the lessor, in the *646 absence of specified delays, to complete its alterations by December 1, it must be noted that appellant is given no right to cancel the lease unless the lessor "shall fail to deliver possession of the demised premises ... on or before March 15, 1958." If appellant were correct in its contention that the two provisions were intended to modify one another, it is difficult to understand why the parties chose the date March 15, rather than the tax assessment date of March 3. Furthermore, it must be noted that appellant's right to cancel the lease is not contingent upon the lessor's failure to complete the alterations but is dependent upon its failure to deliver possession of the demised premises. It is certainly conceivable that this latter condition could be fulfilled while a large portion of the contemplated improvements to the remainder of the building were still unfinished, and that appellant, under such circumstances, would be limited to a cause of action for breach of covenant. Had the parties actually intended to make the additional rental provision dependent upon the assessment of the lessor's improvements within the base year 1958-1959, they could easily have done so by including language to that effect. The fact remains that they did not do so and that appellant has failed to show any conflict or ambiguity between the various clauses which the parties did place in the lease. The case of Philipsborn v. Hutzler Bros. Co. (1916) 128 Md. 337 [97 A. 628], upon which appellant relies, is distinguishable for precisely that reason. The lease in that case was susceptible of the interpretation contended for by respondent because the tax clause specifically provided that the lessee was to be liable for any tax increase occurring after certain contemplated improvements had been assessed. Since the lease in the present case contains no such language, that decision is of little benefit to appellant.
[4] Turning now to appellant's contention that the "additional rental" was not to encompass any tax increase caused by alterations on portions of the premises not covered by the lease, we are again confronted with language directly to the contrary. The lease provides that the additional rental is to be based upon the taxes levied upon "the land and building ... in which said demised premises are located. ..." (Emphasis ours.) The lease further provides that "The term 'taxes' ... means only the ordinary City and County taxes upon the real property described on page 1 hereof, and the improvements thereon. ..." *647
Appellant does not seriously contend that the above quoted language is unclear or ambiguous. Appellant does assert, however, that "the patent unfairness" of such a provision indicates that it could not have been intended by the parties. Under such circumstances, appellant contends that the court may ignore the plain wording of the lease and may hold it applicable solely to tax increases resulting from alterations to the demised premises.
An examination of the authorities cited by appellant lends little support to its position. In Bryant Park Building, Inc. v. Acunto (1928) 133 Misc. 225 [231 N.Y.S. 451], for example, the lessee was obligated to pay 7 1/2 per cent of any increase " 'in the amount of real estate taxes. ...' " The New York Municipal Court held that the tenant was not liable for an increase in taxes resulting from the landlord's act of adding nine stories to the building, since the lease provision was applicable only to an increased real estate valuation and not to an increased building valuation. The decision was also based on a finding that the parties had in the past construed the provision as inapplicable to tax increases resulting from higher valuations of the building. In the case at bar, the language of the lease is clearly applicable to taxes upon the land and building. Furthermore, there was no showing that the parties had ever construed the provision to be more limited in scope.
Seaboard Radio Broadcasting Corp. v. Yassky (1954) 176 Pa.Super. 453 [107 A.2d 618], is similarly of little assistance to appellant. The lease in that case provided that the lessee was to pay all taxes assessed " 'upon the demised premises and/or the building' " in excess of those assessed at the time of making the lease. The Pennsylvania Superior Court found the phrase "and/or" to be so ambiguous as to justify the conclusion that the tenant's tax liability extended only to increased taxes upon "the demised premises." Appellant has pointed to no such ambiguity in the instant case.
Appellant asserts, however, that the additional rental provision is at least "extrinsically ambiguous" when applied to alterations on portions of the premises not covered by the lease. Appellant cites Pacific Indem. Co. v. California etc. Ltd. (1938) 29 Cal. App. 2d 260 [84 P.2d 313], as authority for this proposition. In that case, the court held that a contract providing for indemnity against " 'any and all loss, damage, injury, liability ... howsoever caused' " (p. 271) was extrinsically ambiguous when applied to liability caused *648 by the indemnitee's own negligence. The court reasoned that it would be highly unusual for an indemnitor to undertake such an obligation. The court therefore concluded that it could find such a duty only if the contract contained language so clear and explicit as to compel that interpretation. Since the clause actually employed by the parties was broad and comprehensive, it was provocative of some doubt, and it was therefore proper to admit evidence explaining what the parties had intended.  [fn. 2] Appellant contends that the instant case presents a similar situation because it would be equally unusual to hold a lessee liable for tax increases resulting from alterations to portions of the building not included within the lease.
In the case at bar, however, the additional rental clause cannot properly be termed a "broad and comprehensive" provision. Appellant is specifically obligated to pay a designated portion of any increase in taxes on the land and building over those for the base year 1958-1959. Appellant itself concedes that the proportion of the tax increase (72 per cent) which it agreed to bear was based upon its occupancy of 72 per cent of the floor space of the entire building. We are of the opinion that such an arrangement, which represented an attempt by the parties to arrive at a fair method of allocating the tax burden, cannot be deemed so "unusual" as to give rise to an "extrinsic ambiguity." Appellant was aware that it was not leasing the entire building, and it could certainly have anticipated that all future alterations and improvements might not be confined solely to the area included under its lease. Yet appellant expressly agreed to pay 72 per cent of the increased taxes on the entire building and the underlying land. Had appellant sought reformation of the lease against the original lessor, Mar Monte, it might have been able to show a mutual mistake resulting in a contract different from that intended. Since it did not do so, however, it is now foreclosed from showing that language plain on its face has hidden meaning known only to appellant and its original lessor.
[5] The trial court was correct in finding the lease to be devoid of ambiguity, hence we find no merit in appellant's *649 contention that it ought to have been allowed to introduce evidence of the preliminary negotiations between the original parties to the lease. In Barnhart Aircraft, Inc. v. Preston (1931) 212 Cal. 19 [297 P. 20], the court held that parol evidence of "surrounding circumstances" was admissible " 'only in cases where upon the face of the contract itself there is doubt and the evidence is used to dispel that doubt, not by showing that the parties meant something other than what they said but by showing what they meant by what they said.' " (Pp. 22- 23.) The court, in quoting from 3 Jones, Commentaries on Evidence, section 454, went on to state: " ' "It must be borne in mind that although declarations of the parties may in some cases be received to explain contracts or words of doubtful meaning, yet no other words can be added to or substituted for those of the writing. The courts are not at liberty to speculate as to the general intention of the parties, but are charged with the duty of ascertaining the meaning of the written language." ' " (Pp. 23- 24.) Similarly, in Sass v. Hank (1951) 108 Cal. App. 2d 207, 211 [238 P.2d 652], the court stated: "Parties have a right to require their contracts to be in writing. When an agreement has been thus reduced the contractor has the right to rely strictly upon the written word. Before evidence of its meaning can be received it must first be determined by the court to be so ambiguous or uncertain that its meaning cannot be divined from its own language."
For the foregoing reasons, the lease in the instant case was susceptible of no other reasonable interpretation than that accorded it by the lower court.
Judgment affirmed.
Kaufman, P. J., and Agee, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. Although Mar Monte Corporation was originally named as an additional defendant, the action against it was dismissed by plaintiff.
[fn. 2]  2. (But see Continental Mfg. Corp. v. Underwriters at Lloyds London (1960) 185 Cal. App. 2d 545, 551-552 [8 Cal. Rptr. 276, 9 Cal. Rptr. 115], where the court distinguished the Pacific Indemnity case and noted that the court had there held only that the contract " 'was legally susceptible of the interpretation placed upon it by the learned trial judge.' " (P. 552.)

=== CASE 9738190 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:44:41.165345+00 ===

ANNETTE KINGSLAND ZIEGLER, J.
¶ 1. This is a review of an unpublished per curiam decision of the court of appeals1 that reversed an order of the Green Lake County Circuit Court, Judge William M. McMonigal presiding, which granted summary judgment to Robert and Ann Konneker (the Konnekers) and denied summary judgment to Robert and Francis Romano (the Romanos) and Norman and Lawrence Nelson (the Nelsons). The court of appeals remanded, directing the circuit court to enter summary judgment in favor of the Romanos.2 The Konnekers petitioned this court for review, and we accepted. We now reverse the decision of the court of appeals and remand the case to the circuit court for further proceedings.
¶ 2. This case presents the following issues: (1) whether this lakefront easement, created by a deed that is otherwise silent as to the easement's use and purpose, grants riparian rights, including the right to *274construct and maintain a pier; and (2) what impact, if any, do Wis. Stat. §§ 30.131 and 30.133 (2007-08)3 have *275on this case.4
¶ 3. We conclude that summary judgment was improper in this case. The language of the deed, which created the Konnekers' easement, is ambiguous. The deed conveys to the Konnekers a 20-foot wide lakefront easement along the west side of the Romanos' and Nelsons' property but is otherwise silent as to the easement's use and purpose. It is therefore not clear from the deed whether the parties intended the easement holder to have riparian rights, including the right to construct and maintain a pier. Because the parties' competing affidavits raised a genuine issue of material fact concerning the intent behind the easement, summary judgment was improper. We therefore reverse the decision of the court of appeals and remand the case to the circuit court for further proceedings.
¶ 4. We further conclude that Wis. Stat. §§ 30.133 and 30.131 are inapplicable to this case. It is undisputed that the easement was originally conveyed well before the effective date of § 30.133. In addition, the issue in *276this case is whether the easement grants riparian rights, including the right to construct and maintain a pier, not whether a pier — if and once constructed by the easement holder — constitutes a lawful structure under § 30.131.
I. FACTUAL BACKGROUND AND PROCEDURAL POSTURE
¶ 5. On October 29, 2004, the Konnekers obtained via deed property on Orchard Avenue in Green Lake County, Wisconsin, more particularly described as follows: "Lot One (1) of Certified Survey Map 2643 recorded in Volume 13 of Certified Survey Maps on Page 2643 and 2643B, being a division of Lot Two (2) of Certified Survey Map No. 770, being a part of the SE 1k of the SW 1k of Section 34, T16N, R12E." The conveyance included an easement across riparian5 property identified as Lot 3:
TOGETHER WITH an easement 20 feet in width along the Westerly side of Lot Three (3) of Certified Survey Map No. 289 as recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds for Green Lake County, Wisconsin on September *2771,1965 in Volume 1 of Certified Survey Maps at page 289 being a part of the S V2 of the SW XU of Section 34, T16N, R12E, extending from Orchard Avenue to Beyer's Cove. All of the above lying and being in the Township of Princeton, County of Green Lake, State of Wisconsin.
(Emphasis added.) Lot 3, co-owned by the Romanos and the Nelsons, is lakefront property that borders a portion of Green Lake known as Beyer's Cove. Lot 3 is located across the street from the Konnekers' property, on the opposite side of Orchard Avenue. Accordingly, the Konnekers, unlike the Romanos and the Nelsons, are non-riparian landowners. The Konnekers' easement is "20 feet in width" and "extend[s] from Orchard Avenue to Beyer's Cove" along the west side of the Romanos' and Nelsons' property. The easement is the subject of this dispute.
¶ 6. The easement was first created and conveyed in 1983 by Barbara D. Ciszek, Edward Ciszek, Peter J. Ciszek, and Angeline L. Ciszek (the Ciszeks).6 That conveyance and each subsequent conveyance7 contained the same substantive language, describing the *278easement as 20 feet in width along the westerly side of Lot 3 of Certified Survey Map No. 289, extending from Orchard Avenue to Beyer's Cove.
¶ 7. The Ciszeks were also predecessors in interest to Lot 3. According to an affidavit signed by Edward Ciszek and Barbara D. Ciszek on August 13, 1984, and maintained in the Register of Deeds Office for Green Lake County, as of that date, seven different parcels of land were entitled to use Lot 3 "as an access to Beyer[']s Cove, being a part of Green Lake." The affidavit further states that "it was the intention of all parties in granting the above-described access easements, that said easements should be appurtenant to and run with the ownership of the respective lots which they service."
¶ 8. On November 5, 1985, the Ciszeks conveyed Lot 3 to Richard A. Fagar and Catherine M. Fagar and the Nelsons, as tenants in common. On May 1, 1987, the Fagars conveyed their one-half interest in Lot 3 to the Romanos. Accordingly, the Romanos and the Nelsons are the current co-owners of Lot 3.
¶ 9. According to the Nelsons' affidavit, sometime prior to May 1,1990, the Nelsons "constructed a pier on or close to the 20 foot easement for mooring their boat." Beginning in May 1990, the Romanos and the Nelsons leased to Grant Gardner, a predecessor in interest to the Konnekers' property, see supra note 7, "a portion of Lot #3 . . . for the purpose of berthing [his] boat thereon." For annual rent of $150, Gardner was permitted "to place a boat lift and a limited number of pier sections to moor" a particularly described boat through the end of the 1994 boating season. The lease advised Gardner that he "may not sublet or assign [his] space to others" and that "seven other property owners have access rights on and to the subject premises" with which *279he may not interfere. On January 24, 1994, Robert Romano sent a letter to Lake Realty "concerning the sale of Grant Gardner's home" and reiterated that the pier rights under the lease were "not transferable and were only extended to Grant Gardner and his [] boat."
¶ 10. Thereafter, the Romanos and the Nelsons entered into a similar lease with Arne Carlsson, the Gardners' successor in interest, see supra note 7. For annual rent of $200, Carlsson was "allowed to place a boat lift and a limited number of pier sections to moor" a particularly described boat along Lot 3. The original term of the lease was May 1, 1994, to October 1, 1994, but the parties initialed a lease extension from May 1, 1995, to October 1, 1995. In an undated letter, Robert Romano informed Hagstrom/Schneider Real Estate that "[their] agreement with the Carlssons [was] not transferable."
¶ 11. As stated by Robert Konneker in his affidavit, when the Carlsson Trust conveyed Lot 1 to the Konnekers, the Konnekers understood that they would also have access to the piers on the Romanos' and the Nelsons' property.
¶ 12. At some point, the Konnekers installed their own pier along Lot 3. The Romanos and the Nelsons objected to the pier in a letter to Robert Konneker, dated October 10, 2006:
On October 7, 2006 we learned that you placed a boat pier in the water on Lot 3 of [Certified Survey Map] 289 in Green Lake, Wisconsin. As you are well aware, you are neither an owner nor a lessee of this property and we consider your actions in placing the pier to be unlawful and to constitute trespassing.
Your assertion that your property's easement somehow conveys riparian rights and entitles you to unilaterally place a pier is both incorrect and contrary to Wisconsin law. It was made clear to you prior to your purchase of *280your property and numerous times thereafter, that you do not have the right to place a pier in Lot 3.
If you do not remove the pier immediately we will arrange to have it removed ....
The Romanos and the Nelsons subsequently removed the Konnekers' pier.
¶ 13. On March 1, 2007, the Konnekers filed this action, seeking a declaratory judgment that the easement granted to them riparian rights, including the right to erect and maintain a pier on the easement. In their answer, the Romanos alleged that the complaint failed to state a legally cognizable claim and should be dismissed. The Romanos counterclaimed for trespass and sought an order prohibiting the Konnekers from erecting any future structures on the easement. In their answer, the Nelsons likewise sought a declaration that the Konnekers do not have riparian rights under the easement and are not entitled to erect any structures on the easement.
¶ 14. The parties filed cross motions for summary judgment. The Romanos argued that the Konnekers were not granted riparian rights under the easement, which provides only "for a 200-foot [sic] easement from Orchard Avenue to Beyer[']s Cove," indicating "that the easement is to simply provide ingress and egress to the lake." The Romanos further asserted that no pier was installed at the time the easement was originally conveyed, and in fact, when a pier was erected on Lot 3, a lease was created specifically for the pier's use.
¶ 15. In support of their motion for summary judgment, the Nelsons also argued that the easement did not grant to the Konnekers the right to construct a pier thereon and that the granting of such a right was never the parties' intent:
*281[T]he fact that the [Konnekers] predecessors in title (the Gardners and the Carlssons) entered into separate, private lease agreements to use the [Romanos' and the Nelsons'] pier and actually paid rent on an annual basis, illustrate that there was no intent between the parties that a pier could be constructed on the 20 foot easement.
In their brief, the Nelsons made a point that their pier "is placed well to the east of the 20 foot easement." However, the Nelsons' affidavit asserted that said pier was constructed "on or close to the 20 foot easement."
¶ 16. The Konnekers, on the other hand, moved for summary judgment on the grounds that they have a right to install their own pier on the easement, consistent with the intent of the original parties who granted the easement. In particular, "Beyer's Cove is historically an area of the lake wherein individuals enter the lake by boat." In his affidavit, Robert Konneker maintained the following:
Beyer[']s Cove is an access area into Green Lake and consists of large amounts of vegetation. The water at Beyer[']s Cove is not conducive to swimming and there is no heach area for sun bathing. The only use for the access area at the end of the easement at Beyer[']s Cove is to enter Green Lake by boat.
His affidavit further asserted that the Konnekers' predecessors in interest accessed the lake by using the Romanos' and the Nelsons' piers and that when the Konnekers purchased their lot, the Konnekers "understood that [they] would have access to the piers on the [Romanos' and the Nelsons'] property in order to enter Beyer[']s Cove; just as the owners before [them] had the use of the piers to access the lake." Once informed that *282they were not permitted to use the Romanos' and the Nelsons' piers, the Konnekers erected their own pier on the easement.
¶ 17. On May 5, 2008, the circuit court granted the Konnekers' motion for summary judgment and denied the Romanos' and the Nelsons' motions for summary judgment. The court declared that the easement "is a lake access easement which allows the [Konnekers] access to the lake including the right to construct a pier upon that easement." The court clarified that it is "not making any finding that a pier could or could not be installed, but that the intent of the parties was to grant the easement holder a lake access easement and to allow for the construction of a pier."
¶ 18. In its oral ruling, the circuit court acknowledged that it was making a determination on competing motions for summary judgment, in which case he "would theoretically be setting the matter up for trial." Nevertheless, the court was satisfied that despite the specific language in the easement, the intent of the original parties in granting the easement "was to permit a back lot owner to have lake access, and lake access inherently would allow for the construction of a pier." In arriving at his conclusion, the circuit court questioned Attorney Lehner, counsel for the Nelsons, regarding his knowledge of Green Lake:
The Court: Mr. Lehner, I know that your family has had a home or a cottage on Green Lake for several generations. How would you describe Beyer's Cove as it relates to Green Lake?
Attorney Lehner: Originally, Your Honor — we have a second home on Orchard Avenue, which is — that road runs right by, of course, where we're talking here. We're further to the east on the main part of the lake between *283Beyer's Cove and Sugar Loaf. When I was growing up, Beyer's Cove was a marshy area... [but] certainly is navigable now....
The Court: Would you believe that people who buy homes in the Beyer's Cove area, either on the cove or with access to Beyer's Cove, do so for the opportunity to kayak or canoe on or for the opportunity to have access to Green Lake?
Attorney Lehner: I would say both....
In addition, the circuit court took judicial notice of the apparent fact that many off-shore properties are sold with confirmation that the properties enjoy the benefit of lake access.
¶ 19. The Romanos moved for reconsideration, which the circuit court denied in an oral ruling on June 13, 2008. The Romanos appealed.
¶ 20. On March 19, 2009, the court of appeals issued a per curiam decision reversing the order of the circuit court and remanding with directions that summary judgment be entered in favor of the Romanos. Konneker v. Romano, No. 2008AP1546, unpublished slip op., ¶ 1 (Wis. Ct. App. Mar. 19, 2009). The court of appeals concluded that the easement language was ambiguous, given its silence as to purpose and scope. Id., ¶ 9. Accordingly, the court looked to the parties' intent when creating the easement to determine the parties' rights, finding no evidence to support the Konnekers' contention that the easement included a conveyance of riparian rights permitting them to erect a pier. Id., ¶ 11. In particular, the court noted the fact that there was no pier in place when-the easement was created, id., ¶ 9, and that the contemporaneous grant of several easements to the same 20-foot parcel made it "inherently improbable" that the original grantors con*284templated that all of the easement holders would have the right to erect their own piers, id., ¶ 11. Finally, the court rejected the Konnekers' assertion that the only use for the access area at Beyer's Cove is to enter the lake by boat, id., ¶ 9, concluding that "other than the personal knowledge of the court and counsel, there [did] not appear to be any verifiable evidence that the historical use of the cove was primarily for access to Green Lake by boat," id., ¶ 10.
¶ 21. The Konnekers petitioned this court for review, which we granted on October 20, 2009. We now reverse the decision of the court of appeals and remand the case to the circuit court for further proceedings.
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
¶ 22. " 'Whether the circuit court properly granted summary judgment is a question of law that this court reviews de novo.'" Hocking v. City of Dodgeville, 2009 WI 70, ¶ 7, 318 Wis. 2d 681, 768 N.W.2d 552 (quoting Schmidt v. N. States Power Co., 2007 WI 136, ¶ 24, 305 Wis. 2d 538, 742 N.W.2d 294). We apply the same methodology used by the circuit court, which is set forth in Wis. Stat. § 802.08. Noffke v. Bakke, 2009 WI 10, ¶ 9, 315 Wis. 2d 350, 760 N.W.2d 156; Novell v. Migliaccio, 2008 WI 44, ¶ 23, 309 Wis. 2d 132, 749 N.W.2d 544. "Summary judgment is appropriate only where there is no genuine issue of material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Schmidt, 305 Wis. 2d 538, ¶ 24; see also § 802.08(2). The circuit court should not grant summary judgment "unless the moving party demonstrates a right to a judgment with such clarity as to leave no room for controversy." Grams v. Boss, 97 Wis. 2d 332, 338, 294 N.W.2d 473 (1980).
*285¶ 23. In this case, we are called upon to interpret a deed creating an easement and address the application of Wis. Stat. §§ 30.131 and 30.133. The threshold inquiry of whether a deed is ambiguous presents a question of law that this court reviews independently. AKG Real Estate, LLC v. Kosterman, 2006 WI 106, ¶ 14, 296 Wis. 2d 1, 717 N.W.2d 835. The construction of an unambiguous deed is likewise a question of law. Id. However, if the language of the deed is ambiguous, then the intent behind the language presents a question of fact. Rikkers v. Ryan, 76 Wis. 2d 185, 188, 251 N.W.2d 25 (1977).
¶ 24. Finally, statutory interpretation and application is a question of law that we review de novo while still benefiting from the lower courts' analyses. Heritage Farms, Inc. v. Market Ins. Co., 2009 WI 27, ¶ 5, 316 Wis. 2d 47, 762 N.W.2d 652.
III. ANALYSIS
A. Whether the Konnekers' Easement Grants Riparian Rights, Including the Right to Construct and Maintain a Pier
¶ 25. "An easement 'is a permanent interest in another's land, with a right to enjoy it fully and without obstruction.' "8 Hunter v. McDonald, 78 Wis. 2d 338, 343, 254 N.W.2d 282 (1977) (quoting Schwartz v. Evan*286gelical Deaconess Soc'y of Wis., 46 Wis. 2d 432, 438, 175 N.W.2d 225 (1970)). The "dominant estate" enjoys the privileges granted by the easement, and the "servient estate" permits the exercise of those privileges. Atkinson v. Mentzel, 211 Wis. 2d 628, 637, 566 N.W.2d 158 (Ct. App. 1997). While the servient estate may not unreasonably interfere with the dominant estate's right to use the easement, "[t]he use of the easement must be in accordance with and confined to the terms and purposes of the grant." Stoesser v. Shore Drive P'ship, 172 Wis. 2d 660, 668, 494 N.W.2d 204 (1993); Hunter, 78 Wis. 2d at 343.
¶ 26. "Because the easement in question is created by deed, the court must look to that instrument in construing the relative rights of the landowners." Hunter, 78 Wis. 2d at 342-43. "Deeds are construed as are other instruments"; accordingly, "the purpose of the court is to ascertain the intention of the parties." Rikkers, 76 Wis. 2d at 188; see also Gilbert v. Geiger, 2008 WI App 29, ¶ 10, 307 Wis. 2d 463, 747 N.W.2d 188. The primary source of the parties' intent is what is written within the four corners of the deed. Rikkers, 76 Wis. 2d at 188. If the language is unambiguous, it would be improper to resort to extrinsic evidence to ascertain the parties' intent. Id. However, if the language of the deed is ambiguous, meaning it is susceptible to more than one *287reasonable interpretation, then the parties may introduce other evidence to demonstrate the intent behind the language. Id.) see also Grosshans v. Rueping, 36 Wis. 2d 519, 528, 153 N.W.2d 619 (1967) ("[I]t is only when a deed is ambiguous that the intent of the parties can be manifested by extrinsic evidence.").
¶ 27. In this case, the issue is whether the Konnekers' lakefront easement grants riparian rights, including the right to construct and maintain a pier.9 Riparian rights, one of which is the right to construct a pier to access navigable waters, are generally reserved for riparian landowners. See Stoesser, 172 Wis. 2d at 666. However, up until April 9, 1994,10 Wisconsin *288recognized the ability of a riparian landowner to convey riparian rights by easement. Id. at 668.11
¶ 28. For example, in Wendt v. Blazek, 2001 WI App 91, 242 Wis. 2d 722, 626 N.W.2d 78, the court of appeals affirmed a summary judgment declaring that an easement, conveyed to the Blazeks and other non-riparian landowners, included the right to use and *289maintain a pier. In that case, the Jaeckle family owned a resort on Okauchee Lake along with other non-riparian lots that adjoined the resort property. Id., ¶ 2. The Jaeckles constructed and maintained a private pier on the resort property. Id., ¶ 3. When they sold the resort property, the deed "reserved to the Jaeckles and their heirs and assigns 'an easement for the purpose of access to Okauchee Lake on and over a strip of land 15 feet in width [along the resort property].'" Id., ¶ 2. The aforementioned pier was located at the point where the easement met the edge of the lake. Id., ¶ 3. The Jaeckles eventually sold their non-riparian lots, one of which was sold to the Blazeks, and the conveyances included the easement. Id., ¶ 2.
¶ 29. Thereafter, the Wendts acquired the servient estate (the former resort property). Id., ¶ 4. The Wendts then sought a judgment declaring that the easement did not include a right to use and maintain the pier. Id. The court of appeals affirmed the circuit court's order granting summary judgment to the Blazeks and the other non-riparian landowners, concluding that the easement was intended to confer to the Jaeckles and their assigns the right to use and maintain the pier. Id., ¶ 18. According to the court of appeals, the critical evidence was an affidavit by a Jaeckle family member representing that the Jaeckles constructed the pier long before the easement was created, and when they sold the resort property, they reserved the easement in order to still use the pier and lakeshore. Id., ¶ 15. Because that affidavit was unrefuted, id., the court concluded that no material issue of fact existed, and the Blazeks and the other non-riparian landowners were entitled to judgment as a matter of law, id., ¶ 18.
*290¶ 30. Turning to the case at issue, we conclude that the language of the October 29, 2004, deed, which created the Konnekers' easement, is ambiguous. The relevant portion of the deed conveyed to the Konnekers Lot 1 "TOGETHER WITH an easement 20 feet in width along the Westerly side of Lot Three (3) of Certified Survey Map No. 289 ... extending from Orchard Avenue to Beyer's Cove." Clearly, the deed conveys to the Konnekers a 20-foot wide lakefront easement along the west side of the Romanos' and Nelsons' property. However, the deed is otherwise silent as to the easement's use and purpose. In particular, it is not clear from the deed whether the parties intended the easement holder to have riparian rights, including the right to construct and maintain a pier. Accordingly, the deed is ambiguous, and the court must resort to extrinsic evidence to ascertain the parties' intent.
¶ 31. In support of their cross motions for summary judgment, the parties presented competing affidavits demonstrating the intent behind the easement. Because the evidence as represented in the affidavits raised genuine issues of material fact, summary judgment was improper.
¶ 32. In support of their position that when the easement was created, the parties intended the easement holder to have riparian rights, including the right to construct and maintain a pier, the Konnekers submitted an affidavit representing that the only use for the easement's access area is to enter the lake by boat because Beyer's Cove consists of large amounts of vegetation, is not conducive to swimming, and lacks *291beach area for sun bathing.12 That evidence, however, was refuted by the Nelsons' affidavit. The Nelsons asserted that when the easement was originally conveyed in 1983, no pier, boat lift, or boat was located on the easement, and therefore, it was not the parties' intent to permit the easement holder to construct or maintain a pier thereon. According to the Romanos, the fact that a pier did not exist on the easement at the time the easement was created raised a significant distinction between the facts of this case and those in Wendt. See 242 Wis. 2d 722, ¶ 15. In addition, in support of their motion for reconsideration, the Romanos introduced evidence that as of August 1984, seven parcels of land were entitled to use Lot 3 for access to Beyer's Cove, and accordingly, the parties could not have possibly intended for each of those easement holders to have the right to construct a pier on the easement.
¶ 33. At the same time, the evidence put forth by the Nelsons and Romanos contradicted itself. Their *292assertion that it was never the parties' intent to have a pier constructed on the easement conflicted with the Nelsons' affidavit, which provided generally that "sometime prior to May 1, 1990, [the Nelsons] constructed a pier on or close to the 20 foot easement for mooring their boat." (Emphasis added.) While the Nelsons maintained that "said pier was not to be used in common with any of the easement holders," the pier leases to Grant Gardner and Arne Carlsson raised an inference otherwise. Each lease provided the same language: "Lessees are advised and understand that seven other property owners have access rights on and to the subject premises and agree not to interfere with those rights." That provision can be construed as consistent with the Konnekers' position; that is, the parties intended for all the easement holders to have use of a pier for access to Green Lake. Because these competing affidavits raised a genuine issue of material fact concerning whether the parties intended the easement holders to have riparian rights, including the right to construct and maintain a pier, summary judgment was improper.
B. Impact of Wis. Stat. §§ 30.131 and 30.133
¶ 34. The issue of whether Wis. Stat. §§ 30.131 and 30.133 are applicable to this case was not invoked, argued, or appealed below. However, we asked the parties to brief the issue before this court.
¶ 35. Pursuant to the public trust doctrine, the state holds the beds of navigable waters in trust for all its citizens. Hilton v. DNR, 2006 WT 84, ¶ 18, 293 Wis. 2d 1, 717 N.W.2d 166. The legislature has the primary authority to administer and effectuate the purposes of the public trust, id., ¶ 19, and does so through the regula*293tions of Wis. Stat. ch. 30. See ABKA Ltd. P'ship v. DNR, 2002 WI 106, ¶ 11, 255 Wis. 2d 486, 648 N.W.2d 854. The legislature has delegated to the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) broad authority to administer ch. 30. Hilton, 293 Wis. 2d 1, ¶ 20; ABKA, 255 Wis. 2d 486, ¶ 12.
1. Wisconsin Stat. § 30.133
¶ 36. In Stoesser v. Shore Drive Partnership, this court held that riparian rights can be conveyed by easement to non-riparian landowners. 172 Wis. 2d at 670. The legislature responded to Stoesser by enacting Wis. Stat. § 30.133. ABKA, 255 Wis. 2d 486, ¶ 60. Beginning April 9,1994, "no owner of riparian land that abuts a navigable water may grant by an easement or by a similar conveyance any riparian right in the land to another person, except for the right to cross the land in order to have access to the navigable water." § 30.133(l)(a). Further, the "right to cross the land may not include the right to place any structure" in the navigable water. Id.
¶ 37. In this case, it is undisputed that the easement was originally conveyed in 1983, well before the April 9, 1994, effective date of Wis. Stat. § 30.133. Therefore, § 30.133 is inapplicable.
2. Wisconsin Stat. § 30.131
¶ 38. Pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 30.131, a pier placed in navigable water by a non-riparian landowner is considered a lawful structure if six statutory conditions are met. Ellingsworth v. Swiggum, 195 Wis. 2d 142, 148, 536 N.W.2d 112 (Ct. App. 1995). Those six conditions include:
(a) The owner of the riparian land or the owner's predecessor in interest entered into a written easement *294that was recorded before December 31, 1986, and that authorizes access to the shore to a person who is not an owner of the riparian land.
(b) The person to whom the easement was granted or that person's successor in interest is the person who places and maintains the wharf or pier.
(c) The placement and maintenance of the wharf or pier is not prohibited by and is not inconsistent with the terms of the written easement.
(d) The wharf or pier has been placed seasonally in the same location at least once every 4 years since the written easement described in par. (a) was recorded.
(e) The wharf or pier is substantially the same size and configuration as it was on April 28, 1990, or during its last placement before April 28, 1990, whichever is later.
(f) The placement of the wharf or pier complies with the provisions of this chapter, with any rules promulgated under this chapter and with any applicable municipal regulations or ordinances.
§ 30.131(1).
¶ 39. Here, the Romanos argue that even if the easement is construed as granting the Konnekers the riparian right to construct and maintain a pier, the easement is unenforceable as contrary to Wis. Stat. § 30.131. In particular, they assert that the easement does not meet the requirement of subsection (l)(d) because a pier was neither built at the creation of the easement in 1983 nor erected seasonally every four years thereafter.
¶ 40. As the court of appeals explained in Wendt, the Romanos' argument is "off the mark." See 242 Wis. 2d 722, ¶ 14. The issue in this case is whether the *295easement grants riparian rights, including the right to construct and maintain a pier, not whether a pier — if and once constructed by the Konnekers — constitutes a lawful structure under Wis. Stat. § 30.131. See Wendt, 242 Wis. 2d 722, ¶ 14.
IV CONCLUSION
¶ 41. We conclude that summary judgment was improper in this case. The language of the deed, which created the Konnekers' easement, is ambiguous. The deed conveys to the Konnekers a 20-foot wide lakefront easement along the west side of the Romanos' and Nelsons' property but is otherwise silent as to the easement's use and purpose. It is therefore not clear from the deed whether the parties intended the easement holder to have riparian rights, including the right to construct and maintain a pier. Because the parties' competing affidavits raised a genuine issue of material fact concerning the intent behind the easement, summary judgment was improper. We therefore reverse the decision of the court of appeals and remand the case to the circuit court for further proceedings.
¶ 42. We further conclude that Wis. Stat. §§ 30.133 and 30.131 are inapplicable to this case. It is undisputed that the easement was originally conveyed well before the effective date of § 30.133. In addition, the issue in this case is whether the easement grants riparian rights, including the right to construct and maintain a pier, not whether a pier — if and once constructed by the easement holder — constitutes a lawful structure under § 30.131.
By the Court. — The decision of the court of appeals is reversed, and the cause is remanded to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Konneker v. Romano, No. 2008AP1546, unpublished slip op. (Wis. Ct. App. Mar. 19, 2009).
The Nelsons did not appeal from the circuit court's order.
All subsequent references to the Wisconsin Statutes are to the 2007-08 version unless otherwise indicated.
Wisconsin Stat. § 30.131, "Wharves and piers placed and maintained by persons other than riparian owners," provides:
(1) Notwithstanding s. 30.133, a wharf or pier of the type which does not require a permit under ss. 30.12(1) and 30.13 that abuts riparian land and that is placed in a navigable water by a person other than the owner of the riparian land may not be considered to be an unlawful structure on the grounds that it is not placed and maintained by the owner if all of the following requirements are met:
(a) The owner of the riparian land or the owner's predecessor in interest entered into a written easement that was recorded before December 31, 1986, and that authorizes access to the shore to a person who is not an owner of the riparian land.
(b) The person to whom the easement was granted or that person's successor in interest is the person who places and maintains the wharf or pier.
(c) The placement and maintenance of the wharf or pier is not prohibited by and is not inconsistent with the terms of the written easement.
(d) The wharf or pier has been placed seasonally in the same location at least once every 4 years since the written easement described in par. (a) was recorded.
(e) The wharf or pier is substantially the same size and configuration as it was on April 28, 1990, or during its last placement before April 28, 1990, whichever is later.
(f) The placement of the wharf or pier complies with the provisions of this chapter, with any rules promulgated under this chapter and with any applicable municipal regulations or ordinances.
(2) Notwithstanding s. 30.133, an easement under sub. (1) may be conveyed if it is conveyed at the same time, and to the same person, that the land to which the easement is appurtenant is conveyed.
Wisconsin Stat. § 30.133 is a "[prohibition against conveyance of riparian rights":
*275(1) Beginning on April 9,1994, and except as provided in s. 30.1355 [s. 30.1335], no owner of riparian land that abuts a navigable water may grant by an easement or by a similar conveyance any riparian right in the land to another person, except for the right to cross the land in order to have access to the navigable water. This right to cross the land may not include the right to place any structure or material, including a boat docking facility, as defined in s. 30.1335(l)(a), in the navigable water.
(2) This section does not apply to riparian land located within the boundary of any hydroelectric project licensed or exempted by the federal government, if the conveyance is authorized under any license, rule or order issued by the federal agency having jurisdiction over the project.
The issue of whether Wis. Stat. §§ 30.131 and 30.133 are applicable to this case was not invoked, argued, or appealed below. However, pursuant to our order, the parties briefed the issue before this court.
"Riparian" means "[o]f, relating to, or located on the bank of a river or stream (or occasionally another body of water, such as a lake)." Black's Law Dictionary 1328 (7th ed. 1999); see also Stoesser v. Shore Drive P'ship, 172 Wis. 2d 660, 665, 494 N.W.2d 204 (1993). In the legal sense, a landowner whose property borders on a body of water has "riparian rights," meaning "the right to make reasonable use of the water." Black's 1328. Though subject to regulation, riparian rights "include the right to use the shoreline and have access to the waters, the right to reasonable use of the waters for domestic, agricultural and recreational purposes, and the right to construct a pier or similar structure in aid of navigation." ABKA Ltd. P'ship v. DNR, 2002 WI 106, ¶ 57, 255 Wis. 2d 486, 648 N.W.2d 854.
On November 23, 1983, the Ciszeks conveyed Lot 2 of Certified Survey Map No. 770, together with the easement along Lot 3, to Robert Thomas Blizek and Marguerite Blizek.
On February 11, 1989, the Blizeks conveyed Lot 2 of Certified Survey Map No. 770, together with the easement along Lot 3, to Grant G. Gardner and Patricia A. Gardner. On May 25, 1994, the Gardners conveyed Lot 2 of Certified Survey Map No. 770, together with the easement along Lot 3, to Rose D. Carlsson, as Trustee under self declared Trust. On October 11,1999, the Carlsson Trust had Lot 2 resurveyed into two lots, creating Lot 1 of Certified Survey Map No. 2643. Finally, as previously mentioned, on October 29, 2004, the Carlsson Trust conveyed Lot 1 of Certified Survey Map No. 2643, together with the easement along Lot 3, to the Konnekers.
Title does not pass to an easement holder, "but only a right of use or privilege in the land of another." Polebitzke v. John Week Lumber Co., 157 Wis. 377, 381, 147 N.W. 703 (1914); see also Hunter v. McDonald, 78 Wis. 2d 338, 344, 254 N.W.2d 282 *286(1977) ("The [easement holder's] interest is not an estate in land, but rather a right to use the land of another for a special purpose not inconsistent with the general property in the owner."). "Thus, this court has stated, 'A conveyance of a right-of-way two rods wide is a conveyance of a right-of-way over a strip of land two rods wide, not a conveyance of the strip of land itself. Title to the land does not pass but only the right to pass over it.'" Hunter, 78 Wis. 2d at 344 (quoting Kleih v. Van Schoyck, 250 Wis. 413, 418, 27 N.W.2d 490 (1947)).
The concurrence posits that "the focus on remand should not be on whether the easement grants riparian rights, but on determining what rights or interests the easement was intended to grant." Concurrence, ¶ 45. However, our framing of the issue is consistent with the relief that the Konnekers seek in their complaint. They seek a judgment "[djeclaring that the plaintiffs have an easement, which include[s] riparian rights" and that "with those easement rights, the plaintiffs have the right to erect and maintain a pier on said easement." Likewise, in their answer, the Nelsons requested a judgment "[d]eclaring that the Plaintiffs do not have riparian rights under said easement" and that "the Plaintiffs do not have the right to erect and maintain a pier, boat lift or other structure upon said easement." In addition, in their motions for summary judgment, both the Romanos and the Nelsons framed the issue in terms of whether the Konnekers' easement grants riparian rights. Thus, consistent with the parties' requests for relief, we determine that the proper focus in this case is whether the Konnekers' lakefront easement grants riparian rights, including the right to construct and maintain a pier.
Effective April 9, 1994, the legislature prohibited riparian landowners from conveying "any riparian right in the land *288to another person, except for the right to cross the land in order to have access to the navigable water." Wis. Stat. § 30.133(1). For a detailed discussion of § 30.133 and its application to this case, see infra Part III.B.l.
The circuit court relied principally on this court's decision in Stoesser to arrive at its conclusion that in this case, the parties' intent in creating the easement "was to permit a back lot owner to have lake access, and lake access inherently would allow for the construction of a pier." However, the holding in Stoesser that "[r]iparian rights can be conveyed by easement to non-riparian owners" was premised on our recognition that a deed, which in that case expressly granted the easement holders the right "to use the lake shore for bathing, boating or kindred purposes," should not be rewritten by the court. See 172 Wis. 2d at 670. We explained:
Since one cannot bathe or boat on the shore this language was obviously intended to allow the [easement holders] access to Lake Beulah from the [servient estate's] lakeshore. The [easement holders] seek to use their easement for the purposes expressly stated in the deed and must be allowed that right.
Id. at 668. A conclusion otherwise "would destroy the certainty upon which contracting parties are entitled to rely." Id. at 670.
Accordingly, our holding in Stoesser should not be relied upon to support the proposition that a lakefront easement, created by a deed that is otherwise silent as to the easement's use and purpose, necessarily permits lake access, let alone "inherently ... allow[s] for the construction of a pier." A lakefront easement, like any easement, must be used only in accordance with and confined to the terms and purposes of the grant. See id. at 668; Hunter, 78 Wis. 2d at 343.
At the motion hearing, the circuit court questioned Attorney Lehner, counsel for the Nelsons, regarding his personal knowledge of Green Lake, specifically relating to whether Beyer's Cove is used for boat access. See supra Part I, ¶ 18. Attorney Lehner's testimony, however, does not constitute evidence and therefore should not have been relied upon in support of the circuit court's order. Pursuant to Wisconsin Supreme Court Ride 20:3.7, a lawyer is generally not permitted to serve dual roles as advocate and witness. Comment (2) explains:
The tribunal has proper objection when the trier of fact may be confused or misled by a lawyer serving as both advocate and witness. The opposing party has proper objection where the combination of roles may prejudice that party's rights in the litigation. A witness is required to testify on the basis of personal knowledge, while an advocate is expected to explain and comment on evidence given by others. It may not be clear whether a statement by an advocate-witness should be taken as proof or as an analysis of the proof.

=== CASE 9738191 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:44:41.170952+00 ===

*296SHIRLEY S. ABRAHAMSON, C.J.
¶ 43. {concurring). I agree with the majority opinion that the case should be remanded to the circuit court. The language in the deed creating the easement is silent about the purpose and scope of the easement, leaving a factual dispute that warrants further proceedings.
¶ 44. The majority remands the matter to the circuit court because "it is not clear from the deed whether the parties intended the easement holder to have riparian rights, including the right to construct and maintain a pier." Majority op., ¶ 41.
¶ 45. In my view, the focus on remand should be not on whether the easement grants riparian rights, but on determining what rights or interests the easement was intended to grant. An easement expressly granted by deed conveys only those rights or interests that the parties intended to convey.1 I would therefore remand the matter for the circuit court to ascertain what rights or interests the easement was intended to convey and specifically whether the right to install and maintain a pier was intended. The majority opinion at ¶ 2 and passim focuses on the bundle of riparian rights rather than on the intent of the parties. The majority opinion (¶ 2) states: "This case presents the following issues: (1) whether this lakefront easement, created by a deed that is otherwise silent as to the easement's use and purpose, grants riparian rights, including the right to construct and maintain a pier . . . ."
¶ 46. The circuit court declared that the easement "is a lake access easement which allows [the Konnekers] access to the lake including the right to construct a pier upon that easement." The Konnekers' brief here asks *297this court to "reinstate the trial court's Order and Judgment granting summary judgment. ..
¶ 47. An easement conveyed to a non-riparian owner [the Konnekers] does not confer riparian ownership to the non-riparian landowner.2 The easement may convey one, several, or all riparian rights to a non-riparian landowner.3
¶ 48. "Riparian rights" are generally defined by common law. The phrase "riparian rights" is expansive, referring to a vast array of water-related rights. Riparian rights include the right to reasonable use of the waters for domestic, agricultural and recreational purposes; the right to use the shoreline and have access to the waters; the right to any lands formed by accretion or reliction; the right to have water flow to the land without artificial obstruction; the limited right to intrude upon the lake-bed to construct devices for protection from erosion; and the right, "now conditioned by statute," to construct a pier or similar structures in aid of navigation.4
¶ 49. The only mention the Konnekers make of any potential riparian rights other than egress and ingress and the right to install a pier is in arguing that Beyer's Cove is not conducive to various water uses other than boating.5
*298¶ 50. Although the Konnekers' filings refer to "riparian rights" generally, including the right to install a pier,6 their affidavits on the summary judgment motion, their position before the circuit court and their arguments on appeal all center solely on access to the lake and the right to install and maintain a pier. Before the circuit court, the Konnekers' attorney stated that "the question I think for the Court is . .. whether or not as a matter of law it can be determined that that easement contained the riparian right to install and maintain a pier." For a narrative supporting my summary of the record, see majority op., ¶¶ 11-18.
¶ 51. Considering the expansive nature of "riparian rights" and the focused arguments of the Konnekers, I conclude that the proper inquiry for the circuit *299court is to determine what specific rights or interests are included in the terms and purpose of the easement, rather than to state the inquiry broadly as a question of whether the easement conveyed other unspecified riparian rights.
¶ 52. This case is very similar to Wendt v. Blazek, 2001 WI App 91, ¶ 14, 242 Wis. 2d 722, 626 N.W.2d 78, in which the court had to interpret an expressly conveyed lake access easement and review a summary judgment record to determine whether the easement was intended to confer the right to use and maintain a pier. There the court of appeals focused its determination simply on whether "the easement was intended to confer the right to use and maintain the pier." 242 Wis. 2d at 732, ¶ 18.
¶ 53. As presented to this court, the instant case is very similar and I would similarly focus the determination to be made on remand. The majority determines that the parties' competing affidavits have raised a genuine issue of material fact. I agree, but the issue raised centers on the right to install and maintain a pier, not on riparian rights more generally.
¶ 54. For the reasons set forth, I write separately.
¶ 55. I am authorized to state that Justice ANN WALSH BRADLEY joins this opinion.
See Hunter v. McDonald, 78 Wis. 2d 338, 343, 254 N.W.2d 282 (1977).
Stoesser v. Shore Drive P'ship, 172 Wis. 2d 660, 669-70, 494 N.W.2d 204 (1993).
Stoesser, 172 Wis. 2d at 668-70. See Wis. Stat. § 30.133 (overruling Stoesser and prohibiting the conveyance of riparian rights effective Apr. 9, 1994, as discussed in ABKA Ltd. P'ship v. DNR, 2002 WI 106, ¶¶ 57-61, 255 Wis. 2d 486, 648 N.W.2d 854).
Stoesser, 172 Wis. 2d at 666 n.2, citing Cassidy v. DNR, 132 Wis. 2d 153, 159, 390 N.W.2d 81 (Ct. App. 1986). See also ABKA Ltd. P'ship v. DNR, 2002 WI 106, ¶ 57, 255 Wis. 2d 486, 648 N.W.2d 854.
In his affidavit in support of his motion for summary *298judgment, Robert Konneker stated: "That Beyer[']s Cove is an access area into Green Lake and consists of large amounts of vegetation. The water at Beyer[']s Cove is not conducive to swimming and there is no beach area for sunbathing. The only use for the access area at the end of the easement at Beyer[']s Cove is to enter Green Lake by boat." The implication appears to be that the Konnekers are not seeking rights other than access to the water and the right to install and maintain a pier.
The Konnekers' Complaint asks for judgment "declaring that [they] have an easement, which include [sic] riparian rights" and "[t]hat with those easement rights, [they] have the right to erect and maintain a pier on said easement."
The Konnekers' motion for summary judgment sought judgment "declaring [their] rights as easement holders to have unobstructed access to Beyer's Cove on Green Lake including the right to install and maintain a pier"
The Konnekers' brief in support of their motion for summary judgment argued for judgment "declaring their interest and rights as lake access easement holders; specifically their right to install, use and maintain a pier" at the end of the easement.

=== CASE 2213564 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:33.295057+00 ===

406 N.W.2d 365 (1987)
In the Matter of the ESTATE OF Soren SORENSEN A.K.A. Soren M. Sorensen, Deceased.
Greg BAEHM, Todd Baehm, Charles Baehm and Roland Baehm, Jr., Claimants and Appellants,
v.
FIRST WESTERN BANK, Personal Representative of the Estate of Soren Sorenson, Deceased, Appellee.
Civ. No. 11403.
Supreme Court of North Dakota.
May 28, 1987.
Teevens, Johnson, Montgomery, Minot, for claimants and appellants; argued by Kent L. Johnson.
McGee, Hankla, Backes & Wheeler, Minot, for appellee; argued by Richard H. McGee.
LEVINE, Justice.
This is a consolidated appeal from orders denying the claims of Greg Baehm, Todd Baehm, Charles Baehm and Roland Baehm, Jr., against the Estate of Soren Sorensen in a supervised probate proceeding. Because the requirements of Rule 54(b), North Dakota Rules of Civil Procedure, have not been met, we dismiss the appeal.
Under North Dakota Century Code § 30.1-02-06.1 [U.P.C. 1-308], the right to appellate review of probate orders is governed by the rules applicable to appeals to the Supreme Court in equity cases from the district court. Section 28-27-02, NDCC, specifies which orders are appealable to this Court. Once jurisdiction is established under § 28-27-02, NDCC, Rule 54(b)'s separate requirements must also be met, if applicable. Gillan v. Saffell, 395 N.W.2d 148, 149 (N.D.1986). Parties in probate cases bear the duty of requesting a Rule 54(b) order or certification if they seek an appeal. First Trust Co. of North Dakota v. Conway, 345 N.W.2d 838, 842 (N.D.1984). We find no Rule 54(b) certification in the record as required and accordingly dismiss the appeal.
ERICKSTAD, C.J., and VANDE WALLE, GIERKE, and MESCHKE, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9738121 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:43:13.584778+00 ===

WUEST, Chief Justice.
This is an appeal from an order denying habeas corpus relief. We affirm.
Petitioner, Douglas Logan, was indicted for rape in the first degree and was later arraigned before Judge Gene Paul Kean. Judge Kean explained the right to trial by jury, the right to confront hostile witnesses and the privilege against self-incrimination. The judge also advised petitioner that a guilty plea would constitute waiver of these rights. Petitioner pled not guilty.
Petitioner was indicted in a second case for rape in the first degree, rape in the second degree, and sexual contact with a child under the age of sixteen. He was arraigned before Judge Richard D. Hurd. Judge Hurd explained the right to trial by jury, the right to confront hostile witnesses and the privilege against self-incrimination. The judge did not advise petitioner a guilty plea would constitute waiver of these rights. Petitioner pled not guilty to all three counts in the indictment.
Judge Hurd joined the two cases upon motion by the State. Pursuant to plea agreement, petitioner agreed to withdraw his plea of not guilty of sexual contact with a child under sixteen. In return, the State agreed to dismiss the first and second degree rape charges in both cases. At the continued arraignment, Judge Hurd told the petitioner:
[THE COURT] ... Mr. Logan, before I proceed to ask you to plead anew to Count 3, I want to once again recall with you that at the time of your initial arraignment you were advised of various constitutional and statutory rights that you enjoy in regards to this matter....
The judge again reviewed the various rights with petitioner but in his summary did not mention self-incrimination. Judge Hurd continued:
[THE COURT] ... Do you recall me advising you of those matters?
DEFENDANT LOGEN: Yes, sir.
THE COURT: Do you have any questions at all about those constitutional rights?
DEFENDANT LOGEN: No.
THE COURT: I want to make sure that you understand this also, sir. If you enter a plea of no contest to this charge you would be waiving many of those important rights because by pleading no contest the State no longer has the burden of proving your guilt beyond a reasonable doubt....
Judge Hurd then told petitioner there would be no trial and therefore no confrontation with hostile witnesses, but the judge omitted the privilege against self-incrimination when he was discussing waiver of petitioner’s rights.
The petitioner entered a plea of nolo con-tendere to Count III. He was sentenced to ten years in the South Dakota State Peni*716tentiary.1 He then filed a petition for ha-beas corpus and requested that his case be remanded for re-arraignment. Petitioner argued his plea of nolo contendere was invalid because the court did not advise him that the plea constituted waiver against self-incrimination or ascertain whether petitioner understood this. After hearing, Judge Robert C. Heege denied the writ for habeas corpus relief.
Petitioner asks this court to vacate the judgment and sentence, and to remand the case to the trial court for re-arraignment. Petitioner argues that his plea was invalid because Judge Hurd did not “advise him or ascertain whether he understood that a no contest plea would waive his privilege against self-incrimination.” Petitioner does not assert that he was unaware of this privilege, nor does he argue that he was unaware of his waiving that right. In effect, petitioner argues that because an express waiver of this right does not occur in the record, his plea cannot be found to have been voluntarily and intelligently made or with an understanding of the nature and consequences of the plea.
A plea of guilty cannot stand unless the record in some manner indicates a free and intelligent waiver by the defendant of his constitutional right to confront and cross-examine witnesses against him, his constitutional right to trial by jury, and his constitutional privilege against self-incrimination.2 Boykin v. Alabama, 395 U.S. 238, 89 S.Ct. 1709, 23 L.Ed.2d 274 (1969); State v. King, 400 N.W.2d 878 (S.D.1987); Application of Garritsen, 376 N.W.2d 575 (S.D.1985); Stacey v. State, 349 N.W.2d 439 (S.D.1984); State v. Sutton, 317 N.W.2d 414 (S.D.1982); Nachtigall v. Erickson, 85 S.D. 122, 178 N.W.2d 198 (S.D.1970).
In Nachtigall, this court held that the record must also show the accused had “an understanding of the nature and consequences of the plea.” This requirement appeared in former Rule 11(c) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure (“understanding of the nature of the charge and the consequences of the plea”). See 18 U.S.C.A., Rule 11 Advisory Notes (1986); Compare Boykin, 395 U.S. at 245, n. 7, 89 S.Ct. at 1713 n. 7; Commonwealth v. Rundle, 428 Pa. 102, 105-106, 237 A.2d 196, 197-198 (1968); Commonwealth v. Myers, 423 Pa. 1, 5 & n. 3, 222 A.2d 918, 921 & n. 3 (1966). Although Rule 11 is constitutionally based, full compliance with the statutory rule is not constitutionally mandated by Boykin. See Halliday v. United States, 394 U.S. 831, 89 S.Ct. 1498, 23 L.Ed.2d 16 (1969); McCarthy v. United States, 394 U.S. 459, 89 S.Ct. 1166, 22 L.Ed.2d 418 (1969).
Nachtigall held this second requirement is necessary for a constitutionally valid plea. However, it must be made clear that application of the rule as a constitutional requirement is bound to the free and intelligent waiver analysis of Boykin. Waiver of Boykin rights is one of the “consequences” of a guilty or nolo plea. In effect, these two requirements overlap for purposes of constitutional analysis. Knowledge of other consequences, such as the maximum range of penalties, is also important to help a defendant evaluate the case against him and make an informed plea, but such knowledge is not necessary for constitutional due process under Boy-kin.3
Logic requires that a defendant know what his Boykin rights are and what they involve, for without knowledge he cannot understanding^ waive those rights. The trial court must normally inform the de*717fendant of these rights personally to insure that the record indicates a free and intelligent waiver of these rights. However, specific articulation of these rights by the trial judge is not an indispensible requisite for the record to establish a valid plea. It is sufficient when the record in some manner shows the defendant entered his plea understanding^ and voluntarily. Garritsen, supra; Stacey, supra. See Brady v. United States, 397 U.S. 742, 90 S.Ct. 1463, 1468, 25 L.Ed.2d 747 (1970); North Carolina v. Alford, 400 U.S. 25, 31, 91 S.Ct. 160, 164, 27 L.Ed.2d 162 (1970); Wilkins v. Erickson, 505 F.2d 761, 763 (9th Cir.1974).
The record shows petitioner was aware of his privilege against self-incrimination. Both Judge Kean and Judge Hurd specifically canvassed petitioner on the privilege against self-incrimination during the initial arraignments. Although Judge Hurd failed to again mention this specific right at the continued arraignment, a criminal defendant need not be readvised of his rights immediately prior to his entering a plea of guilty. It is only necessary that the record show that he knew of his rights and the consequences of his guilty plea at the time the plea was entered. Garritsen, supra; Stacey, supra; Clark v. State, 294 N.W.2d 916 (S.D.1980). We hold this rule applies for nolo pleadings.
In addition to the judges’ canvassing these rights with the petitioner, the record also reveals that petitioner was thirty years of age, had received assistance of counsel, and once had even been tried on similar charges in a court of law.4 Thus, the record conclusively shows petitioner understood that he had a right to a jury trial and those other rights, including the privilege against self-incrimination, which attach to a jury trial.
Petitioner does not claim that he was unaware of his Boykin rights. Nor does he assert that the trial court failed to advise him of these rights, on the record, in order to establish that he was aware of these rights. Rather, he claims that the record does not establish that he freely and intelligently waived one of those Boykin rights.
There is no requirement that the record show an express enumeration by the court nor an express waiver by the defendant of the three constitutional rights mentioned in Boykin as a condition precedent to a voluntary and intelligent guilty plea. State v. Driver, 290 N.W.2d 856 (S.D.1980); Lodermeir v. State, 273 N.W.2d 163 (S.D.1978); Rust v. State, 88 S.D. 265, 218 N.W.2d 482 (1974); Crew v. Nelson, 88 S.D. 162, 216 N.W.2d 565 (1974); Merrill v. State, 87 S.D. 285, 206 N.W.2d 828 (1973). Boykin is devoid of any language stating that valid waiver requires the defendant be specifically told each of those rights he is waiving and then expressly waive each right for the record.
The record shows that petitioner knew he was waiving these constitutional rights. Judge Kean informed petitioner that a guilty plea would waive the three constitutional rights mentioned in Boykin. During arraignment in the second case, Judge Hurd did not discuss waiver of these rights. At the continued arraignment, however, petitioner stated that he recalled those important constitutional rights mentioned at his earlier arraignment before Judge Hurd, and the judge told petitioner that a plea of nolo contendere would constitute waiver of many of those important rights. When Judge Hurd then began to address waiver of each specific right, he forgot to mention the privilege against self-incrimination. However, this oversight does not invalidate petitioner’s plea. The record shows that petitioner voluntarily entered his plea with a full understanding of the rights he would be waiving. Nothing more is required for a constitutionally valid plea. In determining the validity of guilty pleas the “standard was and remains whether the plea represents a voluntary and intelligent choice among the alternative causes of action open to the defendant.” Alford, 400 U.S. at 30, 91 S.Ct. at 164.
*718Petitioner cites SDCL 23A-7-4(4) and structures his main argument around the language in the statute. SDCL 23A-7-4 and subsection 4 are identical to Rule 11(c)(4) except for the language emphasized below:
Before accepting a plea of guilty or nolo contendere a court must address the defendant personally in open court and inform him of, and determine that he understands, the following:
(4) That if he pleads guilty or nolo contendere there will not be a further trial of any kind, so that by pleading guilty or nolo contendere he waives the right to a trial, the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses against him, and the right riot to be compelled to incriminate himself. (Emphasis supplied).
SDCL 23A-7-4(4). See 18 U.S.C.A. Rule 11(c).
Failure to comply with the statutory provisions of SDCL 23A-7-4 does not amount to a constitutional defect. See Goodroad v. Solem, 406 N.W.2d 141 (S.D.1987); King, 400 N.W.2d at 880 (factual basis of a plea is not a constitutional consideration or proper on habeas appeal). However, we note that if the trial judge had canvassed the appellant under the statute this case would have never appeared before any other court.
Petitioner argues that transcripts from the prior arraignments should have never been allowed into evidence. These transcripts were not in the record at the start of the hearing, but were admitted by Judge Heege after motion by the State. Petitioner objected to the State introducing these transcripts and any other evidence because the State failed to file a return to the writ as required by SDCL 21-27-9.3. Petitioner argues this failure constituted default by the State and therefore barred admission of the State’s evidence on the merits. He cites no authority for his argument.
The failure to make a formal return will not invalidate a hearing on the merits, particularly where substantial rights of the parties are not affected. Application of Habeck, 75 S.D. 535, 69 N.W.2d 353 (1955). We do not condone the State’s Attorney’s failure to perform his duty as provided by SDCL 21-27-9.3. Nevertheless, Judge Heege was required to determine whether petitioner was imprisoned without authority of law. SDCL 21-27-14. This determination required hearing evidence on whether petitioner intelligently waived his Boy-kin rights. Therefore we find no error or abuse of discretion in the court examining the State’s evidence on the merits.
Judgment affirmed.
MORGAN, J., concurs.
SABERS and MILLER, JJ., concur specially.
HENDERSON, J., dissents.
. Evidence at the sentencing hearing indicated that on numerous occasions, during a period of some 15 years, petitioner had either been placed in psychiatric care, arrested, and/or prosecuted for rape and other sex crimes.
. A nolo contendere plea must also be given voluntarily and intelligently. A nolo plea in criminal cases has essentially the same practical effect as a guilty plea, and this includes waiver of defendant’s Boykin rights. See North Carolina v. Alford, 400 U.S. 25, 35-36, 91 S.Ct. 160, 166-167, 27 L.Ed.2d 162, 170-71 (1970).
. Federal rule 11(c)(2) which requires the judge to inform the defendant of the maximum and minimum sentences he may receive, is one of the amendments to the former Rule 11 which required the court to inform the defendant of the "consequences of the plea.”
. The presence of these facts in the record is an important consideration in determining whether there was a knowing, intelligent, and voluntary plea. King, supra; Stacey, supra; Roseland v. State, 334 N.W.2d 43 (S.D.1983).

=== CASE 9738123 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:43:13.591688+00 ===

MILLER, Justice
(concurring specially).
I concur.
This case points out the important necessity for our trial courts to religiously utilize arraignment checklists. It is seldom that we are able to hold that failure to fully advise a defendant of his Boykin/Nachti-gall rights does not result in a constitutionally infirm arraignment. Here, the collective circumstances of proceedings in multiple actions resulted in an adequate result, albeit far from perfect. The trial judges *719here are competent and experienced, not to mention most judicially active. It is incumbent upon all judges, irrespective of the frequency of their arraignment tasks, to follow their arraignment checklists to assure that all salient rights are completely explained.
Secondly, as briefly alluded to by the majority, it was not error for the habe-as corpus trial court to receive into evidence transcripts of the prior proceedings. Admittedly, the circumstances were unusual — namely, that the transcripts were received at a non-reported (for some unexplained reason) hearing, two weeks following the principal hearing on the petition. However, as a practical matter, it was not necessary for the court to receive these transcripts into evidence, since they were part of the court’s own records of which it could properly take judicial notice. Although some of the delay was caused by the time it took for the court reporter to transcribe the notes, that is irrelevant. In many other circuits in this state it is the better practice to routinely transcribe and file all felony arraignments and sentenc-ings so that the transcripts are immediately available for review in any subsequent inquiry.
Lastly, the state’s attorney’s failure to fulfill his duties under SDCL 21-27-9.3 is very serious. The record is unclear as to his reasons for not complying with the statute. Although his inaction could have resulted in some type of sanction upon him or his office, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying petitioner’s motion.

=== CASE 9738124 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:43:13.595541+00 ===

HENDEKSON, Justice
(dissenting).
In keeping with the spirit of my dissent in State v. King, 400 N.W.2d 878, 881 (S.D.1987), as well as the authorities recited therein, I dissent.
This conviction should be reversed and set aside with the case being remanded to the trial court for re-arraignment. Thereby, we would protect the integrity of arraignments in this state and serve the constitutional rights of this petitioner. So far as I can determine, Judge Hurd advised petitioner of (1) his right to a jury trial and (2) his right of confrontation and cross-examination. Silent is the record concerning the loss of privilege against self-incrimination. See continued arraignment hearing on June 24,1985, at 3-4. Petitioner’s original arraignment was on May 6, 1985. See trial arraignment, at 1-8. At said time, petitioner was advised, in detail, of the nature of the offenses, the possible penalties, and his constitutional and statutory rights. However, pleas were entered at that time and no advice was tendered to petitioner that a nolo contendere plea would waive the right against self-incrimination.
Judge Kean’s arraignment of March 18, 1985, cannot bootstrap the State’s position even though an advisement was made against self-incrimination if petitioner pleaded guilty, for, thereat, petitioner was facing a totally different charge. In Clark v. State, 294 N.W.2d 916 (S.D.1980), we held, inter alia, that a record must show the defendant had knowledge of his rights and the consequences of the guilty plea at the time it is entered. Here, we have a record which does not meet the Clark criterion.
It is to be further noted that Judge Kean’s advice pertained to the consequences of a guilty -plea and not to the consequences of a nolo contendere plea. This Court assumes too much. Petitioner cannot be expected to know that the privilege against self-incrimination is waived by either a guilty plea or nolo contendere plea. Judge Kean did not refer to a nolo contendere plea. Judge Hurd did not refer to a nolo contendere plea at the May 6, 1985 arraignment. Nolo contendere, as a plea, was never advised by any judge until Judge Hurd mentioned the consequences of such a plea on June 24, 1985. Did petitioner understand that his nolo contendere plea would amount to a loss of his privilege against self-incrimination? Nothing in the record supports it. It is not in the arraignment before Judge Kean; it is not in the arraignment before Judge Hurd; it is not in the continued arraignment before Judge Hurd; and it is not in the habeas corpus *720hearing/proceedings before Judge Heege. Let us delve further into the factual background of this case: (1) In the first arraignment before Judge Hurd, petitioner was not advised of the consequences of a possible plea; (2) in the arraignment before Judge Kean, he was advised only of the consequences of a guilty plea which pertained to a different charge; (3) only at the continued arraignment before Judge Hurd, was the petitioner advised of the consequences of a plea of nolo contendere, which advisement suffered dreadfully and constitutionally from an omission: loss of petitioner’s privilege against self-incrimination. South Dakota Constitution, BILL OF RIGHTS, article VI, § 7, provides:
In all criminal prosecutions the accused shall have the right to defend in person and by counsel; to demand the nature and cause of the accusation against him; to have a copy thereof; to meet the witnesses against him face to face; to have compulsory process served for obtaining witnesses in his behalf, and to a speedy public trial by an impartial jury of the county or district in which the offense is alleged to have been committed.
This mirrors the Sixth Amendment of the United States Constitution. Our state constitution added the provision of furnishing a copy of the Information. These rights “are fundamental in character, and the failure of the court to protect them in a criminal prosecution is a denial of due process of law. U.S. Const. Fourteenth Amendment, § 1; S.D. Const, art. VI, § 2; Powell v. State of Alabama, 287 U.S. 45, 53 S.Ct. 55, 77 L.Ed. 158, 84 A.L.R. 527 [1932].” State v. Jameson, 71 S.D. 144, 146, 22 N.W.2d 731, 732 (1946). See also S.D. Const., BILL OF RIGHTS, art. VI, § 9, which provides: “No person shall be compelled in any criminal case to give evidence against himself or be twice put in jeopardy for the same offense.”
In summation, petitioner’s plea was involuntary and will not support the conviction and the sentence upon which it is based. The last sentence of appellant’s reply brief is that petitioner did not know a nolo contendere plea would surrender the three rights set forth in my dissent in State v. King and the constitutional infirmities arising from a failure of a free and intelligent waiver of the three constitutional rights mentioned in Boykin — self-incrimination — confrontation—jury trial. We adopted these principles of Boykin in Nachtigall v. Erickson, 85 S.D. 122, 178 N.W.2d 198 (1970). And we additionally imposed that a defendant have an understanding of the nature and consequences of a plea of guilty. See commentary in Clark, 294 N.W.2d at 919.
For the majority opinion to characterize petitioner as having failed to assert that he was unaware of this privilege and not arguing that he was unaware of waiving that right (self-incrimination) does not fairly present the contentions of petitioner’s brief.
When the Constitution was written, it represented a dramatic idea to perpetuate a free people’s right to be governed by themselves under, prayerfully, an enduring document. We approach its 200th anniversary. I cannot join this opinion as I am convinced Logan has been denied his constitutional rights.

=== CASE 9738125 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:43:14.20372+00 ===

JUSTICE SPITZ delivered the opinion of the court: On August 12, 1985, plaintiffs T. L. Cain, Wayne T. Cain, and Edward J. Cain, as coexecutors of the estate of Marie M. Cain, filed a medical malpractice action in the circuit court of Champaign County against defendant Fred Sukkar, and naming Cole Hospital, Inc., A. Barnes, Americana Healthcare Center, Kenneth L. Bussey, M.D., and Anthony F. Karich, M.D., as respondents in discovery (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 110, par. 2 — 402). On January 9, 1986, Sukkar filed a motion for summary judgment on the count filed against him in the complaint. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 110, par. 2 — 1005.) On February 3, 1986, plaintiffs filed the affidavit of purported expert, Dr. Richard C. Gardner, in opposition to Sukkar’s motion for summary judgment. Thereafter, Sukkar moved to strike Gardner’s affidavit. On February 5, 1986, plaintiffs filed an objection to Sukkar’s motion to strike the affidavit, a motion to consolidate the instant action with one naming Americana Healthcare Center as defendant (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 110, par. 2 — 1006), a motion to add Kenneth L. Bussey, M.D., as a party defendant, and a first amendment to their original complaint alleging medical malpractice and naming Bussey as a defendant. On March 17, 1986, respondents in discovery, Cole Hospital, Inc., A. Barnes, and Anthony F. Karich, M.D., were dismissed with prejudice on the plaintiffs’ motion. On May 16, 1986, Sukkar filed a motion to strike Dr. Gardner’s affidavit as being merely conclusory and failing to comply with Supreme Court Rule 191 (107 Ill. 2d R. 191). A hearing on Sukkar’s motions for summary judgment and to strike Gardner’s affidavit was held on July 3, 1986. At the conclusion of the hearing, Gardner’s affidavit was stricken for failure to comply with the requirements of Supreme Court Rule 191 and Sukkar’s motion for summary judgment was taken under advisement. On July 10, 1986, the trial court entered its "written order finding, based upon the uncontradicted affidavit of the defendant, that there was no genuine issue of material fact as to the action against Sukkar. Thus, the court entered summary judgment in favor of Sukkar and against the plaintiffs. Further, the court entered its finding of no just reason to delay enforcement or appeal. 107 Ill. 2d R. 304(a). On July 29, 1986, the plaintiffs filed a motion for reconsideration and to vacate summary judgment in favor of Sukkar. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 110, par. 2 — 1203.) On September 8, 1986, Sukkar filed a motion to strike plaintiffs’ motion for reconsideration, arguing that the trial court had no jurisdiction to hear the motion. A hearing was held on September 29, 1986, after which the trial court denied Sukkar’s motion to strike and took plaintiffs’ motion for reconsideration under advisement. On October 7, 1986, the trial court entered its “Memorandum Upon Vacating Summary Judgment for Defendant Sukkar.” The court found that Gardner’s affidavit was erroneously stricken and plaintiffs were granted leave to refile the affidavit. Further, the court found that a genuine issue of material fact was raised thereby. Thus, the court vacated its July 10, 1986, order granting summary judgment in favor of Sukkar and in turn denied Sukkar’s motion for summary judgment. Sukkar now appeals from this order. Sukkar contends on appeal that as a consequence of the trial court’s entry of a Rule 304(a) finding, which immediately followed the entry of summary judgment in favor of Sukkar, the summary judgment was final and appealable and the trial court was divested of jurisdiction. Sukkar points out that the court on July 9, 1986, entered summary judgment in his favor and thereafter entered a finding pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 304(a) of no just reason to delay enforcement or appeal. Sukkar further points out that within the 30-day period following the entry of the Rule 304(a) finding, the plaintiffs filed a motion to reconsider or vacate the order granting summary judgment, which was ultimately allowed on October 7, 1986. Sukkar contends that as a result of the Rule 304(a) finding, the order granting summary judgment became immediately appealable and the circuit court was divested of jurisdiction to entertain a petition to reconsider or vacate the order.  Initially, we note that a trial court’s order vacating a judgment is ordinarily not appealable because it leaves the merits of the case pending and, therefore, is not a final order. (William Aupperle & Sons, Inc. v. American National Bank & Trust Co. (1975), 28 Ill. App. 3d 573, 329 N.E.2d 458.) However, Sukkar contends the circuit court lacked jurisdiction on October 7, 1986, to vacate the summary judgment in his favor. If Sukkar is correct, the order vacating the judgment in his favor would be void and could be challenged in this court because a void order can be directly attacked at any time on appeal. (Petersen Brothers Plastics, Inc. v. Ullo (1978), 57 Ill. App. 3d 625, 373 N.E.2d 416.) Hence, we must decide whether the circuit court’s entry of the 304(a) finding divested the court of jurisdiction.  It is fundamental that the proper filing of a notice of appeal causes the jurisdiction of the appellate court to attach instanter and deprives the trial court of jurisdiction to modify its judgment or to rule on matters of substance which are the subject of appeal. (Montgomery Ward & Co. v. Wetzel (1981), 98 Ill. App. 3d 243, 423 N.E.2d 1170.) Once an appeal has been duly filed in the appellate court by filing a notice of appeal, the trial court is restrained from entering any order which would change or modify the judgment or its scope, and from entering any order which would have the effect of interfering with the review of the judgment. (Bachewicz v. American National Bank & Trust Co. (1985), 135 Ill. App. 3d 294, 482 N.E.2d 95 (and cases cited therein).) In the case at bar, however, no notice of appeal was filed which would have deprived the circuit court of jurisdiction to rule on the plaintiffs’ motion to reconsider or vacate the summary judgment.  Rule 304, which governs “appeals from Final Judgments That Do Not Dispose of an Entire Proceeding,” provides in pertinent part: “If multiple parties or multiple claims for relief are involved in an action, an appeal may be taken from a final judgment as to one or more but fewer than all of the parties or claims only if the trial court has made an express written finding that there is no just reason for delaying enforcement or appeal. Such a finding may be made at the time of the entry of the judgment or thereafter on the court’s own motion or on motion of any party. The time for filing the notice of appeal shall run from the entry of the required finding.” (Emphasis added.) (107 Ill. 2d R. 304.) Although Rule 304 does not include any provision for post-judgment motions, our supreme court and several appellate courts have discussed situations in which post-judgment motions have followed the entry of findings of appealability pursuant of Rule 304(a). None of these courts were called upon to address the precise issue before this court. Nevertheless, the opinions demonstrate that following the entry of a Rule 304(a) finding, the circuit court retains jurisdiction to rule on a timely post-trial motion and the circuit court is not divested of jurisdiction until such time as a notice of appeal is timely filed. (See, e.g., Elg v. Whittington (1987), 119 Ill. 2d 344; Mau v. Unarco Industries, Inc. (1985), 135 Ill. App. 3d 736, 481 N.E.2d 1207; In re Estate of Tingos (1979), 72 Ill. App. 3d 703, 390 N.E.2d 1349; Petersen Brothers Plastics, Inc. v. Ullo (1978), 57 Ill. App. 3d 625, 373 N.E.2d 416.) In light of the foregoing, we hold that the circuit court had jurisdiction to rule on the plaintiffs’ timely motion to reconsider or vacate the summary judgment in favor of Sukkar.  In so holding we point out that pursuant to Rule 304(a) the time for filing the notice 'of appeal shall run from the entry of the required finding. Our supreme court in Elg has recently determined that the filing of a timely motion to reconsider a piecemeal judgment will not toll the running of the 30-day period for filing a timely notice of appeal from that judgment based upon a Rule 304(a) finding. The Elg court recognized that Rule 304(a) places the piecemeal appellant in a somewhat worse position than the usual appellant, who need not file a notice of appeal until 30 days after the denial of a motion attacking the original judgment. The court reasoned, however, that this difference in treatment is justified by the fact that a Rule 304(a) appeal is an exception to the general policy disfavoring piecemeal appeals. (Elg, 119 Ill. 2d 344.) Further, the court stated that a new rule or decision will be given prospective operation whenever injustice or hardship due to justifiable reliance on the overruled decision would thereby be averted. (Elg, 119 Ill. 2d 344.) Thus, the court held that its decision in Elg applied prospectively to all cases in which the notice of appeal was filed or due to be filed on or after November 16, 1987. (Elg, 119 Ill. 2d 344.) In reaching its decision the court stated: “Consideration of the purpose of our holding and the balance of the equities favors a prospective application. The purpose of our holding is to insure that parties contesting piecemeal judgments swiftly prosecute their appeals without engaging in unnecessary delay. In all cases previously decided or now pending the delay caused by the filing of post-trial motions has already taken place. Prospective application will not, therefore, thwart the purpose of the rule. Moreover, retroactive application of the rule would provide appellees who benefit from possibly erroneous piecemeal judgments with the unearned windfall of the dismissal of appeals against them. Conversely, it would unfairly deprive many appellants of an opportunity to have meritorious appeals heard. We believe that these considerations outweigh any prejudice caused to appellees by the unnecessary delay of these appeals.” (Elg, 119 Ill. 2d at 359.) Hence, Elg does not apply to the instant case. Accordingly, the trial court had authority to enter its order of October 7, 1986, vacating the previous summary judgment entered in favor of Sukkar on July 10, 1986. The order of the trial court entered October 7, 1986, under these circumstances is not a final order and thus is not appealable as an interlocutory order. For the foregoing reason, the appeal is dismissed. Appeal dismissed. McCullough, j., concurs.

=== CASE 9738126 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:43:14.208593+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE GREEN, specially concurring: I concur in the decision of the majority to dismiss the appeal. I agree that the October 7, 1987, order setting aside the summary judgment was not void and was an interlocutory order not made appealable by any supreme court rule and, therefore, not appealable. I disagree with the statement of the majority that the order would be appealable had it been void. (See 167 Ill. App. 3d at 944.) I recognize that not only my able panelists but other distinguished jurists disagree with me. While little harm would have resulted from our permitting an appeal had the order been void, I deem the theory upon which such a holding would be based to be contrary to" the constitutional basis of our jurisdiction and to be a theory which could have undesirable results. In concurring, I write separately for those reasons. The jurisdiction of this court is determined by the Illinois Constitution of 1970, which states that our civil jurisdiction consists of direct review of (1) “final judgments” of a circuit court not appealable directly to the supreme court; (2) such “other than final judgments” of circuit courts as the supreme court may provide by rule; and (3) “administrative action” as the legislature may provide by law. (Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, §6.) The supreme court rules make no provision for appeals from void orders. I cannot see how voidness can render final an order not otherwise final. I fail to see how, here, a void order setting aside a summary judgment would terminate the case when an order entered with jurisdiction does not do so. The rule that a void order can be attacked at any time by a person affected is a generally accepted legal principle. (46 Am. Jur. 2d Judgments §641, at 800-01 (1969).) I do not interpret that rule to be one conferring jurisdiction on a court of review. Rather, the rule provides that the issue of whether an order is void can always be raised in a case properly before a court of review. Apparently, the theory that voidness creates appealability originates in language of the Illinois Supreme Court in Barnard v. Michael (1945), 392 Ill. 130, 63 N.E.2d 858. There, an order was entered in a county court in a probate proceeding on November 4, 1940, ordering a sale of real estate. In 1944, a report of sale was filed and objections were made to the report. Appeal was taken to the supreme court from an order approving the report of sale. The supreme court had jurisdiction under law in force at that time, because the order was final and a freehold was involved. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1943, ch. 37, par. 32.) The court concluded (1) the court had jurisdiction to enter the 1940 order for the sale; (2) that order had appealability because of its finality (Anderson v. Anderson (1930), 338 Ill. 309, 170 N.E. 212), and any error involved could not later be raised at the hearing on the report of sale; and (3) any error in approving the report of sale could not then be rectified, because the property had been sold to a purchaser not a party to the case, and more than 30 days had elapsed. Accordingly, the court dismissed the appeal as being moot. In describing how, if the county court lacked jurisdiction to enter the order for sale, the propriety of that order could have been attacked in the county court at the time of the hearing on the report of sale, which occurred four years after the order of sale, the supreme court stated: “A judgment, order or decree entered by a court which lacks jurisdiction of the parties or of the subject matter, or which lacks the inherent power to make or enter the particular order involved, is void, and may be attacked at any time or in any court, either directly or collaterally.” (Emphasis added.) (Barnard, 392 Ill. at 135, 63 N.E.2d at 861-62.) I do not interpret that language to be directed to the supreme court’s jurisdiction to hear the appeal. Rather, the language was directed (1) to the trial court’s power to correct its own final order after 30 days if the order had been issued without jurisdiction; and (2) to the power of the supreme court, which had jurisdiction because the order approving the report of sale was final and involved a free hold, to set aside the order for the sale if it was void even if that question had not been raised previously. In City of Chicago v. Fair Employment Practices Comm’n (1976), 65 Ill. 2d 108, 357 N.E .2d 1154, the city filed in the circuit court a complaint for administrative review of a final order of the Fair Employment Practices Commission but failed, by four days, to meet the statutory deadline for filing. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 110, par. 267.) The supreme court recognized that timely filing was ordinarily a jurisdictional requirement but concluded that, because the Commission order was void, review could be sought at any time. The previously quoted language from Barnard was cited. Most recently, in Weingart v. Department of Labor (1988), 122 Ill. 2d 1, citing City of Chicago, the supreme court held the circuit court had jurisdiction of a case on administrative review even though the complaint was filed several months after the statutory deadline for administrative review. The decisions in City of Chicago and Weingart are binding precedent upon us, but both concern final orders of an administrative agency, a type of order for which the legislature had provided for administrative review in the circuit court. See Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, §9. The cases which have holdings or dictum directly on point stating that voidness gives appealability to otherwise unappealable orders begin with that of the First District Appellate Court in Underwood v. Yellow Cab Co. (1971), 131 Ill. App. 2d 449, 268 N.E.2d 254. There, the circuit court had vacated an order dismissing a case for want of prosecution. The court recognized that such an order ordinarily “is not a final and appealable order.” (Underwood, 131 Ill. App. 2d at 452, 268 N.E.2d at 256.) Nevertheless, there, the order was void because it was entered after a second, and void, motion for reconsideration. Without citation of authority, the court held the voidness of the order made it appealable. The court did not say whether voidness made the order final or whether void interlocutory orders are appeal-able. Subsequently, in Petersen Brothers Plastics, Inc. v. Ullo (1978), 57 Ill. App. 3d 625, 373 N.E.2d 416, and Mares v. Metzler (1980), 87 Ill. App. 3d 881, 409 N.E.2d 447, the appellate court for the First District dismissed appeals from orders vacating final orders and requiring further proceedings. The orders of vacation were held to lack finality and not to be otherwise appealable. In each case, the court noted the circuit court had jurisdiction to enter the orders from which appeal was sought and stated that, if jurisdiction had been lacking, those orders would be appealable. In Petersen Brothers Plastics, Inc., Underwood was cited, and in Mares, Petersen Brothers Plastics, Inc. was cited. The appellate court for the Fifth District struggled with a similar problem in Williams v. A. E. Staley Manufacturing Co. (1980), 80 Ill. App. 3d 981, 400 N.E.2d 724, rev’d on other grounds (1981), 83 Ill. 2d 559, 416 N.E.2d 252. There, the circuit court had dismissed a complaint in bar of action after the plaintiff had defaulted in complying with discovery requirements. Seventy-nine days thereafter, the plaintiff filed a motion to amend the order of dismissal to state the dismissal was without prejudice to plaintiff’s right to refile. The motion did not conform to then section 72 of the Civil Practice Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 110, par. 72). Nevertheless, the circuit court heard and purported to allow the motion even though it had lost jurisdiction 30 days after entry of the order. No contention of revestment was made. The defendant appealed. The appellate court recognized the order was not appealable under Supreme Court Rule 304(b)(3) (73 Ill. 2d R. 304(b)(3)), because that rule applied only to rulings on section 72 petitions. The court also noted that, ordinarily, an order vacating a judgment is not final, since it leaves the merits of the case pending, and that, absent finality, an order is appealable only if provision is made for such an appeal by supreme court rules. The Williams majority opinion was written by a distinguished former member of the appellate court of the State, Charles Jones, who has studied and lectured extensively on matters of procedure. The opinion was concerned with problems which would arise if final judgments could be set aside and further proceedings ordered by courts purporting to act at a time they lacked jurisdiction. The opinion concluded that the rule of Underwood and Petersen Brothers Plastics, Inc., giving appealability to void orders, was a fair and appropriate answer to the problem. The court accepted the appeal and reversed the void order. No rationale was given as to how an appeal from an order of the nature involved fit into the constitutional scheme of appellate court jurisdiction. Finally, in Havlen v. Waggoner (1981), 92 Ill. App. 3d 916, 416 N.E.2d 684, appeal was attempted to the Appellate Court for the Fifth District from a circuit court order setting aside a default judgment. The appellate court remanded the case to the circuit court for a factual determination as to whether that court had jurisdiction to hear the request to set aside the default judgment. The court, citing Williams, stated that if the circuit court had no jurisdiction to set aside the judgment, the order doing so was “final and appealable.” (Havlen, 92 Ill. App. 3d at 918, 416 N.E.2d at 686.) Thus, the apparent reason for designating such an order appealable is that it is final. As I have indicated, I must respectfully state I can find no logical reason to describe an order, whether void or valid, which sets aside a judgment and leaves a claim at issue, as a “final” order. The cases of City of Chicago and Weingart are binding precedent upon us, but I would not expand upon their theory. They only concern the time for filing for administrative review. The Illinois Constitution of 1970 does not speak to this issue. The cases do not speak directly to the type of orders which are appealable. If we interpret the theory that a void order can be appealed to any court at any time, a wide variety of situations could arise whereby a party against whom an interlocutory order is entered, not in the course of trial, could, in good faith, contend the circuit court lacked jurisdiction and claim an appeal as a matter of right to the supreme court. In a less nonsensical application of the rule, such a party could claim a right to appeal to the appellate court. Many examples of how the rule that voidness of an order creates appealability might be used to stall proceedings can be cited. In civil cases under statutes, uncertainty still exists as to whether the subject matter jurisdiction of the circuit court is dependent upon statutory compliance. A party against whom an interlocutory order is entered in such a case could often, in good faith, take an appeal from such an order. That appeal could be from an order denying a continuance of trial. A defendant in a civil case entering a special appearance under section 2 — 301 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 110, par. 2 — 301) on the grounds he is not amenable to process by courts of this State, losing his motion to dismiss, and being denied leave to appeal under Supreme Court Rule 306(a)(lXiii) (107 Ill. 2d R. 306(a)(l)(iii)), could then appeal the next order entered against him contending the court lacked jurisdiction of his person, thus rendering the order void. He would, thus, raise the very issue which under Rule 306(a)(l)(iii) is one which a reviewing court has discretion as to whether to decide. The Williams court properly pointed out that situations may arise where, in fairness to the parties, review should be granted from some type of void interlocutory order. However, the likelihood of this happening is the reason that the judicial article (Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI) created a power to make rules to cover such situations. With sincere respect of those who disagree with my analysis, I submit that to deem the instant order appealable if void, tortures the well-defined constitutional direction as to appealability. Such a mistake cannot be avoided by designating orders lacking in the attributes of finality as being “final” because appealability would appear desirable in a particular instance.

=== CASE 2213572 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:33.389249+00 ===

240 Cal.App.2d 348 (1966)
THOMAS K. McMANUS et al., Plaintiffs and Respondents,
v.
SEQUOYAH LAND ASSOCIATES, Defendant and Appellant.
Civ. No. 22519.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. One.
Feb. 24, 1966.
Sturgis, Den-Dulk, Douglass & Anderson and Robert T. Anderson for Defendant and Appellant.
John Felton Turner for Plaintiffs and Respondents.
MOLINARI, J.
Plaintiffs brought this action to recover from defendant, Sequoyah Land Associates, a corporation, one-half of the costs of improving an easement which runs across plaintiffs' property and which, at the time the improvements were made, was owned by defendant, and to enjoin defendant from trespassing on plaintiffs' property. After trial without a jury, the court entered judgment for $21,374.82 in favor of plaintiffs, this amount constituting one-half of the amount the court found to be the fair and reasonable cost of *350 improving the subject easement, but denied plaintiffs the injunctive relief they sought. From that portion of the judgment in favor of plaintiffs defendant appeals,  [fn. 1] urging in particular that there was in fact no easement in existence when plaintiffs constructed the roadway on their property; that, if there was in fact an easement in existence at that time, plaintiffs as the owners of the servient tenement had no right to improve it at the expense of defendant without defendant's consent; and that requiring defendant to pay one-half of the cost of the improvements would constitute an unjust enrichment to plaintiffs.
The Record
Prior to March 16, 1959 one Sarah Mendonca owned two adjoining parcels of land of approximately 17 acres and 10 acres (hereafter referred to as parcels A and B, respectively) in the City of San Leandro  [fn. 2] By deed dated March 16, 1959 Sarah Mendonca conveyed parcel A to defendant and on the same day granted defendant an easement of approximately 60 feet in width running north and south across parcel B to Williams Street, which formed the southern boundary of parcel B. This easement, according to the terms of the grant, was "A non-exclusive, perpetual easement and right of way" generally for street and utility purposes. The grant further provided that the easement was subject to the following conditions: "1--In the event the party of the second part, its successors or assigns, desire to use said easement, as set forth herein, the cost of improving same (which shall be approved by the City of San Leandro and according to City of San Leandro specifications) shall be bourne [sic] equally by the owner or owners of said Parcel 'A' and by the owner or owners of Parcel 'B' hereinafter described. ... 3--In the event the Party of the second part herein, its successors or assigns, do not want to use said easement as set forth herein, or to use said easement only for sewer purposes, within a period of three years from the date of this instrument, then this instrument shall be considered null and void."
Testimony concerning the circumstances surrounding the grant of easement was conflicting: Arthur Mendonca, who had *351 executed the grant of easement as attorney in fact for his mother, Sarah Mendonca, testified that Diane Mason, the real estate broker, requested this easement on behalf of defendant. However, John Thiel, defendant's vice president, who testified on behalf of defendant, stated that defendant had not requested the easement, but that it had been proposed by Diane Mason, who had prepared the actual document.
On March 16, 1962 defendant caused to be recorded the grant of easement and a document entitled "Declaration of Election to Use Easement." This document provided that "Sequoyah Land Associates, a corporation, hereby declares, elects and expresses its desire and intention to use that certain easement granted by Sarah C. Mendonca, a widow, on March 16th, 1959, which grant is recorded concurrently herewith and incorporated herein as follows: ..." At this point in the instrument the provisions of the grant of easement were set out in full, including descriptions of the easement and of the dominant and servient tenements and the conditions to which the grant was subject. The document concluded with the following language: "The intention and purpose of this declaration is to exercise the option and use the easement granted to Sequoyah Land Associates by the grant as set forth above for all the purposes of the grant (and not to use said easement only for a sewer pipe line)  [fn. [3]] and otherwise to comply with all of the conditions of said grant."
On February 11, 1963 Arthur Mendonca, having inherited parcel B upon his mother's death, conveyed this land to plaintiffs. Commencing in the latter part of 1962, prior to the date on which plaintiffs acquired title to parcel B, and continuing through April 1963, plaintiffs, through letter, telephone conversations, and several face-to-face meetings, advised the officers of defendant that they desired to develop parcel B; that they were prepared to proceed with defendant in improving defendant's easement across parcel B; that they considered the construction of the improvements on the easement to be a matter of some urgency; and that they would appreciate defendant's cooperation in selecting an engineer to determine the requirements, specifications, and costs for *352 constructing a street on the easement. In addition, plaintiffs furnished defendant with a preliminary sketch of the roadway and an estimate of the costs of constructing this roadway. Throughout these communications defendant remained noncommittal as to its plans for proceeding with the development of the easement. However, by letter dated April 9, 1963, Lewis Keller, defendant's secretary, informed plaintiffs that defendant did not desire to proceed with plans for the construction of a roadway across plaintiffs' property at that time. Thereafter, from April 12, 1963 until May 1, 1963 there ensued a series of communications between plaintiffs and defendant. Plaintiffs indicated to defendant that they would proceed with the construction of the roadway and that they expected to be reimbursed by defendant for one-half of the costs incurred. The tenor of defendant's communications to plaintiffs was that defendant asserted its easement rights under the grant; that the determination of the time at which the easement would be developed was solely that of defendant; that the proposal to develop the easement did not at that time fit defendant's plans; that when defendant was ready to proceed with the improvement it would advise plaintiffs so that mutually satisfactory plans could be worked out; that plaintiffs should desist from any activity which would affect the easement; and that if plaintiffs persisted in proceeding with the development they did so at their own risk and expense.
Plaintiffs proceeded with the construction of the roadway along the line of defendant's easement across parcel B upon securing approval of their plans from the City of San Leandro. During the course of construction plaintiffs advised defendant of the nature and cost of the work and, upon completion of the roadway in January 1964, presented defendant with a statement for one- half of the total cost amounting to $44,963.55. Payment was refused by defendant. Subsequently, the roadway was approved by the City of San Leandro and, upon being dedicated as a public street, was named Neptune Drive. Following the filing of the instant action defendant sold parcel A and recorded a document entitled "Declaration of Election Not to Use Easement." In finding for plaintiffs the trial court disallowed an "overhead" item and set the actual total cost of the roadway improvement at $42,749.64, of which one-half was assessed against defendant.
Existence of the Easement
Considering defendant's first contention, namely, that at the time plaintiffs constructed the roadway on their property, *353 there was in fact no easement in existence, we note that defendant's argument is predicated on the assertion that the language used in the grant of easement is so uncertain as to be unenforceable. Specifically, defendant argues that the grant "can be interpreted to mean that the grantee must use the easement within the 3 year period, or that 'wanting' to use it means at least some action taken in regard to the development of the easement, or that the mere declaration is all that is required." While we agree with defendant that the language of the grant of easement is ambiguous, such ambiguity does not require a conclusion that defendant acquired nothing by the grant. Rather, we are faced with a problem of interpreting the language of the grant of easement in order to determine which interpretation is the proper one.
[1] In construing an instrument conveying an easement the rules applicable to the construction of deeds generally apply. (Kerr v. Brede, 180 Cal.App.2d 149, 150 [4 Cal.Rptr. 443]; Eastman v. Piper, 68 Cal.App. 554, 561 [229 P. 1002].) [2] Accordingly, where the language of a grant of easement is ambiguous, extrinsic evidence is admissible to determine its meaning. (Schofield v. Bany, 175 Cal.App.2d 534, 536-537 [346 P.2d 891]; Wright v. Best, 19 Cal.2d 368, 383 [121 P.2d 702]; Code Civ. Proc.,  1856; see Laux v. Freed, 53 Cal.2d 512, 522-523 [2 Cal.Rptr. 265, 348 P.2d 873].) [3] Where such evidence is properly received the appellate court will accept or adhere to the interpretation adopted by the trial court where the extrinsic evidence is conflicting and conflicting inferences arise therefrom. (Parsons v. Bristol Development Co., 62 Cal.2d 861, 865-866 [44 Cal.Rptr. 767, 401 P.2d 839]; Estate of Platt, 21 Cal.2d 343, 352 [131 P.2d 825].) [4] Where, on the other hand, extrinsic evidence is received but there is no conflict in the evidence the interpretation of the instrument becomes a question of law and the appellate court is not bound by the trial court's interpretation of it. (Parsons v. Bristol Development Co., supra, pp. 865-866; Estate of Platt, supra, p. 352.)
[5a] In the instant case the only extrinsic evidence contained in the record concerning the interpretation of the grant of easement is the document entitled "Declaration of Election to Use Easement," which was recorded on behalf of defendant, plus the series of communications between plaintiffs and various officers of defendant. This evidence makes it abundantly clear that the officers of defendant, throughout their dealings with plaintiffs, believed that their company *354 possessed an easement across plaintiffs' property and that by virtue of their "Declaration of Election to Use Easement" they had prevented the grant from becoming null and void pursuant to the terms of condition "3" under the grant. In other words, it was clearly the belief of defendant's officers that in order to prevent the grant of easement from being nullified under condition "3" of the grant, the only action which defendant had to take within three years from the date of the grant was to express its intention to use the easement. Moreover, it is also clear that defendant considered that an easement existed from the filing of a document entitled "Declaration of Election Not to Use Easement" subsequent to the bringing of this action.
[6] It is a well-established rule in California that the acts of the parties under and pursuant to an instrument afford one of the most reliable means of arriving at their intention. (Cutter Laboratories, Inc. v. Twining, 221 Cal.App.2d 302, 312 [34 Cal.Rptr. 317]; Sierad v. Lilly, 204 Cal.App.2d 770, 774 [22 Cal.Rptr. 580]; Collins v. Home Savings & Loan Assn., 205 Cal.App.2d 86, 99 [22 Cal.Rptr. 817].) This rule is stated in the case of Lawrence Block Co. v. Palston, 123 Cal.App.2d 300, 311 [266 P.2d 856], as follows: "A construction given a contract by the acts and conduct of the parties with knowledge of its terms, before any controversy has arisen as to its meaning, is entitled to great weight and will when reasonable be adopted and enforced by the court. [Citation.] The practical construction of a contract made by the parties thereto is the best evidence of what they intended. [Citations.]" [5b] In the instant action the trial court found that the grant of easement to defendant was in force at the time of the filing of the action. Although we are not bound by this finding, the interpretation of the subject grant of easement being a question of law since there is no conflict in the extrinsic evidence in the present case (Parsons v. Bristol Development Co., supra, pp. 865- 866.), we are, nevertheless, in accord with the trial court's interpretation of the instrument based upon the extrinsic evidence consisting of defendant's acts and conduct subsequent to the execution of the grant of easement. Accordingly, we conclude that there is no merit to defendant's contention that at the time plaintiffs constructed a roadway on their property there was in fact no easement in existence.
Right to Reimbursement
The thrust of defendant's appeal is focused on the contention *355 that, assuming there was an easement in existence in favor of defendant at the time plaintiffs constructed the roadway on their property, plaintiffs, as the owners of the servient tenement, did not have the right to improve defendant's easement and to charge defendant for these improvements without defendant's consent. We know of no statutory or case law in California concerning the rights of a servient tenement owner to make major improvements to an easement which runs across his property and to charge the dominant tenement owner with a portion of the costs of these improvements. Civil Code section 845, which deals with sharing the costs of maintaining a right-of-way,  [fn. 4] and the case of Holland v. Braun, 139 Cal.App.2d 626 [294 P.2d 51], which concerns apportionment of the costs of improving an easement, both relate to apportionment of these costs as between joint owners of an easement, that is where the easement itself is owned by more than one person or is attached to parcels of land under different ownership. In Holland, the plaintiffs and the defendants were the several owners of land abutting on an unpaved jointly- owned easement to which each owner had a nonexclusive right for road purposes. The plaintiffs wanted to and did, without the defendants' consent, improve the easement by paving it. Relying on Civil Code section 845, the plaintiffs then sought to compel the defendants to pay their proportionate share of the cost of paving the road. Based on these facts both the trial court and the appellate court held that the paving of the road was not "maintaining it in repair" as that term is used in section 845, and that without the defendants' consent to the performing of this work the plaintiffs could not enforce contribution by the defendants for this work.
[7] In view of the foregoing it is apparent that in this state nonconsenting coowners of an easement in the nature of a right-of-way may be compelled to contribute to the keeping of the way in repair, but they may not, without their consent, be compelled to contribute to the cost of major improvements. *356 [8] It is equally well settled that as between an easement owner and the owner of the land upon which the easement is situated (i.e., the servient tenement owner), the duty to keep the easement in repair rests on the former rather than the latter. (Ware v. Walker, 70 Cal. 591, 596 [12 P. 475]; Durfee v. Garvey, 78 Cal. 546, 551 [21 P. 302]; Bean v. Stoneman, 104 Cal. 49, 55-56 [37 P. 777, 38 P. 39]; Herzog v. Grosso, 41 Cal.2d 219, 228 [259 P.2d 429]; Bailey v. Superior Court, 142 Cal.App.2d 47, 56-57 [297 P.2d 795]; Conklin v. Goodson, 125 Cal.App.2d 823, 825 [271 P.2d 147].)
Applying these principles to the instant case we must conclude, absent any contractual obligation providing to the contrary, that: (1) If defendant was the sole owner of the easement it was its duty to keep the easement in repair; (2) if defendant and plaintiffs were coowners of the easement because of its nonexclusive nature, then, plaintiffs could require defendant to contribute to the cost of repairing the right-of-way in proportion to the use of the right-of-way made by plaintiffs and defendant; and (3) in either situation, however, defendant could not be compelled to contribute without its consent to the cost of major improvements such as the construction of the subject roadway.
[9] The question presents itself, therefore, as to whether under the terms of the grant of easement in the instant case, plaintiffs, as owners of the servient tenement, were authorized to construct the subject roadway improvement on the path of defendant's easement, and, if so, whether one-half of the costs thereof could be charged by plaintiffs to defendant. Condition "1" of the grant of easement, as we interpret it, contemplates that a roadway be constructed along the path of the easement. The reference in said condition and in condition "3" to "use of the easement" means development of the easement by constructing a roadway thereon. The easement itself is described in the grant as a "right of way for use as a roadway, for vehicles of all kinds. ..." Condition "1" of the grant speaks of "improving" the easement according to the City of San Leandro specifications and with the city's approval "In the event ... [the grantee] desire[s] to use said easement. ..." (Italics added.) Moreover, condition "3" of the grant, which states that "this instrument shall be considered null and void" in the event that the grantee "do[es] not want to use said easement as set forth herein," is most reasonably susceptible to the interpretation that the grantee must desire to construct a roadway on the easement in order to prevent the grant from being nullified. Finally, we note *357 that in two of the letters on behalf of defendant from Keller to plaintiffs, Keller uses the phrase "construction of the easement. ..."
In accord with this interpretation of the grant of easement, it follows that defendant, by recording its "Declaration of Election to Use Easement" in which it stated that it intended to comply with all of the conditions of the grant of easement, must be held to have agreed to the construction of a roadway on the easement and to the obligation to pay one-half of its cost. This interpretation, made by us as a matter of law since there are no conflicts in the extrinsic evidence received with respect to the interpretation of the grant of easement, coincides with that made by the trial court. Moreover, if our scope of review were governed by the principles applicable where conflicting inferences may be drawn from conflicting evidence we would be required to hold that the trial court's interpretation finds substantial support in the evidence.
Unjust Enrichment
[10] Defendant's final contention is that the payment by it of one-half of the cost to plaintiffs of improving defendant's easement would constitute unjust enrichment to plaintiffs. On this issue the trial court found that the improvements to said easement were for the benefit of both the servient and dominant tenement owners and for the benefit of both parcel A and parcel B, and specifically found that such improvements were not solely for the benefit of plaintiffs and the property owned by them. We have concluded that these findings are substantially supported by the following evidence in the record and that accordingly defendant's contention is without merit: Witnesses for defendant testified that their property was otherwise landlocked or that they were concerned about being landlocked; that the easement was advantageous to defendant; that defendant recorded its "Declaration of Election to Use Easement" in order to perfect the easement and that defendant wanted to comply with all of the terms of conditions of the grant; and that the right-of-way was frequently crossed from defendant's property onto plaintiffs' property. The record discloses, moreover, that the paved roadway extends to the railroad right-of-way separating parcel A and parcel B. Since there is nothing in the record to indicate that the railroad right-of-way prevented defendant from having access to the paved roadway, the trial court was justified in drawing the inference that a 60-foot wide paved roadway, consisting of a dedicated public street, running directly *358 from defendant's land to Williams Street, a public thoroughfare, was of a permanent, practical and substantial benefit to parcel A.
That portion of the judgment appealed from is affirmed.
Sullivan, P. J., and Sims, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. Plaintiffs have not appealed from that portion of the judgment denying them the injunctive relief which they sought.
[fn. 2]  2. Although plaintiffs' complaint and the pretrial order designate parcels A and B as adjoining, it appeared at the trial that a spur track right-of-way owned by the Southern Pacific Company runs approximately east and west between the two parcels, having been in existence since prior to the grant of easement to defendant.
[fn. [3]]  [3]. The grant of easement also contained a provision which read as follows: "2--In the event the party of the second part its successors or assigns desire to use said easement only for a sewer pipe line, the cost of installing said sewer pipe line, (which shall be approved by the City of San Leandro and according to the City of San Leandro specifications) shall be borne equally by the owner or owners of said Parcel 'A' and by the owner or owners of Parcel 'B' hereinafter described."
[fn. 4]  4. Specifically, Civ. Code,  845 provides in pertinent part as follows: "The owner of any easement in the nature of a private right of way, or of any land to which any such easement is attached, shall maintain it in repair. If the easement is owned by more than one person, or is attached to parcels of land under different ownership, the cost of maintaining it in repair shall be shared by each owner of the easement or the owners of the parcels of land, as the case may be, pursuant to the terms of any agreement entered into by the parties for that purpose. In the absence of an agreement, the cost shall be shared proportionately to the use made of the easement by each owner."

=== CASE 2213573 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:33.402087+00 ===

167 Ill. App.3d 529 (1988)
521 N.E.2d 628
ANTONIO EADS, a Minor by his Mother and Next Friend, Bonnie Helfand, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
JOHN THOMAS, Indiv. and d/b/a Thomas' Garage, et al., Defendants-Appellees (John Thomas, Indiv. and d/b/a Thomas' Garage, Third-Party Plaintiff; Carman Enterprises, Inc., Third-Party Defendant).
No. 4-87-0508.
Illinois Appellate Court  Fourth District.
Opinion filed March 30, 1988.
Rehearing denied April 29, 1988.
*530 Perz, McGuire, Condon & Ridge, of Chicago (Joseph T. McGuire and Stephen J. Smalling, of counsel), for appellant.
Glen A. Featherstun and Frederic L. Kenney, both of Armstrong, Winters, Prince, Featherstun & Johnson, of Decatur, for appellee John Thomas.
Garry E. Davis, of Erickson, Davis, Murphy & Paine, Ltd., of Decatur, for appellee Keith Shell.
Judgment affirmed.
JUSTICE LUND delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiff Antonio Eads, a minor, by his mother and next friend, Bonnie Helfand, appeals from orders of the circuit court of DeWitt County, granting summary judgment in favor of defendant John Thomas, individually and d/b/a Thomas' Garage (Thomas), as to plaintiff's count I of the fifth-amended complaint and granting summary judgment in favor of defendant Keith Shell, individually and d/b/a Shell-Downs Motors (Shell), as to plaintiff's count III of the fifth-amended complaint. The trial court entered Supreme Court Rule 304(a) (107 Ill.2d R. 304(a)) findings as to both orders.
The cause of action results from an accident on June 22, 1984. Plaintiff was a 12-year-old boy who had been befriended by Thomas and his employees. Thomas ran a gasoline service station adjoining Shell's garage and on property Thomas leased from Shell. Thomas and his family owned a race car and participated in stock car races. On June 22, 1984, work was being done on the race car, and plaintiff took a wheel to the air pump, filled the tire, and rolled it back to the area of the race car. The wheel exploded, blowing off part of the rim and injuring plaintiff.
Counts I and III of the amended complaint attempt to state a cause of action based on a violation of section 7 of the Child Labor Law (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 48, par. 31.7). The allegations in the two counts did not state plaintiff was employed by either Thomas or Shell. *531 Instead, it was alleged that the plaintiff "was injured in the course of doing work," and referred to the defendants violating "the duty to refrain from permitting or suffering the minor plaintiff to work in or about a service station." The record clearly indicates the plaintiff was not an employee of either Thomas or Shell.
The Child Labor Law provided in part:
"No minor under the age of 16 years of age shall be employed, permitted or suffered to work:
* * *
(17) In or about any filling station or service station." (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 48, par. 31.7(17).)
Plaintiff argues that "permitted or suffered to work" should be interpreted as applying the Child Labor Law to his performance of an act of work, i.e., servicing a tire. He contends section 7 of the Child Labor Law protects not only those who are employed, but also those who are allowed to do work at a garage, filling station, or service station.
Purtell v. Philadelphia & Reading Coal & Iron Co. (1912), 256 Ill. 110, 99 N.E. 899, and Gorczynski v. Nugent (1948), 402 Ill. 147, 83 N.E.2d 495, are cited for plaintiff's position. While Purtell explains that one of the purposes of the Child Labor Law is to protect children from hazardous occupations, neither case stands for plaintiff's position in the present case. Purtell involved a young boy being employed by the defendant's laborers to haul water during the work process. Gorczynski involved a young child being employed by a horse owner at defendant's horse track. Both boys were employed, and the work done related to the occupation of the defendants. As we have indicated, Antonio Eads was not employed.
The legislative history is devoid of legislative debate which would assist in interpreting the Child Labor Law. The Child Labor Law has historically contained two prohibitive sections. Section 1 of the Child Labor Law was in effect prior to the 1945 amendment of House Bill 508 (64th Ill. Gen. Assem., House Bill 508, 1945 Sess; 1945 Ill. Laws 754) and provided a general limitation as to certain listed occupations, and provided in part:
"No minor under the age of fourteen years shall be employed, permitted or suffered to work at any gainful occupation in, for or in connection with, any * * *." Ill. Rev. Stat. 1945, ch. 48, par. 17.
Section 10 of the Child Labor Law referred to many seemingly hazardous occupations and began with the words:
"No minors under the age of sixteen years shall be employed *532 at sewing belts, in any capacity * * *." (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1945, ch. 48, par. 26.)
Section 1 of the 1945 amendment, which is similar to the present Child Labor Law, began with the words:
"No minor under sixteen years of age at any time shall be employed, permitted or suffered to work in any gainful occupation in connection with * * *." (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1945, ch. 48, par. 31.1.)
Section 7 of the 1945 amendment was entitled "Hazardous occupation" and, evidently, replaced the prior section 10. Section 7 provided:
"No minor under the age of sixteen (16) years of age shall be employed, permitted or suffered to work * * *." (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1945, ch. 48, par. 31.7.)
Section 7 then listed areas of work, but did not use the term "any gainful occupation."
All of the sections we have considered are descendants of the 1897 Child Labor Law to regulate the employment of children. Section 1 of the 1897 Child Labor Law provides in total:
"That no child under the age of fourteen years shall be employed, permitted or suffered to work for wages at any gainful occupation hereinafter mentioned." (1897 Ill. Laws 90.)
Section 2 of the 1897 Child Labor Law (1897 Ill. Laws 90) places a record-keeping duty on the "person, firm or corporation * * * employing minors." The required record keeping applied to "every child employed, or permitted or suffered to work therein under the age of sixteen years."
Sections 4, 5 and 6 of the 1897 Child Labor Law provided:
"Sec. 4. No person under the age of sixteen years shall be employed or suffered to work for wages at any gainful occupation more than sixty hours in any one week, nor more than ten hours in any one day.
Sec. 5. The presence of any person under sixteen years of age in any manufacturing establishment, factory or workshop shall constitute prima facie evidence of his or her employment therein.
Sec. 6. No child under the age of sixteen years shall be employed, or permitted or suffered to work by any person, firm or corporation in this State at such extra hazardous employment whereby its life or limb is in danger, or its health is likely to be injured, or its morals may be depraved." 1897 Ill. Laws 90, 91.
 1 The use of the phrase "gainful occupation" implies an employment relationship. "Occupation" in the sense used in these sections is *533 defined as "one's regular business or employment." (Black's Law Dictionary 1230 (4th ed. 1951).) The other terminology of the various sections of the Child Labor Law implies employment. Illinois courts have interpreted the words "permitted or suffered" to impose liability on a defendant who does not directly employ a minor in violation of the Child Labor Law, but who has enough control over the employer to discover the illegal employment and put an end to it. Purtell v. Philadelphia & Reading Coal & Iron Co. (1912), 256 Ill. 110, 99 N.E. 899 (coal company owed duty of reasonable care to stop its employees' long-standing custom of illegally hiring minors as water boys); Gorczynski v. Nugent (1948), 402 Ill. 147, 83 N.E.2d 495 (racing board rules empowered defendant race track to suspend horse owner for illegally employing minor).
 2 Regardless, we find this issue to be determined by a basic rule of statutory construction. Sections 17.3 and 19 of the Child Labor Law (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 48, pars. 31.17-3, 31.19) provide for penalties. Section 19 makes a violation of the Child Labor Law a Class A misdemeanor and provides for a separate offense for each day the violation continues. A Class A misdemeanor can result in a fine of $1,000 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 1005-9-1(a)(2)) and confinement of any time less than one year (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 1005-8-3(a)(1)). Penal statutes are strictly construed. 3 A. Sutherland, Statutory Construction § 59.03 (4th ed. 1986); People v. Standerfer (1950), 339 Ill. App. 454, 458, 90 N.E.2d 229, 231; People v. Lund (1943), 382 Ill. 213, 216, 46 N.E.2d 929, 930; see Edwards v. Hill (1849), 11 Ill. 22, 23.
We recognize there are statutes penal in nature, yet "enacted for the benefit of the public generally and should receive a fair and reasonable construction." (People v. Tallmadge (1927), 328 Ill. 210, 215, 159 N.E. 319, 322.) The present statute is enacted for the benefit of those who come within its coverage. We find that the strict construction rule application does not interfere with a fair and reasonable construction. Early history indicates the intention was to prevent employer exploitation of children by employing them in hazardous occupations. If we adopt plaintiff's argument, the operator of a service station could be exposed to a violation of the Child Labor Law when a customer's 15-year-old child fills the gas tank of the family auto at a self-service pump. Limiting the Child Labor Law to the employed is not unreasonable. Extension of the coverage of the Child Labor Law is more properly within the realm of the legislative branch of government than the judicial branch.
 3 Both counts I and III were premised on a violation of the *534 Child Labor Law. Employment, not just work, was required before the Child Labor Law could be violated. Plaintiff was not employed. The summary judgments were correctly entered.
 4 Plaintiff alleges error relating to violation of local Rule 2.1(f) (Rules of Practice of the Circuit Court, Sixth Judicial Circuit, Rule 2.1(f), eff. June 1, 1983), which provides that a motion for summary judgment will not be heard until at least 10 days after service of the motion. At the hearing, the trial court heard plaintiff's objection and indicated a willingness to grant a motion for continuance to give plaintiff additional time. Plaintiff's attorney withdrew his motion prior to the argument on the summary judgment motions. Any error is waived.
Plaintiff's argument contending a violation of his right to trial by jury is frivolous and does not justify further comment.
For the above reasons, the decisions of the circuit court of DeWitt County are affirmed.
Affirmed.
KNECHT and SPITZ, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2213575 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:33.418956+00 ===

240 Cal.App.2d 546 (1966)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
RAYMOND JERRY LEWIS, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 10852.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Four.
Mar. 2, 1966.
Stiles Wegener, under appointment by the District Court of Appeal, for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, and S. Clark Moore, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
FILES, P.J.
On December 23, 1964, defendant was charged with one count of burglary, a violation of section 459 of the Penal Code. The information was amended before trial to allege six prior convictions. Defendant pled "Not Guilty" and admitted the second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth priors. On motion of the district attorney, the first prior was stricken in the interest of justice. Jury trial was duly waived. Defendant was found guilty of burglary in the second degree. Probation was denied and defendant was sentenced to state prison, from which judgment he appeals.
Sufficiency of the Evidence
Horace C. Owens, who lived almost directly across from the Friendly Cleaners, was watching television at home when he heard breaking glass and a burglar alarm. He looked across the street and saw a person come out of the Friendly Cleaners, reenter a few moments later, and come out again carrying clothes. Mr. Owens' son called the police. When Officer Bryant arrived Mr. Owens went to the street and met him. While they *548 were talking, Mr. Owens saw defendant walking along 131st Street, some 50 to 100 feet away. Mr. Owens said " 'That's him. I can tell the way he is walking.' " The officer then stopped the defendant. The officer's description of what then occurred is as follows: "I asked him where he was going, and he told me 2747 East El Segundo, which was only several blocks from there. I asked him where he had been, and he said he had been at a relative--I believe it was a sister--at 527 West Caldwell."
"I asked him why he was walking on 131st Street, and he stated that he had left his sister's house and walked over to Central Avenue and then north on Central Avenue to 131st and then had come across 131st."
"At that point I told him he was under arrest for suspicion of burglary." Officer Bryant searched the defendant's pockets and found a group of loose pennies, a roll of pennies, a silver dollar, and a distinctive button that was later found to match the buttons which were in the cash register of the Friendly Cleaners. Following the search, the officer took the defendant back to the scene in order that Mr. Owens might confirm his identification. Defendant was then taken to the police station and booked.
[1] At the trial Mr. Owens testified that the defendant was the man whom he had seen enter the cleaning establishment, though his testimony was not as positive as the statement he had made to Officer Bryant at the time of the arrest. The witness added "Well, to be honest I could not say by features because I couldn't see the features from where I was." He then explained that he could identify the defendant by his build, walk and mannerisms. This testimony is sufficient to support the finding of the trial court.
[2] The strength or weight of identification testimony is for the jury, or for the trial court in a nonjury trial. (People v. Knight (1941) 44 Cal.App.2d 887, 891 [113 P.2d 226].) In People v. Van De Wouwer (1949) 91 Cal.App.2d 633, 639 [205 P.2d 293], the court said: "The identity of a defendant may be established by proof of any peculiarities of size, appearance, similarity of voice, features or clothing." (See also People v. Lindsay (1964) 227 Cal.App.2d 482 [38 Cal.Rptr. 755].) [3] Lack of positiveness in identification does not destroy the value of the identification but goes only to its weight. (People v. Ash (1948) 88 Cal.App.2d 819, 825 [199 P.2d 711].) *549
Legality of the Arrest
[4a] Since the distinctive button and the roll of pennies taken from defendant's pockets added to the weight of the evidence against him it is necessary to consider the admissibility of that evidence. It was and is the contention of defendant that Officer Bryant had no legal grounds to make an arrest. Without a lawful arrest the search could not be justified and the evidence so acquired would be inadmissible.
An officer may make an arrest without a warrant when he has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a felony. (Pen. Code,  836, subd. 3.)
[5] Legal cause to arrest exists when there is "... such a state of facts as would lead a man of ordinary care and prudence to believe and conscientiously entertain an honest and strong suspicion that the person is guilty of a crime." (People v. Ingle, 53 Cal.2d 407, 412 [2 Cal.Rptr. 14, 348 P.2d 577].)
[4b] Officer Bryant knew from his own observation that someone had just broken into the cleaning establishment, setting off the burglar alarm. He knew someone had telephoned the police to report a burglary in progress. A citizen emerging from the house across the street had given him an eyewitness description of the crime, as seen from the window of the house, and this purported eyewitness had positively identified a man on the street nearby as the burglar. When Officer Bryant questioned the accused, he received answers which were nonincriminating, but which were not persuasive of innocence. The suspect might well have been walking home from his sister's house, as he had asserted, and committed the burglary seen by Mr. Owens. The officer had no reliable way of determining this matter as he stood on the street corner. His immediate alternatives were to make an arrest or to allow the accused man to go his way, perhaps never to be found again. If the law allowed Officer Bryant to place any credence whatever in Mr. Owens' statements, it was his duty to make the arrest.
In bookmaking and narcotics cases the courts have developed the concept of the "reliable informant," which, in that context means a person who has previously given the police information which has been found to be true. By that standard a known criminal, a drug addict, or even an anonymous voice on the telephone may become a "reliable informant," upon whose word the police may make warrantless arrests, *550 break in doors and conduct searches. (See, e.g., People v. Prewitt, 52 Cal.2d 330 [341 P.2d 1].)
[6] But experienced stool pigeons are not the only sources of credible information, and the tests of reliability which must be applied to such persons are not necessarily applicable to every citizen who assists the police.
Bookmaking and narcotics offenses are crimes which are usually committed in the presence only of the criminals themselves, where there is no innocent victim to complain. The persons most likely to furnish information are themselves criminally involved or disposed, and their reports to the police are generally motivated by something other than good citizenship. Such an informer rarely offers himself as a witness to crimes already committed. His usual function is to supply a tip in confidence whereby the police may witness a crime or uncover evidence of it for themselves. [7] A citizen such as Mr. Owens, who reports a crime committed in his presence, is more than a mere informer. He is an observer of criminal activity who, by calling the police, acts openly in aid of law enforcement.
Courts have not hesitated to find it reasonable for police officers to act upon the reports of such observers.
In People v. Kilvington, 104 Cal. 86 [37 P. 799, 43 Am.St.Rep. 73], a police officer was convicted of manslaughter for having shot and killed a fleeing man. The judgment was reversed because the trial court had failed to instruct the jury that the defendant had reasonable cause to arrest the deceased. The facts were that the officer, off duty, observed one man chasing another and crying out "stop thief." The officer did not recognize either man. The Supreme Court said at pages 92-93: "It was night; the deceased was fleeing, pursued by a person who was shouting 'stop thief!' This was in effect a charge that the deceased had committed a theft of some kind, and the defendant had just as much reason to suspect or believe that the deceased may have committed robbery, or burglary, or grand larceny, as to suppose that his pursuer only meant by the cry of 'stop thief!' to charge him with petit larceny. The defendant was called upon to act promptly, and, as the language used by the witness Howard was broad enough in its popular sense to import a charge of felony, the defendant was justified in attempting to arrest the deceased. An officer who would refuse to arrest a person fleeing and pursued under the circumstances disclosed in this case, because the charge was not more direct and specific as to the commission *551 of a felony, would be justly censurable for a neglect of official duty."
In People v. Williams, 169 Cal.App.2d 400 [337 P.2d 134], a clerk in a department store saw the defendant shoplifting and called the police. The arrest, made solely upon this report, was held to be lawful. A search made as an incident to the arrest disclosed stolen merchandise under the defendant's clothing.
In People v. Vaughn, 155 Cal.App.2d 596, 598-599 [318 P.2d 148], the manager of a motel informed police he was looking out of a window when he saw one man take a gun forcibly from another. He described the men and their car. On this information the police found and arrested the men, and in a search, incident to the arrest, found evidence of a robbery, for which the men were prosecuted. The manager's report was held to have justified the arrest.
In People v. Wright, 216 Cal.App.2d 866 [31 Cal.Rptr. 432], a liquor store proprietor and a customer in the store were kidnaped and robbed. The customer gave the police a description of the robbers. The arrest, based upon this report, was held to have been lawful.
In Cole v. Johnson, 197 Cal.App.2d 788 [17 Cal.Rptr. 664], a bartender reported to police that he had been robbed, and described the robber. An arrest, based entirely upon the bartender's identification, was held valid as a matter of law in an action for damages brought by the arrestee against the policeman.
In none of the foregoing cases was there any suggestion by the court that the police should not have acted until they had first investigated the background, character or mental capacity of the person who reported the crime and described the criminal. [4c] We do not think that in the case at bench the law required Officer Bryant to disbelieve Mr. Owens' report and allow defendant to disappear into the night. The facts supported an honest and strong suspicion that defendant was the burglar.
The Dorado Point
[8] Defendant claimed, during his trial, that he was not advised of his constitutional rights to remain silent and to be advised by counsel, as required by People v. Dorado (1965) 62 Cal.2d 338 [42 Cal.Rptr. 169, 398 P.2d 361]. During the initial conversation with the officer no warning was required, *552 since the proceedings then were purely investigatory. The record does not reflect any interrogation leading to any incriminating statement after the arrest and initial search. The point is without merit.
The judgment is affirmed.
Jefferson, J., and Kingsley, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9738127 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:43:18.274041+00 ===

BROWN (R.M.), J.
This is an appeal from a summary judgment entered on motion of the above named respondent. The case involves a March 1963 accident which occurred between a Mack truck owned by the appellant and a road grader owned by the original plaintiff, Asbury Transportation Company. Appellant’s truck struck the road grader which accident was allegedly caused by an aluminum disk wheel on the Mack truck which collapsed.
The Asbury Transportation Company sued the appellant, who cross-complained against many cross-defendants, including respondent. There are allegations in the cross-complaint that the respondent sold the Mack truck to appellant and orally warranted the truck to be free from defects, which warranties were breached. A second cause of action repleads all the allegations of the first, except the warranties are alleged to be implied rather than express. A third cause of action was based on negligence in manufacture, assembly, fabrication and sale. The cross-complaint did not involve damages for personal injury, but only substantial property damage. The respondent subsequently moved for a summary judgment in addition to filing a demurrer.
A sole moving affidavit was filed in this matter by Sweet & Ashjian Automotive, Inc., the successor corporation to respondent. The pertinent statements in the affidavit are: In 1958 the respondent sold the Mack truck in question to one Ezra Grenz; respondent did not sell the Mack truck or any of its wheels to appellant; the truck was not manufactured by respondent; the wheels on said truck when sold by respondent to Grenz were not provided by respondent, but by Mack, *175the manufacturer of the truck; and that neither the respondent nor its successor manufactured or assembled or fabricated the truck or any of the truck wheels, nor had the respondent ever engaged in the manufacture of any truck or truck wheels.
The appellant failed to file any counteraffidavits and thus admits the truth of the respondent’s affidavit. “. . . the absence of such counteraffidavits does not relieve the moving party from the burden of establishing the evidentiary facts of every element necessary to entitle him to the judgment,” as said in American Society of Composers, Authors & Publishers v. Superior Court, 207 Cal.App.2d 676, 687 [24 Cal.Rptr. 772]; and in House v. Lala, 180 Cal.App.2d 412, 416 [4 Cal.Rptr. 366].
In Dorsey v. City of Los Angeles, 132 Cal.App.2d 716, at page 719 [282 P.2d 997], it is said that proceedings under section 437c of the Code of Civil Procedure are not to be used to test the sufficiency of the pleadings. The real test for support of the motion for summary judgment is whether by affidavits there is a showing that no triable issue of fact is disclosed. If the court finds that there is an issue to be tried, a summary judgment is not proper. (Walsh v. Walsh, 18 Cal.2d 439 [116 P.2d 62] ; Eagle Oil & Ref. Co. v. Prentice, 19 Cal.2d 553 [122 P.2d 264].)  It is further true that one material triable issue requires reversal of a summary judgment. (Miller & Lux, Inc. v. Bank of America, 212 Cal.App.2d 719, 724 [28 Cal.Rptr. 401].)
Section 437c of the Code of Civil Procedure sets down the rules and procedure to be followed in moving for summary judgment.  The moving party must file affidavits in support of that motion, and those affidavits must contain facts sufficient to entitle it to judgment. These rules are restated and defined in two recent Supreme Court eases, Towne Development Co. v. Lee, 63 Cal.2d 147 [45 Cal.Rptr. 316, 403 P.2d 724] and Stationers Corp. v. Dun & Bradstreet, Inc., 62 Cal.2d 412 [42 Cal.Rptr. 449, 398 P.2d 785], In Stationers, the court, at page 417, states: 11 Summary judgment is proper only if the affidavits in support of the moving party would be sufficient to sustain a judgment in his favor and his opponent does not by affidavit show such facts as may be deemed by the judge hearing the motion sufficient to present a triable issue. The aim of the procedure is to discover, through the media of affidavits, whether the parties *176possess evidence requiring the weighing procedures of a trial. In examining the sufficiency of affidavits filed in connection with the motion, the affidavits of the moving party are strictly construed and those of his opponent liberally construed, and doubts as to the propriety of granting the motion should be resolved in favor of the party opposing the motion.”
The appellant argues and maintains that there is a theory of strict liability in tort and therefore there is a triable issue as to the proximate cause of the damage to the appellant as set forth in his cross-complaint.
In the landmark case of Vandermark v. Ford Motor Co., 61 Cal.2d 256, the court held at page 263 [37 Cal.Rptr. 896, 391 P.2d 168], that the retailer is subject to strict liability in tort for personal injuries because “it is in the business of selling automobiles, one of which proved to be defective and caused injury to human beings. ’ ’
In Greenman v. Yuba Power Products, Inc., 59 Cal.2d 57 [27 Cal.Rptr. 697, 377 P.2d 897], the court said at page 62, that strict liability in tort is applicable to a manufacturer of an article which was placed on the market when the manufacturer knows “that it is to be used without inspection for defects” and the article “proves to have a defect that causes injury to a human being.” In that case the plaintiff was not the party who bought the defective shopsmith; it was a gift. In the Yandermark case, supra, the passenger in the automobile was entitled to maintain an action for personal injuries under the theory of strict liability although it was clear there was no sale of the car to her.
In Seely v. White Motor Co., 63 Cal.2d 9, the court stated at page 15 [45 Cal.Rptr. 17, 403 P.2d 145] : “It is contended that the foregoing legislative scheme of recovery has been superseded by the doctrine of strict liability in tort set forth in Greenman v. Yuba Power Products, Inc., 59 Cal.2d 57, 63 [27 Cal.Rptr. 697, 377 P.2d 897], and Vandermark v. Ford Motor Co., 61 Cal.2d 256, 261 [37 Cal.Rptr. 896, 391 P.2d 168], We cannot agree with this contention. The law of sales has been carefully articulated to govern the economic relations between suppliers and consumers of goods. The history of the doctrine of strict liability in tort indicates that it was designed, not to undermine the warranty provisions of the sales act or of the Uniform Commercial Code but, rather, to govern the distinct problem of physical injuries.” The court further said: “White is responsible for these losses only *177because it warranted the truck to be ‘free from defects in material and workmanship under normal use and service.’ ” (P. 16.)
However, we are not unmindful of the appellant’s reliance on the court’s view that, “Plaintiff contends that, even though the law of warranty governs the economic relations between the parties, the doctrine of strict liability in tort should be extended to govern physical injury to plaintiff’s property, as well as personal injury. We agree with this contention.” (P. 19.) And, in the concurring and dissenting opinion to the Seeley case by Justice Peters, he points out: ‘ ‘ Then the majority say, unnecessarily and gratuitously, that plaintiff cannot recover on the theory of strict liability. Both the holding and the dicta are, in my opinion, incorrect.” (P. 20.)
Under the authority of the above Supreme Court decisions, we conclude that the respondent is not responsible under the doctrine of strict liability for property damages caused by the truck which was not sold by it to the appellant.
The judgment is affirmed.
Conley, P. J., concurred.

=== CASE 9738129 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:43:18.531502+00 ===

Per Curiam.
Ford Motor Company (hereinafter defendant) appeals from the May 17, 1985, Wayne Circuit Court judgment entered in favor of plaintiffs, Michael E. Harrigan and his wife Mathilda Harrigan, and from the denial of its motion for entry of a judgment of no cause of action and its motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict for a new trial or for remittitur.
This controversy arises out of a July 25, 1980, single vehicle accident in the State of Kentucky. On that day, plaintiff Michael Harrigan, a Kentucky resident and truck driver, was driving an eighteen-wheel tractor-trailer which left the roadway as he went around a curve near Pikeville, Kentucky. The tractor, a Ford CLT 9000, was manufactured in Kentucky. Mr. Harrigan suffers quadriplegia as a result of the severe cervical spinal column and spinal cord injuries he sustained in the accident. It was plaintiffs’ theory that the accident was caused by a failure in the tractor’s air brake system. Defendant argued that it was Mr. Harrigan’s negligence in entering the curve at an excessive speed that caused the rig to roll over and leave the roadway. Defendant also presented evidence that Mr. Harrigan told the ambulance driver who transported him from the accident scene that he had fallen asleep at the wheel.
As reflected in the February 21, 1985, verdict form, the jury found that defendant manufactured the truck with a defect in the braking system *780which made the truck unreasonably dangerous, that the defect proximately caused plaintiffs’ injuries, that Mr. Harrigan sustained damages totalling $12,000,000, that Mrs. Harrigan’s damages for loss of consortium totalled $1,000,000, that Mr. Harrigan was negligent in operating the tractor, that his negligence was a contributing proximate cause of the accident, and that seventy-five percent of the total combined negligence was attributable to him.
On May 2, 1985, a hearing was held on defendant’s motion for entry of no cause of action. Defendant argued that Kentucky law governed and that, under Kentucky law, Mr. Harrigan’s contributory negligence barred recovery. The hearing was adjourned to May 9, 1985, when the trial judge, John H. Gillis, Jr., found that Kentucky substantive law controlled but that, in Kentucky products liability cases, the doctrine of comparative negligence applies. Defendant’s request for reconsideration was denied.
On May 17, 1985, judgment was entered for Mr. Harrigan against Ford Motor Company in the amount of $2,987,500, reflecting the reduction for his own negligence and the deduction of a $50,000 settlement with another defendant. Judgment was entered for Mrs. Harrigan in the amount of $250,000.
Defendant filed a motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, new trial or remittitur, renewing its argument that, under Kentucky law, judgment of no cause of action should be entered in its favor. Defendant further challenged the sufficiency of the evidence and the trial judge’s failure to instruct the jury as to Mr. Harrigan’s failure to use a seat belt. Defendant also argued that the verdict was so grossly excessive that *781defendant was entitled to a new trial. The motion was denied in its entirety on June 21, 1985.
On appeal defendant argues that, under controlling Kentucky law, Mr. Harrigan’s contributory negligence bars plaintiffs’ recovery. Plaintiffs do not disagree that Kentucky substantive law controls and, in light of the Kentucky Supreme Court’s decision in Reda Pump Co v Finck, 713 SW2d 818 (Ky, 1986), they do not disagree that Kentucky law mandates that a plaintiff’s contributory negligence bars recovery in a products liability case.1 Plaintiffs argue, however, that defendant is precluded from advancing a defense of contributory negligence as a total bar to recovery, having argued this case, and having agreed to submit it to the jury, on comparative negligence.
Review of the record discloses only two instances when "contributory negligence” was mentioned prior to submission of the case to the jury. In its August 27, 1981, answer to plaintiffs’ complaint, defendant asserted in its affirmative defense that "the plaintiff was negligent, contributorily negligent, comparatively negligent in failing to act as a reasonable, prudent person would under the circumstances.” Arguing forum non conveniens, defendant accompanied its answer with a motion *782asking the Wayne Circuit Court to decline jurisdiction and dismiss the complaint so that the case could be brought in Kentucky. In support of its motion, defendant argued, inter alia, that "Kentucky law as to negligence, contributory negligence and breach of warranty would control.” Pretrial judge Charles Farmer denied the motion without prejudice. The motion was later renewed, and denied by Judge Farmer. Neither at the original hearing on the motion nor on rehearing was there any mention of the doctrine of contributory negligence. Kentucky contributory negligence principles were not invoked in any other pretrial pleadings.
Review of the trial record discloses no reference to the affirmative defense of contributory negligence as a total bar to recovery. The parties and Judge Gillis, the trial judge, conducted the trial strictly on the assumption that the doctrine of comparative negligence would apply. On the first day of the three-week trial, for example, defendant argued that Kentucky substantive law controlled and asked that evidence of Mr. Harrigan’s failure to use a seat belt be admitted as relevant to the issue of his comparative negligence.2 The judge *783ruled that "testimony on comparative negligence on the part of the plaintiff for not wearing a seatbelt” would not be admitted.
The parties’ discussion about questions to be asked of prospective jurors on voir dire similarly reflects their mutual understanding that the case would go to the jury on comparative negligence.3
*784The parties were given ample opportunity to submit proposed jury instructions to the trial judge. They agreed that the jury would be instructed on the doctrine of comparative negligence.4 In closing argument, defense counsel noted that the doctrine of comparative negligence would be applied.5 Without objection, the jury was given *785the standard jury instruction, and corresponding verdict form, on comparative negligence. SJI2d 11.01, 66.01. Not until seven weeks after the jury was discharged did defendant argue that Mr. Harrigan’s contributory negligence was a total bar to recovery.
As noted supra, the trial judge found that, under controlling Kentucky law, this case was properly submitted to the jury under the doctrine of comparative negligence. On the authority of Reda Pump Co v Finck, supra, we are constrained to find that the trial judge erred in ruling that Kentucky permits application of the doctrine of comparative negligence in products liability cases. We nevertheless find that application of the doctrine of comparative negligence in this case did not constitute error requiring reversal.
On appeal, parties are held to the theory upon which the case was tried without objection. Westman v Brumm, 248 Mich 387, 389; 227 NW 764 (1929); Gustin v Ziem, 289 Mich 219, 224; 286 NW 219 (1939).
The parties tried this case on a theory of comparative negligence. Evidence of Mr. Harrigan’s negligence was presented in support of that theory, not in support of a theory of contributory negligence as a total bar to recovery. There was no objection to the court’s comparative negligence instruction, which informed the jury that Mr. Harrigan’s negligence, if any, did not bar recovery. See SJI2d 11.01.
We are persuaded that any error in the trial judge’s failure to instruct the jury on contributory negligence as a total bar to recovery was precipitated by the parties’ deliberate choice of trial *786strategy.6 As the Supreme Court has observed, it is "elementary” that "[e]rror to be reversible must be error of the trial judge; not error to which the aggrieved appellant has contributed by planned or neglectful omission of action on his part.” Smith v Musgrove, 372 Mich 329, 337; 125 NW2d 869 (1964).
The concern of this Court is with whether the parties received a fair trial. We are not persuaded that the trial in this case was unfair to defendant, and we find no error requiring reversal in application of the doctrine of comparative negligence.7
*788Challenging the trial judge’s denial of its motion for new trial, defendant next argues that the jury’s finding that a manufacturing defect contributed to the accident was contrary to the overwhelming weight of the evidence.
The grant or denial of a motion for new trial on the ground that the verdict is against the great weight of the evidence is a matter addressed to the sound discretion of the trial judge, whose exercise of that discretion will not be disturbed on appeal unless a clear abuse is shown. Bosak v Hutchinson, 422 Mich 712, 737; 375 NW2d 333 (1985), reh den 424 Mich 1201 (1985). The standard of this Court’s review of a trial judge’s denial of a motion for new trial recognizes the unique opportunity of the jury and trial judge to observe the witnesses:
The trial court, upon a motion for a new trial on the grounds here urged, determines in the first instance the question, and this court, upon such question being properly saved and presented for review, determines whether error was committed by the trial court on such grounds. But in the determination of the question in this court it must be borne in mind that this court is not the trier of the facts. We cannot invade the province of the jury. It must also be kept in mind that the trial judge heard and saw the witnesses, was in a position to judge of their credibility and their mental capacity; that the presumption that he correctly measured them must be considered, and that we may not set aside a verdict unless it is manifestly against the clear weight of the evidence. [Pachuczynski v Detroit United Railway, 202 Mich 594, 596; 168 NW 418 (1918).]
We have carefully considered defendant’s claim of error and are persuaded of no error in the trial judge’s rejection of defendant’s challenge to the adequacy of the evidence. It was plaintiffs’ theory *789that the rear tractor brakes failed because of a defective brake hose. Plaintiff Michael Harrigan testified that the brakes failed soon after he applied them upon entering the curve in the road. Plaintiffs presented expert testimony that the brake hose was defective and that the hose did not break in the accident. There was expert testimony that the configuration of skid marks supported plaintiffs’ description of the accident.
Although defendant presented extensive expert evidence which, if believed, would have cast considerable doubt on plaintiffs’ theory of the accident, the trial judge, who saw and heard the witnesses, declined to grant a new trial. Review of the record persuades us of no abuse of the trial judge’s discretion; the verdict is not manifestly against the clear weight of the evidence.
Defendant also challenges the trial judge’s refusal to allow introduction of evidence of plaintiff Michael Harrigan’s failure to use a seat belt. Defendant states that Kentucky law controls but observes that there is no Kentucky case which has decided this issue.  In the absence of controlling Kentucky law, we look to pertinent Michigan law. *790Bostrom v Jennings, 326 Mich 146, 154; 40 NW2d 97 (1949). Under Michigan law, the ruling of the trial judge in this case was proper. Kirk v Ford Motor Co, 147 Mich App 337, 341-342; 383 NW2d 193 (1985), lv den 426 Mich 866 (1986); Hierta v General Motors Corp, 147 Mich App 274; 382 NW2d 765 (1985); Lowe v Estate Motors Ltd, 147 Mich App 523; 382 NW2d 811 (1985), lv gtd 425 Mich 872 (1986); DeGraff v General Motors Corp, 135 Mich App 141; 352 NW2d 719 (1984), lv den 422 Mich 852 (1985); Schmitzer v Misener-Bennett Ford, Inc, 135 Mich App 350; 354 NW2d 336 (1984), lv den 422 Mich 852 (1985).
Next, defendant claims that the total damages set unanimously by the seven-person jury— $12,000,000 for Mr. Harrigan and $1,000,000 for Mrs. Harrigan — are excessive and should shock this Court’s conscience. The trial judge, denying defendant’s motion for new trial or remittitur, rejected this claim.
The question of damages was fundamentally a question for the jury in this case; the scope of our review is limited by the presumption that, if the damages were excessive, the trial judge would have granted relief. Aho v Conda, 347 Mich 450, 455; 79 NW2d 917 (1956). The rationale for, and nature of, the limited scope of appellate review of *791jury awards was recently described by the Supreme Court:
[Decisions of this Court state that awards for personal injury should rest within the sound judgment of the trier of fact, particularly awards for pain and suffering, and recognize that there is no absolute standard by which to measure such awards. Such deference in part reflects recognition that the trier of fact observes live testimony, while an appellate court reviews a printed record. In a case tried to a jury, such deference may further reflect a reliance on the communal judgment of the members of the jury in awarding monetary compensation for such imponderables as pain and suffering.
In reviewing damage awards in cases tried to juries, this Court has asked whether the award shocks the judicial conscience, appears unsupported by the proofs, or seems to be the product of improper methods, passion, caprice, or prejudice; if the amount awarded falls reasonably within the range of the evidence and within the limits of what reasonable minds would deem just compensation for the injury sustained, the verdict has not been disturbed. [Precopio v Detroit, 415 Mich 457, 464-465; 330 NW2d 802 (1982).]
The evidence in this case establishes that, as a result of injury to his spinal column at the C-6, C-7 level, Mr. Harrigan was rendered immediately and irreversibly quadriplegic in the accident. He has no function of the muscles of his lower extremities, his hands, his trunk or his abdomen. He has very limited control of some arm and shoulder muscles. He is paralyzed from the collarbone down, and has no bladder or bowel control. His bowel is emptied by suppository stimulation. Bladder evacuation is by intermittent catheterization. He has some spontaneous, involuntary bladder voiding. Mrs. Harrigan has assumed primary responsibility for his *792bladder and bowel control. His ability to breathe and cough is diminished. He has lost sensation to pain, pressure and temperature. Sexual activity between Mr. and Mrs. Harrigan is no longer possible.
Mr. Harrigan is at great risk to develop pressure sores and must frequently move or be moved. In August, 1981, he underwent surgery to repair a pressure sore on his tailbone.
An attempt to align Mr. Harrigan’s spinal column surgically was unsuccessful and, in September, 1980, a halo traction device was attached by pins attached to his skull. That device likewise was unsuccessful in achieving correct anatomical configuration of his spine.
At the time of the accident, Mr. Harrigan was a healthy, 210-pound, six-foot, six-inch, active, twenty-seven-year-old father of a baby son. For the rest oí' his life, he will be paralyzed and in need of constant care and attention. Mrs. Harrigan has suffered the permanent loss of her husband’s active companionship and support. All agree that the catastrophic nature of their losses is not subject to precise economic evaluation. The jurors were nonetheless obligated to determine just compensation in monetary terms. The conscience of this Court is not shocked by the jury’s exercise of its communal judgment in that endeavor.
In its final assignment of error, defendant claims that the trial judge erred in refusing to instruct the jury that any award to plaintiffs would not be subject to income taxation. The Supreme Court recently acknowledged the practice, consistent with the majority rule, that juries are not instructed on the income tax consequences of damage awards. Kovacs v Chesapeake & OR Co, 426 Mich 647, 650-651; 397 NW2d 169 (1986), reh den 428 Mich 1201 (1987). See also Kirk v Ford Motor *793Co, supra, p 347. We are persuaded of no error in the trial judge’s adherence to the majority rule in this case.
Affirmed.
The Product Liability Act of Kentucky, Ky Rev Stat 411.300 et seq., (effective June 17,1978), provides in pertinent part:
In any product liability action, if the plaintiff failed to exercise ordinary care in the circumstances in his use of the product, and such failure was a substantial cause of the occurrence that caused injury or damage to the plaintiff, the defendant shall not be liable whether or not said defendant was at fault or the product was defective. [Ky Rev Stat 411.320(3).]
In Reda Pump Co, the Kentucky Supreme Court held that Ky Rev Stat 411.320(3) absolutely bars recovery in products liability actions where the plaintiff is contributorily negligent and the plaintiff’s negligence is a substantial cause of the occurrence which caused the injury; the court further held that the statute is not unconstitutional. 713 SW2d 821.
Defense counsel argued:
But more importantly, if the Court please, is that Kentucky —and we are dealing in this case with Kentucky law because all the substantive law in this case is from Kentucky this is a Kentucky case, it should be in Kentucky.
Judge Farmer, on at least six occasions, decided to transfer it to Kentucky and changed his mind.
Everything in this case is in Kentucky; the witnesses are all from Kentucky, with the exception of experts, and Kentucky law applies: the substantive law of Kentucky.
And the substantive law of Kentucky, insofar as we’ve been able to determine, is totally silent on the issue.
Last summer they first came in with comparative negligence; their supreme court adopted it and they are not totally silent.
I will submit to the Court, that every state that has adopted *783comparative negligence has then eliminated the exclusionary rule as to seatbelts and said it is a matter to be considered by the jury with the exception of Michigan.
I will also state that every state in the union that has excluded seatbelt evidence — the states that have excluded it, and I think this because I have argued it so many times — are the states with the wide open spaces.
The states that have excluded it are Nevada, Arizona, Colorado, Texas.
Those states that are populated that have decided the issue: Florida, New York, Pennsylvania, Maryland, California, have all decided against the exclusionary rule and have permitted seatbelt.
I submit that since Kentucky law is silent that we have to assume that they are going to adopt the majority view, which is that the failure to use a seatbelt can be considered by the jury.
It is not negligence per se, not negligence as a matter of law, but it can be considered by the jury in determining whether or not the plaintiff acted with reasonable care for his own safety and thus, whether or not it is sufficient to cause a reduction in the amount of his damages.
So, we strongly suggest to the Court that Kentucky law would permit this, Kentucky being a populated state and a mountainous state as opposed to a flat wide open state with highways that go for hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of mües with nothing and for some reason that seems to be the division between the states.
We request the Court’s permission to argue comparative negligence on the basis of the seatbelt.
We intend to argue it on other bases, too, but on the basis of the seatbelt included.
In the following exchange, plaintiffs’ counsel expresses dissatisfaction with a voir dire question proposed by defendant:
Mr. Finn [plaintiffs’ counsel]: Number 1, your Honor.
It is an incorrect statement of the law on the question of negligence because I think it is really one that must go back to the days when it doesn’t deal with comparative negligence.
Mr. Kruse [defendant’s counsel]: It doesn’t have to.
*784It is still the law that if the accident was caused solely by the plaintiff that they are not entitled to recover.
Mr. Finn: But that is not what it says. It says:
"If you find the plaintiff was negligent or caused her own injury or was the sole cause of the accident . . . .”
It is asking for an opinion from the jury in advance, which Mr. Kruse objected to on ours so at least I can return it.
Mr. Kruse: Well, I’ll only ask them if they find that plaintinff in this case was the sole cause of his own accident, could they return a verdict of no cause of action.
That’s all I’ll ask them.
Mr. Finn: I don’t have any objection to that one.
Mr. Kruse: All right.
The following is an excerpt from the parties’ conference with the trial judge concerning how the jury would be instructed:
Mr. Kruse [defendant’s counsel]: 15:02 is negligence of the plaintiff and goes to proximately contributed. So that would be proper.
Mr. Ricca [plaintiffs’ counsel]: But the—
Mr. Kruse: It goes along with 16.01, which I believe is comparative negligence — or 11.01.
Mr. Ricca: I think it’s 11.01.
That’s the only question I have there. We agree on the law, but I think it should be grouped differently, that 15.02 should be grouped, so it’s less confusing to the jury, with comparative negligence, because that’s what—
Mr. Stec [defendant’s counsel]: That will follow it.
Mr. Kruse: I think that would be the first one that follows it. 11.01 and then 16 — -11.01, then 15.02 — so they do go right together.
The Court: Yeah, 11.01 would be comparative. Then I would go to 15.02 definition of proximately contributed.
If Ford’s truck was defective, then under the rules of our country and our society, Ford should be obligated to pay this man some money. Not that money, but some money. And, of course, any fault of Ford would be decreased — any amount they *785owe would be decreased by the amount he himself contributed to the accident. The Judge will also tell you that.
Seven weeks after trial, in support of its notice of entry of judgment, defendant filed a brief in which it argued vigorously that plaintiffs contributory negligence was a complete bar to recovery under the Products Liability Act of Kentucky. Ky Rev Stat 411.300 et seq. There was no change in Kentucky law between the trial and the filing of defendant’s brief. If at the time of trial defendant were persuaded that it was in its best interest to proceed under a theory of contributory negligence, it could have made the same arguments it later made in support of its notice of entry of judgment. It did not do so. On the contrary, it actively and affirmatively proceeded on the theory of comparative negligence. We conclude, therefore, that it chose deliberately to proceed on that theory.
In Reda Pump Co v Finck, supra, as in the instant case, the jurors were instructed on comparative negligence. They found that both parties were negligent and prorated liability between them — 34.25 percent to the plaintiff and 64.25 percent to the defendant. The Kentucky Supreme Court reversed and directed that the complaint be dismissed, rejecting the plaintiffs argument that the case should be remanded for retrial:
Appellee contends that in the event the judgment is reversed, the case should be remanded for retrial. However, the issue of Finck’s negligence was submitted to the jury, and he was found to be contributorily negligent. We are not cited to any reason why that finding is erroneous except the postulation by appellee that if the jury had known a finding of contributory negligence would bar appellee’s recovery, the jury might have found him free of contributory negligence. We cannot countenance an argument premised upon á supposition that a jury being convinced of one state of facts would make a finding diametrically opposite solely in order to permit a recovery by the plaintiff.
The judgment is reversed with direction that the complaint and the intervening complaint be dismissed. [713 SW2d 821.]
*787We are not persuaded that a similar result is mandated in this case. The defendant in Reda Pump preserved the contributory negligence issue by asserting it at trial. 713 SW2d 819. We are persuaded that defendant chose to try this case as a comparative negligence case, and that the parties’ conduct of the trial was determined by that deliberate choice. Thus, notwithstanding the applicability of Kentucky law, which plaintiffs do not dispute, and the jury’s finding of Mr. Harrigan’s substantial negligence, we are persuaded of no error requiring reversal.
We disagree with the dissent’s statement that "[h]ad the trial court instructed the jury that a finding of contributory negligence was a defense and the jury returned a verdict of no cause of action, a serious appealable issue would have resulted.” The dissent’s reliance on Hilen v Hays, 673 SW2d 713 (Ky, 1984), and Lewis v Inland Steel Co, CCH Prod Liab Rep, ¶ 10,253, p 26,883 (Ky App, 1984), is, in our opinion, misplaced.
In Hilen, an auto accident case, the Kentucky Supreme Court replaced the traditional Kentucky rule of contributory negligence with the doctrine of comparative negligence in ordinary negligence cases. Addressing Ky Rev Stat 411.320, the Supreme Court stated that the question of whether the statute was to be construed as providing for contributory negligence as a complete defense to a product liability action remained open. 673 SW2d 715. In Lewis, a product liability case arising out of a 1973 accident, the Kentucky Court of Appeals, remanding for new trial on another ground, directed that, in light of Hilen, the jury instructions on retrial should conform to the doctrine of comparative negligence. The court’s opinion was modified on denial of rehearing (January 11, 1985), to provide: "To avoid any misunderstanding, we note that because the fatal injury in the instant action occurred before 1978, the provisions of KRS 411.320 are not applicable to this case.” Lewis, supra, p 26,886, n 2.
In Anderson v Black & Decker (US), Inc, 597 F Supp 1298, 1299, n 2 (ED Ky, 1984), a Kentucky product liability case, the federal district court rejected the plaintiff’s reliance on Lewis, and held that Ky Rev Stat 411.320 clearly and unambiguously provides that a plaintiff’s contributory negligence is a total bar to recovery.
Thus, in addition to the fact that the plain words of the Kentucky Product Liability Act provide for contributory negligence as a bar to recovery in product liability cases, prior cases construing Kentucky law were not inconsistent with the result reached in Reda Pump. We are persuaded that, if defendant had argued at trial that Michael Harrigan’s negligence totally barred recovery as a matter of law, and if the jury, instructed on that theory, had returned a verdict of no cause of action, no "serious appealable issue” would have thereby been presented. The jury instruction would have been supported by ample authority.
In this case, however, it was not until several weeks after discharge of the jury, and after presenting its case strictly on a comparative negligence theory, that defendant argued that recovery was barred as a matter of law by Michael Harrigan’s contributory negligence. For the reasons stated above, we are persuaded of no error requiring reversal or remand for new trial.

=== CASE 9738130 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:43:18.537224+00 ===

Cynar, J.
(dissenting). I respectfully dissent on one issue only. In my opinion, fairness and justice call for a reversal of the lower court ruling and retrial of this case.
The Kentucky statute, Ky Rev Stat 411.320(3), provides:
In any product liability action, if the plaintiff failed to exercise ordinary care in the circumstances in his use of the product, and such failure was a substantial cause of the occurrence that caused injury or damage to the plaintiff, the defendant shall not be liable whether or not said defendant was at fault or the product was defective.
It is a fair observation that the defendant did plead contributory negligence, and relied on proofs denying negligence on its part and contending negligence on plaintiff’s part.
Plaintiffs contended, the trial court agreed, and the trial was conducted on the basis that, under the law in the State of Kentucky, comparative negligence applied in this product liability action.
The trial court, in ruling on the motion for entry of judgment of no cause of action in the instant case, stated:
So this Court’s opinion is that the law today is [sic] the state of Kentucky is that comparative negligence is the law on product liability actions and regular negligence cases because — and I rely on this Inland v Steel [sic] case which was handed down in October of 1984. And therefore, the motion for entry of judgment of no cause of action is *794denied. I’ll sign the judgment as rendered by the jury.
Well, my reading of Hilen, in the Hilen v Hayes case, the Supreme Court adopted comparative negligence in Kentucky in regular negligence cases and that in the Lewis v Inland Steel case, the Court of Appeals took the Hilen v Hayes case and extended it to include product liability cases by directing that when that case be retried, that the jury be instructed on the issue of comparative negligence because their interpretation is that the State statute now has comparative negligence.
That’s my reading of the case and the ruling will remain the same on that.
The trial court applied Kentucky law in this case. The trial court, based on its reading of the Kentucky Supreme Court cases of Hilen v Hayes, 673 SW2d 713 (Ky, 1984), and the Kentucky Court of Appeals case of Lewis v Inland Steel Co, CCH Prod Liab Rep, ¶ 10,253 (Ky App, 1984), ruled that the Kentucky Supreme Court adopted comparative negligence in product liability cases.
Even if the trial court’s reading of Hilen and Lewis was disputed, reversal on appeal would not appear likely, absent subsequent applicable Kentucky law to the contrary. Had the trial court instructed the jury that a finding of contributory negligence was a defense and the jury returned a verdict of no cause of action, a serious appealable issue would have resulted.
On July 3, 1986, after the initial appellate briefs had been submitted in this case, the Kentucky Supreme Court expressly ruled that contributory negligence is an absolute bar to recovery in product liability cases. Reda Pump Co v Finck, 713 SW2d 818, 821 (Ky, 1986). The Reda court observed in part:
*795We adhere to the principle that the establishment of public policy is the prerogative of the General Assembly. If there is any present conñict or confusion in the law applicable to products liability actions it is of our own making. We resolve the issue now by holding that [Ky Rev Stat] 411.320(3) absolutely bars recovery in products liability options [sic] where the plaintiff is contributorily negligent and his negligence is a substantial cause of the occurrence which caused his injury, and by further holding that [Ky Rev Stat] 411.130(3) is not unconstitutional. [Emphasis added.]
Construction of Kentucky’s statutes is best left to Kentucky courts.
However, in my opinion, the Reda court proceeded further than justice and fairness indicated. Reda additionally ruled that, since the jury found comparative negligence, recovery by plaintiff was not permitted.
Based on MCR 7.216(A)(7), formerly GCR 1963, 820, relief from judgment may be granted as the case may require. I would rule to set aside the judgment and remand the case for a new trial with the question of contributory negligence being submitted to the jury for determination if a fact question was involved.

=== CASE 9738131 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:43:19.056178+00 ===

JUSTICE WARD delivered the opinion of the court: The defendant, Enricho Navarroli, was charged on September 21, 1982, in the circuit court of Peoria County in an indictment of two counts with unlawful possession of cocaine with intent to deliver (a Class X offense) and with unlawful possession of cocaine (a Class 1 offense). There were plea negotiations between the defendant and the State’s Attorney, and on August 27, 1984, the defendant moved to compel the State to carry out a claimed plea agreement. He stated that under the terms of the plea agreement, he acted as an informant in various drug investigations in exchange for the State’s promise to reduce the charges against him and to agree to his being given probation plus a fine. The defendant alleged that after he assisted law enforcement officials the State’s Attorney refused to reduce the charges against him. The State denied both the existence of an agreement and the claimed terms. At a hearing on the motion, the trial court found that there had been the plea agreement the defendant claimed and it ordered “specific performance” of the agreement. The appellate court reversed (146 Ill. App. 3d 466), and we granted the defendant leave to appeal. The evidence presented at the hearing on the defendant’s motion as to whether there had been a plea agreement was sharply divided. At the conclusion of the hearing, the circuit court stated that the evidence was so conflicting that a fact finder could decide in favor of or against the motion without finding contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. The court concluded, however, that an agreement was made and that the defendant fully performed his portion of it. Discussing the terms of the agreement, the circuit court stated: “Whether or not the prosecution made a specific promise the defendant said it did, the reasonable inference is that the defendant believed so, and that such belief was not unreasonable under these circumstances. To preserve the sanctity of justice, the defendant must prevail. The defendant is entitled to receive probation and a fine. The reduction of the charge, the length and terms of the probation whether or not accompanied by incarceration and the amount of the fine are left to the parties and to the sentencing judge, should the defendant, in fact, plead guilty.” The appellate court, in reversing, held that even if the plea agreement did exist, the defendant was not entitled to specific performance of the agreement, because he was not deprived of his liberty or any other constitutionally protected interest in reliance on the agreement. The appellate court also judged that the circuit court improperly employed a subjective, rather than objective, test to determine the terms of the agreement. Because of this error, the appellate court did not consider whether the circuit court’s conclusion that a plea agreement existed was contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. On appeal, the defendant argues that the circuit court’s conclusion that a plea agreement existed was supported by the preponderance of evidence. He also argues that the appellate court erroneously concluded that the circuit court employed a subjective, rather than an objective, standard in resolving the conflicting testimony. The defendant claims that the circuit court’s references to defendant’s reasonable belief in the agreement and its terms did not make the.court’s conclusions, ones reached on a subjective standard. The defendant contends too that the appellate court erred in concluding that he was not entitled to specific performance of the proposed plea agreement because he was not deprived of any constitutionally protected interest." He asserts that he surrendered constitutional rights guaranteed by the first, fourth, fifth and sixth amendments in reliance upon the State’s agreement to reduce the charge and recommend probation in exchange for his cooperation. Finally, the defendant submits that the appellate court misused Rule 352, which authorizes a court to dispose of an appeal without oral argument if no substantial question is presented. The defendant says a substantial question was raised in his appeal which required more than a year for the court to decide and which resulted in a split opinion. The State argues that even if there was a plea agreement, the defendant was not deprived of any constitutional right by virtue of the State’s refusal to comply with the agreement. The defendant is at liberty to proceed to trial. The appellate court, the State says, correctly held that the defendant was not entitled to specific performance of the claimed plea bargain, and the State finally argues that the trial court incorrectly applied a subjective test determining whether there was a plea agreement. A plea agreement results when the prosecutor and the defendant exchange promises to perform or refrain from performing specified actions. (People v. Davis (1981), 94 Ill. App. 3d 809.) The existence of a plea agreement and its terms and conditions are questions of fact which the trier of fact must determine after assessing the credibility of witnesses and the weight to be given their testimony. (People v. Starks (1986), 146 Ill. App. 3d 843.) If disputed, the terms of the agreement are to be judged under objective standards (People v. Boyt (1984), 129 Ill. App. 3d 1, aff’d (1985), 109 Ill. 2d 403; People v. Davis (1981), 94 Ill. App. 3d 809; United States v. Quan (9th Cir. 1986), 789 F.2d 711), and the court’s determination whether there was a plea agreement should not be reversed unless contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. It will not be necessary for us to consider whether, as the State contends, the circuit court’s finding that there was a plea agreement, as the defendant claimed, was contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence, nor need we decide whether, in making that finding, the court erroneously employed a subjective, rather than an objective, test. Even assuming, arguendo, that the circuit court correctly found that an agreement existed with terms as the defendant alleges, we must conclude that the prosecutor’s denial of an agreement and refusal to carry out the claimed bargain did not deprive the defendant of due process, and that therefore, the defendant was not entitled to have the assumed agreement enforced. The enforceability of plea agreements was recognized in Santobello v. New York (1971), 404 U.S. 257, 30 L. Ed. 2d 427, 92 S. Ct. 495, where the Supreme Court held that a defendant who enters a guilty plea in reliance upon the promise of the prosecutor is entitled to a remedy when the prosecutor breaches that promise. The Court cautioned that, “[wjhen a plea rests in any significant degree on a promise or agreement of the prosecutor, so that it can be said to be part of the inducement or consideration, such promise must be fulfilled.” 404 U.S. at 262, 30 L. Ed. 2d at 433, 92 S. Ct. at 499. In Santobello, however, the prosecutor breached the plea agreement after the defendant entered a plea of guilty. In Mabry v. Johnson (1984), 467 U.S. 504, 81 L. Ed. 2d 437, 104 S. Ct. 2543, the Supreme Court determined that the same constitutional concerns are not implicated when the prosecutor takes a course of action inconsistent with an alleged plea agreement before the defendant enters a guilty plea. In Mabry, the prosecutor proposed a plea bargain but then withdrew the offer after the defendant’s acceptance and proposed a second, less favorable, plea agreement. The Supreme Court rejected the defendant’s claim that his acceptance of the first plea bargain created a constitutional right to have that bargain specifically enforced. Relying on due process principles, the Mabry Court defined the scope of the constitutional protection afforded a defendant who enters a plea agreement, stating: “[A] plea bargain standing alone is without constitutional significance; in itself it is a mere executory agreement which, until embodied in the judgment of a court, does not deprive an accused of liberty or any other constitutionally protected interest. It is the ensuing guilty plea that implicates the Constitution. Only after respondent pleaded guilty was he convicted, and it is that conviction which gave rise to the deprivation of respondent’s liberty at issue here.” (Emphasis added.) (467 U.S. at 507-08, 81 L. Ed. 2d at 442,104 S. Ct. at 2546.) The Court concluded that the defendant’s guilty plea was not involuntary or induced by the withdrawn plea bargain because the defendant knew that the second agreement controlled when he pleaded guilty. Consequently, the Court held that the defendant could not challenge his plea under the due process clause because the claimed breach of the plea bargain did not deprive him of his liberty in any fundamentally unfair manner. The Supreme Court in Mabry made it clear that due process principles govern the enforceability of plea agreements. (United States v. Coon (8th Cir. 1986), 805 F.2d 822, 824.) Therefore, the controlling issue here is whether the State’s repudiation of the asserted plea agreement constituted a denial of due process, which can be remedied only by allowing the defendant specific enforcement of the agreement. This court recently denied enforcement of a plea agreement in a case involving circumstances resembling those here. (People v. Boyt (1985), 109 Ill. 2d 403.) Our holding there governs the disposition of this appeal. In Boyt, the defendant agreed to testify against her codefendant in exchange for the State’s promise to reduce the charge against her. Before the defendant could testify, however, the codefendant pleaded guilty. When the State thereafter refused to reduce the charges, the defendant sought to enforce the bargain. .This court held that, even if there had been an agreement, the defendant did not have a constitutional right under the due process clause to have the agreement enforced. The court reasoned that the State’s repudiation of the agreement did not deprive the defendant of liberty or any other constitutionally protected interest because the defendant did not plead guilty in reliance on the agreement. Here, as in Boyt, the defendant has not entered a plea of guilty in reliance on the proposed plea agreement. He cannot say he was deprived of liberty by virtue of the State’s refusal to abide by the terms of the claimed plea agreement. The defendant still has the option of pleading not guilty and proceeding to trial. The defendant asserts that Boyt does not control under the circumstances because he, unlike Boyt, surrendered constitutional rights in reliance on the agreement. Specifically, the defendant argues that he relinquished rights under the first, fourth, fifth and sixth amendments in reliance on the alleged agreement. The defendant first claims that he surrendered his first amendment right to freedom of association when he was placed among dangerous men at the decision of State officials. He cites no authority to support this contention, nor does our research disclose any. The contention is close to frivolous. The defendant also asserts that he surrendered his rights under the fourth amendment in reliance on the alleged plea bargain. But in this, too, he fails to point out any evidence or authority in support of this claim. He merely says that his “fourth amendment right to be free from search absent a warrant or probable cause arising in exigent circumstances was vanquished by the police policy of searching a confidential informant before and after each such directed association with suspected drug offenders.” Constitutional questions cannot be raised by unsupported and conclusory allegations that a constitutionally protected right has been invaded. (Janson v. Pollution Control Board (1979), 69 Ill. App. 3d 324.) One must state in complete detail from the record how constitutional rights were infringed before a court will consider the constitutional objection. (See People v. Hanserd (1985), 136 Ill. App. 3d 928; Consultants & Administrators, Inc. v. Department of Insurance (1982), 103 Ill. App. 3d 920.) The defendant’s general allegation that his fourth amendment rights were violated, without stating the circumstances under which the asserted constitutional rights were infringed, or submitting authority to substantiate the claimed violation, did not adequately raise a constitutional claim. The defendant also claims that he relinquished his fifth amendment privilege against self-incrimination when he reported evidence of criminal conduct to the police of which he was aware and they were not. We disagree. The privilege against self-incrimination protects one from being compelled to disclose facts tending to establish criminal liability. (People ex rel. Keith v. Keith (1967), 38 Ill. 2d 405; In re Bon Voyage Travel (N.D. Ill. 1978), 449 F. Supp. 250). The defendant does not claim that he engaged in criminal activities in reliance on the proposed bargain, nor does he state that the police compelled him to disclose information which might tend to incriminate him. The record suggests only that the defendant voluntarily provided the police with information regarding criminal conduct which he had witnessed in the hope of obtaining favorable treatment in regard to the charges pending against him. Finally, the defendant claims that he surrendered his sixth amendment rights when he was subjected to post-indictment interrogation outside the presence of his counsel. The sixth amendment guarantees an accused the right to the assistance of counsel after the filing of formal charges or adversarial proceedings against him. (See Maine v. Moulton (1985), 474 U.S. 159, 88 L. Ed. 2d 481, 106 S. Ct. 477.) Here, the defendant’s sixth amendment right to counsel attached to the Class X and Class 1 drug offenses with which he was charged. The defendant did not claim, however, nor does the record suggest, that agents of the prosecution questioned him about the charges pending against him as to which the right to counsel had attached. The record does suggest that the defendant met with Illinois Department of Law Enforcement agents and gave them information about drug-related activity which occurred while the defendant was acting as an agent and informant of the State. The sixth amendment “protects the right of the accused not to be confronted by an agent of the State regarding matters as to which the right to counsel has attached without counsel being present.” (Emphasis added.) (Maine v. Moulton (1985), 474 U.S. at 177-78 n.14, 88 L. Ed. 2d at 497 n.14, 106 S. Ct. at 488 n.14.) The amendment does not prohibit police agents from questioning a defendant about criminal activity with which the defendant is not charged and as to which the sixth amendment right to counsel has not attached, simply because unrelated charges are pending against the defendant at the time. (See State v. Lale (Wis. App. 1987), 141 Wis. 2d 480.) The defendant’s sixth amendment right to counsel was not violated when he talked with State agents about criminal activities which occurred while the defendant was acting as an agent and informant for the State. As we reject the defendant’s contention that he relinquished constitutional rights in reliance on the agreement, we also reject his claim that this court’s decision in People v. Starks (1985), 106 Ill. 2d 441, requires enforcement of the agreement. In Starks, the defendant submitted to a polygraph examination allegedly in exchange for the prosecutor’s promise to dismiss the charges pending against him if he passed the test. The defendant passed the test, but the State refused to dismiss the charges. This court concluded that enforcement of the promise was necessary because the defendant surrendered his fifth amendment privilege in exchange for and in reliance on the proposed plea agreement. (106 Ill. 2d 441, 451.) Here, in contrast, the defendant did not surrender constitutionally protected interests in reliance on the agreement. The defendant states he performed his part of the bargain in reliance on the agreement, making restoration of the pre-plea-agreement status impossible. He urges that specific enforcement is the only remedy which will adequately insure his rights under the due process clause. Federal decisions have rejected similar arguments in circumstances where, as here, the defendant cooperated with government agents in reliance on an agreement, but did not enter a plea of guilty in reliance on it. In United States v. Coon (8th Cir. 1986), 805 F.2d 822, the defendant agreed to plead guilty to a drug offense and to cooperate with Federal authorities in narcotics investigations in exchange for the government’s promise not to bring additional charges and to make no recommendation to the court regarding the sentence. The prosecutor, through error, advised the defendant that the crime of which he was accused carried a maximum fine of $25,000. After the defendant fully cooperated with authorities, however, the parties learned that the maximum fine had been increased by statute to $250,000. The defendant pleaded guilty, knowing of the increased fine, and was fined $100,000. The defendant then sought to have his fine reduced to the amount discussed in the plea agreement. The defendant argued that by cooperating with the Federal agents, he had so changed his position in reliance on the erroneous statement in the plea agreement that he could not be restored to the pre-agreement status by pleading not guilty and proceeding to trial. The court rejected the defendant’s contention, explaining: “The only change in position that can be considered ‘detrimental reliance’ is the actual entry of an involuntary guilty plea. Not until that point has the defendant been deprived of any constitutionally protected liberty interest. See Mabry, 104 S. Ct. at 2546. When, as in this case, the defendant learns of a change in the terms of a plea agreement prior to entering his plea, a detrimental reliance argument is inappropriate. At that stage, the defendant still has the option of pleading not guilty and proceeding to trial.” 805 F.2d at 825. Similarly, in United States v. McGovern (8th Cir. 1987), 822 F.2d 739, the court rejected a defendant’s claim that specific performance of the government’s promise was necessary to redress his detrimental reliance on the plea agreement. The defendant asserted that he cooperated with the government in reliance on the agreement and provided it with otherwise unavailable information. He contended that, as a result, he suffered substantial prejudice, and that specific performance was therefore necessary because he could not be returned to his pre-plea-agreement position. The court rejected his claim, stating that, although allowing both parties to proceed to trial did not restore the defendant to the status quo in the sense that he could call back his year of cooperation with Federal agents, it preserved his right to a fair trial. The court concluded that none of the statements which the defendant made during the course of his plea negotiations and cooperation, nor any fruits of those statements, were used against him at his subsequent trial and that refusing to specifically enforce the plea agreement did not deprive the defendant of due process. 822 F.2d at 746. Upon consideration of the circumstances in this case, we have concluded that the prosecutor’s stated unwillingness to carry out the alleged bargain did not deprive the defendant of due process and accordingly we reject his claim that specific performance of the bargain is the only adequate remedy. Here, as in Coon and McGovern, the defendant still has the option of pleading not guilty and going to trial. His right to a fair trial is unimpaired. We agree with one court’s observation that “[t]his fundamental right would be belittled if we held it to be an insufficient ‘remedy’ or result for a defendant who has not been induced to rely on the plea to his detriment.” Government of Virgin Islands v. Scotland (3d Cir. 1980), 614 F.2d 360, 365. We must reject the defendant’s argument that the appellate court’s judgment should be reversed because the court improperly decided the case without oral argument. There is, of course, no constitutional right to present oral argument, and Supreme Court Rule 352 allows an appellate court to dispose of a case without oral argument, after briefs are filed, if no substantial question is presented (107 Ill. 2d R. 352(a)). This court’s decision in People v. Boyt clearly was applicable here, and we conclude that the appellate court properly determined that no substantial question was presented for its review. In any event, that we allowed leave to appeal from the appellate court’s judgment and have considered all arguments raised by the defendant removes any problem which might have been created when the appellate court disposed of the appeal without oral argument. Cf. People v. Mitchell (1984), 105 Ill. 2d 1, 15. For the reasons given, the judgment of the appellate court is affirmed and the cause is remanded to the circuit court of Peoria County for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. Appellate court affirmed; cause remanded.

=== CASE 9738132 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:43:19.060931+00 ===

JUSTICE CLARK, dissenting: On January 13, 1984, law enforcement agents raided a residence in Verage, Illinois, occupied by a man named Ralph Trask. Trask and a second person, Leslie Ann Larson, were arrested. In the house agents found 10 ounces of cocaine, a large quantity of marijuana, and a cache of firearms and ammunition. Since his arrest, Trask has cooperated with law enforcement authorities and has helped to dismantle the drug distribution network with which he had been associated. This arrest was not achieved by magic. It was the result of the defendant’s bargained-for cooperation with law enforcement authorities. At considerable risk to his own life and safety the defendant acted as the State’s undercover agent, dealing with Trask on many occasions and often entering the Trask residence. It was the defendant’s personal observation of narcotics in the Trask residence which was the basis for the State’s search warrant. During the course of his undercover work, the defendant suffered a heart attack. After recovering, he continued to work as an undercover agent. The defendant lived with his wife and son more than several miles from the Trask residence, and the defendant had reason to believe that Trask knew where he lived. The defendant did not risk his own life, and the lives of his family, out of the goodness of his heart. He took these risks in exchange for the State’s promise that pending charges against him would be reduced and the State would recommend that he only receive probation and a fíne. Nor was the State’s promise to the defendant motivated by eleemosynary concern. State agents promised leniency to the defendant in return for his cooperation, cooperation from which they reaped the intended benefit. The trial court did nothing more than enforce this bargain. I am unable to understand why the majority believes that such enforcement, after the defendant has fully performed, violates the Constitution. Under the court’s decision today, a prosecutor could persuade a defendant to swim the English Channel as consideration for a plea bargain and then, for no reason at all, break the bargain and force the defendant to go to trial. More precisely, the court’s decision today precludes a trial court from ordering the specific performance of a plea bargain, even where the defendant has substantially performed under its terms. And while the court obviously believes its decision will benefit law enforcement authorities, it has overlooked the actual effect its decision will have on the plea bargaining process. Today’s decision throws a monkey wrench into our plea bargaining machinery. As of today, a prosecutor’s promise to reduce the charges for a defendant in exchange for the defendant’s assistance will not be enforceable; few informed defendants will aid the prosecution in return for a promise when they know that it is not enforceable by a trial court. Since I do not believe that the plea bargaining process should be hampered in this way, I respectfully dissent. It is difficult to exaggerate the importance of plea bargaining to our criminal justice system. As our court has previously stated, “Whatever the situation might be in an ideal world, the fact is that agreements between the prosecution and the defense are an important component of this country’s criminal justice system. [Citation.] If a defendant cannot place his faith in the State’s promise, this important component is destroyed.” (People v. Starks (1985), 106 Ill. 2d 441, 452.) One function of plea bargaining is to allow law enforcement authorities to secure information from criminal defendants who otherwise would have very little incentive to cooperate. In the regulation of plea bargaining, the courts have applied several different perspectives. First, the due process clause imposes constitutional limitations on plea bargaining. To the extent that a defendant’s guilty plea is induced by a false promise of the prosecution, the defendant’s plea is involuntary; as a remedy the defendant must be granted specific performance of the prosecution’s promise or an opportunity to withdraw his plea. However, plea bargaining is also to some extent contractual; courts typically speak of offer, acceptance, detrimental reliance, specific performance, and recission. Finally, the application of contract principles to plea bargaining is limited by the public interest in the efficient operation of the criminal justice system, an interest which may sometimes justify the trial court’s decision to ignore or set aside the terms of a plea bargain. I believe that all of these perspectives compel us to refrain from interfering with the trial court’s decision to grant specific performance. As a matter of constitutional law, it is clear that a fully executed plea bargain must be honored. If the defendant pleads guilty in return for a promise which the prosecution fails to fulfill, the defendant must be granted either specific performance of the prosecution’s promise or an opportunity to withdraw his plea and proceed to trial. (Santobello v. New York (1971), 404 U.S. 257, 261-62, 30 L. Ed. 2d 427, 432-33, 92 S. Ct. 495, 498-99.) On the other hand, it is also clear that the Constitution does not demand the specific performance of a plea bargain which is completely executory. If the defendant has not yet pled guilty or otherwise performed the terms of the bargain, the prosecution cannot be constitutionally required to specifically perform its part of the bargain. Mabry v. Johnson (1984), 467 U.S. 504, 510-11, 81 L. Ed. 2d 437, 444-45, 104 S. Ct. 2543, 2548. From the constitutional perspective, the issue posed by this case and some of our earlier cases is whether: (1) a defendant’s agreement to a plea bargain is truly voluntary where the defendant is so misled as to the value of the prosecution’s commitments that he does something for the benefit of the prosecution and to his own detriment other than actually pleading guilty and (2) even assuming that the defendant’s agreement is voluntary, whether the Constitution precludes a court from specifically enforcing such a bargain. I believe that the answer to both questions is no. First, the provision of actual consideration in addition to a mere promise distinguishes this case from Mabry. The Court in Mabry considered what might be called a “pure” plea bargain: the defendant gave his promise to plead guilty in return for the prosecution’s promise of leniency. Under these circumstances, the prosecution’s decision to break the bargain deprived the defendant of nothing more than the expectation that the prosecution would keep its word; conversely, the prosecution received nothing from the defendant. The status quo was restored. The prosecution did not receive the promised benefit of a guilty plea which would save it from the risk and expense of a trial; conversely, the defendant did not receive the benefit of the prosecution’s leniency. Under these circumstances, the Court held that the defendant had no constitutional right to specific performance. His ensuing guilty plea was voluntary because it had not been induced in any way by the false promise. He remained free to withdraw the plea and go to trial. Moreover, the disappointment of his mere expectation did not deprive him of a constitutionally protected interest in life, liberty, or property. Neither of these rationales supports the denial of specific performance in this case. While the defendant still remained free to go to trial, the voluntariness of this decision had been impaired by his actual performance in response to the prosecution’s promise. Moreover, even had the defendant wished to plead guilty again, he could not possibly have received the same bargain that he had initially agreed to and carried out, since the prosecution, having already received the benefit of his information, no longer needed to provide him with leniency in return for it. Moreover, the defendant did not lose only a mere expectation. Rather, he lost his time, his labor, and his safety, as well as a significant bargaining chip. Even setting aside his time and risk involved in face-to-face meetings with a drug dealer, it is no secret that the life of a government informant in prison is never pleasant and, often, short. I am therefore puzzled by the majority’s implicit conclusion that the government’s conduct did not implicate the defendant’s constitutionally protected right to life, liberty, and property. For these reasons, I believe that this case stands on all fours with People v. Starks (1985), 106 Ill. 2d 441, where the defendant “performed” by taking a lie detector test, and is distinguishable from People v. Boyt (1985), 109 Ill. 2d 403, where the defendant merely promised to plead guilty. Candor compels me to admit that I still disagree with the result in Boyt for the reasons I expressed in my dissent in that case; Boyt is distinguishable from Mabry because the prosecution in Boyt used the defendant’s executory promises to persuade her codefendant to plead guilty, thus transforming the promises into performances. But even were I to accept Boyt I would still believe the majority’s reliance upon it misplaced. Here the defendant did something more than make a mere executory promise. He performed. As in Stark, he provided the State with new information. It is this fact which estops the State from contesting the court’s grant of specific performance. I therefore believe that the court’s grant of specific performance was constitutionally required. But even were I to agree that such a grant was not constitutionally required, I would still not agree with the majority’s decision. For the majority appears to conclude that the Constitution somehow precludes the trial court from ordering specific performance of the agreement. This conclusion is without merit. Mabry and the Federal cases cited by the court all involved trial courts which refused to specifically enforce plea agreements and challenges on the ground that such refusals violated the due process rights of the defendants. (See Mabry, 467 U.S. at 505-06, 81 L. Ed. 2d at 441, 104 S. Ct. at 2545; United States v. McGovern (8th Cir. 1987), 822 F.2d 739, 740-43; United States v. Coon (8th Cir. 1986), 805 F.2d 822, 824; Government of the Virgin Islands v. Scotland (3d Cir. 1980), 614 F.2d 360, 362.) None of these cases indicate that a trial court is precluded from ordering specific performance as a matter of public policy. In fact, McGovern clearly states that “in an agreement that contemplates the defendant’s preplea cooperation as well as his plea of guilty, the government must, unless and until the court rejects the plea, honor in good faith its obligations under the agreement.” (McGovern, 822 F.2d at 744.) In McGovern, the court held only that the trial court’s rejection of the plea (on the grounds of mutual mistake and violation of public policy) released the government from its obligation. Here the trial court, far from rejecting the plea, actually enforced the agreement. Therefore McGovern is inapplicable. A second possible perspective is the perspective of contract law and public policy. Even assuming arguendo that no constitutional rights are involved, I still believe that the trial court was well within its discretion in granting specific performance. This agreement was not a commercial contract. But just as we enforce commercial contracts so as to better serve the public interest in the free flow of commercial exchange, so enforcement of executed or partially executed plea bargains serves the public interest in the efficient administration of justice. We do law enforcement authorities no favor when we decide they cannot be held to their agreements. In the long run that decision can only undermine their ability to persuade defendants to cooperate. I acknowledge that in this instance there is room for dispute as to whether an agreement was actually reached. But, after examining the record, I see no reason to disagree with the trial court’s conclusion that someone in the defendant’s position would be objectively justified in believing that the government was promising leniency in return for his cooperation. I respectfully dissent.

=== CASE 9738133 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:43:23.800401+00 ===

Lynch, J.
This case comes before the court on certification from the United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts of two questions involving the applicability of the so-called discovery rule to claims for wrongful death and conscious pain and suffering arising from exposure to workplace chemicals. See S.J.C. Rule 1:03, as appearing in 382 Mass. 700 (1981).
The plaintiffs filed suit in the Superior Court in Hampden County on December 31, 1984, seeking to recover for the alleged wrongful death and conscious pain and suffering of John I. Pobieglo (decedent) and for their loss of consortium and loss of parental society. The claims relevant here, for wrongful death pursuant to G. L. c. 229, § 2 (1986 ed.), and for the decedent’s conscious pain and suffering, pursuant to G. L. c. 229, § 6 (1986 ed.), were founded in theories of negligence, breach of express and implied warranties, and reckless conduct. The plaintiffs alleged that the decedent was exposed to formaldehyde materials and products while employed by the defendant, Monsanto Company (Monsanto), at its chemical plant near Springfield, Massachusetts, and that this exposure caused the decedent to contract cancer of the nasopharynx resulting in his death on July 22,1979. The plaintiffs further alleged that (1) they remained in good faith ignoranee of the existence of grounds for a complaint against the defendants until more than three years after the date of the decedent’s death, and (2) they commenced this action within three years of the date they first discovered the existence of grounds for suit.
On or about January 30, 1985, Union Carbide Corporation on behalf of all the defendants removed the case to the United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts. On October 21, 1986, a judge in that court denied the defendants’ motion to dismiss or for summary judgment as to those claims *114challenged on statute of limitations grounds, adopting the report and recommendation of the magistrate, inter alla, that there was a reasonable likelihood that this court “would apply the statute of limitations ‘discovery rule’ to actions brought under the Massachusetts wrongful death and survival statutes.”4 At the same time, the judge denied the plaintiffs’ motion for certification. However, on May 18, 1987, subsequent to our decision in Hallett v. Wrentham, 398 Mass. 550 (1986), the judge ordered certified the following questions of law: 1. “May a discovery rule be applied in an action for wrongful death brought under Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 229, § 2 where, as a consequence of plaintiffs ’ good faith ignorance of the existence of grounds for a complaint, the action was commenced more than three years after the date of decedent’s death?” 2. “May a discovery rule be applied in an action for conscious pain and suffering brought under Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 229, § 6 where, as a consequence of plaintiffs’ good faith ignorance of the existence of grounds for a complaint, the action was commenced more than three years after the date of the decedent’s death, and more than two years after the executor of the decedent’s estate posted his bond?”
For the following reasons, we answer both certified questions in the negative.
1. In pertinent part, G. L. c. 229, § 2 (1986 ed.), provides: “An action to recover damages under this section shall be commenced within three years from the date of death or within such time thereafter as is provided by section four, four B, nine or ten of chapter two hundred and sixty.”
Relying principally on our opinions in Gaudette v. Webb, 362 Mass. 60 (1972), and Olsen v. Bell Tel. Laboratories, Inc., 388 Mass. 171 (1983), the plaintiffs urge us, in the interest of fairness, to extend application of the discovery rule to claims for wrongful death so as not to deprive the plaintiffs of a remedy before they knew, or reasonably should have known, that the decedent was harmed by the defendants’ conduct. In *115Gaudette, supra at 72, we held that the right to recover for wrongful death is of common law origin and that “statutes limiting the period for bringing actions for death are to be construed in the same manner as the limitations contained in G. L. c. 260, the general statute of limitations, and that they may be tolled by the various provisions of G. L. c. 260.” The plaintiffs contend that there is no principle of distinction between modification of the wrongful death statute of limitations through a discovery rule and application of the minor tolling provisions of G. L. c. 260 (1986 ed.). Similarly, the plaintiffs argue that where, in a case involving nonfatal injuries caused by workplace exposure to a toxic substance, we applied a discovery rule to claims arising under G. L. c. 260, § 2A, we should not deny recovery merely because the injury alleged to have been caused by the defendants here was so serious as to result in death. In a case involving death, too, the plaintiffs contend, the principle that “a plaintiff should be put on notice before his claim is barred,” Franklin v. Albert, 381 Mass. 611, 619 (1980), warrants application of a discovery rule to the wrongful death statute.
Central to the plaintiffs’ analysis of this evolving area of the law is the common law origin of the right to recover for wrongful death. Thus, the plaintiffs contend, where this is the view, a discovery rule has been uniformly applied despite explicit statutory language directing that the limitations period is to run “from death.” E.g., Eisenmann v. Cantor Bros., 567 F. Supp. 1347 (N.D. Ill. 1983); Hanebuth v. Bell Helicopter Int'l, 694 P.2d 143 (Alaska 1984); Myers v. McDonald, 635 P.2d 84 (Utah 1981).5
*116Conversely, the plaintiffs argue, courts of jurisdictions which do not recognize a nonstatutory right of action for wrongful death have reasoned that the lack of a nonstatutory right compelled strict construction of “from death” language, despite “harsh” results. See, e.g, Cadieux v. International Tel. & Tel. Corp., 593 F.2d 142 (1st Cir. 1979) (interpreting Rhode Island law); Knauer v. Johns-Manville Corp., 638 F. Supp. 1369 (D. Md. 1986); Stiles v. Union Carbide Corp., 520 F. Supp. 865 (S.D. Tex. 1981); Holzsager v. Warburton, 452 F. Supp. 1267 (D.N.J. 1978); Clark v. Prakalapakorn, 8 Kan. App. 2d 33 (1982).
Here it is of no significance that the wrongful death claim has common law origins, since we are first concerned with the meaning of G. L. c. 229, § 2, which limits the right to bring such claims. Only if the statute is ambiguous, or couched in terms that suggest that we do so, do we look beyond the express statutory language.
The Legislature has unambiguously stated that a claim for wrongful death must be brought within “three years from the date of death. ” Application of a rule which would delay accrual until discovery would be in clear contravention of the legislative directive that the period of limitation runs from the date of death. Furthermore, it must be understood that the discovery rule grew out of the need to determine when a cause of action “accrued.” When the Legislature limits the time within which suit can commence from the date of accrual, it leaves to the court the determination of the precise meaning of the term accrued.
At least as early as 1974, this court interpreted accrual language in c. 260 to incorporate the discovery rule. Hendrickson v. Sears, 365 Mass. 83 (1974). Since that time, the Legislature has amended the wrongful death statute of limitations at least twice and has retained the concept of limiting the time from the date of death thereby avoiding the accrual concept. See, e.g., St. 1981, c. 493, § 1; St. 1979, c. 164, § 1. Contrary to the plaintiffs ’ assertion that there is no principle of distinction between a discovery rule and application of the minor tolling provisions of G. L. c. 260, § 7, we see at least three important *117distinctions. First, the wrongful death statute under consideration in Gaudette was silent about tolling provisions. Second, the discovery rule is a judicial creation whereas tolling rules are themselves of legislative creation applicable to a wide range of causes of action. Third, and perhaps most significant, application of a minor tolling provision to the wrongful death statute does not disturb the legislatively determined date of accrual, the date of death. General Laws c. 260, § 7, merely provides that the running of the limitations period will be suspended “[i]f the person ... is a minor . . . when a right to bring an action first accrues ...” (emphasis added).
We reiterate that “Gaudette does not stand for the proposition that the requirements of the statute may be disregarded. ” Hallett v. Wrentham, 398 Mass. 550, 555 (1986).6 Although the right is of common law origin, “the death statute specifies the procedure and recovery.” Id. We cannot say that the result is illogical or absurd. See Grass v. Catamount Dev. Corp., 390 Mass. 551 (1983) (Legislature might reasonably choose to put wrongful death claimant on different footing from one claiming injury). Moreover, “arguments as to hardship . . . [are] appropriate respecting the enactment of legislation. They are not controlling in the interpretation of existing statutes.” Klein v. Catalano, 386 Mass. 701, 713 (1982), quoting Eastern Mass. St. Ry. v. Trustees of E. Mass. St. Ry., 254 Mass. 28, 33 (1925). We, therefore, answer that, where the Legislature has specifically provided that claims for wrongful death must be brought within three years from the date of death, it would be *118inappropriate for this court to vitiate that legislative determination and apply a discovery rule to claims brought pursuant to G. L. c. 229, § 2.
2. It is well settled that, “[although G. L. c. 229, § 6 . . . permits the joinder of separate counts for death and for conscious suffering in a single action, they are separate causes of action.” Gaudette v. Webb, 362 Mass. 60, 62 (1972). Claims for conscious pain and suffering survive by virtue of G. L. c. 228, § 1. Id. That claims for wrongful death and for conscious pain and suffering are premised upon different theories of recovery and are intended for separate categories of beneficiaries is recognized in the legislative directive of G. L. c. 229, § 6, that “damages . . . recovered for conscious suffering resulting from the same injury . . . shall be held and disposed of by the executors or administrators as assets of the estate of the deceased.” It follows, therefore, that the plaintiffs’ claims for the decedent’s conscious suffering are governed by G. L. c. 260, § 10.
In pertinent part, G. L. c. 260, § 10, provides: “If a person entitled to bring or liable to any action before mentioned dies before the expiration of the time hereinbefore limited, or within thirty days after the expiration of said time, and the cause of action by law survives, the action may be commenced by the executor or administrator at any time within the period within which the deceased might have brought the action or within two years after his giving bond for the discharge of his trust ..."
Reasoning that, had the decedent survived, a discovery rule would have applied to his claims for conscious pain and suffering, Olsen v. Bell Tel. Laboratories, Inc., supra, the plaintiffs argue that we should apply a discovery rule under G. L. c. 260, § 10, on the basis of the following principle: “A survivor takes the rights of the decedent — no more and no less. Therefore if the decedent would have had a cause of action during his lifetime, but for the invidious nature of his disease and his inability to link the injury to the wrongdoer, then that cause of action, when discovered, should survive his death.” Eisenmann v. Cantor Bros., 567 F. Supp. 1347, 1354 (N.D. Ill. *1191983). Accord White v. Johns-Manville Corp., 103 Wash. 2d 344, 360 (1985). The defendants, on the other hand, argue that the survival statute merely permits a personal representative to initiate a cause of action which has already accmed to the deceased before death. See, e.g., McDaniel v. Johns-Manville Sales Corp., 511 F. Supp. 1241 (N.D. Ill. 1981); Trimperv. Porter-Hayden, 305 Md. 31 (1985); Pastierik v. Duquesne Light Co., 514 Pa. 517 (1987); Anthony v. Koppers Co., 496 Pa. 119 (1981).7
General Laws c. 260, § 10, was enacted long before this court’s recognition of the discovery rule. It may be, therefore, that the statutory language does not provide us with a sufficient answer to the question at hand. Nevertheless, that section refers only to claims which the decedent was “entitled to bring.” In Sliski v. Krol, 361 Mass. 313, 315 (1972), we interpreted this language to refer “to cases where the right of action accrued during a lifetime of decedent.” Again it may be argued that Sliski has limited significance here since it was decided before our recognition of the discovery rule. Policy considerations, however, lead us in the same direction. To delay accrual of a claim until the decedent’s personal representative might discover the cause of injury would create a situation where “there seldom would be a prescribed and predictable period of time after which a claim would be barred.” Olsen v. Bell Tel. Laboratories, Inc., supra at 175. The application of a postdeath discovery rule to survival actions would produce “an unacceptable imbalance between affording plaintiffs a remedy and providing defendants the repose that is essential to stability in human affairs.” Id. Furthermore, we are guided by our answer to the first question and the legislative decree that wrongful death actions must be brought within three years of death. There is no apparent reason to apply a common law rule that would permit claims for conscious suffering to be brought under the discovery rule by the decedent’s representatives long *120after death but to limit a death action to a much shorter time. We answer question 2 negatively and, therefore, that, under G. L. c. 260, § 10, we would not apply a discovery rule to a cause of action for conscious suffering commenced more than three years after the date of the decedent’s death, and more than two years after the executor of the decedent’s estate posted his bond.
We answer questions 1 and 2, “No.”
As to Monsanto, the plaintiffs’ claims for wrongful death and conscious pain and suffering are barred by the exclusivity provisions of the workers’ compensation act. G. L. c. 152 (1986 ed.).
The defendants argue that the Utah wrongful death statute is an accrual statute rather than a from death statute. The Supreme Court of Utah did not base its decision on this distinction. Instead, that court has held that “the [wrongful death] cause of action accrues at the time of death; hence, the two-year period begins to run at that time.” Matter of Estate of Garza, 725 P.2d 1328, 1329 (Utah 1986). See also Platz v. International Smelting Co., 61 Utah 342 (1922). The Utah court nevertheless applied a narrow exception to this rule based on the fact that the death itself was not discovered until after the statute had run. Myers v. McDonald, supra.
The plaintiffs contend that in Fidler v. E.M. Parker Co., 394 Mass. 534 (1985), we applied a discovery rule to a nonaccrual type statute which explicitly states when the limitations period begins to run, G. L. c. 106, § 2-318. The plaintiffs’ reliance on Fidler is misplaced. The issue in Fidler was whether the doctrine of collateral estoppel precluded the plaintiffs from relitigating the issue whether the statute of limitations had run. First, we held that “[t]he Federal court’s judgment applying the same measure of accrual [as in negligence claims] reflects a reasonable interpretation and application of Massachusetts law.” Id. at 545. Second, where G. L. c. 106, § 2-318, provides that the statute runs from “the date the injury and damage occurs,” we view this language as potentially ambiguous language requiring judicial interpretation, rather than specific, “nonaccrual” type language, as is contended by the plaintiffs.
But compare Trimper v. Porter-Hayden, supra at 42, in which that court stated: “But the injured party need not know that he has suffered a legally cognizable injury which has resulted in harm in order to have a complete cause of action.”

=== CASE 9738134 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:43:23.805253+00 ===

Liacos, J.
(dissenting, with whom Abrams, J., joins). I join my brother, Justice O’Connor, in his dissent to the court’s opinion as to certified question no. 2. I write separately to express my disagreement with the court’s view, as well as Justice O’Connor’s, as to the proper response to certified question no. 1.
The court today holds that the discovery rule is inapplicable to actions arising under the wrongful death statute, G. L. c. 229, § 2 (1986 ed.). I disagree. The result in this case is incongruent with our previous decisions and is fundamentally unfair.
In my view, this court should not engage in narrow and formalistic legal reasoning so as to deny the plaintiff the ability to bring suit. In the words of our sister court in Utah, such an approach places the law “in the untenable position of having created a remedy for the plaintiff[ ] and then barring [him] from exercising it before [he] had any practical opportunity to do so.” Myers v. McDonald, 635 P.2d 84, 87 (Utah 1981). Accord Eisenmann v. Cantor Bros., 567 F. Supp. 1347, 1352 (N.D. Ill. 1983), quoting Matter of Johns-Manville Asbestosis Cases, 511 F. Supp. 1235, 1238 (N.D. Ill. 1981) (“we would have the anomaly of an action [for wrongful death] being barred before the cause of action even arose”).
The thoughtful and well-reasoned opinion of the Supreme Court of Alaska in Hanebuth v. Bell Helicopter Int’l, 694 P.2d 143 (Alaska 1984), is more persuasive and compelling than *121the response our court gives to question no. I.1 The Alaska court, like our own, had, several years earlier, recognized a common law right of action for wrongful death and had allowed the statutory period of limitations for that action to be tolled. Haakanson v. Wakefield, 600 P.2d 1087 (Alaska 1979). See Gaudette v. Webb, 362 Mass. 60 (1972).2 In Hanebuth, supra at 145, the Alaska court rejected the contention that the use of “from death” rather than “accrual” language expressed a *122clear legislative intent to restrict such actions more severely than other tort actions. Indeed, the difference in language was “not necessarily significant because [in Haakanson] the application of the minor tolling rule was not barred by the ‘from death’ language.” Id. at 146. The Hanebuth court recognized that two key propositions flowed from Haakanson: first, that it is unnecessary narrowly to construe wrongful death statutes as being in derogation of common law;3 second, that wrongful death statutes merely deal with the form of remedy available. They do not bar the underlying right of action. Hanebuth, supra. The same conclusions apply under Gaudette.
In this context, the Alaska court concluded that the “discovery rule does apply to the death act because of the fundamental fairness of the rule and, like the minor tolling rule, because it is consistent with the purposes of the act.. . . The same reasoning, founded on basic justice, that has led us to adopt the discovery rule generally is present in wrongful death actions.” Hanebuth, supra at 146-147. The court noted that to hold otherwise would provide a windfall to tortfeasors whose conduct was so grievous as to cause death, while other tortfeasors, whose conduct fortuitously only caused injury, would be held liable. Id. at 147 & n.12.
We should decline, as did the Alaska court, to “attribute an intent to adopt such an irrational result to the legislature.” Id. at 147. Recently, this court found itself in a similar posture. We unanimously refused to “attribute to Congress an intention, and certainly not a clear intention, to dictate an absurd result.” Apkin v. Treasurer & Receiver Gen., 401 Mass. 427, 436 (1988) (holding Federal legislation, in absence of clear congressional intent, does not preempt State constitutional mandate for judges’ retirement at age seventy). We refused to read the Fed*123eral legislation at issue “in a vacuum,” whatever the legislation “may say if read literally.” Id. at 436, 435. I would hold legislation promulgated by the General Court to no lesser standard.
There is no clear legislative intent illuminating the boundaries of this statute. The court’s emphasis on the Legislature’s use of a nonaccrual style of language is misplaced. The wrongful death act is not a statute of repose that “limits the time within which an action may be brought and is not related to the accrual of any cause of action.” Klein v. Catalano, 386 Mass. 701, 702 (1982). Under such statutes “[t]he injury need not have occurred, much less have been discovered” within the time frame. Id. Statutes of repose evince a clear legislative intent for an absolute time bar.
The wrongful death act, however, affects only the form of the remedy and not the underlying right. Gaudette, supra at 71. It is a statute of limitations, which “normally governs the time within which legal proceedings must be commenced after the cause of action accrues.” Klein v. Catalano, supra. The traditional purpose of a statute of limitations is to “require the assertion of claims within a specified period of time after notice of the invasion of legal rights.” Urie v. Thompson, 337 U.S. 163, 170 (1949). While repose may be a goal of a limitations statute, previous cases adopting the discovery rule illustrate that the time bar is not absolute. See, e.g., Olsen v. Bell Tel. Laboratories, Inc., 388 Mass. 171, 174-175 (1983), and cases cited. When knowledge of the tortious wrong is, within the statutory time frame, unknown and unknowable, courts have applied a discovery rule to prevent legislation from affording merely “a delusive remedy.” Urie, supra at 169.
Where the Legislature intended an absolute time bar on certain actions, it has included language of repose. See, e.g., G. L. c. 260, §§ 2B, 4, and 4B (1986 ed.). In other instances, the benefits of a discovery rule have been conferred legislatively coupled with specific time limitations running from the date of discovery. See, e.g., G. L. c. 260, §§ 2C-2D (1986 ed.). In the absence of such legislative restrictions or limitations regarding G. L. c. 229, § 2, this court is free to apply the *124traditional judicial doctrine of a discovery rule. Application of the rule in this case would ensure that all plaintiffs for whom the Legislature intended to provide a remedy for tortiously caused wrongful deaths would be placed on an equal footing to commence an action upon notice of a wrong.
Finally, I observe that the court relies on several cases which support a contrary result. The court purports to rest its views on Grass v. Catamount Dev. Corp., 390 Mass. 551 (1983). In that case we commented that “[t]he Legislature might reasonably choose to put a wrongful death claimant on a different footing from one claiming injury . . . [because] [t]he latter claims are likely to be myriad in number . . . [while] [djeath claims, on the other hand, being drastic in the extreme and relatively infrequent, need not be constrained” in the same manner. Id. at 553, quoting Gallant v. Worcester, 383 Mass. 707, 714 (1981). This language does not support the court’s position because Grass and Gallant actually stand for the proposition that the Legislature has intended to afford liberal protection to claimants under the wrongful death act. Also, cases such as Klein, which the court cites, ante at 117, are cases in which we were interpreting statutes where clear-cut indications of legislative intent existed. Klein, as discussed above, involved a statute of repose. We thus believed that there was an indisputable legislative intent to abrogate a tort remedy after a time certain. See id. at 712. Similarly, in Eastern Mass. St. Ry. v. Trustees of the E. Mass. St. Ry., 254 Mass. 28, 31-33 (1925), this court concluded that, given the chronological development of the statutory provisions at issue, the Legislature could not have been thought to have intended certain seemingly broad grants of power in one provision so as to exempt the plaintiff from the licensure requirements of another provision. These cases are simply inapposite to the one at bar.
The plaintiff should not be barred from commencing a wrongful death action if he could not have known of the cause of action within the time limitation. Neither fairness nor a proper reading of legislative intent warrants such a conclusion. Accordingly, I dissent.
The language of the Alaska wrongful death statute interpreted in Hanebuth, supra, Alaska Stat. § 09.55.580 (1987), is similar to the Massachusetts statute, providing in relevant part: “When the death of a person is caused by the wrongful act or omission of another, the personal representatives of the former may maintain an action therefor against the latter, if the former might have maintained an action, had the person lived, against the latter for an injury done by the same act or omission. The action shall be commenced within two years after the death . . . .”
General Laws c. 229, § 2 (1986 ed.), provides in relevant part: “A person who (1) by his negligence causes the death of a person, or (2) by willful, wanton or reckless act causes the death of a person under such circumstances that the deceased could have recovered damages for personal injuries if his death had not resulted . . . shall be liable in damages .... An action to recover damages under this section shall be commenced within three years from the date of death or within such time thereafter as is provided by section four, four B, nine or ten of chapter two hundred and sixty.”
Haakanson, supra at 1092 n.11, relied, in part, on our decision in Gaudette, supra. There, we held that the right to recover for wrongful death is of common law origin. Consequently, the statutes governing wrongful death actions are no longer viewed as creating a right to recovery. Rather, they prescribe the form of suit, the damages recoverable, and, like any statute of limitations, the period of time within which actions may be commenced. Gaudette, supra at 71.
Our decision in Hallett v. Wrentham, 398 Mass. 550, 555 (1986), merely reaffirmed the distinction that “the death statute specifies the procedure and recovery” but does not create the underlying right of action. The court notes correctly Hallett’s emphasis that “Gaudette does not stand for the proposition that the requirements of the statute may be disregarded.” Id. We were referring, however, to the necessity for the action to be brought “by a personal representative on behalf of the designated categories of beneficiaries.” Id., quoting Gaudette, supra. The matter arose because the plaintiffs claimed that, under Gaudette, they could sue for wrongful death under the statute or proceed with independent, common law claims for their father’s death. We rejected the claim that Gaudette permitted the statutory procedures on filing to be ignored. Hallett in no way touched upon, nor limited, the instruction that the statute of limitations in G. L. c. 229, § 2, is to be construed like any other. Gaudette, supra at 71.
Indeed, the court emphasized that the death statute should be construed liberally, since it is remedial in nature and “designed to compensate those who have suffered a direct loss because of the tortiously caused death of a benefactor.” Hanebuth, supraat 145. See Boston v. Hospital Transp. Servs., Inc., 6 Mass. App. Ct. 198, 201-202 (1978) (remedial legislation should be construed “so as to accomplish more fully the remedial purpose which prompted its passage”).

=== CASE 9738135 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:43:23.809034+00 ===

*125O’Connor, J.
(dissenting in part). I agree with the court’s answer to the first certified question. General Laws c. 229, § 2, is clear. Claims for wrongful death must be brought within three years after the death occurs.
The second certified question is as follows: “May a discovery rule be applied in an action for conscious pain and suffering brought under [G. L. c. 229, § 6], where, as a consequence of plaintiffs’ good faith ignorance of the existence of grounds for a complaint, the action was commenced more than three years after the date of the decedent’s death, and more than two years after the executor of the decedent’s estate posted his bond?” I do not agree that the correct answer to that question is “no.” I would answer that, whether a discovery rule applies to the conscious pain and suffering claim depends, not on the state of mind of either plaintiff,1 but on whether, regardless of the date of the decedent’s death, the decedent’s disease and its cause were inherently unknowable until three years before this action was commenced.
In several cases, this court and the Appeals Court have recognized the “principle that a plaintiff should be put on notice before his or her claim is barred by the passage of time. Thus, the discovery rule has been applied to causes of action based on ‘inherently unknowable’ wrongs.” Olsen v. Bell Tel. Laboratories, Inc., 388 Mass. 171, 175 (1983), quoting Friedman v. Jablonski, 371 Mass. 482, 485 (1976). Under the discovery rule, “certain causes of action based on inherently unknowable wrongs do not accrue until the plaintiff learns, or reasonably should have learned, that he has been harmed by the defendant’s conduct.” White v. Peabody Constr. Co., 386 Mass. 121, 129 (1982). Gore v. Daniel O’Connell’s Sons, 17 Mass. App. Ct. 645 , 647 (1984). Zampell v. Consolidated Freightways Corp., 15 Mass. App. Ct. 954 (1983).
The purpose of the court-made discovery rule is to implement the legislative intent. The mie corrects the unfairness that would *126result from the limitation period beginning to run against an injured party before his cause of action is knowable. Thus, if John I. Pobieglo, the deceased, had survived to the present, he would have been entitled to bring an action to recover for his personal injuries caused by the defendants’ negligence any time after the injuries were incurred, but he would not have been required to bring the action until three years after the wrong became knowable. If the deceased himself had brought this action on December 31,1984, the date on which the action was in fact brought by the personal representative, the action would have been timely had the deceased’s disease and its cause been inherently unknowable until three years before that date. If the disease and its cause were knowable before December 31, 1981, the action would have been time-barred.
This action was brought, not by the deceased, but by the executor of his estate. As the court notes, ante at 118, “‘[although G. L. c. 229, § 6 . . . permits the joinder of separate counts for death and for conscious suffering in a single action, they are separate causes of action.’ Gaudette v. Webb, 362 Mass. 60, 62 (1972).” A cause of action for conscious suffering, like any other cause of action for personal injuries, is subject to the three-year limitation of actions provisions of G. L. c. 260, § 2A. Id. It survives the death of the injured party, G. L. c. 228, § 1 (2) (a), and vests in the personal representative. Id. at 63.
General Laws c. 260, § 10, provides: “If a person entitled to bring . . . any action before mentioned [a personal injury tort action, as here; see § 2A] dies before the expiration of the time hereinbefore limited [before the expiration of three years after the cause of action accrues; see § 2A], or within thirty days after the expiration of said time, and the cause of action by law survives [a cause of action for personal injuries survives; see G. L. c. 228, § 1 (2) (a)], the action may be commenced by the executor or administrator at any time within the period within which the deceased might have brought the action or within two years after giving his bond for the discharge of his trust . . . .”
*127It is clear that, with respect to surviving causes of action, the Legislature’s objective in enacting G. L. c. 260, § 10, was to give the estate of the deceased at least as much time for bringing an action as the deceased would have had if he had survived. Thus, if a person with a surviving cause of action dies while an action brought by him would still be timely, or within thirty days thereafter, his personal representative “inherits” the time denied to the deceased by reason of his death. Also, if the time for bringing an action has not expired more than thirty days before the death of the deceased, the personal representative has two years from the posting of his bond within which to commence the action. Whether G. L. c. 260, § 10, provides time to the personal representative to bring an action, and if so, how much time, depends on whether there was time remaining to the deceased thirty days before his death. In turn, whether there was time remaining to the deceased thirty days before his death requires application of the discovery rule as discussed above.
Examples might be helpful. If a person dies six months after his disease and its cause have become knowable, his personal representative would have either two years and six months from the date of the death to bring an action (because the deceased would have had that time) or he would have two years from the date of posting his bond, whichever computation results in the longer period. If a person dies two years after the wrong becomes knowable, the personal representative would “inherit” only one year from the date of death, but he nevertheless would have two years from the posting of his bond. If a person dies before the disease and its cause are knowable, the personal representative’s allowable time begins to run when the disease and its cause become knowable because that is the time that would have been available to the deceased if he had survived. In any event, given those circumstances, the personal representative would have at least two years from the posting of his bond.
General Laws c. 260, § 10, addresses the situation where “a person entitled to bring . . . any action” dies before the period of limitation has expired. I would reject the argument *128that, if a person dies before his disease and its cause are knowable, he was not “entitled” to bring an action before he died and therefore c. 260, § 10, is inapplicable. Such a construction frustrates the overriding purpose of the statute, which is to put the estate of the deceased as nearly as possible in the position the deceased would have been in if he had lived. There is no inconsistency in saying that a person who has been injured by the fault of another is entitled to bring an action for his injury although he is unaware of it, but he is not required to bring the action until a prescribed time after the wrong becomes knowable.
Certified question number 2 inquires about the applicability of the discovery rule “where ... the action was commenced more than three years after the date of the decedent’s death, and more than two years after the executor of the decedent’s estate posted his bond.” Just as the period for commencing a wrongful death action begins with the death, because the Legislature has so provided, the provision of two years from the posting of the executor’s bond, as required by G. L. c. 260, § 10, can only begin with the posting of the bond. I would answer, however, that if the wrong of which the plaintiffs complain was inherently unknowable at least until December 31, 1981, three years before the action was brought, the action was timely.
Of course, applying the discovery rule to a claim for conscious suffering arising out of a wrong that is inherently unknowable until after the injured person’s death will usually result in the action to recover for such injury being viable for a longer time (perhaps much longer) than is a claim for that person’s wrongful death. If that lack of symmetry is thought by the Legislature to be undesirable, its correction is for that body. If the Legislature chooses to act, it may enact legislation providing that claims for conscious suffering must be brought within three years after the injured person’s death. But, it is also open to the Legislature, if it chooses to act, to enact legislation providing that a wrongful death action must be brought within three years after the wrong has become inherently knowable, thus synchronizing claims for wrongful death *129with claims for conscious suffering, which is the result Justice Liacos contends is correct on the basis of the present statute. It is my view that the court should not create its own “statute” of limitations by arbitrarily announcing that a cause of action for conscious suffering arises no later than the injured person’s death even though, at that time, the cause of action is not inherently knowable and would not have accrued if the injured person had survived.
The plaintiffs are John L. Pobieglo, executor of the estate of his father, John I. Pobieglo, and administrator of the estate of his mother, Doris Pobieglo, and Kathy Pobieglo, daughter of John I. Pobieglo and Doris Pobieglo.

=== CASE 9738136 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:43:24.100725+00 ===

DAY, J.
This is a review of an unpublished decision of the court of appeals dated February 12, 1986, which reversed Stephen L. Grant’s (Defendant’s) conviction on June 18, 1984, in the circuit court for Milwaukee county, Hon. Ralph G. Gorenstein, Circuit Judge, of the violation of two counts of second-degree sexual assault under sec. 940.225(2)(e), Stats., and one count of robbery, contrary to sec. 943.32.
The issue on review is: Did the court of appeals properly apply the harmless error test in reviewing an erroneous decision by the trial court to admit "other *47acts” evidence consisting of Defendant’s arrest for prowling?1 We conclude that the court of appeals incorrectly applied the harmless error test. Properly applying the test for harmless error enunciated in State v. Dyess, 124 Wis. 2d 525, 370 N.W.2d 222 (1985), there is no reasonable possibility that the error contributed to the conviction and we determine that the admission of evidence of the arrest for the ordinance violation constituted harmless error. We therefore reverse the decision of the court of appeals.
On February 22, 1983, Defendant was charged with two counts of second-degree sexual assault and one count of robbery. The crimes with which he was charged took place on February 13, 1983.
At trial, the victim testified as to the events that occurred in the early morning hours of February 13, 1983. After having fallen asleep with a bedroom light and television left on, the victim was awakened at approximately 3:30 a.m. by a noise in the dining room. A man wearing a stocking cap and jacket entered the bedroom. The victim testified she had about twenty seconds in which to view the man prior to his switching off of the light and television.
The assailant approached the victim, placing his hand over her mouth and advising her that if she did not move she would not be hurt. After questioning the victim as to whether they were alone, the man demanded money, and the two proceeded side-by-side *48to the dining room to retrieve the victim’s wallet. They then walked into the kitchen to count the money.
Dissatisfied with the amount of money found, the man demanded more. The victim assured the man that this was all the money she had. The victim testified that she was threatened; the man kept telling her that if she looked at him he would kill her. In an effort to appease the assailant, the victim removed her eyeglasses. The victim testified that she was nearsighted and had no difficulty seeing objects near to her. The victim testified that she had no difficulty seeing the denominations of the bills removed from her wallet — two ten dollar bills and a one dollar bill. She also stated while on the witness stand that she could see the face of the court reporter without wearing her glasses. The distance between the court reporter and the victim while testifying was approximately one yard. In addition, she testified that since the living room, dining room, and kitchen were illuminated by a street light she had no difficulty seeing the assailant’s face.
After walking to the front door and locking it, the assailant then took the victim to the bedroom. The man threatened the victim, stating: "[i]f you don’t do what I ask you to do I’m going to hurt you.” She was instructed to close her eyes and remove her clothes. The victim was then sexually assaulted.
At one point during the assault the assailant pulled aside the drape to look out the window. At this moment the victim glanced at him. This was the only time the victim looked at the man during the assault. After the assault, the man rummaged through some dresser drawers and then departed.
*49The victim called police and upon their arrival gave the following physical description of her assailant: he was a black male in his late teens to early twenties, about five foot eight inches tall, and weighed around 130 pounds. She then went to the police station and viewed fifty to sixty photographs, but did not identify any as the photograph of her assailant.
On February 21, 1983, the victim returned to the police station to view a lineup. She identified the Defendant, who was one of the five men in the lineup. The lineup took place following the Defendant’s arrest for prowling. The Defendant is a black male, twenty-seven years old, five foot seven inches tall and weighs 140 pounds.
During the jury trial, the prosecutor sought to introduce evidence of Defendant’s arrest on February 19, 1983, on an ordinance violation for prowling. A woman, standing inside her home, had observed Defendant peering in her window. The police were called and upon their arrival they also saw the Defendant peering into the window of the woman’s house. Upon his arrest, Defendant had in his possession the name and address of the woman. The trial court allowed admission of evidence of the prowling violation pursuant to sec. 904.04(2) Stats.2
*50On appeal, the state conceded that the trial court abused its discretion when it admitted evidence of the prowling violation. The court of appeals held that the trial court erroneously allowed the state to admit evidence of Defendant’s arrest for prowling, and that the error was not harmless.3 The judgment was reversed and the case remanded for a new trial.
*51In determining whether the admission of the prowling evidence constituted harmless error, the court of appeals stated:
"We must now determine whether this error is harmless. The harmless error test is whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error contributed to the conviction. A reasonable possibility is a possibility sufficient to undermine our confidence in the outcome. As a general rule, the erroneous receipt of evidence of the defendant’s bad character or his commission of specific disconnected acts is prejudicial error. The burden is on the state to show that there is no reasonable possibility that the error contributed to the conviction.
"Here the state has failed to carry its burden. It is reasonably likely that the jury, upon hearing the prowling evidence, convicted Grant not because the evidence proved his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, but because it thought that Grant had the propensity to commit bad acts. This is the very *52conclusion that sec. 904.04, Stats., seeks to prevent. The jury could have believed that Grant was indeed 'caught in the act’ when he was arrested for prowling. Had the prowling evidence been excluded, it is reasonably possible that the outcome of the trial would have been different. Our confidence in the outcome of this trial is thus undermined.” (Footnotes omitted). (Emphasis added.)
The instant case presents the single issue of whether the admission of other acts evidence constitutes harmless error.
The potential dangers in admitting other-acts testimony are well known. Our rules of evidence do not allow this type of evidence to be admitted merely to show that the Defendant had a propensity to commit the type of acts for which he is charged. In the instant case it is argued that the admission of the evidence of the prowling arrest may have influenced the jury in such a way that it was more easily led to resolve the identity issue and determine the matter of guilt based on the Defendant’s apparent propensity to commit acts such as prowling, acts which are arguably related to the sexual misconduct with which he was charged.
While the error was potentially prejudicial to the Defendant, there remains the fact that there is substantial evidence, unrelated to the prowling evidence, which confirms the victim’s identification of the Defendant. Courts turn to the harmless error test for guidance in these situations in assessing whether the error is sufficiently grievous that a new trial should result.
The harmless error test as set forth in Dyess contemplates that the "reviewing court must set aside *53the verdict unless it is sure that the error did not influence the jury or had such slight effect as to be de minimus.” Dyess, 124 Wis. 2d at 541-542. The reviewing court must determine "whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error contributed to the conviction.” Id. at 543. In assessing this, the focus should be on whether the error undermines the court’s confidence in the outcome of the case. Id. at 545. We conclude that the outcome in this case was not undermined by the admission of the other-acts testimony.
This court has reviewed trial error by analyzing the error "in the context of the entire trial.” State v. Zelenka, 130 Wis. 2d 34, 49, 387 N.W.2d 55 (1986). In Zelenka, this court applied the Dyess harmless error test to assess whether erroneous jury instructions could be deemed harmless. This court stated: "To make this determination, we do not view this instruction in isolation from the trial nor do we consider whether such an instruction could prejudice the verdict in some hypothetical trial. We view this instruction in the context of the entire trial.” Id. at 49.
In the instant case the erroneous admission of the other-acts testimony must be viewed in a similar light. In State v. Fishnick, 127 Wis. 2d 247, 378 N.W.2d 272 (1985), the court applied the Dyess harmless error test to determine whether the erroneous admission of other acts evidence could be deemed harmless. As in the present case, application of the Dyess test involved the review of evidence presented at trial. An important part of the Fishnick harmless error analysis involved an assessment of the sufficiency of the evidence "untainted by the error.” See, Fishnick, 127 Wis. 2d at 266-267. Viewing the error in the context of *54the entire trial, and considering the strength of the untainted evidence, we conclude that the error was harmless.
As noted above, the chief issue at trial was identification. To a large extent, the jury had to depend on judging the credibility of the victim on the stand. It has been observed many times that credibility of witnesses is a matter best determined by the jury. The victim’s testimony states that she was with the assailant for approximately thirty to forty-five minutes. She saw the assailant enter her bedroom, and was able to look at him directly for roughly twenty seconds. She walked through the house with the assailant, between rooms that were illuminated by a street light. She had removed her glasses, but her nearsightedness did not prohibit her seeing the assailant, who was in close proximity the entire time. She also saw his face again briefly during the assault. We note that the victim also listened to the man speak the entire time. The victim was able to judge the physical characteristics of the man based on direct physical contact. The victim did not identify the assailant at a police station photograph session but did identify the Defendant at a subsequent lineup. We find that the jury could have convicted Defendant based on the foregoing testimony. There is no reasonable possibility that the error contributed to the conviction.
We agree with the state that the other-acts evidence had little impact on the jury. This evidence constituted a very minor part of the prosecution’s case. Our review of the record reveals overwhelming evidence supporting guilt.
We also note that an additional factor is present in the instant case which supports upholding the *55conviction: a concern for the victim. As noted in United States v. Mechanik, 106 S. Ct. 938, 942 (1986):
"The reversal of a conviction entails substantial social costs: it forces jurors, witnesses, courts, the prosecution, and the defendant to expend further time, energy, and other resources to repeat a trial that has already once taken place; victims may be asked to relive their disturbing experiences. ” (Emphasis added.)
The United States Supreme Court has stated that "in the administration of criminal justice, courts may not ignore the concerns of victims” and the potential "ordeal” they would be forced and put through in a retrial. Morris v. Slappy, 461 U.S. 1, 14 (1982). Here there would be nothing gained in forcing the victim to relive the humiliating and degrading experience of a sexual assault. We, therefore, using the test in Dyess, reverse the decision of the court of appeals in this non-constitutional error case.
By the Court. — The decision of the court of appeals is reversed.
The arrest for prowling involved a violation of a city ordinance. Since such violation is only a forfeiture action, this did not constitute a "crime” under sec. 939.12, Stats., which provides:
“939.12 Crime defined. A crime is conduct which is prohibited by state law and punishable by fine or imprisonment or both. Conduct punishable only by a forfeiture is not a crime.”
Section 904.04(2), Stats., provides:
"904.04 Character evidence not admissible to prove conduct; exceptions; other crimes. ... (2) OTHER CRIMES, WRONGS, OR ACTS. Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the character of a person in order to show that he acted in conformity therewith. This subsection does not exclude the evidence when offered for other purposes, such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, or absence of mistake or accident.”
The trial court cited State v. Pharr, 115 Wis. 2d 334, 340 N.W.2d 498 (1983) for the two-part test to be used when consider*50ing the admissibility of other-acts evidence. The trial court found, under the first part of the test, that the evidence fit into one of the exceptions listed in sec. 904.04(2), Stats. The trial court concluded that the evidence was "relevant to show ... motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan.” The trial court also noted: "I think this also shows the absence of mistake ... since here it was involved in at least the percursor [sic], or possible percursor [sic] to another similar act.”
Under the second step, the court determines whether the probative value of the evidence outweighs its prejudicial effort. Section 904.03, Stats., provides:
"904.03 Exclusion of relevant evidence on grounds of prejudice, confusion, or waste of time. Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence.”
In balancing the probative value versus prejudicial effect under sec. 904.03, Stats., the trial court concluded: "[t]his court feels that because of the nature of the event, the closeness of the time, the closeness of the description, the modus operandi; that the probative value is greater than the prejudicial value ....”
The court of appeals noted that the trial court admitted the prowling evidence because the trial court was of the opinion that it showed the defendant "was caught in the act of committing an act similar to the prior sexual assault and robbery.” The court of appeals cited remarks made by the trial judge at the postconviction motion hearing:
*51"For Mr. Grant to have picked out this lady to rape he obviously had to check over the premises, to look out, to plan to do all the things the cases talk about, and that’s exactly the same thing he was doing six days later when he was caught. Exactly.”
The court of appeals, observing that the sole issue at trial was identification, noted that in order for the prowling evidence to be relevant, it had to "make the fact of Grant’s identification” either more probable or less probable. Reasoning that the fact the Defendant was later arrested for prowling did not make it any more probable that he committed the assault and robbery, the court held that the prowling evidence was irrelevant and that therefore the trial court abused its discretion in allowing the evidence to be admitted.
For purposes of this review, we assume the court of appeals is correct in holding the prowling evidence was inadmissible.

=== CASE 9738137 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:43:24.106081+00 ===

HEFFERNAN, CHIEF JUSTICE
{concurring). The writer joins in the majority opinion but concurs for the purpose of expressing disagreement with the separate concurring opinion of Justice Day, which states dissatisfaction with the harmless error rule recently adopted in State v. Dyess, 124 Wis. 2d 525, 370 N.W.2d 222 (1985).
Quite aside from the broader policy reasons for not now switching to a new harmless error rule, I am troubled by the analysis which would discard the Dyess rule because of the dictionary’s definitional difference between "possible” and "probable.” Dyess *56was formulated for the express purpose of escaping the enslaving yoke of semantics. It would indeed be absurd to say that the words, "possible” and "probable,” are always synonymous. But what we said in Dyess was that henceforth, for the purpose of the application of the test, meanings of those words should make little difference, that we should look to the substance of the test. We pointed out therein that "there are few meaningful distinctions among the various formulations of the test for prejudice.” P. 545. Dyess attempted to stress a common-sense approach to whether or not an error seriously undermined confidence in a verdict. We drew on the experience of this court which taught us "that the determination of whether the trial error was harmless is unaffected by the particular formulation of the harmless error test used.” P. 543.
I fear that what the concurring opinion urges is that we resort to a "counting-the-angels-on-the-head-of-a-pin” logic or to an undue reliance on Webster’s Dictionary. I also point out that anyone who thinks that "possible” and "probable” are discrete words with no congruent meanings will be promptly disabused of this idea after even a cursory examination of some of the meanings ascribed to these words in Burton’s Legal Thesaurus (MacMillan 1980).
While I sympathize with, and agree with, Justice Day’s quest for an ever better harmless error rule, that quest should put aside the assumption that the solution to this vexing problem is to be found in dictionary definitions. Any rule adopted, or to be adopted, by this court or others will only confirm the appropriateness of the nomenclature used by Chief Justice Traynor: "The Riddle of Harmless Error.” No test is likely to be completely satisfactory. What is *57harmless or prejudicial eventually comes down to a subjective judgment, no matter how carefully we attempt to hedge that subjective decision with recognizable guidelines. What this court needs is a consistent and predictable policy in handling questions of harmless error.
The effect of the concurring opinion is to place in doubt our present admittedly less than perfect harmless error rule. Perhaps we will now replace it with another formulation that will be equally subject to criticism and whose jurisprudential life will soon be terminated. Nothing in the briefs or oral arguments in the present case has suggested any dissatisfaction or argued for a change in Dyess. On the other hand, when Dyess was adopted, there was widespread and publicly acknowledged dissatisfaction with whatever harmless error rule we theretofore had. To my knowledge, there has been no widespread disagreement with the Dyess procedure.
Recognizing, as any reasonable person should, that there is indeed a "Riddle of Harmless Error,” I believe the court should, in the effort to give some predictability and reckonability to this aspect of the law, stick with the present test of harmless error. Until or unless we can reach the conclusion, based on experience, that the Dyess rule, properly read, understood, and applied, fails to serve the purpose of seeing to it that criminal convictions are not set aside for trivial reasons but are set aside only where the right to a fair trial has been impaired, the Dyess rule should be preserved. The duty of this court to provide and assure some continuity and predictability mandates that there be no change in the rule unless we can, with some assurance, come up with a better rule that in likelihood can be applied with greater understand*58ing and consistency by the lawyers and the judges of this state. What the concurrence appears to propose is a rule that compounds whatever confusion may arise out of the present rule. I would suggest that whatever rule we have, or which we may adopt in the future, assuming it substantially meets the dual test of foregoing reversals for trivial errors but yet assuring fair trial, we stick with the rule and work with it if necessary to see to it that it is made workable and understandable.
I am authorized to state that JUSTICE BA-BLITCH joins in this concurrence.

=== CASE 9738138 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:43:24.115862+00 ===

DAY, J.
(concurring). I concur with the results of the majority opinion. However, I write separately because the application of the "reasonable possibility” test under the facts of the instant case is especially disturbing. It makes little sense to equate the erroneous admission of evidence related to violation of a municipal ordinance with a violation of a constitutional right. I believe that the court’s decision in Dyess to adopt a uniform test for constitutional and non-constitutional error was ill-advised and that the court should, át the first available opportunity, overrule Dyess. Although one of the Dyess majority, I would restate the law of harmless error in order to reinstate separate tests for constitutional and non-constitutional error.
While it is clear in the instant case that the error complained of did not affect the evidence of the trial under any test for harmless error, this type of error, i.e., non-constitutional error, should not be subject to the strict, "reasonable possibility” test of Dyess. This test is applied by the United States Supreme Court only to constitutional errors.
*59As noted, Dyess, abandoned distinctive tests for constitutional and non-constitutional error. Observing that "[t]here seems to be no special virtue in having different harmless error tests for constitutional error and non-constitutional error,” a majority of this court stated:
"We conclude that, in view of the gradual merger of this court’s collective thinking in respect to harmless versus prejudicial error, whether of omission or commission, whether of constitutional proportions or not, the test should be whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error contributed to the conviction.” Dyess, 124 Wis. 2d at 543. (Footnote omitted.) (Emphasis added.)
There appears to have been two reasons which prompted the Dyess court to conclude that a single harmless error test is appropriate. First, this court, as a matter of practice, has frequently resorted to a single test in cases involving both constitutional and non-constitutional error. Id. at 542.
The single test that has been used was originally formulated by the United States Supreme Court in Kotteakos v. United States, 328 U.S. 750 (1946), a case involving non-constitutional error. Kotteakos is generally cited for the United States Supreme Court’s statement of the harmless error test for non-constitutional errors. Courts have relied on various statements of the test appearing in the Kotteakos opinion. The following is one of the key paragraphs:
"[i]f, when all is said and done, the conviction is sure that the error did not influence the jury, or had but very slight effect, the verdict and the judgment should stand, except perhaps where the departure is from a constitutional norm or a *60specific command of Congress. But if one cannot say, without fair assurance, after pondering all that happened without stripping the erroneous action from the whole, that the judgment was not substantially swayed by the error, it is impossible to conclude that substantial rights were not affected. The inquiry cannot be merely whether there was enough to support the result, apart from the phase affected by the error. It is rather, even so, whether the error itself had substantial influence. If so, or if one is left in grave doubt, the conviction cannot stand.” Kotteakos, 328 U.S. at 764-765. (Footnote and citation omitted).
The Dyess court noted that the Kotteakos test had been adopted by this court in prior cases involving constitutional error, citing State v. Poh, 116 Wis. 2d 510, 529, 343 N.W.2d 108 (1984), State v. Burton, 112 Wis. 2d 560, 571, 334 N.W.2d 263 (1983), and State v. Billings, 110 Wis. 2d 661, 667, 329 N.W.2d 1982 (1983), as examples. 124 Wis. 2d at 542.
The Dyess court also noted that in a number of cases involving non-constitutional error this court has concluded that the proper test was whether there was a reasonable possibility that the error contributed to the conviction, citing State v. Cartagena, 99 Wis. 2d 657, 671, 299 N.W.2d 872 (1981), Barrera v. State, 99 Wis. 2d 269, 295, 298 N.W.2d 820 (1980), Pohl v. State, 96 Wis. 2d 290, 312, 291 N.W.2d 554 (1980), and Novitzke v. State, 92 Wis. 2d 303, 308, 284 N.W.2d 904 (1979), as examples. The Dyess court reasoned that these cases, using a "reasonable possibility” test, were applying, for all intents and purposes, the Kotteakos test. Dyess, 124 Wis. 2d at 542-543. Thus, the majority in Dyess concluded that this court has applied a single *61test (the Kotteakos test), in cases involving both constitutional and non-constitutional error.
The second reason given by the Dyess court as to why a single harmless error test is appropriate is that "there is little practical difference between the formulations of harmless error” which this court has used. Dyess, 124 Wis. 2d at 543. This means that the conclusion as to whether harmless error exists is often "unaffected by the particular formulation of the harmless error test used.” Id.
In arriving at its conclusion as to the correct test, the Dyess court took guidance from Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668 (1984). In Strickland, the court stated the test of prejudice which must be applied to determine whether reversal is required in cases of defective performance by counsel.
Under Strickland, the appropriate test for prejudice requires that: "the defendant ... show that there is a reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been different. A reasonable probability is a probability sufficient to undermine confidence in the outcome.” 466 U.S. at 694. The Strickland Court stated: "when a defendant challenges a conviction, the question is whether there is a reasonable probability that, absent the errors, the factfinder would have had a reasonable doubt respecting guilt.” Id. at 695.
The Strickland Court set forth the defendant’s burden:
"Taking the unaffected findings as a given, and taking due account of the effect of the errors on the remaining findings, a court making the prejudice inquiry must ask if the defendant has met the burden of showing that the decision reached would *62reasonably likely have been different absent the errors.” Id. at 696.
The Dyess majority said that although Strickland phrased the test in terms of "reasonable probability,” the United States Supreme Court’s test "is substantively the same as ours.” Dyess, 124 Wis. 2d at 544.
As noted in Dyess, "[t]his court for years has been struggling with methodology to rationalize upholding a conviction despite the acknowledgement that error has been committed.” Id. at 540. Prior to Dyess, the leading case on harmless error analysis was Wold v. State, 57 Wis. 2d 344, 204 N.W. 482 (1973).
In Wold, a defendant convicted of sexual misconduct argued that erroneously admitted evidence constituted prejudicial error. The Wold court stated:
"The test of harmless error is not whether some harm has resulted, but, rather, whether the appellate court in its independent determination can conclude there is sufficient evidence, other than and uninfluenced by the inadmissible evidence, which would convict the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.” Wold, 57 Wis. 2d at 356.
In arriving at this formulation of the test, the Wold court relied on three United States Supreme Court cases: Fahy v. Connecticut, 375 U.S. 85 (1963); Chapman v. California, 386 U.S. 18 (1967); and, Harrington v. California, 395 U.S. 250 (1969).
The Wold court noted that in Fahy, the harmless error test was stated in terms of "whether there is a reasonable possibility that the evidence complained of might have contributed to the conviction.” Wold, 57 Wis. 2d 344, n. 12, quoting Fahy, 375 U.S. at 86-87. Following the Fahy decision, the Court in Chapman held that "before a federal constitutional error can be *63held harmless, the court must be able to declare a belief that it was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.” Chapman, 386 U.S. at 24. Chapman is the case generally cited for the United States Supreme Court’s statement of the harmless error test for constitutional errors.
The Wold court noted that the formulations of the test in Fahy and Chapman were thought to be similar by the Chapman Court. Wold, 57 Wis. 2d at 357, n. 12, quoting Chapman, 386 U.S. at 24. The Wold court concluded: "[tjaking these two cases together, it seems the court is saying an error cannot be deemed harmless beyond a reasonable doubt where there is a reasonable possibility that the evidence complained of might have contributed to the conviction.” Wold, 57 Wis. 2d at 357, n. 12.
The Wold court reasoned, however, that the subsequent Harrington case "exchanged the 'possibility’ test of Fahy for one based on 'probability.’” Id. Thus, the test was "based on reasonable probabilities.” Wold, 57 Wis. 2d at 356. In explaining the possibility/probability distinction, the Wold court noted: "[a] possibility test is the next thing to automatic reversal. In determining guilt 'beyond a reasonable doubt,’ the human mind should not work on possibilities, but on reasonable probabilities.” Id. at 356-357. (Footnote omitted.)1 The Wold test was applied in a *64number of cases, and the statement of the test experienced some variation.2
This court struggled with the Chapman "beyond a reasonable doubt” language as incorporated in the Wold test. In assessing the "degree of harm” caused by trial error, whether constitutional or not, the focus has typically been on the strength of evidence "untainted” by the error. In Sheehan v. State, 65 Wis. 2d 757, 223 N.W.2d 600 (1974), the defendant was denied his constitutional right to confrontation when the trial court allowed a deposition to be read at trial. The court held the error harmless, concluding that there was sufficient untainted evidence to sustain the conviction. Sheehan, 65 Wis. 2d at 767-768.
This approach was followed in State v. Dean, 67 Wis. 2d 513, 227 N.W.2d 712 (1975), cert. denied, 423 U.S. 1074 (1976), which involved the admission of inadmissible hearsay evidence. The Dean court stated: "[w]e conclude that because of other evidence offered in the trial that the receipt of this testimony constituted harmless error.” Dean, 67 Wis. 2d at 533. A similar approach was used in Ramaker v. State, 73 Wis. 2d 563, 243 N.W.2d 534 (1976), where constitutional error had been committed through the ex parte reception of evidence, giving the defendant no notice or opportunity to respond. The Ramaker court concluded: "[i]n short, the error is harmless because this court can independently conclude that there is suffi*65cient evidence, other than and uninfluenced by the unconstitutionally received evidence, which would warrant the revocation of Mr. Ramaker’s probation.” Ramaker, 73 Wis. 2d at 570.
Kelly v. State, 75 Wis. 2d 303, 249 N.W.2d 800 (1977), highlighted the uncertainty surrounding the Wold harmless error test and marked the departure of one of the members of this court from the Wold test. The error in Kelly involved the admission into evidence of a gun case and a box of shells which had been found upon a warrantless search of the bedroom of the defendant, an individual convicted of first-degree murder. The court concluded that the admission of this evidence constituted harmless error, relying on evidence "uninfluenced” by the inadmissible evidence. Kelly, 75 Wis. 2d at 316-317. In a footnote, the majority in Kelly remarked that: "[w]e decline to upset Wold in favor of Kotteakos v. United States, ”but noted that "the improperly admitted evidence had 'but only slight effect,’ Kotteakos, 328 U.S. at 764 and the result in this case would be the same under that test.” Kelly, 75 Wis. 2d at 317, n. 3.
In his concurring opinion, Justice Heffernan doubted the correctness of the formulation of the harmless error rule in Wold, arguing that Wold erroneously placed "emphasis upon the admissible evidence rather than upon the alleged error.” Id. at 321. Justice Heffernan noted that Wold should be reconsidered in light of United States v. Agurs, 427 U.S. 97 (1976), a case which sets forth a rule different from that adopted in Wold.3
*66Justice Heffernan wrote the opinion in State v. Jennaro, 76 Wis. 2d 499, 251 N.W.2d 800 (1977), where the defendant appealed his criminal conviction, in part, on the ground that the trial court erred in failing to grant defendant’s motion for severance of defendant’s trial from the trial of his co-defendant. The Jennaro court held the error to be harmless, offering the following statement on harmless error analysis:
"Under Chapman v. California, 386 U.S. 18 (1967), the United States Supreme Court stated that, before a federal constitutional error can be held harmless, 'the court must be able to declare a belief that it was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.’ *67(at 24) This standard of Chapman was specifically reaffirmed in Harrington v. California, 395 U.S. 250, 254 (1969). Under the Chapman test, it is apparent beyond a reasonable doubt that the error complained of did not contribute to the guilty verdict in respect to Jennaro. Under the test apparently applicable to nonconstitutional error, set forth in Kotteakos v. United States, 328 U.S. 750 (1946), and recently restated in United States v. Agurs, 427 U.S. 97, 49 L. Ed. 2d 342, 96 S. Ct. 2392 (1976), the error is equally harmless, because it is clear that the error did not influence the jury or had only slight effect. See Kelly v. State, 75 Wis. 2d 303, n. 2.5 at 317, 249 N.W.2d 800 (1977), and concurring opinion at 321. Under any test, the error was harmless.” Jennaro, 76 Wis. 2d at 509-510.
Here the Jennaro court explicity recognized that the Chapman test was to be used in instances involving constitutional error, while the Kotteakos test, focusing on whether the error influenced the jury or only had a slight effect, was to be used in assessing non-constitutional error. Despite the recognition of this distinction, the Jennaro court opted not to choose any single test, and concluded that the error was harmless "under any test.” Id. at 510.
Jennaro was relied on in Simpson v. State, 83 Wis. 2d 494, 266 N.W.2d 270 (1978), where the court reviewed the erroneous admission into evidence of two photos of a murder victim. The Simpson court stated: "[w]e conclude, applying either the test adopted in Wold, 57 Wis. 2d [at] 356, or the test suggested in Jennaro, 76 Wis. 2d [at] 509-510, that the error was not prejudicial.” 83 Wis. 2d at 507. See also, Hammen v. State, 87 Wis. 2d 791, 801, 275 N.W.2d 709 (1979).
*68The "under any test” approach seemed to be modified somewhat in State v. Clark, 87 Wis. 2d 804, 818, 275 N.W.2d 715 (1979), where the court held that the admission of testimony by the victim of a sexual assault that she had not had sexual intercourse prior to the incident in question constituted error. The court held that the error was "harmless under any test for nonconstitutional error.” Clark, 87 Wis. 2d at 818. (Emphasis added.) The Clark court again raised the distinction between constitutional and non-constitutional error. The court noted: "[t]he defendant invokes the standard for harmless constitutional error. See Chapman v. California, 386 U.S. 18, 24 (1967). The error here was admission of testimony in violation of state law; this in no way rises to the level of deprivation of the right to a fair trial guaranteed by the sixth and fourteenth amendments.” Clark, 87 Wis. 2d at 818, n. 3.
The "under any test” approach is also employed in State v. Sarinske, 91 Wis. 2d, 55, 280 N.W.2d 725; Novitzke v. State, 92 Wis. 2d at 308 and Pohl. In Pohl, the court compared various statements of the harmless error test, and appeared to have given up making any distinction among them.4
*69The distinction between the harmless error test for constitutional and non-constitutional errors arose again in State v. Billings, 110 Wis. 2d 661, 329 N.W.2d 192 (1983). In Billings, this court stated that the standard for determining whether constitutional error is harmless was found in Chapman, 386 U.S. at 24. 110 Wis. 2d at 666-667.
Following Billings, the court in State v. Gavigan, 111 Wis. 2d 150, 163, 330 N.W.2d 571 (1983) identified the Wold test as the standard for determining whether a non-constitutional error is harmless. See also, State v. Ruiz, 118 Wis. 2d 177, 198, 347 N.W.2d 352 (1984). The application of the Wold test was challenged by the dissenters in Gavigan. Justice Heffer-nan, in his dissent, stated: "[t]he Wold test is not whether there was sufficient evidence to convict *70without the tainted evidence, but whether the jury would have done so.” Id. at 174. Claiming that the majority misapplied the Wold test, Justice Heffernan stated: "[t]his court in Wold clearly applied the test of harmless error in respect to its effect upon a jury and did not confine its scrutiny solely to the effect that the untainted evidence would have as regarded solely from the viewpoint of an appellate court.” 111 Wis. 2d at 174, n. 2.
The foregoing brief sketch of this court’s treatment of the harmless error test since Wold shows that: 1) the distinction between tests for constitutional and non-constitutional error has not always been preserved; 2) the court has stated the harmless error test in various ways; 3) the "under any test” approach reveals not only imprecision in language, but frustration with the harmless error methodology; and 4) even when agreeing on the proper formulation, this court often has disagreement on the elements of the test, and how the test is to be applied. It was against this background that the Dyess court addressed the question of harmless error analysis.
The decision in Dyess to adopt a single uniform test for harmless error appears to have resulted, in part, from both dissatisfaction with this court’s treatment of trial court errors in earlier cases, as well as a desire to set forth a clear rule that can be simply employed. The uniform test for harmless error had been advocated by Chief Justice Roger Traynor of the Supreme Court of California:
"Constitutional though it may be to impose different tests for errors that are not of constitutional dimension and errors that are, each new test brings new complications to appellate review, which may do less to serve justice than to impede *71it. For the long run it would be much better to evolve a uniform test that could realistically govern errors of constitutional or nonconstitutional dimension, in both civil and criminal cases. Since trials are often marred by both constitutional and nonconstitutional errors, an appellate court can hardly perceive the record whole if it must constantly adjust its sights to various degrees of probability as it scrutinizes various types of error. Such busy work not only befuddles its vision but causes a court to lose sight of the main objective. The real problem of justice is not whether an error is of constitutional or nonconstitutional dimension or whether it mars a criminal or a civil trial, but whether it affected the judgment.” R. Traynor, The Riddle of Harmless Error, 48-49 (1970).
Wigmore also advocates a uniform standard. 1 J. Wigmore, Evidence, Sec. 21 (3d ed. 1940). See also, Comment, Harmless Error: The Need for a Uniform Standard, 53 St. John’s L. Rev. 541 (1979). As noted by the author of the foregoing Comment:
"Although, as a general rule, constitutional violations may be more egregious than other types of errors, the circumstances of a particular case may render the nonconstitutional error far more prejudicial .... Since 'the effect of the evidence in the context of [a] particular case’ bears little relation to whether the error is constitutional or nonconsti-tutional, there seems to be little justification for a rule which makes the determination of harmlessness hinge on the label attached to the error.” 53 St. John’s L. Rev. at 559 (footnotes omitted).
The constitutional/non-constitutional distinction has been criticized on the ground that "it is erroneous to say that constitutional errors are more likely to *72have an injurious effect at trial than other errors.” Saltzburg, The Harm of Harmless Error, 59 Va. L. Rev. 988, 1025 (1973). Professor Saltzburg argues for two distinct tests for harmless error, but the type of test should depend on whether the case is an appeal from a civil or criminal trial, and should not be related to the type of error involved. He states:
"The basis for requiring a different standard for judging the effect of a procedural error in criminal and in civil trials is that a different standard of proof is utilized in the two kinds of cases, and that the standard of proof utilized at trial should relate in large measure to the standard used by an appellate court in evaluating the impact or potential harm of any trial error.” 59 Va. L. Rev. at 991.
In discussing the arguments in favor of a uniform test, Saltzburg notes that Wigmore advocated a uniform test due to a desire to reduce the number of criminal convictions overturned on appeal, and did not consider the different burdens of proof in criminal and civil cases and whether that difference should play a part in assessing error. Id. at 995. Saltzburg observes that Justice Traynor did recognize the "relationship between burden of proof in the trial court and the standards of review on appeal,” but only with respect to questions involving sufficiency of evidence and not questions related to review of error. Id. at 995-996. Saltzburg concluded that "aside from abstract notions of symmetry or an unsubstantiated assumption that a single standard is more easily applied, [Justice Traynor] supplied no more justification for uniformity in both kinds of cases. Indeed there appears to be none.” Id. at 997. (Footnote omitted.)
*73Since questions of harmless error often involve constitutional rights under the United States Constitution, the starting point, when considering any formulation of the harmless error test, must be with what is minimally required when dealing with federal constitutional rights. In Chapman, the United States Supreme Court stated:
"The application of a state harmless-error rule is, of course, a state question where it involves only error of state procedure or state law. But the error from which these petitioners suffered was a denial of rights guaranteed against invasion by the fifth and fourteenth amendments_Whether a conviction for crime should stand when a State has failed to accord federal constitutionally guaranteed rights is every bit as much of a federal question as what particular federal constitutional provisions themselves mean, what they guarantee, and whether they have been denied.” 386 U.S. at 21.
In adopting a uniform test for harmless error, a state must therefore construct the test so that it meets the United States Supreme Court’s test for constitutional error. See, Comment, Confusion in the Court-Wisconsin’s Harmless Error Rule in Criminal Appeals, 63 Marq. L. Rev. 643, 659 (1980). The test enunciated in Dyess, i.e., whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error contributed to the conviction, amounts to the Chapman harmless error test for constitutional error. The Chapman Court stated:
"There is little, if any, difference between our statement in Fahy v. Connecticut about 'whether there is a reasonable possibility that the evidence complained of might have contributed to the conviction’ and requiring the beneficiary of a *74constitutional error to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the error complained of did not contribute to the verdict obtained.” Chapman, 386 U.S. at 24.
As stated previously, the Wold court concluded that, in Harrington, the United States Supreme Court abandoned the "possibility test” and exchanged it for a test based on "reasonable probabilities.” An analysis of the Harrington case as well as subsequent United States Supreme Court opinions reveals that Wold was incorrect and that the Chapman test for constitutional error is still phrased in terms of reasonable possibilities.
In a recent case, Morris v. Mathews, 106 S. Ct. 1032 (1986), the United States Supreme Court dealt with a violation of the Double Jeopardy Clause. A five member majority held that "when a jeopardy-barred conviction is reduced to a conviction for a lesser included offense which is not jeopardy-barred, the burden shifts to the defendant to demonstrate a reasonable probability that he would not have been convicted of the non-jeopardy-barred offense absent the presence of the jeopardy-barred offense.” Id. at 1038. In treating a violation of the Double Jeopardy Clause, the majority was not applying any harmless error test, since it did not consider the case to be a "'harmless error’ case.” Id. at 1037. In defining reasonable probability, the Morris majority looked to Strickland. Id. at 1038.
Four members of the court, however, agree that that case could have been treated as a "'harmless error’ case.” Id. at 1040 (L. Blackmun, J., concurring).5 *75The violation or error which occurred was constitutional in nature and thus the Chapman test should apply. Id. Those four Justices reaffirm that the Chapman "harmless beyond a reasonable doubt” standard is essentially the same as the Fahy "reasonable possibility” standard, and that it is the latter test — one of reasonable possibilities — that is appropriate in cases involving constitutional error.
It is clear that the uniform test adopted in Dyess is the traditional test for constitutional error. Applying this test to cases involving nonconstitutional errors, cases may be reversed in instances where a reviewing court may conclude that there was a reasonable possibility that a nonconstitutional error contributed to the result. This situation may be unacceptable given the original purposes of the harmless error rule and the purposes it continues to serve.
It does well to keep in mind the history behind the evolution of the harmless error rule. Wigmore expressed his frustration at the American courts’ adoption of the "Exchequer rule,” garnered from the early case of Crease v. Barrett, 1 C.M. & R. 919, 149 Eng. Rep. 1353 (Ex. 1835), and the use of that rule in such a way so as to overturn cases on the most trivial technical errors. He notes:
"Whether in civil or criminal cases, it has done more than any other one rule of law to increase the *76delay and expense of litigation, to encourage defiant criminality and oppression, and to foster the spirit of litigious gambling .... That the law has gone to the extremes of absurd and provoking technicality in applying this rule is plain enough even in a casual glance through the reports .... Just so long as an erroneous ruling on evidence, however, trifling, is described by the highest judges (and in many courts it habitually is) as 'working a reversal,’ just so long will the reproach of technicality and futility mark our litigation.” 1 J. Wig-more Evidence Sec. 21, p. 891 (Tillers rev. 1983).
See also, Mause, Harmless Constitutional Error: The Implications of Chapman v. California, 53 Minn. L. Rev. 519 (1969); Comment, Harmless Error: The Need for a Uniform Standard, 53 St. John’s L. Rev. 541, 543 (1979).
This court should not employ a harmless error test which would result in the overturning of a great number of cases on the grounds that a nonconstitu-tional error could not pass a harmless error test which the United States Supreme Court has said only constitutional errors need be subjected to. As noted by Justice Traynor: "The practical objective of tests of harmless error is to conserve judicial resources by enabling appellate courts to cleanse the judicial process of prejudicial error without becoming mired in harmless error.” Traynor, at 81.
I am persuaded that the purposes underlying the harmless error rule are best served by preserving distinctive tests for constitutional and non-constitutional error. There are two primary reasons for retention of the distinctive tests. First, courts must be concerned with the integrity of the outcome of trials. Determining whether an individual received a fair *77trial is essentially a matter of judgment. In distinguishing between constitutional and non-constitutional error, the underlying assumption is that constitutional errors should undergo greater scrutiny since a violation of a constitutional right would likely have a more injurious effect than commission of a non-constitutional error.
Second, constitutional rights are of fundamental importance and deserve heightened protection. See, Lane, 106 S. Ct. at 730, n. 9 (Court notes "heightened regard” for constitutional protections). It is harder to countenance the affirmance of a judgment which is based on constitutional error, not only because the constitutional error may have indeed contributed to the result based on the fundamental and pervasive nature of constitutional rights in general, but because upholding the result impliedly approves the violation of the constitutional right.
The foregoing reasons, while they suggest a high standard for constitutional error, also suggest that non-constitutional error should receive a less intense review. The likelihood that non-constitutional error contributed to or determined a verdict may be less, and the rights implicated are not of the same magnitude. Moreover, in applying the higher constitutional standard to non-constitutional errors, it is likely that a host of lesser technical errors may be swept in as having affected the determination of the verdict at trial. This result is at cross-purposes with the harmless error test and its underlying rationale: eliminating prejudicial error but not becoming bogged down in endless formulas for determining harmless error.
I disagree with the conclusion reached by the majority in Dyess that there is no difference between our use of the "reasonable possibility” test and the *78United States Supreme Court’s use of the "reasonable probability” test:
"Although the [United States Supreme] Court uses the words 'reasonable probability’ of a different outcome, in contrast to our use of 'reasonable possibility,’ it is clear from the Strickland opinion that the Supreme Court’s test is substantively the same as ours.” Dyess, 124 Wis. 2d at 544.
The meaning conveyed by the "reasonable possibility” and "reasonable probability” tests is not the same. Their meaning depends, in turn, on the meaning of the words "possible” and "probable.” There is a distinction in meaning between these words.
Possible is defined in Webster’s Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary 918 (1983):
"Possible. 1. to be able — more at POTENT; a: being within the limits of ability, capacity, or realization b: being what may be done or may occur according to nature, custom, or manners. 2. a: being something that may or may not be true or actual (explanation). 3. having an indicated potential (a housing site).”
Probable is defined in Webster’s Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary 937 (1983) as:
"Probable, to test, approve, prove — more at PROVE (1606). 1. supported by evidence strong enough to establish presumption but not proof (a hypothesis) 2: establishing a probability (evidence) 3: likely to become true or real (events).”
Dyess relied on Strickland to conclude that there was no difference between the probability and possibility tests. This reliance was misplaced. Strickland was not concerned with the harmless error test. As *79noted by Justice Blackmun in his concurring opinion in Morris, Strickland "did not concern the adequacy of a proffered remedy for an acknowledged constitutional violation. The question in Strickland was whether there had been a constitutional violation in the first place.” Morris, 106 S. Ct. at 1041. (Blackmun, J., concurring.)
The United States Supreme Court has maintained a distinction between tests for constitutional and non-constitutional error. In Connecticut v. Johnson, 460 U.S. 73 (1982), Justice Stevens expressly stated that: "the harmless-error rule which may be applied when federal constitutional error has been committed, see Chapman v. California ... is not to be confused with either the federal harmless-error rule that is applied in federal courts when non-constitutional error occurs, see Kotteakos ... or with a State’s own harmless-error rule applicable to errors of state law_” 460 U.S. at 88, n. 2 (Stevens, J. concurring).
One of the key problems in dealing with harmless error tests is that there is a crucial difference between formulating the test into a concise statement and then crafting a practical approach which correctly implements that test. This problem was something that the Dyess court apparently thought best solved by the adoption of a single test. Commentators have noted that the United States Supreme Court has employed various approaches in harmless error analysis, despite the fact that the same test was being used. See, Note, Harmless Constitutional Error: An Analysis of Its Current Application, 33 Baylor L. Rev. 961 (1981); Field, Assessing the Harmlessness of Federal Constitutional Error-A Process in Need of a Rationale, 125 U. Pa. L. Rev. 15 (1976); Comment, Harmless Error: The *80Need for a Uniform Standard, 53 St. John's L. Rev. 541 (1979).
In the area of constitutional error, the United States Supreme Court appears to have employed three different approaches. As noted by one commentator, the Court has:
"(1) Focused exclusively on the erroneously admitted evidence to decide whether it contributed to the conviction;
"(2) Determined whether overwhelming evidence of guilt exists absent the constitutional error; and
"(3) Examined the record to decide whether the unconstitutionally obtained evidence is 'merely cumulative’ of some other admissible evidence.” 33 Baylor L. Rev. at 962 (Footnote Omitted.)
As demonstrated earlier, this court has similarly employed various approaches in implementing harmless error tests.
In assisting a reconsideration of the harmless error test, it is helpful to consult recent pronouncements by the United States Supreme Court on the subject. The recent case of United States v. Lane, 106 S. Ct. 725 (1986) sheds light on the state of the Court’s harmless error jurisprudence.
In Lane, a father and son, James and Dennis Lane, were indicted on multiple counts for mail fraud, conspiracy, and perjury in connection with insurance claims that were made and that insurers paid for fire damage to a restaurant and duplex that James had hired a professional arsonist to burn. Prior to trial, the Lanes made motions for severance, contending that the charged offenses were misjoined in violation of Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, 8(b), but the *81motions were denied and the trial proceeded jointly before a jury.
On appeal, the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals concluded that one of the counts should not have been joined with the others; it was held the misjoinder was prejudicial per se and the court reversed the convictions and remanded for new trials. 106 S. Ct. at 728-729. The Supreme Court granted certiorari to determine whether a misjoinder under Rule 8 is subject to the harmless error rule. Id. at 727.
The Lane Court notes that there are federal rules and statutes which deal with the topic of harmless error.6 Rule 52(a) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure provides:
"RULE 52. HARMLESS ERROR AND PLAIN ERROR, (a) Harmless Error. Any error, defect, irregularity or variance which does not affect substantial rights shall be disregarded.”
*82In addition, there is a "harmless error” statute, 28 U.S.C., sec. 2111, which provides:
"Sec. 2111. Harmless error. On the hearing of any appeal or writ of certiorari in any case, the court shall give judgment after an examination of the record without regard to errors or defects which do not affect the substantial rights of the parties.”
In Lane, the Court relied on Rule 52(a) and sec. 2111 since "the specific joinder standards of Rule 8 are not themselves of constitutional magnitude.” 106 S. Ct. at 730. (Footnote omitted.)
The Lane Court noted that, in Kotteakos, the Court construed a harmless error statute with language similar to that seen in Rule 52(a), and observed: "[t]he inquiry cannot be merely whether there was enough to support the result, apart from the phase affected by the error. It is rather, even so, whether the error itself had substantial influence. If so, or if one is left in grave doubt, the conviction cannot stand.” Lane, 106 S. Ct. at 732, quoting Kotteakos, 328 U.S. at 765. Lane invoked the Kotteakos test, holding that "an error involving misjoinder 'affects substantial rights’ and requires reversal only if the misjoinder results in actual prejudice because it 'had substantial and injurious effect or influence in determining the jury’s verdict.”’ Id. at 732, quoting Kotteakos, 328 U.S. at 776. In assessing the effect of the error, the Lane Court appeared to adopt an "overwhelming evidence of guilt” standard. The court concluded, "[i]n the face of overwhelming evidence of guilt shown here, we are satisfied that the claimed error was harmless.” Lane, 106 S. Ct. at 732.
*83The Lane majority agreed with the dissent that the harmless error inquiry is different from a sufficiency of the evidence inquiry, stating: "[b]ut that does not in any sense mean that overwhelming evidence of guilt is irrelevant; the threshold of overwhelming evidence is far higher than mere sufficiency to uphold conviction.” Id. at 732-733, n. 13.
Although Lane dealt with non-constitutional error, the Court also discussed Chapman and the test for harmless error involving constitutional error. In addressing the dissenters, the majority notes that "the standard for harmless error analysis adopted in Chapman concerning constitutional errors is considerably more onerous than the standard for non-constitutional errors adopted in Kotteakos. ...” Id. at 730, n. 9. (Emphasis added.)
In harmless error analysis, notes the Lane Court, "it is the duty of a reviewing court to consider the trial record as a whole and to ignore errors that are harmless, including most constitutional violations.” Id., quoting, United States v. Hastings, 461 U.S. 499, 509 (1983).7 This review of the whole record is áppar-ently required for all harmless error analysis, whether the error is constitutional or not. Lane, 106 S. Ct. at 731, n. 11.
*84Other recent cases in the United States Supreme Court show that the distinction between harmless error tests for constitutional and non-constitutional error has been maintained. In Van Arsdall, the error involved was of constitutional proportions, (the denial of defendant’s opportunity to impeach a witness for bias which involved the confrontation clause) and the Court held the error to be subject to the Chapman harmless error analysis. 106 S. Ct. at 1438. The court outlined the nature of the test:
"The correct inquiry is whether, assuming that the damaging potential of the cross-examination were fully realized, a reviewing court might nonetheless say that the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Whether such an error is harmless in a particular case depends upon a host of factors, all readily accessible to reviewing courts. These factors include the importance of the witness’ testimony in the prosecution’s case, whether the testimony was cumulative, the presence or absence of evidence corroborating or contradicting the testimony of the witness on material points, the extent of cross-examination otherwise permitted, and, of course, the overall strength of the prosecution’s case.” Id.
The Chapman test was also employed in Hasting. In Hasting, the Court reviewed the reversal of respondent’s convictions because of prosecutorial allusion to their failure to rebut the government’s evidence. 461 U.S. at 500. The Hasting Court formulated the harmless error inquiry as follows: "[t]he question a reviewing court must ask is this: absent the prosecutor’s allusion to the failure of the defense to proffer evidence to rebut the testimony of the victims is it clear beyond a reasonable doubt that the jury would *85have returned a verdict of guilty?” 461 U.S. at 510-511.
Harmless error analysis in Wisconsin should be based on the distinction between constitutional and non-constitutional error. The United States Supreme Court chooses to maintain this distinction, employing the Chapman test for constitutional error, and Kot-teakos for non-constitutional error. I agree with this approach.
There are certain elements that the harmless error tests for constitutional and non-constitutional error have in common. First, in each test the reviewing court must take its own view of the record as a whole. Second, in assessing whether the error was harmless the court must determine the probable impact the error had in the minds of the jury. See, Schneble v. Florida, 405 U.S. 428, 432 (1972). Third, in looking at the impact that the error had on the jury, the court must imagine the impact on the hypothetical average jury, acting rationally.8
The foregoing makes clear that the method by which a reviewing court determines whether error is harmless is to assess the effect the error had on the jury’s deliberations. Since the jury’s chief job entails weighing the evidence, the reviewing court must also look to the evidence presented.
In setting forth the methodology by which reviewing courts look at evidence in a harmless error case, the United States Supreme Court has articulated *86different tests. I would not distinguish among them but would instead adopt a combined approach. In reviewing the evidence presented, the court should look at the following factors:
1. Focusing on the error by itself, how much, if at all, did it contribute to the conviction? In cases of erroneously admitted evidence, the court would determine the importance of the evidence in the prosecutor’s case. .
2. Aside from the error, and any evidence that may have been admitted pursuant to it, is there overwhelming evidence supporting guilt?
3. Is there admissible evidence which would be considered cumulative to the evidence which may have been admitted as a result of the error?
Based on the foregoing determinations designed to help the court assess the significance of the error in the context of the evidence presented at trial, the court should then apply the standards for determining whether the error can be deemed harmless. Since the purpose of the harmless error test is to assess the probable impact of the error on the jury, the standard for both types of error is appropriately stated in terms of the degree of influence on the jury.
For constitutional error, the court should ask: Can it be said that the error had no more than minimal influence on the jury? If the error is thought to have more than minimal influence, then it is not harmless.
For non-constitutional error, the court should ask: Did the error substantially influence the jury? If it did substantially influence the jury, then it is not harmless.
*87As with other court-crafted tests, the tests here are not absolutely precise, nor scientific. However, they do provide a means to differentiate between the tests for constitutional and non-constitutional error.
The United States Supreme Court in Chapman stated the test for constitutional error as whether a reviewing court could hold that the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. The test was restated as whether there is a reasonable possibility that the error contributed to the conviction. The minimal influence test mirrors the "reasonable possibility” and "harmless beyond a reasonable doubt” formulations of the test. It provides a means of measuring the effect of the error in a way that parallels the test for non-constitutional error: Both tests now assess the degree of influence on the jury.
The adoption of the minimal influence test would mean that errors which are trivial, inconsequential or insignificant are not grounds for holding the error not harmless. "Minimal influence” means that degree of influence which calls into question the basis upon which the jury reached its verdict, the fairness of the proceedings, and whether the violation of defendant’s constitutional right should be tolerated.9 The minimal influence test is a lower standard than the substantial influence test since the intent would be to give greater *88protection to constitutional rights which are violated in the course of trial.
The constitutional error test is based on Chapman. The non-constitutional error test is based on the test enunciated in Kotteakos. The substantial influence test imposes a higher burden upon the party seeking to overturn a conviction on the grounds that there was a non-constitutional error committed. In applying this test, the reviewing court should determine whether the error was essential to the jury reaching its verdict.
The two distinct standards articulated above would preserve the difference between constitutional and non-constitutional errors, while at the same time serve the underlying purposes of the harmless error test.
I am authorized to state that JUSTICE DONALD W. STEINMETZ and JUSTICE LOUIS J. CECI join in this concurring opinion.
In his dissenting opinion in Dyess, Justice Steinmetz, who was joined by Justice Ceci, expressed his disagreement with the majority’s decision to express the test in terms of "reasonable possibility” rather than "reasonable probability.” Justice Steinmetz stated: "[reasonable probability is a much better test than reasonable possibility.” Dyess, 124 Wis. 2d at 553. See also, State v. Leach, 124 Wis. 2d 648, 674, n. 10, 370 N.W.2d 240 (1985).
For example, in Allison v. State, 62 Wis. 2d 14, 29, 214 N.W.2d 437 (1974), this court, dealing with a constitutional error stated: "[a]pplying the rule of Wold, that error is harmless unless the result would reasonably have been different, we have no doubt that the error here is harmless.” (Emphasis added.) This approach was also followed in Rohl v. State, 65 Wis. 2d 683, 701, 223 N.W.2d 567 (1974), a case involving constitutional error.
In Agurs, the Court identified as the "customary harmless error standard” the test set forth in Kotteakos: "[U]nder that standard when error is present in the record, the reviewing judge *66must set aside the verdict and judgment unless his 'conviction is sure that the error did not influence the jury, or had but very slight effect.’” Agurs, 427 U.S. at 112, quotingKotteakos, 328 U.S. at 764.
Uncomfortableness with the Wold test is evident in other cases. In Hart v. State, 75 Wis. 2d 371, 249 N.W.2d 810 (1977), the court dealt with the error of improperly admitted testimony. The court held the error not harmless, citing the Wold test, but also citing the following language: "[e]rrors committed at trial should not overturn the conviction unless it appears the result might probably have been more favorable to the party complaining had the error not occurred.” Hart, 75 Wis. 2d at 394, citing Woodhull v. State, 43 Wis. 2d 202, 215, 168 N.W.2d 281 (1969). See also, State v. Bowie, 92 Wis. 2d 192, 204-205, 284 N.W.2d 613 (1979); Novitzke, 92 Wis. 2d at 308. Justice Abrahamson stated that since the court unanimously concluded that the error was not harmless under Wold, the Wold formulation would be "accepted for purposes of this opinion.” Hart, 75 Wis. 2d at 395, n. 11. Justice Abrahamson went on to state that she advocated a reconsideration of the Wold rule. Id. Justice Abrahamson’s reservations were expressed in later cases. See, e.g., Micale v. State, 76 Wis. 2d 370, 373, n. 2, 251 N.W.2d 458 (1977); State v. Spraggin, 77 Wis. 2d 89, 101, n. 9, 252 N.W.2d 94 (1977).
The Pohl court outlines the harmless error test as follows:
"In Hart v. State, 75 Wis. 2d 371, 249 N.W.2d 810 (1977), this court held that:
"'Errors committed at trial should not overturn the conviction unless it appears the result might probably have been more favorable to the party complaining had the error not occurred. Woodhull v. State, 43 Wis. 2d 202, 168 N.W.2d 281 (1969).’ Id. at 394. See also: State v. Bowie, 92 Wis. 2d 192, 284 N.W.2d 613 (1979).
" 'Moreover, in Novitzke v. State, 92 Wis. 2d 302, 284 N.W.2d 904 (1979) this court set forth the test for harmless error as follows:
*69'"Errors committed at trial should not overturn the conviction unless it appears the result might probably have been more favorable to the party complaining had the error not occurred.’ Hart v. State, 75 Wis. 2d 371, 249 N.W.2d 810 (1977). In Wold v. State, 57 Wis. 2d 344, 356, 204 N.W.2d 482 (1973), a case involving improperly admitted evidence, the court stated:
'"The test of harmless error is not whether some harm has resulted, but, rather, whether the appellate court in its independent determination can conclude there is sufficient evidence, other than and uninfluenced by the inadmissible evidence, which would convict the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt. See Harrington v. California, 395 U.S. 250, 89 Sup. Ct. 1726, 23 L. Ed. 2d 284 (1969). This test is based on reasonable probabilities.’
"'Other formulations of the harmless error test would require reviewing courts to set aside the verdict and judgment unless sure that error did not influence the jury or had but only slight effect. Kelly v. State, 75 Wis. 2d 303, 317, n. 3, 249 N.W.2d 800 (1977) and concurring opinion at 321.’ Id. at 308.” Pohl, 96 Wis. 2d at 311-312.
See also, Barrera, 99 Wis. 2d at 294-295.
Justice Blackmun was joined in his concurrence by Justice *75Powell. Justice Brennan and Justice Marshall each wrote separate dissents. 106 S. Ct. at 1044. Justices Blackmun, Powell, and Marshall all agree that the harmless error test should have been applied and that the correct test was one of the reasonable possibility. Justice Brennan stated that there should be only one prosecution. Id. However, assuming a second prosecution was permissible, the proper test for determining whether respondent was entitled to a new trial was as stated by Justice Blackmun. Id.
Wisconsin has its own "harmless-error statute.” Section 805.18, Stats., provides:
"805.18 Mistakes and omissions; harmless error. (1) The court shall, in every stage of an action, disregard any error or defect in the pleadings or proceedings which shall not affect the substantial rights of the adverse party.
"(2) No judgment shall be reversed or set aside or new trial granted in any action or proceeding on the ground of drawing, selection or misdirection of jury, or the improper admission of evidence, or for error as to any matter of pleading or procedure, unless in the opinion of the court to which the application is made, after an examination of the entire action or proceeding, it shall appear that the error complained of has affected the substantial rights of the party seeking to reverse or set aside the judgment, or to secure a new trial.”
This section has been applied in both civil and criminal cases. See Dyess, 124 Wis. 2d at 547.
There are some constitutional errors which are cause for automatic reversal, and not subject to harmless error analysis. In Delaware v. Van Arsdall, 106 S. Ct. 1431 (1986), the Court noted that constitutional errors, "such as denying a defendant the assistance of counsel at trial, or compelling him to stand trial before a trier of fact with a financial stake in the outcome — are so fundamental and pervasive that they require reversal without regard to the facts or circumstances of the particular case.” Van Arsdall, 106 S. Ct. at 1437.
As noted in Harrington, the judgment should be based on the Court’s reading of the record and what would have been the probable impact of the error on the minds of an "average jury.” 395 U.S. at 254. The Court rejected the argument that reversal was necessary if it could imagine a single juror who would have relied on the error for his or her vote. Id.
As stated by the United States Supreme Court:
"The harmless error doctrine recognizes the principle that the central purpose of a criminal trial is to decide the factual question of the defendant’s guilt or innocence, United States v. Nobles, 422 U.S. 225, 230 (1975), and promotes public respect for the criminal process by focusing on the underlying fairness of the trial rather than on the virtually inevitable presence of immaterial error.” Rose v. Clark, 106 S. Ct. 3101, 3105-3106 (1986) quoting Delaware v. Van Arsdall, 106 S. Ct. 1431, 1436-1437 (1986).